Author ' s personal copy Creativity polymathy : What Benjamin Franklin can teach your kindergartener James C . Kaufman a , ⁎ , Ronald A . Beghetto b , John Baer c , Zorana Ivcevic d a Learning Research Institute , California State University at San Bernardino , 5500 University Parkway , San Bernardino , CA 92407 - 2318 , United States b University of Oregon , Eugene , OR 97403 , United States c Rider University , 2083 Lawrenceville Road , Lawrenceville , NJ 08648 - 3099 , United States d Tufts University , 490 Boston Ave , Medford , MA 02155 , United States a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 4 February 2009 Received in revised form 1 October 2009 Accepted 10 October 2009 Keywords : Creativity Polymathy Creativity enhancement Giftedness Creative polymathy at the very highest levels is rare , but this is largely the result of a long period of training usually necessary to become pro ﬁ cient in any ﬁ eld . We explain why creative polymathy is not ruled out by arguments for the domain speci ﬁ city of creativity and argue that consideration of multiple levels of creativity ( Big - C , Pro - c , little - c , and mini - c ) leads to the conclusion that creative polymathy may actually be fairly common . We introduce a hierarchical model of creativity ( the APT Model ) to help understand some constraints on and possibilities for creative polymathy , suggest different ways creative polymathy may be expressed , and offer guidelines for recognizing and nurturing creative polymathy in students . © 2009 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Benjamin Franklin may have been the Unites States ' ﬁ rst true contribution to creative polymathy . He was an inventor , creating a clean - burning stove , bifocals , and the lightning rod . He was a scientist , chartingouttheGulfStreamanddiscoveringnewpropertiesofelectricity . He was a literary success , writing and editing Poor Richard ' s Alamanack ; his autobiography is still a regularly assigned college reading . He was a civicleader , helpingtocreatetheUniversityofPennsylvaniaandoneofthe ﬁ rstpubliclendinglibraries . And , ofcourse , hewasapoliticalgenius , being a founding father of America and subsequently ambassador to France . His legacy continues to this day . Whereas many other early founders of the United States ( such as John Hancock or John Adams ) are remembered in name only by most of the general public , Franklin lives on — as a lead character in two different Broadway musicals ( 1776 and Ben Franklin in Paris ) , as a common source of quotations , as namesake to ﬁ ctional characters ( “ Hawkeye ” Pierce on MASH and Lt . Pinkerton in Madame Butter ﬂ y ) , and immortalized on the hundred dollar bill ( Isaacson , 2004 ) . Creative accomplishment in so many different areas is extremely rare . Imagine someone alive today with the satiric literary wit of a Jon Stewart , the political insights of an Orrin Hatch or Ted Kennedy , the civic mindedness of an Erin Gruwell ( the teacher who founded the Freedom Writers ) , andthegeneralmagnetismandcharismaofaTomHanksorWill Smith . Searching for a handful of modern day women and men who can join the ranks of Leonardo da Vinci , Paul Robeson , Clare Booth Luce , Bertrand Russell , and Linus Pauling , however , can be an exercise in frustration . Webelieve , however , thatjustbecausetherearesofewhighly accomplished multi - creative individuals does not mean that creative polymathy ( i . e . , being creative in more than one domain ) is impossible . Rather , as we will discuss , we believe it is possible to both identify and nurture the multi - creative abilities of gifted students . So the question is not so much is multi - creative ability possible ( it certainly is ) , but rather howmighteducatorsnurturethemulti - creativetalentingiftedstudents ? In tackling the question , we ﬁ rst consider the question in light of the Four - C model of creativity ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . We will then examine two positions about the nature of creativity itself . Position one argues that creativity is a general construct ( i . e . , the skills that lead to creative performance are the same , or very similar , across all domains ) . Positiontwoarguesthatcreativityisa domain - speci ﬁ c construct ( i . e . , the skills that help one be creative in one domain would be of little use in other , unrelated domains ) . We then describe a more balanced position by drawing on the Amusement Park Theoretical ( APT ) Model ( Baer & Kaufman , 2005a , b ; Kaufman & Baer , 2004 , 2006 ) . We conclude by presenting a marionette analogy to help illustrate how a gifted student might be creative in multiple domains , which varies depending on their level of creative development . 1 . The Four - C model of creativity : Big - C and little - c “ If you would not be forgotten as soon as you are dead , either write something worth reading or do things worth writing . ” – Benjamin Franklin Prior to understanding how multi - creative ability might be identi ﬁ ed and nurtured in gifted students it is ﬁ rst important to understand what it meanstobecreative . Twostudiesofcreativitytypicallyfocusonlegendary ( Big - C ) expressions of creativity and everyday ( little - c ) expressions of Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 909 537 3841 . E - mail address : jkaufman @ csusb . edu ( J . C . Kaufman ) . 1041 - 6080 / $ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2009 . 10 . 001 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Learning and Individual Differences journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / lindif Author ' s personal copy creativity ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 ; Stein , 1953 ) . StudiesofBig - Ccreativity often have the goal of learning about creative genius and which explore the types of creative works that may last forever ( e . g . , Simonton , 1994 ) . Big - Ccreatorstypicallyhavedevotedmany – usuallytenormore – yearsof intense study developing the requisite domain expertise necessary for making revolutionary contributions ( Ericsson , Roring , & Nandagopal , 2007 ; Simon , 1981 ; Simonton , 1997 ) . Big - C creators typically are rememberedyearsaftertheirdeath ; theirlifeandworksmaybestudied by subsequent generations — consider Charles Dickens , Albert Einstein , Oscar Wilde , Jane Austen , or Duke Ellington . Creative greatness may be studied by analyzing the lives of well - known creators , or interviewing renowned individuals , or perhaps by studying people who excel at high levels on creativity measures . Big - C creativity has , traditionally , been the focus of much research and theorizing in creativity studies ( see Simonton , 2009 , for a review of many of these studies ) . Creativity researchers have also focused on more everyday or little - c experiences of creativity ( Richards , 1990 ) . Everyday or little - c creativity highlights the creativity involved in the daily activities and experiences in which just about anyone can participate . Examples of little - c creativity include : making up song lyrics to a favorite song , ﬁ guring out new ways to motivate your roommate to ﬁ nish cleaning up her mess in the kitchen , combing leftovers into a tasty new synthesis of ﬂ avors , or your toddler coming up with a new story - line for his or her favorite picture book . Although it may seem that these two common categories of creativity ( Big - C and little - c ) account for just about any expression of creativity , on closer expression it becomes evident that these two categories do not suf ﬁ ciently account for subtle , yet meaningful distinctions in levels of creativity . Consider , forinstance , amusicianwhohasperformedatseveral major venues , but may never attain the status of an eminent musician ( whose work is featured on radio shows or taught in music classes ) . This musician clearly is not aBig - C performer , but to categorize her as alittle - c musician would diminish her professional success ( as she would be lumped in with the occasional musician who plays music for family and friendsandmaynotbeabletoperforminaconcerthall ) . Theprofessional musician , when considered in light of the Big - c / little - c split , is misplaced orobscured . Thesamecanbesaidforthemuchmoresubjectivecreativity of a student learning how to play music . Although the student may have new and personally meaningful insights about how to combine notes whileplaying , suchinsightsmaynotbesuf ﬁ cientlynoveltobeconsidered creative even at the little - c level . Given these limitations with traditional Big - C / little - c conceptions of creativity , Kaufman and Beghetto ( 2009 ) proposed the Four - C Model of Creativity ; which added the two categories of “ mini - c ” creativity ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2007 ) and “ Pro - c ” creativity ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . 1 . 1 . What is mini - c ? “ Tell me and I forget . Teach me and I remember . Involve me and I learn . ” – Benjamin Franklin The mini - c category focuses on the novel and personally meaningful insights and interpretations involved in learning and experience ( e . g . , a newinsightintohowtosolveamathproblem , anewconnectionbetween what has been learned in science and history class ) . Mini - c creativity includes the “ personal ” ( Runco , 1996 , 2004 ) , “ expressive ” ( Taylor , 1959 ) , and “ developmental ” ( Cohen , 1989 ) aspects of creativity . Examples of mini - ccreativityincludeastudenthavingapersonallymeaningfulinsight that helps her make a connection between an algebraic equation and the calculationsneededforhersciencefairproject ; ayoungstermakinganew connection between the design of building he saw on summer vacation and the Lego towers he now makes at home , or a teacher watching a historical documentary ontelevisionandhaving anew insightabout how to incorporate math into a social studies lesson . The de ﬁ nition of mini - c creativity ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2007 ) stresses the importance of personal ( or subjective ) judgment of novelty and meaningfulness . This focus on subjective judgment distinguishes mini - c creativity from more objective expressions of creativity in which the novelty and meaningfulness of the outcome requires external judgment . Consequently , mini - c insights many never go beyond the individual creator . On the other hand , however , just because mini - c creativity does not meet the traditional standards used for judging Big - C or even little - c creativity ( the production of a product that is externally judged to be novel and meaningful ) mini - c creativity can and should be considered a sign of creative potential . As Vygotsky ( 2004 ) has argued , internalcreativeactscanstillbeconsideredcreative , evenwhentheyonly taketheformof “ somementaloremotionalconstructthatliveswithinthe person who created it and is known only to him ” ( p . 7 ) . Consider a child learning to ﬁ nger - paint . His painting may not bring anything “ new ” to the domain of art ; it may not be entirely within the typicalcon ﬁ nesofpainting ( perhapsitisapaintedpinecone ) , andhemay demonstrate no special talent or aptitude ( more paint may end up on his clothing than on the paper ) . Yet there is nonetheless a core of internal creative expression taking place : for instance , he is discovering new and personally meaningful ways to combine color and how to represent images on paper . Such mini - c insights and interpretations , while valuable in their own right , can also serve as building blocks on which further creative insights and expression might be produced ( he may end up creating personalized holiday cards that his family recognizes as creative , or make his own comic book that is judged by peers , teachers , or perhaps even established creators of graphic novels to be creative ) . In this way , mini - c creativity can ( and often does ) serve as the genesis for more objective levels of creative expression . The concept of mini - c creativity also underscores the relationship between creativity and personally meaningful learning . This connection was recognized more than ﬁ fty years ago by J . P . Guilford ( 1950 ) , who argued that “ a creative act is an instance of learning ” and , therefore , “ acomprehensivelearningtheorymusttakeintoaccountbothinsightand creativity activity ” ( p . 446 ) . As such , any time a student has a unique and personally meaningful insights or interpretation when learning a new discipline it can be said that the student has engaged in a personally creativeactandaninstanceofpersonallymeaningfullearning . Thisistrue even if no one else recognizes the insight as unique or particularly meaningful ( indeed there is some distance to travel , which often includes focusedlearningoftheconventionsofaparticulardomain , beforeamini - c insightcandevelopintoanidea , productorbehaviorrecognizedbyothers as creative ) . Even though we argue that there is a relationship between personally meaningful learning and mini - c creativity , we also recognize that not all aspects of learning are creative . Someone learning a series of vocabulary words by rote , for example , likely would not be experiencing mini - c ( as this may not lead to any new or personally meaningful insights or interpretations ) . Mini - c creativity may still occur , however , if the student learning the series of vocabulary words used his or her imagination to form mental connections ( i . e . , “ headstrong means being stubborn and willful ; in order to do that , you need a strong head ” ) . 1 . 2 . What is Pro - c ? “ Genius without education is like silver in the mine . ” – Benjamin Franklin Pro - c creativity includes professional - level creators who have not yet attainedlegendarystatus ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . Someonewhoisa hobbyist and creates point - and - click games using free shareware falls intothelittle - c category , whereasSidMeier ( the Civilization games ) and Will Wright ( the Sims games ) are likely examples of Big - C . The Pro - c game designer , in contrast , would be someone who has worked as part of a team on a well - reviewed game , or has perhaps created an iPhone game that is popular as a paid download . The distinctions between 381 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy these levels of creativity are based purely on the amount of revenue generated ( although that can play some role ) . Rather , the distinction pertains more to expertise and level of impact . The game designer creating highly popular iPhone games is clearly beyond any amateur status — but is not necessarily close to leaving a permanent mark on the ﬁ eld . Manyprofessionalsinavarietyofdisciplines ( e . g . , anthropologists , business management professors , stage lighting designers , chefs , public relations consultants ) would also be considered examples of Pro - c creators . The Four - C model ' s speci ﬁ c categories are described in Table 1 . 2 . The Four - C model and multi - creative potential As we have discussed , the Four - C model helps broaden conceptions of creativity to include everything from the more subjective , mini - c creative insightsandpotentialtothemoreobjectiveandclearcutexamplesofBig - C creative eminence . But how might this model be helpful in identifying and nurturing the multi - creative potential of gifted students ? One important way that it is helpful is that it allows researchers to consider the likelihood of expressing multi - creative potential across the various levels of creative magnitude ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2009 ) . If one begins at the Big - C level , for instance , the likelihood of a teacher identifying a legendary creator in his or her classroom is near impossible . As discussed earlier , Big - C creativity requires recognition by critics , historians , orotherrelevantgatekeepersofadomain — nottomentionthe many years of intensive study to develop the expertise necessary for eminentcreativeachievement . Thismakesitextremelydif ﬁ culttopredict whether a particular youngster will be capable of a Big - C contribution in one domain , let along across multiple domains . Multi - creative ability , spanning more disparate ﬁ elds , seems more likely when you consider creative achievement at lower levels of creative expression . Indeed , Root - Bernstein ( 1989 ) has documented 400 cases of famous scientists who werealsohighlyskilled inthearts . Galileoisbestknownforhislegendary work in science ; however , he was also a skilled artist and musician . When it comes to individuals who have multi - creative talent at a professional - level , it isn ' t dif ﬁ cult to list several examples . Consider , for instance , Byron “ Whizzer ” White ( athlete and Supreme Court justice ) , Arnold Schwarzenegger ( actor and politician ) , Rachel Ray ( cook , writer , talk show host , entrepreneur ) , So ﬁ a “ Sonya ” Kovalevskayas ( mathema - tician , writer and political activist ) , and Omar Sharif ( actor and bridge player ) . The list quickly expands when Pro - c and little - c levels are combined . Thinking of anyone at the Pro - c level who also is creative at an everyday level in a different domain is quite easy ( e . g . , accomplished academics that also have vocations in areas such as cooking , poetry , art , music , theatre , photography ) . Atthelittle - candmini - clevel , itprobablyismorelikelyto ﬁ ndcreative polymathy than not . Many people have multiple everyday creative avocations ( cooking , gardening , photography , story - telling ) , and mini - c polymathy can occur anytime someone combines new and personally meaningful insights and interpretations across different disciplines or domains . Forinstance , astudentmighthaveamini - cinsightabouthowto incorporate design principles that she is learning in her art class into the poster - presentation of her science experiment for her school science fair . 3 . The domain speci ﬁ city v . domain generality paradox Even though we have just argued that multi - creative ability – particularly at the little - c and mini - c level – is relatively common , research on creativity across multiple domains ( at the little - c level ) suggests that creativity may be very domain - speci ﬁ c . This seems to present a paradox . The research on domain speci ﬁ city does seem to rule out polymathy , because if the skills that underlie creativity are completely different in differentdomains , thentheskillsapersonhasthatleadtocreativityinone area would be of no value at all in other domains . How then could one personbecreativeinmultipledomains ? Inordertoresolvethisseemingly paradoxical situation , we must ﬁ rst try to understand what research does in fact say about domain speci ﬁ city . If creativity is domain general , it would be expected that different creative behaviors would be highly correlated each other and with a common set of psychological descriptors for those behaviors . If creativity is domain speci ﬁ c , it would be expected that different creative behaviors would be poorly correlated or uncorrelated among each other , and that there would be a diverging set of psychological descriptors of those behaviors ( Ivcevic , 2007 ) . Baer , for example , has explored this issue in samples of students ranging from second graders to college . He had these students produce creative work through writing poetry , writing short stories , telling stories out loud , creating mathematical equations , creating mathematical word problems , and making collages . Baer consistently found low and usually non - signi ﬁ cant correlations between ratings of creative performance in these different areas ( Baer , 1991 , 1993 , 1994 , 1996 ) . In other words , a student who wrote a creative poem was not more likely to also tell a creative story , make a creative collage , or write a creative mathematical equation ( a creative algebraic equation might use numbers in a playful or unusual way ) . Several other studies ( e . g . , Han , 2003 ; Runco , 1989 ) have found similar results . And if you remove variations due to IQ , the small correlations get even smaller . Other researchers , for example , Conti , Coon , and Amabile ( 1996 ) analyzed data from studies in which subjects had both written stories and engaged in art activities . The intercorrelations among the creativity ratings of the stories were high , con ﬁ rming the prediction that “ creativity measures within the same domain are substantially inter - correlated ” ( p . 387 ) . Intercorrelationsofcreativityratingsamongtheart tasks , whichwere more unlike one another thanwere the story - writing tasks , were positive but somewhat lower . But within - domain correla - tions tell us nothing about the domain speci ﬁ city / generality question . Cross - domain correlations , on the other hand , speak directly to the generality - speci ﬁ city question . None of the 13 cross - domain correla - tions that Conti , Coon , and Amabile reported – the crucial tests for domain generality – was statistically signi ﬁ cant , and the mean of these 13 correlations was just 0 . 109 , accounting for just a little more than one percent of the variance . Noteveryone , ofcourse , isconvincedbytheevidencefavoringdomain speci ﬁ city ( see , e . g . , Plucker , 1998 , 2005 ; Plucker & Beghetto , 2004 ) . Research that looks at actual creative products tends to yield results like Table 1 The Four - C model . Brief de ﬁ nition Example Types of measures mini - c Novel and personally meaningful interpretation of experiences , actions and events . Student ' s new and meaningful insight about how to use a strategy learned in math class to analyze data in her science fair project . Self - assessment , micro genetic methods . little - c Everyday expressions of novel and task appropriate behaviors , ideas or products . Combing left over Italian and Thai food into a new and tasty fusion of ﬂ avors that your family enjoys . Ratings ( teachers , peers , parents ) ; psychometric tests ( e . g . , Torrance tests ) ; Consensual assessment . Pro - c Expert expressions of novel and meaningful behaviors , ideas or products ( that exceed everyday but have not attained legendary status ) . A professor ' s psychological study that receives an award from a professional psychological association . Consensual assessment ; peer review ; prizes / honors . Big - C Legendary novel and meaningful accomplishments , whichoftenredirectan entire ﬁ eld of study or domain . The scienti ﬁ c theories of Isaac Newton . Major prizes / honors ; historiometric measures . The innovative social justice work of Martin Luther King , Jr . 382 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy those just cited favoring domain speci ﬁ city , but whereas personality - based studies or traditional psychometric methods tend to ﬁ nd that creativity is domain - general ( Plucker , 1998 ) . One common psychometric method is to use a divergent - thinking test , such as the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . The Torrance Tests assume domain generality and therefore offer no way to evaluate the possibility of domain speci ﬁ city . Self - report scales sometimes support a combination of domain - general anddomain - speci ﬁ cviewpoints . Forexample , Hocevar ( 1976 ) found “ low tomoderate ” ( p . 869 ) correlations amongself - reportindexes of creativity in various domains among college students . In a study in which several thousand subjects self - reported their own creativity in 56 domains , Kaufman , Cole , andBaer ( 2009 ) foundbothanover - archinggeneralfactor and seven more speci ﬁ c areas of creative performance . Theissueofdomainspeci ﬁ city / generalityremainsanopenquestionin creativity research . Because domain speci ﬁ city would seem to argue against the likelihood of ﬁ nding polymaths , however , we need to explain why even if the domain speci ﬁ city theorists are right , this would still not rule out the possibility ( or even likelihood ) of creative polymathy . With that concern out of the way , we can then present our model , a model that includes features of both the domain - general and domain - speci ﬁ c approaches , and explain how polymathy ﬁ ts into this wider conception of creativity . 4 . Why domain speci ﬁ city does not rule out creative polymathy Proponents of domain speci ﬁ city don ' t claim that no one has a multi - tude of creative abilities ( just as they don ' t claim that everyone is creative in one domain or another ) . Their argument simply says that ( a ) the skills thatunderliecreativityvarybydomainand ( b ) thepresenceorabsenceof anyparticularskillorsetofskills ( orthedegreetowhichtheseskillsexist , because they are not dichotomous , either / or kinds of abilities ) in any one individual involves a degree of randomness ( e . g . , chance encounters , experiences , or opportunities that support – or undermine – the develop - ment creativity - relevant skills in a domain ) . Based on this argument , a small fraction of people would be expected to have severely underdevel - opedcreativity - relevantskillsinjustaboutanydomain ; manypeoplewill have developed modest amounts of skills in several domains ; some will have a developed a great deal of skill in one or more domains ; and a few will have developed great quantities of such skills in many domains . Here ' s an analogy : If there were a thousand each of red , blue , green , and orange ﬂ ags that were randomly distributed among one hundred people , a few people might end up with no ﬂ ags at all and a few other people might end up with several dozen ﬂ ags of every color . Most people would getsomemix , whichmightbeamodestnumberof ﬂ agsofallcolorsorlots of ﬂ ags of some colors and few of other colors . That ' s how randomness works . Of course , just because the development of creativity - relevant skills involve some degree of randomness does not mean that underdevelopedcreativityinaparticulardomaincanneverbedeveloped . Rather , understanding the role that chance plays in the development of creativity - relevantskillshelpsexplainthedistributionofpeoplewhohave ( or have not ) developed the skills requisite for creative expression within or across domains . Benjamin Franklin , from a domain - general interpretation , would be thought to have a great deal of creativity , which he simply applied to all the different ﬁ elds that interested him . From a domain - speci ﬁ c interpretation , however , Franklin ' s multi - creative talent would be explained by claiming that he happened to have a great deal of creativity - relevant abilities in many domains . The talents that led to his successasapoliticianneednotbethesameas ( orevenoverlapatallwith ) the skills that helped him be a great inventor , and neither set of skills might have had anything to do with his success as a politician or writer . Theremayhavebeenoverlap , butthereneednothavebeen . Someonecan betalentedinmathandalsobeagoodtennisplayer , andyetthesemaybe entirely distinct domains that are based on completely different underlying abilities . Being creative in two seemingly unrelated areas doesn ' t show that creativity is domain - general anymore than the existence of a mathematically talented tennis expert would prove that tennis and math are rooted in the same set of skills . Domain speci ﬁ city , eveninitsmostextremeform , doesn ' targuethatpeoplecanbecreativein only asingle domain . It simply argues that because the abilities that make creativitypossibleindifferentdomainsaredifferent , creativeperformance in one domain doesn ' t predict creativity in other areas . If domain - based talents are randomly distributed , then one should ﬁ nd a few people who have a great deal of creativity - relevant skills in many domains , some people who have talents ( of varying degrees ) in several domains , and some who have little talent in any domain . This is what a normal distri - bution of unrelated skills would predict . So the presence of a few poly - mathicRenaissancepeoplewouldn ' tcontradictdomainspeci ﬁ city . Infact , it is precisely what domain speci ﬁ city predicts . One of the most important aspects to keep in mind when considering the rarity of legendary creative polymaths is that it simply takes a great dealoftimetodeveloptheskillsnecessarytoproducecreativeworkinany one particularly domain ( Gruber & Davis , 1988 ) . According to the “ ten - year rule ” ( Hayes , 1989 ) it takes , on average , at least ten years of prepa - ration in a given domain prior to reaching the highest levels of creative accomplishment in that domain , ( Weisberg , 1999 ) . It , therefore , should come as little surprise that few people manage to reach those highest levelsinmorethanone ( orperhapstwoorthreeatmost ) ﬁ eldsinasingle lifetime . Importantly , neither the domain general nor domain speci ﬁ c models ofcreativityruleoutthepossibilityoftherebeingmanypeoplewhomight be Big - C creative in one domain and also Pro - c creative in several others , or simply Pro - c creative in many ﬁ elds ( under the assumption that the ten - year rule limits Big - C creativity far more than Pro - c creativity ) . And domain speci ﬁ city certainly does not lead one to expect a scarcity of polymathsatthelittle - cormini - clevels ( Domaingeneralitywouldleadus to expect polymathy to be even more widespread than would domain speci ﬁ city , but neither theory makes speci ﬁ c predictions . ) . In the next section we present a model that can provide a framework for the many kinds ( anddegrees ) ofcreativitythatweseeintheworld , amodelthatwe believe can help us understand both single talents and polymathy . It can alsohelpusinidentifyingpromisingapproachesforidentifyingthemulti - creative potential of students . 5 . The Amusement Park Theoretical model of creativity A theory that can yield ( along with the Four - C model ) new insights about creative domains is the Amusement Park Theoretical ( APT ) model of creativity . The details of the model are presented elsewhere ( Baer & Kaufman , 2005a , 2005b ; Kaufman & Baer , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 ) , so we will simplysummarizethekeyfeaturesofthistheorytodemonstratehowthis theory might allow for more “ intelligent ” creativity testing by highlight the related constructs that could be considered in such an assessment ( such as personality ) 1 . The APT model is based ( perhaps somewhat whimsically , as some of our reviewers have noted ) on the metaphor of a large amusement park . ( The APT model = the Amusement Park Theoretical model . ) In an amusement park there are initial requirements that apply to all areas of the park . For example you will not be admitted with a ticket . You must be wearing proper attire ( Disney has yet to sponsor a nudist day ) , and you must be able to ride on public transportation or have a car to take you to the park . Similarly , there are initial requirements that , to varying degrees , are necessary to creative performance in all domains . For example , in order to be creative at something , you must have a certain base amount of intelligence . You also need to be motivated to be creative , regardless of what factors motivate you . Finally , you should be in an environmental that allows ( and , ideally , nurtures ) creative expression . All three of these initial requirements are needed for any attempt at creativity to succeed . 1 The APT model is not the only one to address domain speci ﬁ city and generality ; see Plucker and Beghetto ' s ( 2004 ) Hybrid model . 383 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy Amusement parks also have general thematic areas ( e . g . , at Disney World one might select among EPCOT , the Magic Kingdom , the Animal Kingdom , and Disney – MGM Studios ) , just as there are several different general areas in which someone could be creative ( e . g . , the arts , science , business ) . Once in one type of park , there are sections ( e . g . , Discovery Island Station , Dinoland , and Ri ﬁ ki ' s Planet Watch are all found in the Animal Kingdom ) , just as there are domains of creativity within larger general thematic areas ( e . g . , painting and poetry are domains in the general thematic area of the arts ) . These domains in turn can be subdivided into micro - domains ( e . g . , the Conservation Station and Wildlife Express Train are both part of Ri ﬁ ki ' s Plant Watch ; in the domain ofpoetry , onemightspecializeinhaikusorfreeverse ) . Althoughtheinitial requirementsareonlyspelledoutforthebeginningofthemodel , thereare clearly requirements for every descending level . Lubinski and Benbow ( 2006 ) argue that personal attributes ( abilities and interests ) and the environment are of equal importance in determining success and satisfaction . The more that one ' s abilities and interests match the require - ments of the environment , the better . Asanexample , ifonewereinterestedinassessingthecreativeabilities ofasubjectintermsofcreativityinpsychologicalresearch , onemightstart by assessing such initial requirements as a certain minimal level of intelligence and appropriate motivation and environment , as well as skill in the general thematic areas of language and mathematics . Next one might assess skills in certain domains especially relevant to psychological research ( such as statistical acumen , analytic thinking , domain - speci ﬁ c knowledge ) . Finally , if one was interested only in the ability to ( for example ) be a neuropsychologist , as opposed to social or clinical psycho - logist , one might evaluate skills in speci ﬁ c micro - domains speci ﬁ cally related to neuropsychology . If , on the other hand , one were interested in a student ' s creative potential in the area of painting , the hierarchy of skills that one would evaluate would be quite different . The initial requirements might be similar ( such as motivation ) , but skills from very different general thematic areas would be of interest ( e . g . , verbal skills would be less important , whereas spatial ability and aesthetic style would be of much greater interest ) . The differences would become even greater as one moved down the hierarchy to domains and micro - domains . Motivation could also be assessed at different levels of such a hierarchy . For example , a student might have strong intrinsic motivation atthelevelofthegeneralthematicareaofscience , andthiswouldindicate a tendency toward creative productivity in the sciences in general . Anotherstudentmayhaveextremelyhighintrinsicmotivationonlyinthe domainofmarinescience , however , whichpredictsagreaterlikelihoodof creativity in that domain but not in other sciences . Or a student ' s interest atagivenpointintimemightbeevenmorenarrowlyfocusedonamicro - domain ( for example , a student may have great interest in the reproductive success of certain kinds of mollusks in different environ - ments but show little interest in other areas of marine science ) . Ability would certainly be a key determinant of creative success ( as opposed to creative motivation or interest ) . Although actual domain - related ability would be less essential for mini - c insights or even little - c enjoyment , a genuine pursuit of Pro - c ( or , of course , Big - C ) would require the appropriate ability . As Park , Lubinski , and Benbow ( 2007 ) found , math and verbal SAT scores given at age 13 predicted people ' s accomplishments 25 years later . A person ' s speci ﬁ c strengths ( in this case , math vs . verbal ) predicted both patents ( math ) and literary publications ( verbal ) . Similarly , Wai , Lubinski , and Benbow ( 2005 ) foundinthesamepopulationthatmathandverbalSATscorespredicted success by occupation — math SAT scores predicted success in science - related ﬁ elds , and verbal SAT scores predicted success in Humanities - related ﬁ elds . People who attempt to advance to Pro - c in a domain poorly suited to their abilities may be metaphorically kicked off the ride 2 . 6 . Surprising connections Even within the fairly structured con ﬁ nes of the APT model , there will also always be surprising connections that make sense only upon closer examination . Someone may decide to pick their amusement parks based onlyonhowgoodthepopcornisatthefoodcourt . Someoneelsemayonly go to cheap amusement parks ( Big Alan ' s Generic Roadside Attraction ) . In a similar way , micro - domains or domains may be selected for reasons that are less obvious . Maybe Phil does not have a lot of money . He therefore pursues creative domains that do not require funds to pursue , such as poetry , stand - up comedy , and geology ( he ﬁ nds interesting rocks and looks for patterns in their shapes ) . We believe that many interesting creative polymaths can be uncovered within these strange connections . Certainly , in examining people who are creative in two micro - domains , these areas are typically within the same overall general domain . Examples can be found easily ; considerthelateJimCarroll . Hewasamemoirist ( TheBasketballDiaries ) , a poet , and a punk rock singer ( “ People Who Died ” ) known for his provocative lyrics . His micro - domains are distinct , but they all center on his possession of a strong narrative voice . Those rare people who are creative in dissimilar areas – like Franklin ' s accomplishment in politics , science , inventing , journalism , and literature – represent the pinnacle of creative polymathy . Itisthesamephenomenonbehindthestrangebedfellowsconceptin the APT model that brings us to the distinction between being creative across multiple domains vs . creative polymathy . Most studies that have examinedthedomain - speci ﬁ cvs . domain - generalquestionhavepicked their domains — so , for example , Baer ( 1993 ) has given students such tasks as story - writing , story - telling , poetry - writing , mathematical equation - creating , mathematical word problem - creating , and collage - making . He found consistently low and usually non - signi ﬁ cant correla - tions between creative ability in these different areas . In other words , a student who wrote a creative poem was not more likely to also tell a creative story or write a creative mathematical equation . As a result , most of these studies supported the idea that creativity is not a general construct that will manifest itself across all areas . The domain - speci ﬁ c point of view suggests that the underlying components of creativity are probably different from one domain to another . Let ' s say that Jacob is creative at computer programming and acting . If we believed that creativity was one general thing , we would say that the elements that enable Jacob to be creative in both of the areas are the same . The domain - speci ﬁ c approach would consider such double pro ﬁ ciency the equivalent of being able to both bench press three hundred pounds and recite pi to two hundred places — both neat things to be able to do , but ones that are based on quite different abilities ! Imagine , however , a puppeteer manipulating two marionettes . She is making the ﬁ rst marionette play the piano , and the second marionette is juggling . Both marionettes are engaged in activities and they certainly shareacommonality — thesamepersonispullingthestringsforboth . But thestringsthemselvesarecompletelydifferent . Webelievethatthissame marionette analogy can hold for creative polymaths . Whatever compo - nentsenabledBenjaminFranklintobeacreativewriter ( suchashissense of humor , his ability to construct pithy quotations , and his facility with language ) may have been different than those components that enabled himtobeacreativescientist ( suchashispersistence , hisingenuity , andhis ability to craft experiments ) . And yet he ( Benjamin Franklin ) was himself the puppeteer who was responsible for his creative marionettes in those different domains ( Kaufman , Beghetto , & Baer , in press ) . Like the APT Model , the puppeteer / marionette analogy allows us to consider multiple levels of creative talent or skill . There may be some general abilities ( the APT model ' s initial requirements ) that in ﬂ uence creativity in many areas , just as the skill and dexterity of the puppeteer makes it possible for him to manipulate many different kinds of marionettes . But that general puppeteering skill gets one nowhere withoutspeci ﬁ cmarionettes , eachofwhichhasitsownstringstopulland 2 Thank you to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this idea and phrase . 384 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy its own possible range of performances . In the same way , an initial requirement like general intelligence may be important for creativity in many areas , but general intelligence alone is not enough . One also needs more speci ﬁ c skills and motivations in particular general thematic areas , and in speci ﬁ c domains , if one is to evidence creativity . And this is true whether one is thinking about genius - level Big - C creativity , high - level Pro - c creativity , or more everyday little - c or even mini - c creativity ( although of course the necessary degree of domain - speci ﬁ c talent is far greater at the higher levels of creativity ) . Howdocreativepolymathsdifferfromindividualswhoarecreativein a single domain ? Some abilities and traits are helpful for creativity expressed in any ( or close to any ) domain . For instance , Openness to Experience has been proposed as a personality disposition for creativity ( McCrae , 1987 ) . People who are open to experiences will be interested in new ideas and approaches in their work and ﬂ exible in examining their ideas . They will question and re - examine commonly held assumptions and imagine new possibilities . These personal attributes similarly help an artist explore and employ new techniques and materials and a scientist see and address gaps in existing knowledge . Openness is also related to wide interests , suggesting another way how this personality disposition can be related to creative polymathy . It is plausible that creative polymaths have more pronounced certain facets of Openness , such as Openness to Ideas . Another personal attribute related to creativity in most or all domains is intrinsic motivation or a personal disposition to ﬁ nd enjoyment and challenge in work ( Amabile , 1983 , 1996 ) . Many people are intrinsically motivated for a narrow range of subject matter . A social psychologist might be intrinsically motivated to study interracial relations and implicit prejudice and an oceanographer might be only interested in studying centimeter - scale turbulence in the open ocean . Other people are intrinsically motivated for a wider range of subjects in one domain ( e . g . , a physical oceanographer interested in both coastal ocean circulation and biological productivity ) , across related domains ( e . g . , a psychologist interested in social policy and educational applications of her work ) , or across very different domains ( e . g . , a scientist interested in music performance and evolution of music ) . Intrinsic motivation for a variety of subject matter and multiple domains become an essential personal attributeincreativepolymathy . Othersuchattributesmightincludesocial non - conformity ( in order to avoid the traps of domain - speci ﬁ c conven - tions ) and a global , broad - ranging thinking style . In addition to the personal attributes , there are social and cultural factors that either support or discourage creative polymathy . Certain historical periods and associated Zeitgeist can encourage attitudes or interests that facilitate polymathy . The European Renaissance is one such period when religious dogmas were starting to be challenged andnewideasdevelopedinphilosophy , science , andthearts . Leonardoda Vinci is the world ' s most famous creative polymath , having made contributions to in the domains of art , science , and engineering . Another time and place facilitating creative polymathy in the Western world was Victorian England . The Victorian era coincided with the major technolog - ical changes of the industrial revolution , an interest in change and innovation , and a mindset of great self - con ﬁ dence . For instance , Sir Thomas Raf ﬂ es was the founder of Singapore , a major contributor to the expansion of the British Empire , and the author of a monumental History of Java ( which includes detailed accounts of diverse topics such as customs , religion , military , and natural history ) . How supportive of creative polymathy is our contemporary society ? What do parents and educators mean when they attempt to instill in children that they “ can be whatever they want to be ” ? Are they saying ( implicitly or even explicitly ) that one can become any one thing ( e . g . , an engineerorascientist , alawyeroradoctor , asenatororevenpresident ) or that they could pursue their multiple interests in the arts , biology , and computerscience ? Thepoint of decisionaboutspecializationineducation and profession varies greatly across cultures , from educational systems whereseparationintocollegeandnon - collegetracksoccursasearlyas5th grade to those that largely postpone this decision until high school or college and allow ﬂ exibility for change even after graduation . Postponing these decisions can provide more opportunity for individuals to develop , explore , and pursue interests across multiple domains . Entrance require - ments into certain activities , such as music or art programs , also vary across cultures , from ( generally ) widely available music programs in public schools ( e . g . , in the United States ) to highly selective specialized music schools available only to students with early talent ( e . g . , in Eastern Europe ) . A person who does not gain entrance to these programs loses an opportunitytolearnhowtoplayamusicalinstrument . Similarly , astudent who is sti ﬂ ed by a strict formal approach to music instruction might lose intrinsic motivation for music and abandon it as a meaningful area of expression . Speci ﬁ c organizations can also be more or less enabling or supportive of creative polymathy . The Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology presents itself as a place where “ the future is lived , not imagined ” and “ where traditional disciplines get checked at the door ” . This philosophy is re ﬂ ected in the wide range of domains in which the Media Lab ' s members are engaged , from behavioral economics to nanotechnology , data visualization , and music . Many lab members clearly cross domain boundaries . Some speci ﬁ c examples include Chris Csikszentmihalyi , who developed new technologies aimed at strengthening geographic communities and exhibited his art installations in both North America and Europe ; Judith Donath , who created computing interfaces for online commu - nities and exhibited her art at the Institute for Contemporary Art in Boston and several galleries in New York ; and Barry Vercoe , who is a renowned composer and a pioneer in computer sound manipulation and audio technology development . Polymathy - supportive environ - ments have suf ﬁ ciently broad missions to be able to bene ﬁ t from creativity in multiple domains . Furthermore , they develop a reward structure that provides incentives valued by its members . Note that incentives can be external rewards , such as compensation packages , but they are also ﬂ exible supports for continuation of work projects , such as project funding and appreciation for diverse interests . Given favorable macro - level social or cultural and micro - level organizational supports , what form is creative polymathy most likely to take ? In the Renaissance era , it was possible for an individual to master the existing ( and comparatively sparse ) knowledge on the arts , sciences , and engineering . Today , when the knowledge base in each of these domains is vast , specialization happens out of necessity . The demands of obtaining higher education degrees necessary as a basis for creativity in engineering are such that they do not allow a person much time to pursue other interests in the same time , especially if these interests are not similar in theme or method . As a result , creative polymathy in the information and knowledge ages will most likely take a form of artists becoming interested in new technologies that can further their art , musicians interested in developing improved ways to deliver music to listeners , or scientists and engineers using technology as themes in creating art installations . These individuals create new work at the intersection of multiple domains by seeing connections and synergies where none existed . Similar skills and ideas can contribute to creation in multiple domains . Another pathway to creative polymathy is one of successive con - tributions to different domains . In this case , an individual takes several relatively traditional routes to creativity . One can ﬁ rst study computer science and become a creative software developer after multiple years of training and work . At a later time this person can develop a new interest or start pursuing ongoing interests in another domain , again spending long time on training , skill development , and persistent work . In this case , there may be little similarity between the two domains of creation and many employed skills may be domain - speci ﬁ c . Such successive polymathy can have an indirect effect on enhancing creative output in older age . The overall developmental trend indicates that creative output declines in old age ( Simonton , 1991 ) . However , for individuals who change their area of work , this trend can be eliminated or reversed ( Simonton , 1998 ) . 385 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy 7 . Discovering and supporting talent There are several important things to keep in mind when considering how use these models to help identify the multi - creative talents of students . First , it is essential to reiterate that we should not expect to ﬁ nd legendary or professional levels of creativity in young students . Their mini - c and little - c creativity may someday grow into larger forms of creative expression , but not all professional or even legendary creators display the extraordinary precocity of Mozart , who at ﬁ ve could read , write , and play music pro ﬁ ciently . There is not a one - to - one correspon - dence between precocity and later outstanding achievement . We are not suggesting that educators overlook any young Mozarts in our classes ( something almost impossible to do ) , but rather to emphasize thatitisthelessextreme ( andlessobvious ) little - candmini - ctalentsand interests that we should be working hard to identify . The APT model does notclaimthattherearenogeneralcreativity - relevantskills , justasagood identi ﬁ cation program for gifted / talented students should not ignore IQ test scores , but it reminds us that there are many far less general abilities and motivations that are just as important . Young students who show an extraordinary joy in playing with words ; children who ﬁ nd delight in making sketches of scenes from the books they love ( and who may have what Winner called a “ rage to draw ” ( Winner , 1996 , p . 87 ) , in her des - cription of one talented your artist ) ; students who devour books about stars , or architecture , or some other area of special interest : these are all potentiallycreativelytalentedchildren . Anyspecialskillorinterestmaybe evidence of creativity in a given domain or micro - domain . Our search for giftedness and talent should not be limited to those who have high IQs ( although those with high IQs should certainly be included as well ) , and oureffortstonurturetalentshould , totheextentpossible , harmonizewith the speci ﬁ c talents that our students exhibit . Canweexpectto ﬁ nd studentswhoexhibitmulti - creativeability ? Yes and no . Like Benjamin Franklin , our students may exhibit their talents at different times rather than all at once . Franklin ' s talents as a politician were not apparent early in his newspaper career . But many of his achievementsindiverse ﬁ eldsdidoverlap ( hissage - likewisdomcertainly informed both his politics and his writing ) , and so they sometimes will in our students . To the extent possible , we are wise to follow our students ' creative muses , which may have their own calendars and schedules . If a student ' s interests include both music and science , we would do well to nurtureboth , butifonlyonetalentorspecialinterestisapparentatagiven time , then that is the area on which we should focus . Onceidenti ﬁ ed , whatcanwedotonurturebuddingtalentsandspecial interests ? There are at least two kinds of things that the psychology of creativitytellsusarehelpful : ( 1 ) showinterest , butgetoutoftheway , and ( 2 ) help students develop domain - relevant skills and knowledge . Here ' s what we mean . ( 1 ) Show interest but get out of the way : Expressing interest in children ' s ideas , projects , activities , perfor - mances , and passions is helpful . Talking with them ( and especially listening to them talk ) about their interests , and providing resources they might need ( materials , books , tools , instruments , contacts , etc . ) are also important . Providing access to academic acceleration ( such as AP classes ) is also a wonderful chance to challenge children to push their limits and achieve more . Butthenweoftenneedtogetoutoftheirway . Intrinsicmotivationisa wonderful thing . Unfortunately , when extrinsic motivation is added , the net result may be temporarily higher total motivation , but in the long - term it often leads to lower intrinsic motivation . Bribing children ( or adults ) to do things they already like to do seems to turn fun into work , and extrinsic motivation more generally ( e . g . , rewards , anticipated evaluation ) has this unfortunate long - term effect , while at the same time often decreasing creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ; Baer , 1997b , 1998a , b ; Hennessey & Amabile , 1988 ; Lepper & Greene , 1975 , 1978 ) . Thiseffectis not a simple one , and there is dispute in the creativity research community about its generality . There is evidence that rewards that are more clearly targeted or tied to speci ﬁ c behaviors can either have no negative effect or sometimes even enhance creativity ( Eisenberger , Pierce , & Cameron , 1999 ; Eisenberger & Shanock , 2003 ) . But the evidence that extrinsic motivators can decrease both intrinsic motiva - tion and creativity is fartoo strongto ignore , andthe last thinga teacher wants to do , even inadvertently , is to take away a student ' s joy or passion for being creative . Perhapsthemostcommonkindofreward / bribethatteachersusewith talented students is extra credit . The teacher ' s motivation is often a positive one – e . g . , after noticing that a student has a real passion for creative writing , the teacher may offer extra credit for writing an extra shortstoryorpoem – butthelikelylonger - termeffectisnottoincreasethe student ' s interest , but ( somewhat counter - intuitively ) to reduceit . We all like getting rewards , so what could seem better getting extra credit for doing someone one already likes to do ? The problem is that such well - intentioned bribes tend to have very negative long - term consequences . What was originally something the student did because of genuine interest has become something she does to get points from her teacher , who has ( entirely inadvertently ) taken over part of the source of motivation and the direction of the student ' s once entirely self - directed pursuit . If the student who loved creative writing had wanted to write a short story , she would have done so anyway without the extra credit . Instead of pursuing her interest in creative writing in her own way , she writes her poem or story for the external bene ﬁ ts . Perhaps the student would have otherwise spent her writing energies on something of even more interest ( such as keeping her blog up to date or collaborating with a friend on a comic strip , her teacher has , quite unintentionally , converted fun into work . This is not to say that all extrinsic motivation is bad . Students need to learn skills ; in order to learn these skills , they need feedback on their performance . Learning to anticipate evaluation is an essential skill . Teachers need to give their students – including their most creative and talentedones – thekindsoffeedbacktheyneedtodeveloptheirskills . Such feedback should focus on providing information that will support improvement – letting students know what they have done well – pointing out how students might continue to improve their understanding of domain conventions and constraints , and helping students modify , develop new , and even abandon ideas , insights , and interpretations in light of the particular domain and task constraints ( Beghetto , 2007 ) . Whenprovidingsuchfeedback , teachersshouldalsotrytominimizesocial comparison and evaluative pressures and , instead , stress the informative aspects of their evaluative feedback and acknowledge intellectual risk taking of their students ( Beghetto , 2005 ) . It is worth bearing in mind that it is generally far easier to kill intrinsic motivation than to instill it , and teachers should be careful not to use rewards , or evaluations , as tools to motivate students in areas where they already have signi ﬁ cant levels of intrinsic motivation . It is often wiser just to get out of the way of such highly motivated students as they pursue their passions than to try to promote or encourage interests that need no promotion ( Baer , 1997a ) . ( 2 ) Help students develop domain - relevant skills and knowledge : Ittakesmanyyearstolearneverythingthatonemightneedtoknowto become an expert ( and possibly a Big - C creator ) in any ﬁ eld , as noted above . Students therefore need opportunities to learn about the domains that are of particular interest to them , and they cannot wait until those things happen to appear ( or fail to appear ) in the regular curriculum . If students have special interests and / or talents , we can nurture those interests by providing opportunities for students to learn more , far more than the curriculum generally expects , in their areas of special interest . Thisassistancemighttaketheformofarrangingforthemtoparticipate in special programs ( e . g . , summer science camps or spelling bees ) or simply providing books and other resources . It might involve special training ( e . g . , voice lessons ) , curriculum acceleration ( as mentioned earlier ) , or connecting students with others ( both peers with similar interests and abilities and adults who might become mentors ) who share 386 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387 Author ' s personal copy their passions . Opportunities to learn about the lives ( both professional and personal ) of Big - C creators in a student ' s ﬁ eld of interest can also be helpful . For students who have many special interests and talents – little - c polymaths – teachers might also provide help with time management . A student with many special interests can never have enough time for all that she wants to do , not to mention those pesky things that the world seems to think she has to do ( e . g . , those other subjects , the ones that might not – at least yet – excite her ) . Multi - creative individuals , like Benjamin Franklin , are rare and we are unlikely to encounter many ( or any ) in our teaching careers . But legen - dary creators often have many professional or everyday creative talents and interests ( Root - Bernstein & Root - Bernstein , 2004 ) , and many students exhibit vary degrees of everyday and , certainly , mini - c creativity when learning various academic domains . One can never know which talentswillbecomethemostimportanttoapolymathatanypointinone ' s life . Joni Mitchell thought music would remain a hobby , playing second ﬁ ddle to her serious work as a painter ( DiMartino , 1998 ; Weller , 2008 ) ; Alan Greenspan pursued being a saxophone player before “ falling back ” on economics . Benjamin Franklin surely could not have known which of hismanytalentswouldbecomemostimportanttohimlaterinlife . Soitis with our students . What we can offer them is the chance to develop any , and all , of their creative talents . References Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity . New York : Springer - Verlag . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psychology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview . Baer , J . ( 1991 ) . Generality ofcreativity acrossperformance domains . Creativity Research Journal , 4 , 23 − 39 . Baer , J . ( 1993 ) . Divergent thinking and creativity : A task - speci ﬁ c approach . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Baer , J . ( 1994 ) . Divergent thinking is not a general trait : A multi - domain training experiment . Creativity Research Journal , 7 , 35 − 46 . Baer , J . ( 1996 ) . The effects of task - speci ﬁ c divergent - thinking training . Journal of Creative Behavior , 30 , 183 − 187 . Baer , J . ( 1997a ) . Creative teachers , Creative students . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . Baer , J . ( 1997b ) . Gender differences in the effects of anticipated evaluation on creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 25 − 31 . Baer , J . ( 1998a ) . Thecasefordomainspeci ﬁ cityincreativity . CreativityResearchJournal , 11 , 173 − 177 . Baer , J . ( 1998b ) . Gender differences in the effects of extrinsic motivation on creativity . Journal of Creative Behavior , 32 , 18 − 37 . Baer , J . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2005a ) . Bridging generality and speci ﬁ city : The Amusement Park Theoretical ( APT ) Model of creativity . Roeper Review , 27 , 158 − 163 . Baer , J . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2005b ) . Whence creativity ? Overlapping and dual - aspect skills and traits . In J . C . Kaufman J . Baer ( Eds . ) , Creativity across domains : Faces of the muse ( pp . 313 − 320 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Beghetto , R . A . ( 2005 ) . Doesassessmentkillstudentcreativity ? TheEducationalForum , 69 , 254 − 263 . Beghetto , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Ideational code - switching : Walking the talk about supporting student creativity in the classroom . Roeper Review , 29 , 265 − 270 . Beghetto , R . A . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Toward a broader conception of creativity : A caseformini - ccreativity . Psychologyof Aesthetics , Creativity , andtheArts , 1 , 73 − 79 . Beghetto , R . A . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Do we all have multicreative potential ? ZDM — The International Journal of Mathematics Education , 41 , 39 − 44 . Cohen , L . M . ( 1989 ) . A continuum of adaptive creative behaviors . Creativity Research Journal , 2 , 169 − 183 . Conti , R . , Coon , H . , & Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Evidencetosupportthecomponentialmodelof creativity : Secondary analyses of three studies . Creativity Research Journal , 9 , 385 − 389 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity : Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . New York : HarperCollins . DiMartino , D . ( 1998 ) . The un ﬁ ltered Joni Mitchell . MOJO , August , 1998 . Retrieved electronicallyOctober24 , 2008fromJMDLathttp : / / jmdl . com / library / view . cfm ? id = 195 . Eisenberger , R . , Pierce , W . D . , & Cameron , J . ( 1999 ) . Effects of reward on intrinsic motivation : Negative , neutral , and positive . Psychological Bulletin , 125 , 677 − 691 . Eisenberger , R . , & Shanock , L . ( 2003 ) . Rewards , intrinsicmotivation , andcreativity : Acase study of conceptual and methodological isolation . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 121 − 130 . Ericsson , K . A . , Roring , R . W . , & Nandagopal , K . ( 2007 ) . Giftedness and evidence for reproducibly superior performance : An account based on the expert performance framework . High Ability Studies , 18 , 3 − 56 . Gruber , H . E . , & Davis , S . N . ( 1988 ) . Inching our way up Mt . Olympus : The evolving - systems approach to creative thinking . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 243 − 270 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 − 454 . Han , K . S . ( 2003 ) . Domain - speci ﬁ city of creativity in young children : How quantitative and qualitative data support it . Journal of Creative Behavior , 37 , 117 − 142 . Hayes , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Cognitive processes in creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Roning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 202 – 219 ) . New York : Plenum . Hennessey , B . A . , & Amabile , T . M . ( 1988 ) . Conditions of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 11 − 38 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Hocevar , D . ( 1976 ) . Dimensionality of creativity . Psychological Reports , 39 , 869 − 870 . Isaacson , W . ( 2004 ) . Benjamin Franklin : An American life . New York : Simon & Schuster . Ivcevic , Z . ( 2007 ) . Artistic and everyday creativity : An act - frequency approach . Journal of Creative Behavior , 41 , 271 − 290 . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2004 ) . Hawking ' sHaiku , Madonna ' smath . InR . J . Sternberg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . L . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : From potential to realization ( pp . 3 − 20 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2005 ) . TheAmusementParkTheoryofCreativity . InJ . C . Kaufman & J . Baer ( Eds . ) , Creativityacrossdomains : Facesofthemuse ( pp . 321 − 328 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2006 ) . Intelligent testing with Torrance . Creativity Research Journal , 18 , 99 − 102 . Kaufman , J . C . , & Beghetto , R . A . ( 2009 ) . Beyond big and little : The Four C Model of Creativity . Review of General Psychology , 13 , 1 − 12 . Kaufman , J . C . , Cole , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( 2009 ) . Theconstructofcreativity : Astructuralmodel for self - reported creativity ratings . Journal of Creative Behavior , 43 , 119 − 134 . Lepper , M . , & Greene , D . ( 1975 ) . Turning work into play : Effects of adult surveillance and extrinsic rewards on children ' s intrinsic motivation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 31 , 479 − 486 . Lepper , M . , & Greene , D . ( 1978 ) . The hidden costs of reward . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Lubinski , D . , & Benbow , C . P . ( 2006 ) . Study of mathematically precocious youth after 35 years : Uncovering antecedents for the development of math – science expertise . Perspectives on Psychological Science . McCrae , R . R . ( 1987 ) . Creativity , divergent thinking , and openness to experience . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 1258 − 1265 . Park , G . , Lubinski , D . , & Benbow , C . P . ( 2007 ) . Contrasting intellectual patterns predict creativityintheartsandsciences : Trackingintellectuallyprecociousyouthover25years . Psychological Science , 18 , 948 − 952 . Plucker , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Beware of simple conclusions : The case for the content generality of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 179 − 182 . Plucker , J . A . ( 2005 ) . The ( relatively ) generalist view of creativity . In J . C . Kaufman & J . Baer ( Eds . ) , Creativity across domains : Faces of the muse ( pp . 307 − 312 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Plucker , J . A . , & Beghetto , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Why creativity is domain general , why it looks domain speci ﬁ c , and why the distinction doesn ' t matter . In R . J . Sternberg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . L . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : Frompotentialtorealization ( pp . 153 − 168 ) . Washington , DC , US : American Psychological Association . Richards , R . ( 1990 ) . Everyday creativity , eminent creativity , andhealth : “ Afterview ” for CRJ issues on creativity and health . Creativity Research Journal , 3 , 300 − 326 . Root - Bernstein , R . ( 1989 ) . Discovering . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Root - Bernstein , R . , & Root - Bernstein , M . ( 2004 ) . Artistic scientists and scienti ﬁ c artists : The link between polymathy and creativity . In R . J . Sternberg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . L . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : Frompotentialtorealization ( pp . 127 − 152 ) . Washington , DC , US : American Psychological Association . Runco , M . A . ( 1989 ) . The creativity of children ’ s art . Child Study Journal , 19 , 177 − 190 . Runco , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Personal creativity : De ﬁ nition and developmental issues . New Directions for Child Development , 72 , 3 − 30 . Runco , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology , 55 , 657 − 687 . Simon , H . A . ( 1981 ) . The sciences of the arti ﬁ cial ( 2nd ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1991 ) . Creative productivity through the adult years . Generations : Journal of the American Society on Aging , 15 , 13 − 16 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1994 ) . Greatness : Who makes history and why . New York : Guilford Press . Simonton , D . K . ( 1997 ) . Creative productivity : A predictive and explanatory model of career trajectories and landmarks . Psychological Review , 104 , 66 − 89 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1998 ) . Careerpaths and creative lives : Atheoreticalperspective on late - life potential . In C . Adams - Price ( Ed . ) , Creativity and successful aging : Theoretical and empirical approaches ( pp . 3 − 18 ) . New York : Springer . Simonton , D . K . ( 2009 ) . Genius 101 . New York : Springer . Stein , M . I . ( 1953 ) . Creativity and culture . The Journal of Psychology , 36 , 311 − 322 . Taylor , I . A . ( 1959 ) . The nature of the creative process . In P . Smith ( Ed . ) , Creativity ( pp . 521 − 582 ) . New York : Hastings House . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 2004 ) . Imagination and creativity in childhood . ( M . E . Sharpe , Inc . , Trans . ) Journal of Russian and East European Psychology , 42 , 7 – 97 . ( Original work published 1967 ) . Wai , J . , Lubinski , D . , & Benbow , C . P . ( 2005 ) . Creativityandoccupationalaccomplishments among intellectually precocious youth : An age 13 to age 33 longitudinal study . Journal of Educational Psychology , 97 , 484 − 492 . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1999 ) . Creativityandknowledge : Achallengetotheories . InR . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 226 − 250 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Weller , S . ( 2008 ) . Girlslikeus : CaroleKing , JoniMitchell , CarlySimon — Andthejourneyof a generation . New York : Atria Books . Winner , E . ( 1996 ) . Gifted children : Myths and realities . New York : Basic Books . 387 J . C . Kaufman et al . / Learning and Individual Differences 20 ( 2010 ) 380 – 387