International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 1 A MODEL OF CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION IN ORGANIZATIONS Mr Rama Chandra Nayak , Registrar , NIET G . Noida Dr . Ramesh Agarwal , Director , JRE Group of Institutions , Greater Noida . ABSTRACT As reported by Amabile et al . ( 1996 : 1154 ) : “All innovation begins with creative ideas . We define innovation as the successful implementation of creative ideas within an organization . In this view , creativity by individuals and teams is a starting point for innovation ; the first is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the second " . As creativity is an important source of organizational innovation as well as competitive advantage ( Amabile , 1988 , 1996 ; Oldham & Cummings , 1996 ) , organizations are increasingly seeking to foster it . Different managerial practices influence the work environment , which is one of the major factors impacting on creativity within business organizations ( Couger , 1995 ) . Therefore , managers face the challenge of creating the right context and conditions for creativity to flourish ( Shalley , Gilson & Blum , 2000 ) . Keywords : Model , Creativity , Organizations , Uncertainty , Survival , Ideas INTRODUCTION In today’s economy , characterized by uncertainty , risk and dynamism , creativity becomes a vital source of competitive advantage for companies . Considerable evidence suggests that creativity makes an important contribution to organizational innovation , effectiveness and survival . Therefore , encouraging creativity is a strategic choice firms have to make ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Both creativity and innovation involve the generation of novel ideas , yet the two concepts are not identical . While , according to some authors , creativity is usually associated with the generation of new ideas as an end to itself ( Amabile , 1988 ; Van de Ven , 1986 ) , innovation emphasizes the applicability of new ideas to address particular problems ( Kanter , 1983 ) . As reported by Amabile et al . ( 1996 : 1154 ) : “All innovation begins with creative ideas . We define innovation as the successful implementation of creative ideas within an organization . In this view , creativity by individuals and teams is a starting point for innovation ; the first is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the second " . As creativity is an important source of organizational innovation as well as competitive advantage ( Amabile , 1988 , 1996 ; Oldham & Cummings , 1996 ) , organizations are increasingly seeking to foster it . Different International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 2 managerial practices influence the work environment , which is one of the major factors impacting on creativity within business organizations ( Couger , 1995 ) . Therefore , managers face the challenge of creating the right context and conditions for creativity to flourish ( Shalley , Gilson & Blum , 2000 ) . REVIEW OF LITERATURE Motivation for the research Recent year studies on creativity have proliferated in the field of management and organization ( Gil & Spiller , 2007 ; Woerkum et al . , 2007 ; Hargadon & Bechky , 2006 ; Amabile et al . , 2004 ; Shalley et al . , 2000 ) . Creativity has been studied from different perspectives and has been associated with a number of interacting and contrasting defining elements . However , an agreement on its definition is still to emerge . Furthermore , numerous studies have provided evidence that creativity is a paradoxical concept , which is manifested in a number of dualities and tensions , such as passion and discipline , as well as individuality and collaboration ( DeFillippi , Grabher , & Jones , 2007 ; Svejenova , Mazza , & Planellas , 2007 ; Alvarez , Mazza , Strandgaard , & Svejenova , 2005 ) . These paradoxes take place at different levels and need to be balanced within an organization . For example , scholars have related creativity to notions such as passion , imagination and inspiration , characteristics usually associated with the creative genius ( Bilton & Leary , 2002 ; Simonton , 1999 ; Boden , 1994 ) . Simonton ( 1999 ) defines the creative genius as a person who regularly seeks out complexity and novelty across a wide range of interests while remaining independent , autonomous , and non - conforming in personal and professional endeavours . He argues that such individuals have a tendency toward introversion , a strong tolerance for ambiguity , an openness to diverse experiences , and a persistent , uncompromising passion and commitment to work that often results in estrangement from significant others . These individuals also appear to others to be unconventional , rebellious , and boundless in their energy for particular projects and activities . In addition , despite any barriers that may arise in their International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 3 work , they usually persevere while remaining flexible enough to alter and adapt their methods when dealing with repeated failure . Following this perspective , creativity emerges as something “divergent” and “messy” ( De Bono , 1992 ) , embedded and hidden into this particular type of the creative personality ( Storr , 1985 ) . Other scholars however , without denying a view of creativity as a personal process of “deviating from the conformity of shared custom and culture” , have introduced the idea of creativity as something composed by two “completely different genetic materials” ( Hargadon , 2006 : 199 ) . On the one hand , creativity implies rebelling against a tradition - bound social system , on the other hand , it encompasses a backstage process , which is rooted in an established social system and seeking acceptance in that system ( Hargadon , 2006 ) . Furthermore , scholars have argued that the celebration of and overemphasis on the creative personality and genius has started giving way to a collective conception of creativity that depicts creative work as interactions or collaboration ( DeFillippi , Grabher , & Jones , 2007 ; Farrell , 2001 ; Becker , 1982 ) . Recent evidence has also suggested that while some creative solutions can be seen as the product of an individual insight , many others are the result of a collective process . Therefore , investigating creativity means understanding how the collective problem solving happens in sets of interrelated activities ( Hargadon & Bechky , 2006 ) . What emerges from these theoretical accounts is an imagery of the creative endeavour as a more disciplined and orderly behaviour . RESEARCH METHODOLOGY The objective of this review is to outline the dissertation’s methodology . To this purpose , first I overview the research questions and process . Second , I highlight the main elements of the research design . Third , I review key aspects of the empirical setting . International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 4 RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND PROCESS As stated in the introduction , the purpose of this dissertation is to open up the black - box of creativity and improve the understanding on how it can be managed in organizations . Fulfilling the purpose requires first , clarifying what creativity is and the elements that constitute it ; second , investigating the specific mechanisms that allow creativity to take place and be disciplined and transformed into marketable products and third , identifying the practices that can help companies retain the employees with a creative potential . Therefore , the two research questions inspiring this dissertation : How have scholars defined creativity ? What mechanisms and practices allow managing creativity in organizations ? Answering these questions is a challenge for both researchers and practitioners alike that requires a multilevel focus : an investigation into the dynamics of and the interplay among individual , team and organizational levels . It is surely difficult to see how systematic , comprehensive research on organizational creativity can be pursued without integrating different levels of analysis . In order to address the research gaps identified and articulated in the introduction , the first purpose of this work is to clarify the meaning of creativity by providing evidence of its conceptual categories and elements . Accordingly , chapter two seeks to address the following research questions : How have scholars defined creativity ? For the purpose of answering the research question , chapter two performs a content analysis on 94 definitions of creativity , collected from 462 articles published in selected management journals and in 50 books over an 18 - year period ( from 1990 to 2008 ) . Results show that although the definitions of creativity given by scholars converge to some extent , they also differ considerably and highlight different dimensions . What emerges is that six conceptual categories on “creativity” enjoy general support , namely , creation , synthesis , output , modification , interactions , and engagement . Analyzing the results in detail , on a total of 487 coding references , International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 5 39 % of the coding associates creativity with an outcome ( the quality that a specific product , process , idea or solution should have in order to be considered creative ) , 32 % with synthesis ( the ability to bring together knowledge or ideas from different areas and discover new solutions , or to “think outside the box” ) , 19 % with creation ( the power or ability to bring into existence , generate , produce ) . Moreover , 5 % of the coding relates creativity with modification ( a dynamic process of transformation and renewal within a field ) , 3 % with interaction ( a relational perspective that focuses on when the creative insight emerges not within a single individual , but through the interactions of multiple actors ) and finally 2 % with engagement ( an intrinsically highly motivated state , in which there is total involvement in the creative task ) . Although no attempt is made to establish any form of hierarchy of the conceptual constructs derived , 90 % of the coding references link creativity with the categories outcome , creation and synthesis : only few scholars have advanced the new concepts of modification , interaction and engagement in the definitions . All the conceptual categories and their defining elements are analyzed in depth in the chapter , in order to provide a clear explanation of their meanings . SIGNIFICANCE OF STUDY In addition , it is generally recognized that part of an organization’s creativity is embedded in its individual members . Employees with a creative potential usually come up with new ideas that enhance the organization’s ability to grow and compete ( Kanter , 1983 ) . Therefore , investing in human capital is surely one of the keys for organizational success . However , very few studies have investigated how to manage and , above all , retain those employees with the best creative potential ( Mumford , 2000 ) . Indeed , harnessing creativity means not just developing ways to allow employees to be creative , but also retaining employees so that creative momentum can build over time and not be disrupted by the constant need to recruit new personnel to fill vacant positions . International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 6 Following these considerations , three main research gaps emerge in the literature . First , considering the lack of consensus on the definition of creativity , there is a need for greater clarity in the domain and operationalization of the concept . Second , considering the tension between fostering and disciplining creativity , further research is needed on the specific social mechanisms that allow creativity to take place and the creative passion to be disciplined and transformed into a marketable product . Third , considering the importance of the creative individuals in enhancing organizational creativity and results , further studies are required to analyze the impact of human resource management ( HRM ) practices on creative employees’ retention SCOPE FOR FURTHER RESEARCH The purpose of this dissertation is to open up the black - box of creativity and improve the understanding on how it can be managed in organizations . Firstly , this work seeks to advance the literature on organizational creativity by providing definitional clarity on the term , analyzing how different scholars have conceptualized it . It tries to integrate separate streams of research into a whole and to increase the understanding of what constitutes the essence of creativity , by exploring its defining elements and concepts . Secondly , it seeks to shed new light on creativity as a paradoxical phenomenon and to contribute to a view of creativity as a social process ( DeFillippi , Grabher , & Jones , 2007 ; Farrell , 2001 ; Becker , 1982 ) . For this purpose , it develops theory , by advancing a theoretical framework that identifies a number of under - explored roles and relational mechanisms that help translate the individual creative passion into a disciplined collective effort to bring cultural products to market . Accordingly , it seeks first to add to the collective perspective on creativity by delving into a number of roles , beyond the role of the creator , that are crucial for igniting and enhancing the creative endeavour , and second to extend the collaborative view of creativity by examining different relational mechanisms that connect individual creators and creative firms . International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 7 Thirdly , the dissertation aims at identifying specific HRM practices that help companies retain creative employees in creativity - driven organizations . At this purpose , it investigates the specific case of a multi - unit corporation operating in the high symbolic context . In this way , the dissertation also contributes to the human resource management and multi - unit organizations literature . Finally , this work integrates the findings into a multilevel theoretical framework , which pushes forward a new perspective on how creativity happens in organizations that has implications for both theory and practice . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Amabile T . M . 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . In B . M . Straw and L . L . Cummings ( Eds ) . Research in Organizational Behavior , 10 . [ 2 ] Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 123 - 167 . Amabile T . M . 1996 . Creativity in context . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Amabile T . M . 1998 . How to kill creativity . Harvard Business Review , September - October , 77 - 87 . [ 3 ] Baum J . R . & Locke E . A . 2004 . The relationship of entrepreneurial traits , skill , and motivation to subsequent venture growth . Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 587 . [ 4 ] Baysinger B . D . & Mobley W . H . 1983 . Employee turnover : individual and organizational analysis . In K . M . Rowland & G . R . Ferris ( Eds . ) , Research in personnel and human resource management , 1 , 269 - 919 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . [ 5 ] Bechky B . 2006 . Gaffers , gofers , and grips : role - based coordination in temporary organizations . Organization Science , 17 ( 1 ) , 3 - 22 . [ 6 ] Becker H . 1982 . Art worlds . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Berelson B . 1952 . Content analysis in communication research . Glencoe , IL : The Free International Journal of Transformations in Business Management http : / / www . ijtbm . com ( IJTBM ) 2011 , Vol . No . 1 , Issue No . 1 , January - March International Journal of Transformations in Business Management ( IJTBM ) Page 8 [ 6 ] Bilton C . 2007 . Management and Creativity . From creative industries to creative management . Oxford , UK : Blackwell Publishing . Boden M . A . 1994 . Introduction . In M . A . Boden ( Ed . ) , Dimensions of creativity . Cambridge : MIT Press . [ 7 ] Brass D . J . 1995 . A social network perspective on human resource management . In K . M . Rowland & G . R . Ferris ( Eds ) . Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management , 13 , 39 - 79 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . [ 8 ] Burt R . S . 2004 . Structural holes and good ideas . American Journal of Sociology , 110 , 349 – 399 . [ 9 ] Cappetta R . & Gioia D . 2006 . Fine fashion : symbolic artifacts , sensegiving , and sensemaking in the construction of organizational identity and image . In Rafaeli A . & Pratt M . Artifacts and Organizations , Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum [ 10 ] Publishers . Cappetta R . , Cillo P . & Ponti A . 2006 . Convergent designs in fine fashion : an evolutionary model for stylistic innovation . Research Policy , 35 , 1273 - 1290 . [ 11 ] Cappetta R . & Cillo P . 2008 . Managing integrators where integration matters : insight from symbolic industry . International Journal of Human Resource Management , 19 , 2235 - 2251 . [ 12 ] Chandler A . D . Jr . 1991 . The functions of the HQ unit in the multibusiness firm . Strategic Management Journal , 12 , 31 - 50 . [ 13 ] Chen X . P . , Yao X . & Kotha S . 2009 . Entrepreneur passion and preparedness in business plan presentations : a persuasion analysis of venture capitalists’ funding decisions . Academy of Management Journal , 52 ( 1 ) , 19 - 214 . [ 14 ] Christensen C . 1997 . The innovator’s dilemma : when new technologies cause great firms to fail . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Collis D . , Young D . & Goold M . 2007 . The size , structure and performance of corporate headquarters . Strategic Management Journal , 28 , 383 – 405 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Authors would like to extend their heartfelt thanks to the academic and infrastructural support received from their respective Dept . / University .