Visual adaptation and the purpose of perception Ian Phillips and Chaz Firestone Johns Hopkins University What is the purpose of perception ? And how might the answer to this question help distinguish perception from other mental processes ? Block’s landmark book , The Border Between Seeing and Thinking , investigates the nature of perception , how perception differs from cognition , and why the distinction matters . It is , as one would expect , wide - ranging , deeply informed by relevant science , and hugely stimulating . Here , we explore a central project of the book — Block’s attempts to identify the features of perception that distinguish it from higher - level cognition — by focusing on his suggestion that such features closely relate to perception’s purpose . As well as offering detailed critical discussion of these proposals , our more general aim is to advertise both the promise and pitfalls of asking : What is perception for ? ∗ Correspondence may be addressed to ianbphillips @ jhu . edu ( IP ) or chaz @ jhu . edu ( CF ) Forthcoming , Analysis January 11 , 2022 1 . Purpose in perception science Many theories , hypotheses , and explanations in vision science appeal to the evolved purpose ( s ) of perceptual systems . Consider three examples . First , Goodale and Milner motivate their highly influential two visual systems hypothesis by appealing to the evolutionary benefits of separate processing streams : “It seems plausible from a functional standpoint that separate processing modules would have evolved to mediate the different uses to which vision can be put . ” ( 1992 : 20 ) Specifically , they contend that we should distinguish two such systems : an evo - lutionarily more ancient system whose function is to guide visuomotor action , and a more recent system that constructs a stable , conscious visual representation of the world , for use in memory , planning and decision making . Similarly , Xu introduces her related two visual systems account by noting two competing functions of visual processing : “Visual information processing contains two opposite needs . There is both a need to comprehend the richness of the visual world and a need to extract only pertinent visual information to guide thoughts and behavior at a given mo - ment . ” ( 2018 : 312 ) Xu’s hypothesis is that one system is “invariant” ( constructing a detailed model of the world independent of the perceiver’s goals or intentions ) and the other “adaptive” ( representing only salient and task - relevant information to inform decisions ) . Second , both proponents and critics of the cognitive penetration of vision ap - peal to functional considerations . Bhalla and Proffitt ( 1999 ) notoriously claim that wearing a heavy backpack makes slopes look steeper , arguing that such an effect dissuades people from climbing slopes beyond their physiological potential ( though see Durgin et al . , 2009 ; Firestone , 2013 ) . Similarly , Balcetis and Dunning claim that desirable objects ( e . g . , chocolate ) are seen as closer than undesirable objects ( e . g . , faeces ) , proposing that “these biases arise in order to encourage perceivers to en - gage in behaviors leading to the acquisition of the object . ” ( 2010 ; 151 ) . In contrast , Gilchrist offers a functional argument against penetration , likening an encapsulated architecture to a “free press” . His point is that visual ( like public ) information is needed for myriad , perhaps unpredictable purposes , and that distorting it for one end may leave the well “poisoned , with serious damage to other functions” ( 2020 : 1002 ) . For example , exaggerating slopes and heights may mislead perceivers who intend to use a hill as a landmark for later navigation or to escape a flood ( Firestone & Scholl , 2016 ) . 2 Finally , many theorists offer functional arguments for the veridicality of percep - tion . 1 For instance , Palmer writes : “Evolutionarily speaking , visual perception is useful only if it is reasonably accurate” ( 1999 : 6 ) . Against this , Hoffman et al . ( 2015 ) make the striking claim that perception’s goal — guiding adaptive behaviour — supports an opposing view on which our percepts are wholly non - veridical , de - liberately hiding objective reality and instead offering an easily engageable interface ( for criticism , see Berke et al . , 2021 ) . Block joins this tradition in outlining his approach to determining the border between perception and cognition . He begins by refining our common - sense grasp of the distinction , seeking out “scientific indicators that make sense of the pre - theoretic classifications” ( 32 ) . Such markers offer empirical purchase on the joint between perception and cognition , and position us to ascertain its fundamental nature . Block offers five such indicators : rivalry , pop - out , illusory contours , processing speed , but first and foremost , adaptation — the phenomenon whereby perceiving a given stimulus feature ( e . g . , blue ) temporarily biases perception away from that feature ( e . g . , towards yellow ; though see below for refinement ) . He singles out adap - tation as “the main scientific indicator . . . of what is perceptual and what cognitive” ( 32 ) and “the most useful of the methods” ( 51 ) for distinguishing perception from cognition . For Block , although not constitutive of perception , adaptation represents “a basic feature of perception that is present in all known perceptual systems” ( 86 ) . In an especially tantalising passage , he suggests that these claims are connected to the purpose of perception : to deliver “news” . What do the indicators have to do with what perception is at the most fundamental level ? Are they mere symptoms of perception or are they more deeply connected with what perception is ? In the case of adapta - tion , one connection is very likely evolutionary . The evolutionary purpose of perception is acquiring information about what is happening here and now . Call that ‘news’ . Any feature of the visual system that produces a constant effect has to be filtered out in order to focus on news . This evolutionary explanation of adaptation is commonly cited . “Sensory adaptation allows us to tune out stimuli that do not provide us with new information needed to cope with the environment . This is the property of adaptation that is generally used to define adaptation in textbooks . ” ( McBurney , 2010 , p . 406 ) . . . . 1 For discussion , see Burge ( 2010 : 301ff . ) , and Graham ( 2014 ) . 3 By contrast , for cognition , facts that are not news are important too . We want to continue to know that tigers are dangerous , for example . In short , the psychological indicators for distinguishing the perceptual from the cognitive . . . are closely related to the different functions of perception and cognition . ( 99 – 100 ) Here , we explore these ideas in more detail . We first look critically at the claim that adaptation is a key indicator of perception . Then , we turn to the connection Block draws between adaptation and the putative evolutionary purpose of perception , viz . news . We cast doubt on the idea that the function of news - acquisition distin - guishes perception from cognition , and so question its usefulness in determining the markers of perception . More positively , we end by considering what light might be shed on other putative features of perception by reflecting on its purpose ( s ) . 2 . Adaptation as a specific marker of perception What is perceptual adaptation ( Figure 1 ) ? Sceptical of strict definitions , Block proposes that adaptation is a natural kind , offering a paradigm example : the motion aftereffect . A classic motion aftereffect occurs after staring at continuous motion in one direction ( e . g . , leftward ) for an extended period . Immediately afterwards , sta - tionary stimuli in the same location will appear to move in the opposite direction ( e . g . , rightward ) . This example is paradigmatic in being short - lived ( lasting seconds to minutes ) , repulsive ( biased “away” from what was experienced earlier ) and retino - topic ( specific to the retinally - defined location of the original stimulation ; Knapen , Rolfs , & Cavanagh , 2009 ) . Importantly , however , not all adaptation exhibits these features . As Block notes , the McCollough effect , in which one adapts jointly to colour and orientation , can last months ( 60 ) , and sometimes adaptation can be attractive ( 60 – 1 ) . Nor is all adaptation retinotopic : Some adaptation effects are spatiotopic ( specific to an environmentally - defined location , rather than the retinally - defined lo - cation of earlier stimulation ; Turi & Burr , 2012 ) , and many higher - level effects are plausibly global and cross - modal ( Storrs , 2015 ) . For adaptation to play its putative role in distinguishing perception from cogni - tion , it must be both ( a ) sensitive and ( b ) specific , as an indicator of perception . In other words , ( a ) cases of perception without adaptation must be rare ( or at least isolable ) , as must ( b ) cases of adaptation without perception . Consider first , specificity . Since adaptation is not claimed to be constitutive of perception but rather a symptom of its underlying nature , Block’s view can accom - modate exceptional cases of non - perceptual adaptation . However , adaptation would 4 ( ii ) ( i ) ( ii ) ( i ) ( ii ) ( i ) ( iii ) A B C ( ii ) ( i ) D E ( i ) ( ii ) Figure 1 : Demonstrations of visual adaptation . In each panel , the relevant effects can be experienced by first staring at display ( i ) for approximately 30 seconds , and then moving one’s gaze to display ( ii ) . ( A ) Colour : After staring at coloured circles in the top display , white circles in the bottom display appear in the top circles’ opponent colours ( such that , e . g . , the white circle in the bottom left appears yellow ) . ( B ) Orientation : After letting one’s eyes move along the horizontal red line in the top display , the straight lines in the bottom display appear tilted . ( C ) The McCollough Effect : After staring at vertically oriented red bars and horizontally oriented green bars , neutral vertical bars appear green and neutral horizontal bars appear red . Here , display ( iii ) roughly depicts the expected phenomenology . ( D ) Numerosity : After staring at the two arrays in the top display ( one of which is numerous and one of which is not very numerous ) , the two equinumerous arrays in the bottom display look different from one another — the left one appears less numerous than the right one . ( E ) Facial emotions : After staring at the angry and surprised faces in the top display , the identical faces in the bottom display look different — the left face appears less angry ( and more surprised ) than the right face . ( Demonstrations adapted from Thompson & Burr , 2009 ; Burr & Ross , 2008 ; Webster et al . , 2004 . ) 5 clearly be a poor marker of perception if cognitive adaptation were widespread — e . g . , if merely considering or judging some property ( such as the price of an ex - pensive car ) caused later judgements to be temporarily repulsed ( such that , e . g . , subsequently considered cars seem less expensive than they would otherwise ) . This possibility connects to a serious methodological issue which besets much work on adaptation ( Storrs , 2015 ; Smortchkova , 2021 ) — namely , establishing that a pattern of responses reflects perceptual adaptation as opposed to shifts in decision criteria . Recall the motion aftereffect . Here subjects who adapt to leftwards motion tend to classify subsequent stationary stimuli as moving rightwards . But — a sceptic might ask — is this because they experience the stationary stimuli as moving rightwards , or is it that their threshold for judging a stimulus to be moving rightwards has shifted ? Block offers two replies to this methodological puzzle : retinotopic / spatiotopic localization , and phenomenal character . On the former , Block claims : “No criterion effect has ever been shown to be retinotopic or spatiotopic . Since many perceptual adaptation effects are retinotopic or spatiotopic to some degree , criterion effects can often be ruled out . ” ( 62 ; also Figure 12 , caption , p . 73 ) We have three concerns about this reply . First , as Storrs ( 2015 ) points out , and Block acknowledges in discussing Matsumiya and Shiori ( 2008 ) on pp . 74 – 5 , this approach cannot be applied to putative high - level perceptual adaptation effects ( e . g . , seeing faces as “happy” or “sad” ; Matsumiya , 2013 ) , since these can be spatially global , and indeed cross - modal . Second , whilst we agree that retinotopy specifically is evidence against mere decision - criterion shifts ( see Hafri & Firestone , 2021 ) , it is difficult to see why criterion effects cannot be spatially local . 2 Decision criteria are ( at least in theory ) flexible and under voluntary control ; indeed , observers who are explicitly asked to favour one of two responses can intentionally alter their decision criteria without altering precision or sensitivity ( Morgan et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , any subject capable of tracking stimulus location could theoretically adopt spatiotopic decision criteria . Certainly , it would seem that a committed psychophysicist could produce a spatiotopic criterion effect . Again , consider the motion aftereffect . Our psychophysicist could decide to adjust their criterion for rightwards motion where 2 Block’s book is primarily about seeing , but he claims that his points apply “at least to all the spatial senses” ( 6 ) , which for him include smell ( though see fn . 27 ) . Yet retinotopy cannot be a general mark of spatial perception , since it reflects a peculiar feature of ( most ) visual systems . Over - emphasizing retinotopy may also be in tension with Block’s view that “visual perception , is characteristically multi - modal , even at the level of the first cortical stage of visual processing” ( 329 ) . 6 they have been recently staring but not other locations . This would recover the basic pattern of responses characteristic of adaptation , without any change in perception . 3 Finally , insofar as retinotopy or spatiotopy are diagnostic of perception , it is unclear how central or useful an indicator adaptation per se is . After all , non - local “adaptation” effects may simply reflect shifts in decision criteria . Moreover , establishing that an effect is retinotopic will suffice to count it as perceptual ( or at least non - cognitive ) , whether it involves adaptation or not . For instance , residual attentional traces are left behind following saccades ( Talsma et al . , 2013 ; Golomb et al . , 2010 ) . These might be argued to be perceptual on the basis that they are retinotopic — but they are not adaptation effects . In other words , retinotopy , not adaptation , is doing the work separating perception from cognition . Block’s second reply to the methodological puzzle of ruling out shifts in decision criteria appeals to introspection . Consider an experiment where participants adapt to two dot arrays , a more numerous one on the left and a less numerous one on the right , before looking at two equinumerous displays ( Figure 1D ) . Commenting on such a setup , Block remarks as follows : . . . standard psychophysical approaches fail to consider an obvious way of avoiding criterion issues . In the numerosity experiment just described , it briefly looks as if there are more dots on the right than on the left . Further , the period of looking this way is brief . I have shown these dis - plays in many classes and I have to assure the audience that I have not tricked them with a video that starts with more dots on the right and shifts to equal numbers of dots . There is no reason to expect criterion effects to fade . This is not the first - person experience of a criterion ef - fect . It is a robust effect that you can experience for yourself despite the absence of laboratory conditions . This point might fall on deaf ears in the psychophysics community because of suspicion of “introspective” reports , but a rational reader should be persuaded by it . ( 62 ) What should we make of this appeal to our first - person experience of adaptation effects ? An immediate concern is whether we really have so firm a grip on the phenomenology of a criterion effect . After all , what would it feel like to experience a strong and sudden change in one’s classificatory dispositions ? It is not obvious to us that such a change could not fade or be robust . Nor is it clear that such a change 3 Of course , further features of the effect ( e . g . , its time course , signature limit or encapsulation from voluntary control ) may count against its being a criterion effect . But , as we argue below , it would not then be adaptation specifically which was marking out perceptual processes . 7 would not be perfectly natural to report using comparative looks - constructions ( cf . Martin , 2010 ; Phillips , 2016 ) . However , a further concern arises even granting the probity of introspection . If we appeal to first - person judgements to distinguish perceptual adaptation proper from criterion effects , then it is again unclear what work adaptation itself is doing . Rather it seems that our prior grasp on the perceptual , grounded in our first - person perspective , does the heavy lifting . This echoes our earlier concern about retinotopy . Recall that , for Block , adaptation is supposed to be “the main scientific indicator” of perception . However , if in tricky cases it turns out that other features — features which are independently markers of perception — are needed to show that the effect is really perceptual , the centrality of adaptation per se is cast into doubt . 4 So far , we have considered explanations of putative perceptual adaptation in terms of shifts of decision criteria . However , our fundamental concern is with the specificity of adaptation as a marker of perception . As Block writes : “If adaptation is to be useful in distinguishing perception from cognition , there would have to be adaptation for perception but not cognition . ” ( 81 ) Block doubts that there are any examples of cognitive adaptation . Yet criterion effects would seem a ready source of cases where an aspect of cognition ( i . e . , one’s decision criterion , and so judgement ) is repulsively affected by a prior cognitive state . A nice example is random number generation ( Figure 2 ) . Notoriously , humans struggle to generate genuinely random numbers , and exhibit instructive biases in trying to do so . On top of a ( zero - order ) non - uniformity in the distribution of numbers chosen , subjects also avoid repetition and tend to produce numbers in close proximity to the last number produced . For instance , if asked to produce a long sequence of random numbers in the interval [ 0 , 9 ] , a subject might rarely if ever say “5” twice in a row ; but , having said “5” , the subject will show a marked tendency to subsequently say “6” or “4” ( as opposed to , say , “2” or “8” ) . Moreover , these effects are plausibly short - lived , such that the number one says at a given time biases the choices of numbers in the moments following , but not on the scale of ( say ) days or weeks . Treisman and Faulkner ( 1987 ) provide a powerful model of random number gen - eration in terms of criterion setting theory ( CST ; Treisman & Williams , 1984 ) — a model originally developed for psychophysical tasks . CST posits two mechanisms : 4 Unlike retinotopy , phenomenal character might be proposed as a unifying marker , even a con - stitutive feature of perception in general . However , this view is unavailable to Block , since he is a proponent of unconscious perception ; that is , he believes there are genuinely perceptual states that have no phenomenal character . For discussion see , e . g . , Phillips and Block ( 2017 ) . 8 O b s e r v e d f r e qu e n c i e s / Exp e c t e d f r e qu e n c i e s 0 1 2 Numerical distance from previous response - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B A prompt ( say a random # ) 5 response prompt ( say a random # ) 4 response 2 . 1s Figure 2 : Criterion setting as cognitive adaptation . ( A ) In experiments by Treisman and Faulkner ( 1987 ) , subjects are asked to produce random numbers at regular intervals . ( B ) The figure approximately reproduces the data from a typical subject . In general , subjects are very unlikely to repeat the same number twice ( as indicated by the central dip ) , but very likely to produce subsequent responses near to their previous response . For example , after saying “5” , subjects are unlikely to say “5” on the next trial , but also unlikely to say “1” , “2” , “8” , or “9” ; instead , they are repelled to only a small extent ( e . g . , with “3” , “4” , “6” , or “7” much more likely than other responses ) . In Treisman and Faulkner’s model , the fact that subjects are unlikely to repeat numbers is explained by a stabilization mechanism which shares the “flavour” of visual adaptation . tracking and stabilization . For our purposes , stabilization is key since it is the sib - ling of adaptation . In psychophysical tasks , stabilization ensures that one’s criterion remains in the centre of the sensory distribution , maximizing response informative - ness . It does this by shifting one’s criterion towards the value of the most recent input , thus lowering the probability of responding the same way on the next trial . Treisman and Faulkner show that this mechanism can explain the absence of rep - etition in random number generation . Positing an internal analogue source which produces a genuinely random variable , the stabilization mechanism leads to negative dependencies , specifically absence of repetition . The tracking mechanism ( a positive mechanism for exploiting environmental continuity , described in the more recent lit - erature on sequential dependencies as a “continuity field” ) explains the tendency to produce numbers in close proximity . The overall pattern of data in attempted random number generation does not exhibit pure adaptation ; to explain the data , both mechanisms are needed . Our point , however , is that random number generation as understood by Treisman and Faulkner is partly driven by stabilization processes which are naturally described as cognitive adaptation . Moreover , as we shall see below , the dual operation of 9 mechanisms leading to both negative and positive sequential dependencies is equally at work in perception . Perception too is arguably not a purely adaptive process . Note also that this example of cognitive adaptation would seem to resist Block’s reply to other proposed cases . For instance , Block discusses Helton’s ( 2016 ) example of medium - size homes seeming small after first thinking about very large homes ; he suggests that this could simply be regression to the mean . But regression to the mean cannot explain the response patterns in attempted random number generation . The observed tendency is not towards the mean of the distribution of numbers but rather in any direction away from the previously given number ( including directions farther from the mean ) . Block discusses another putative example of cognitive adaption , Wexley et al . ’s ( 1972 ) employment experiments in which actors posing as job candidates were ranked on suitability . Repulsive responses ( negative sequential dependencies ) were found , such that interviewing a high - quality candidate led interviewers to rate subsequent candidates lower than they otherwise would . Block comments that explanations of these dependencies ( e . g . , in terms of attention to novelty ) lack “the flavor of adaptation” ( 83 ) as well as its signatures . However , it seems natural to model these data using CST . Insofar as CST provides a good fit , the explanation will have the flavor of adaptation . Moreover , the fact that stabilization occurs in tandem with tracking could well explain the more complex pattern of data and the absence of adaptation’s classic “signatures” . There is no reason to insist that cognition must reveal its adaptive effects in uncontaminated form . Indeed , there may well be other forms of cognitive adaptation , including forms ex - plicitly referred to as “adaptation” in their relevant literatures . One example might be hedonic adaptation ( Frederick & Loewenstein , 1999 ) , whereby an individual’s well - being apparently adjusts to newly positive or negative circumstances such as a sudden change in wealth . Does this phenomenon exhibit the hallmarks of adapta - tion ? Perhaps so : After winning the lottery , a subject’s happiness might temporarily increase ; but then after some time , luxuries that would normally have brought joy are experienced as less pleasurable than they were previously . Similarly , someone whose circumstances change for the worse might find happiness in activities that most others ( and even their past self ) find neutral or unpleasant . Another candidate for cognitive adaptation is boredom . Performing the same activity for an extended period often makes that activity seem less interesting or engaging , and may make other activities ( including previously unappealing ones ) seem more attractive . In - deed , bored subjects prefer to self - administer painful electric shocks rather than stay bored ( Wilson et al . , 2014 ) , even though such actions are normally quite aversive . Of course , these cases are not straightforward . But note that , while they are at least 10 plausible cases of adaptation , they are manifestly not plausible cases of perception , and clearly lack features such as retinotopy . These examples suggest that adaptation falls short of serving as perception’s “main scientific indicator” . Concluding his discussion of cognitive adaptation , Block addresses something like the above point : “let us suppose , no doubt contrary to fact , that there is cognitive adaptation . We can still distinguish cognitive adaptation from perceptual adaptation by consideration of the specific features that I have been mentioning of perceptual adaptation . ” These features include ( i ) retinotopy and spatiotopy ( as discussed ) , but also various other specific features : ( ii ) conforming to models of either multichannel or norm - based adaptation , ( iii ) the effect’s magnitude being a logarithmic function of adapting stimulus duration , and ( iv ) a pattern of attraction and repulsion explicable in terms of “known visual properties” like centring and scaling mechanisms ( 83 ) . 5 3 . Adaptation , sensitivity , and the purpose of perception ; is perception about “news” ? Thus far , we have questioned whether adaptation is a specific indicator of percep - tion . But is it a sensitive indicator ? Is adaptation “present in all known perceptual systems” ( 86 ) ? As discussed by Block , one of us ( CF ) previously noted various prop - erties that are arguably perceptual but may not adapt . For example , it seems that we can see that objects as located to our left ; but does seeing several things as being to our left make a central item appear to our right ? Likewise with seeing objects as near / far , connected / disconnected , symmetric / asymmetric , homogenous / hetero - geneous , and doubtless many others . There may also be structural features of the different perceptual modalities which do not adapt ( e . g . , the structure of the visual field itself ) . Discussing these examples ( 67 – 8 ) , Block suggests that Finke’s ( 1989 ) prism glass studies may show left / right adaptation . In these studies , a prism shifts the perceiver’s point - of - view slightly to the right or left , such that objects that would otherwise have appeared straight ahead appear slightly right of centre ( say ) , and objects that would otherwise have appeared slightly left of centre now appear straight ahead . When the prisms are removed after prolonged use , the visual world reportedly overshoots in the other direction , such that a subject who is asked to point at a physically straight - ahead object will point slightly left of centre . However , it is doubtful that Finke’s studies show a “classic repulsive adaptation effect” with respect to the perception 5 Much could be said about each of these features . For instance , cognitive effects can be log functions and arguably may involve centring or scaling mechanisms . 11 of left - locatedness and right - locatedness . First , one might think that the effect is purely a matter of visuomotor recalibration , as seems to be the case with inverting goggles ( Linden et al . , 1999 ) . Second , it is unclear how Finke’s study speaks to the original thought about seeing many things on one side . Finke’s prisms do not cause the wearer to see many things on one side ; instead , they create a systematic distortion across the entire visual field . Block does provide evidence that adaptation occurs for facial asymmetry ( Rhodes et al . , 2009 ) . However , he recognizes that this finding doesn’t demonstrate adaptation for symmetry in general . Gheorghiu et al . ( 2014 ) report some tentative evidence in that direction , though only for collections of objects ( rather than , say , a single symmetric or asymmetric object ) , and only for symmetry , not for asymmetry ( that is : prolonged exposure to symmetric stimuli made other stimuli appear less symmetric , but prolonged exposure to asymmetric stimuli did not make other stimuli appear more symmetric ) . However , Block is surely right to conclude that we don’t yet know the scope of adaptation in general . Here is where Block’s appeal to the purpose of perception may seem probative . As we saw in the passage quoted earlier , Block offers a powerful evolutionary ratio - nale for expecting adaptation to be a general perceptual phenomenon . Recall that this argument begins with the idea that “the evolutionary purpose of perception is acquiring information about what is happening here and now” — what Block calls “news” — and then suggests that adaptation is precisely a mechanism for screening out constant effects “in order to focus on news” . In contrast , “for cognition , facts that are not news are important too” . In this way , adaptation’s role in distinguishing perception and cognition is “closely related to the different functions of perception and cognition” . This is an extremely interesting line — and indeed , style — of argument . There is , of course , a rich literature exploring what can ( and , importantly , cannot ) be learnt about human and animal cognition by approaching it as the product of nat - ural selection ( for different perspectives , see : Buss , 2014 ; Cosmides & Tooby , 2013 ; Godfrey - Smith , 1996 , Lloyd 1999 ; Sterelny , 2003 ; Smith , 2020 ) . 6 However , this lit - erature has typically not engaged with the kinds of precise and empirically - informed proposals concerning visual perception which Block offers . Moreover , in contrast to capacities such as language or moral cognition , hypotheses about vision can be tested across a wide range of taxa . Block’s remarks thus highlight a substantial interdisci - 6 There is also an important literature distinguishing different notions of function and functional explanation ( see , for instance , Cummins , 1975 ; Godfrey - Smith , 1993 ; Millikan , 1989 ; Wright , 1973 ) . 12 plinary opportunity to gain fresh insight by reflecting on the evolved purpose ( s ) of perceptual systems . However , despite the promise in bringing such considerations to bear on our the - orising about perception , we see significant pitfalls with its present application . The central difficulty is that perception and cognition plausibly have multiple , potentially conflicting , evolutionary purposes , including — in both cases — the acquisition of “news” . In that case , appeal to news - acquisition does little to support the specificity or sensitivity of adaptation as a marker of perception . Multiple purposes are the norm for evolved systems . Does hair have a single function ? No . It functions to regulate body temperature ; it protects us from dirt , dust , rain , sweat , and in some cases physical damage ; it enhances our sense of touch ; it can signal emotions ; and it may play other social roles . Do tongues have a singular function ? No . In humans , tongues are used for speech , taste , chewing , kissing , and wound licking ; in other animals , we might add grooming and predation . 7 Perception plausibly serves multiple purposes too . As Marr notes ( in a section titled “The Pur - pose of Perception” ) : “Vision . . . is used in such a bewildering variety of ways” ( 1982 : 32 ) , including navigation , movement , detection ( of food and motion ) , discrimination ( of mates from meals ) , and initiation of reflexes such as blinking and ducking . We might add many others : Perception forms and triggers memories , allows us to learn and communicate , induces emotional states , gives pleasure , and so on . Marr infers from his list that because of such different purposes in different animals , “it is in - conceivable that all seeing animals use the same representations” ( 32 ) . Vision comes in different forms for different purposes . We ought to consider a similar possibility regarding mechanisms . A hint of this diversity of purposes can already be found in Rhodes et al . ’s ( 2009 ) study of facial symmetry adaptation discussed above . There , Rhodes et al . offer a highly specific evolutionary explanation for the adaptation effects they report . This explanation is based on the difference between fluctuating asymmetries , which indi - cate developmental instability and so are relevant to mate selection , and directional asymmetries , which are not relevant . Adaptation filters out directional asymmetries , allowing better appreciation of fluctuating asymmetries . This is a highly contingent and specific explanation , and we should not expect it to generalize . Indeed , there may be properties where it would be quite maladaptive to filter the analogue of di - rectional asymmetry ( i . e . , cases where directional asymmetry is the survival - relevant property ) , making adaptation counter - productive . This all suggests that we should 7 Graham ( 2014 : 15 ) makes a similar point . Another of his examples is hands . 13 be live to highly specific and idiosyncratic variation in mechanisms , given the wealth of different purposes perception may serve . Might news - acquisition be an over - arching , general purpose of vision ? To answer this question , we need more clarity as to what is meant by “news” . If news simply refers to important information about the here and now , then it will be hard to disagree that perception cares about news . The problem , however , is that it is quite unclear why the purpose of acquiring news in this broad sense should produce a visual system that exhibits visual adaptation . Adaptation is characteristically a repulsive effect along a particular feature dimension . Such a mechanism will only aid news - acquisition if we understand “news” as referring specifically to changes in the environment . Many of the purposes listed by Marr do seem consistent with a narrow focus on change - detection ( e . g . , ducking and blinking ) . But facts that are not changes are clearly also important for perceptual purposes . Perched on a lofty tree branch , a hawk will wish to keep an eye on her prey , keeping its location at front of mind while she plans her descent ( even if the prey’s location is entirely unchanging ) . It would be a disaster to filter her prey out of the scene simply because it is stationary . In navigating , a creature ( or sailor ) may wish to continually track the position of some unchanging feature of the environment so it can ensure it is heading home ( or to port ) . Similarly , you might bring a map on a walk so you can see ( and return to ) the layout of the landscape and where you are in it in a distinctively rich , visual way ( here contrast a verbal route description , or relying only on memory ) . Here , the map is not changing , nor are you expecting it to — and yet it is crucial to continue perceiving it . Other cases may arise when we simply study an unchanging object or scene — for example , determining whether a plant is edible or whether some terrain would make a suitable campsite . In such cases , we may evaluate what’s before us for many minutes , scrutinizing and double - checking key visual features ; we wouldn’t want such features to disappear just because we’re staring at them . Block may well agree with this and deny that his sense of “news” refers only to changes . But this returns us to the question of why news - acquisition in this broader sense should predict adaptation . In other words , Block faces a dilemma : Either understand “news” broadly as “information about what is happening here and now” and give up on the idea that this purpose explains perception as characterised by adaptation ; or understand “news” more narrowly as referring to changes along a specific feature dimension , but then lose the plausibility of the claim that detecting news is a general purpose of perception . One theorist who does make an explicit appeal to news in the narrow sense of change is Gilchrist . In discussing his related analogy between vision and a free press , 14 he claims that “our senses have evolved to detect change” ( 2020 : 1002 ) . On this basis , Gilchrist contends that resolving the ambiguity of visual signals according to prior probabilities constitutes “a terrible way to run a visual system” . However , this seems surprising in two respects . First , anyone acquainted with the last several decades of vision science has reason to be puzzled at the idea that perception’s primary goal is to tell us what’s changing ( or indeed simply novel ) . The extensive and highly influential literatures on change blindness , inattentional blindness , and object tracking are widely taken to suggest that change detection is highly limited and unreliable — and it would be odd indeed for perception to be so inept at carrying out its allegedly primary ( or even exclusive ) function . Such results seem more consistent with a system which has change detection as one amongst several goals , performing adequately but imperfectly as it trades off the costs and benefits of these different ends . ( We return to this idea below . ) Second , there is excellent evidence that , alongside mechanisms of adaptation , the visual system does exploit mechanisms of the kind which Gilchrist deems “terrible” . Fischer and Whitney highlight such a complementary mechanism in reporting their influential discovery of “serial dependence” ( Figure 3 ) : A crucial function of vision is detecting important changes in the environ - ment , and sensory adaptation aids in maximizing sensitivity to change . . . . Adaptation is a simple , but powerful , mechanism for leveraging past visual input to maximize change sensitivity , but there is a flip side to the coin : the physical world is largely stable and continuous over time . Objects , scenes and physical properties tend to persist over time , mak - ing the recent past a good predictor of the present . The visual system may therefore delicately balance the need to optimize sensitivity to im - age changes with the desire to capitalize on the temporal continuity of the physical environment . It may often be advantageous to assume that the present visual environment is similar to the one seen moments ago . ( 2014 : 2 ) Here , Fischer and Whitney agree that change detection is one important goal of vision , but they point out that even with this goal in mind ( let alone with others ) , there is reason to exploit prior experience . In line with this , Fischer and Whitney report systematic positive serial dependences in vision . Specifically , perception of ori - ented stimuli appears systematically biased towards recently perceived orientations . Their findings have been generalized in great detail in subsequent years ( Kiyonaga et al . , 2017 ) . 15 + … + … + + … stimulus ( oriented gabor ) response ( adjust to match ) stimulus ( oriented gabor ) response ( adjust to match ) trial t - 1 … trial t E rr o r o n t r i a l t ( ° ) - 50 - 25 0 25 50 Relative orientation of trial t - 1 ( ° ) - 50 - 25 0 25 50 A B Figure 3 : Serial dependence in visual perception . Not all sequential effects in vision are repulsive . ( A ) In experiments by Fischer and Whitney ( 2014 ) , subjects adjust a faint bar to match the orientation of a Gabor patch . ( B ) The results show that recent stimulus history can attract ( rather than repel ) subsequent perception , such that estimates on the next trial are drawn towards the orientation seen on the previous trial . ( Figure redrawn based on Fischer and Whitney , with data only approximated here . ) Consistent with our suggestion that perception has multiple purposes , Fischer and Whitney argue that positive serial dependence and negative adaptation effects “reflect different , competing goals of the visual system” . In doing so , they make the important point that perception is inherently noisy . Some changes in input may not reflect relevant changes in the environment but rather passing shadows , blinks , saccades , or internal noise ( as it were , fake news ) . Thus , even if perception were purely focused on change , it would not follow that adaptation is the only relevant mechanism . Integrating information over time in more complex ways may lead to a more reliable and trust - worthy view of the world . Ultimately , Fischer and Whitney suggest that positive and negative mechanisms operate simultaneously at different levels and timescales throughout the visual sys - tem . Even so , it is not obvious that both positive and negative mechanisms will operate in all modalities , for all features , timescales and species . For instance , Van der Burg et al . ( 2021 ) found only positive sequential dependencies for intensity and familiarity in odour perception , and none for valence and arousal . They also note : “Positive sequential effects for intensity ratings have been reported within the au - ditory domain when participants were instructed to judge the loudness of a sound ( Holland & Lockhead , 1968 ; Jesteadt et al . , 1977 ) , while a negative sequential ef - 16 fect has been found for taste intensity ( sweetness : Schifferstein & Frijters , 1992 ) . ” Perception may be quite various . Conversely , it is hard to see why the theoretical rationales for adaptation in perception would not also apply in many cases of cognition . Consider social cognition : why would it not be important to be maximally sensitive to changes in one’s social hierarchy ? A sudden change in allegiances , power structures and coalitions might be vital to one’s prosperity or survival . Or consider games such as blitz chess : perhaps adaptation to position or structure enables rapid detection of subtle positional shifts leading to tactics and strategic play . Thus , even if perception is news - focused , this does not provide a solid rationale for the contention that adaptation is distinctive of perception . How should Block react to these points ? One option would simply be to accom - modate positive serial dependence as another feature of vision . However , this would reduce the plausibility of the claim that vision / perception was distinctive in its di - achronic profile . As Pascucci et al . write , in general , “short - term dependencies are not peculiar to visual perception but permeate a wide range of cognitive processes , including attention , decision - making , memory , confidence in performance , and motor behavior . This implies that , at multiple stages , our cognitive system is anchored and calibrated to the recent history of sensory and decisional processes . ” ( 2019 : 2 ) Another option would be to double - down on adaptation as the true mark of per - ception and deny that serial dependence is a genuinely visual phenomenon . There is indeed evidence for a two - stage model on which adaptation is a “low - level sen - sory” process and serial dependence is a “higher - level process” ( Fritsche et al . , 2017 ; Pascucci et al . , 2019 ; Ceylan et al . , 2021 ) . It would be an exciting result if indeed all serial dependencies were truly post - perceptual . However , it is more plausible that ( as Fischer and Whitney suggest ) such dependencies occur at multiple levels , both perceptual and post - perceptual . Indeed , there is evidence for retinotopic pos - itive dependencies ( Collins , 2019 ) . Moreover , on the model defended by Pascucci et al . ( 2019 ) and Ceylan et al . ( 2019 ) , whereas the source of serial dependence is higher - level / decisional , its site is perception . That is : such dependencies show up in changes in perceptual phenomenology . The difference is a difference in perception . Perhaps , then , one possibility is that adaptation is a signature of low - level ( as op - posed to high - level ) visual processing . But even on this view , it will not be a mark of perception per se . 17 4 . Other features Block connects other features of perception with function . “The winner - takes - all aspect of perception is required because the perceiving subject has to act , often quickly . It won’t do for perception to wallow in ambiguity as with the more leisurely activity of cognition . ” ( 100 ) This is an intriguing argument . However , it is unclear how a winner - takes - all conception of perception is consistent with the psychophysical evidence supporting signal detection theory ( SDT ) . SDT has long emphasized that decisions , including decisions to act , must be understood as based on a continuous evidence variable or likelihood ratio which ( in the simple case of , say , tiger detection ) is always to some extent “ambiguous” between signal ( tiger ) and noise ( see , e . g . , Swets , 1961 , Swets et al . , 1961 ; also McLean et al . , 2020 ) . One standard finding which is hard to explain on a winner - takes - all model is that observers perform above chance when asked to make a second choice in multi - alternative forced - choice tasks ( Figure 4 ) . For instance , when asked to select a target from a set of four options , participants who choose wrongly on their first guess will do better than 33 % on their second . Such evidence suggests that perception contains more information than simply a single “winning” option . But in any event , since in the case of non - reflex actions there must always be a decision to act or not , it is unclear why ambiguity precludes quick action . If one sets a criterion which says : “Run if there is even a 1 % chance of a tiger being present , ” one does not need a winner - takes - all tiger percept to run quickly . Despite these critical remarks , we are nonetheless optimistic that considerations of purpose in perception will provide substantial insights . In particular , we suggest that another central feature of perception is very plausibly closely connected to purpose . A core thesis of Block’s book is that “perception is constitutively iconic as contrasted with cognition which is paradigmatically discursive” . It is tempting to motivate this feature by appeal to perception’s function ( just as theorists have long made a functional case for the discursivity of cognition ) . Recall Xu’s ( 2018 ) remark that vision in part needs “to comprehend the richness of the visual world” . Whether or not all perception is purely and constitutively iconic ( cf . Quilty - Dunn , 2020 ) , it might well be argued that this purpose is best served by iconic representations . The critical idea here is that iconic representations are especially well suited to encoding rich information about multiple , simultaneous features of the external environment — a picture is worth a thousand words ( see , e . g . , Dretske , 1981 ; Fodor , 2000 ; Kosslyn , 1996 , 1994 ; for a somewhat different functional argument for iconicity , see Kulvicki , 2015 ) . Xu’s remark might also be paired with an idea of Gilchrist’s intended to make a different point . Gilchrist argues that cognitive penetration is problematic since visual 18 Figure 4 : Guessing correctly when given a second chance . Even after an initially incorrect response on a 4 - alternative forced - choice task , subjects who choose among the remaining three options perform well above chance ( Swets , 1961 ) . These results are difficult to explain on “winner - take - all” models of perception . information has to serve many purposes , and that these purposes are together best served by a free press . But the same idea that vision must serve many purposes — purposes which may not be predictable in advance — suggests that there would be value in initially gathering a great deal of information and only then allowing more flexible , task - dependent ( attentional and cognitive ) processes to begin filtering . Such an idea also has affinities with Block’s views on phenomenal overflow . These are large and complex issues which we cannot explore satisfactorily here . Instead , we end with an invitation to Block and other theorists . How should we determine the purpose — or purposes — of perception ? How can we avoid the notorious perils of adaptationist approaches in doing so ( e . g . , Gould , & Lewontin , 1979 ; Fodor , 2000 ) , including the problem of distinguishing present functions from 19 the purposes for which the capacity originally evolved to serve ? And how do these purposes relate to the distinctive indicators and constitutive features of perception ? Acknowledgments For helpful discussion and / or comments on previous drafts , the authors thank Luca Barlassina , Ned Block , Simon Brown , Jeremy Goodman , Steven Gross , Matan Mazor , and members of the JHU Perception & Mind Laboratory . This work was supported in part by NSF BCS - 2021053 awarded to C . F . References Balcetis , E . and Dunning , D . ( 2010 ) . Wishful seeing : More desired objects are seen as closer . Psychological Science , 21 ( 1 ) : 147 – 152 . Berke , M . , Walter - Terrill , R . , Jara - Ettinger , J . , and Scholl , B . ( 2021 ) . Flexible goals require that inflexible perceptual systems produce veridical representations : Implications for realism as revealed by evolutionary simulations . Journal of Vision , 21 ( 9 ) : 2416 . Bhalla , M . and Proffitt , D . R . ( 1999 ) . Visual – motor recalibration in geographical slant perception . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 25 ( 4 ) : 1076 – 1096 . Burge , T . ( 2010 ) . Origins of objectivity . Oxford University Press . Burr , D . and Ross , J . ( 2008 ) . A visual sense of number . Current Biology , 18 ( 6 ) : 425 – 428 . Buss , D . ( 2014 ) . Evolutionary psychology : The new science of the mind . Pearson , Boston . Ceylan , G . , Herzog , M . H . , and Pascucci , D . ( 2021 ) . Serial dependence does not originate from low - level visual processing . Cognition , 212 : 104709 . Collins , T . ( 2019 ) . Retinotopic serial dependency in visual perception . Journal of Vision , 19 ( 10 ) : 196 . Cosmides , L . and Tooby , J . ( 2013 ) . Evolutionary psychology : New perspectives on cognition and motivation . Annual Review of Psychology , 64 : 201 – 229 . 20 Cummins , R . ( 1975 ) . Functional analysis . The Journal of Philosophy , 72 ( 20 ) : 741 – 765 . Dretske , F . ( 1981 ) . Knowledge and the flow of information . MIT Press , Cambridge . Durgin , F . H . , Baird , J . A . , Greenburg , M . , Russell , R . , Shaughnessy , K . , and Way - mouth , S . ( 2009 ) . Who is being deceived ? the experimental demands of wearing a backpack . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 16 ( 5 ) : 964 – 969 . Finke , R . A . ( 1989 ) . Principles of mental imagery . MIT Press , Cambridge . Firestone , C . ( 2013 ) . How “paternalistic” is spatial perception ? Why wearing a heavy backpack doesn’t—and couldn’t—make hills look steeper . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 8 ( 4 ) : 455 – 473 . Firestone , C . and Scholl , B . J . ( 2016 ) . Seeing and thinking : Foundational issues and empirical horizons . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 39 : e264 . Fischer , J . and Whitney , D . ( 2014 ) . Serial dependence in visual perception . Nature Neuroscience , 17 ( 5 ) : 738 – 743 . Fodor , J . ( 2000 ) . Why we are so good at catching cheaters . Cognition , 75 ( 1 ) : 29 – 32 . Frederick , S . and Loewenstein , G . ( 1999 ) . Hedonic adaptation . In D . Kahneman , E . Diener , N . S . , editor , Well - being : The foundations of hedonic psychology , pages 302 – 329 . Russell Sage Foundation . Fritsche , M . , Mostert , P . , and de Lange , F . P . ( 2017 ) . Opposite effects of recent history on perception and decision . Current Biology , 27 ( 4 ) : 590 – 595 . Gheorghiu , E . , Bell , J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Visual adaptation to symmetry . Journal of Vision , 14 ( 10 ) : 63 . Gilchrist , A . ( 2020 ) . The integrity of vision . Perception , 49 ( 10 ) : 999 – 1004 . Godfrey - Smith , P . ( 1993 ) . Functions : consensus without unity . Pacific Philosophical Quarterly , 74 ( 3 ) : 196 – 208 . Godfrey - Smith , P . ( 1996 ) . Complexity and the function of mind in nature . Cambridge University Press . Golomb , J . D . , Pulido , V . Z . , Albrecht , A . R . , Chun , M . M . , and Mazer , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Robustness of the retinotopic attentional trace after eye movements . Journal of Vision , 10 ( 3 ) : 19 . 21 Goodale , M . A . and Milner , A . D . ( 1992 ) . Separate visual pathways for perception and action . Trends in Neurosciences , 15 ( 1 ) : 20 – 25 . Gould , S . J . and Lewontin , R . C . ( 1979 ) . The spandrels of san marco and the panglossian paradigm : a critique of the adaptationist programme . Proceedings of the royal society of London . Series B . Biological Sciences , 205 ( 1161 ) : 581 – 598 . Graham , P . ( 2014 ) . The function of perception . In Fairweather , A . , editor , Virtue Epistemology Naturalized , pages 13 – 31 . Springer . Hafri , A . and Firestone , C . ( 2021 ) . The perception of relations . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 25 ( 6 ) : 475 – 492 . Helton , G . ( 2016 ) . Recent issues in high - level perception . Philosophy Compass , 11 ( 12 ) : 851 – 862 . Hoffman , D . D . , Singh , M . , and Prakash , C . ( 2015 ) . The interface theory of percep - tion . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 22 ( 6 ) : 1480 – 1506 . Holland , M . K . and Lockhead , G . ( 1968 ) . Sequential effects in absolute judgments of loudness . Perception & Psychophysics , 3 ( 6 ) : 409 – 414 . Jesteadt , W . , Luce , R . D . , and Green , D . M . ( 1977 ) . Sequential effects in judg - ments of loudness . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 3 ( 1 ) : 92 – 104 . Kiyonaga , A . , Scimeca , J . M . , Bliss , D . P . , and Whitney , D . ( 2017 ) . Serial depen - dence across perception , attention , and memory . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 21 ( 7 ) : 493 – 497 . Knapen , T . , Rolfs , M . , and Cavanagh , P . ( 2009 ) . The reference frame of the motion aftereffect is retinotopic . Journal of Vision , 9 ( 5 ) : 16 . Kosslyn , S . ( 1994 ) . Image and brain . MIT Press , Cambridge . Kosslyn , S . ( 1996 ) . Image and mind . Harvard University Press , Cambridge . Kulvicki , J . ( 2015 ) . Analog representation and the parts principle . Review of Phi - losophy and Psychology , 6 ( 1 ) : 165 – 180 . Linden , D . E . , Kallenbach , U . , Heinecke , A . , Singer , W . , and Goebel , R . ( 1999 ) . The myth of upright vision . a psychophysical and functional imaging study of adaptation to inverting spectacles . Perception , 28 ( 4 ) : 469 – 481 . 22 Lloyd , E . A . ( 1999 ) . Evolutionary psychology : The burdens of proof . Biology and Philosophy , 14 ( 2 ) : 211 – 233 . Marr , D . ( 1982 ) . Vision : A computational investigation into the human representa - tion and processing of visual information . W . H . Freeman , San Francisco . Martin , M . ( 2010 ) . What’s in a look ? In Nanay , B . , editor , Perceiving the World , pages 160 – 225 . Oxford University Press . Matsumiya , K . ( 2013 ) . Seeing a haptically explored face : Visual facial - expression aftereffect from haptic adaptation to a face . Psychological Science , 24 ( 10 ) : 2088 – 2098 . Matsumiya , K . and Shioiri , S . ( 2008 ) . Haptic movements enhance visual motion aftereffect . Journal of Vision , 8 ( 6 ) : 172 . McBurney , D . ( 2010 ) . Evolutionary approach : Perceptual adaptations . In Goldstein , B . , editor , Encyclopedia of Perception , pages 405 – 407 . Sage , Los Angeles . McLean , C . S . , Ouyang , B . , and Ditterich , J . ( 2020 ) . Second guessing in perceptual decision - making . Journal of Neuroscience , 40 ( 26 ) : 5078 – 5089 . Millikan , R . G . ( 1989 ) . An ambiguity in the notion “function” . Biology and Philos - ophy , 4 ( 2 ) : 172 – 176 . Morgan , M . , Dillenburger , B . , Raphael , S . , and Solomon , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Observers can voluntarily shift their psychometric functions without losing sensitivity . Attention , Perception , & Psychophysics , 74 ( 1 ) : 185 – 193 . Palmer , S . ( 1999 ) . Vision science : Photons to phenomenology . MIT Press , Cam - bridge . Pascucci , D . , Mancuso , G . , Santandrea , E . , Della Libera , C . , Plomp , G . , and Chelazzi , L . ( 2019 ) . Laws of concatenated perception : Vision goes for novelty , decisions for perseverance . PLoS Biology , 17 ( 3 ) : e3000144 . Phillips , I . ( 2016 ) . Naive realism and the science of ( some ) illusions . Philosophical Topics , 44 ( 2 ) : 353 – 380 . Phillips , I . and Block , N . ( 2017 ) . Debate on unconscious perception . In Nanay , B . , editor , Current Controversies in Philosophy of Perception , pages 165 – 192 . Rout - ledge . 23 Quilty - Dunn , J . ( 2020 ) . Perceptual pluralism . Noˆus , 54 ( 4 ) : 807 – 838 . Rhodes , G . , Louw , K . , and Evangelista , E . ( 2009 ) . Perceptual adaptation to facial asymmetries . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 16 ( 3 ) : 503 – 508 . Schifferstein , H . N . and Frijters , J . E . ( 1992 ) . Sweetness does not habituate during a sip - and - spit experiment . Physiology & Behavior , 51 ( 2 ) : 331 – 336 . Smith , S . E . ( 2020 ) . Is evolutionary psychology possible ? Biological Theory , 15 ( 1 ) : 39 – 49 . Smortchkova , J . ( 2021 ) . After - effects and the reach of perceptual content . Synthese , 198 ( 8 ) : 7871 – 7890 . Sterelny , K . ( 2003 ) . Thought in a hostile world : The evolution of human cognition . Blackwell , Oxford . Storrs , K . R . ( 2015 ) . Are high - level aftereffects perceptual ? Frontiers in Psychology , 6 : 157 . Swets , J . A . ( 1961 ) . Is there a sensory threshold ? Science , 134 ( 3473 ) : 168 – 177 . Swets , J . A . , Tanner Jr , W . P . , and Birdsall , T . G . ( 1961 ) . Decision processes in perception . Psychological Review , 68 ( 5 ) : 301 – 340 . Talsma , D . , White , B . J . , Mathˆot , S . , Munoz , D . P . , and Theeuwes , J . ( 2013 ) . A retinotopic attentional trace after saccadic eye movements : evidence from event - related potentials . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 25 ( 9 ) : 1563 – 1577 . Thompson , P . and Burr , D . ( 2009 ) . Visual aftereffects . Current Biology , 19 ( 1 ) : R11 – R14 . Treisman , M . and Faulkner , A . ( 1987 ) . Generation of random sequences by human subjects : Cognitive operations or psychological process ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 116 ( 4 ) : 337 – 355 . Treisman , M . and Williams , T . C . ( 1984 ) . A theory of criterion setting with an application to sequential dependencies . Psychological Review , 91 ( 1 ) : 68 – 111 . Turi , M . and Burr , D . ( 2012 ) . Spatiotopic perceptual maps in humans : evidence from motion adaptation . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 279 ( 1740 ) : 3091 – 3097 . 24 Van der Burg , E . , Toet , A . , Brouwer , A . - M . , and van Erp , J . B . ( 2021 ) . Sequential effects in odor perception . Chemosensory Perception . Webster , M . A . , Kaping , D . , Mizokami , Y . , and Duhamel , P . ( 2004 ) . Adaptation to natural facial categories . Nature , 428 ( 6982 ) : 557 – 561 . Wexley , K . N . , Yukl , G . A . , Kovacs , S . Z . , and Sanders , R . E . ( 1972 ) . Impor - tance of contrast effects in employment interviews . Journal of Applied Psychology , 56 ( 1 ) : 45 – 48 . Wilson , T . D . , Reinhard , D . A . , Westgate , E . C . , Gilbert , D . T . , Ellerbeck , N . , Hahn , C . , Brown , C . L . , and Shaked , A . ( 2014 ) . Just think : The challenges of the disengaged mind . Science , 345 ( 6192 ) : 75 – 77 . Wright , L . ( 1973 ) . Functions . Philosophical Review , 82 ( 2 ) : 139 – 168 . Xu , Y . ( 2018 ) . A tale of two visual systems : Invariant and adaptive visual information representations in the primate brain . Annual review of vision science , 4 ( 1 ) : 311 – 336 . 25