© 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim 1 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com C O MM U N I C A T I O N Cheng - Hwa R . Kuo , Jian Xian , James D . Brenton , Kristian Franze , * and Easan Sivaniah * Complex Stiffness Gradient Substrates for Studying Mechanotactic Cell Migration C . - H . R . Kuo , Dr . E . Sivaniah Biological and Soft Systems Cavendish Laboratory University of Cambridge , CB3 0HE , UK E - mail : es10009 @ cam . ac . uk Dr . J . Xian , Dr . J . D . Brenton Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way , Cambridge CB2 0RE Dr . K . Franze Department of Physiology Development and Neuroscience University of Cambridge , CB2 3DY , UK E - mail : kf284 @ cam . ac . uk DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 Directed cell migration in response to chemical signals ( “chem - otaxis” ) has been extensively studied . [ 1 ] In contrast , mechano - taxis ( i . e . , cellular migration towards mechanical cues ) is poorly understood , partly due to a lack of facile methods for gener - ating appropriate cellular environments . Biological tissues are mechanically inhomogeneous ; [ 2 , 3 ] particularly during growth and migration , cells are exposed to different mechanical stimuli . The importance of mechanical signaling for cell functioning is becoming increasingly clear . For example , mechanical cues have been shown to direct stem - cell fate , [ 4 ] contribute to cancer development , [ 5 ] and to inﬂ uence the growth of nerve - tissue cells . [ 6 ] While the number of studies on cellular mechanosen - sitivity has exploded in recent years , the response of cells to changes in substrate rigidity – despite its potential importance for cell growth and migration – remains sparsely studied . [ 6 ] This lack of data may at least partly be attributed to the tech - nical challenges that come with the production of substrates incorporating changes in stiffness while maintaining constant topological and chemical properties . Currently , most cell - culture substrates used for testing the response of cells to their mechanical environment are made of hydrogels such as polyacrylamide ( PAA ) , polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) , or polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) . Approaches to cell - culture substrates with changes in mechanical properties usually aim at altering the degree of cross - linking in the gel , [ 7 – 13 ] which alters its stiffness . Gradients in cross - linker density are either generated by ﬂ owing two sols with different amounts of cross - linking agent into one another or by differentially exposing a photo - crosslinkable gel to UV radiation using a photomask . However , in both instances the gel’s mesh size and crosslink - induced surface chemistry will also vary . [ 14 ] These substrates are , furthermore , often limited by the minimum possible shear modulus , which is usually in the kilopascal range ; the steepness of the gradient , which is usually rather shallow ; or the simplicity of the stiffness gradients , which are often linear . Herein we present a new approach to mechanically complex cell - culture substrates , which overcomes these limitations . This approach is based on the fact that stiff materials can be sensed through soft ones , similar to the fairy - tale princess feeling a pea underneath a pile of mattresses . [ 12 ] The amount to which an underlying stiff substrate is felt through a second layer of material depends on the thickness of the superﬁ cial compliant layer and the magnitude of its deformation . [ 15 – 18 ] Most tissue cells constantly exert forces on their substrate ; the resulting substrate deformation depends on its mechanical properties and the force amplitude . If cells are growing on a compliant gel , which is tightly coupled to an underlying , inﬁ nitely stiff material , the gel’s apparent stiffness is enhanced as its thick - ness becomes comparable to the characteristic length scale over which the deformation zone extends . We employed this phenomenon and built cell - culture sub - strates with lateral apparent stiffness gradients by varying the height of the superﬁ cial compliant material . These variations were achieved by pouring a polymerizing PAA solution onto a glass slide with a topographically patterned surface . After polymerization , the resulting composite materials had a smooth surface ; however , the height of the upper , compliant hydrogel layer changed according to the structure of the underlying glass substrate ( Figure 1 ) . In this study , we used three different topographically deﬁ ned glass substrates , which included a step of 100 μ m height ( “step substrates” ) ; an array of polystyrene spheres of 80 μ m diam - eter ( “bead substrates” ) ; and a series of 200 μ m wide grooves ( “groove substrates” ) ( Figure 1 a ) . Subsequently , we coated these modiﬁ ed substrates with PAA gels of controlled thickness H and known bulk shear modulus G ’ PAA [ 19 ] ( Figure 1 , Supporting Information , Figure S1 ) . PAA was chosen because of its favo - rable properties as substrate for cell culture : it provides a diverse range of mechanical compliances covering the elasticity range of most tissue types ( 0 . 1 – 100 kPa ) , while remaining isotropic and biologically inert . In this study , we used PAA hydrogels with G ´ PAA = 3 . 3 k Pa , 10 kPa , and 30 kPa , resembling the stiff - ness of muscle tissue ( ≈ 3 – 6 kPa ) , [ 20 ] osteoids ( > 10 kPa ) , [ 16 ] and arteries ( ≈ 24 – 45 kPa ) [ 21 ] ( assuming a Poisson’s ratio ν = 0 . 5 ) : tis - sues which are in close contact with ﬁ broblasts in vivo . Thus , the surface of the resulting cell - culture substrates was made of the same material with the same cross - linker density and mesh size ; however , the distance between of the gel surface and the underlying glass surface varied across the substrate . This local change in height resulted in a one - dimensional stiff - ness gradient in case of the step and groove substrates . More - over , bead substrates incorporated a periodic , two - dimensional , azimuthally symmetric stiffness gradient . To demonstrate this , Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 2 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim C O MM U N I C A T I O N atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) was used to measure stiffness maps of the gel surface . [ 2 , 3 ] The Hertz model was used to extract an apparent elastic constant K app = E / ( 1 − v 2 ) from the raw data , where E and ν are Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio , respec - tively . [ 22 ] Similar to cells , the Hertz model overestimates the true stiffness of a compliant material that is coupled to an under - lying stiffer material if the thickness of the compliant material is not much larger than the indentation depth of the probe . [ 23 ] Accordingly , K app signiﬁ cantly increased with decreasing gel thicknesses below ≈ 15 μ m , ( Figure 1 b and Supporting Informa - tion , Figure S2 for different indentation depths ) . In order to evaluate the suitability of this novel template for mechanotaxis studies , we cultured ﬁ broblasts on the sub - strates . Fibroblasts are cells found in connective tissue , which is mechanically inhomogeneous . Previously , these cells have been shown to migrate along stiffness gradients . [ 7 ] Fibroblasts were ﬁ rst cultured on ‘step substrates’ for up to 24 h . When the gel thickness H step was larger than ≈ 15 μ m , the cells remained homogeneously distributed across the whole area as quantiﬁ ed by the area - normalized fraction of cells in the shallow region ϕ c , s = ( N s / A s ) / ( N s / A s + N d / A d ) ≈ 50 % , where N refers to cell number , A to the area over which the cell count was performed and d and s denote the deep and shallow zones . However , for substrate areas with H step < 15 μ m , cells relocated towards the shallower ( stiffer ) region over a matter of hours of culture ( Figure 2 a ) . This critical value for H step was similar to the gel thicknesses below which K app increased sharply . We found an inverse relationship between H step and ϕ c , s ; on the thinnest PAA gels ( ≈ 3 μ m ) , between ≈ 75 % and 90 % of the cells were located at the apparently stiff region . Surprisingly , ϕ c , s depended only on H step and not on the bulk modulus of the PAA gel ( Figure 2 b ) . One advantage of this method is the ability to create more complex stiffness variations in the cell - culture surface . ‘Bead substrates’ , for example , provide a simple way of engineering substrates incorporating alternating patterns of apparent stiffness . Fibroblasts cultured on these substrates behaved similarly as on step substrates . For H bead < 15 μ m , cell distribu - tions were again inversely correlated with gel height , with ≈ 80 % of the cells being located on top of the beads at a substrate thickness of ≈ 3 μ m ( Figure 2 c , d ) . To constrain the space available on the apparently softer gel , we then cultured cells on groove substrates ( Figure 1 a ) . These sub - strates were used to test the effect of pharma - cological interference with the cells’ intrinsic motility machinery on their mechanotactic behavior . Similarly , we investigated how genetic modiﬁ cation of the cells’ interaction with their extracellular environment impacts mechanotaxis . Untreated ﬁ broblasts on groove substrates with H groove < 15 μ m showed preferential cov - erage over the non - grooved area ( Figure 3 a , d ) . Furthermore , their average spreading area ¯ A c increased signiﬁ cantly ( Figure 3 e ) , which is typical for ﬁ broblasts grown on stiff sub - strates . [ 24 ] On thicker gels , coverage and spreading area were indiscriminate ( Figures 3 b , e ) . The cytoskeleton is crucial for cell motility . [ 25 ] To investi - gate the contribution of its constituents to mechanotactic cell migration , we applied : 1 ) cytochalasin D ( Figure 3 c ) , which inhibits actin polymerization ; 2 ) nocodazole , which induces disassembly of microtubules ; or 3 ) blebbistatin , which blocks the activity of the myosin II motors . All of the independently treated cells were insensitive to the presence of an apparent stiffness gradient , yielding indiscriminate cell coverage over the entire groove substrate area ( Figure 3 d ) and no increase in spreading area ( Figure 3 e ) . This insensitivity indicated that all three cytoskeletal components ( actin ﬁ laments , myosin II motors and microtubules ) are required for mechanotactic cell migration . Transforming growth factor beta induced ( TGFBI ) is a secreted extracellular - matrix protein that mediates cell adhe - sion through its interaction with integrins and microtubule sta - bility . [ 26 ] It is involved in cell migration , and in cancer cells it may promote invasion and metastasis . [ 27 ] To test the importance of cell adhesion for mechanotactic cell migration , we cultured human colorectal DLD1 cells that had been engineered to be TGFBI − / − by homologous recombination on groove substrates . While wild - type DLD1 cells relocated towards the shallow regions of the gel , TGFBI − / − cells homogeneously covered the whole substrate area ( Supporting Information , Figure S3 ) , indi - cating that cell adhesion is crucial for mechanotaxis . In this study , we developed three simple approaches to fabri - cate rigidity - patterned cell - culture substrates with homogeneous chemical composition . The slope of the apparent stiffness gra - dient was altered by the geometry of the underlying stiff sub - strate : K app will be sharper over an abrupt step if compared to the smoother change in gel height over beads or polymer melts ( Supporting Information , Figure S4 ) . These substrates provide promising tools to look into mechanically guided cell Figure 1 . Design of complex mechanical substrates . a ) Schematic of different substrates designed for this study . Polyacrylamide ( PAA ) hydrogel of controlled compliance is polymerized on a topographically patterned stiff support . The resulting variation in gel height H generates apparent stiffness gradients at the substrate surface . The substrates used in this study included ‘step substrates’ , ‘bead substrates’ , and ‘groove substrates’ . b ) Apparent stiffness K app of a “bead substrate” , determined by AFM indentation experiments , as a function of gel thickness . The Hertz model was used to ﬁ t the raw data at an indentation depth of 1 μ m . Inset : apparent stiffness distribution of the substrate over a bead ; the bead is indicated by the white broken line . Scale bar : 10 μ m . Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 3 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim C O MM U N I C A T I O N to be 1 – 2 μ m . [ 15 , 16 ] Other studies based on cell - induced traction estimate values on the order of tens of micrometers . [ 31 ] How - ever , these values depend on the magnitude of forces exerted by the cells and their adhesion strength . [ 15 ] The apparent substrate stiffness K app that is perceived by a cell is a function of stress σ ( i . e . , the force it applies to the gel per area , and the resultant strain ε ) as K app = σ / ε . Thus , K app will be larger if cells exert larger forces ( compare also Sup - porting Information , Figure S2 ) . Different cell types exert different strength forces on their substrates , [ 32 , 33 ] so that sub - strates should be tailored to the cells of interest . Furthermore , cellular traction forces are dynamic and force magnitudes vary over time . [ 32 ] Consequently , K app may vary for a cell within an experiment . While these variations in perceived stiffness cannot experimentally be controlled directly , they partly resemble in vivo conditions where cells are in close contact with the extra - cellular matrix and other cells whose mechanical properties are often dominated by their cytoskeleton . Similar to the topo - graphically deﬁ ned substrates presented in this work , extracel - lular matrix and cytoskeletal proteins stiffen with increasing strain [ 34 ] ( Supporting Information , Figure S2 ) . The substrates’ apparent stiffness reached the gel’s bulk mod - ulus within a few tens of micrometers away from the shallow migration . In vivo , many cells are constantly exposed to a variety of mechanical cues : tissues are mechanically inhomoge - neous at the cellular scale , and local tissue stiffness may change during developmental and pathological events . [ 6 ] Many tissue cells respond to their mechanical environment ; cellular mech - anotaxis may , for example , be involved in wound closure [ 28 ] and glial - scar formation after nerve - tissue injuries . [ 6 ] Fibroblasts , which are known to migrate towards increased substrate stiffness , [ 7 , 29 ] recognized and migrated towards the increasing apparent stiffness of their polyacrylamide substrate , whose bulk shear modulus G ’ PAA was homogeneous but whose depth varied across the surface . We found the critical depth H below which the cells responded to the underlying stiff scaf - fold to be ≈ 15 μ m , with more cells relocating with decreasing hydrogel thickness . Surprisingly , within the investigated range this critical thickness was largely independent of G ’ PAA . The critical depth found in our experiments is in good agree - ment with previous experiments investigating how deeply cells feel . The substrate height at which cells started to show an increase in area was around 10 – 20 μ m , [ 17 ] and cells were suggested to feel the underlying stiff substrate when the gel thickness approaches the lateral cell dimension . [ 30 ] In contrast , ﬁ nite - element computations estimated the critical gel thickness Figure 2 . Cell response to complex mechanical substrates . a ) Confocal laser scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) images of ﬁ broblasts growing on a step substrate with H step = 3 μ m and G ′ PAA = 10 kPa . Cells were labelled with CellTracker Orange ( orange ) , nuclei with Syto 59 ( blue ) . To visualize steps , PAA gels were stained with ﬂ uorescein dimethylacrylate ( green ) . The cells are maximum intensity z - projections , the substrates correspond to one optical plane . Fibroblasts relocated towards the apparently stiffer region of the substrate . b ) Plot of the area - normalized fraction of cells in the shallow region of the step substrate , ϕ c , s , as a function of gel thickness and bulk shear modulus G ′ PAA ( average ± SEM ) . For gels with H step < 15 μ m , cells preferentially relocated towards the apparently stiffer shallow region ( N = 45 , 45 , and 59 for G ′ PAA = 3 , 10 , and 30 kPa , respectively ; P < 1 × 10 − 5 for all shear moduli , ANOVA ) , with more cells relocating with decreasing hydrogel thickness . Within the investigated range this critical thickness was largely independent of the bulk shear modulus G ′ PAA of the hydrogel ( P > 0 . 05 for H step ≠ 7 μ m , ANOVA ) . The inset shows the temporal development of cell coverage for a step gel with H step = 10 μ m ; the broken line serves as guide to the eye . c ) CLSM z - projection of ﬁ broblasts grown on a bead substrate with H bead = 8 μ m and G ′ PAA = 10 kPa . Cells migrated to the area over the beads where K app is highest . d ) Plot of ϕ c , s for bead substrates . For H bead < 15 μ m , cells accumulated in the apparently stiffer regions ( N = 59 , 89 , and 136 for G ′ PAA = 3 , 10 , and 30 kPa , respectively ; P < 0 . 01 for all shear moduli , ANOVA ) ; ϕ c , s increased with further decreasing hydrogel thickness . Again , this critical thickness was independent of the bulk shear modulus of the hydrogel ( P > 0 . 05 for all H bead , ANOVA ) . Scale bar : 50 μ m . Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 4 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim C O MM U N I C A T I O N In conclusion , we present an elegant application of mate - rial physics that allows the projection of an effective stiffness map onto an otherwise homogenous substrate surface using a submerged programmable topography . The production of topo - graphically deﬁ ned substrates is achievable with lithographic and mold - processing techniques , enabling the fabrication of large amounts and varieties of substrate architectures and hence stiffness patterns . Moreover , these stiffness patterns can be combined with controlled chemical stimuli in a complemen - tary or competing manner . The resulting substrates will offer a complex road - map resembling in vivo conditions more closely than what currently can be achieved . Ultimately , this approach may contribute to the development of a next - generation of bio - compatible scaffolds suitable for tissue engineering and bio - medical applications . Experimental Section Gel and Substrate Preparation : PAA gels of known bulk shear modulus were prepared according to Moshayedi et al . [ 19 ] ( Supporting Information , Table S1 ) . Brieﬂ y , phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) ( Bioclear ) , acrylamide part , making the generated apparent stiffness gradient sharper than what is usually achieved by changing the gels’ cross - linker density . However , by varying the topology of the underlying stiff substrates , much shallower gradients can be achieved if desired ( Supporting Information , Figure S4 ) . Because the sur - face of these substrates consists of the same material , cells are not exposed to substrate - mediated differential chemical or topo - logical cues at the cellular scale . [ 14 ] A previous study exploiting the principle of layered cell - culture substrates to create stiffness gradients used PDMS as a material that can be patterned using photolithographic techniques . [ 35 ] However , the bulk modulus of PDMS is comparatively high , which limits its physiological appli - cation to cells found in stiffer tissues such as cartilage or bone . Due to the nature of hydrogels , thicker portions of the substrates ( i . e . , larger volume ) show a slightly larger degree of swelling than the shallower ones . However , the resulting change in height at the substrate surface has a small slope and occurs over several cell lengths . Furthermore , shallower regions of the gel , which are apparently stiffer , show a concave curva - ture , which , if at all , should repel cells , which would lead to an underestimation of the number of mechanically guided cells accumulating at shallow gel regions . [ 36 ] Figure 3 . Inﬂ uence of cytoskeletal components on cellular mechanotaxis . a – c ) y - ( top ) and z - projections ( bottom ) of ﬁ broblasts cultured on groove substrates with G ′ PAA = 10 kPa . The white broken lines indicate the transition between the shallow and the deep regions of the substrate . Scale bar : 50 μ m . a ) H groove = 6 μ m ; most cells relocated towards the apparently stiffer region of the substrate . b ) H groove = 21 μ m ; cells no longer responded to the underlying stiff substrate and remained homogeneously distributed . c ) Representative image of pharmacologically treated cells . H groove = 12 μ m ; the ﬁ broblasts were treated with cytochalasin D , which interferes with their actin cytoskeleton . Although H groove was below the critical threshold of ≈ 15 μ m , the cells did not respond to stiffness variations in their substrate . d ) Plot of ϕ c , s for groove substrates ( G ′ PAA = 10 kPa ) . For H groove < 15 μ m , untreated cells relocated towards the apparently stiffer region ( N = 57 , P < 10 − 15 , ANOVA ) ; ϕ c , s increased with further decreasing hydrogel thickness . However , when cells were treated with either cytochalasin D , nocodazole , or blebbistatin , cells did not respond to the increasing apparent stiffness of their sub - strate , indicating that all of the affected components of their cytoskeleton ( actin ﬁ laments , microtubules , and myosin II motors , respectively ) are impor - tant for mechanotactic cell migration . e ) Similarly , the average spreading area ¯ A c of untreated cells increased signiﬁ cantly for H groove < 15 μ m ( N = 93 , P = 0 . 017 , ANOVA ) , which is typical for ﬁ broblasts grown on and responding to stiff substrates . [ 24 ] In contrast , ¯ A c of pharmacologically treated cells did not increase ( N = 45 , P = 0 . 65 , ANOVA ) , suggesting that all of the investigated cytoskeletal components are involved in cellular mechanosensitivity . Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 5 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim C O MM U N I C A T I O N Force – distance curves were recorded every 10 μ m within arrays of 100 × 100 μ m ( Figure 1 b inset ) ; phase - contrast microscopy was used at the same time to visualize the position on the substrate . Data were analyzed for up to 1 μ m indentation depths using a custom algorithm based in Matlab ( MathWorks , Natick , USA ) , [ 2 ] which ﬁ tted the data with the Hertz model . [ 22 ] Optical imaging was performed using a Zeiss LSM - 510 Meta confocal laser scanning microscope with a 25 × objective ( water immersion , NA = 0 . 8 ) . Z - stacks were acquired at randomly selected areas along the transition zone between shallow and deep regions of the gels . The gel thickness H was measured using a 3D reconstruction of the z - stacks . Image stacks were further processed and analyzed using ImageJ to determine the pattern coverage area and total cell counts . The statistical signiﬁ cance of the cell coverage was determined using analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Jochen Guck and Krystyn Van Vliet for valuable discussions and Jens Grosche ( Efﬁ gos AG ) for providing Figure 1 a . This work was supported by funding by the EPSRC , and an MRC Career Development Award ( to K . F . ) . Received : June 21 , 2012 Revised : August 14 , 2012 Published online : solution ( Electran BDH ) in PBS , and N , N ′ - methylenebis ( acrylamide ) ( Fisher Scientiﬁ c ) were mixed in appropriate monomer / cross - linker ratios . The gels were ﬂ uorescently labeled by addition of ﬂ uorescein dimethylacrylate ( Aldrich ) solution in dimethyl sulfoxide ( Sigma ) . The gel premix was desiccated for 20 min and then gelation initiated by the addition of tetramethyletylenediamine ( Argos Organics ) accelerator and ammonium persulphate initiator ( Sigma ) . The gel thickness was controlled by altering the volume of pregel mixture added onto topographically patterned substrates before gently sandwiching the gel layer with a further coverslip . To obtain substrates with H < 15 μ m , ≈ 10 μ L PAA solution were used for the step and bead substrates and ≈ 30 μ L for groove substrates . After gelation , the substrates were soaked in PBS for 2 h followed by the gentle removal of the top coverslips . To functionalize the surface and facilitate cell adhesion , the substrates were then soaked in hydrazine hydrate ( Aldrich ) for 16 h , followed by washing in 5 % acetic acid ( 1 h ) and sterile PBS before treatment with poly ( D - lysine ) ( PDL ) ( 100 μ g mL − 1 , Sigma ) in PBS . Finally , substrates were washed in PBS and cell - culture medium and then cells were added . Step substrates were prepared by gluing two overlapping coverslips together ( using UV adhesives ; Northland UV - cured Adhesive 81 ) . Bead substrates were prepared by depositing and drying a dilute solution of mondisperse polystyrene spheres ( 80 μ m diameter , 8 wt % in absolute ethanol ; Duke Scientiﬁ c ltd . ) on coverslips . Slow air drying enabled the surface tension of the solvent to gently pull individual polystyrene spheres together as it evaporated away , leaving behind a densely packed monolayer array of beads . These spheres were brieﬂ y heat treated to ensure adhesion to themselves and the glass surface . Groove substrates were custom - made from microscope glass slides ( UQG Optics ltd . ) using a diamond saw to create a 200 μ m deep and 150 or 200 μ m wide grooves that were 2 mm apart , and 2 cm long . To allow the PAA gel to adhere to these structures , substrates were chemically treated as previously described . [ 19 ] Cell Culture : 3T3 ﬁ broblasts ( ATCC : CCL - 92 ) and DLD - 1 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells were grown in polystyrene ﬂ asks between passages 2 and 20 in a humidiﬁ ed 37 ° C , 5 % CO 2 incubator using modiﬁ ed Dulbecco’s Modiﬁ ed Eagle’s Medium ( DMEM ) ( Invitrogen ) for ﬁ broblasts and RPMI - 1640 medium ( Invitrogen ) for DLD - 1 cells . DLD - 1 colorectal adenocarcinoma cell - line wild - type and TGFBI − / − cells were produced by homologous recombination . The strategy for generating gene - targeting constructs was described by others . [ 37 ] Using polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , regions of homology at the TGFBI loci were ampliﬁ ed from genomic DNA extracted from DLD1 cells . NotI sites were embedded within the primers used to amplify homology arms . Targeting constructs were generated by fusion PCR , which links homology arms and selectable marker gene cassettes . The targeting plasmid pAAV - TGFBI ( AAV : adeno - associated viral ) was assembled by ligation of fusion PCR product into pAAV - MCS ( MCS : multiple cloning site ) , an AAV shuttle vector that carries two inverted terminal repeats ( ITR ) sequences necessary for viral packaging ( Stratagene ) . The selectable marker gene cassette contained neomycin resistant or hygromycin B resistant gene ﬂ anked by lox P sites . The cells were ﬂ uorescently labeled with CellTracker Orange CMRA ( C34551 , Invitrogen ) and Hoechst 33342 ( H3570 , Invitrogen ) or Syto 59 ( red ﬂ uorescent , S11341 , Invitrogen ) . Stained cells were resuspended in fresh culture medium , 100 μ L of which ( 5 × 10 5 cells mL − 1 ) were added onto the PDL - coated substrates . After allowing 10 min for cells to settle onto the gel surface , petri dishes were ﬁ lled with fresh cell - culture medium and incubated for 24 h before imaging . In a set of experiments , cells were treated with blebbistatin ( 1 × 10 − 6 M , Sigma ) , cytochalasin D ( 1 × 10 − 6 M , Sigma ) , or nocodazole ( 1 × 10 − 6 M , Sigma ) for 1 h inside an incubator prior to staining and seeding using the same protocol as mentioned above . [ 25 ] Imaging and Analysis : AFM measurements were carried out as previously described . [ 2 , 3 ] Monodisperse polystyrene beads ( diameter 5 . 46 μ m ± 0 . 12 μ m , microParticles GmbH , Berlin , Germany ) were glued to silicon cantilevers ( spring constant ≈ 0 . 1 N m − 1 ) ( PPP - BSI , Nanosensors , Neuchatel , Switzerland ) . Cantilevers were mounted on a Nanowizard III AFM ( JPK Instruments AG , Berlin , Germany ) , which was setup on an inverted microscope ( AxioObserver A1 , Zeiss , UK ) . [ 1 ] N . Li Jeon , H . Baskaran , S . K . Dertinger , G . M . Whitesides , L . Van de Water , M . Toner , Nat . Biotechnol . 2002 , 20 , 826 . [ 2 ] A . F . Christ , K . Franze , H . Gautier , P . Moshayedi , J . Fawcett , R . J . Franklin , R . T . Karadottir , J . Guck , J . Biomech . 2010 , 43 , 2986 . [ 3 ] K . Franze , M . Francke , K . Günter , A . F . Christ , N . Körber , A . Reichenbach , J . Guck , Soft Matter 2011 , 7 , 3147 . [ 4 ] A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , Cell 2006 , 126 , 677 . [ 5 ] M . J . Paszek , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , A . Gefen , C . A . Reinhart - King , S . S . Margulies , M . Dembo , D . Boettiger , D . A . Hammer , V . M . Weaver , Cancer Cell 2005 , 8 , 241 . [ 6 ] K . Franze , J . Guck , Rep . Prog . Phys . 2010 , 73 , 094601 . [ 7 ] C . M . Lo , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , Y . L . Wang , Biophys . J . 2000 , 79 , 144 . [ 8 ] S . Kidoaki , T . Matsuda , J . Biotechnol . 2008 , 133 , 225 . [ 9 ] B . C . Isenberg , P . A . Dimilla , M . Walker , S . Kim , J . Y . Wong , Biophys . J . 2009 , 97 , 1313 . [ 10 ] F . J . Byﬁ eld , Q . Wen , I . Levental , K . Nordstrom , P . E . Arratia , R . T . Miller , P . A . Janmey , Biophys . J . 2009 , 96 , 5095 . [ 11 ] S . Sant , M . J . Hancock , J . P . Donnelly , D . Iyer , A . Khademhosseini , Can . J . Chem . Eng . 2010 , 88 , 899 . [ 12 ] J . R . Tse , A . J . Engler , Preparation of Hydrogel Substrates with Tun - able Mechanical Properties , Current Protocols in Cell Biology , 2010 , 47 : 10 . 16 . 1 – 10 . 16 . 16 ; DOI : 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb1016s47 . [ 13 ] S . Nemir , H . N . Hayenga , J . L . West , Biotechnol . Bioeng . 2010 , 105 , 636 . [ 14 ] B . Trappmann , J . E . Gautrot , J . T . Connelly , D . G . Strange , Y . Li , M . L . Oyen , M . A . Cohen Stuart , H . Boehm , B . Li , V . Vogel , J . P . Spatz , F . M . Watt , W . T . Huck , Nat . Mater . 2012 , 11 , 742 . [ 15 ] J . M . Maloney , E . B . Walton , C . M . Bruce , K . J . Van Vliet , Phys . Rev . E 2008 , 78 , 041923 . Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520 6 www . advmat . de www . MaterialsViews . com wileyonlinelibrary . com © 2012 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim C O MM U N I C A T I O N [ 16 ] S . Sen , A . J . Engler , D . E . Discher , Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 2009 , 2 , 39 . [ 17 ] A . Buxboim , K . Rajagopal , A . E . X . Brown , D . E . Discher , J . Phys . : Condens . Matter 2010 , 22 , 1 . [ 18 ] W . T . Chen , Int . J . Eng . Sci . 1971 , 9 , 775 . [ 19 ] P . Moshayedi , L . D . Costa , A . Christ , S . P . Lacour , J . Fawcett , J . Guck , K . Franze , J . Phys . : Condens . Matter 2010 , 22 , 194114 . [ 20 ] A . J . Engler , M . A . Grifﬁ n , S . Sen , C . G . Bonnemann , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , J . Cell . Biol . 2004 , 166 , 877 . [ 21 ] M . Bernal , I . Nenadic , M . W . Urban , J . F . Greenleaf , J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 2011 , 129 , 1344 . [ 22 ] H . Hertz , J . Reine Angew . Math . 1881 , 92 , 156 . [ 23 ] K . Franze , Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 2011 , 21 , 530 . [ 24 ] T . Yeung , P . C . Georges , L . A . Flanagan , B . Marg , M . Ortiz , M . Funaki , N . Zahir , W . Ming , V . Weaver , P . A . Janmey , Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 2005 , 60 , 24 . [ 25 ] J . da Silva , F . Lautenschlager , C . H . Kuo , J . Guck , E . Sivaniah , Integr . Biol . 2011 , 3 , 1202 . [ 26 ] A . A . Ahmed , A . D . Mills , A . E . Ibrahim , J . Temple , C . Blenkiron , M . Vias , C . E . Massie , N . G . Iyer , A . McGeoch , R . Crawford , B . Nicke , J . Downward , C . Swanton , S . D . Bell , H . M . Earl , R . A . Laskey , C . Caldas , J . D . Brenton , Cancer Cell 2007 , 12 , 514 . [ 27 ] C . Ma , Y . Rong , D . R . Radiloff , M . B . Datto , B . Centeno , S . Bao , A . W . Cheng , F . Lin , S . Jiang , T . J . Yeatman , X . F . Wang , Genes Dev . 2008 , 22 , 308 . [ 28 ] T . E . Angelini , E . Hannezo , X . Trepat , J . J . Fredberg , D . A . Weitz , Phys . Rev . Lett . 2010 , 104 , 168104 . [ 29 ] D . S . Gray , J . Tien , C . S . Chen , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 2003 , 66 , 605 . [ 30 ] Y . C . Lin , D . T . Tambe , C . Y . Park , M . R . Wasserman , X . Trepat , R . Krishnan , G . Lenormand , J . J . Fredberg , J . P . Butler , Phys . Rev . E 2010 , 82 , 041918 . [ 31 ] R . Merkel , N . Kirchgebner , C . M . Cesa , B . Hoffmann , Biophys . J . 2007 , 93 , 3314 . [ 32 ] T . Betz , D . Koch , Y . B . Lu , K . Franze , J . A . Kas , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , 13420 . [ 33 ] B . Sabass , M . L . Gardel , C . M . Waterman , U . S . Schwarz , Biophys . J . 2008 , 94 , 207 . [ 34 ] C . Storm , J . J . Pastore , F . C . MacKintosh , T . C . Lubensky , P . A . Janmey , Nature 2005 , 435 , 191 . [ 35 ] B . Cortese , G . Gigli , M . Riehle , Adv . Funct . Mater . 2009 , 19 , 2961 . [ 36 ] J . Y . Park , D . H . Lee , E . J . Lee , S . H . Lee , Lab Chip 2009 , 9 , 2043 . [ 37 ] M . Kohli , C . Rago , C . Lengauer , K . W . Kinzler , B . Vogelstein , Nucleic Acids Res . 2004 , 32 , e3 . Adv . Mater . 2012 , DOI : 10 . 1002 / adma . 201202520