Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design by Adopting Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Oghenemaro Anuyah Karla Badillo - Urquiola Ronald Metoyer University of Notre Dame University of Notre Dame University of Notre Dame Notre Dame , IN , USA Notre Dame , IN , USA Notre Dame , IN , USA oanuyah @ nd . edu kbadillou @ nd . edu rmetoyer @ nd . edu ABSTRACT While various frameworks and heuristics exist within the HCI com - munity to guide research and design for vulnerable populations , most are centered on the researcher’s involvement . In this work , we developed a conceptual framework for supporting the participation of vulnerable populations in the research and design of technologies . Building upon Maslow’s hierarchy of needs , we synthesized 84 re - search articles that focus on vulnerable populations and technology to develop our framework . This framework conceptualizes both the barriers , such as lack of technology access and digital literacy , and assets , like social relationships , that impact efective participation in research and design . Using our framework can guide researchers in identifying and fulflling the technology - related needs of vulnerable populations , leading to more empowering research participation for these groups . The framework’s guiding questions ofer researchers the opportunity to refect on their approach prior to and during their collaboration with vulnerable populations in technology research and design . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and models ; Human computer interaction ( HCI ) . KEYWORDS Vulnerable Populations , Research and Design , Conceptual Frame - work , Marginalized Communities , Motivation Theories , Systematic Review ACM Reference Format : Oghenemaro Anuyah , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , and Ronald Metoyer . 2023 . Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Partici - pation in Research and Design by Adopting Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 20 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581221 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581221 1 INTRODUCTION Over the years , the SIGCHI community has contributed signif - cantly to research and design approaches for working with vulner - able populations . Vulnerable populations refer to people who may have a low - socioeconomic status , identify as a racial and ethnic minority [ 166 ] , or are susceptible to harm [ 141 ] . These populations can include but are not limited to , those who have experienced domestic abuse , those who live in poverty or in foster care , immi - grants , refugees , economically and emotionally disabled , people with chronic illnesses , people who identify as LGBTQ + , youth , chil - dren , and older adults [ 108 , 160 ] . In attempts to conduct responsible research while protecting the welfare of vulnerable populations , many researchers have developed frameworks and heuristics for engaging with these populations [ 3 , 140 , 177 , 183 ] . For instance , Walker et al . [ 177 ] created heuristic guidelines for conducting re - search with vulnerable populations , encouraging researchers to ask key questions throughout the research process and even before a research project begins . In terms of design , Wong et al . [ 183 ] developed a framework to understand the unique health challenges of vulnerable populations when designing specialized health tech - nologies . While these frameworks help orient the researchers’ and designers’ participation in engaging with vulnerable groups , the frameworks do not directly address the participation of the vulnera - ble individual . To the best of our knowledge , no existing framework considers the needs and motivations of vulnerable populations when engaging them in research and design . Therefore , our goal was to develop a conceptual framework that could serve as a lens for sup - porting the participation of vulnerable populations in technology research and design . Our work was guided by the following research question : RQ1 : How can the needs and motivations of vulnerable popula - tions be conceptualized for technology research and design participation ? To answer this research question , it is important to build upon established theories of human motivation . We started by research - ing several well - known motivation theories used in the HCI lit - erature . Theories explored included Maslow’s theory of motiva - tion [ 187 ] , the theory of planned behavior ( TPB ) [ 41 ] , and the self - determination theory ( SDT ) [ 85 ] . Based on this comparison , we decided to use Maslow’s theory to build the conceptual framework for the following reasons ; 1 ) The TPB and SDT emphasize behav - ioral change and behavior prediction , respectively . Considering that the goal of this research was not to change the behavior of vulnerable populations , but to orient researchers to their needs and motivations to participate in research and design , we argue that CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . behavioral change and behavioral prediction are not appropriate . Maslow’s theory , on the other hand , focuses on behavior motiva - tion . We believe this theory is suitable as it allows us to understand factors that could infuence vulnerable populations’ participation during technology research and design and how researchers can ofer support . 2 ) Maslow’s theory explains motivation through the satisfaction of needs . Following this theory allows us to investigate what needs exist for vulnerable populations in technology settings and how researchers may support their research and design par - ticipation by assisting in the fulfllment of these needs . 3 ) Like other motivation theories , Maslow’s theory is robust in its coverage of human psychological and growth needs , critical factors when considering human behavior and motivation . We scoped our research and conceptualized the technology needs for vulnerable populations’ research and design participation using Maslow’s theory of motivation [ 104 ] . Similar to Maslow’s distinc - tion between lower - order ( defciency ) and higher - order ( growth ) needs , we characterized the technology needs as defcits - based and assets - based . Defcits - based technology needs are those that result from a defcit or shortcoming or a population’s susceptibility to it . These needs , corresponding to the basic and safety levels of the hierarchy , include access to information and communication technologies , digital literacy skills , and the assurance of safety and privacy in technology - related environments . Assets - based tech - nology needs , on the other hand , are derived from the assets or strengths that vulnerable populations possess , such as their social ties , their social identities , and the ability to lend their voice to research and design . These assets - based needs correspond to the relationships , self - esteem , and self - actualization levels of the hier - archy , respectively . The primary premise of our framework is that satisfying the various technology needs of vulnerable populations can motivate their engagement in technology research and design , making them feel more supported and empowered as a result . To develop our framework , we conducted a systematic review of 84 research articles focusing on vulnerable groups and topics related to the diferent levels of Maslow’s hierarchy ( e . g . , safety and self - esteem ) in technology settings . We used a thematic analysis approach to analyze the research articles [ 23 ] , which allowed us to identify several technology - related needs for vulnerable popula - tions for each level of the framework . We discuss how theories , such as intersectionality [ 51 ] and design justice [ 36 ] , can help researchers explore dimensions pertaining to vulnerable populations and satisfy these technology needs . Further , using the physiological concepts of empowerment provided by Schneider et al . [ 152 ] , we describe how meeting the various technology needs in our framework could result in researchers empowering vulnerable populations through research and design engagements , and ultimately , supporting their participation . Our contributions include : • A conceptual framework that guides researchers on how to support the participation of vulnerable populations in research and design . • An understanding of how addressing technology needs can empower vulnerable populations through research and de - sign participation . • A set of questions for researchers to follow while engaging with vulnerable groups so as to empower them through technology research and design . This paper is organized as follows . First , we provide related work on existing HCI research for vulnerable populations . We also present background on HCI research for engaging vulnerable pop - ulations in technology research and design and Maslow’s theory of motivation . Second , we describe our method , including the process we followed for selecting papers and conducting thematic analysis . Third , we present our framework synthesis based on fndings from our thematic analysis of relevant literature centered on vulnerable populations , technology - related settings , and topics related to the diferent levels of the Maslow’s hierarchy . Finally , we present our discussion , limitations , and conclusions . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK In this section , we discuss related works on HCI research for vul - nerable populations . We also discuss background work on methods used in engaging with vulnerable populations for research and design and Maslow’s theory of motivation . 2 . 1 HCI Research for Vulnerable Populations The SIGCHI community has made several eforts to research vul - nerable populations and their use of technology . These studies have covered a range of topics , including health and wellness [ 149 , 150 ] , social support [ 4 , 7 , 25 , 40 , 44 , 149 ] , and safety [ 165 , 170 ] . For exam - ple , Saksono et al . [ 150 ] designed a ftness application to support healthy attitudes among low - income households , and Brown and Grinter [ 25 ] developed a messaging app to help minimize vulner - abilities faced by refugees when they resettle in a new country . Similarly , Gomez et al . [ 60 ] designed a system to help Hispanic day laborers in low - income communities overcome emotional barriers to learning how to use computers . These studies demonstrate the value of technology in assisting vulnerable populations in maintain - ing their existing social support networks and facilitating emotional attachment . Focused on safety , the research by Thinyane et al . [ 170 ] examined the role of technology in mitigating the exploitation of vulnerable groups and developed an application to support the iden - tifcation of victims of human trafcking . Safety and social support are well - studied topics in the HCI literature as they pertain to ad - dressing the vulnerabilities and needs of marginalized populations . Our framework addresses these concepts to foster an understanding of the technology - related needs of vulnerable groups , with a focus on research and design contexts . There is also a plethora of research on the technological chal - lenges that vulnerable and marginalized populations encounter [ 25 , 75 ] which are commonly attributed to dimensions such as social or cultural factors [ 70 ] , digital inclusion [ 141 ] , and digital inequity or digital divide [ 3 ] . For example , Harrington et al . [ 75 ] reveal how socio - cultural factors impact the conception of health technologies for older adults . Brown and Grinter [ 25 ] explain how cultural barriers , such as language limitations , prevent refugees from efectively utilizing technology . Newhart et al . [ 3 ] also high - light how systemic disparities in healthcare and education threaten digital equity for Latino populations in low - income neighborhoods . To address these challenges , researchers have developed frame - works that guide the study of vulnerable populations and examine these dimensions . For instance , the framework by Newhart et al . [ 3 ] focuses on disparities within systems , resiliency , and familialism in Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany the development of health technology for vulnerable groups . The framework by Perez et al . [ 141 ] explores the intersection of vulner - able populations and digital inclusion . Almohamed et al . [ 5 ] have also developed a framework that analyzes the specifc challenges faced by refugees and asylum seekers , including cultural contexts , displacement - related struggles , and the impact of social capital on access to resources in host communities . Our framework similarly emphasizes the exploration of dimensions unique to vulnerable and marginalized populations , such as their social or cultural identities and the digital divide . However , our framework specifcally centers on technology research and design with the goal of empowering and supporting the participation of these individuals . Furthermore , our framework incorporates established theories , such as social capital [ 66 ] and intersectionality [ 51 ] , to address these various di - mensions and provide guidance to researchers on how they can understand the technology needs of vulnerable and marginalized populations . 2 . 2 Engaging Vulnerable Populations for Research and Design within HCI HCI researchers and designers employ various methods when work - ing with vulnerable populations , with participatory research and design being among the most commonly used methods [ 15 , 45 , 48 , 69 , 143 , 184 ] . Participatory design is based on the premise that individuals who will use an artifact should have the freedom to contribute to the design and function , giving them more control over the use and more room for action [ 48 , 87 , 174 ] . Participatory research , like participatory design , promotes deeper connections with marginalized or vulnerable groups and involves them as active stakeholders or research partners instead of just treating them as research subjects [ 48 ] . In their study with young forced migrants facing language barriers , Duarte et al . [ 48 ] utilized participatory methods and found that it facilitated communication and inter - cultural collaboration between the research team and participants . Similarly , Dillahunt et al . [ 45 ] used a participatory design approach in economically challenged areas to work with marginalized groups , leading to their understanding of the perceptions regarding the use of sharing - economy applications for employment and resource sharing . These studies demonstrate how participatory methods enable vulnerable groups to participate in the design of technology , regardless of their challenges , resulting in the development of tools that meet their community’s needs [ 45 , 184 ] . Participatory action research , like traditional participatory ap - proaches , is another method commonly used in the literature [ 34 , 42 , 90 ] . This method provides valuable insights into the values , be - liefs , and needs of marginalized communities [ 69 ] and emphasizes collective and community involvement in social action [ 48 , 72 ] . As an example , Clarke et al . [ 34 ] used this approach to study the role of technology in supporting women survivors of domestic abuse and gained deeper insights into their values and contexts . Kotturi et al . [ 90 ] used the participatory action research method to work with local entrepreneurs in building a technical service application that benefts the community and promotes social change . Participatory approaches can potentially empower vulnerable populations through research and design [ 48 , 72 ] . Duarte et al . [ 48 ] found that using participatory design research empowered young forced immigrants to make a diference in their everyday lives and improve the situation of others in similar situations . According to Wyche et al . [ 184 ] , residents of rural communities who repaired mobile devices felt empowered to produce their own technology for their communities in the future through participatory design . The collective and community - based approach of participatory action research fosters a sense of autonomy and empowerment among participants [ 34 , 90 ] , as they are actively involved in identifying and addressing social issues that afect their lives . Our framework is inspired by the use of participatory approaches for conducting research and designing with marginalized and vulnerable com - munities and holds the potential to uplift these communities and empower them . However , despite the advantages of participatory approaches , there are also drawbacks to consider , such as the signifcant bur - den placed on participants [ 47 , 48 , 79 ] and the potential disem - powerment of some sensitive groups [ 96 , 164 ] . To address these challenges , there have been calls for the community to carefully consider engagement methods that can empower vulnerable groups . Frameworks such as value - sensitive design [ 24 , 57 ] , design justice [ 36 ] , and assets - based design [ 140 , 183 ] have been used in the HCI literature to guide engagement with vulnerable populations . Value - sensitive design methodologies consider human values such as autonomy , privacy , accountability , and the right to own property . Assets - based approaches to research and design focus on the knowl - edge , strengths , and capabilities of individuals rather than their needs [ 183 ] . Design justice is a conceptual framework that recog - nizes the power of design to empower marginalized communities through collaborative and creative practices , emphasizing fair ben - efts for marginalized and vulnerable communities and justice in the design of technological systems [ 36 ] . These frameworks put the perspectives of various users and populations at the center of the design process , recognizing their underlying values and knowl - edge as important factors in informing technology design [ 74 ] . For example , Karusala et al . [ 88 ] used an assets - based framework to study how community health workers of diverse backgrounds and contracted status respond to the mandated use of digital payment methods and long payment delays . Given our goal of supporting and empowering vulnerable popu - lations in their engagement in technology research and design , our proposed framework builds on existing paradigms such as value - sensitive design , design justice , and assets - based design . We use these paradigms to guide discussions on how researchers can meet the technology needs of vulnerable and marginalized communi - ties identifed through our framework , with the ultimate goal of empowering these groups . 2 . 3 Maslow’s Theory of Motivation Abraham Maslow developed the hierarchy of needs model , the most well - known theory of motivation [ 104 ] . Maslow splits the category of human needs into lower - order ( or defciency ) and higher - order ( or growth ) needs . He places physiological / basic ( e . g . , food , air ) , at the bottom of the defciency needs , followed by safety and love / belonging / relationships . According to Maslow , defciency needs arise due to deprivation . On the opposite spectrum , the growth needs include self - esteem and self - actualization and arise CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . due to an individual’s motivation to grow and reach their full poten - tial . As needs are met , new ones emerge to motivate behavior , until self - actualization is achieved . Maslow initially argued that higher - order needs must be addressed only after the lower - order needs have been met . He later stressed that these depend on context and that in some cases , higher - order needs may come before lower - order ones [ 176 ] . The Maslow theory of motivation has been applied in several domains , including education [ 116 , 128 ] and business [ 101 ] , and typically in the context of motivating performance . This theory has also been used within the HCI literature . For instance , Zhang et al . [ 187 ] used Maslow’s theory to examine how technology may respond to the basic needs of older adults during times of crisis . Gou et al . [ 62 ] used this theory as a needs model to examine the personality traits of users from social media . The authors of [ 18 ] build upon Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory to examine the motivations of users who use peer - to - peer or sharing economy services . Other theories of motivation commonly used in HCI include the self - determination theory ( SDT ) [ 146 ] and the theory of planned behavior ( TPB ) [ 82 ] . The TPB was created to predict behaviors over which people have only minimal voluntary control [ 158 ] . An example of its use is in the promotion of participation in physical activity [ 30 ] . Several studies in the persuasive system’s domain inform their research and design using the TPB [ 8 , 153 , 169 ] . The Self - determination Theory introduces the concepts of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation to explain how individuals develop desired behaviors [ 146 ] . According to this theory , for a behavior to occur , three factors must be present at the same time : competence , au - tonomy , and relatedness . The SGT has commonly been applied in domains such as gaming [ 20 , 171 , 172 ] , sports / health [ 31 , 85 , 93 ] , and learning [ 17 , 56 ] . The TPB and SDT are both used to understand behavior change and behavior prediction . We used Maslow’s theory of motivation to scope our framework for the following reasons ; First , Maslow’s theory emphasizes the satisfaction of needs that motivate humans and how these needs difer . Our work extends this concept to vulnerable populations and discusses technology needs that exist for vulnerable populations in research and design settings . Second , unlike the TPB and SDT which emphasize behavior change and behavior prediction , Maslow’s the - ory is centered on behavior motivation . Our framework builds upon this theory of behavior motivation to conceptualize factors that can motivate participation during technology research and design . Third , like other theories of motivation , Maslow’s theory is robust for covering both psychological and growth needs , which are essen - tial for humans and motivation . Building on Maslow’s theory , we categorize technology needs into defcits - based and assets - based , similar to defciency and growth needs in the hierarchy . The defcits - based ( lower - order ) needs are those that arise due to lack and are based on the current limitations to which they are susceptible in the context of technology , such as their access to information and communication technologies and their online safety / privacy . Simi - larly , the assets - based ( higher - order ) needs are those that can be leveraged as strengths or assets ( such as their social ties , social identities , and their voice ) and which , when met , can help them attain the ultimate aim of self - actualization . 3 METHOD To inform our conceptual framework , we consulted the literature to identify research articles focusing on vulnerable groups and topics related to the diferent levels of Maslow’s hierarchy ( e . g . , safety and self - esteem ) in technology settings . Our goal was to identify these papers and thematically analyze them to identify themes that align with the hierarchy levels . 3 . 1 Databases Searched We identifed relevant research articles across multiple disciplines ( e . g . , HCI , education , psychology , health , information technology ) by searching both the Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) Digital Library and Web of Science databases . Journals retrieved in - clude ACM Transactions on Computing Education ( TOCE ) , Journal of Medical Internet Research ( JMIR ) , International Journal of Tech - nology Enhanced Learning ( IJTEL ) , and Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) . Conferences include ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) , ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) , and ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ) . 3 . 2 Search Process : Search Terms and Results We searched the aforementioned databases using concepts from Maslow’s hierarchy ( e . g . , safety and self - esteem ) as key search terms . Because members of disadvantaged and underrepresented groups fall under our defnition of vulnerable populations , it was important that we fnd relevant literature focusing on these groups . As a result , we included the keywords : “marginalized , ” “sensitive , ” “disadvantaged , ” or “underrepresented” in our search terms . For example , we conducted the following search for the safety concept of the hierarchy : “technology” AND ( “vulnerable populations” OR “sen - sitive populations” OR “disadvantaged populations” OR “underrepresented populations” OR “marginalized populations” ) AND “safety” Following our initial search , we discovered several unique key - words associated with each concept within the initial articles . For example , the term “digital divide” was frequently associated with basic needs for technology participation , the terms “privacy and security” with safety needs , and the term “social identity” with self - esteem needs . As a result , we included these terms in our query to initiate the search . The modifed search query we used for the safety needs concept of the hierarchy is shown below : “technology” AND ( “vulnerable populations” OR “sen - sitive populations” OR “disadvantaged populations” OR “underrepresented populations” OR “marginal - ized populations” ) AND ( “safety” OR “privacy” OR “protection” OR “security” OR “safety needs” ) Table 1 lists the keywords we used to search for articles corre - sponding to each concept in the hierarchy . We searched the entire article content in both databases ( i . e . , full text and metadata ) . Re - search articles retrieved were peer - reviewed , open access , written in the English language , and published within the last 10 years ( 1 / 01 / 2012 – 07 / 31 / 2022 ) . There were 1 , 668 search results in total . It is worth noting that our search yielded a few articles that were not Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 1 : Search terms . We use these search keywords in combination with the terms [ + ( “vulnerable populations” OR “sensitive populations” OR “disadvantaged populations” OR “underrepresented populations” OR “marginalized populations” ) + “technol - ogy” ] to search for articles corresponding to each level of the conceptual framework . Motivation Concepts ( or Needs ) Search Keywords Basic digital divide , basic needs Safety safety , protection , privacy , security , safety needs Relationship ( or Social ) social capital , social relationships , social support , social needs , relationship needs Self - Esteem self - esteem , social identity , esteem needs Self - Actualization self - actualize , self - fulfllment , self - actualization published in English venues ( or not written in English ) and that was not open access (  = 4 ) , which we excluded from our search results . The following is a breakdown of the search results for each concept : Basic needs (  = 157 ) , Safety needs (  = 968 ) , Relationship needs (  = 325 ) , Self - Esteem needs (  = 205 ) , and Self - Actualization needs (  = 13 ) . It is important to note that we initially create sepa - rate corpora for each of the diferent motivation concepts . In this case , basic needs search results belong to one corpus , safety needs to another , and so on for the other concepts . 3 . 3 Selection Process : Inclusion and Exclusion Before considering articles for screening , we removed duplicates , non - research articles ( e . g . , doctoral consortium , panel , keynote , con - ference proceedings , and symposium papers ) , non - peer - reviewed articles ( e . g . , workshops ) , and non - full text articles ( e . g . , conference abstracts and those with fewer than six pages , excluding references ) . This resulted in a total of 913 unique articles . Given that the goal of this work is to understand how vulnerable populations’ technology needs and motivations can be conceptualized , we included articles that met the following criteria : 1 ) The main focus of the paper is on vulnerable populations ( Note : Articles with mentions of vulnerable populations but not as the primary user group being studied do not meet this criterion ) . 2 ) The research is centered on the context of technology use ( Note : Articles that discuss their use of technology , a device , a system , or their participation in technology design meet this criterion . Articles that discuss a concept more generally ( e . g . , safety by social distancing during the pandemic ) do not meet this criterion ) . 3 ) Contributions and implications of the research are focused on one of the fve motivation concepts . For articles corresponding to each concept , the frst author ex - amined the titles and abstracts of the top 50 articles ( ranked by rele - vancy in the databases searched ) using the above inclusion criteria . Articles that met the inclusion criteria were recorded and exam - ined . We discovered that across all fve corpora , relevant papers frequently referenced vulnerable populations ( e . g . , young children , older adults , people with disabilities , or low - resource job seekers ) and the topic of focus ( e . g . , privacy , social support , or safety ) in their titles , abstracts , and their author keyword tags . Therefore , Figure 1 : Search , screening , and selection process ( fow dia - gram ) . we scanned the remaining articles and excluded those that did not mention vulnerable populations and technology - related discussion in their titles , abstracts , or author keyword tags . This resulted in 238 unique articles that were within scope . After reading their full texts using our inclusion criteria , 84 unique articles remained for review : Basic needs (  = 25 ) , Safety needs (  = 31 ) , Relation - ship needs (  = 26 ) , Self - Esteem needs (  = 8 ) and Self - Actualization needs (  = 4 ) . Figure 1 shows details on the screening and inclusion process . Table 2 presents a description of our fnal set of papers and includes the number of papers in each year and their publication venue . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . Table 2 : Publication year , counts , and venue of papers included in the analysis . Year n Venues and References Conferences Journals 2012 0 2013 1 Soc . Sci . Res . [ 118 ] 2014 2 CHI [ 39 ] , DIS [ 103 ] 2015 1 CHI [ 45 ] 2016 4 CHI [ 9 , 25 ] CSCW [ 35 ] , JAMIA [ 107 ] 2017 8 CHI [ 162 ] , IDC [ 11 ] , MobileHCI [ 50 ] , NSPW [ 179 ] CSCW [ 2 , 83 ] , IJTEL [ 188 ] , JMU [ 117 ] 2018 11 AfriCHI [ 121 ] , CHI [ 166 , 181 ] , IDC [ 148 ] CSCW [ 81 , 115 , 151 , 175 ] , Edu + Training [ 123 ] , ITD [ 124 ] , TOCHI [ 48 ] 2019 10 CHI [ 84 , 127 , 131 ] , MobileHCI [ 114 ] , SMSociety [ 38 ] CSCW [ 67 , 88 ] , IJTEL [ 189 ] , JACR [ 156 ] , TOCHI [ 4 ] 2020 10 CHI [ 80 , 139 , 187 ] , IDC [ 157 ] , IEEE [ 159 ] , NordiCHI [ 102 ] CSCW [ 65 ] , IMWU [ 178 ] , J . Inf . Commun . Ethics Soc . [ 95 ] , MHealth [ 186 ] 2021 21 CHI [ 10 , 54 , 68 , 94 , 99 , 110 , 133 , 161 ] , Compass [ 168 ] , CSCW [ 13 , 29 , 129 , 190 ] , Mar . Policy [ 100 ] , Mobile Media FAccT [ 138 ] , ICMI [ 135 ] & Comm [ 59 ] , SAGE [ 97 ] , TOCE [ 154 ] , TOCHI [ 111 ] , TAC - CESS [ 16 ] 2022 16 ASSETS [ 77 ] , CHI [ 19 , 58 , 120 , 122 , 132 , 167 , 182 ] , DIS CSCW [ 6 ] , Community Psychol . [ 76 ] , Digital Health [ 33 ] , [ 137 ] GROUP [ 5 ] , J . Fam . Violence [ 147 ] , JMIR [ 185 ] , IJTHI [ 145 ] Table 3 : Summary of themes developed from the data . Motivation Concepts n Themes Examples Basic 25 Concerns about technology adoption Psychological impacts of technology access Psychological impacts of limited digital literacy [ 19 , 162 ] [ 95 , 124 ] [ 154 , 161 ] Safety 31 Privacy concerns Perceptions of online risks or harm Safety perceptions of spaces or environments [ 35 , 190 ] [ 167 , 186 ] [ 65 , 147 ] Relationship ( or Social ) 26 Composition of social relations Roles of social relations in tech contexts Impacts of access to social relations [ 99 , 157 ] [ 59 , 129 ] [ 6 , 148 ] Self - Esteem 8 Triggers of low self - esteem in tech contexts [ 58 , 173 ] Self - Actualization 4 Actions for self - actualizing [ 103 , 135 ] 3 . 4 Analysis We used a thematic analysis approach to analyze our data [ 23 ] . The frst author led the analysis . The entire research team met to confrm and discuss the themes . We started by reading a subset of the research articles ( ≈ 10 % ) for each hierarchy concept and noting common fndings in these papers in relation to our research questions . We focus on relevant sections such as the abstract , intro - duction , results , and discussion . We then created initial codes based on these fndings . We revisited previously read papers as well as the remaining unread papers in the corpus and applied the codes to them . We add new codes as they emerge in the articles . All codes were organized , reevaluated , and regrouped as needed , and then used to develop themes ( see Table 3 for examples of themes that we developed from our analysis ) . Our analysis was iterative , as we continued to review our themes and data throughout the process to synthesize our fndings . Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 3 . 4 . 1 Defining Empowerment . One important argument for our framework is that it can assist researchers in empowering vulnera - ble populations by meeting their technology needs during research participation . As a result , we tied each level of the framework to various forms of empowerment that may be achieved . Schneider et al . [ 152 ] developed a framework that characterizes empowerment in the HCI literature . The authors describe how psychological em - powerment manifests itself in three ways : knowing , feeling , and doing . The acquisition of new skills is the result of empowerment through knowing . Taking action or exerting power is the result of empowerment through doing . Having a perception of control , competency , support , or confdence are some of the results of em - powerment through feeling . We use these descriptions throughout the discussions in our framework to explain how by satisfying the diferent technology needs identifed from our analysis , researchers may empower vulnerable populations through research and design participation . 4 FRAMEWORK SYNTHESIS Researchers and designers must address the knowledge gaps and technology needs of vulnerable groups in order for those popula - tions to efectively participate in technology research and design . We build on Maslow’s hierarchy of needs to develop a framework based on a synthesis of the research papers identifed in Section 3 . 3 . As shown in Figure 2 , the framework characterizes technology needs into two types : defcits - based and assets - based . The frst two levels are based on defcits - based technology needs ( corresponding to basic and safety needs ) , while the remaining three levels are based on assets - based technology needs ( corresponding to relation - ships , self - esteem , and self - actualization needs ) . The tech - centric terms used to defne each level of the framework were derived from our synthesis of the literature . The underlying basis of our frame - work is that ultimately , researchers can empower and motivate vulnerable populations to participate in technology research and design by fulflling these technology needs . In the rest of the section , we will further describe each level of the framework and provide insights into how researchers can empower vulnerable populations through their participation . 4 . 1 Basic Needs : Participating in a Technological Society Our synthesis for the frst level of the hierarchy was guided by the following question : what are the basic needs for vulnerable popula - tions to participate in a technological society ? Themes we observed from the literature include technology adoption concerns , psycho - logical impacts of technology access , and psychological impacts of digital literacy or technology profciency . According to the literature , the basic necessities for integrat - ing into a technology society include access to information and communication devices such as a phone , tablet , or computer , the Internet or a data plan , and the profciency or literacy skills to use these technologies [ 19 , 95 , 140 , 141 , 154 , 162 , 188 ] . Several vul - nerable ( or marginalized ) groups , however , are known to have more difculty participating in a technological society than the general population , attributable to issues with technology access [ 19 , 33 , 50 , 59 , 68 , 124 ] , technology profciency , and digital literacy skills [ 19 , 33 , 107 , 117 , 118 , 123 , 162 ] . Technology Adoption Concerns & Psychological Implications . Re - search reveals that although several vulnerable groups , including older adults , have embraced technology over the years ( e . g . , mo - bile phones ) [ 55 , 100 , 166 , 185 , 187 ] , they frequently struggle to access essential technologies such as the Internet , data plans , or personal computers [ 28 , 59 , 63 , 97 , 107 , 139 ] . Barriers to their access to technology are commonly due to socioeconomic limitations such as low income , limited education , or their geographic locations [ 29 , 124 ] . For instance , Nemer et al . [ 124 ] found that some people in low - resource neighborhoods in Brazil were unable to properly utilize the Internet because they lacked the resources to buy smart - phones , while for others it was because of the poor connectivity they received due to where they lived . In today’s society , using technology like computers , an Internet connection , smartphones , and a data plan is necessary for many tasks for vulnerable groups . For example , the Internet can provide foster youth with a wealth of information on topics of personal interest ( e . g . , medical health , employment , school work ) [ 64 ] . Unfor - tunately , lacking basic technologies impose a number of limitations on vulnerable or marginalized populations . Vitak et al . [ 175 ] , for example , discussed how people who lack Internet at home and rely on public computers to complete important tasks like job searching frequently get exposed to security and privacy risks , such as from leaving personal information and becoming vulnerable to theft . Vulnerable elders frequently require resources to assist them in us - ing the digital monitoring systems that their doctors have advised , as well as Internet - based health education and advice [ 61 ] . Lack of ownership of relevant technologies frequently interferes with com - munication and information sharing between them and their care providers . Similarly , children from low - income households who do not have access to computers at home may be at a disadvantage compared to their peers who do have computers , such as for the completion of assignments and other school - related tasks [ 188 ] . This lack of access to computers can prevent these children from taking full advantage of educational opportunities . Technology profciency and digital literacy are yet other barriers that vulnerable and marginalized populations commonly face in integrating into a technological society [ 58 , 107 , 117 , 118 , 123 , 125 , 141 , 145 , 189 ] . Digital literacy refers to the variety of literacies involved with the use of digital technology , such as hardware or software [ 126 ] . For example , the ability to operate devices such as mobile phones or desktop computers [ 126 ] , as well as having the knowledge to navigate , seek , and decode information through the Internet [ 145 ] . Difculty with digital literacy often forces members of vulnerable or marginalized groups to rely on other people for help with their devices . For example , it is common for older adults to rely on family and peers to help them navigate their devices [ 127 ] . These difculties could also interfere with important tasks in their daily lives . Ogbonnaya et al . [ 130 ] found that returning citizens often lacked digital literacy skills , which amplifed the struggles they faced fnding jobs using technology . Unfortunately , struggles with digital literacy skills or technology profciency may have psychological implications for vulnerable groups in technological contexts . According to the literature , rely - ing on others may discourage them from using technology at all CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . Figure 2 : Framework for supporting vulnerable populations in their engagements in technology research and design . Technology needs are characterized as Defcits - and Assets - based . for fear of ridicule [ 154 , 168 ] . One example is the study by Seo et al . [ 154 ] who discovered that women who were formerly incarcerated and lacked digital literacy skills avoided using or owning technol - ogy out of fear of being consistently mocked by family or peers when they could not complete some simple tasks . Other detrimental impacts of a lack of digital literacy include a lack of confdence [ 168 ] and self - efcacy [ 154 , 161 , 168 ] , which discourages vulnerable groups from using or owning technology [ 154 , 161 ] . Technology access and digital literacy skills are both technologi - cal needs that must be addressed in order to motivate vulnerable populations’ participation in technology research and design and to empower them . The literature shows that ownership and use of technology trigger a feeling of empowerment for vulnerable popula - tions [ 95 , 124 ] . Studies also reveal that having the necessary digital literacy skills increases one’s sense of self - efcacy , confdence , and feeling of empowerment [ 123 , 156 ] . Fulflling Basic Needs . Researchers can motivate and empower vulnerable populations by providing access to the technology re - quired for the technology research and design engagement design ( e . g . , a phone or tablet ) . Researchers must also make provisions to provide participants with the digital literacy skills required to use these devices . Doing so could be accomplished by organizing training workshops or programs to teach them relevant digital literacy skills [ 123 , 131 ] . The benefts of such training would not only be related to the immediate use of technology , but it could also give them confdence during research and design engagements [ 51 ] . These access and digital literacy barriers can be analyzed by researchers using the digital divide lens [ 37 , 97 , 139 ] . Using this lens can help researchers understand their technology access issues , existing barriers , and how the research and design process can be better tailored to ensure that their basic technology needs are met . Takeaway . Vulnerable populations should be supported with the technical skills and equipment to participate in research . How Participants Achieve Empowerment . Through Knowing ( Acquiring Digital Literacy Skills ) & Through Doing ( Having Experience with Necessary Technology ) . 4 . 2 Safety Needs : Feeling Protected during Research The following question guided our synthesis for the second level of the hierarchy : what safety needs might exist for vulnerable popula - tions in technology contexts ? ” High - level themes we observed from our synthesis include : privacy concerns , perceptions of online risks or harm , and perceptions of safe spaces or environments . By defnition , vulnerable populations are already more suscep - tible to harm because of their identities [ 98 , 105 ] . For example , vulnerable or marginalized persons who are racial or gender mi - norities could be targets of threats or physical attack [ 27 ] . Sexual abuse victims are also more likely to be attacked or stalked by their abuser [ 109 ] . Several safety concerns for vulnerable populations in technological contexts are also highlighted in the literature . Privacy Concerns . Studies show that one of the critical safety needs for many vulnerable groups is privacy [ 10 , 67 , 77 , 138 , 151 , 186 ] . For example , the authors of [ 186 ] explain how the global criminalization of sex work makes privacy equate to safety for female sex workers living with HIV . Invasion of privacy for these sensitive groups may result in stigma , harassment , problems with law enforcement , or even fatality . In general , privacy concerns are frequently tied to data collection and data sharing [ 2 , 35 , 65 , 121 , 122 , 135 , 154 , 156 , 186 , 190 ] , such as from the use of the Internet [ 65 , 76 , 154 , 156 , 186 ] . For example , Seo et al . [ 154 ] explains how women who were formerly incarcerated expressed concerns with Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Internet - enabled devices as they feared that they were constantly surveilled by law enforcement . These privacy concerns are the reasons several vulnerable groups are discouraged from engaging with Internet - enabled technologies [ 154 , 156 ] . Perceptions of Online Harm or Risks . Another safety concern that emerged from our synthesis is the perception of exposure to online risks or harm . Studies show that populations vulnerable due to their age , fnancial situation , immigration status , being part of a minority group , having a disability or cognitive challenge , or where they live are more susceptible to online risks than the general population [ 38 , 81 , 110 , 167 , 186 , 189 ] . Older adults ( typically those older than 60 years of age ) face more online safety threats than younger adults , such as being targeted by online fraudsters [ 114 ] . Autistic children experience signifcantly more online safety risks and poorer well - being than non - autistic children [ 102 ] ; as they are more likely to be sexually and fnancially exploited , bullied , and harassed , especially on social media [ 16 , 91 ] . According to Badillo - Urquiola et al . [ 11 ] , one in four teens is unintentionally exposed to sexually explicit materials online . Seo et al . [ 154 ] describes how women who were formerly incarcerated are often targets of Internet scams and fraud . Their susceptibility to online risks or harm is exacerbated by the fact that , while the Internet may expose them to these risks , several vulnerable groups are unaware of these risks or how to address them ( e . g . , older adults and children especially ) [ 58 , 179 , 182 ] . Perceptions of Safe Spaces or Environments . Access to safe spaces or environments in digital contexts emerged as a third safety need for vulnerable groups . Sensitive populations , such as victims of abuse ( e . g . domestic abuse ) , individuals with chronic health con - ditions ( e . g . , HIV ) , and minority groups , commonly have safety concerns stemming from sharing the same spaces with parties who may cause them harm or amplify their already existing vulnera - bilities . For instance , the authors of [ 147 ] describe how women victims of domestic abuse are often at risk of safety due to sharing the same digital ‘spaces’ ( or technologies ) with their partners and where they can express themselves freely without being monitored . These women frequently go to great lengths to ensure that they can access environments that are free of scrutiny . Haimson et al . [ 65 ] discuss how people who identify as LGBTQ + often seek safe spaces online , especially through social media sites , to connect with others and share their own experiences freely . Fulflling Safety Needs . Taken together , all of these safety con - cerns could also translate to the research settings . According to research , there may also be safety risks associated with vulnera - ble groups participating in research [ 152 , 160 , 177 ] . For instance , research with sensitive populations such as those with HIV and mental diseases might inadvertently put them at risk of facing stigma and discrimination if the methods for data collection and dissemination are violated [ 160 ] . Also , studies with undocumented immigrants focused on how they utilize technology to seek re - sources and help may unintentionally put them in danger [ 177 ] . When working with vulnerable populations , researchers must acknowledge that they face unique threats that are uncommon in the general population . To address their safety needs , it is impor - tant that researchers demonstrate and guarantee that they will not be exposed to harm or additional threats by participating in the research [ 13 ] . For instance , vulnerable individuals must understand that the tools being used during the research engagement ( described in Section 4 . 1 ) will protect their privacy and will not expose them to online harm . Researchers must also consider these safety needs when determining research and design methods . One factor to con - sider is ensuring that the vulnerable participants are comfortable with all parties present in the research . For example , Park et al . [ 137 ] ensured a safe and comfortable environment for their participants who were sexual assault survivors by having separate sessions with them and professionals who were also research stakeholders . This would also mean that if joint research sessions , such as a focus group , are deemed suitable and the participants include sensitive groups like domestic violence victims or individuals living with HIV , researchers must consider their context and prioritize their safety and privacy . Researchers should ensure that people who may make them feel uncomfortable , such as their partners , cannot ob - serve or become aware of their participation . All of these factors for ensuring safety must be considered by researchers at every phase of the research engagements and the interactions with them . For example , Sabri et al . [ 147 ] discuss how victims of domestic abuse may be subject to more abuse if their partners found out they were involved in research or communicating with researchers . Takeaway . Vulnerable populations should be guaran - teed no harm and made aware of protective measures for technology research and design engagements . How Participants Achieve Empowerment . Through Knowing ( Awareness of Safety Risks and How these are Mitigated ) & Through Feeling ( Perception of being Safe ) . 4 . 3 Relationship Needs : Facilitating Emotional Engagement during Research The following question guided our synthesis for the third level of the hierarchy : what infuence ( or value ) might social relations have on vulnerable populations in technology settings ? ” Three themes we observed from our synthesis are ; the composition of social relations or networks , roles of social relations , and impacts of access to social relations . The social capital theory is a useful framework for understand - ing the emotional and social relationships that people develop [ 66 ] . Social capital consists of two constructs – bonding and bridging cap - ital [ 180 ] . Bonding capital is formed based on strong social ties , such as between family members and close friends [ 26 ] . Bonding networks are most likely to be sources of personal and compre - hensive assistance and are frequently sustained over time [ 180 ] . Because persons who are connected in these networks are not just closely connected but also tend to be in similar conditions , bonding capital is regarded as “strong” [ 26 , 180 ] . Bridging capital , on the other hand , refers to relationships that bring people together for shared interests without their being closely related or emotion - ally attached ( e . g . , between neighbors , colleagues , or organizations ) [ 26 , 113 ] . These types of relationships can be signifcant structures that facilitate diverse social interactions and new opportunities , as well as for sharing new ideas ( e . g . , job opportunities ) [ 1 , 53 ] . Unlike bonding networks , bridging capital is referred regarded as “weak” because it is formed by context - specifc interactions such as through work , community - based groups , or leisure activities . For CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . the purpose of this work , social capital describes the value that vul - nerable individuals’ social relations provide in technology research and design contexts due to their network composition [ 83 ] . Composition of Social Relations . The literature reveals that the bonding social relations for vulnerable or marginalized groups in technological contexts are typically made up of immediate family members , such as parents , children , siblings , and relatives [ 4 , 5 , 39 , 54 , 59 , 84 , 115 , 129 , 157 , 167 , 178 ] . Examples of bridging social relations include their caregivers ( e . g . , for the elderly or children ) [ 99 ] , organizations in their local community [ 80 , 83 , 167 , 181 ] , their neighbors or local community members [ 25 , 45 , 83 , 129 , 132 , 133 ] , or friends from social networking sites ( e . g . , Facebook ) [ 6 , 45 ] . Roles & Impacts of Social Relations or Networks . Social ties or networks play various roles in technological contexts . Bonding ties are often the source of personal assistance for vulnerable groups when using technology . For example , older adults who struggle with technology profciency often receive help from their children or other immediate family members [ 114 , 155 , 178 ] , such as for navigating the Internet [ 129 ] and managing their privacy settings [ 178 ] . Bridging links may also be a source of comprehensive and emotional support . Care providers may be tasked with helping their wards ( e . g . , older adults or foster teens ) in managing privacy and safety [ 11 ] . Ammari et al . [ 6 ] describe how women postpartum depression survivors use online digital spaces to connect with other women who have similar vulnerabilities and talk about subjects they might not feel comfortable discussing with family or close friends , receiving emotional support and feeling empowered as a result . These studies all demonstrate that vulnerable groups often have support networks available to them in technology settings . These support networks , whether bonding or bridging , can help a vulnerable person feel better emotionally , reduce technology risks , and minimize difculties in technological settings . Fulflling Relationship ( or Social ) Needs . During research partic - ipation , vulnerable individuals may require access to their social ties for a variety of reasons , such as seeking support to handle challenges , ofering emotional support , or when collaborating on design solutions . Studies have demonstrated that including close family ties can be empowering for vulnerable groups during re - search participation . This kind of collaboration is common when the participants are children , teenagers , older adults , or persons with disabilities [ 9 , 13 , 111 , 148 , 157 ] . For example , Sadka et al . [ 148 ] suggest that children may feel empowered during research collabo - rations if their parents are present to observe their behavior and mental states . Similarly , Sharma et al . [ 157 ] show that involving parents , caregivers , and others in the lives of children with special needs during research and design activities can make them feel more motivated and empowered . The study by McDonalds et al . [ 111 ] provides an example of a research collaboration involving bonding ties . In this case , the partners were older adult couples , with one having memory impairments , and they worked together to create a tool that would empower them to improve their secu - rity practices . Research collaborations involving bridging links are also common , especially in community - based research [ 132 , 133 ] . For example , the study by O’Leary et al . [ 133 ] showed how focus groups conducted with racial minorities who belonged to the same church communities led to the identifcation of the community’s strengths and the collaborative design of a mobile health application to empower their community . Researchers can fulfll the relationship needs of vulnerable pop - ulations by acknowledging their social ties as assets for technology research and design engagements . Researchers can provide access to social ties by allowing participants to bring a support person to research sessions and encouraging them to maintain contact with their social ties and to seek support as needed . By doing this , re - searchers are supporting their vulnerable participants with the help and resources that they need to efectively participate in research and design activities . Researchers should keep in mind that these relationship needs may not be generalizable for all vulnerable groups and hence may not be a requirement for supporting vulnerable persons to partic - ipate in technology research . In other contexts , including a close family member in the research may potentially be more stressful emotionally than empowering [ 94 ] . In their study , Lee et al . [ 94 ] provided an illustration of how the presence of a participant’s fam - ily ( such as their parents ) , although necessary if they are a child , could be a source of distraction and pressure , particularly when they frequently comment on the child’s design engagements . As another example , if research is being conducted with LGBTQ + youth and intersectional identities are being explored , having family members present can be emotionally stressful or harmful if the youth has not yet come out to their family . Takeaway . The social ties of vulnerable populations should be considered assets during technological re - search and design engagements . How Participants Achieve Empowerment . Through Feeling ( Perception of Emotional Support or Sense of Community ) . 4 . 4 Self - Esteem Needs : Acknowledging Social Intersectional Identities during Research The following question guided our synthesis for the fourth level of the hierarchy : how might self - esteem impact how vulnerable pop - ulations perceive themselves in technology settings ? ” The articles synthesized resulted in an overarching theme for this concept : trig - gers of lower self - esteem when using technology . Self - esteem represents an individual’s perception and assessment of his or her own personal value , self - worth , or accomplishment [ 21 ] . High self - esteem is often associated with autonomy , famil - iarity , confdence , and satisfaction [ 9 , 92 , 116 , 134 ] . Self - esteem , therefore , refects how much a person believes they are capable , meaningful , valuable , and successful ; often in relation to personal beliefs about their skills , competencies , social interactions , and future outcomes [ 119 ] . Social factors such as race , age , class , and educational level among others , are known to impact people’s self - esteem [ 119 , 136 ] . Vulnerable individuals who are marginalized across multiple social identity dimensions , such as race , gender , class , ethnicity , socioeconomic status , cultural background , and sex - uality [ 70 , 71 ] , may face technological challenges that can impact their self - esteem [ 58 , 77 , 173 ] . Lower Self - Esteem Triggers . Some vulnerable groups frequently struggle with technology mastery and competence [ 4 , 78 , 131 ] , with several of these challenges associated with their social identities Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 161 ] . For example , refugees and asylum seekers who do not speak English as a frst language face challenges using popular social tech - nologies to communicate with close friends and family [ 4 ] , often forcing them to regularly rely on their hosts for translation . Job seekers in low - income communities are unable to use technology efectively for job search because popular employment sites ( e . g . , Indeed ) rarely , if ever , have jobs for unskilled workers on their plat - forms [ 43 ] . Unfortunately , these technological difculties , are one of the key factors contributing to lower self - esteem in technological contexts [ 173 ] . The authors of [ 173 ] worked with participants from a low - income community in India who were blind , to understand the struggles they faced fnding content online . Their study revealed that participants had lower self - esteem due to difculties under - standing English and accents in screen reader software available on the devices they used . Fulflling Self - Esteem Needs . When conducting technology re - search and design with vulnerable populations , it is important for researchers to be aware of their intersectional identities [ 51 ] . This means recognizing and acknowledging the ways in which their social identities intersect and potentially impact their tech - nology research and design activities . For example , a person who is marginalized across ability , race , and class , may feel that their experiences and perspectives are not valued or considered in tech - nology research and design processes . This could lead to feelings of exclusion and low self - esteem , as they may feel that their unique experiences are not being considered . If , on the other hand , this individual is able to participate in technology research and design processes that are inclusive and supportive of their social identities , they may have higher self - esteem as a result of feeling included and valued . Researchers can use the lens of intersectionality [ 144 ] to better understand and analyze the diferent social intersecting identities of their vulnerable research participants . To make the engagements more empowering , researchers should focus on the positive aspects of their social and cultural identities , or their assets [ 73 ] . For ex - ample , ethnicity can be a rich and diverse source of knowledge , experiences , and views that can enhance and guide the research . Researchers can provide opportunities for people who are marginal - ized because of their ethnicity , to share their unique views and ex - periences , which can help inform technology research and design activities . Also , language can be a source of pride and empowerment for vulnerable research participants because it plays a signifcant role in defning one’s cultural identity . The ability to communicate in multiple languages is a valuable skill that can help people feel more confdent and competent in a variety of ways . Acknowledging and afrming the value of their language as a cultural identity , can build their self - esteem and make them feel proud of who they are and where they come from . By acknowledging the participants’ so - cial and cultural identities ( e . g . , ethnicity and language ) , researchers can help to foster a sense of inclusion and competence among them . Another consideration for researchers when working with vulner - able populations is to avoid causing additional harm , whether by perpetuating stereotypes , interacting biasedly , or responding to problems that their vulnerable participants encounter superfcially , based on their social identities [ 142 ] . For example , because of the complexity of social identities , certain indicators or triggers ( such as remarks , actions , or behaviors ) may have a negative impact on vulnerable participants’ self - esteem during research and design engagements [ 86 , 154 ] . Takeaway . The social identities of vulnerable popula - tions should be acknowledged as assets for technology research and design . How Participants Achieve Empowerment . Through Feeling ( Perception of Competence ) . 4 . 5 Self - Actualization Needs : Integrating and Promoting a Justice - Centered Research Participation The following question guided our synthesis for the ffth level of the hierarchy : how might vulnerable populations reach self - actualization in technology settings ? ” The overarching theme from our synthesis was : actions for self - actualizing . More generally , self - actualization is the realization of a per - son’s potential , self - fulfllment , the pursuit of personal growth , and the attainment of peak experiences [ 112 ] . In the context of technology , there is no single defnition or approach to achiev - ing self - actualization . For example , Bart et al . [ 89 ] explain how , in the case of recommendation systems , individuals may achieve self - actualization by being provided the opportunity to develop , explore , or understand their own unique interests and preferences . Several studies in the HCI literature show that encouraging self - refection , sharing knowledge or experiences , and contributing to society are avenues for individuals to self - actualize or feel fulflled [ 14 , 22 , 46 , 106 ] . In light of these defnitions , one thing is clear : self - actualization can result from empowering one to do something ( e . g . , speaking out , engaging in an activity , or making better decisions ) . Actions for Self - Actualization . Only a few studies have defned self - actualization in the context of vulnerable populations and tech - nology use . These studies commonly attribute the realization of self - actualization to autonomy and contribution to social actions [ 103 , 120 , 135 ] . Oviatt [ 135 ] explains that self - actualization ( or personal autonomy ) can occur in a socially supportive context that allows collaborative participation in social change to achieve community goals . Similarly , Marshall et al . [ 103 ] suggest that self - actualization is linked to actions that align with a person’s values and goals . Given these fndings , it is important that vulnerable populations be empowered to play an active role in shaping de - signs that refect their values and goals , and that ultimately beneft their communities . This can lead to the self - actualization of these populations . Fulflling Self - Actualization Needs . The use of participatory meth - ods in technology research and design ofers opportunities for self - actualization among vulnerable populations . These methods in - volve directly engaging marginalized and vulnerable communities as active stakeholders in the research process and in the creation of technology that is tailored to them and their community’s needs [ 72 ] . Not only does this address the issue of underrepresentation for these groups in technology research and design [ 71 , 72 ] , but it also empowers individuals by giving them a sense of agency and con - trol over their lives [ 72 ] . Additionally , participating in technology research and design can lead to the acquisition of new skills and knowledge [ 48 , 184 ] , promoting personal and professional growth . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . While participatory methods in technology research and de - sign are well - intentioned , they do not provide a default path to empowerment or self - actualization for marginalized groups . The methods used to engage with marginalized groups can actually disempower them . For instance , a study by Spiel et al . [ 164 ] discov - ered that failing to take into account the specifc needs of sensitive groups like those with ADHD in research and design eforts can lead to feelings of disempowerment . Moreover , it is common for researchers to engage individuals of vulnerable groups solely for the purpose of gathering data , with little to no follow - up or true relationship - building [ 36 , 49 ] , which can contribute to a sense of ex - ploitation and further disempowerment [ 52 ] . To orient the research toward being more empowering for vulnerable groups , researchers should incorporate justice - centered approaches in their methods . These methodologies take into account the efects of the design on users and populations , as well as who owns or benefts from the design outcomes , the equitable distribution of the benefts and burdens of the design , and values that ought to be embodied in the design objects [ 36 ] . Employing justice - centered approaches allows researchers to both prioritize the unique perspectives of vulnerable groups and to ensure equitable beneft - sharing . This not only helps these populations understand the value of their contributions but also highlights the impact of their voices on research outcomes and design processes . As a result , they can be encouraged to play more active roles in the research and design of technologies , thereby supporting their self - actualization . Another potential drawback of participatory approaches is that while they can empower participants to have more agency in the design process , there may be a disconnect between their values and the research agenda . To address this issue , researchers should consider incorporating value - sensitive design ( VSD ) [ 57 ] into their methods . VSD allows researchers to understand and align their research with the values and goals of vulnerable and marginalized groups , ultimately creating research that truly empowers and ben - efts these communities . Adopting VSD can ensure that research is conducted in a way that respects and supports the values and goals of the communities being studied , thereby fulflling the self - actualization needs of the participants . Takeaway . Vulnerable populations should be given opportunities to contribute their voices to technology interventions that refect their values and goals , and equitable practices for distributing research benefts should be put in place . How Participants Achieve Empowerment . Through Doing or Taking Action ( Contributing to Impactful Re - search ) & Through Feeling ( Perception of Autonomy and Being Valued ) & Through Knowing ( Awareness of the Outcome or Impacts of their Research Contributions ) . 5 DISCUSSION It is a common ( and understudied ) problem that people who are vul - nerable or marginalized may have current needs that prevent them from efectively participating in technology research and design eforts . For example , Erete et al . [ 51 ] discuss how “ in populations low socio - technical backgrounds , members may have limited knowledge of or exposure to technology and consequently may lack the skills or confdence to participate in technology design . ” Two things can be inferred in light of this issue : ( i ) Before engaging with vulnerable or marginalized populations for technology research and design , there is generally no common understanding of their existing technolog - ical needs and how these impact their participation . ( ii ) There is also no common understanding of the various ways in which they could be supported in the research and design process , and how participation could make them feel more empowered . The concep - tual framework has been developed by adopting Maslow’s theory of needs hierarchy and synthesizing work in the literature to char - acterize the diferent technology needs of vulnerable populations . Our framework also highlights the various ways in which vulnera - ble groups can be empowered through engagement in technology design and research . 5 . 1 Theoretical Implications In this research , we adopt Maslow’s theory of motivation [ 104 ] to develop our conceptual framework . According to Maslow’s theory , human motivation needs are divided into two categories : defciency - based needs and growth needs . The former is focused on what people lack , while the latter is based on the urge to grow . Similar to this , we categorize the technological needs of vulnerable groups into defcit - and assets - based requirements , with the former arising from what they lack and the latter from assets they currently have ( their strengths ) . Defcits - based needs correspond to their basic and safety needs . From the literature , we identifed basic needs includ - ing access to technology and digital literacy skills . Safety needs included privacy , protection from online risks or harm , and access to safe spaces or environments . assets - based needs corresponded to relationship , esteem , and self - actualization needs . These assets included their social ties , social identities , and voice . Similar to Maslow , we argue that defcits - based needs should be fulflled be - fore the assets - based needs , as the desire for competence , autonomy , and personal growth will only arise after people have their most fundamental needs met . A vulnerable individual may not realize that they have the ability to contribute to impactful technology research and design for themselves ( or their communities ) until they are empowered with the necessary skills to use technology and have become aware of the numerous possibilities that technology presents . However , we do not argue for a sequential approach to meeting these technological needs . For example , it is possible that both basic and safety needs are addressed in tandem . As reported in the literature , safety skills education is now integrated into several digital literacy training workshops [ 123 ] . We invite researchers to consider how to optimally address the various needs that we have characterized in our framework . Our framework’s emphasis on the diferent ways that marginal - ized and vulnerable groups can be empowered by participating in design and research is another theoretical signifcance . The psy - chological impact of meeting each technology need , which we gathered from the synthesis , is congruent with diferent psycholog - ical components of empowerment [ 152 ] . First , fulflling vulnerable populations’ basic need for research participation means empow - ering them through doing and knowing , since they will have the opportunity to interact with technology before the research begins Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 4 : Summary of the empowerment characterizations for the diferent levels of the conceptual framework . Psychological empowerment forms are adopted from the research by Schneider et al . [ 152 ] . Motivation Concepts Descriptions of Needs Suggested Interventions Empowerment Forms and Descriptions Basic Access to ICT Digital Literacy Skills Provide participants with the nec - essary technology ( for example , smartphones or devices ) . Teach participants relevant digital literacy skills . Knowing : Acquiring Digital Literacy Skills Doing : Having Experience with Technology Feeling : Perception of Self - Efcacy Safety Protection from Online Risks or Harm Privacy Access to Safe Spaces Demonstrate and guarantee no ex - posure to harm . Provide transparency into and fexibility of the methods , settings , and spaces for the research . Knowing : Awareness of Safety Risks Knowing : Awareness of Risk Mitigation Approach Feeling : Perception of being Safe Relationship ( or Social ) Leveraging Social Connec - tions Include social ties during research , if necessary . Feeling : Perception of Emotional Support Feeling : Sense of Community Self - Esteem Transcending Barriers of So - cial Intersectional Identities Acknowledge social intersec - tional identities during research . Feeling : Perception of Competence Self - Actualization Lending One’s Voice in Re - search and Design Leverage justice - centered design approaches . Explore and acknowledge inter - personal values and goals . Knowing : Awareness of Research Outcome / Impact Doing : Contributing to Impactful Research Feeling : Perception of Autonomy Feeling : Perception of being Valued and will be learning the technical skills necessary to efectively par - ticipate in technology research and design . Second , by meeting their safety needs , researchers are empowering vulnerable populations through their knowing ( or awareness ) of safety risks and how these will be mitigated and the feeling of safety . By meeting relationship needs through research , vulnerable populations will be empowered by having a feeling of emotional support and having a sense of community . Fulflling self - esteem needs would mean that vulner - able populations are empowered through feeling competent and confdent in their skills and abilities , as their social identities will be acknowledged as assets during the research . Lastly , by meeting self - actualization needs , vulnerable populations will be empowered through doing or engaging in impactful work , the feeling of auton - omy and being valued , and knowing about the outcomes or impacts of their research contributions . We show a summary of these char - acterizations in Table 4 . To the best of our understanding , there are no existing works that have characterized both technology needs for vulnerable populations in technology settings and the forms of empowerment that may be achieved . Our fndings call for the need for researchers and designers to carefully consider how their collaborations with vulnerable research participants could be better oriented to support and empower them . 5 . 2 Putting the Framework into Practice Researchers can use the framework during both the research plan - ning phase and while conducting their research . When working with a vulnerable group of participants , researchers should consider asking questions related to each level of our framework , as listed below . While not exhaustive , we believe this is a starting point for planning research with vulnerable populations and for considering ways to support them . The research team developed these questions based on insights gained from our synthesis ( Section 4 ) and those inspired by our literature review , including the heuristics by Walker et al . [ 177 ] and the perspective by Erete et al . [ 51 ] on designing for marginalized communities . Basic Needs . We developed these questions to respond to the issue of lack of technology access and digital literacy skills among marginal - ized communities [ 59 , 139 , 141 , 189 ] , which can afect their ability to efectively participate in research and design [ 51 ] . ■ Have they [ research participants ] used ( or been exposed to ) technology before ? ■ Do they currently have access to technology ? Mobile de - vices ? The Internet ? CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . ■ What level of familiarity do they have with technology ? ■ What digital literacy skills do they have ( or currently lack ) ? ■ What barriers do they face when accessing technology or digital content ? Safety Needs . We developed these questions based on the identifed safety risks and potential harm that marginalized communities may face in technology research and design settings [ 147 , 177 , 186 ] . These questions encourage researchers to think about how they can make sure marginalized communities feel safe and protected during the research process . ■ Have they fully understood the risks of participating in the research ? ■ Are they comfortable with the research methods , settings , and ‘spaces’ or environments in which the research is con - ducted ? Relationship ( or Social ) Needs . We created these questions to address the potential importance of incorporating emotional support , observation , or design collaborations with social ties in technology research and design as identifed in the literature [ 111 , 133 , 148 , 157 ] . These questions also encourage researchers to assess the community’s receptiveness to including these ties in the research process . ■ Could emotional support or observation or design collabora - tions with social ties be valuable for the research ? ■ Do they need or feel comfortable including social ties in the research ? Self - Esteem Needs . In light of potential challenges that may arise in technology settings due to one’s social and cultural identities [ 4 , 173 ] , we developed these questions as a means of encouraging researchers to critically examine their approach towards working with vulner - able groups of participants and to ensure their social intersectional identities are acknowledged throughout the entire research and design process . ■ What social and cultural identities do they have ? ■ What needs , challenges , and strengths might exist in light of these social and cultural identities ? Self - Actualization Needs . These questions address the potential for disempowerment and lack of mutual beneft in research collabo - rations with marginalized communities [ 36 , 49 , 164 ] by encouraging researchers to consider the alignment of their research with com - munity values and goals , fostering mutual beneft , and supporting self - actualization . ■ What are their long - term values and goals ? ■ How could we [ the researchers ] create a learning and growth opportunity for them ? ■ What would a meaningful and long - term impact of this re - search look like for them ? ■ What is the most accessible method to present the research fndings to them to facilitate learning and self - fulfllment ? 5 . 3 Limitations of the Framework and Future Work Vulnerability occurs in all shapes and sizes , causing people to ex - perience it in various ways . Everyone , including people who have disabilities , people marginalized across racial , gender , or social sta - tus , immigrants who have been displaced from their home countries , and indigenous people , all of whom are vulnerable in diferent ways , has their own unique needs , values , experiences , and practices . As a result , we recognize that the characterization of technology needs described in this work for engaging vulnerable populations may not be universal to all vulnerable or marginalized groups . For instance , one vulnerable or marginalized group’s needs for safety may be completely unique from those of another group in the same situa - tion . This is because the concept of safety depends on the context and can take on a variety of meanings to diferent individuals ( e . g . , foster teenagers vs . teenagers , in general , [ 11 , 12 ] ) . We acknowledge that understanding these unique technology needs is important for our future work even though they may not be fully covered in this research . We also recognize that it may not be appropriate to engage all vulnerable groups in technology research and design , and hence fndings from our synthesis might not be applicable to all groups . For example , indigenous communities are frequently ingrained with their rituals and traditional practices [ 32 ] and there are potential repercussions associated with engaging with specifc aspects of their culture and collecting data from them . Researchers working with indigenous people must take special considerations into the methods for engaging them in the frst place or even when tech - nology research is necessary , given how the knowledge for these communities is deeply ingrained in their culture [ 163 ] . Because our framework covers the needs and motivations of vulnerable and marginalized groups , a need to not harm these communities’ rituals and traditions should be considered . Additionally , while we characterize various technology needs to support research and design engagements , we recognize that these needs may not be exhaustive for empowering and supporting them . We invite researchers to expand on our work by investigating whether there are technology needs that go beyond the concepts in Maslow’s hierarchy to expand upon our framework . Finally , we plan to expand our work by investigating the col - laborations of HCI researchers with various vulnerable groups to ascertain how they addressed the needs based on our frame - work and whether satisfying these needs impacted the outcomes of these collaborations . 6 CONCLUSION Empowering vulnerable or marginalized populations through re - search is a topic that has been well - studied in the HCI community . Various frameworks and heuristics have been created to guide research and design for vulnerable populations . However , they typically center on the researcher’s engagement while ignoring needs that can motivate vulnerable populations to participate in research and design . The conceptual framework presented in this paper can be used to support and empower vulnerable populations through their participation in research and design . To develop our framework , we synthesized the research literature using Maslow’s Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany framework concepts as a guide ( e . g . , safety , self - esteem , and self - actualization ) . We have shown that these concepts can help re - searchers in identifying technology needs that if not addressed , may hinder vulnerable populations from efectively participating in research . We discuss how researchers might meet these tech - nology needs using several HCI theories , including intersectional - ity . Understanding and addressing technology needs for research participation can not only ensure that vulnerable populations are supported and empowered through research , but also result in more efective research and design engagements . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Michael B Aguilera and Douglas S Massey . 2003 . Social capital and the wages of Mexican migrants : New hypotheses and tests . Social forces 82 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 671 – 701 . [ 2 ] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Md Romael Haque , Jay Chen , and Nicola Dell . 2017 . Dig - ital privacy challenges with shared mobile phone use in Bangladesh . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 1 – 20 . [ 3 ] Veronica Ahumada - Newhart , J . Maya Hernandez , and Karla Badillo - Urquiola . 2021 . A Call for Action : Conceptualizing Assets - Based Inclusive Design as a Social Movement to Address Systemic Inequities : An Assets - Based Inclusive Design Framework . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI EA ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 12 , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3450368 [ 4 ] Asam Almohamed and Dhaval Vyas . 2019 . Rebuilding Social Capital in Refugees and Asylum Seekers . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 26 , 6 , Article 41 ( nov 2019 ) , 30 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3364996 [ 5 ] Asam Hamed Abbas Almohamed , Reem Talhouk , and Dhaval Vyas . 2022 . To - wards a conceptual framework for understanding the challenges in refugee re - settlement . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , GROUP ( 2022 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 6 ] Tawfq Ammari , Momina Nofal , Mustafa Naseem , and Maryam Mustafa . 2022 . Moderation as Empowerment : Creating and Managing Women - Only Digital Safe Spaces . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW2 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 36 . [ 7 ] Nazanin Andalibi , Gabriela Marcu , Tim Moesgen , Rebecca Mullin , and An - drea Forte . 2018 . Not Alone : Designing for Self - Disclosure and Social Sup - port Exchange After Pregnancy Loss . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI EA ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3188473 [ 8 ] Sonia M . Arteaga , Mo Kudeki , Adrienne Woodworth , and Sri Kurniawan . 2010 . Mobile System to Motivate Teenagers’ Physical Activity . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( Barcelona , Spain ) ( IDC ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810545 [ 9 ] Zahra Ashktorab and Jessica Vitak . 2016 . Designing Cyberbullying Mitigation and Prevention Solutions through Participatory Design With Teenagers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3895 – 3905 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858548 [ 10 ] Laima Augustaitis , Leland A . Merrill , Kristi E Gamarel , and Oliver L . Haimson . 2021 . Online Transgender Health Information Seeking : Facilitators , Barriers , and Future Directions . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 205 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445091 [ 11 ] Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Scott Harpin , and Pamela Wisniewski . 2017 . Abandoned but Not Forgotten : Providing Access While Protecting Foster Youth from Online Risks . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( Stanford , California , USA ) ( IDC ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 17 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079724 [ 12 ] Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Xinru Page , and Pamela J . Wisniewski . 2019 . Risk vs . Restriction : The Tension between Providing a Sense of Normalcy and Keeping Foster Teens Safe Online . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300497 [ 13 ] Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Zachary Shea , Zainab Agha , Irina Lediaeva , and Pamela Wisniewski . 2021 . Conducting risky research with teens : co - designing for the ethical treatment and protection of adolescents . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW3 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 46 . [ 14 ] Ronald M Baecker , Karyn Mofatt , and Michael Massimi . 2012 . Technologies for aging gracefully . interactions 19 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 32 – 36 . [ 15 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2014 . Utopias of Participation : Design , Criticality , and Eman - cipation . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium Papers , and Keynote Abstracts - Volume 2 ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 189 – 190 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662213 [ 16 ] Andrew A . Bayor , Margot Brereton , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer , Filip Bircanin , Benoit Favre , and Stewart Koplick . 2021 . Toward a Competency - Based Approach to Co - Designing Technologies with People with Intellectual Disability . ACM Trans . Access . Comput . 14 , 2 , Article 6 ( jul 2021 ) , 33 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3450355 [ 17 ] Jeanie Beh , Sonja Pedell , and Wendy Doube . 2015 . Where is the " I " in IPad ? The Role of Interest in Older Adults’ Learning of Mobile Touch Screen Technologies . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction ( Parkville , VIC , Australia ) ( OzCHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 437 – 445 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838776 [ 18 ] Victoria Bellotti , Alexander Ambard , Daniel Turner , Christina Gossmann , Kamila Demkova , and John M . Carroll . 2015 . A Muddle of Models of Motivation for Using Peer - to - Peer Economy Systems . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1085 – 1094 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702272 [ 19 ] Jacob T . Biehl , Rosta Farzan , and Yingfan Zhou . 2022 . Can Anybody Help Me ? : Using Community Help Desk Call Records to Examine the Impact of Digital Divides During a Global Pandemic . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 314 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517693 [ 20 ] Max Birk and Regan L . Mandryk . 2013 . Control Your Game - Self : Efects of Con - troller Type on Enjoyment , Motivation , and Personality in Game . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 685 – 694 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470752 [ 21 ] Gregory J . Boyle , Donald H . Saklofske , and Gerald Matthews . 2015 . Chapter 1 - Criteria for Selection and Evaluation of Scales and Measures . In Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Constructs , Gregory J . Boyle , Donald H . Saklofske , and Gerald Matthews ( Eds . ) . Academic Press , San Diego , 3 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 386915 - 9 . 00001 - 2 [ 22 ] Stacy M . Branham , Anja Thieme , Lisa P . Nathan , Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . Co - Creating & Identity - Making in CSCW : Revisiting Ethics in Design Research . In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( Baltimore , Maryland , USA ) ( CSCW Companion ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 305 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2558859 [ 23 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 24 ] Pam Briggs and Lisa Thomas . 2015 . An inclusive , value sensitive design perspec - tive on future identity technologies . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 22 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 1 – 28 . [ 25 ] Deana Brown and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2016 . Designing for Transient Use : A Human - in - the - Loop Translation Platform for Refugees . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 321 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858230 [ 26 ] Moira Burke , Robert Kraut , and Cameron Marlow . 2011 . Social Capital on Facebook : Diferentiating Uses and Users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 571 – 580 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979023 [ 27 ] Pew Research Center . Published : April 21 , 2021 . Accessed : September 1 , 2022 . One - third of Asian Americans fear threats , physical attacks and most say violence against them is rising . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2021 / 04 / 21 / one - third - of - asian - americans - fear - threats - physical - attacks - and - most - say - violence - against - them - is - rising / [ 28 ] Pew Research Center . Published : April 7 , 2021 . Accessed : March 15 , 2022 . In - ternet / Broadband Fact Sheet . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / internet / fact - sheet / internet - broadband / [ 29 ] Priyank Chandra . 2021 . Piracy and the Impaired Cyborg : Assistive Technolo - gies , Accessibility , and Access . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW3 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 30 ] Nikos LD Chatzisarantis and Martin S Hagger . 2005 . Efects of a brief interven - tion based on the theory of planned behavior on leisure - time physical activity participation . Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 27 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 470 – 487 . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . [ 31 ] Beenish Moalla Chaudhry , Dipanwita Dasgupta , and Nitesh Chawla . 2022 . For - mative Evaluation of a Tablet Application to Support Goal - Oriented Care in Community - Dwelling Older Adults . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , MHCI , Article 208 ( sep 2022 ) , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3546743 [ 32 ] Bagele Chilisa . 2019 . Indigenous research methodologies . Sage publications , Thousand Oaks California . [ 33 ] Mohamed - Amine Choukou , Diana C Sanchez - Ramirez , Margriet Pol , Mohy Uddin , Caroline Monnin , and Shabbir Syed - Abdul . 2022 . COVID - 19 infodemic and digital health literacy in vulnerable populations : A scoping review . Digital Health 8 ( 2022 ) , 20552076221076927 . [ 34 ] Rachel Clarke , Peter Wright , Madeline Balaam , and John McCarthy . 2013 . Digital Portraits : Photo - Sharing after Domestic Violence . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2517 – 2526 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481348 [ 35 ] Raymundo Cornejo , Robin Brewer , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2016 . Vulnerability , Sharing , and Privacy : Analyzing Art Therapy for Older Adults with Dementia . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( San Francisco , California , USA ) ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1572 – 1583 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819960 [ 36 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design justice : Community - led practices to build the worlds we need . The MIT Press , Cambridge Massachesetts , USA . [ 37 ] Rowena Cullen . 2001 . Addressing the digital divide . Online Information Review 25 , 5 ( 2001 ) , 311 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 14684520110410517 [ 38 ] Tom De Leyn , Ralf De Wolf , Mariek Vanden Abeele , and Lieven De Marez . 2019 . Reframing Current Debates on Young People’s Online Privacy by Taking into Account the Cultural Construction of Youth . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Social Media and Society ( Toronto , ON , Canada ) ( SMSociety ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 174 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328529 . 3328558 [ 39 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2014 . Fostering Social Capital in Economically Dis - tressed Communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 531 – 540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557123 [ 40 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Nishan Bose , Suleman Diwan , and Asha Chen - Phang . 2016 . Designing for Disadvantaged Job Seekers : Insights from Early Investiga - tions . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Brisbane , QLD , Australia ) ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 905 – 910 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901865 [ 41 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt and Joey Chiao - Yin Hsiao . 2020 . Positive Feedback and Self - Refection : Features to Support Self - Efcacy among Underrepresented Job Seekers . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376717 [ 42 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Vaishnav Kameswaran , Desiree McLain , Minnie Lester , Delores Orr , and Kentaro Toyama . 2018 . Entrepreneurship and the Socio - Technical Chasm in a Lean Economy . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173814 [ 43 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt and Alex Lu . 2019 . DreamGigs : Designing a Tool to Empower Low - Resource Job Seekers . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300808 [ 44 ] Tawanna R Dillahunt , Alex Jiahong Lu , Aarti Israni , Ruchita Lodha , Savana Brewer , Tiera S Robinson , Angela Brown Wilson , and Earnest Wheeler . 2022 . The Village : Infrastructuring Community - Based Mentoring to Support Adults Experiencing Poverty . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 574 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501949 [ 45 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt and Amelia R . Malone . 2015 . The Promise of the Sharing Economy among Disadvantaged Communities . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2285 – 2294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702189 [ 46 ] Emma Dixon and Amanda Lazar . 2020 . Approach Matters : Linking Practitioner Approaches to Technology Design for People with Dementia . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376432 [ 47 ] Paul Dourish , Christopher Lawrence , Tuck Wah Leong , and Greg Wadley . 2020 . On Being Iterated : The Afective Demands of Design Participation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376545 [ 48 ] Ana Maria Bustamante Duarte , Nina Brendel , Auriol Degbelo , and Christian Kray . 2018 . Participatory design and participatory research : An HCI case study with young forced migrants . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 25 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 39 . [ 49 ] Catherine D’Ignazio . 2019 . Four Tensions Between HCI Research , Social Justice Aspirations , and Grassroots Politics . In CSCW ‘19 Workshop on Design and the Politics of Collaboration . ACM New York , NY , USA , ustin , TX , USA . [ 50 ] Carrie Demmans Epp , Cosmin Munteanu , Benett Axtell , Keerthika Ravinthi - ran , Yomna Aly , and Elman Mansimov . 2017 . Finger Tracking : Facilitating Non - Commercial Content Production for Mobile e - Reading Applications . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interac - tion with Mobile Devices and Services ( Vienna , Austria ) ( MobileHCI ’17 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 34 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3098279 . 3098556 [ 51 ] Sheena Erete , Aarti Israni , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . An intersectional approach to designing in the margins . Interactions 25 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 66 – 69 . [ 52 ] Sheena Erete , Yolanda A . Rankin , and Jakita O . Thomas . 2021 . I Can’t Breathe : Refections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW3 , Article 234 ( jan 2021 ) , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432933 [ 53 ] Bonnie H Erickson . 1996 . Culture , class , and connections . American journal of Sociology 102 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 217 – 251 . [ 54 ] Juan F . Maestre , Tawanna Dillahunt , Alec Andrew Theisz , Megan Furness , Vaishnav Kameswaran , Tifany Veinot , and Patrick C . Shih . 2021 . Examining Mobility Among People Living with HIV in Rural Areas . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 201 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445086 [ 55 ] Lisa Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Underserved Populations Have Access To Technology - Why Is No One Investing in Them ? https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / lisaftzpatrick / 2019 / 11 / 01 / underserved - populations - have - access - to - technologywhy - is - no - one - investing - in - them / ? sh = 4a2b593a37ea [ 56 ] Matthew Ford , Peta Wyeth , and Daniel Johnson . 2012 . Self - Determination Theory as Applied to the Design of a Software Learning System Using Whole - Body Controls . In Proceedings of the 24th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference ( Melbourne , Australia ) ( OzCHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 146 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2414536 . 2414562 [ 57 ] Batya Friedman , Peter H Kahn , Alan Borning , and Alina Huldtgren . 2013 . Value sensitive design and information systems . In Early engagement and new tech - nologies : Opening up the laboratory . Springer , Dordrecht , Netherlands , 55 – 95 . [ 58 ] Alisa Frik , Juliann Kim , Joshua Rafael Sanchez , and Joanne Ma . 2022 . Users’ Expectations About and Use of Smartphone Privacy and Security Settings . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 407 , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517504 [ 59 ] Hernan Galperin , François Bar , and Hoan Nguyen . 2021 . The power divide : mobile communication in Los Angeles’ skid row . Mobile Media & Communication 9 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 30 – 50 . [ 60 ] Ricardo Gomez , Ivette Bayo , Philip J . Reed , Cong Wang , and Marisol Silva . 2013 . Fearless Cards : Addressing Emotional Barriers to Computer Learning among Extremely Marginalized Populations . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 631 – 636 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468468 [ 61 ] Nancy P Gordon and Mark C Hornbrook . 2018 . Older adults’ readiness to engage with eHealth patient education and self - care resources : A cross - sectional survey . BMC health services research 18 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 62 ] Liang Gou , Michelle X . Zhou , and Huahai Yang . 2014 . KnowMe and ShareMe : Understanding Automatically Discovered Personality Traits from Social Media and User Sharing Preferences . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 955 – 964 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557398 [ 63 ] World Bank Group . Published : January 13 , 2016 . . Harnessing the Internet for Development . https : / / www . worldbank . org / en / topic / digitaldevelopment / brief / harnessing - the - internet - for - development [ 64 ] Nora Gustavsson and Ann MacEachron . 2015 . Positive Youth Development and foster care youth : A digital perspective . Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment 25 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 407 – 415 . [ 65 ] Oliver L Haimson , Justin Buss , Zu Weinger , Denny L Starks , Dykee Gorrell , and Briar Sweetbriar Baron . 2020 . Trans Time : Safety , Privacy , and Content Warnings on a Transgender - Specifc Social Media Site . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 66 ] David Halpern . 2005 . Social capital . Polity , Wiley . [ 67 ] SM Taiabul Haque , Pratyasha Saha , Muhammad Sajidur Rahman , and Syed Ish - tiaque Ahmed . 2019 . Of Ulti , ’hajano’ , and " " Matachetar otanetak datam " " Ex - ploring Local Practices of Exchanging Confdential and Sensitive Information Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany in Urban Bangladesh . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 68 ] Christina Harrington and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2021 . Eliciting Tech Futures Among Black Young Adults : A Case Study of Remote Speculative Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 397 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445723 [ 69 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 70 ] Christina Harrington , Aqueasha Martin - Hammond , and Kirsten E Bray . 2022 . Examining Identity as a Variable of Health Technology Research for Older Adults : A Systematic Review . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 265 , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517621 [ 71 ] Christina N Harrington . 2020 . The forgotten margins : what is community - based participatory health design telling us ? Interactions 27 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 24 – 29 . [ 72 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging Low - Income African American Older Adults in Health Discussions through Community - Based Design Workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 73 ] Christina N Harrington , Brittany Johnson , Denae Ford , and Angela DR Smith . 2021 . Designing for the black experience . Interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 22 – 27 . [ 74 ] Christina N . Harrington , Shamika Klassen , and Yolanda A . Rankin . 2022 . “All That You Touch , You Change” : Expanding the Canon of Speculative Design Towards Black Futuring . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 450 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502118 [ 75 ] Christina N . Harrington and Anne Marie Piper . 2018 . Informing Design through Sociocultural Values : Co - Creation with Low - Income African - American Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( New York , NY , USA ) ( PervasiveHealth ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 294 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240925 . 3240966 [ 76 ] Taylor Harris , Sonya Gabrielian , Brian Ilagan , Megan K Olsen , and Michael F Green . 2022 . Acceptability of a mobile sensing application to characterize community integration among homeless - experienced veterans . Journal of Com - munity Psychology 51 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 7 – 16 . [ 77 ] Sharon Heung , Mahika Phutane , Shiri Azenkot , Megh Marathe , and Aditya Vashistha . 2022 . Nothing Micro About It : Examining Ableist Microaggres - sions on Social Media . In Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( Athens , Greece ) ( ASSETS ’22 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 27 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3517428 . 3544801 [ 78 ] Tad Hirsch and Jeremy Liu . 2004 . Speakeasy : Overcoming Barriers and Promot - ing Community Development in an Immigrant Neighborhood . In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques ( Cambridge , MA , USA ) ( DIS ’04 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 345 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1013115 . 1013176 [ 79 ] Noura Howell , Audrey Desjardins , and Sarah Fox . 2021 . Cracks in the suc - cess narrative : Rethinking failure in design research through a retrospective trioethnography . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 28 , 6 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 31 . [ 80 ] Julie Hui , Nefer Ra Barber , Wendy Casey , Suzanne Cleage , Danny C . Dolley , Frances Worthy , Kentaro Toyama , and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2020 . Community Collectives : Low - Tech Social Support for Digitally - Engaged Entrepreneurship . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376363 [ 81 ] Julie Hui , Kentaro Toyama , Joyojeet Pal , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . Making a Living My Way : Necessity - Driven Entrepreneurship in Resource - Constrained Communities . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 71 ( nov 2018 ) , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274340 [ 82 ] Ajzen Icek . 1985 . From Intentions to Actions : A Theory of Planned Behavior . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 11 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 69746 - 3 _ 2 [ 83 ] Farnaz Irannejad Bisafar , Aditya Ponnada , Ameneh Shamekhi , and Andrea G Parker . 2017 . A sociotechnical study of a community - based rewards program : Insights on building social , fnancial and human capital . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 84 ] Azra Ismail and Neha Kumar . 2019 . Empowerment on the Margins : The Online Experiences of Community Health Workers . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300329 [ 85 ] Arne Jansen , Maarten Van Mechelen , and Karin Slegers . 2017 . Personas and Behavioral Theories : A Case Study Using Self - Determination Theory to Construct Overweight Personas . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Denver , Colorado , USA ) ( CHI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2127 – 2136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026003 [ 86 ] Jasmine Jones and Joyojeet Pal . 2015 . Counteracting Dampeners : Understanding Technology - Amplifed Capabilities of People with Disabilities in Sierra Leone . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information and Com - munication Technologies and Development ( Singapore , Singapore ) ( ICTD ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 6 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2737856 . 2738025 [ 87 ] Suhas Govind Joshi and Tone Bratteteig . 2016 . Designing for prolonged mas - tery . On involving old people in participatory design . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 28 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 1 . [ 88 ] Naveena Karusala , Isaac Holeman , and Richard Anderson . 2019 . Engaging identity , assets , and constraints in designing for resilience . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 89 ] Bart P . Knijnenburg , Saadhika Sivakumar , and Daricia Wilkinson . 2016 . Rec - ommender Systems for Self - Actualization . In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Con - ference on Recommender Systems ( Boston , Massachusetts , USA ) ( RecSys ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 11 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2959100 . 2959189 [ 90 ] Yasmine Kotturi , Herman T Johnson , Michael Skirpan , Sarah E Fox , Jefrey P Bigham , and Amy Pavel . 2022 . Tech Help Desk : Support for Local Entrepreneurs Addressing the Long Tail of Computing Challenges . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 15 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517708 [ 91 ] Robin M Kowalski and Cristin Fedina . 2011 . Cyber bullying in ADHD and Asperger Syndrome populations . Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 5 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 1201 – 1208 . [ 92 ] Rodrigo Laiola Guimarães , Andrea Britto Mattos , and Carlos Henrique Cardonha . 2016 . Investigating Instructional Pacing Supports for Teaching Students with Intellectual Disability . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Ab - stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI EA ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2171 – 2177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892342 [ 93 ] Reeva Lederman , John Gleeson , Greg Wadley , Simon D’alfonso , Simon Rice , Olga Santesteban - Echarri , and Mario Alvarez - Jimenez . 2019 . Support for Carers of Young People with Mental Illness : Design and Trial of a Technology - Mediated Therapy . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 26 , 1 , Article 4 ( feb 2019 ) , 33 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301421 [ 94 ] Kung Jin Lee , Wendy Roldan , Tian Qi Zhu , Harkiran Kaur Saluja , Sungmin Na , Britnie Chin , Yilin Zeng , Jin Ha Lee , and Jason Yip . 2021 . The Show Must Go On : A Conceptual Model of Conducting Synchronous Participatory Design With Children Online . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 345 , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445715 [ 95 ] Azi Lev - On , Nili Steinfeld , Hama Abu - Kishk , and Sigal Pearl Naim . 2020 . The long - term efects of digital literacy programs for disadvantaged populations : analyzing participants’ perceptions . Journal of Information , Communication and Ethics in Society 19 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 146 – 162 . [ 96 ] Calvin A Liang , Sean A Munson , and Julie A Kientz . 2021 . Embracing four tensions in human - computer interaction research with marginalized people . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 28 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 47 . [ 97 ] Ji Liu . 2021 . Bridging digital divide amidst educational change for socially inclusive learning during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Sage Open 11 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 21582440211060810 . [ 98 ] Sonia Livingstone . 2013 . Online risk , harm and vulnerability : Refections on the evidence base for child Internet safety policy . ZER : Journal of Communication Studies 18 , 35 ( 2013 ) , 13 – 28 . [ 99 ] Lian Loke , Aaron Blishen , Carl Gray , and Naseem Ahmadpour . 2021 . Safety , Connection and Refection : Designing with Therapists for Children with Serious Emotional Behaviour Issues . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 162 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445178 [ 100 ] Ines Lopez - Ercilla , Maria Jose Espinosa - Romero , Francisco J Fernandez Rivera - Melo , Stuart Fulton , Rebeca Fernández , Jorge Torre , Araceli Acevedo - Rosas , Arturo J Hernández - Velasco , and Imelda Amador . 2021 . The voice of Mexican small - scale fshers in times of COVID - 19 : Impacts , responses , and digital divide . Marine Policy 131 ( 2021 ) , 104606 . [ 101 ] Kira Lussier . 2019 . Of Maslow , motives , and managers : The hierarchy of needs in American business , 1960 – 1985 . Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Anuyah , et al . 55 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 319 – 341 . [ 102 ] Kirsty Macmillan , Tessa Berg , Mike Just , and Mary Stewart . 2020 . Are Autistic Children More Vulnerable Online ? Relating Autism to Online Safety , Child Wellbeing and Parental Risk Management . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( Tallinn , Estonia ) ( NordiCHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 14 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420160 [ 103 ] Kevin Marshall , Anja Thieme , Jayne Wallace , John Vines , Gavin Wood , and Madeline Balaam . 2014 . Making Wellbeing : A Process of User - Centered Design . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( DIS ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 755 – 764 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2600888 [ 104 ] Abraham Harold Maslow . 1943 . A theory of human motivation . Psychological review 50 , 4 ( 1943 ) , 370 . [ 105 ] Catriona Matheson , Lesley Bon , Louise Bowman , Adrienne Hannah , and Katy MacLeod . 2022 . Vulnerability , risk and harm for people who use drugs and are engaged in transactional sex : learning for service delivery . International journal of environmental research and public health 19 , 3 ( 2022 ) , 1840 . [ 106 ] Akhila Mathur . 2013 . Augmented Virtual Identities : Facilitating Rehabilitation and Societal Reconnect . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion ( San Antonio , Texas , USA ) ( CSCW ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 219 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441955 . 2442009 [ 107 ] Rachel F McCloud , Cassandra A Okechukwu , Glorian Sorensen , and K Viswanath . 2016 . Beyond access : barriers to internet health information seeking among the urban poor . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 23 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 1053 – 1059 . [ 108 ] Nora McDonald , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Morgan G . Ames , Nicola Dell , Elizabeth Keneski , Manya Sleeper , and Pamela J . Wisniewski . 2020 . Privacy and Power : Ac - knowledging the Importance of Privacy Research and Design for Vulnerable Pop - ulations . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375174 [ 109 ] Nora McDonald and Andrea Forte . 2022 . Privacy and Vulnerable Populations . In Modern Socio - Technical Perspectives on Privacy . Springer , Cham , 337 – 363 . [ 110 ] Nora McDonald and Helena M . Mentis . 2021 . Building for ‘We’ : Safety Settings for Couples with Memory Concerns . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 554 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445071 [ 111 ] Nora Mcdonald and Helena M Mentis . 2021 . “Citizens Too” : Safety Setting Collaboration Among Older Adults with Memory Concerns . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 32 . [ 112 ] Saul McLeod . 2007 . Maslow’s hierarchy of needs . Simply psychology 1 ( 2007 ) , 1 – 18 . [ 113 ] David Mechanic and Jennifer Tanner . 2007 . Vulnerable people , groups , and populations : societal view . Health Afairs 26 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 1220 – 1230 . [ 114 ] Tamir Mendel , Debin Gao , David Lo , and Eran Toch . 2021 . An Exploratory Study of Social Support Systems to Help Older Adults in Managing Mobile Safety . In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Mobile Human - Computer Interaction ( Toulouse & Virtual , France ) ( MobileHCI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 30 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3447526 . 3472047 [ 115 ] Dana¨ " e Metaxa - Kakavouli , Paige Maas , and Daniel P Aldrich . 2018 . How social ties infuence hurricane evacuation behavior . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 116 ] Karen L Milheim . 2012 . Towards a better experience : Examining student needs in the online classroom through Maslow’s hierarchy of needs model . Journal of online learning and teaching 8 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 159 . [ 117 ] David P Miller Jr , Kathryn E Weaver , L Doug Case , Donald Babcock , Donna Lawler , Nancy Denizard - Thompson , Michael P Pignone , and John G Spangler . 2017 . Usability of a novel mobile health iPad app by vulnerable populations . JMIR mHealth and uHealth 5 , 4 ( 2017 ) , e7268 . [ 118 ] Richard K Moule Jr , David C Pyrooz , and Scott H Decker . 2013 . From ‘What the F # @ % is a Facebook ? ’ to ‘Who Doesn’t Use Facebook ? ’ : The role of criminal lifestyles in the adoption and use of the Internet . Social Science Research 42 , 6 ( 2013 ) , 1411 – 1421 . [ 119 ] Luã Marcelo Muriana and Maria Cecilia Calani Baranauskas . 2021 . Technological Infuence on Self - esteem : Towards a Research Agenda Through a Systematic Literature Review . In International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , Cham , 451 – 471 . [ 120 ] Tyler Musgrave , Alia Cummings , and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2022 . Experiences of Harm , Healing , and Joy among Black Women and Femmes on Social Media . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 240 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517608 [ 121 ] Moses Namara , Daricia Wilkinson , Byron M . Lowens , Bart P . Knijnenburg , Rita Orji , and Remy L . Sekou . 2018 . Cross - Cultural Perspectives on EHealth Privacy in Africa . In Proceedings of the Second African Conference for Human Computer Interaction : Thriving Communities ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( AfriCHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 7 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3283458 . 3283472 [ 122 ] Sheza Naveed , Hamza Naveed , Mobin Javed , and Maryam Mustafa . 2022 . ”Ask This from the Person Who Has Private Stuf” : Privacy Perceptions , Behaviours and Beliefs Beyond W . E . I . R . D . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 105 , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501883 [ 123 ] Prema P Nedungadi , Rajani Menon , Georg Gutjahr , Lynnea Erickson , and Raghu Raman . 2018 . Towards an inclusive digital literacy framework for digital India . Education + Training 60 , 6 ( 2018 ) , 516 – 528 . [ 124 ] David Nemer . 2018 . Wired mobile phones : the case of community technology centers in favelas of Brazil . Information Technology for Development 24 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 461 – 481 . [ 125 ] Irene YH Ng , Sun Sun Lim , and Natalie Pang . 2022 . Making universal digital access universal : lessons from COVID - 19 in Singapore . Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2022 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 126 ] Wan Ng . 2012 . Can we teach digital natives digital literacy ? Computers & education 59 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 1065 – 1078 . [ 127 ] James Nicholson , Lynne Coventry , and Pamela Briggs . 2019 . " If It’s Important It Will Be A Headline " : Cybersecurity Information Seeking in Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300579 [ 128 ] Amity Noltemeyer , Kevin Bush , Jon Patton , and Doris Bergen . 2012 . The rela - tionship among defciency needs and growth needs : An empirical investigation of Maslow’s theory . Children and Youth Services Review 34 , 9 ( 2012 ) , 1862 – 1867 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2012 . 05 . 021 [ 129 ] Novia Nurain , Chia - Fang Chung , Clara Caldeira , and Kay Connelly . 2021 . Hug - ging with a Shower Curtain : Older Adults’ Social Support Realities During the COVID - 19 Pandemic . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 31 . [ 130 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Kentaro Toyama , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . Returning Citizens’ Job Search and Technology Use : Preliminary Findings . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Jersey City , NJ , USA ) ( CSCW ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 365 – 368 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3274098 [ 131 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Kentaro Toyama , and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2019 . Towards an Efective Digital Literacy Intervention to Assist Returning Citizens with Job Search . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300315 [ 132 ] Teresa K . O’Leary , Dhaval Parmar , Stefan Olafsson , Michael Paasche - Orlow , Timothy Bickmore , and Andrea G Parker . 2022 . Community Dynamics in Tech - nospiritual Interventions : Lessons Learned from a Church - Based MHealth Pilot . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 19 , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517700 [ 133 ] Teresa K . O’Leary , Elizabeth Stowell , Jessica A . Hofman , Michael Paasche - Orlow , Timothy Bickmore , and Andrea G . Parker . 2021 . Examining the Intersections of Race , Religion & Community Technologies : A Photovoice Study . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 698 , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445418 [ 134 ] Lisa Orii , Nami Ogawa , Yuji Hatada , and Takuji Narumi . 2022 . Designing for Speech Practice Systems : How Do User - Controlled Voice Manipulation and Model Speakers Impact Self - Perceptions of Voice ? . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 56 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502093 [ 135 ] Sharon Oviatt . 2021 . Technology as Infrastructure for Dehumanization : Three Hundred Million People with the Same Face . In Proceedings of the 2021 Inter - national Conference on Multimodal Interaction ( Montréal , QC , Canada ) ( ICMI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 278 – 287 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3462244 . 3482855 [ 136 ] Jeni Paay , Heidi Nielsen , Helle Larsen , and Jesper Kjeldskov . 2018 . Happy Bits : Interactive Technologies Helping Young Adults with Low Self - Esteem . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( Oslo , Norway ) ( NordiCHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 584 – 596 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240180 [ 137 ] Hyanghee Park , Jodi Forlizzi , and Joonhwan Lee . 2022 . Voices of Sexual Assault Survivors : Understanding Survivors’ Experiences of Interactional Breakdowns Characterizing the Technology Needs of Vulnerable Populations for Participation in Research and Design CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany and Design Ideas for Solutions . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Virtual Event , Australia ) ( DIS ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 485 – 503 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533509 [ 138 ] Joon Sung Park , Danielle Bragg , Ece Kamar , and Meredith Ringel Morris . 2021 . Designing an Online Infrastructure for Collecting AI Data From Peo - ple With Disabilities . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fair - ness , Accountability , and Transparency ( Virtual Event , Canada ) ( FAccT ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 52 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3442188 . 3445870 [ 139 ] Lucy Pei and Roderic Crooks . 2020 . Attenuated Access : Accounting for Startup , Maintenance , and Afective Costs in Resource - Constrained Communities . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376587 [ 140 ] Lucy Pei and Bonnie Nardi . 2019 . We Did It Right , But It Was Still Wrong : Toward Assets - Based Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI EA ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310434 [ 141 ] Marta Perez - Escolar and Fernando Canet . 2022 . Research on vulnerable people and digital inclusion : toward a consolidated taxonomical framework . Universal Access in the Information Society ( 2022 ) , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 022 - 00867 - x [ 142 ] Hawra Rabaan and Lynn Dombrowski . 2022 . Breaking stereotypes : Islamic feminism and HCI . Interactions 29 , 6 ( 2022 ) , 6 – 7 . [ 143 ] Robert Racadio , Emma J . Rose , and Beth E . Kolko . 2014 . Research at the Margin : Participatory Design and Community Based Participatory Research . In Proceed - ings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium Papers , and Keynote Abstracts - Vol - ume 2 ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( PDC ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662188 [ 144 ] Yolanda A Rankin and Jakita O Thomas . 2019 . Straighten up and fy right : Rethinking intersectionality in HCI research . Interactions 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 64 – 68 . [ 145 ] Sarah Richard , Daria Plotkina , and Hélène Saurel . 2022 . Exploration of ICT Appropriation by Disabled People and Its Efect on Self - Perceived Normalcy : Insights From France . International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction ( IJTHI ) 18 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 18 . [ 146 ] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci . 2000 . Self - determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation , social development , and well - being . American psychologist 55 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 68 . [ 147 ] Bushra Sabri , Jyoti Saha , Jennifer Lee , and Sarah Murray . 2022 . Conducting Digital Intervention Research among Immigrant Survivors of Intimate Partner Violence : Methodological , Safety and Ethnical Considerations . Journal of Family Violence ( 2022 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 148 ] Ofr Sadka , Hadas Erel , Andrey Grishko , and Oren Zuckerman . 2018 . Tan - gible Interaction in Parent - Child Collaboration : Encouraging Awareness and Refection . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( Trondheim , Norway ) ( IDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 157 – 169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202746 [ 149 ] Herman Saksono , Carmen Castaneda - Sceppa , Jessica Hofman , Magy Seif El - Nasr , Vivien Morris , and Andrea G . Parker . 2019 . Social Refections on Fitness Tracking Data : A Study with Families in Low - SES Neighborhoods . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300543 [ 150 ] Herman Saksono , Carmen Castaneda - Sceppa , Jessica A . Hofman , Magy Seif El - Nasr , and Andrea Parker . 2021 . StoryMap : Using Social Modeling and Self - Modeling to Support Physical Activity Among Families of Low - SES Back - grounds . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 203 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445087 [ 151 ] Zachary Schmitt and Svetlana Yarosh . 2018 . Participatory design of technologies to support recovery from substance use disorders . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 152 ] Hanna Schneider , Malin Eiband , Daniel Ullrich , and Andreas Butz . 2018 . Em - powerment in HCI - A Survey and Framework . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173818 [ 153 ] Hanna Schneider , Kilian Moser , Andreas Butz , and Florian Alt . 2016 . Un - derstanding the Mechanics of Persuasive System Design : A Mixed - Method Theory - Driven Analysis of Freeletics . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 309 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858290 [ 154 ] Hyunjin Seo , Darcey Altschwager , Baek - young Choi , Sejun Song , Hannah Brit - ton , Megha Ramaswamy , Bernard Schuster , Marilyn Ault , Kaushik Ayinala , Rafda Zaman , et al . 2021 . Informal technology education for women transition - ing from incarceration . ACM Transactions on Computing Education ( TOCE ) 21 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 155 ] Hyunjin Seo , Matthew Blomberg , Darcey Altschwager , and Hong Tien Vu . 2021 . Vulnerable populations and misinformation : A mixed - methods approach to underserved older adults’ online information assessment . New Media & Society 23 , 7 ( 2021 ) , 2012 – 2033 . [ 156 ] Hyunjin Seo , Joseph Erba , Darcey Altschwager , and Mugur Geana . 2019 . Evidence - based digital literacy class for older , low - income African - American adults . Journal of Applied Communication Research 47 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 130 – 152 . [ 157 ] Sumita Sharma , Krishnaveni Achary , Marianne Kinnula , Netta Iivari , and Blessin Varkey . 2020 . Gathering Garbage or Going Green ? Shifting Social Perspectives to Empower Individuals with Special Needs . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference ( London , United Kingdom ) ( IDC ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 311 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394394 [ 158 ] KEIBA L Shaw . 2015 . Patient education , motivation , compliance , and adherence to physical activity , exercise , and rehabilitation . Pathology and intervention in musculoskeletal rehabilitation 3 ( 2015 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 159 ] Imani N . Sherman , Jasmine D . Bowers , Liz - Laure Laborde , Juan E . Gilbert , Jaime Ruiz , and Patrick G . Traynor . 2021 . Truly Visual Caller ID ? An Analysis of Anti - Robocall Applications and their Accessibility to Visually Impaired Users . In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Symposium On Technology And Society ( ISTAS ) ( IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society ) . IEEE , New York , NY , USA , 266 – 279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ISTAS50296 . 2020 . 9462185 [ 160 ] Preethi Shivayogi . 2013 . Vulnerable population and methods for their safeguard . Perspectives in clinical research 4 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 53 . [ 161 ] Jaisie Sin , Rachel L . Franz , Cosmin Munteanu , and Barbara Barbosa Neves . 2021 . Digital Design Marginalization : New Perspectives on Designing Inclusive Inter - faces . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 380 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445180 [ 162 ] Ranjit Singh and Steven J . Jackson . 2017 . From Margins to Seams : Imbrication , Inclusion , and Torque in the Aadhaar Identifcation Project . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Denver , Colorado , USA ) ( CHI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 4776 – 4824 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025910 [ 163 ] Linda Tuhiwai Smith . 2021 . Decolonizing methodologies : Research and indigenous peoples ( 3 ed . ) . Zed Books , London , England . [ 164 ] Katta Spiel , Eva Hornecker , Rua Mae Williams , and Judith Good . 2022 . ADHD and Technology Research – Investigated by Neurodivergent Readers . In Pro - ceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 547 , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517592 [ 165 ] Denny L . Starks , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Oliver L . Haimson . 2019 . Designing Technology to Support Safety for Transgender Women & Non - Binary Peo - ple of Color . In Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2019 Companion ( San Diego , CA , USA ) ( DIS ’19 Compan - ion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 289 – 294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3323898 [ 166 ] Elizabeth Stowell , Mercedes C . Lyson , Herman Saksono , Reneé C . Wurth , Holly Jimison , Misha Pavel , and Andrea G . Parker . 2018 . Designing and Evaluating MHealth Interventions for Vulnerable Populations : A Systematic Review . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173589 [ 167 ] Nurul M Suhaimi , Yixuan Zhang , Mary Joseph , Miso Kim , Andrea G Parker , and Jacqueline Grifn . 2022 . Investigating Older Adults’ Attitudes towards Crisis Informatics Tools : Opportunities for Enhancing Community Resilience during Disasters . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 258 , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517528 [ 168 ] Sharifa Sultana , Ilan Mandel , Shaid Hasan , S . M . Raihanul Alam , Khandaker Reaz Mahmud , Zinnat Sultana , and Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed . 2021 . Opaque Obstacles : The Role of Stigma , Rumor , and Superstition in Limiting Women’s Access to Computing in Rural Bangladesh . In ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies ( Virtual Event , Australia ) ( COMPASS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 243 – 260 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3460112 . 3471960 [ 169 ] Anja Thieme , Rob Comber , Julia Miebach , Jack Weeden , Nicole Kraemer , Shaun Lawson , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . " We’ve Bin Watching You " : Designing for Refection and Social Persuasion to Promote Sustainable Lifestyles . In Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Austin , Texas , USA ) ( CHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2337 – 2346 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208394 CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 170 ] Hannah Thinyane and Karthik S . Bhat . 2019 . Apprise : Supporting the Critical - Agency of Victims of Human Trafcking in Thailand . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300385 [ 171 ] April Tyack and Elisa D . Mekler . 2020 . Self - Determination Theory in HCI Games Research : Current Uses and Open Questions . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376723 [ 172 ] April Tyack and Peta Wyeth . 2017 . Exploring Relatedness in Single - Player Video Game Play . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( Brisbane , Queensland , Australia ) ( OZCHI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 422 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3156149 [ 173 ] Aditya Vashistha and Richard Anderson . 2016 . Technology Use and Non - Use by Low - Income Blind People in India . SIGACCESS Access . Comput . 0 , 116 ( dec 2016 ) , 10 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3023851 . 3023853 [ 174 ] Lisa M Vaughn and Farrah Jacquez . 2020 . Participatory research methods – Choice points in the research process . Journal of Participatory Research Methods 1 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 13244 . [ 175 ] Jessica Vitak , Yuting Liao , Mega Subramaniam , and Priya Kumar . 2018 . ’I Knew It Was Too Good to Be True " " The Challenges Economically Disadvantaged Internet Users Face in Assessing Trustworthiness , Avoiding Scams , and Develop - ing Self - Efcacy Online . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 176 ] Mahmoud A Wahba and Lawrence G Bridwell . 1976 . Maslow reconsidered : A review of research on the need hierarchy theory . Organizational behavior and human performance 15 , 2 ( 1976 ) , 212 – 240 . [ 177 ] Ashley Marie Walker , Yaxing Yao , Christine Geeng , Roberto Hoyle , and Pamela Wisniewski . 2019 . Moving beyond’one size fts all’ research considerations for working with vulnerable populations . Interactions 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 34 – 39 . [ 178 ] Zhiyuan Wan , Lingfeng Bao , Debin Gao , Eran Toch , Xin Xia , Tamir Mendel , and David Lo . 2019 . Appmod : Helping older adults manage mobile security with online social help . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 3 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 179 ] Yang Wang . 2017 . The Third Wave ? Inclusive Privacy and Security . In Proceed - ings of the 2017 New Security Paradigms Workshop ( Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) ( NSPW 2017 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 122 – 130 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3171533 . 3171538 [ 180 ] Deborah J Warr . 2006 . Gender , class , and the art and craft of social capital . The Sociological Quarterly 47 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 497 – 520 . [ 181 ] Earnest Wheeler and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2018 . Navigating the Job Search as a Low - Resourced Job Seeker . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173622 [ 182 ] Daricia Wilkinson and Bart Knijnenburg . 2022 . Many Islands , Many Problems : An Empirical Examination of Online Safety Behaviors in the Caribbean . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 102 , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517643 [ 183 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Aakash Gautam , Wendy Roldan , Lucy Pei , Jessa Dickin - son , Azra Ismail , Betsy DiSalvo , Neha Kumar , Tammy Clegg , Sheena Erete , Emily Roden , Nithya Sambasivan , and Jason Yip . 2020 . From Needs to Strengths : Opera - tionalizing an Assets - Based Design of Technology . In Conference Companion Pub - lication of the 2020 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Comput - ing ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( CSCW ’20 Companion ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 527 – 535 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3406865 . 3418594 [ 184 ] Susan Wyche , Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Nightingale Simiyu , and Sharon Alaka . 2015 . " If God Gives Me the Chance i Will Design My Own Phone " : Exploring Mobile Phone Repair and Postcolonial Approaches to Design in Rural Kenya . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing ( Osaka , Japan ) ( UbiComp ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 463 – 473 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2750858 . 2804249 [ 185 ] Eunjin Yang , Kyung Hee Lee , et al . 2022 . The Moderating Efects of Disability on Mobile Internet Use Among Older Adults : Population - Based Cross - sectional Study . Journal of Medical Internet Research 24 , 4 ( 2022 ) , e37127 . [ 186 ] William X You , Carly A Comins , Brooke A Jarrett , Katherine Young , Vijayanand Guddera , Deliwe R Phetlhu , Ntambue Mulumba , Mfezi Mcingana , Harry Hausler , Stefan Baral , et al . 2020 . Facilitators and barriers to incorporating digital tech - nologies into HIV care among cisgender female sex workers living with HIV in South Africa . Mhealth 6 ( 2020 ) . [ 187 ] Yixuan Zhang , Nurul Suhaimi , Rana Azghandi , Mary Amulya Joseph , Miso Kim , Jacqueline Grifn , and Andrea G . Parker . 2020 . Understanding the Use of Crisis Informatics Technology among Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) Anuyah , et al . ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376862 [ 188 ] Gila Cohen Zilka . 2017 . Awareness of ICT capabilities , digital literacy , and use of refective processes in children who received their frst home computer . International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning 9 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 80 – 98 . [ 189 ] Gila Cohen Zilka . 2019 . The digital divide : implications for the eSafety of children and adolescents . International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning 11 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 20 – 35 . [ 190 ] Annuska Zolyomi and Jaime Snyder . 2021 . Social - emotional - sensory design map for afective computing informed by neurodivergent experiences . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 37 .