Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2015 ) 1 – 4 Copyright © 2015 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 1756 - 8757 print / 1756 - 8765 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / tops . 12152 The Role of Sequential Dependence in Creative Semantic Search Kevin A . Smith , Edward Vul Department of Psychology , University of California Received 22 February 2015 ; received in revised form 1 May 2015 ; accepted 1 May 2015 How do we search through our vast stores of knowledge to retrieve information demanded by the context and task at hand ? Davelaar ( this issue ) ﬁnds that the words people report while searching for one word that is meaningfully associated with three cues ( e . g . , cues : comb , moon , dew ; answer : honey ; the Remote Associates Test , RAT ) seem to be drawn from a superadditive combination of the semantic associations of the three cues , rather than “clustered” in pre - existing patches as expected by previous theo - ries of semantic search ( e . g . , Troyer , Moscovitch , & Winocur , 1997 ) . Although we found similar behavior in the same paradigm ( Smith , Huber , & Vul , 2013 ) , our interpretation hinged on a different property of search : There is sequential dependence between words reported during the search process . We believe that this sequential dependence is a funda - mental feature of semantic search that gives rise to apparent clustering in previous work as well as providing further insights into Davelaar’s current results . When people list words that come to mind while solving RAT problems , responses that are closer in the sequence are more similar to one another than would be expected based solely on independent word selection , given the cue constraints ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . This holds both for words from the same semantic patch and those in different patches , indicating that semantic search is not simply sampling from sets of words or patches constrained by the cues , but that instead , the current state of the search process inﬂuences what will be retrieved next . This sequential dependence has recently provided new explanations of behavioral phe - nomena in semantic search with a single cue . For instance , it has been well established that in the process of free recall — producing as many words as possible that relate to a given category — peoples’ responses “cluster” ( e . g . , when listing animals , they might list several farm animals then some aquatic animals , etc . ; Bousﬁeld , 1953 ; Bousﬁeld & Correspondence should be sent to Kevin A Smith , Department of Psychology , University of California , San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , # 0109 , La Jolla , CA 92093 . E - mail : k2smith @ ucsd . edu Sedgewick , 1944 ; Gruenewald & Lockhead , 1980 ) . This ﬁnding has been interpreted as evidence that free recall operates by a two - stage process : ﬁrst searching for subcategories ( e . g . , farm animals or aquatic animals ) , then listing stored words from within those sub - categories ( Troyer et al . , 1997 ; Wixted & Roher , 1994 ) , which would suggest that mem - ory is organized in categorical clusters . However , more recent work suggests that semantic search is not a two - stage search - then - list process . Instead , responses tend to be related to prior responses , with occasional “resets” in the search process to start the search process de novo ( Hills , Jones , & Todd , 2012 ) . If semantic distance to the previous response inﬂuences which word will be cho - sen , then words will appear to cluster simply because after saying “cow” one is more likely to say “goat” than “shark . ” Breaks in the clusters could arise either because ( a ) responses after a reset are less likely to be related to prior responses , or ( b ) because responses that are only partially related to prior responses may cross category boundaries . Indeed , two models of semantic search that randomly walk through semantic networks without explicit clusters ( though with resets ) demonstrate the same clustering behavior as people ( Abbott , Austerweil , & Grifﬁths , in press ; Hills et al . , 2012 ) . These ﬁndings sug - gest that clustering may be an epiphenomenal consequence of the sequential dependence of human semantic search combined with the distribution of semantic relations among words rather than an organizing principle of the search process . Considering this same sequential dependence in creative search tasks like the RAT potentially yields a different interpretation of Davelaar’s results . Like Davelaar ( this issue ) , we ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) found that responses are likely to switch at near - chance levels between “patches” of words deﬁned by the semantic associates of the individual cues . On top of this , Davelaar ﬁnds that the cues combine in a superadditive fashion , since the probability of producing a word in response to all three RAT cues is greater than an additive combination of producing that word in response to the three cues indi - vidually . But if existing sequential dependence is not considered , responses may appear to be more grouped around the cues , when in fact this additional grouping is driven by the constraint of the prior response . For instance , if the cue constraints are actually addi - tive , then when different cues produce adjacent responses , the second response may be more similar to the original cue solely because the ﬁrst response is related to the original cue , and the second response is related to the ﬁrst response ; this may make the effect of the cues look superadditive ( see Fig . 1 ) . While it is possible that these response chains are based on both cue superadditivity and sequential dependence , only by considering that sequential dependence can the effect of the cues on the search process be fully deter - mined . In addition , a model based on Hills et al . ( 2012 ) and Abbott et al . ( 2015 ) that considers an additive inﬂuence of the cues and sequential dependence emulates many of the diagnostic features of human RAT search behavior ( Bourgin , Abbott , Grifﬁths , Smith , & Vul , 2014 ) , suggesting that the sequential dependence might be a core component of the creative search process . Our ability to quickly search through our vast stores of knowledge is a powerful capa - bility of the brain , and investigating that search process is a key part of understanding 2 K . A . Smith , E . Vul / Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2015 ) how that knowledge is stored and accessed . Sequential dependence is a key component of this process that may be crucial to understanding how other features of search arise . References Abbott , J . T . , Austerweil , J . L . , & Grifﬁths , T . L . ( in press ) . Random walks on semantic networks can resemble optimal foraging . Psychological Review . Bourgin , D . D . , Abbott , J . T . , Grifﬁths , T . L . , Smith , K . A . , & Vul , E . ( 2014 ) . Empirical evidence for Markov Chain Monte Carlo in memory search . In Bello P . , Guarini M . , McShane M . , & Scassellati B . ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 224 – 229 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Bousﬁeld , W . A . ( 1953 ) . The occurrence of clustering in the recall of randomly arranged associates . Journal of General Psychology , 49 , 229 – 240 . Bousﬁeld , W . A . , & Sedgewick , C . H . W . ( 1944 ) . An analysis of squences of restricted associative responses . Journal of General Psychology , 30 , 149 – 165 . Davelaar , E . J . ( this issue ) . Semantic Search in the Remote Associates Test . Topics in Cognitive Science . Gruenewald , P . J . , & Lockhead , G . R . ( 1980 ) . Semantic Search in the Remote Associates Test . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Human Learning and Memory , 6 ( 3 ) , 225 – 240 . Hills , T . T . , Jones , M . N . , & Todd , P . M . ( 2012 ) . Optimal foraging in semantic memory . Psychological Review , 119 ( 2 ) , 431 – 440 . Cue 1 Cue 2 Cue 3 R1 R2a R2b Fig . 1 . Illustration of how even if cue inﬂuences are independent and additive , response chains may look su - peradditive if sequential dependence is not considered . In an additive system , two potential responses ( R2a and R2b ) are equally likely solely given Cue 2 . However , if the ﬁrst response ( R1 ) inﬂuences the next response , R2a is more likely to follow . It , therefore , looks like Cue 1 inﬂuences the second response as well , but only by nature of the relationship of Cue 1 to R1 . K . A . Smith , E . Vul / Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2015 ) 3 Smith , K . A . , Huber , D . E . , & Vul , E . ( 2013 ) . Multiply - constrained semantic search in the Remote Associates Test . Cognition , 128 ( 1 ) , 64 – 75 . Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , & Winocur , G . ( 1997 ) . Clustering and switching as two components of verbal ﬂuency : Evidence from younger and older healthy adults . Neuropsychology , 11 ( 1 ) , 138 – 146 . Wixted , J . T . , & Roher , D . ( 1994 ) . Analyzing the dynamics of free recall : An integrative review of the empirical literature . Psychnomic Bulletin & Review , 1 ( 1 ) , 89 – 106 . 4 K . A . Smith , E . Vul / Topics in Cognitive Science ( 2015 )