Developmental Science 11 : 2 ( 2008 ) , pp 282 – 298 DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2008 . 00675 . x © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 9600 Garsington Road , Oxford OX4 2DQ , UK and 350 Main Street , Malden , MA 02148 , USA . Blackwell Publishing Ltd PAPER Bilingual experience and executive functioning in young children Stephanie M . Carlson 1 and Andrew N . Meltzoff 2 1 . Department of Psychology , University of Washington , USA 2 . Department of Psychology and Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences , University of Washington , USA Abstract Advanced inhibitory control skills have been found in bilingual speakers as compared to monolingual controls ( Bialystok , 1999 ) . We examined whether this effect is generalized to an unstudied language group ( Spanish - English bilingual ) and multiple measures of executive function by administering a battery of tasks to 50 kindergarten children drawn from three language groups : native bilinguals , monolinguals ( English ) , and English speakers enrolled in second - language immersion kindergarten . Despite having signiﬁcantly lower verbal scores and parent education / income level , Spanish - English bilingual children’s raw scores did not differ from their peers . After statistically controlling for these factors and age , native bilingual children performed signiﬁcantly better on the executive function battery than both other groups . Importantly , the relative advantage was signiﬁcant for tasks that appear to call for managing conﬂicting attentional demands ( Conﬂict tasks ) ; there was no advantage on impulse - control ( Delay tasks ) . These results advance our understanding of both the generalizability and speciﬁcity of the compensatory effects of bilingual experience for children’s cognitive development . Introduction Investigators have long been interested in the advantages and disadvantages of learning more than one language for children’s linguistic and cognitive development ( e . g . Bialystok , 2001 ; Bloomﬁeld , 1933 ; Ervin & Osgood , 1954 ; Hakuta , 1986 ; Ianco - Worrall , 1972 ) . Bilingual individuals , and children in particular , are valuable to study because of the fundamental issues that can be addressed , such as how language is represented in the mind and brain ( e . g . Albert & Obler , 1978 ; Deuchar & Quay , 1998 ; Genesee , 1989 ; Green , 1998 ; Kim , Relkin , Lee & Hirsch , 1997 ; Kuhl , 2004 , 2007 ; Meisel , 1990 ; Neville , 1993 ; Nicoladis , 1998 ) ; whether bilingual children have accelerated metalinguistic awareness compared to monolingual children ( e . g . Bialystok , 1991 ; Bowey , 1988 ; Bruck & Genesee , 1995 ; Campbell & Sais , 1995 ; Cummins , 1978 ; Feldman & Shen , 1971 ; Galambos & Goldin - Meadow , 1990 ; Gathercole , 1997 ; Hakes , 1980 ) ; and how early bilingual experience impacts children’s later linguistic activities , such as reading ( e . g . Bernhardt , 1991 ; Bialystok , 1997 ; Bialystok , Luk & Kwan , 2005 ; Durgunoglu & Verhoeven , 1998 ; Edwards & Christopherson , 1988 ; Oller & Eilers , 2002 ) . Speculation on broad differences between monolingual and bilingual speakers historically has tended to focus on the disabling effects of growing up with two languages ( e . g . negative effects on certain measures of ‘intelligence’ ) , although such speculations have been questioned ( for reviews see Bialystok , 2001 ; Hakuta , 1986 ) . In contrast , examinations of speciﬁc areas of cognitive functioning suggest that bilingual children might be at an advantage . These include superior ﬂexibility using a symbol - reorganization task ( Peal & Lambert , 1962 ) , understanding the arbitrary nature of numeric symbols ( Saxe , 1988 ) , ignoring misleading features of a number concept task ( Bialystok & Codd , 1997 ) , understanding object con - stancy ( Feldman & Shen , 1971 ) , superior performance on spatial problems ( Bialystok & Majumder , 1998 ) , generating multiple hypotheses on a physical science problem ( Kessler & Quinn , 1980 ) , and performing well on nonlinguistic tests of creativity and geometric design ( Ricciardelli , 1992 ) . Bialystok ( 2001 ) comprehensively reviewed the research on cognitive differences between bilingual and monolingual children and concluded that the pattern of evidence thus far supports enhancement for a set of speciﬁc intellectual abilities . According to this analysis , one aspect of cognitive functioning , namely inhibitory control over attentional resources , develops more rapidly in children with extensive bilingual experience . Speciﬁcally , the proposal is that bilingual children are advanced in the ability to control attention to conﬂicting perceptual or representational features of a problem . Inhibitory processes are instrumental Address for correspondence : Stephanie M . Carlson , Institute of Child Development , University of Minnesota – Twin Cities , 51 East River Road , Minneapolis , MN 55455 - 0345 , USA , e - mail : smc @ umn . edu Bilingual experience 283 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . in such tasks because one must inhibit or suppress attention to irrelevant or misleading aspects of a stimulus in the service of attending to the appropriate ones and generating a successful response . Inhibitory control is , in turn , a key component of executive functioning , which refers to the conscious control of thought and action ( Posner & Rothbart , 2000 ) . Additional components of executive function traditionally include resistance to interference , set - shifting , working memory ( the ability to manipulate contents of short - term memory ) , and planning ability , all of which also may implicate inhibitory processes ( e . g . Diamond , 2002 ; Engle , 2002 ; Roberts & Pennington , 1996 ) . There is strong evidence that executive functioning is dependent on the neural systems of the prefrontal cortex ( e . g . Luria , 1966 ; Miller & Cohen , 2001 ; Stuss & Benson , 1986 ) , although much remains to be learned about the speciﬁc brain structure – function relations involved , especially in development ( cf . Bunge & Zelazo , 2006 ) . Executive function has a protracted developmental timetable , but children make dramatic gains in self - control over thoughts , behaviors , and emotions in the preschool period ( for overviews see Carlson , 2005 ; Kopp , 1982 ; Zelazo & Müller , 2002 ) . Disruptions in executive function are implicated in a number of childhood disorders , including autism and Attention Deﬁcit / Hyperactivity Disorder ( for a review see Casey , Tottenham & Fossella , 2002 ) . In contrast , in typically developing children executive function is positively correlated with several important aspects of development , such as social competence ( e . g . Hughes , Dunn & White , 1998 ) , moral conduct ( e . g . Kochanska , Murray & Harlan , 2000 ) , and school readiness ( e . g . Riggs , Blair & Greenberg , 2003 ) . Executive function is robustly related to theory of mind ( e . g . Carlson , Mandell & Williams , 2004 ; Carlson & Moses , 2001 ; Hughes , 1998 ; Perner & Lang , 1999 ) , and interestingly , there is some evidence of advanced theory of mind in bilingual compared to monolingual preschoolers ( Goetz , 2003 ) . The present investigation seeks to extend our understanding of the possible effects of bilingual experience on young children’s executive functioning . Evidence of advanced inhibitory control in bilingual children Why would inhibition / selective attention develop com - paratively more rapidly in bilinguals ? Bialystok ( 2001 ) provided a theoretical analysis addressing this question . Contrary to earlier speculation about the two languages in bilinguals ‘switching’ on and off as the situation calls for it , Guttentag , Haith , Goodman and Hauch ( 1984 ) demonstrated that both languages remain active during language processing . Distributed activation , however , raises the probability of interference from the nonrelevant language . According to Bialystok ( 2001 ) , language intrusions are prevented in bilingual speakers by holding in mind the relevant language and inhibiting the nonrelevant language , thus implicating frontal lobe processes ( see also De Groot & Kroll , 1997 ; Green , 1998 ) . If this analysis is correct , then bilingual children would have extensive , indeed daily , practice with inhibitory control , at least in a linguistic context . Bialystok ( 1986 ) found that bilingual children performed signiﬁcantly better than monolingual speakers on a metalinguistic task ( Moving Word ) requiring children to ignore perceptual features of a stimulus ( see also Bialystok , 1997 ; Bialystok , Shenﬁeld & Codd , 2000 ) . Bialystok ( 1999 ) reported that this advantage appeared to carry over to other cognitive domains in research using the Dimensional Change Card Sort ( DCCS ) task , a well - established assessment of executive function for preschool children ( Frye , Zelazo & Palfai , 1995 ; Zelazo , Frye & Rapus , 1996 ; Zelazo , Müller , Frye & Marcovitch , 2003 ) . In the DCCS , children are given a series of cards to sort by one dimension ( e . g . shape ) and then asked to switch and sort by a different dimension ( e . g . color ) . Children of 3 years , despite having no difﬁculty on the pre - switch trials , tend to sort incorrectly on these post - switch trials , perseverating on the old sorting rule . By 4 or 5 years of age , most children switch successfully . Young children’s difﬁculties on the DCCS have been attributed to an inability to represent complex rules ( Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) as well as deﬁcits in working memory and inhibitory control ( Diamond , Carlson & Beck , 2005 ; Kirkham , Cruess & Diamond , 2003 ; Kloo & Perner , 2005 ; Munakata & Yerys , 2001 ; Rennie , Bull & Diamond , 2004 ; Towse , Redbond , Houston - Price & Cook , 2000 ; Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) . In Bialystok’s ( 1999 ) research , Chinese - English bilingual preschoolers performed signiﬁcantly better than English monolingual speakers on the DCCS after controlling for differences in verbal ability . The developmental advantage was approximately one year , with bilingual 4 - year - olds performing similarly to mono - lingual 5 - year - olds . In follow - up research , Bialystok and Martin ( 2004 ) tested 4 - to 5 - year - old children who were bilingual ( Chinese - English , Experiments 1 and 3 ; French - English , Experiment 2 ) or English monolingual , using modiﬁed versions of the DCCS designed to tease apart the representation and inhibition components of the task . They replicated the basic ﬁnding and further speciﬁed that the bilingual advantage held up only in task versions that call for ‘conceptual inhibition’ , that is , resisting attention to the previously relevant feature ( e . g . color ) in order to represent the newly relevant feature . Bilinguals and monolinguals did not differ on the ability to represent complex rules in the absence of distracting stimuli or to inhibit a familiar motor response . Subsequent studies in which bilingual children from heterogeneous language backgrounds were combined corroborated these results . The bilingual advantage extended to the Simon task ( in which there is a spatial conﬂict between stimulus and response ; Bialystok , Martin & Viswanathan , 2005 ) , the ambiguous ﬁgures task ( which can be construed as an executive control task insofar as one must inhibit one perspective in order 284 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . to apprehend an alternative perspective ; Bialystok & Shapero , 2005 ) , and response times on an anti - saccade task in adults ( Bialystok , Craik & Ryan , 2006 ) . In each case , bilinguals were better than monolinguals at selectively attending to a stimulus in the presence of distracting information . Given that executive function is recognized as a critical component of cognitive and social development , this research on bilingualism has implications for our understanding of the development of executive function as well as practical issues with respect to second - language instruction in the home and school . Limitations of prior research Despite these important implications , extant research on executive function in bilingual speakers has some limitations . The ﬁrst concerns the language groups tested thus far . Ideally , the effects would be replicable in any language combination and any laboratory . Bialystok and colleagues have gone a long way toward establishing this in their studies including speakers of Chinese - English , French - English , and heterogeneous language backgrounds ( Bialystok , 1999 ; Bialystok & Martin , 2004 ; Bialystok , Martin et al . , 2005 ) . It is particularly important to replicate the results with non - Chinese samples because of the possibility that aspects of Chinese culture , rather than bilingualism per se , promote greater self - control in young children . In fact , Sabbagh , Xu , Carlson , Moses and Lee ( 2006 ) reported signiﬁcantly higher executive functioning scores in monolingual preschool children in Beijing , China compared to North American preschoolers , possibly due in part to cultural differences in the early socialization of self - control . For obvious practical reasons , there was not a Chinese - only control group in Bialystok’s studies . Choi , Won and Lee ( 2003 ) , however , tested Chinese monolingual and Chinese - Korean bilingual 4th graders in China and found that bilinguals signiﬁcantly outperformed their monolingual counterparts on a test of selective attention , suggesting a speciﬁc effect of bilingual language experience over and above cultural inﬂuences on executive function . In the current study , we extended this research to a language group that has not been investigated previously with regard to executive functioning . In the US , at least one in 12 kindergartners is exposed to a language other than English in the home , and in approximately 75 % of such cases , Spanish is the primary language ( August & Hakuta , 1997 ) . Given that Spanish is the most rapidly growing language group in America’s kindergarten children , the effect of Spanish - English bilingualism on cognitive abilities is of great interest and practical importance . A second limitation of prior research is that a small number of executive function measures was used in a given study , thus making it difﬁcult to examine the spe - ciﬁcity of the effect . Executive function is a multifaceted set of skills ( e . g . Miyake , Friedman , Emerson , Witzki , Howerter & Wagner , 2000 ; Zelazo , Carter , Reznick & Frye , 1997 ) . Nonetheless , Carlson and Moses ( 2001 ) make a useful distinction , based on a factor analysis of executive function measures in preschool children , between ‘delay tasks’ , which require children to delay / temper a prepotent response , and ‘conﬂict tasks’ , which require children to make a novel response while inhibiting a conﬂicting , prepotent response ( as in the DCCS ) . Further research suggested that conﬂict tasks are more strongly related to working memory capacity than are delay tasks ( Carlson , Moses & Breton , 2002 ; see also Diamond , Kirkham & Amso , 2002 ) . Bialystok’s evidence for superior per - formance by bilingual children on speciﬁc tasks suggests that there is an advantage in the conﬂict domain , but it leaves open the question of whether the beneﬁts are more widespread and would extend to tests of response - suppression and delay - of - gratiﬁcation . To help investigate the speciﬁcity of bilingual children’s performance , we included multiple measures of executive function designed to tap both conﬂict ( inhibition and working memory ) and delay ( inhibition with relatively low working memory demands ) in a repeated measures design . Following Bialystok ( 2001 ; Bialystok & Martin , 2004 ) , we hypoth - esized that bilingual speakers would be relatively more proﬁcient on the conﬂict measures of executive function compared to monolingual speakers , but not on the delay measures , thus supporting speciﬁcity in the way that early language experiences map onto the development of cognitive skills . Definitional issues and challenges Deﬁning who is ‘bilingual’ is not straightforward . Language proﬁciency can be deﬁned as ‘the ability to function in a situation that is deﬁned by speciﬁc cognitive and linguistic demands , to a level of performance indi - cated by either objective criteria or normative standards’ ( Bialystok , 2001 , p . 18 ) . However , bilingual children typically have a larger productive and receptive vocabulary in one of the languages and their vocabulary in each language taken individually is usually less than that of a monolingual speaker of the same age ( e . g . Ben - Zeev , 1977 ; Bialystok , 1988 ; Nicoladis & Genesee , 1997 ; Umbel , Pearson , Fernandez & Ollie , 1992 ) . Furthermore , although researchers agree that bilingualism is better described as a matter of degree than as a categorical variable , currently there are no accepted standards for classifying children on the basis of an objective bilingualism scale . Grosjean ( 1989 , 1998 ) argued against the view that a bilingual individual is two monolinguals in one person , and instead proposed a pragmatic deﬁnition that a bilingual is someone who can function in each language according to given needs . On this deﬁnition , functional proﬁciency in the two languages is equivalent in bilingual individuals : they have conversational skills and can carry out similar activities in each language , even though Bilingual experience 285 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . formal proﬁciency in either language may not match that of a monolingual speaker . Furthermore , it is rarely possible to equate bilingual children and monolingual children on all variables aside from the number of languages they speak . Children in North America become bilingual for a variety of reasons , such as having non - native parents but all community activities and schooling in English , or having one parent or extended family member who speaks a language other than English . Bialystok ( 2001 ) noted that these conditions tend to correlate with several other factors that are likely to inﬂuence the course of social - cognitive development , including parental education level , literacy learning in the home , proﬁciency in each language , the settings in which the second language is used , and socioeconomic status ( SES ) . Hence , the ideal experi - mental situation in which bilingual and monolingual speakers have equal proﬁciency in their common language and equivalent social and economic circumstances is not easily attainable in the US today , or , if it could be achieved through extensive screening of participants , the ﬁndings would be grossly under - representative of the actual bilingual population found in North America . Nonetheless , questions about the effects of bilingualism on executive function are pressing and deserve further examination , despite the practical complications . To address these challenges , we included three novel design features in the present study . First , we included three groups of kindergarten children having different degrees of exposure to a second language : native bilinguals ( Spanish - English ) , English monolinguals , and children attending a language - immersion kindergarten program . This design enabled us to examine a range of second - language experience that is more representative than simple ‘bilingual’ and ‘monolingual’ categories . Further - more , it extends previous research by allowing a preliminary investigation of the impact of early foreign - language immersion education on children’s developing executive function skills . If there are signiﬁcant advantages of a multi - lingual environment for children’s social - cognitive abilities , then does early ( but non - native ) exposure confer similar beneﬁts compared to a traditional monolingual school environment ? Answering such questions could have a considerable impact on educational theory and practice . Second , based on prior research we anticipated that native bilingual children would score signiﬁcantly lower on vocabulary size than the other groups ( e . g . Bialystok , 1988 ; Nicoladis & Genesee , 1997 ; Umbel et al . , 1992 ) . This poses a problem for evaluating the outcome of interest , however , because vocabulary measures are consistently found to be positively related to executive functioning in preschool and kindergarten children ( e . g . Carlson & Moses , 2001 ; Carlson et al . , 2002 ; Hughes , 1998 ) . To control for this confound , we administered the Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test - Spanish - English Bilingual Edition ( Brownell , 2001 ) and included total scores as a covariate in the major analyses , following Bialystok ( 1999 ) . Third , it is of considerable importance to take into account the cultural context in which bilingualism occurs to better evaluate cognitive outcomes . Therefore we documented several relevant contextual factors in the participating families , such as settings of primary and secondary language use , family income , parent education level and number of years living in the US , and home - based reading practices . Also , because cultural or subcultural differences might exist regarding the extent to which conscious control over behavior is valued , we included a new measure of parental attitudes about children’s self - control . To summarize , the present study aimed to address the following questions . First , do Spanish - English bilingual children show accelerated executive functioning similar to that found previously in other languages ? Second , does the bilingual advantage extend to multiple executive function tasks that have not previously been assessed ? Third , is the effect found for both conﬂict and delay executive function measures or , as we hypothesize , is it more speciﬁc to conﬂict ? Finally , do English - speaking children attending a second - language immersion kinder - garten also show similar beneﬁts in executive function , compared to children in a traditional kindergarten ? Method Participants Participants included 50 kindergarten children and their parent or legal guardian ( M age = 72 months , SD = 5 . 68 months , range = 58 – 83 months ; 26 boys , 24 girls ) . An additional two children participated but were not included in the analyses due to developmental delay ( n = 1 ) and extensive prior exposure to Spanish in one of the supposed non - Spanish Control cases ( n = 1 ) . The Bilingual group consisted of 12 children with exposure from birth to Spanish and English . They were recruited with posted ﬂiers and oral presentations at community centers and elementary schools having a substantial Hispanic student population , the Bilingual Orientation Center for the public schools , bilingual reading groups at the public library , worship centers , and by word of mouth . We administered a Language Background Questionnaire to parents ( in the parent’s preferred language ) to examine children’s language exposure . In this group , either both parents were native Spanish speakers who spoke both Spanish and English at home and in the community , or one parent spoke Spanish and the other spoke English . Half the parents reported they had lived in the US for less than 10 years ; for the other half it was between 10 and 20 years . Six parents reported Spanish as their child’s dominant language ; ﬁve reported English ; and one marked ‘can’t decide’ . All children reportedly spoke a mixture of Spanish and English in the home . The majority spoke English with friends and had attended an English - speaking 286 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . preschool program . Approximately half the parents in this group reported reading to their child in both Spanish and English ; the remaining children were evenly divided between English and Spanish . Children were reading on their own or beginning readers in both languages or in English only . These items from the Language Background Questionnaire suggested that our Bilingual group was composed of children with approximately equal exposure to Spanish and English . The Immersion group included 21 kindergarten children attending a language immersion public elementary school ( grades K – 5 ) in which children receive instruction in multiple subjects in English for half the day and in either Spanish ( n = 13 ) or Japanese ( n = 8 ) for half the day ( approximately three hours in each language ) . We recruited children into the study regardless of which language they received their immersion in , under the assumption that the potential cognitive beneﬁts of sec - ond - language learning should generalize across the lan - guages involved . Nonetheless , we performed analyses comparing the children enrolled in the Spanish and Jap - anese programs ( see Results section ) . Children were recruited by sending ﬂiers in take - home mail and follow - ing up with a telephone call to the families . At the time of testing , children in the Immersion group had received six months of second - language exposure on average . It is important to note that the children in the Immersion group were all English monolinguals when they entered the program and their families spoke only English at home . Thus all study procedures and parent questionnaires could be administered in English to these participants . The Control group included 17 English monolingual children attending traditional kindergarten programs with very limited exposure to a second language at school ( 30 min per week maximum ) or at home . The Immersion and Control groups included White / non - Hispanic children ( approximately two - thirds of each sample ) as well as children of Asian , Hispanic , and African American origin according to parent report . All parents in these two groups reported English as the child’s dominant language , the language of print and television in the home , and preschool programs , with no ( or minimal ) exposure to a second language ( prior to kindergarten for the Immersion group ) . Table 1 contains detailed demographic information , broken down by each of the three language groups . Procedure Children and a parent / guardian visited a university playroom for a single session lasting 1 . 5 – 2 hours . Informed written consent procedures ( and child oral assent ) were followed for all participants according to guidelines of the American Psychological Association and were provided in English or Spanish , according to participant preference . All tasks were administered in English , Spanish , or a combination of the two , as the child preferred . A male experimenter who is a native English speaker with excellent conversational and grammatical ﬂuency in Spanish conducted all sessions . The ﬁxed order of tasks was : Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence , Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test – Spanish / English Bilingual Edition , Dimensional Change Card Sort , Simon Says , < break to watch a video of ‘ Where the Wild Things Are ’ in the child’s preferred language > , Delay of Gratiﬁcation , Kansas Reﬂection - Impulsivity Scale , Visually Cued Recall , Statue , Gift Delay , and Attention Network Task . 1 Sessions were videotaped for later coding . Families received $ 20 and parking or transportation reimburse - ment . Children received a T - shirt and a small prize for participating . Ten measures were included to assess various aspects of executive functioning including conﬂict and delay measures . Additionally , the Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test ( EOWPVT ) was included to control for group differences in verbal ability . Parents completed Family Information and Language Background ques - tionnaires and two questionnaires assessing household rules and their child’s self - control ( see Table 1 ) . All task instructions and questionnaires were translated into Spanish by a native English speaker who is ﬂuent in Spanish , and then back - translated by a native Spanish speaker who is ﬂuent in English and has a PhD in psychology . Finally , two native Spanish speakers who have only limited English language proﬁciency independently made minor adjustments to the Spanish versions of the consent form , task protocols and parent questionnaires 1 Two additional tasks were administered but later excluded from analyses due to a ceiling effect ( Moving Word ) and a ﬂoor effect ( Conservation of Mass ) . Table 1 Demographic characteristics and parent questionnaires Variable Language group Bilingual Immersion Control Age ( months ) Mean ( SD ) 72 ( 6 . 44 ) 70 ( 5 . 4 ) 75 ( 4 . 15 ) Range 58 – 80 63 – 81 70 – 83 Sex 8m , 4f 10m , 11f 8m , 9f Verbal Ability ( EOW - PVT ) Mean ( SD ) 100 ( 20 . 19 ) 136 ( 11 . 14 ) 135 ( 14 . 34 ) Range 73 – 145 115 – 145 103 – 145 Mother Education ( median ) High School College College Father Education ( median ) High School College + College Annual Family Income ( average ) $ 20 – 30 , 000 $ 70 – 80 , 000 $ 60 – 70 , 000 Hours / Week Child is Read To Mean ( SD ) 2 . 60 ( 1 . 17 ) 3 . 81 ( . 51 ) 3 . 87 ( . 50 ) Rules Questionnaire ( Sum ) Mean ( SD ) 105 . 5 ( 28 . 36 ) 90 . 43 ( 22 . 21 ) 95 . 24 ( 13 . 68 ) Range 79 – 134 63 – 146 48 – 118 Importance of Child’s Self - Control to Parent ( Sum ) Mean ( SD ) 43 . 22 ( 4 . 71 ) 35 . 0 ( 8 . 56 ) 37 . 20 ( 5 . 48 ) Range 36 – 45 27 – 50 7 – 42 Note : Bilingual n = 12 ; Immersion n = 21 ; Control n = 17 . Bilingual experience 287 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . to make their meaning as clear as possible to families who expressed a preference for Spanish . Coding agreement was established by double - coding eight participants and all dependent measures were reliable within accepted standards ( at most 1 disagree - ment ; RTs within . 5 sec were considered reliable ) . Discrepancies were resolved by a third coder . All other sessions were single - coded by trained coders who were blind to the major study hypotheses . Parent questionnaires Rules questionnaire ( Smetana , Kochanska & Chuang , 2000 ; based on Gralinski & Kopp , 1993 ) This 29 - item questionnaire asks about household rules such as not interrupting when mother is on the phone and eating food that parents serve . The items represent categories including child safety , protection of property , interpersonal manners , obedience / order , food / mealtime routines , family routines / chores , self - care , and parental control over the child’s choices in clothing , friends , etc . Item wording was modiﬁed slightly to be more appro - priate for this older age group of children . Parents indicated ﬁrst if the item is a ‘rule’ ( formal or informal expectation ) for their child , and second how important it is to them that their child complies , on a 5 - point scale . Total scores on the rule - importance items were used in analyses . Children’s behavior questionnaire ( Rothbart , Ahadi , Hershey & Fischer , 2001 ) Four subscales of this temperament questionnaire that were of greatest interest related to executive functioning were included ( 45 items ) : Attentional Focusing , Attentional Shifting , Inhibitory Control , and Impulsivity . Parents indicated how true each statement is of their child on a 7 - point scale . Next , we asked parents to indicate how important they believe these skills are at their child’s present age , such as , ‘How important is it to you that your child can focus his / her attention and easily concentrate on a particular task ? ’ followed by , ‘How upsetting is it to you when your child does not focus his / her attention on a particular task ? ’ for a total of eight questions ( also on a scale of 1 – 7 ) . Responses to these eight items indicating the importance of self - control according to the parent were summed for analyses . Verbal ability control measure EOWPVT - SBE ( Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test – Spanish Bilingual Edition ; Brownell , 2001 ) This is a norm - referenced test intended for use with children aged 4 – 12 years who speak Spanish and English with varying levels of proﬁciency . Instructions are presented in the examinee’s dominant language ( English for all Immersion and Control children ) . For Bilingual participants this was determined by parent report and by giving participants examples in each language and then asking which language they preferred to use for this game . ( Two children expressed a preference for Spanish and one wanted both English and Spanish . However , in keeping with the EOWPVT protocol , the examiner was permitted to repeat the question in the alternate lan - guage if children hesitated or responded incorrectly in their dominant language . ) The examiner presented a series of illustrations depicting an object , action , or concept and asked children to name each illustration ( e . g . ‘What’s this ? ’ or ‘Qué es esto ? ’ ) . Testing stopped when children reached a ceiling item ( six consecutive errors ) . Final responses in either language were scored . Standard scores were used in analyses . Executive function measures The nine executive function measures in our battery are described below . Advanced DCCS ( Dimensional Change Card Sort ; Zelazo et al . , 1996 ) We ﬁrst administered the standard preschool version , described brieﬂy in the introduction . The pre - switch dimension was shape ( rabbits / boats ; criterion was ﬁve consecutive correct sorts ) and the post - switch dimension was color ( red / blue ; ﬁve trials , three of which perceptually conﬂicted with the old sorting rule , following Frye et al . , 1995 ) . Given the age of participants we anticipated that most if not all children would succeed on the preschool version . Therefore , all children were next given the advanced ‘stars’ version of the DCCS ( Hongwanishkul , Happaney , Lee & Zelazo , 2005 ) . For these trials , the experimenter introduced the same types of cards used earlier , except that some of them had a gold star sticker located above the colored shape . After pointing out the stars , he announced , ‘When you see a card with a star on it , you’ll sort it by color . But if the card doesn’t have a star on it , then sort it by shape . OK ? Let’s practice ﬁrst . See , here is a red boat , and it doesn’t have a star on it . So I’ll sort it by shape , and I’ll put it in this box ( pointing to the blue boat tray ) . And here’s another red boat , and it does have a star on it , so I’ll sort it by color , and I’ll put it in this one ( pointing to the red rabbit tray ) . ’ A verbal rule check followed : ‘OK , let’s go over the rules , just to make sure you know how we play this game . So if the card has a star on it , do you sort it by color or shape ? ’ ( Color is correct . ) The experimenter corrected any errors , repeated the question , and moved on to inquire about what should happen if the card does not have a star on it ( sort by shape ) , and corrected errors and repeated the question as needed , up to three times . Twenty advanced sorting trials ensued , with a rule reminder given after 10 trials but no feedback on 288 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . responses . The majority ( 16 ) of these cards did not contain a star , and so the correct ( now dominant ) sorting rule was shape . On four trials , however , a star appeared , and in each case the correct response was in conﬂict with the shape rule ( e . g . put a blue rabbit in the blue boat tray ) . The number of correct conﬂict trials on the advanced sorting phase ( 0 – 4 ) was used in data analyses . Simon Says ( Strommen , 1973 ) To warm up , children were asked to perform a series of actions while standing opposite the experimenter . Then the experimenter announced that they were going to play Simon Says and reviewed the rules : ‘Whenever I say “Simon Says” , you do what I say . But when I don’t say “Simon Says” , you shouldn’t do anything at all . If I don’t say “Simon Says” , you should try to stay perfectly still . ’ Two practice trials ensued ( one of each kind ) , followed by a verbal rule check and 10 test trials . The experimenter performed all actions regardless of whether it was a ‘Simon Says’ trial . He reminded children of the rules halfway through , but did not give feedback . ‘Simon’ trials were coded as follows : 0 = failure to move , 1 = wrong movement or ﬂinch , 2 = partial correct movement , 3 = full correct movement . For non - Simon ( non - imitation ) trials : 0 = full commanded movement ; 1 = partial com - manded movement ; 2 = wrong movement or ﬂinch ; 3 = no movement . Total scores across the ﬁve non - Simon trials were analyzed ( possible range = 0 – 15 ) . Visually cued recall ( Zelazo , Jacques , Burack & Frye , 2002 ) This task was included as a measure of short - term memory capacity that also requires inhibition of a response to previously selected items . The experimenter introduced children to a puppet ‘Pat’ who likes certain things very much and presented them with 12 different arrays of pictures ( three rows of four pictures ) , one at a time . First he said , ‘I’m going to show you pictures of things that Pat likes . When I ﬁnish showing you pictures of things that he likes , I want you to point to them for me . But you can only point to things that Pat likes , OK ? See , on this poster , Pat likes the tricycle [ simultaneously pointing to the item ] . Can you point to the one that Pat likes ? ’ On two practice trials and the ﬁrst test trial , only one item had to be remembered . On each subsequent trial , a new array was presented and participants were required to remember one more item than in the preceding array ( pointing in the same serial order was not required ) . Items from previous arrays reappeared on subsequent trials . Hence , this task is related to the updating function of working memory ( Baddeley , 1986 ) . The task was dis - continued when participants failed two consecutive trials ( or when they reached a maximum of 12 items ) . Final accuracy scores were calculated by subtracting the number of false alarms ( pointing to old items ) and misses ( omitting new items ) from the total number of correct hits . Kansas Reflection / Impulsivity Scale ( KRISP ; Wright , 1972 ) Children were presented with a ﬂip - book arranged vertically and asked to select the drawing from the bottom page that exactly matches a drawing on the top page . The choices differed only slightly from the target drawing and so needed to be inspected carefully before making a selection . After ﬁve practice trials , there were 15 test trials of increasing difﬁculty . The last ﬁve trials were added to create a more advanced version for this kinder - garten age group . Following Wright ( 1972 ) , up to three errors were permitted on each trial before moving on . For errors the experimenter said , ‘No , look up here . Can you ﬁnd the one that is exactly like this one up here ? ’ Accuracy scores ( total correct minus number of errors ) were used in analyses . C - TONI ( Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence ; Hammill , Pearson & Wiederholt , 1997 ) This test of nonverbal reasoning ability has been validated for use with children who speak English as a second language . It was designed to assess the intellectual ability of individuals for whom most other mental ability tests are either inappropriate or biased . Instructions were provided for oral and pantomime administration to accommodate children with lower verbal ability . The pictorial and geometric categories subscales were included ( in that order ) . The task began with three practice trials in which the experimenter pointed to an array of items ( drawings or geometric shapes ) at the top of the page , saying , ‘These two are alike in some way . Which one of these [ sweeping a ﬁnger along the row of alternatives at the bottom of the page ] is most like these two and should go in the empty box [ pointing to the top ] ? Point to your answer . ’ Most of the alternative choices bore some relation to the target items , and often an incorrect choice was more salient perceptually ( e . g . physically more similar to the target items ) than the correct response ( e . g . one that was thematically similar ) . For example , one of the pictorial category trials included a frog and a rabbit as target items ( both depicted on four legs ) . The choices for ‘most like’ included a kangaroo , beaver on hind legs , ostrich , bear , and bird . The kangaroo was the correct thematic choice ( hopping ) , but the bear was a perceptual distractor because it was the only one depicted with four legs . Hence , the task calls for pattern recognition but also inhibition of salient but interfering response options . If children responded incorrectly on a practice trial , the experimenter corrected them and helped them point to the correct answer . All children demonstrated correct performance by the third practice trial . Test trials followed , with the experimenter con - tinuing these instructions ( but without feedback ) until children responded incorrectly on three out of the last ﬁve items . An identical procedure was followed for the geometric categories . Raw scores for each subtest were Bilingual experience 289 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . calculated by subtracting the number of errors from the ceiling item number , and then summed for a total C - TONI score . Attention Network Task ( ANT ; Rueda , Fan , McCandliss , Halparin , Gruber , Pappert - Lercari & Posner , 2004 ) The children’s version of the ANT was presented in the form of a computerized game ( using a Dell Dimension 1850 with a 15 - in color screen ; programmed in E - Prime , Psychology Software Tools , Inc . , 2001 ) . The experimenter introduced the task by telling a story about a hungry ﬁsh , using laminated illustrations . The object of the game was to ‘feed’ the ﬁsh as quickly as possible when it appeared on the computer screen . If the ﬁsh was oriented facing left , children were told to click the left side of a computer mouse , and to press the right side for a right - facing ﬁsh . On no - ﬂanker trials , the target ﬁsh appeared alone on the screen . On ﬂanker trials , children were instructed that the target ﬁsh is always the one in the middle ( of a row of ﬁve ﬁsh ) . All ﬁsh were facing the same direction on congruent trials . On incongruent trials , however , the target was embedded in a school of ﬁsh that were facing the opposite direction from it , hence creating attentional conﬂict . Children had to inhibit the tendency to attend to the direction of the ﬂankers and instead respond according to the direction of the target . Following a practice block of 24 trials , the test block consisted of 48 trials , including 16 with no ﬂanker , 16 congruent , and 16 incongruent trials ( randomly ordered ) . The ﬁsh uttered a ‘woohoo’ sound in an excited voice , wagged its tail , and made bubbles following a successful response . Errors were followed by a buzzer sound and no animation . The warm - up and task took 20 min to complete on average . The task was motivating for children , but given that it occurred at the end of a 1 . 5 - hr session with young participants , we were concerned about a high refusal rate and did not proceed with the three additional test blocks provided with the game . We caution that the reliability of performance may be lower in our sample for this reason . Following Rueda et al . ( 2004 ) , response times exceeding 1700 ms after the target ﬁsh was presented were excluded from analysis . ( The mean and modal number of trials completed within the time limit was 38 , SD = 6 . 46 ; there were no group differences on the number of trials excluded . ) Accuracy ( proportion correct ) on incongruent trials was used in the present analyses . This task was not yet available for the ﬁrst eight subjects , who were all in the Immersion group . Delay of gratification ( Mischel , Shoda & Rodriguez , 1989 ) This task assesses children’s ability to delay a food reward in order to receive a larger amount . The experimenter placed a hotel - style bell on the table and explained that it can be used to summon him to return to the room whenever the child rings it ( with demonstration ) . Next , he presented a variety of treats ( e . g . Goldﬁsh crackers , fruit - ﬂavored cereal ) and invited children to try them and say which kind they liked best . He then presented two piles of the preferred treat in shallow bowls – one having two treats and the other having 10 – and asked children which amount they would prefer ( all indicated the larger one ) . Children were told that the experimenter needed to leave the room , and that if they waited in their seats without eating the treats , then they could have the large pile of treats when he returned . However , if they did not want to wait , they could ring the bell at any time and the experimenter would return , but then they could only have the small pile of treats . After checking children’s verbal understanding of the rules , the experimenter placed the bell directly in front of the child , between the two bowls , and exited the room for 8 min or until the child rang the bell or began eating the treats . Children were praised for waiting regardless of performance . Most children ( 75 . 6 % ) waited the entire time without ringing the bell . Therefore , in analyses we used the latency to the ﬁrst touch to the bell , bowl , or treat as an index of attention deployment toward the tempting stimulus during the delay period , similar to Mischel and colleagues ( e . g . Sethi , Mischel , Aber , Shoda & Rodriguez , 2000 ) . Statue ( Korkman , Kirk & Kemp , 1998 ) This task measures the ability to suppress motor action during a delay . The experimenter suggested that the child stand up like a statue holding a ﬂag . Children were asked to keep their eyes closed and to be completely still , not to open their eyes , and not to say anything until the experimenter said , ‘Time’s up ! ’ They were permitted to keep their free hand on the table for support . The experimenter said , ‘begin’ and proceeded to create a distraction four times during the 75 - sec delay ( dropping a pencil , coughing , knocking on the table , and saying ‘ho hum’ , in that order at speciﬁed intervals ) . Body movements , eye opening , and vocalizations were recorded as errors . Each 5 - sec interval was scored as 0 ( 2 – 3 errors ) , 1 ( 1 error ) , or 2 ( no errors ) . Total interval scores were used in analyses ( possible range = 0 – 26 ) . Gift delay with cover We developed this delay - of - gratiﬁcation task in which children needed to wait and try not to peek inside a gift box while the experimenter was out of the room . The experimenter placed a gift box on the table and announced that he had a present for the child inside . Then he noticed that there was a window on one side of the box with a felt cover placed over it . However , the cover was not fully blocking the window : ‘I think the cover must be broken ! It’s falling off . I really want this gift to be a good surprise , so I’m going to go get another 290 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . cover for the window . I’m going to get a cover that hides the whole window , so no one can peek inside . ’ The experimenter arranged the window at a 90 - degree angle from the child’s seat . Next he said , ‘Let’s play a game again . Try not to touch this box until I come back , and try not to peek inside , OK ? So , see how long you can stay in your seat without touching the box or looking inside it , OK ? ’ He exited the room for 3 min before returning with a cover and inviting the child to open the present . Scores were assigned according to the level of restraint shown in not attending to the box : 1 = removes cover and looks inside box ; 2 = looks in window but does not remove cover ; 3 = touches box or cover without looking inside ; 4 = looks at ( but not inside ) the box and does not touch box or cover ; 5 = never touches or looks at or inside the box . Composite scores In addition to individual task scores , we computed a composite score for each participant reﬂecting the mean of the nine executive function tasks . Individual task dependent variables were converted to z scores because they were on different scales , and then averaged to create Composite Executive Function scores . This technique allowed us to assess overall performance without diminishing power due to the small amount of missing data . Results All statistical analyses reported were two - tailed , included automatic correction for uneven group sizes , and alpha set to . 05 . A Bonferroni adjustment was performed for multiple comparisons . Preliminary analyses Demographic characteristics Demographics and parent questionnaires are summarized in Table 1 . A one - way ANOVA indicated that the groups differed in age , F ( 2 , 49 ) = 4 . 74 , p < . 05 . This was expected because most children in the Control group were tested in the summer following kindergarten ; they were sig - niﬁcantly older than children in the Immersion group ( Tukey’s HSD , p = . 01 ) and so age was included as a covariate in the main analyses . The Bilingual group did not differ from the other two groups in age . Groups did not differ signiﬁcantly in the representation of males and females . As anticipated , the Bilingual group was signiﬁcantly socially disadvantaged compared to the other two groups on a number of indicators . These included maternal education , F ( 2 , 46 ) = 11 . 21 , p < . 0001 , family income , F ( 2 , 45 ) = 8 . 74 , p = . 001 , and the amount of time parents read to their children , F ( 2 , 46 ) = 12 . 45 , p < . 0001 . In each case , the Bilingual group differed signiﬁcantly from the other two groups ( Tukey’s HSD , p s < . 01 ) . The Immersion and Control groups did not differ signiﬁcantly from each other on these measures . Importance of self - control We assessed the value parents accord to children’s self - control using the Rules Questionnaire and the importance ratings of self - control from the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire . These Rules and Importance measures were signiﬁcantly correlated with one another , r ( 45 ) = . 56 , p < . 0001 . Group differences were nonsigniﬁcant for Rules Total ( p = . 19 ) ; however , there was a signiﬁcant difference on the Importance - of - Self - Control scores , F ( 2 , 44 ) = 4 . 34 , p < . 05 . Tukey’s HSD tests indicated that parents of Bilingual children rated self - control as more important than did parents of children in the Immersion group ( p < . 05 ) ; the comparisons between Bilingual and Control and Immersion and Control groups were nonsigniﬁcant . These results suggested that family and cultural values pertaining to self - control might be an important factor to weigh in comparisons of children’s executive function , and so we included Importance - of - Self - Control ratings as a covariate in secondary analyses . Verbal ability As expected from past literature , the groups differed signiﬁcantly on verbal ability ( the EOWPVT - SBE ) , F ( 2 , 49 ) = 26 . 96 , p < . 0001 ( see Table 1 ) . Bilingual children performed more poorly than the other groups ( Tukey’s HSD , p s < . 0001 ) , whereas the Immersion and Control groups did not differ from each other . Hence , verbal ability was included as a covariate in the main analyses . Effects of age , sex , verbal ability , and SES The correlations among age , sex , verbal ability , and socioeconomic status ( SES ) measures are presented in Table 2 . As expected , several of the executive function measures were signiﬁcantly related to these measures . EF Composite scores were signiﬁcantly correlated with age , r ( 50 ) = . 36 , p = . 01 . Correlations between the EF Composite and verbal ability were signiﬁcant in the sample as a whole , r ( 50 ) = . 63 , p < . 0001 , as well as within each group analyzed separately , r s = . 66 – . 81 , p s < . 01 . EF Composite scores also were signiﬁcantly related to maternal and paternal education levels , r s ( 47 , 46 ) = . 36 and . 34 , respectively , p s < . 05 . ( Maternal and paternal education levels were in turn related to family income , r s ( 47 , 46 ) = . 65 and . 43 , p s < . 0001 and . 01 , respectively . ) Sex was not related to task performance . Given this pattern of results , we covaried age ( in months ) , verbal scores ( EOWPVT - SBE ) , and maternal and paternal education levels ( as a proxy for SES ) in later analyses of EF . Bilingual experience 291 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Raw scores Before reporting the analyses in which these demographic variables were adjusted , we provide preliminary analyses with raw scores in Table 3 , in order to be comprehensive in characterizing the raw data set . We ﬁrst carried out a MANOVA on all EF tasks with language group as the between - subjects factor . This analysis was nonsigniﬁcant ( p = . 33 ) , and no group comparisons on individual tasks were signiﬁcant . Also , when we examined the Immersion group separately , there were no signiﬁcant correlations between the number of months of second - language exposure and performance on any of the EF tasks . There were also no differences between the Spanish - and Japanese - immersion subgroups on any measures , suggesting that it was appropriate to treat this as a single group in subsequent analyses . Executive function results controlling for age , verbal ability , and SES In the main analyses , given the inﬂuence of age , verbal ability , and SES on task performance , together with the signiﬁcant group differences on these measures , it was important to control for these factors in our assessment of second - language experience on executive function . In particular , determining whether bilingual children respond differently on executive function measures might be masked by group differences in language proﬁciency and SES . Therefore , we conducted ANCOVA analyses of group effects on the executive function measures with age , verbal ability , and parent education levels as covariates ( see also Bialystok , 1999 ) . These analyses addressed how , given a certain level of language functioning and SES , children in each group performed on the EF tasks . The results are shown in Table 4 . First , we examined overall performance on EF ( the composite EF score composed of nine items ) . As shown in Table 4 , the effect of group on Composite EF scores was signiﬁcant with a moderate effect size , partial η 2 = . 28 . Pairwise comparisons ( Bonferroni correction ) revealed that Bilinguals performed signiﬁcantly better than both Immersion students and Controls ( p s < . 01 and . 05 , respectively ) . This result was robust even when parent ratings of the importance of children’s self - control were covaried in addition to age , vocabulary , and parents’ education , F ( 2 , 41 ) = 7 . 04 , p < . 01 , partial η 2 = . 29 . Table 2 Correlations among measures Variable Age Sex EOWPVT M . Educ . F . Educ . C - TONI KRISP VCR DCCS + Simon S ANT DoG Gift D Statue Age – Sex − . 27† – EOWPVT . 06 . 14 – M . Educ . − . 04 . 18 . 63 * * * – F . Educ . . 00 . 02 . 53 * * * . 56 * * * – C - TONI . 22 − . 02 . 50 * * . 26† . 29† – KRISP . 30 * . 03 . 26† . 09 . 24 . 45 * * – VCR . 37 * * − . 08 . 08 . 15 − . 12 . 24† . 04 – DCCS + . 26† . 11 . 35 * . 35 * . 26† . 22 . 10 . 31 * – Simon S . 07 . 20 . 30 * . 18 . 16 . 21 . 10 . 19 . 00 – ANT . 20 − . 10 . 38 * * . 20 . 20 . 33 * . 07 − . 03 . 18 . 39 * – DoG . 08 . 02 . 29 * . 16 . 12 . 10 − . 01 . 06 − . 14 . 11 . 23 – Gift D − . 21 − . 08 . 26† . 23 . 42 * * . 20 . 21 − . 09 . 12 − . 18 − . 06 − . 02 – Statue . 21 . 01 . 18 − . 10 − . 14 . 01 . 22 . 15 . 01 . 12 . 10 . 18 . 02 – Note : n = 50 . EOW - PVT = Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test . C - TONI = Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence . KRISP + = Kansas Reﬂection - Impulsivity Scale ( advanced version ) . VCR = Visually Cued Recall . DCCS + = Dimensional Change Card Sort ( advanced version ) . ANT = Attention Network Task . DoG = Delay of Gratiﬁcation . * * * p < . 001 ; * * p < . 01 ; * p < . 05 ; † p < . 10 . Table 3 Descriptive statistics on each executive function task by language group ( raw scores ) Task Language group Bilingual ( n = 12 ) Immersion ( n = 21 ) Control ( n = 17 ) Visually Cued Recall ( ﬁnal score ) Mean ( SD ) 23 . 33 ( 10 . 13 ) 17 . 9 ( 7 . 16 ) 24 . 00 ( 9 . 82 ) Range 5 – 38 7 – 32 6 – 40 C - TONI ( total standard score ) Mean ( SD ) 20 . 36 ( 4 . 88 ) 21 . 52 ( 3 . 31 ) 22 . 06 ( 4 . 74 ) Range 14 – 32 13 – 28 10 – 28 KRISP ( accuracy ) Mean ( SD ) 39 . 25 ( 2 . 83 ) 39 . 1 ( 2 . 98 ) 39 . 41 ( 3 . 57 ) Range 35 – 43 33 – 45 30 – 44 Dimensional Change Card Sort Advanced ( post - switch incongruent trials correct ) Mean ( SD ) 2 . 27 ( . 91 ) 2 . 69 ( 1 . 01 ) 2 . 41 ( 1 . 06 ) Range 1 – 4 1 – 4 0 – 4 Simon Says ( anti - imitation trial total correct ) Mean ( SD ) 7 . 25 ( 5 . 06 ) 7 . 95 ( 4 . 71 ) 10 . 35 ( 2 . 89 ) Range 0 – 13 0 – 15 4 – 15 Attention Network Task ( incongruent ﬂanker trial accuracy ) Mean ( SD ) . 71 ( . 22 ) . 77 ( . 19 ) . 84 ( . 15 ) Range . 36 – 1 . 0 . 5 – 1 . 0 . 45 – 1 . 0 Statue ( total interval score ) Mean ( SD ) 12 . 64 ( 2 . 87 ) 13 . 06 ( 2 . 41 ) 13 . 35 ( 2 . 03 ) Range 7 – 16 9 – 17 8 – 15 Delay of Gratiﬁcation ( RT to ﬁrst touch in seconds ) Mean ( SD ) 354 ( 181 . 63 ) 383 ( 162 . 14 ) 437 ( 104 . 22 ) Range 0 – 480 8 – 480 107 – 480 Gift Delay ( touch score ) Mean ( SD ) 3 . 27 ( 1 . 35 ) 3 . 65 ( 1 . 22 ) 3 . 53 ( . 87 ) Range 1 – 5 2 – 5 2 – 5 Note : Bilingual n = 12 ; Immersion n = 21 ; Control n = 17 . 292 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . At the individual task level , ﬁndings were in the expected direction ( Table 4 ) , although less reliable than with the Composite EF scores . There was a signiﬁcant effect of language group on Visually Cued Recall , the Advanced DCCS , and the C - TONI . These tasks all require inhibition of attention to misleading items or aspects of the stimuli . Pairwise comparisons ( Bonferroni correction ) indicated that Bilinguals scored signiﬁcantly higher than the Immersion group on Visually Cued Recall ( p < . 05 ) , signiﬁcantly higher than the Control group on the Advanced DCCS ( p < . 05 ) , and marginally better than both of the other groups on C - TONI ( p s < . 10 ) . All other pairwise comparisons were nonsigniﬁcant , indi - cating no differences between the Immersion and Control groups . Specificity of the bilingual effect Finally , to begin to assess the speciﬁc aspects of executive functioning that may be inﬂuenced by bilingual experi - ence , we submitted the nine EF dependent measures to a principal components analysis with Varimax rotation that converged in three iterations . The analysis resulted in two distinct factors that explained 65 % of the variance and were interpreted as representing Conﬂict and Delay aspects of EF . The factor loadings are presented in Table 5 . We subsequently computed a Conﬂict score for each participant by averaging the six tasks ( standardized with z conversion ) loading highly on the ﬁrst factor ; similarly , Delay scores were composed of the three tasks loading highly on the second factor . As illustrated in Figure 1 , these analyses indicated that the group difference was isolated to the Conﬂict subscale , F ( 2 , 45 ) = 8 . 15 , p < . 01 , partial η 2 = . 30 . Bilinguals scored signiﬁcantly higher than both the Immersion and Control groups ( p s < . 01 ) . The Immersion and Control groups did not differ signif - icantly from each other . In contrast , performance on the Delay subscale was unrelated to language group , F ( 2 , 45 ) = . 24 , partial η 2 = . 01 . Discussion The aims of the present investigation were to examine the effect of bilingual experience on young children’s executive functioning in a previously unstudied language group ( Spanish - English ) , assess the generality of a bilingual advantage to a wide range of executive function measures , and determine the speciﬁcity of this effect ( taking into account different aspects of executive function and different levels of second - language exposure ) . Table 4 Performance on executive function measures by group , controlling for age , verbal ability , and parent education Task / Variable Language group F Effect size η 2 Bilingual Immersion Control Composite test scores ( z ) EF Composite . 46 ( . 13 ) − . 19 ( . 08 ) − . 02 ( . 08 ) 7 . 23 * * . 28 Individual tasks Visually Cued Recall 30 . 91 ( 3 . 40 ) 17 . 25 ( 2 . 11 ) 21 . 67 ( 2 . 05 ) 4 . 69 * . 20 Advanced DCCS 3 . 26 ( . 35 ) 2 . 52 ( . 22 ) 2 . 12 ( . 21 ) 3 . 49 * . 16 C - TONI 25 . 38 ( 1 . 57 ) 20 . 34 ( . 98 ) 20 . 62 ( . 95 ) 3 . 34 * . 15 Simon Says 9 . 29 ( 1 . 83 ) 6 . 94 ( 1 . 14 ) 10 . 31 ( 1 . 11 ) 2 . 25 . 11 ANT . 83 ( . 07 ) . 72 ( . 04 ) . 82 ( . 04 ) 1 . 75 . 08 KRISP 40 . 80 ( 1 . 20 ) 39 . 12 ( . 75 ) 38 . 29 ( . 72 ) 1 . 49 . 07 Delay of Gratiﬁcation 439 . 02 ( 65 . 4 ) 348 . 33 ( 40 . 6 ) 416 . 38 ( 39 . 5 ) 0 . 91 . 05 Statue 12 . 95 ( . 97 ) 13 . 37 ( . 60 ) 12 . 87 ( . 59 ) 0 . 19 . 01 Gift Delay 3 . 62 ( . 44 ) 3 . 42 ( . 27 ) 3 . 48 ( . 27 ) 0 . 06 . 00 Note : Bilingual n = 12 ; Immersion n = 21 ; Control n = 17 . Means are estimated after controlling for age in months , verbal ability ( Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test scores ) , and parent education levels using ANCOVA . * * p < . 01 ; * p < . 05 ; † p < . 10 . Figure 1 Performance on conflict and delay measures of executive function according to language group . Scores shown are estimated means after adjusting for group differences in age , verbal ability , and parent education levels . Bars represent standard errors . Bilingual experience 293 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . The results showed that the language groups differed on several demographic variables that are likely to affect cognitive and social development . In our sample , the Bilinguals were economically disadvantaged and had lower expressive vocabulary compared to the other two groups . An examination of raw scores on the executive function tasks revealed no group differences . However , consistent with other reports of executive function in young children , performance was inﬂuenced by age , verbal ability , and SES . When we controlled for these factors , there was a signiﬁcant relative advantage of native bilingualism on a composite of all tasks and , in particular , the subset of tasks involving conﬂicting attention ( Conﬂict EF tasks ) . There was little evidence for a selective advantage of the early immersion kindergarten program on our measures of executive function . With age , verbal ability , and SES controlled , the Immersion group performed similarly to the Control group on the individual and combined measures . Doing more with less Although these results are intriguing and highly consist - ent with previous research with bilingual children from other language backgrounds , it is a limitation that our language groups were not matched on all variables such as verbal ability , income and parent education levels . In fact , it is extremely challenging to do so for reasons noted in the Introduction . In our sample , the Bilingual group was relatively disadvantaged over the others , but , nonetheless , our results showed that raw scores for executive function were not signiﬁcantly different . As Bialystok ( 2001 ) noted , ‘one must not lose sight of the possibility that the impact of bilingualism may not be advantageous but rather detrimental to cognitive performance , so dem - onstrations of equivalent performance for monolinguals and bilinguals are themselves salutary’ ( p . 203 ) . Given social disadvantages such as lower parent education levels and the lack of home - based reading , which was particularly striking in our study , Spanish - English bilingual children are at risk for an achievement gap on a number of indices . What our results suggest is that they may be ‘doing more with less’ in at least one important sphere of cognitive development – executive functioning . In other words , given the well - established relation between verbal ability and executive function , the positive relation between verbal ability and SES ( e . g . Hoff , 2006 ) , and recent evidence of a relation between SES and executive function ( e . g . Ardila , Roselli , Matute & Guajardo , 2005 ; Hughes & Ensor , 2005 ; Mezzacappa , 2004 ; Noble , Norman & Farah , 2005 ) , our sample of bilingual children would be expected to perform signiﬁcantly worse on executive function measures than monolinguals , but in fact their raw scores were equivalent . Moreover , when we statistically adjusted for these factors following Bialystok ( 1999 ) , the bilingual children signiﬁcantly outperformed the other groups . These ﬁndings suggest that when bilingual children are not equally matched with their monolingual peers on verbal ability and SES ( as is the reality for many Spanish - English bilingual children in US schools today ) , they may be able to compensate or achieve the same ends by an alternative route , namely , in our view , honing of the cognitive operations involved in language switching . Neville and her colleagues have shown that there is a great deal of plasticity in developing brain systems dependent on the type of linguistic input infants receive – such as spoken English versus American Sign Language , and one language versus two ( Neville , 1993 ; see also Kuhl , 2004 ) . Neville’s research shows that left frontal activation is signiﬁcant in inﬂuencing the way language is processed and develops . Interestingly , Bialystok , Craik et al . ( 2005 ) showed that the center of activation for responding to the Simon task was in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for monolinguals but in Broca’s area for bilinguals . This evidence is consistent with Bialystok’s ( 1999 ) suggestion that frontal cortex is not only involved in shaping language , but also that , in turn , language experiences can inﬂuence further development of frontal lobe functions such as inhibition and the control of attention ( se also Deák , 2003 ) . Following the evidence summarized here and Bialystok’s theory regarding the dual direction of inﬂuence between language and execu - tive functioning , our proposal is that early exposure to more than one language may foster the inhibition and working memory skills necessary for cognitive ﬂexibility in a variety of problem - solving situations . The behavioral and brain evidence thus far supports the notion that language switching might be a subset of more generalized executive and behavior - selection processes rather than an isolated linguistic process ( cf . Chee , 2006 ) . Children must actively inhibit one way of representing the world ( e . g . thinking ‘cup’ ) in order to activate an alternative representation and response ( e . g . say ‘vaso’ ) . Intensive practice forming dual symbols , holding in mind and ﬂexibly suppressing activation of one in favor of the other , might result in more highly honed executive control skills in children with early bilingual exposure than children without this exposure . Further , they might even compensate for relative disadvantages in verbal Table 5 Factor loadings ( principal components analysis ) for conflict and delay measures of executive function Task Factor 1 Factor 2 ‘Conﬂict’ ‘Delay’ C - TONI . 75 . 27 ANT . 72 . 14 Simon Says . 65 . 25 KRISP . 60 . 06 DCCS . 55 − . 12 Visually Cued Recall . 48 . 14 Delay of Gratiﬁcation − . 06 . 60 Statue − . 03 . 40 Gift Delay − . 38 . 39 Note : n = 50 . 294 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . ability and SES . It remains to be determined whether native bilingualism is crucially distinct from high - level ( but non - native ) proﬁciency in producing this effect . Further studies of the manner in which initial dual - language input contributes to brain development are needed ( e . g . Kuhl , 2007 ; Vaid , 2002 ) . Specificity of bilingual effects Our ﬁndings replicate and extend previous research . Consistent with Bialystok ( 1999 ) , we found that bilingual children performed signiﬁcantly better on the DCCS ( the advanced version in our study ) than monolingual children after accounting for vocabulary differences . We demonstrated this effect in a different language group ( Spanish - English ) , and one that is greatly pertinent to the bilingual population in the US . Also , we found that the relative advantage extended to a large battery of executive function measures . Our study also showed some speciﬁcity of the effect , however : The language groups did not differ in the ability to suppress a motor response , delay gratiﬁcation , or in performance on tasks that can be construed as having relatively low working memory demands . The advantage appeared to be isolated to executive function measures that pur - portedly require memory and inhibition of attention to a prepotent / distracting response . This ﬁnding has both methodological and theoretical signiﬁcance . First , it allayed concerns that the method of covarying voca - bulary and SES might have artiﬁcially inﬂated the performance of bilingual children on any measure we included in the study . Verbal scores and SES were correlated with the Delay measures as well as the Conﬂict measures to a similar degree , and there was sufﬁcient variability in the Delay subscale to detect signiﬁcant effects . Yet language group did not contribute signiﬁ - cantly to this variance even with verbal ability and SES controlled . We would argue , therefore , that the speciﬁcity is a genuine result rather than a spurious byproduct of task selection . It should be acknowledged , however , that task intercorrelations in our research were small especially among the Delay measures ; this interpretation would be strengthened by replicating the results with a more coherent battery . The theoretical implication is that the pattern of ﬁndings suggests a speciﬁc role for conﬂict inhibition in the link between bilingualism and executive function . The effect did not generalize to all measures involving inhibition . Our interpretation is thus consistent with Bialystok and Martin’s ( 2004 ) observation that the bilingual advantage is apparent when the correct response to a problem is embedded in a misleading context and when the concep - tual demands are at a moderate level . They highlighted the distinction between inhibition of attention to a men - tal representation ( where there is a bilingual advantage ) and inhibition of an action / motor response ( where there is not ) . This distinction maps roughly onto our ﬁndings for Conﬂict and Delay categories of executive function , respectively . Further , however , we believe that taking into account the working memory requirements of the various executive function measures is useful in explaining where advantages of bilingualism are likely to be found ( i . e . Conﬂict tasks ) . Indeed , recent evidence suggests that bilingual children excel at working memory tasks even when the inhibition demands are relatively low ( Feng , Diamond & Bialystok , 2005 ) . Native versus later exposure Our study also extended previous research by including children with different degrees of exposure to a second language . The effect was speciﬁc to native bilinguals in our study – suggesting that early and intensive exposure to , and mastery of , more than one language may be necessary for a beneﬁt in aspects of executive function to manifest itself . This ﬁnding is consistent with previous research showing that outcomes on cognitive perform - ance are dependent on the extent to which an individual is bilingual . Ricciardelli ( 1992 ) reported that on several measures of creativity and geometric design , English - Italian bilingual 6 - year - olds performed signiﬁcantly better than both monolinguals and English speakers with limited knowledge of Italian . Similarly , Bialystok and Majumder ( 1998 ) found that advantages on meta - linguistic tasks depended on the degree of bilingualism in a linear fashion , with children who were fully bilingual performing best after controlling for age and language proﬁciency . Thus , the pattern of ﬁndings suggests that bilingualism must be of a sufﬁciently high level to con - fer detectable advantages in cognitive tasks . Six months of second - language immersion for half the school day – as in our Immersion group – might not be enough exposure to produce this level . However , experience - dependent improvement on executive function measures has been found for other skills ( e . g . experience with video games enhancing visual search ; Castel , Pratt & Drummond , 2005 ) and in task - speciﬁc efforts to ‘train’ executive control skills in young children ( e . g . Dowsett & Livesey , 2000 ; Kloo & Perner , 2003 ; Posner & Roth - bart , 2005 ; Rueda , Rothbart , McCandliss , Saccomanno & Posner , 2005 ) . Therefore , further research is war - ranted with longer tracking of language and executive function development in a larger sample of children with and without second - language immersion education to determine more deﬁnitively whether ( and what kind of ) immersion experiences can eventually produce the same relative beneﬁts we observed for native bilinguals . It is also important to note , however , that our ﬁndings suggested no marked disadvantage of second - language immersion for children’s cognitive functioning , as had been hypothesized by Macnamara ( 1967 ) . Consistent with earlier research on immersion programs in schools examining a variety of cognitive outcomes , the Immersion group was equivalent to the traditional kindergarten Control group on executive functioning . Bilingual experience 295 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Cultural socialization of executive function skills Lastly , unlike previous studies on this topic , we assessed parental attitudes about self - control in addition to children’s executive function performance . The parents of Bilinguals ( most of Hispanic origin ) indicated that children’s self - control is more important to them than did the other parents in our study . This suggests that the child - rearing culture might contribute to the development of self - control . Indeed , as noted earlier , cultural differences have been found between monolinguals of Chinese versus North American origin ( Sabbagh et al . , 2006 ) . This is a potentially interesting cultural difference in itself , but it is important to note we found that the bilingual advantage in executive function held up even after controlling for these cultural - attitudinal scores . This result strongly suggests that there are genuine cognitive differences in the ability to resolve conﬂicting attentional demands in bilingual versus monolingual speakers , which do not simply boil down to socio - cultural parental attitudes , but may be due speciﬁcally to the cogni - tive ‘exercise’ of thinking in two languages : holding in mind the relevant language and inhibiting activation of the nonrelevant language . It is possible that unmeasured cultural factors inﬂuenced our results . In particular , we note that many bilingual children are also bicultural - facile , not only in switching between languages but also in switching between cultural contexts , such as strikingly different home and school environments , rules , customs , values , and expectations . Much more evidence is needed on socio - cultural factors related to executive function development before we will have a full accounting of the sources of the observed differences in executive functioning ( Carlson , 2003 ) . By further careful studies of development in bilingual chil - dren , we stand to deepen our understanding of the role of language , culture , and symbol systems in social and cognitive development more broadly . Acknowledgements We sincerely thank Luke Williams and several undergraduate assistants for help with data collection and coding , as well as Maritza Rivera - Gaxiola and Beatriz Cambrón for help with translation and recruitment . We thank the participating families and the following schools for their help : John Stan - ford International School , Viewlands , Broadview - Thompsen , Alki , Adams , Arbor Heights , John Rogers , Sacajawea , and Coe Elementary . We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial sup - port from NSF ( SBE - 0354453 ) , Talaris Research Institute and the Apex Foundation , the family foundation of Bruce and Jolene McCaw , and NICHD ( RO1 HD051495 ) . References Albert , M . L . , & Obler , L . K . ( 1978 ) . The bilingual brain : Neu - ropsychological and neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism . New York : Academic Press . Ardila , A . , Roselli , M . , Matute , E . , & Guajardo , S . ( 2005 ) . The inﬂuence of parents’ educational level on the development of executive functions . Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 539 – 560 . August , D . , & Hakuta , K . ( Eds . ) ( 1997 ) . Improving schooling for language - minority children : A research agenda . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Baddeley , A . ( 1986 ) . Working memory . New York : Oxford University Press . Ben - Zeev , S . ( 1977 ) . The inﬂuence of bilingualism on cognitive strategy and cognitive development . Child Development , 48 , 1009 – 1018 . Bernhardt , E . B . ( 1991 ) . Reading development in a second lan - guage : Theoretical , empirical , and classroom perspectives . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Bialystok , E . ( 1986 ) . Factors in the growth of linguistic aware - ness . Child Development , 57 , 498 – 510 . Bialystok , E . ( 1988 ) . Levels of bilingualism and levels of linguistic awareness . Developmental Psychology , 24 , 560 – 567 . Bialystok , E . ( Ed . ) ( 1991 ) . Language processing in bilingual children . London : Cambridge University Press . Bialystok , E . ( 1997 ) . Effects of bilingualism and biliteracy on children’s emerging concepts of print . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 429 – 440 . Bialystok , E . ( 1999 ) . Cognitive complexity and attentional control in the bilingual mind . Child Development , 70 , 636 – 644 . Bialystok , E . ( 2001 ) . Bilingualism in development : Language , literacy , and cognition . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bialystok , E . , & Codd , J . ( 1997 ) . Cardinal limits : evidence from language awareness and bilingualism for developing concepts of number . Cognitive Development , 12 , 85 – 106 . Bialystok , E . , Craik , F . I . M . , Grady , C . , Chau , W . , Ishii , R . , Gunji , A . , & Pantev , C . ( 2005 ) . Effect of bilingualism on cognitive control in the Simon task : evidence from MEG . NeuroImage , 24 , 40 – 49 . Bialystok , E . , Craik , F . I . M . , & Ryan , J . ( 2006 ) . Executive control in a modiﬁed anti - saccade task : effects of aging and bilingualism . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 32 , 1341 – 1354 . Bialystok , E . , Luk , G . , & Kwan , E . ( 2005 ) . Bilingualism , biliteracy , and learning to read : interactions among languages and writing systems . Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading , 9 , 43 – 61 . Bialystok , E . , & Majumder , S . ( 1998 ) . The relationship between bilingualism and the development of cognitive processes in problem solving . Applied Psycholinguistics , 19 , 69 – 85 . Bialystok , E . , & Martin , M . M . ( 2004 ) . Attention and inhibition in bilingual children : evidence from the dimensional change card sort task . Developmental Science , 7 , 325 – 339 . Bialystok , E . , Martin , M . M . , & Viswanathan , M . ( 2005 ) . Bilingualism across the lifespan : the rise and fall of inhibitory control . International Journal of Bilingualism , 9 , 103 – 119 . Bialystok , E . , & Shapero , D . ( 2005 ) . Ambiguous beneﬁts : the effect of bilingualism on reversing ambiguous ﬁgures . Devel - opmental Science , 8 , 595 – 604 . Bialystok , E . , Shenﬁeld , T . , & Codd , J . ( 2000 ) . Languages , scripts , and the environment : factors in developing concepts of print . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 66 – 76 . Bloomﬁeld , L . ( 1933 ) . Language . New York : Holt . Bowey , J . A . ( 1988 ) . Metalinguistic functioning in children . Geelong , Victoria : Deakin University Press . 296 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Brownell , R . ( 2001 ) . Expressive One - Word Picture Vocabulary Test – Spanish - English Bilingual Edition . Novato , CA : Academic Therapy Publications . Bruck , M . , & Genesee , F . ( 1995 ) . Phonological awareness in young second - language learners . Journal of Child Language , 22 , 307 – 324 . Bunge , S . , & Zelazo , P . D . ( 2006 ) . A brain - based account of the development of rule use in childhood . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15 , 118 – 121 . Campbell , R . , & Sais , E . ( 1995 ) . Accelerated metalinguistic ( phonological ) awareness in bilingual children . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 13 , 61 – 68 . Carlson , S . M . ( 2003 ) . Executive function in context : develop - ment , measurement , theory , and experience . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 68 ( 3 , Serial No . 274 ) , 138 – 151 . Carlson , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Developmentally sensitive measures of executive function in preschool children . Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 595 – 616 . Carlson , S . M . , Mandell , D . J . , & Williams , L . ( 2004 ) . Executive function and theory of mind : stability and prediction from age 2 to 3 . Developmental Psychology , 40 , 1105 – 1122 . Carlson , S . M . , & Moses , L . J . ( 2001 ) . Individual differences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of mind . Child Development , 72 , 1032 – 1053 . Carlson , S . M . , Moses , L . J . , & Breton , C . ( 2002 ) . How speciﬁc is the relation between executive function and theory of mind ? Contributions of inhibitory control and working memory . Infant and Child Development , 11 , 73 – 92 . Casey , B . J . , Tottenham , N . , & Fossella , J . ( 2002 ) . Clinical , imaging , lesion , and genetic approaches toward a model of cognitive control . Developmental Psychobiology , 40 , 237 – 254 . Castel , A . D . , Pratt , J . , & Drummond , E . ( 2005 ) . The effects of action video game experience on the time course of inhibition of return and the efﬁciency of visual search . Acta Psychologica , 119 , 217 – 230 . Chee , M . W . L . ( 2006 ) . Dissociating language and word meaning in the bilingual brain . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 10 , 527 – 529 . Choi , H . , Won , Y . , & Lee , K . ( 2003 ) . Comparison of selective atten - tion between Chinese monolinguals and Korean - Chinese bilinguals . Bilingualism , 23 , 113 – 135 . Cummins , J . ( 1978 ) . Bilingualism and the development of metalinguistic awareness . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 9 , 131 – 149 . Deák , G . O . ( 2003 ) . The development of cognitive ﬂexibility and language abilities . Advances in Child Development and Behavior , 31 , 271 – 327 . De Groot , A . M . B . , & Kroll , J . F . ( Eds . ) ( 1997 ) . Tutorials in bilingualism . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Deuchar , M . , & Quay , S . ( 1998 ) . One vs . two systems in early bilingual syntax : two versions of the question . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 1 , 231 – 243 . Diamond , A . ( 2002 ) . Normal development of prefrontal cortex from birth to young adulthood : cognitive functions , anatomy , and biochemistry . In D . Stuss & R . Knight ( Eds . ) , Principles of frontal lobe function ( pp . 466 – 503 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Diamond , A . , Carlson , S . M . , & Beck , D . M . ( 2005 ) . Preschool children’s performance in task switching on the Dimensional Change Card Sort task : separating the dimensions aids the ability to switch . Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 689 – 729 . Diamond , A . , Kirkham , N . Z . , & Amso , D . ( 2002 ) . Conditions under which young children can hold two rules in mind and inhibit a prepotent response . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 352 – 362 . Dowsett , S . M . , & Livesey , D . J . ( 2000 ) . The development of inhibitory control in preschool children : effects of ‘executive skills’ training . Developmental Psychobiology , 36 , 161 – 174 . Durgunoglu , A . Y . , & Verhoeven , L . ( Eds . ) ( 1998 ) . Literacy development in a multilingual context : Cross - cultural perspectives . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Edwards , D . , & Christopherson , H . ( 1988 ) . Bilingualism , literacy , and metalinguistic awareness in preschool children . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 6 , 235 – 244 . Engle , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Working memory capacity as executive attention . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 11 , 19 – 23 . Ervin , S . , & Osgood , C . ( 1954 ) . Second language learning and bilingualism . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology Supplement , 49 , 139 – 146 . Feldman , C . , & Shen , M . ( 1971 ) . Some language - related cog - nitive advantages of bilingual 5 - year - olds . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 118 , 235 – 244 . Feng , X . , Diamond , A . , & Bialystok , E . ( 2005 , October ) . Development of executive functions in monolingual and bilingual children : Separating working memory and inhibitory control . Poster presented at the biennial meeting of the Cognitive Development Society , San Diego , CA . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 , 483 – 527 . Galambos , S . J . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 1990 ) . The effects of learning two languages on levels of metalinguistic awareness . Cognition , 34 , 1 – 56 . Gathercole , V . C . M . ( 1997 ) . The linguistic mass / count dis - tinction as an indicator of referent categorization in monolingual and bilingual children . Child Development , 68 , 832 – 842 . Genesee , F . ( 1989 ) . Early bilingual development : one language or two ? Journal of Child Language , 16 , 161 – 179 . Goetz , P . J . ( 2003 ) . The effects of bilingualism on theory of mind development . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 6 , 1 – 15 . Gralinski , J . H . , & Kopp , C . B . ( 1993 ) . Everyday rules for behavior : mothers’ requests to young children . Developmental Psychology , 29 , 573 – 584 . Green , D . W . ( 1998 ) . Mental control of the bilingual lexico - semantic system . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 1 , 67 – 81 . Grosjean , F . ( 1989 ) . Neurolinguists , beware ! The bilingual is not two monolinguals in one person . Brain and Language , 36 , 3 – 15 . Grosjean , F . ( 1998 ) . Studying bilinguals : methodological and conceptual issues . Mental control of the bilingual lexico - semantic system . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 1 , 131 – 149 . Guttentag , R . E . , Haith , M . M . , Goodman , G . S . , & Hauch , J . ( 1984 ) . Semantic processing of unattended words in bilinguals : a test of the input switch mechanism . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 23 , 178 – 188 . Hakes , D . ( 1980 ) . The development of metalinguistic abilities in children . New York : Springer - Verlag . Hakuta , K . ( 1986 ) . Mirror of language : The debate on bilingualism . New York : Basic Books . Bilingual experience 297 © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Hammill , D . D . , Pearson , N . A . , & Wiederholt , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence ( C - TONI ) . Austin , TX : Pro - Ed . Hoff , E . ( 2006 ) . How social contexts support and shape language development . Developmental Review , 26 , 55 – 88 . Hongwanishkul , D . , Happaney , K . R . , Lee , W . S . C . , & Zelazo , P . D . ( 2005 ) . Assessment of hot and cool executive function in young children : age - related changes and individual differences . Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 617 – 644 . Hughes , C . ( 1998 ) . Finding your marbles : does preschoolers’ strategic behavior predict later understanding of mind ? Developmental Psychology , 34 , 1326 – 1339 . Hughes , C . , Dunn , J . , & White , A . ( 1998 ) . Trick or treat ? Uneven understanding of mind and emotion and executive function among ‘hard to manage’ preschoolers . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 39 , 981 – 994 . Hughes , C . , & Ensor , R . ( 2005 ) . Executive function and theory of mind in 2 - year - olds : a family affair ? Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 645 – 668 . Ianco - Worrall , A . ( 1972 ) . Bilingualism and cognitive develop - ment . Child Development , 43 , 1390 – 1400 . Kessler , C . , & Quinn , M . E . ( 1980 ) . Positive effects of bilingualism on science problem - solving abilities . In J . E . Alatis ( Ed . ) , Current issues in bilingual education : Proceedings of the George - town round table on languages and linguistics ( pp . 295 – 308 ) . Washington , DC : Georgetown University Press . Kim , K . H . S . , Relkin , N . , Lee , K . , & Hirsch , J . ( 1997 ) . Distinct cortical areas associated with native and second languages . Nature , 388 , 171 – 174 . Kirkham , N . Z . , Cruess , L . , & Diamond , A . ( 2003 ) . Helping chil - dren apply their knowledge to their behavior on a dimension - switching task . Developmental Science , 6 , 449 – 467 . Kloo , D . , & Perner , J . ( 2003 ) . Training transfer between card sorting and false belief understanding : helping children apply conﬂicting descriptions . Child Development , 74 , 1823 – 1839 . Kloo , D . , & Perner , J . ( 2005 ) . Disentangling dimensions on the dimensional change card sorting task . Developmental Science , 8 , 44 – 56 . Kochanska , G . , Murray , K . T . , & Harlan , E . T . ( 2000 ) . Effortful control in early childhood : continuity and change , anteced - ents , and implications for social development . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 220 – 232 . Kopp , C . B . ( 1982 ) . Antecedents of self - regulation : a develop - mental perspective . Developmental Psychology , 18 , 199 – 214 . Korkman , M . , Kirk , U . , & Kemp , S . ( 1998 ) . NEPSY : A develop - mental neuropsychological assessment manual . San Antonio , TX : The Psychological Corporation . Kuhl , P . K . ( 2004 ) . Early language acquisition : cracking the speech code . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 5 , 831 – 843 . Kuhl , P . K . ( 2007 ) . Is speech learning ‘gated’ by the social brain ? Developmental Science , 10 , 110 – 120 . Luria , A . R . ( 1966 ) . Higher cortical functions in man ( 2nd edn . ) . New York : Basic Books . ( Original work published in 1962 . ) Macnamara , J . ( 1967 ) . The bilingual’s linguistic performance : a psychological overview . Journal of Social Issues , 23 , 58 – 77 . Meisel , J . ( Ed . ) ( 1990 ) . Two ﬁrst languages : Early grammatical development in bilingual children . Dordrecht : Foris . Mezzacappa , E . ( 2004 ) . Alerting , orienting , and executive attention : developmental properties and sociodemographic correlates in an epidemiological sample of young , urban children . Child Development , 75 , 1373 – 1386 . Miller , E . K . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 , 167 – 202 . Mischel , W . , Shoda , Y . , & Rodriguez , M . L . ( 1989 ) . Delay of gratiﬁcation in children . Science , 244 , 933 – 938 . Miyake , A . , Friedman , N . P . , Emerson , M . J . , Witzki , A . H . , Howerter , A . , & Wagner , T . D . ( 2000 ) . The unity and diver - sity of executive functions and their contributions to complex ‘frontal lobe’ tasks : a latent variable analysis . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 49 – 100 . Munakata , Y . , & Yerys , B . E . ( 2001 ) . All together now : when dissociations between action and knowledge disappear . Psychological Science , 12 , 335 – 337 . Neville , H . J . ( 1993 ) . Neurobiology of cognitive and language processing : effects of early experience . In M . H . Johnson ( Ed . ) , Brain development and cognition : A reader ( pp . 424 – 448 ) . Oxford : Blackwell . Nicoladis , E . ( 1998 ) . First clues to the existence of two input languages : pragmatic and lexical differentiation in a bilingual child . Bilingualism : Language and Cognition , 1 , 105 – 116 . Nicoladis , E . , & Genesee , F . ( 1997 ) . Language development in preschool bilingual children . Journal of Speech - Language Pathology and Audiology , 21 , 258 – 270 . Noble , K . G . , Norman , M . F . , & Farah , M . J . ( 2005 ) . Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in kindergarten children . Developmental Science , 8 , 74 – 87 . Oller , D . K . , & Eilers , R . ( Eds . ) ( 2002 ) . Language and literacy in bilingual children . Clevedon , UK : Multilingual Matters . Peal , E . , & Lambert , W . ( 1962 ) . The relation of bilingualism to intelligence . Psychological Monographs , 76 ( Serial No . 546 ) , 1 – 23 . Perner , J . , & Lang , B . ( 1999 ) . Development of theory of mind and executive control . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 3 , 337 – 344 . Posner , M . I . , & Rothbart , M . K . ( 2000 ) . Developing mecha - nisms of self - regulation . Development and Psychopathology , 12 , 427 – 441 . Posner , M . I . , & Rothbart , M . K . ( 2005 ) . Inﬂuencing brain networks : implications for education . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 9 , 99 – 103 . Rennie , D . , Bull , R . , & Diamond , A . ( 2004 ) . Executive func - tioning in preschoolers : reducing the inhibitory demands of the dimensional change card sort task . Developmental Neuropsychology , 26 , 423 – 443 . Ricciardelli , L . A . ( 1992 ) . Bilingualism and cognitive develop - ment in relation to threshold theory . Journal of Psycholinguis - tic Research , 21 , 301 – 316 . Riggs , N . , Blair , C . , & Greenberg , M . ( 2003 ) . Concurrent and 2 - year longitudinal relations between executive function and the behavior of 1st and 2nd grade children . Child Neuropsychology , 9 , 267 – 276 . Roberts , R . J . Jr . , & Pennington , B . F . ( 1996 ) . An interactive framework for examining prefrontal cognitive processes . Developmental Neuropsychology , 12 , 105 – 126 . Rothbart , M . K . , Ahadi , S . A . , Hershey , K . L . , & Fisher , P . ( 2001 ) . Investigations of temperament at three to seven years : the Children’s Behavior Questionnaire . Child Development , 72 , 1394 – 1408 . Rueda , M . R . , Fan , J . , McCandliss , B . D . , Halparin , J . D . , Gruber , D . B . , Pappert - Lercari , L . , & Posner , M . I . ( 2004 ) . Development of attentional networks in childhood . Neuro - psychologia , 42 , 1029 – 1040 . Rueda , M . R . , Rothbart , M . K . , McCandliss , B . D . , Saccomanno , L . , & Posner , M . I . ( 2005 ) . Training , maturation , and genetic 298 Stephanie M . Carlson and Andrew N . Meltzoff © 2008 The Authors . Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . inﬂuences on the development of executive attention . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , 102 , 14931 – 14936 . Sabbagh , M . A . , Xu , F . , Carlson , S . M . , Moses , L . J . , & Lee , K . ( 2006 ) . The development of executive functioning and theory of mind : a comparison of Chinese and US preschoolers . Psychological Science , 17 , 74 – 81 . Saxe , G . B . ( 1988 ) . Linking language with mathematics achieve - ment : problems and prospects . In R . R . Cocking & J . P . Mestre ( Eds . ) , Linguistic and cultural inﬂuences on learning mathematics ( pp . 47 – 62 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Sethi , A . , Mischel , W . , Aber , J . L . , Shoda , Y . , & Rodriguez , M . L . ( 2000 ) . The role of strategic attention deployment in development of self - regulation : predicting preschoolers’ delay of gratiﬁcation from mother – toddler interactions . Developmental Psychology , 36 , 767 – 777 . Smetana , J . G . , Kochanska , G . , & Chuang , S . ( 2000 ) . Mothers’ conceptions of everyday rules for young toddlers : a longitu - dinal investigation . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 46 , 391 – 416 . Strommen , E . A . ( 1973 ) . Verbal self - regulation in a children’s game : impulsive errors on ‘Simon Says’ . Child Development , 44 , 849 – 853 . Stuss , D . T . , & Benson , D . F . ( 1986 ) . The frontal lobes . New York : Raven Press . Towse , J . N . , Redbond , J . , Houston - Price , C . M . T . , & Cook , S . ( 2000 ) . Understanding the dimensional change card sort : perspectives from task success and failure . Cognitive Devel - opment , 15 , 347 – 365 . Umbel , V . M . , Pearson , B . Z . , Fernandez , M . C . , & Oller , D . K . ( 1992 ) . Measuring bilingual children’s receptive vocabularies . Child Development , 63 , 1012 – 1020 . Vaid , J . ( 2002 ) . Bilingualism . In V . S . Ramachandran ( Ed . ) . Encyclopedia of the human brain , Vol . 1 ( pp . 417 – 434 ) . San Diego , CA : Elsevier . Wright , J . C . ( 1972 ) . KRISP ( Kansas Reﬂection - Impulsivity Scale for Preschoolers ) . Lawrence , KA : University of Kansas . Zelazo , P . D . , Carter , A . , Reznick , J . S . , & Frye , D . ( 1997 ) . Early development of executive function : a problem - solving frame - work . Review of General Psychology , 1 , 1 – 29 . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . , & Rapus , T . ( 1996 ) . An age - related dis - sociation between knowing rules and using them . Cognitive Development , 11 , 37 – 63 . Zelazo , P . D . , Jacques , S . , Burack , J . , & Frye , D . ( 2002 ) . The relation between theory of mind and rule use : evidence from persons with autism - spectrum disorders . Infant and Child Development , 11 , 171 – 195 . Zelazo , P . D . , & Müller , U . ( 2002 ) . Executive function in typical and atypical development . In U . Goswami ( Ed . ) , Handbook of childhood cognitive development ( pp . 445 – 469 ) . Oxford : Blackwell . Zelazo , P . D . , Müller , U . , Frye , D . , & Marcovitch , S . ( 2003 ) . The development of executive function in early childhood . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop - ment , 68 ( 3 , Serial No . 274 ) . Received : 20 July 2006 Accepted : 15 April 2007