1 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports Subjective semantic surprise resulting from divided attention biases evaluations of an idea’s creativity Goran calic 1 * , nour el Shamy 1 , isaac Kinley 2 , Scott Watter 2 & Khaled Hassanein 1 the evaluation of an idea’s creativity constitutes an important step in successfully responding to an unexpected problem with a new solution . Yet , distractions compete for cognitive resources with the evaluation process and may change how individuals evaluate ideas . in this paper , we investigate whether attentional demands from these distractions bias creativity evaluations . this question is examined using 1 , 065 creativity evaluations of 15 alternative uses of everyday objects by 71 study participants . participants in the distraction group ( treatment ) rated the alternative uses as more creative on the novelty dimension , but not the usefulness dimension , than did participants in the baseline group ( control ) . psychophysiological measurements—event - related and spectral eeG and pupillometry—confirm attentional resources in the Treatment group are being diverted to a distractor task and that the Control group expended significantly more cognitive resources on the evaluation of the alternative uses . these data show direct physiological evidence that distractor tasks draw cognitive resources from creative evaluation and that such distractions will bias judgements of creativity . When the air force commissioned J . P . Guilford , a psychologist at the University of Southern California , to conduct one of the first studies of creativity 1 , it was to help select pilots who in an emergency situation – the unexpected failure of an instrument or gear – would respond with an appropriately creative solution and save themselves and the airplane . Creative ideas continue to be especially valuable in unexpected situations that have already pushed information processing to its limiting point 2 . Today , researchers describe the challenges of an interconnected and technology mediated workplace on cognitive performance . On average , a business person sends and receives 109 e - mails per day and that rate is growing at 7 % per year 3 . Instant messages sent and received are similarly increasing , at 11 % per year 3 . Even short distractions can be detrimental to cognitive performance . A distraction lasting 2 . 8 seconds , about the length of a smartphone push notification , can double the risk of decision error 4 . As such , it may be as important to study factors that bias creativity as it is to study creativity 5 . An understanding of factors that bias creativity can lead to remediation of such factors , therefore contributing to improvements in peoples’ ability to solve problems 6 . Evaluation of ideas constitutes an important stage of the creativity process 7 – 9 . Yet , evaluating the cre - ative potential of ideas is not a trivial stage of the creative process as it requires attention , which is taxed by task - unrelated stimuli 10 – 12 . Distractions , defined as task - unrelated cognitive load , that compete for cognitive resources by drawing attention away from evaluations may result in different evaluations than the individual would make when free from distracting stimuli , thus resulting in suboptimal selection of problem solutions . We hypothesize that distractions that draw attention away from the evaluation of ideas will result in changes in creativity evaluations . These evaluations differ from evaluations about an idea’s creativity that individuals make in a state free of distractions . Thus , this study sets out to test whether distractions bias creativity evaluations . More specifically , we present the hypothesis that attentional demands from distracting stimuli will result in upward biased creativity evaluations , such that ideas are evaluated as more creative than they would be by individuals free from distraction . 1 DeGroote School of Business McMaster University 1280 Main Street West , Hamilton , Ontario , L8S 4L8 , Canada . 2 Department of Psychology , Neuroscience & Behaviour McMaster University , 1280 Main Street West , Hamilton , Ontario , L8S 4L8 , Canada . * email : calicg @ mcmaster . ca open 2 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / We rely on behavioral methods , that is creativity evaluations of alternative uses ( AUs ) , to test the broad hypothesis that distractions bias creativity evaluations . We leverage psychophysiological methods such as pupil - lometry and event - related ( ERP ) and spectral electroencephalography ( EEG ) to verify that distracted individuals are expending less cognitive resources on the evaluation task . The three methods are complimentary . Established pupillometry , EEG oscillations , and ERP components ( e . g . , alpha band desynchronization , P300 ) provide reliable and robust real - time measures of attention and cognitive load 13 , 14 that is not susceptible to retrospective and sub - jectivity biases 15 . Multi - method experiments provide support for the existence of a bias . Biases in creativity Selecting among alternative ideas is a fundamental challenge for individuals in a number of different organi - zational settings 16 , 17 . To this end , people devote a great deal of time and effort to evaluating ideas . Sevens and Burley 18 find that , on average , managers evaluate more than 3 , 000 raw ideas to identify one that is commercially successful . The challenge of idea evaluation has only grown with the increase of ideation maximization training , platform - based contests , big data , and crowdfunding as a means of generating a large number of ideas 19 – 21 . The challenge faced by decision - makers is often to select the most creative idea from a myriad of competing alterna - tives and to reduce biases that may have a detrimental effect on this process 22 . In social sciences , mathematics , and engineering , biases refer to systematic errors impacting performance 23 . Prior research has identified a number of decision - making errors in relatively simple decision - making tasks 24 , 25 . Research has also examined biases present in creativity 6 , 26 . Broadly , this research has examined biases against or about creative ideas . For instance , Mueller , Melwani , and Goncalo 27 explain that people often reject creative ideas , despite espousing creativity as a desired goal , in an effort to reduce uncertainty . As another example , Glăveanu 28 finds partial support for an “art bias” , which is the implicit association between art and creativity . Glăveanu finds that artistic professions are scored highest in terms of creativity as a key requirement . Researchers have also discovered biases during stages of the creative process . In examining idea evaluation , Blair and Mumford 29 find that people disregard original , risky , and time - consuming ideas , even when instructed to select ideas for new programs . In another study , Licuanan , Dailey , and Mumford 30 find that when active analysis of an idea’s origi - nality was encouraged , people selected more original ideas . These studies highlight that priming individuals can influence both how they think about creativity and how they perform during a creativity task . Using this research as a starting point , we build on work about factors affecting idea evaluation by exploring whether surprise , which is the presentation of an idea that was unexpected by the individual , impacts creativity evaluations 31 , 32 . Surprise bias . Creative ideas are synthesized by reconfiguring knowledge in new ways ( i . e . , the novelty param - eter ) to achieve a particular objective ( i . e . , the usefulness parameter ) 7 , 33 – 35 . Recently , Simonton 31 also used surprise to conceptualize creativity . In Simonton’s 31 recent and Campbell’s original 36 conceptualization of blind variation selective retention ( BVSR ) theory , creativity and its sub - component of “surprise” are subjective rather than objective parameters . In fact , Campbell’s original definition of BVSR focused on “thought trails” occurring within a person’s head 37 . It follows from these conceptualizations that if creativity is subjectively experienced then differences in expe - rience at the presentation of an idea can result in differences in the evaluation of the creativity of the same idea . Simonton’s 31 three criterion definition ( novel , useful , and surprising ) allows the parameters to vary inde - pendently to acknowledge their separate impact on creativity . This is a useful feature , particularly because it allows creativity researchers to define ideas with more precision and comprehensiveness 32 . That the parameters of novelty , usefulness , and surprise are allowed to vary independently does not preclude their interdependence—a change in one parameter resulting in the change of another . This is intuitive when one considers the subjective nature of creativity just discussed . Instead of conceptualizing creativity as jointly determined by novelty , useful - ness , and surprise , we can conceptualize the creativity function ( creativity equals the product of novelty , useful - ness , and surprise ) as endogenous , with experiences of creativity also determining the levels of novelty , usefulness , and surprise experienced by an individual . Assuming endogeneity , by manipulating any of creativity’s subcompo - nents , one can also manipulate the other two components . Mathematically , this is the equivalent of restructuring Simonton’s creativity equation to solve for novelty , usefulness , or surprise , rather than for creativity 31 . The specific example used by Simonton 31 to demonstrate the subjective and endogenous characteristics of creativity is the invention of the Pelton water wheel , conceived by simultaneously two independent inventors 38 . Although the inventions were objectively identical , equally novel and useful , one inventor adapted the idea from a previous invention and the other inventor unknowingly came up with the same idea after a lucky event , rendering the idea for the invention highly surprising to him . Only the latter sought patent protection and got credit for the invention , possibly because , by the current definition , the latter experienced a subjectively higher degree of creativity resulting from a higher feeling of surprise , and thus also novelty and usefulness , and as such chose to act on his hunch that he was onto something . Thus , our research interest is situations that influence the evaluation of creativity by eliciting surprise at the presentation of an idea . Note that we do not intend “surprise” here to imply a relationship or equivalence with low - level attentional alerting or orienting responses , such as when a sudden loud noise involuntarily attracts attentional focus . Rather , we use “surprise” here to describe how the lack of deliberate controlled evaluation ( or in more colloquial terms , a lack of sufficient “thinking about” ) an event or object can make related information relatively unexpected . Due to their ubiquity and increasing prevalence , we focus on distractions to bias creativity evaluations in this way . Distractors will focus information processing on the ( distracting ) task at hand , limit information processing for creativity evaluation , and result in higher surprise to presented ideas . We posit that this subjective degree of semantic or conceptual surprise at these related ideas will be accompanied by a higher subjective experience of creativity 31 . Thus , we formulate the surprise bias hypothesis : Task - unrelated cognitive load—distractions—will result in higher creativity evaluations . 3 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Methods Sample and procedure . Analyses for this paper were based on a sample of 1 , 065 idea evaluations from 71 participants ( 26 female , 45 male ) . The participants were recruited from McMaster University’s staff and student pools , and varied in both age ( M = 28 , range 21 – 59 ) and educational backgrounds ( High School , = 5 , College = 4 , Bachelors = 43 , Master’s = 17 , PhD = 2 ) . Approval for the study was obtained from the McMaster Research Ethics Board ( MREB ) and the study was carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations . Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to the study . Each participant evaluated the creativity of the same 15 ideas , which were alternative uses , drawn from previously published creativity research , for each of three everyday objects ( tin can , brick , and ping pong ball ) 39 , 40 . Alternative uses were evaluated on a scale of 1 – 5 ( 1 = strongly disagree , 5 = strongly agree ) on the dimensions of novelty and usefulness , which were summed for the creativity variable . Participants were paid for their time and the experiment lasted 20 minutes on average . Participants were randomly assigned to either a baseline ( n = 39 , 15 female ) or a distraction ( n = 32 , 11 female ) group . In the distraction group ( i . e . , Treatment ) , participants simultaneously performed an auditory oddball task and evaluated the 15 AUs of everyday objects . In the present auditory oddball task , auditory stimuli , alternating between a rare high - pitched tone ( n = 17 ) and a frequent low - pitched tone ( n = 133 ) , were played every second ( tone duration = 100 ms , rise and fall duration = 30 ms , total duration = 160 ms ) for both groups during the AU tasks . The sounds used were dual - tone multi - frequency ( DTMF ) signaling tones that are standard in telecommunications , and the tones denoting the numbers 1 and 9 were used for the low - and high - pitched tones , respectively . Participants in the Control group were asked to ignore the target tones , while those in the Treatment group were asked to silently count the number of times the target ( high - pitched ) tone was played and to disregard the non - target tones . At the beginning of the experiment , participants in the Treatment group were given the oppor - tunity to practice and identify both the target and noise tones as many times as they wanted by pressing one of two keyboard keys assigned to play each tone . Once the participants in the Treatment group were done practicing and indicated that they were ready to start the experiment by pressing a third key , a message instructed them to get ready for the actual experimental tasks by clearing their memory and starting a fresh count of the target tones ( i . e . , Clear your memory . Start a new Target count from 0 for the upcoming task . Press a key to begin the task ) 41 . Participants then engaged with a set of five AU evaluation trials for the first of three objects . For each trial , one AU for the object was displayed for 10 seconds , while the tones were simultaneously played at 1 second intervals starting at the onset of the AU . All participants were then asked to rate the novelty and usefulness of the AU of that object . After completing five AU evaluation tasks ( i . e . , trials ) for one everyday object , participants in the Treatment group indicated the number of times the high - pitched tone ( i . e . , target ) was played . Participants in the Treatment group were then again asked to clear their memory ( i . e . , reset counting target tones in their mind and restart from 0 ) and to get ready for a new set of AU’s ( i . e . , trials ) for a new everyday object . Figure 1 provides a summary of the trials . After completing the experiment , all participants were asked to indicate how distracted they were by the auditory stimuli on a scale of 1 – 5 ( 1 = not distracting at all , 5 = very distracting ) . Given the importance of cognitive work to our study , we utilize a non - intrusive behavioral manipulation check of attention . Manipulation checks are particularly important when participants are not responding to an involving situation , but rather sitting at a computer pressing keys in response to written stimuli 42 . Previous stud - ies find that over 30 % of participants in non - involving situations failed an Instructional Manipulation Check ( IMC ) 43 , also called an attention check , a screener , or a trap question . They also found that only those participants that passed the IMC were affected by the treatment . Because explicit manipulation checks can amplify , undo , or interact with the effects of a treatment , recent research suggests non - intrusive behavioral checks of attention 44 . We follow this method in the current study . Participants that pressed the same keyboard key combination for one third or more of all novelty and usefulness ratings were excluded from the analysis . Ninety - two participants were recruited for the study and 21 ( 23 % ) failed the manipulation check . Figure 1 . Experimental Paradigm . For each of the 5 AUs for each of the 3 objects ( i . e . , total of 15 trials ) , the Object and AU were displayed for 10 seconds . Simultaneously , the auditory oddball stimuli were played every 1 , 000 milliseconds ( n = 10 ) starting at the onset of the AU , randomized between rare target ( i . e . , high - pitched ) and frequent non - target ( i . e . , low - pitched ) tones . 4 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / psychophysiological measures . We used ERP analysis , spectral EEG analysis , and eye tracking meth - ods to test the hypothesis that biased creativity evaluations are associated with divided attention from distract - ing stimulus Treatment . During the AU experiment , continuous EEG signals were recorded from 20 channels arranged according to the international 10 – 20 system using Cognionics Quick - 20 Dry EEG headsets at 500 Hz . Eye tracking data , including fixations and pupil diameter , were collected using the Tobii Pro X2 – 60 at 60 Hz . Participants were screened for eye health related problems such as glaucoma , cataracts , the need for bifocals or other assistive technologies . eeG preprocessing . Continuous data were first bandpass filtered between 1 and 30 Hz using a Hamming windowed sinc FIR filter as implemented in EEGLAB ( version 14 ) 45 . Noisy channels were removed on the basis of low correlation ( below 0 . 8 ) with adjacent channels . Artifact subspace reconstruction with a cutoff parameter of 5 was then used to clean the continuous data 45 . Missing channels were then interpolated using EEGLAB’s spherical dipole fit function 46 – 48 . Data from 8 participants was discarded due to technical issues during recording . event - related potential analysis . For ERP analysis , epochs were extracted from 200 ms prior to the onset of auditory stimuli to 700 ms after . Baseline correction was performed using pre - stimulus period . Epochs con - taining artifacts were marked using the moving window peak - to - peak threshold function as implemented in ERPLAB , with a threshold of 100 uV , a window width of 200 ms , and a step size of 100 ms 13 . ERPLAB’s function for detecting step - like artifacts resulting from saccades was also applied with a threshold of 100 uV , a window width of 200 ms , and a step size of 50 ms 49 . Epochs in which any channel triggered either artifact detection func - tion were excluded from further analysis . In total , there were 4916 valid epochs ( 4358 non - target audio , 558 target audio ) in the Control group and 4403 ( 3902 non - target audio , 501 target audio ) in the Treatment group . Spectral eeG analysis . For spectral analysis , 10 - second epochs were extracted for the duration of object display . The same artifact rejection procedure as in the ERP analysis was applied to these epochs . For each epoch , power spectral density was estimated at frequencies separated by steps of 0 . 1 Hz using rectangular - windowed periodograms . The spectral densities were log - transformed and averages between frequency limits of these log - transformed values were used for subsequent statistical analysis . pupillometry . Pupil dilation is widely established as an indicator of cognitive state during task performance under equiluminant conditions 50 – 52 . Specifically , pupils involuntarily dilate as a sympathetic response of the auto - nomic nervous system ( ANS ) proportional to the degree of mental workload or attentional / effortful engagement with the cognitive demands of a task 24 , 50 , 53 . Pupil diameter data for the left and right eyes were collected over the AU experiment , sampled continuously at 60 Hz . Missing pupil data , typically due to blinking , were linearly interpolated after removing two samples before and after the missing data segment , to avoid measurement artifacts from half - occluded pupils during blinking . Data were initially smoothed by a 7 - point moving average filter , then left and right pupil data were averaged to provide a single pupil dilation dataset . Two analysis datasets were defined : ( i ) 9000 ms trial segments from the AU stimulus presentation onset , baselined to the average pupil diameter in the preceding 2000 ms epoch ; and ( ii ) 2000 ms segments based on auditory stimulus onsets for sounds 2 to 9 , excluding the AU onset sound and the final sound , within AU trials , with a 300 ms pre - stimulus baseline . Baselining subtracted the mean baseline pupil diameter value from the trial epoch data , and then divided the epoch data by this baseline value ; this provides pupil dilation data as a proportion of change from baseline . In addition to baseline - adjusted data , we also assessed the same data as absolute pupil diameter measures ( no baseline adjustment ) to capture differences between condi - tions that could persist beyond single AU judgements , particularly the continuous cost of dual - task monitoring in the Treatment condition compared to single - task Control . Trials with more than 50 % missing / interpolated values in the original unprocessed data were excluded from analysis , suggestive of sub - optimal data recording beyond participant blinks . Slight differences in the number of included AU - onset trials with different analysis durations is the result of applying the above exclusion criteria on whole - trial data segments with varying lengths . Statistical analysis . For behavioral , EEG , and pupil dilation data , we used linear mixed effects models with restricted maximum likelihood ( REML ) estimation to better control for random effects of participants and / or items , as available data and study design allowed . We used the “mixed” function from the “afex” package 54 , in R software 55 , which is a recent adaptation of the commonly - used “lme4” package 56 . We describe the particular fixed and random factor structures of these models for particular datasets , below . It is important to note that estimated denominator degrees of freedom for F or t statistics from these models are not readily interpretable as is typically expected from typical ANOVA models ; instead we report the number of individual observations for dependent measures , along with numbers of participants , items , and factor levels for each analysis . We report estimated t sta - tistics and associated p - values calculated using Satterthwaite’s method , recently shown to be a reliable estimator of Type 1 error rates across both small and large sample sizes 57 . All tests for these and other analyses were two - tailed . Results Behavioral measures . Participants in the Treatment group rated the auditory stimuli as more distracting than the participants in the Control group , t = 2 . 77 , p = 0 . 007 , verifying our distraction manipulation . Creativity ratings were developed for each AU by summing the novelty and usefulness ratings together 58 . The final sample results in 1 , 065 idea evaluations , 480 for the Treatment ( n = 32 ) and 585 for the Control ( n = 39 ) group . We assed these data using a mixed linear model with a fixed effect of group ( Treatment versus Control ) . Considering rating differences between groups of participants with our distraction manipulation was our primary behavioral measure , we controlled for the random effect of item ( n = 15 ; intercepts only , not slope ) , considering the wide 5 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / variability of ratings across different individual AU items . Participants in the Treatment group rated the creativity of AUs as higher than the participants in the Control group , supporting the existence of upward biased creativity ratings t = 2 . 41 , p = 0 . 016 . We also explored the difference in AU evaluations for the two dimensions of creativity . Both ratings for usefulness and novelty were higher in the Treatment group , but only the novelty ratings were statistically significant for the Treatment group , t = 2 . 37 , p = 0 . 018 , while those for usefulness were not t = 0 . 86 , p = 0 . 389 . The significant difference in creativity evaluations between the distraction and base - line group provides initial support for the existence of a surprise bias . However , the differences presented in Table 1 do not address the ques - tion of whether these effects are because of divided attention , accompanied by surprise . To make progress in this direction , we measured differences in attentional demand between the two groups . event - related eeG . The Treatment group showed a late , positive centroparietal response to the target audio with polarity , latency , and topography consistent with the P3b component . The Control group showed no such response to the target audio . These results are presented in Fig . 2 , which shows each group’s scalp topographies in response to the target audio , and Fig . 3A , which shows each group’s ERP waveform in response to the target audio . For statistical comparisons , average voltages from 400 to 600 ms post - auditory stimulus onset at central and parietal electrodes ( Cz , C3 , C4 , Pz , P3 , P4 , P7 , and P8 ) were computed . The Treatment group’s response to Distraction manipulation check Ratings of Alternative Uses Novelty Usefulness Creativity Treatment ( T ) 3 . 03 3 . 10 3 . 19 6 . 30 n = 32 ( 0 . 98 ) ( 1 . 47 ) ( 1 . 53 ) ( 1 . 66 ) Baseline ( B ) 2 . 36 2 . 92 3 . 13 6 . 05 n = 39 ( 1 . 03 ) ( 1 . 48 ) ( 1 . 51 ) ( 1 . 72 ) T ≠ B t = 2 . 77 t = 2 . 37 t = 0 . 86 t = 2 . 41 p = 0 . 007 p = 0 . 018 p = 0 . 389 p = 0 . 016 Table 1 . Means and Standard Deviations for Creativity Assessments . Figure 2 . Scalp topography of response to target audio . Data points are the average voltage at the given electrode over the given 100 - ms post - stimulus period . The group performing the counting task showed a late , positive , P300 response , indicating that they were attending to the audio stimuli . Figure 3 . ERP waveforms in response to Target ( Panel A ) and Filler ( non - target , Panel B ) audio tones . Waveforms are grand averages over central and parietal electrodes ( Cz , C3 , C4 , Pz , P3 , P4 , P7 , and P8 ) . Shaded error bars represent one SEM . 6 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / the target audio was greater than the Control group’s response to either the target or the non - target audio , or the Treatment group’s own response to the non - target audio , which is presented in Fig . 3 , Panel B . We assessed these data using a linear mixed effects model with fixed effects of group ( Treatment versus Control ) and audio type ( Target versus Filler ) , controlling for the random effect of participant ( intercepts and slopes for both group and audio type effects ) . Analyses included 9319 total observations ( mean P3b amplitude on a single trial ) from 66 participants ( five participants had no usable EEG trials for P3b analysis ) . The enhanced attentional P3b effect for Target audio for the Treatment group was supported by the significant interaction between group and audio type , t = 2 . 61 , p = 0 . 009 , in addition to driving an overall main effect of larger P3b responses for the Treatment group , t = 3 . 25 , p = 0 . 002 . There was no main effect of audio type , t = 0 . 51 , p = 0 . 609 . According to the context updating theory , which suggests that the brain constantly and automatically gen - erates hypotheses about the environment and imminent experiences , the P300 component results from the attention - driven process of comparing the previous event in working memory to the current one 14 , 59 . If a change is detected , the stimulus context is updated and a P300 component occurs . Indeed , the P300 has been used as an indicator of whether stimuli have broken through an “attentional barrier” 60 . Thus , the presence of a P300 response to target audio stimuli in the Treatment group is evidence that the context - updating process induced by the audio counting task was drawing attentional resources away from the creativity evaluations . Spectral eeG . There are numerous reports that parietal alpha power decreases and frontal midline theta power increases with increasing task load 10 , 61 – 63 . Alpha desynchronization ( i . e . , decrease in alpha power ) is thought to reflect the process of information retrieval , whereas theta oscillations are thought to result from the activation of hippocampo - cortical feedback loops and reflect the encoding of new information as well as general task demands 63 , 64 . Figure 4 presents average periodogram values at given frequencies and electrodes , as calculated over the 1 second epoch after the target audio stimuli began . Both groups showed a frontal concentration of theta power ( 4 – 7 Hz ) and a parietal concentration of alpha power ( 8 – 12 Hz ) . We assessed these data using a linear mixed effects model with a fixed effect of condition ( Treatment versus Control ) , controlling for the random effect of par - ticipant . In total , 756 trials from 62 participants were included in the analyses . Participants were excluded from this analysis if their Fz or Pz channels had been interpolated in preprocessing . Compared to the Control group , the Treatment group had significantly lower parietal midline alpha ( 10 Hz ) power , t = 2 . 60 , p = 0 . 012 , although there was no difference in frontal midline theta power ( 4 – 7 Hz ) between the groups ( t = 0 . 18 , p = 0 . 857 ) . Taken together , the ERP and spectral analysis results serve as a manipulation check and demonstrate that the auditory counting task was drawing attentional resources in the Treatment group . pupillometry . Figure 5 shows mean pupil dilation data over time for Treatment and Control groups . Panel A shows absolute pupil size ( diameter , mm ) separately for the first AU trial ( AU # 1 , immediately following the item definition ) in each five - AU set for a given item , and then for the mean of the subsequent four AUs for that item ( AU # 2 to 5 , where each immediately follows the rating responses for the previous AU definition ) . Panel B shows this latter mean AU # 2 to 5 pupil dilation data as the relative change in diameter from baseline , to better visual - ize the relative event - related changes on top of background pupil dilation effects for Treatment versus Control conditions . We assessed absolute pupil size data with a mixed linear models approach , with three fixed factors : group ( Treatment versus Control ) , to capture an overall measure of dual - task load and distraction ; Trial Type ( AU # 1 versus AU # 2 to 5 ) , to observe any differences in initial item evaluation from later more isolated measures of AU evaluation ; and Time Window ( mean data within seven contiguous 1000 ms windows starting at 1500 – 2500 ms , up to 7500 – 8500 ms ) , to assess the timecourse of AU - related pupil dilation effects . The model included partici - pants as a random factor . A full model including random slopes for the effects of both group and trial type factors would not resolve ; we computed models with one or the other terms independently , which showed extremely similar results , and we report the most conservative results here . These analyses included 5964 total observa - tions , across the combination two conditions by seven time windows , and available trials of pupil data from 64 participants . Figure 4 . Topography of spectral densities at various frequencies . Data points are the average periodogram values at the given frequencies and electrodes , as calculated over the 10 - second epochs during which objects were presented . Both groups show a frontal theta concentration and a parietal alpha concentration . 7 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / From Fig . 5A , the Treatment group showed an overall greater pupil dilation effect , t = 2 . 46 , p = 0 . 017 , con - sistent with a generalized greater cognitive load for the continuous dual - task monitoring requirements of the Treatment condition , compared to Controls who had no ongoing sound monitoring requirement . On top of this general group effect , both groups showed a strong additional pupil dilation effect for the first AU item com - pared to subsequent AU evaluations , t = 10 . 04 , p < 0 . 001 . This initial larger response likely represents additional evaluation and semantic representation of the item itself ( as well as the AU evaluation ) , once there is an initial specific cue to drive that need for evaluation . Subsequent AU evaluations ( AUs # 2 to 5 ) likely represent a more focused and “pure” measure of the AU evaluation process itself . We also note the visible set of pupil dilation peaks at one second intervals in the Treatment AU # 2 to 5 data ( mostly absent in the equivalent Control data ) , driven by sounds in the auditory task when participants are monitoring for rare tones . Finally , the assessment of Time Window ( estimated ANOVA - equivalent main effect considering all seven levels of this factor ) showed AU - related pupil effects over time , F = 15 . 41 , p < 0 . 001 , with an initial maximal peak around 1500 to 2500 ms , that gradually diminished over the course of the trial . The linear contrast for Time Window from the equivalent 3 - way Repeated Measures ANOVA showed a strong linear decreasing trend over time , F ( 1 , 61 ) = 24 . 71 , p < 0 . 001 . These main effects of group , Trial Type and Time Window did not show any significant evidence of interactions , all F s < 1 . 25 . To better assess AU - specific processing differences between Treatment and Control groups , we analyzed dif - ferences over particular time windows for mean AU # 2 to 5 data , to more carefully quantify the event - related pupil dilation differences representing the immediate focused cognitive work of AU evaluation . Figure 5B shows relative changes in pupil data for AU # 2 to 5 trials , baselined to the 2000 ms period before the AU onset . Following the AU onset , there is an initial positive dilation peak around 600 ms ( a response to the initial tone that accompa - nies the AU onset ) , then a relaxation / constriction around 1000 ms , followed by the onset of a sustained dilation response beginning around 1500 ms that corresponds to the cognitive work of AU evaluation . The delayed time - course of 1 to 1 . 5 seconds is typical of event - related pupil responses to complex evaluative tasks . Given the relative amplitude offset between the Treatment and Control groups could be influenced by differ - ences in pre - stimulus baseline , we assessed peak - to - peak minimum - to - maximum mean amplitude differences to compare groups . We assessed mean absolute pupil diameter data over a 1500 to 2400 ms time window capturing the maximal AU - related dilation effect , subtracting the mean of the preceding relaxation / constriction minimum over a 700 to 1300 ms window ( analysis epochs shown in Fig . 5B ) . A mixed linear model with a fixed effect of group , controlling for the random effect of participant ( independent intercepts only , no stable model identifi - able with group by participant interaction ) , used 672 observations from available pupil data from 64 partici - pants . The Control group had a significantly larger AU - related pupil dilation response versus Treatment , t = 2 . 45 , p = 0 . 018 . While we observe substantially greater sustained pupil dilation with more ongoing cognitive work and dual - task monitoring in the Treatment condition ( Fig . 5A ) , the additional cognitive work on top of this ongo - ing background effort is larger for Control than Treatment participants . These data suggest that participants in the Treatment condition expend considerably more cognitive effort throughout the task , and that their ability to devote mental resources to AU evaluation ( here as indexed by pupil dilation specifically time - locked to AU Figure 5 . Mean pupil dilation data for the AU analysis task . Panel A shows absolute pupil diameter over time , with larger pupil dilation for dual - task Treatment versus single - task Control , suggesting overall greater cognitive work with continuous auditory monitoring in addition to AU evaluation . Panel B shows relative change of pupil dilation over time , relative to pre - stimulus baseline mean , for AU # 2 to 5 data ( excluding the initial AU for an item ) . The event - related AU pupil response ( beginning ~ 1500 ms ) was relatively larger for Control versus Treatment . Control participants were able to invest greater cognitive work for deliberate focused event - related AU evaluation relative to background non - AU task demands . While Treatment pupil responses were larger overall with ongoing dual - task demands ( Panel A ) , event - related pupil dilation ( Panel B ) was smaller for AU - specific cognitive work for Treatment participants , suggesting a direct measure of reduced cognitive evaluation of AUs under distraction , predicting biased evaluations . Brackets indicate data analysis time windows . Shaded error bars indicate one SEM . 8 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / evaluation processes ) is observably diminished compared to Control participants with lower ongoing cognitive demands . We also note that the pattern of pupil dilation over time for Treatment participants is strongly locked to the timing of tone stimuli , suggesting that the specific AU evaluation response may be even less than we measure here . These data give direct physiological evidence that Treatment participants are devoting relatively less delib - erate cognitive work to evaluating AU items . In addition to pupil dilation effects relative to AU evaluation , we also assessed pupil dilation responses to auditory tone stimuli directly , as an additional converging measure of the relative attentional load and distraction involved with our Treatment condition . Figure 6 shows relative pupil dilation responses to Target ( rare , high pitched ) and Filler ( common , low pitched ) sounds in Panel A . The enormous difference in pupil response to Target sounds between Treatment and Control conditions is expected , given Treatment participants were explic - itly monitoring for and keeping count of these rare events . A more useful comparison is shown in Panel B , con - sidering only pupil responses to Filler sounds – this reveals a more subtle but very important difference between Treatment and Control task demands . For Filler sounds we observe a strong entrainment of pupil dilation effects in the Treatment condition versus Control , even though Treatment participants don’t need to do anything with these Filler stimuli . The attentional and task demands to simply monitor the regular auditory tones for rare targets is enough for a substantial attentional effect to be seen for Treatment participants for non - target stimuli under these conditions . As before , given the relative amplitude offset between the treatment and Control groups could be influenced by differences in pre - stimulus baseline , we again assessed peak - to - peak minimum - to - maximum amplitude differ - ences to compare groups . We assessed the audio tone Filler pupil effect as the difference between mean maximum and mean minimum absolute pupil diameter values in 650 – 750 ms and 1250 – 1350 ms time windows , respectively , best capturing the peak dilation and constriction periods in these data . A mixed linear model with a fixed effect of group , controlling for the random effect of participant ( independent intercepts only , no stable model identifi - able with independent slopes ) , used 4607 observations from available pupil data from 65 participants . Treatment participants had a significantly larger Filler tone - related pupil response , t = 2 . 63 , p = 0 . 011 . The size of this pupil dilation response is approximately a 1 % change in diameter , which is quite substantial considering the AU - related pupil response for Control participants is not much more than a 2 % change ( though sustained over a longer period of time ) . General Discussion This study confirms the surprise bias hypothesis . The surprise bias hypothesis states that distractions bias an indi - vidual to judge an idea as more creative than an individual would in a state free of distraction . Participants in the Treatment group rated the AUs as more creative on the novelty dimension , but not the usefulness dimension , than did participants in the Control group . Psychophysiological analysis confirmed the Treatment group was dividing attentional resources during the experiment and that the Control group expended more cognitive resources on evaluation of AUs . neural basis of creativity evaluation . We contribute to the literature on creativity with neural basis for creativity evaluation . Our findings suggest that cognitive load biases an individual’s rating of novelty but not their rating of usefulness . This suggests differences in cognitive work required to evaluate novelty and useful - ness of ideas . Evaluations of usefulness are contingent on the individual’s appraisal of whether an idea satisfies an applicable condition of subjective meaningfulness , such as utility or aesthetic appeal . As such , evaluations of usefulness are based on a tests of whether the idea solves a particular problem and the outcomes of such tests are often dichotomous ( the idea is useful , or it is not ) 31 . In contrast , evaluations of novelty require more cognitive work , possibly because novelty evaluations are judged against the probability the evaluator could generated the presented idea 31 . The less likely the evaluator is to generate the presented idea , the more likely they are to rate that idea as novel . Thus , the statistically significant biasing effect of distractions on novelty ratings , but not on useful - ness ratings , indicates that accuracy of novelty evaluation is more susceptive to distractions . Figure 6 . Pupil responses for sound stimuli onset , for sounds 2 to 9 during the AU trial ( one per second , beginning at 1000 ms ) . Panel A shows the expected large pupil dilation response for attended Target sounds for the Tretament condition . Panel B shows pupil dilation responses to auditory Filler ( non - target ) stimuli . The Treatment condition ( counting Target tones ) showed a larger response to non - target sounds versus Control ( ignoring tones ) , confirming a greater continuous overall attentional investment in the secondary task in the Treatment group . Brackets indicate data analysis timewindows . Shaded error bars indicate one SEM . 9 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / The implications is that usefulness evaluations are less cognitively demanding than are novelty ratings . For instance , the usefulness of the Pythagorean theorem to solve the relation among the three sides of a triangle can be judged based on the empirical test : Does the triangle have a right angle ? The theorem is useful for all right tri - angles and useless for all other triangles . As such , the evaluation of whether the Pythagorean theorem is useful is as simple as identifying a right triangle . Similarly , the usefulness to Duncker’s creativity candle problem 65 can be judged based on the empirical test : Is the candle affixed to the wall and does it drip wax on the table ? A solution either affixes the candle to the wall so that it does not drip wax on the table , or it does not . Thus , our findings indi - cate that drawing attentional resources from a creativity evaluation task is particularly likely to bias assessments of novelty . Distractions bias creativity evaluations in a specific direction : upward . We suggest upward biased evaluations are the result of subjective experiences of surprise at the presented idea . According to blind variation and selective retention thoery 31 , 32 , 66 , experiences of creativity , which are associated with “Eureka ! ” and “Aha ! ” moments , are highly related to subjective feelings of surprise . It follows from this that conditions which elicit surprise at pre - sented ideas should result in increased experiences of creativity . Within the context of the focal experiment , pupil dilation response is a marker of greater subjective semantic surprise or expectancy violation 67 , 68 . The substantially larger pupil dilation response in the Treatment group , compared with the response in the Control group , suggest higher experienced surprise at the presented AUs . Attentional elicitation and surprise are particularly closely related during creativity evaluation , where attentional demands of a distraction could draw cognitive resources away from evaluation , resulting in surprise at a presented idea , which leads to upward biased experiences of cre - ativity . Taken together , our findings show that evaluations of novelty are cognitively more demanding , and thus more likely to be upward biased , than are evaluations of usefulness and that surprise ( expectancy violation ) is one possible source of this bias . Distracting stimuli bias creativity evaluations . Event - related and spectral EEG demonstrate that the counting task was drawing attentional resources in the Treatment group , but not from the Control group . The Treatment group showed a P3b component response to the target audio , which suggests attention - drive processes of comparison between two events in working memory ( the repeating sound events ) . The Control group showed no such response . Additionally , linear mixed models of the ERP data show a significant interaction between condition and audio type . Compared to the Control group , the Treatment group had significantly lower parietal midline alpha power , suggesting increased task load . Taken all together , pupil dilation results paint a coherent and converging picture of the cognitive demands and costs of ongoing dual - task monitoring in the Treatment , and the relative ability of participants in Treatment versus Control to selectively and adequately devote focused cognitive work to the AU evaluation task . Treatment participants showed substantially greater pupil dilation throughout the task , and substantially larger event - related pupil dilation to non - target auditory tone stimuli , both indicating a substantial , continuous , and effortful focus on the secondary tone monitoring task . Against this continuous background , Control participants showed larger event - related pupil responses specifically to immediate AU evaluations . These data converge to suggest that Control participants had more cognitive resources available to devote to deliberate focused AU evaluation , while Treatment participants were continuously working harder at a secondary task , and devoted fewer cognitive resources to AU evaluation even though their overall mental workload was higher throughout the task . These data corroborate the EEG findings suggesting the Treatment group was allocating attention to the distractor task . These data are also highly consistent with behavioral data , to show that reduced ability to focus on and sustain deliberative evaluation of AU items in the Treatment group leads to biased evaluation outcomes of creativity . This study contributes to research exploring the impact of distractions on cognitive work . Distractions are detrimental to a wide variety of work that relies on focused attention . For instance , surgeons performing a lap - aroscopic cholecystectomy ( i . e . , gallbladder removal ) were 44 % more likely to make a surgical mistake when interrupted , and only 6 % made mistakes when not interrupted 69 . Interruptive questions triggered the most errors , followed by background conversations . We extend the impact of distractions to evaluations of an idea’s creativity . Distractions bias creativity evaluations because they limit the cognitive resources available for processing infor - mation . We demonstrate that distractions bias the evaluation stage of the creative process in a specific direction and not only interrupt the generation of new ideas . Our work also suggests that optimizing cognitive resources , at least by removing distractions , will result in less biased creativity evaluations . Limitations and future research . The contribution of the current study should be considered in light of its limitation . One of the challenges in exploring the evaluation of ideas is the separation of the generation from the evaluation phase of the ideation process . In general , research assumes that ideas are , in fact , generated during the evaluation stage . For instance , in the Geneplore model of creativity , Finke , Ward , and Smith 70 refer to evalua - tion as hypothesis testing , a stage during which the evaluator synthesizes and explores hypotheses ( e . g . , thought trails ) about how the generated idea would interact with the environment in order to solve a problem . While we assume distractions interfere with this process in order to bias creativity evaluations , we do not directly test or observe these thought trials . Future research could explore how distractions interfere with hypothesis testing and to design remediations that facilitate idea evaluations . While the use of low fidelity creative problem solving tasks , such as the remote associate tasks ( RAT ) 71 and AUs 40 , 72 – 74 , is conducive to laboratory studies of creativity deploying methods sensitive to physical activity ( e . g . , EEG and pupillometry ) and confounding factors ( e . g . domain knowledge ) , more realistic measures of creativity in real - world problem solving would increase the external validity of the surprise bias 75 . Future research should look to replicate the current findings using more realistic measures of creativity , particularly those activities that reflect important components of creative ability , such as domain specificity and expertise . Distractions are detri - mental to work performance and come in many guises that could affect creative performance . Proposals put forth 10 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / by shareholder distract executives 76 , 77 and background conversation distracts physicians performing surgery 69 . Future research could explore a variety of more realistic and context specific distractions as well as their effect on creative evaluations . Perceived creativity influences idea selection and thus has practical implications , such as which ideas are ultimately allocated resources and implemented . As in the Pelton water wheel example , only the inventor who perceived the idea to be creative sought patent protection and received credit for the invention , even though both inventors had discovered objectively the same idea ( i . e . , identical novelty and usefulness ) . The study of whether and how biased evaluations impact idea selection offers opportunities for future research . An increase in the per - ceived creativity of ideas can lead to more ideas being considered for implementation , and eventually to the better idea being selected from the idea set . Alternatively , increases in perceived creativity can result in conventual ideas crowding out the more creative ideas , resulting in less creative idea being selected for implementation . The implications of our findings are therefore unclear for practical purposes , particularly in light of recent research suggesting that intuitive , rather than deliberate , processing outperformers creative idea selection 78 , 79 . Given that dedication of attentional resources to task unrelated stimuli reduces an individual’s capacity for rational evaluation of an idea’s creativity 12 , distractions may simultaneously have biasing effects on idea evaluation and positive effects on idea selection . Consistent with these recent findings , researchers have suggested that relax - ing evaluation criteria may result in more creative outcomes 9 , 80 . The possibility that distractions may , should they reduce deliberative processing and improve intuitive processing , enhance creative idea selection is an interesting question for researchers interested in which ideas are eventually acted upon . While the general underlying mech - anisms between our and the just cited studies may be different , it is possible that , like in the Pelton water wheel example , higher levels of subjectively experienced creativity result in more idea selection . These are questions not explored in this study and opportunities for future research . Lastly , the practical implication of the creativity bias is likely to be context specific . Organizations in film , music , writing , visual art , and other trademark , copyright , and patent - based industries value creative ideas to generate occasional , but highly profitable , blockbuster products 81 , 82 . In such organizations , extremes are what matter most 83 . In other settings , such as in manufacturing , incremental , but frequent , improvements to average product quality are what matters . Studying the effect of the surprise bias in different contexts will not only high - light the practical implications of biased creativity evaluations but address broader questions regarding the value of creativity evaluations . conclusion The results of this study demonstrate that distractions bias the evaluation of novelty . Distractions divide the evaluator’s attention and thus increase the likelihood the individual will evaluate an idea as more novel than they otherwise would . Because surprise is closely linked with experiences of creativity and because distractions reduce the possibility that an individual will generate a semantically similar idea , thus experiencing surprise , we refer to this phenomenon as surprise bias . These findings are confirmed by behavioral and psychophysiological analysis . Data availability The datasets generated during and / or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . Received : 17 January 2019 ; Accepted : 19 January 2020 ; Published : xx xx xxxx References 1 . Guilford , J . P . Creativity . American Psychologist 5 , 444 – 454 ( 1950 ) . 2 . Mumford , M . D . , Giorgini , V . , Gibson , C . & Mecca , J . Creative thinking : processes , strategies and knowledge . Handbook of Research on Creativity ( 2013 ) . 3 . Radicati , S . Email Statistics Report , 2014 – 2018 . ( 2014 ) . 4 . Altmann , E . M . , Trafton , J . G . & Hambrick , D . Z . Momentary interruptions can derail the train of thought . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 143 , 215 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Mumford , M . D . , Martin , R . , Elliott , S . & McIntosh , T . Creative Failure : Why Can’t People Solve Creative Problems . The Journal of Creative Behavior 31 , 1 – 14 ( 2019 ) . 6 . Todd , E . M . , Higgs , C . A . & Mumford , M . D . Bias and Bias Remediation in Creative Problem - Solving : Managing Biases through Forecasting . Creativity Research Journal 31 , 1 – 14 ( 2019 ) . 7 . Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . & Christoff , K . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . Neuroimage 59 , 1783 – 1794 ( 2012 ) . 8 . Lonergan , D . C . , Scott , G . M . & Mumford , M . D . Evaluative Aspects of Creative Thought : Effects of Appraisal and Revision Standards . Creativity Research Journal 16 , 231 – 246 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Kleinmintz , O . M . , Ivancovsky , T . & Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . The twofold model of creativity : the neural underpinnings of the generation and evaluation of creative ideas . Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 27 , 131 – 138 ( 2019 ) . 10 . Antonenko , P . , Paas , F . , Grabner , R . & Gog , T . van . Using Electroencephalography to Measure Cognitive Load . Educ Psychol Rev 22 , 425 – 438 ( 2010 ) . 11 . Sweller , J . Cognitive load theory , learning difficulty , and instructional design . Learning and Instruction 4 , 295 – 312 ( 1994 ) . 12 . Sweller , J . , Ayres , P . & Kalyuga , S . Cognitive Load Theory . ( Springer , 2011 ) . 13 . Luck , S . J . An introduction to the event - related potential technique . ( MIT press , 2014 ) . 14 . Polich , J . Updating P300 : An integrative theory of P3a and P3b . Clinical Neurophysiology 118 , 2128 – 2148 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Dimoka , A . et al . On the use of neurophysiological tools in IS research : Developing a research agenda for NeuroIS . MIS quarterly 679 – 702 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Boudreau , K . J . , Guinan , E . C . , Lakhani , K . R . & Riedl , C . Looking Across and Looking Beyond the Knowledge Frontier : Intellectual Distance , Novelty , and Resource Allocation in Science . Management Science , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2015 . 2285 ( 2016 ) . 17 . Berg , J . M . Balancing on the Creative Highwire Forecasting the Success of Novel Ideas in Organizations . Administrative Science Quarterly 1 – 36 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0001839216642211 ( 2016 ) . 11 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 18 . Stevens , G . A . & Burley , J . 3 , 000 raw ideas = 1 commercial success ! Research Technology Management 40 , 16 ( 1997 ) . 19 . Calic , G . & Mosakowski , E . Kicking Off Social Entrepreneurship : How A Sustainability Orientation Influences Crowdfunding Success . Journal of Management Studies 53 , 738 – 767 ( 2016 ) . 20 . Dahlander , L . & Piezunka , H . Open to suggestions : How organizations elicit suggestions through proactive and reactive attention . Research Policy 43 , 812 – 827 ( 2014 ) . 21 . Anderson , N . , Potočnik , K . & Zhou , J . Innovation and Creativity in Organizations A State - of - the - Science Review , Prospective Commentary , and Guiding Framework . Journal of Management 40 , 1297 – 1333 ( 2014 ) . 22 . Ford , C . M . Business Strategy . in Encyclopedia of Creativiity vol . 1 235 – 243 ( Academic Press , 1999 ) . 23 . Kruglanski , A . W . & Ajzen , I . Bias and error in human judgment . European Journal of Social Psychology 13 , 1 – 44 ( 1983 ) . 24 . Kahneman , D . & Tversky , A . Prospect Theory : An Analysis of Decision under Risk . Econometrica 47 , 263 – 292 ( 1979 ) . 25 . Maier , N . R . F . Reasoning and learning . Psychological Review 38 , 332 – 346 ( 1931 ) . 26 . Mumford , M . D . , Blair , C . , Dailey , L . , Leritz , L . E . & Osburn , H . K . Errors in Creative Thought ? Cognitive Biases in a Complex Processing Activity . The Journal of Creative Behavior 40 , 75 – 109 ( 2006 ) . 27 . Mueller , J . S . , Melwani , S . & Goncalo , J . A . The Bias Against Creativity Why People Desire but Reject Creative Ideas . Psychological Science 13 – 17 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797611421018 ( 2012 ) . 28 . Glăveanu , V . P . Revisiting the “Art Bias” in Lay Conceptions of Creativity . Creativity Research Journal 26 , 11 – 20 ( 2014 ) . 29 . Blair , C . S . & Mumford , M . D . Errors in Idea Evaluation : Preference for the Unoriginal ? The Journal of Creative Behavior 41 , 197 – 222 ( 2007 ) . 30 . Licuanan , B . F . , Dailey , L . R . & Mumford , M . D . Idea evaluation : Error in evaluating highly original ideas . The Journal of Creative Behavior 41 , 1 – 27 ( 2007 ) . 31 . Simonton , D . K . Creative Thought as Blind Variation and Selective Retention : Why Creativity is Inversely Related to Sightedness . Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology 33 , 253 – 266 ( 2012 ) . 32 . Simonton , D . K . Defining Creativity : Don’t We Also Need to Define What Is Not Creative ? The Journal of Creative Behavior 1 – 15 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jocb . 137 ( 2016 ) . 33 . Sun , R . & Hélie , S . Accounting for Creativity Within a Psychologically Realistic Cognitive Architecture . in Computational Creativity Research : Towards Creative Machines 151 – 165 ( Atlantis Press , 2015 ) . 34 . Benedek , M . et al . To create or to recall original ideas : Brain processes associated with the imagination of novel object uses . Cortex 99 , 93 – 102 ( 2018 ) . 35 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . & Schacter , D . L . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends in cognitive sciences 20 , 87 – 95 ( 2016 ) . 36 . Campbell , D . T . Blind variation and selective retentions in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review 67 , 380 – 400 ( 1960 ) . 37 . Simonton , D . K . Foresight , insight , oversight , and hindsight in scientific discovery : How sighted were Galileo’s telescopic sightings ? Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts 6 , 243 – 254 ( 2012 ) . 38 . Constant , E . W . On the diversity and co - evolution of technological multiples : Steam turbines and Pelton water wheels . Social Studies of Science 8 , 183 – 210 ( 1978 ) . 39 . Dietrich , A . & Kanso , R . A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight . Psychological Bulletin 136 , 822 – 848 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Fink , A . , Benedek , M . , Grabner , R . H . , Staudt , B . & Neubauer , A . C . Creativity meets neuroscience : Experimental tasks for the neuroscientific study of creative thinking . Methods 42 , 68 – 76 ( 2007 ) . 41 . Castro , A . & Díaz , F . Effect of the relevance and position of the target stimuli on P300 and reaction time . International Journal of Psychophysiology 41 , 43 – 52 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Baumeister , R . F . , Vohs , K . D . & Funder , D . C . Psychology as the Science of Self - Reports and Finger Movements : Whatever Happened to Actual Behavior ? Perspect Psychol Sci 2 , 396 – 403 ( 2007 ) . 43 . Oppenheimer , D . M . , Meyvis , T . & Davidenko , N . Instructional manipulation checks : Detecting satisficing to increase statistical power . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45 , 867 – 872 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Hauser , D . J . , Ellsworth , P . C . & Gonzalez , R . Are Manipulation Checks Necessary ? Front . Psychol . 9 ( 2018 ) . 45 . Mullen , T . R . et al . Real - time Neuroimaging and Cognitive Monitoring Using Wearable Dry EEG . IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 62 , 2553 – 2567 ( 2015 ) . 46 . Delorme , A . & Makeig , S . EEGLAB : an open source toolbox for analysis of single - trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis . Journal of Neuroscience Methods 134 , 9 – 21 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Ferree , T . C . , Eriksen , K . J . & Tucker , D . M . Regional head tissue conductivity estimation for improved EEG analysis . IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 47 , 1584 – 1592 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Perrin , F . , Pernier , J . , Bertrand , O . & Echallier , J . F . Spherical splines for scalp potential and current density mapping . Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 72 , 184 – 187 ( 1989 ) . 49 . Lopez - Calderon , J . & Luck , S . J . ERPLAB : an open - source toolbox for the analysis of event - related potentials . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 ( 2014 ) . 50 . Knapen , T . et al . Cognitive and ocular factors jointly determine pupil responses under equiluminance . Plos One 11 , 1 – 13 ( 2016 ) . 51 . Hess , E . H . & Polt , J . M . Pupil Size in Relation to Mental Activity during Simple Problem - Solving . Science 143 , 1190 – 1192 ( 1964 ) . 52 . Kahneman , D . & Beatty , J . Pupil Diameter and Load on Memory . Science 154 , 1583 – 1585 ( 1966 ) . 53 . Riedl , R . & Léger , P . - M . Fundamentals of NeuroIS . ( Springer , 2016 ) . 54 . Singmann , H . , Bolker , B . , Westfall , J . & Aust , F . afex : Analysis of factorial experiments . R package version 0 , 13 – 145 ( 2019 ) . 55 . R . Core Team . R : A language and environment for statistical computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing . ( R - Project , 2019 ) . 56 . Bates , D . , Mächler , M . , Bolker , B . & Walker , S . Fitting Linear Mixed - Effects Models using lme4 . arXiv : 1406 . 5823 [ stat ] ( 2014 ) . 57 . Luke , S . G . Evaluating significance in linear mixed - effects models in R . Behav Res 49 , 1494 – 1502 ( 2017 ) . 58 . Amabile , T . M . , Conti , R . , Coon , H . , Lazenby , J . & Herron , M . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of management journal 39 , 1154 – 1184 ( 1996 ) . 59 . Donchin , E . Surprise ! … Surprise ? Psychophysiology 18 , 493 – 513 ( 1981 ) . 60 . Giraudet , L . , St - Louis , M . - E . , Scannella , S . & Causse , M . P300 event - related potential as an indicator of inattentional deafness ? Plos One 10 , e0118556 ( 2015 ) . 61 . Onton , J . , Delorme , A . & Makeig , S . Frontal midline EEG dynamics during working memory . NeuroImage 27 , 341 – 356 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Gevins , A . , Smith , M . E . , McEvoy , L . & Yu , D . High - resolution EEG mapping of cortical activation related to working memory : effects of task difficulty , type of processing , and practice . Cereb Cortex 7 , 374 – 385 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Klimesch , W . EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory performance : A review and analysis . Brain Research Reviews 29 , 169 – 195 ( 1999 ) . 64 . Klimesch , W . , Sauseng , P . & Hanslmayr , S . EEG alpha oscillations : The inhibition – timing hypothesis . Brain Research Reviews 53 , 63 – 88 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Duncker , K . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs 58 , i – 113 ( 1945 ) . 66 . Hélie , S . & Sun , R . Incubation , insight , and creative problem solving : A unified theory and a connectionist model . Psychological Review 117 , 994 – 1024 ( 2010 ) . 12 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 2144 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59096 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 67 . Lavin , C . , San Martín , R . & Rosales Jubal , E . Pupil dilation signals uncertainty and surprise in a learning gambling task . Front . Behav . Neurosci . 7 ( 2014 ) . 68 . Preuschoff , K . , Hart’t , Marius , B . & Einhauser , W . Pupil Dilation Signals Surprise : Evidence for Noradrenaline’s Role in Decision Making . Front . Neurosci . 5 ( 2011 ) . 69 . Feuerbacher , R . L . , Funk , K . H . , Spight , D . H . , Diggs , B . S . & Hunter , J . G . Realistic Distractions and Interruptions That Impair Simulated Surgical Performance by Novice Surgeons . Archives of Surgery 147 , 1026 – 1030 ( 2012 ) . 70 . Finke , R . A . , Smith , S . M . & Ward , T . B . Creative cognition theory , research , and applications . ( MIT Press , 1996 ) . 71 . Sandkühler , S . & Bhattacharya , J . Deconstructing Insight : EEG Correlates of Insightful Problem Solving . Plos One 3 , e1459 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Fink , A . et al . The creative brain : investigation of brain activity during creative problem solving by means of EEG and FMRI . Hum Brain Mapp 30 , 734 – 748 ( 2009 ) . 73 . Fink , A . , Grabner , R . H . , Benedek , M . & Neubauer , A . C . Divergent thinking training is related to frontal electroencephalogram alpha synchronization . European Journal of Neuroscience 23 , 2241 – 2246 ( 2006 ) . 74 . Staudt , B . & Neubauer , A . C . Achievement , underachievement and cortical activation : a comparative EEG study of adolescents of average and above - average intelligence . High Ability Studies 17 , 3 – 16 ( 2006 ) . 75 . Zeng , L . , Proctor , R . W . & Salvendy , G . Can Traditional Divergent Thinking Tests Be Trusted in Measuring and Predicting Real - World Creativity ? Creativity Research Journal 23 , 24 – 37 ( 2011 ) . 76 . Engler , J . How Gadfly Shareholders Keep CEOs Distracted . Wall Street Journal ( 2016 ) . 77 . Securities and Exchange Commission . Shareholder Proposals . ( 2012 ) . 78 . Zhu , Y . , Ritter , S . M . , Müller , B . C . N . & Dijksterhuis , A . Creativity : Intuitive processing outperforms deliberative processing in creative idea selection . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 73 , 180 – 188 ( 2017 ) . 79 . Eling , K . , Langerak , F . & Griffin , A . The Performance Effects of Combining Rationality and Intuition in Making Early New Product Idea Evaluation Decisions . Creativity and Innovation Management 24 , 464 – 477 ( 2015 ) . 80 . Kleinmintz , O . M . , Goldstein , P . , Mayseless , N . , Abecasis , D . & Shamay - Tsoory , S . G . Expertise in Musical Improvisation and Creativity : The Mediation of Idea Evaluation . Plos One 9 , e101568 ( 2014 ) . 81 . Hennessey , B . A . & Amabile , T . M . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology 61 , 569 – 598 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Perry - Smith , J . & Mannucci , P . V . From Creativity to Innovation : The Social Network Drivers of the Four Phases of the Idea Journey . Acad . Manage . Rev . 42 , 53 – 79 ( 2017 ) . 83 . Taylor , A . & Greve , H . R . Superman or the Fantastic Four ? knowledge combination And experience in Innovative Teams . Academy of Management Journal 49 , 723 – 740 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements We thank Dr . Fred Davis , Dr . Peter Walla , and the participants of the 2018 NeuroIS retreat who provided insight and expertise that greatly assisted this research . We thank McMaster University , DeGroote School of Business , and the Faculty of Science for their generous support . Author contributions Goran Calic is responsible for study conception . Goran Calic , Scott Watter , and Nour El Shamy wrote the original draft . Goran Calic and Nour El Shamy performed the experiments . Nour El Shamy and Isaac Kinley investigated the EEG data and Scott Watter investigated the pupil dilation data . Goran Calic , Scott Watter , Isaac Kinley , Nour El Shamy , and Khaled Hassanein are responsible for manuscript review and commentary . competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G . C . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Cre - ative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per - mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2020