REVIEW Progress in 3D printing for bone tissue engineering : a review Weiwei Lan 1 , 2 , 3 , Xiaobo Huang 4 , Di Huang 1 , 2 , 3 , * , Xiaochun Wei 5 , and Weiyi Chen 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Research Center for Nano - Biomaterials & Regenerative Medicine , Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Biomedical Engineering , Taiyuan University of Technology , Taiyuan 030024 , People’s Republic of China 2 Shanxi - Zheda Institute of Advanced Materials and Chemical Engineering , Taiyuan 030032 , People’s Republic of China 3 Shanxi Key Laboratory of Material Strength & Structural Impact , Institute of Biomedical Engineering , Taiyuan University of Technology , Taiyuan 030024 , People’s Republic of China 4 Laboratory of Biomaterial Surface and Interface , School of Materials Science and Engineering , Taiyuan University of Technology , Taiyuan 030024 , Shanxi Province , People’s Republic of China 5 Department of Orthopaedics , The Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical University , Taiyuan 030001 , People’s Republic of China Received : 1 February 2022 Accepted : 23 May 2022 Published online : 12 June 2022 (cid:2) The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2022 ABSTRACT Effective clinical methods for large bone defects are not yet available on account of the complex intrinsic structure and mechanical characteristics of natural bone tissue . It remains a challenge to restore bone damage to its original form by tissue engineering . With the continuous development of three - dimensional ( 3D ) printing in recent years , the emergence of new technical supports and material innovations has established the foundation for bone tissue engineering ( BTE ) . 3D printing has signiﬁcant advantages for personalized treatment , as it allows for the speciﬁc fabrication of scaffolds with appropriate size , shape and intrinsic structural characteristics via patients’ computerized axial tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging . In this review , we ﬁrst systematically reviewed the development of 3D printing , printing methods and the selection of printing inks , then focused on the application of high - strength hydrogels in 3D printing for BTE . A brief anticipation of the future development of 3D printing was presented . Handling Editor : Annela M . Seddon . Address correspondence to E - mail : huangjw2067 @ 163 . com ; chenweiyi211 @ 163 . com https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10853 - 022 - 07361 - y J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 Review GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT Introduction Natural bone is the main load - bearing tissue with a complex structure and component and is constantly in a state of self - renewal and growth . Bone repair and regeneration are still a commonplace and compli - cated clinical challenge in surgery . Each year , mil - lions of individuals are standing by skeletal disorder arising from causes such as trauma , tumor or bone disease - related injuries and so on [ 1 , 2 ] . Even though , natural bone tissue possesses self - repair ability , large defects , which are out of its regenerative range , still need surgery intervention [ 3 , 4 ] . Adopting autogenic and allogenic bones to heal bone defects was still the main solution . Whilst autogenic bone performs better functions in terms of biocompatibility , lower immune responses , better heal abilities and other factors , procuring donor bone from the patients’ own body will cause donor site defect and morbidity . And allogenic bone bears risk of infections and immune responses , which may even lead to more intricate health reaction [ 5 ] . Owing to the insufﬁciencies of autogenic and allogenic surgery , it is urgent to search a new effective approach . As a promising alternative , bone tissue engineering ( BTE ) has been widely developed and clinically tested [ 6 ] . As an interdisciplinary approach , BTE aims to fabricate and utilize biomimetic materials with or without cells to repair , replace and regenerate dam - aged bone tissue [ 7 , 8 ] . Owing to the exquisite structure and hierarchical organization of natural bone , which is consisted of organic and inorganic materials with multiple kinds of cells ( osteoblasts , osteoclasts and endothelial cells ) , the fabrication of BTE bionic scaffolds remains the major obstacle to its application [ 7 , 9 ] . To date , numerous materials have been developed for application in BTE , such as metal [ 10 ] , bioceramic [ 11 ] , polymers [ 12 ] and compounds [ 8 , 13 ] . Among all those potential candidates for BTE , hydrogel exhibited numerous attractive perfor - mances to serve as bone implant , on account of its resemblance to the extracellular matrix , tunable modulus , wetness , favorable biocompatibility and bioactivity [ 14 ] . However , the main obstacle to hydrogels’ usage in BTE was poor mechanical strength . [ 15 ] . Natural bone is a multilayered struc - ture that possess various mechanics in its layered regions . The cortical bone has elastic modulus between 3 – 30 GPa , whereas trabecular or cancellous bone presents a considerably lower elastic modulus ranging from 0 . 02 – 2 GPa [ 16 ] . Metals and their alloys are frequently utilized as orthopaedic implants , such as titanium ( Ti ) , stainless steels and cobalt ( Co ) etc . [ 17 – 19 ] . A majority of existing orthopedic metal 12686 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 implants possess much higher mechanical strength than natural bone ( such as , the modulus of Ti6Al4V is about 110 GPa ) which may lead to stress shielding at bone - implant interface and further contribute to osteoporosis [ 16 ] . Thus , the hydrogels with excellent mechanical performance are a cornerstone of practi - cal applications in various ﬁelds [ 20 , 21 ] . Recently , various methods were applied to fabricate the high - strength hydrogels , such as addition of nanocom - posite , usage of supramolecular hydrogels or double networks structure , etc . [ 22 , 23 ] . Furthermore , implants with suitable pore size and porosity are relatively important to mimic the struc - ture performance of natural bone . And many strate - gies have been adopted to fabricate porous bone implants , such as chemical / gas foaming [ 24 ] , parti - cle / salt leaching [ 25 , 26 ] , freeze - drying [ 27 , 28 ] and others . The conventional scaffold preparation cannot control the inner architecture but randomly orga - nized porous structure which make its shape imper - fectly match with the bone defect to meet the needs of BTE . Recently , three - dimensional ( 3D ) printing , also known as additive manufacturing ( AM ) , technology empowered by a programmed robotic fabrication mechanism was capable of addressing such a chal - lenge , which provided unprecedented accuracy and precision in fabricating implants using a variety of metals , natural / synthetic polymers , bioceramic powders and their composite [ 29 , 30 ] . 3D printing utilizes patient data , which is obtained through computerized axial tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging , as a guide map to make an identical object that can match with the patient’s defect parameters completely [ 31 ] . 3D printing’s ori - gins can be traced back to the twentieth century , when Charles Hull proposed the ﬁrst commercial 3D printing technology , stereolithography , in 1988 [ 29 , 32 ] . Subsequently , a variety of 3D printing tech - niques have been commercially applied in a wide range of materials and applications [ 33 ] . So far , 3D - printed objects have been extensively utilized in many industries , such as the fabrication of turbine blades , jewelry design , mold making , architecture , tissue engineering and many other ﬁelds [ 34 – 38 ] . Meanwhile , it has already become mainstream in many areas of medicine , especially in BTE [ 39 , 40 ] . 3D printing has gained signiﬁcant attention in the biomedical ﬁeld for two main factors : ﬁrstly , the technology was easy to use and the manufacturing process was accurateness , secondly , the resulting products owed the customized shape , architecture and performance . [ 32 ] . According to different mold - ing methods , a variety of 3D printing strategies have been proposed and executed , including those based on vat photopolymerization , inkjet printing , melt extrusion molding technology , fused deposition modeling ( FDM ) , selective laser sintering ( SLS ) , selective laser melting ( SLM ) and 3D bioprinting etc . ( Fig . 1 ) [ 35 , 41 , 42 ] . Each technology owed advan - tages and limitations , which is presented in Table 1 . In this review , the history of 3D printing and its recent advancements in BTE were systematically discussed . We mainly focused on the strategy anal - ysis and printing materials adoption . Furthermore , high - strength hydrogels with 3D printing were emphatically discussed . Finally , we outline and summarize the potential of 3D printing technologies ( Figs . 2 – 5 ) . 3D printing methods Bone existed the hierarchical structure . Each part performs diverse mechanical , biological and chemical functions [ 43 ] . Therefore , it is a tremendous challenge to fabricate bionic implant , even for 3D printing . Although , 3D printing has gained considerable amount of attention , it still faces signiﬁcant chal - lenges and difﬁculties . Among them , controlling the printing speed and the suitable pressure applied on ink are particularly important , which are associated with selection of printing ink . Furthermore , the rela - ted parameters of printing ink need to be considered , such as viscosity , bioactivity , crosslinking methods , etc . Finally , preparing bone repair scaffolds with multiple 3D structure and suitable mechanical strength are still a challenge for mimicking true micro - environment of bone that will eventually lead to whole bone formation [ 44 ] . Vat photopolymerization Vat photopolymerization is the initial 3D printing technology to be commercial produced , which could be dated back to 1986 by Chunk Hull . And it uses light to cross - link the printing ink selectively in a layer - by - layer way to fabricate 3D objects , hence it is also called ‘‘stereolithography ( SLA ) ’’ [ 29 , 45 , 46 ] . SLA printing have been widely used and improved , such as digital light processing ( DLP ) , continuous liquid J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12687 interface production ( CLIP , a developed DLP method ) , two - photon / multiphoton polymerization ( TPP ) , and computed axial lithography ( CAL ) [ 47 – 49 ] . For now , it could fabricate scaffolds with porous complex structure and accurately control the innerstructure pore size . While some disadvantages still remain , one of them is the printing ink must be transparent with limited scattering , or the light might be unable to pass through the material evenly which leads to uneven cross - linking [ 50 ] . In addition , traditional SLA typically has a limited printing speed , which mainly decreases the efﬁciency of its application [ 51 ] . There have been considerable recent developments in SLA printing technology to enhance the printing speed while maintaining its accuracy to fabricate complex architectures that are more bionic to natural skeletal structures . Dynamic lithography , one of the SLA techniques , can be realized by applying a digital micromirror device ( DMD ) . DMD is composed of millions of microscopic mirrors , all of Figure 1 Schematic diagram of different 3D printing technologies applied to current BTE . a Stereolithography . b Fused deposition modeling . c Inkjet printing . D Selective laser sintering . Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of different 3D printing methods Technique Materials Advantages Disadvantages Vat photopolymerization Polymers Bioceramics Complex structures can be produced ; Accuracy Only available for photopolymers ; Slower printing speed Fused deposition Modeling Polymers Bioceramics Metals Low cost and easy to operation ; Faster molding speed The inks should be in the molten state ; Inkjet printing Polymers Bioceramics Simplicity and low cost ; The printing ink must be in the form of a low viscosity liquid ; Relatively poor print accuracy ; Weak mechanical properties Selective laser sintering Polymers Bioceramics Metals Broad material selection ; High molding efﬁciency ; High material utilization rate ; Excellent mechanicalstrength Higher cost 12688 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 which can be independently tilted in to create rapid fabrication of complex 3D designs by forming con - trolled patterns during the photocrosslinking of consecutive layers [ 50 ] . The majority of newest trends in SLA - based systems aim at producing highly complicated architectures by incorporating different methods or further advancing the SLA technology to achieve very high resolutions [ 52 ] . Gue´hennec et al . [ 53 ] evaluated two kinds of Ca / P - based scaffolds manufactured by SLA printing for BTE . The results presented the MG - 63 cells exhibited favorable viability and spreading , and further in vivo experiments conﬁrmed that the scaffolds were effec - tive in promoting new bone production . Amler et al . [ 54 ] isolated mesenchymal progenitor cells from clinically relevant human bone biopsy sites and bio - printed them using projection - based stereolithogra - phy . The results presented the cells had promising proliferation and activity , while the cells exhibited advanced osteogenic differentiation in vitro for 28 days . Thavasiappan and co - workers [ 55 ] designed and fabricated biocompatible polycarbonate ( PC ) bone scaffolds using SLA technique . The stress value of the manufactured rhombus - shaped pore model was about 200 MPa , which is closest to the com - pressive strength of human bones . Feng et al . [ 42 ] prepared a biodegradable UV - cured photosensitive resin by SLA method . It was conﬁrmed that the Figure 2 3D - printed metal and alloy in BTE . A SEM powder morphology of the titanium and tantalum powders used for SLM and images of solid and porous Ti – 25Ta samples produced by SLM . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 99 ] , Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd . B The inner structure and mechanical properties of the four Ti alloy scaffolds with interoperable structures were prepared by SLM . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 98 ] , Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society . C Photographs and SEM of Ta2O5 and Ta scaffolds for BTE . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 106 ] , Copyright 2018 Elsevier B . V . D Surface morphology and microstructure and of the Mg scaffolds for BTE . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 108 ] , Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd . J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12689 composites have good mechanical properties , the tensile strength of the 3D - printed specimens was 68 MPa , 62 % higher than that of the reference speci - mens ( produced by direct casting ) . Furthermore , the ﬂexural strength and modulus can reach 115 MPa and 5 . 8 GPa , respectively . In summary , current SLA printing systems have enabled the preparation of complex structures at high resolution , which is crucial for the preparation of bionic scaffolds . Although , not all of the printing systems mentioned in this section are capable of incorporating cells or active factors into the bio - printing process , continuous innovation of current printing technologies has resulted in innovative and promising bioprinting technologies and platforms in order to better mimic human tissues . Further inves - tigations of these 3D bioprinting will have a signiﬁ - cant impact on the fabrication of biomimetic tissues . Figure 3 3D - printed bioceramics in bone repair . a Different ratios of PLA and BG scaffolds by FDM printing . The fabrication schematic diagram , FDM 3D - printed PLA - BG scaffolds from prior produced ﬁlaments and related mechanical capabilities . Scale bars : 500 l m ( left ) , 15 l m ( right ) . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 64 ] , Copyright 2020 Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology . b 2 - Step Additive manufacturing process for fabrication of CDHA scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 121 ] , Copyright 2021Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S . r . l . c Fabrication of b - TCP microparticles and acrylate - based monomer scaffolds . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 48 ] , Copyright 2020 Optical Society of America . d The bioactive ceramic ( Ca 3 ZrSi 2 O 9 ) scaffolds co - delivering of bone morphogenetic protein - 2 ( BMP2 ) and zoledronic acid ( ZA ) were fabricated by SLA printing technology ( Scale bars : 2 mm in ii , 1 . 5 cm in iii , 2 cm in iv ) . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 122 ] , Copyright 2021 Elsevier Ltd . 12690 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 Notably , the SLA method requires printing inks with photosensitive groups to achieve curing , which will lead to signiﬁcant limitations in the selection of printing inks . In addition , despite various methods to promote the mechanical strength of scaffolds , such as double cross - linking and the addition of bioceramics , the mechanical strength still cannot satisfy the needs of bone repair . Fused deposition modeling Materials extrusion or FDM technology , developed and commercialized by Stratasys company in 1989 , typically uses thermoplastic polymers as the sub - strate [ 56 ] . It is molten and extruded by a print head with small holes , which can move in the X – Y direc - tion . So that the ink in the molten state , which appears as a noodle , falls naturally onto the substrate below , which can be moved in the Z axis to prepare 3D porous scaffolds [ 57 ] . As one of the most extensive and favorite 3D printing technology , FDM is charac - terized by simple operation , maintain , and cus - tomize , with machine and ﬁlament material at low cost [ 58 – 60 ] . The materials that can be printed with FDM include some metals , bioceramics and mixtures , in addition to polymers [ 29 , 39 , 61 ] . Alizadeh - Osgouei et al . [ 62 ] fabricated gyroid polylactic acid ( PLA ) scaffolds with different unit cell sizes via fused deposition modeling for BTE appli - cations . The porosity of each sample was over 86 % with excellent mechanical strength ( The compressive elastic modulus and yield strength of the scaffolds were 118 – 180 MPa and 2 – 8 MPa in the building direction and 106 – 138 MPa and 2 . 5 – 6 . 0 MPa in the transverse direction , respectively . The tensile elastic modulus and yield strength were 51 – 63 MPa and 1 . 5 – 4 . 5 MPa in the building direction and 11 – 17 MPa and 1 – 5 MPa in the transverse direction , respec - tively . ) In all , the study proved the fabricated scaf - folds as promising scaffold biomaterials for BTE applications . Chen and co - workers prepared a bone repaired scaffolds adopting with poly ( vinyl alco - hol ) / b - tricalcium phosphate ( PVA / b - BCP ) via FDM technology [ 63 ] . The experimental results show that b - TCP can be uniformly dispersed into PVA hydro - gels , and it can signiﬁcantly enhance the mechanical strength of hydrogels ( the maximum stress is increased to 10 . 7 kPa at 20 % of b - TCP ) , while in vitro cellular experiments also conﬁrm the good cellular activity and proliferation ability of hydrogels . Distler et al . [ 64 ] presented a PLA - bioactive glass ( BG ) composite scaffolds which was manufactured by FDM . Despite the fact that predominant FDM printing techniques have been broadly utilized for bone defect restoration , they has limited applications in 3D bio - printing due to the high temperature required for printing , which would be sacriﬁced to the effective - ness of its encapsulation of bioactive substances [ 65 ] . Although improvements have been made to enable FDM molding at lower temperatures , e . g . , PCL , there is still less material selectivity . Vascular regeneration is an essential part of bone tissue defect repair , as it Figure 4 Natural materials for BTE by 3D printing . A Schematic illustration of fabrication process for 3D hydrogel constructs and a photograph of 3D hydrogel constructs for vascular and bone formation . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 87 ] , Copyright 2019 MDPI . B Optical and SEM images of the fabricated collagen , CE and CES scaffolds using a low - temperature 3D printing process . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 136 ] , Copyright 2017 Elsevier B . V . J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12691 effectively provides nutrients required for normal metabolism and removes associated waste by - prod - ucts [ 50 ] . Nulty et al . [ 66 ] evaluated the in vitro pre - vascularization performance of scaffolds which was based on PCL co - cultured with human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) and hBMSCs by FDM 3D printing method . The results showed that the bioac - tive scaffolds were effective in promoting vascular - ization and new bone production in rat femurs , which presented potential ability to restore large bone defects . Ojansivu and his colleagues [ 67 ] investigated the effect of wood - based nanocellulose ( CNF ) and BG on the rheological properties of gela - tin - alginate bioinks and the initial responses of bone cells ( Saos - 2 cells and human bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( hBMSCs ) ) which were embedded in these bioinks , via FDM at 26 (cid:3) C . According to their study , addition of CNF and BaG enhanced viscosity of the hydrogel and hence its printability . However , the corresponding increase in Figure 5 3D - printed synthetic polymers in BTE . A PLA scaffolds with three different unit cell sizes and dense fabricated by FDM printing . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 62 ] , Copyright 2017 Elsevier B . V . B Fabrication of human bone - templated 3D constructs via a new micro - CT / 3D inkjet printing process with poly ( ester urethane ) - nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite ( PUR - nHA ) hybrid polymer . Inner structure and mechanical properties were presented ( Scale bar represents 1 mm . ) . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 74 ] Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons . C The characterization of Ta / PCL scaffold . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 107 ] , Copyright 2021 Frontiers in Materials . D PEEK scaffolds in different printing condition with different pores size . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 152 ] , Copyright 2021 De Gruyter . E The structures of nanocomposite ink composed of tri - block poly ( lactide - co - propylene glycol - co - lactide ) dimethacrylate and hydroxyethyl methacrylate ( HEMA ) - functionalized hydroxyapatite nanoparticles ( nHAMA ) for BTE at below 37 (cid:3) C . Reproduced with permission from ref . [ 39 ] , Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd . 12692 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 ﬂuid shear led to a considerable death of Saos - 2 cells , but the cellular activity of hBMSCs was better than that of Saos - 2 cells . It was conﬁrmed that cells via - bility decrease 40 – 80 % due to high ﬂuid shear during the printing process [ 68 ] . Inkjet printing Inkjet printing is a non - contact printing technique that uses thermal or acoustic methods to make dro - plet jetting to print a speciﬁc 3D shape or size , which is obtained from a computer , layer by layer on the substrate below [ 69 ] . As a convenient and efﬁcient way to print , inkjet printing is widely used in the electronics and micro - manufacturing industries , as well as in the ﬁeld of TE . Adjusting the pressure level of the printing head can control the size of the ink droplets and the deposition rate in printing process to achieve precise accumulation [ 70 ] . Due to its sim - plicity and low cost , it has been used in lots of studies for BTE . Rajzer et al . [ 71 ] adopted inkjet printing to modify bioactive particles ( polyaniline , bioactive particles and drugs ( osteogenon , calcium phosphate nanoparticles ) ) with electrospun PCL / gelatin scaf - folds for BTE . Gao and teammates [ 72 ] evaluated the effect of bioactive ceramic nanoparticles ( HA and BG ) in containing hMSCs in polyethylene glycol dimethacrylate ( PEGDMA ) by 3D inkjet bioprinting . Addition of HA increased cell viability ( 86 . 62 ± 6 . 02 % ) and compressive modulus of the scaffold ( 358 . 91 ± 48 . 05 kPa ) after 21 days culture . However , one obvious disadvantage of inkjet printing is that the printing ink must be in the form of a low viscosity liquid , which greatly limits the selection of materials . On the other hand , the mechanical properties of the printed objects are rel - atively weak and fall short of the bone repair needs [ 73 ] . Since it is still in the basic research stage of large organ bioprinting , there were already relevant researchers to enhance it . Vanderburgh et al . [ 74 ] fabricated human bone - templated 3D constructs via a new micro - CT / 3D inkjet printing process , which was contained with a reactive , ﬂowable , and set - table poly ( ester urethane ) - nanocrystalline hydroxya - patite ( PUR - nHA ) hybrid polymer . It was observed that the sample owed strength same with nature bone , and promoted hMSC proliferation and osteo - blast differentiation and mineralization . Barui et al . [ 75 ] fabricated and compared the novel in - situ polymerizable acrylic based ink system , which was capable to print Ti - 6Al - 4 V by inkjet printing and SLM . Samples with 10 – 40 l m pore size , a porosity of 98 . 4 % , and a moderate combination of elastic mod - ulus ( 4 GPa ) and strength reliability ( Weibull mod - ulus * 8 . 1 ) . Compared to SLM - printed Ti - 6Al - 4 V , the adhesion , survival , and cytoskeleton spreading of mouse ﬁbroblasts and preosteoblasts on inkjet - prin - ted Ti - 6Al - 4 V were markedly improved as well as proliferated signiﬁcantly , demonstrating its potential as a scaffold for cortical bone repair . Selective laser sintering and electron beam melting SLS technology was developed at Austin Dulles University in 1986 and commercialized by DTM in 1992 [ 57 ] . It uses a laser beam or an electron bean to melt ( selective laser melting ( SLM ) or electron beam melting ( EBM ) ) or sinter the selected material pow - der on the surface of the powder bed to form the surface layer of the 3D scaffold . After the powder is solidiﬁed , it goes down one layer and the next layer of powder is dipped onto the surface by a roller and molten or sintered again , repeatedly to form the 3D structure [ 29 ] . Compared with EBM which uses electron beam as the energy resource , SLM and SLS are operated through laser beam with adjustable wavelength . Therefore , while EBM can only use metals with electrical conductivity , SLM and SLS are capable of using metals , polymers and even bioceramics to produce scaffolds with complex structure [ 16 , 75 ] . Optimization of factors such as laser power , scanning speed and powder thickness are required to fabricate printed parts with improved mechanical properties and structural characteristics of 3D structures [ 29 ] . Liao et al . [ 76 ] prepared TPMS scaffolds with var - ious radial gradient porosities , which was similar to the graded structure of human bone , by SLM with Ti6Al4V as a building material . The results showed that the internal pore size of the scaffold exhibited a radially decreasing , porosity decreasing from the outer layer to the inner layer . The average porosity of all the constructed samples ranged from 55 to 71 % , and the average pore size ranged from 333 l m to 674 l m . Compression tests showed that Young’s modulus ( 2 . 7 – 7 . 4 GPa ) and yield strength ( 233 – 520 MPa ) of all samples were sufﬁcient for human bone . In addition , in vitro cellular J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12693 experiments conﬁrmed the good biocompatibility . Kamboj and co - workers [ 77 ] obtained the 3D scaf - folds contained with bioceramics , osteoinductive and bioactive elements by SLM printing , without the addition of polymer binders and post - processing sintering steps . The internal structure of sample was a circular pore with a diameter of 50 – 350 microns , its porosity was 35 % , and the compressive strength was 110 MPa . The scaffold had high bioactivity and con - trolled growth of HA . This work demonstrated that complex shapes of ceramic structures can be used as novel bone implants by SLM printing . The SLS and SLM have been extensively used in many ﬁelds due to their broad material selection , high molding efﬁ - ciency , and high material utilization rate , but yet there are limitations , including : high raw material prices , high equipment prices and maintenance pri - ces , and poor mechanical properties ( extensibility ) , which need further improvement . 3D bioprinting As the development of TE , many researchers have attempted to improve and integrate the three ele - ments of TE ( seed cells , growth factors and cellular scaffolds ) in order to prepare substitutes that are more compatible with the physiological characteris - tics of the human body . 3D bioprinting is essentially 3D printing combined with living cells or tissues to replace and remodel defective areas . It is the same as other 3D printing methods , but the only difference is in the printing ink mixed with live cells [ 29 , 56 , 78 – 80 ] . Among all these 3D technologies , the 3D bioprinting which involved cells and hydrogels has showed the effectiveness and potential to heal bone defects [ 81 ] . Hence , the challenge of 3D bio - printing lies in the preparation of bioink , which must be a hydrogel with good biocompatibility , and the physical properties of the hydrogel , such as viscosity , pH and curing methods , need to ensure that the activity of the grown cells is not affected [ 79 ] . The existing general bioink includes GelMA , PCL , PLGA , etc . [ 82 , 83 ] . Currently , there are also some studies using bioactive ceramics such as : TCP and HA to act as bioink , but these solid materials need to be in the hydrogel co - mingled state before printing [ 72 , 84 , 85 ] . Liu et al . [ 86 ] prepared bone repair hydrogels with light - curing properties using oligo ( poly [ ethylene glycol ] fumarate ) ( OPF ) , gelatin , and polyethylene glycoldiacrylate ( PEGDA ) . And the Irgacure 2 , 959 was added as photoinitiators , as well as MC3T3 pre - osteoblast cells were used as the co - mingled cells for the hydrogels . The results conﬁrmed the good bio - compatibility of this hydrogel and its potential as a future 3D bioprinting material for bone repair . Ouyang et al . [ 82 ] have achieved enhanced compati - bility between formability and biocompatibility in the 3D bioprinting process by using complementary network bioinks ( Gelatin was responsible for tem - perature sensitivity , while others with pho - tocrosslinkable bioinks derived from natural and synthetic polymers were added ) , expanding the pal - ette of available bioinks as well as their operability . Demirtas ¸ and co - workers [ 85 ] prepared chitosan and chitosan - HA hydrogels containing MC3T3 - E1 pre - osteoblasts using an extrusion - based bioprinter . Well cell viability , mineralized , and differentiated osteogenically were observed in HA contained hydrogels . Furthermore , it was discovered that chi - tosan was superior to alginate , in terms of cell pro - liferation and differentiation . Anada et al . [ 87 ] developed and utilized a two - step digital light pro - cessing technique to construct a bone - mimicking 3D hydrogel structure based on octacalcium phosphate ( OCP ) and GelMA wrapped with human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) . The outer layer of the hydrogel was an OCP - containing GelMA ring to mimic the long bone cortical shell , and the central GelMA ring contained HUVEC spheroids to mimic the bone marrow space . This experiment demon - strated that uniformly embedded GelMA OCP stim - ulated osteogenic differentiation of MSCs and that the concentration of GelMA regulated the formation of capillary - like structures derived from HUVEC spheroids . This cell - loaded hydrogel - based natural long bone structure with a biomimetic double - ring structure could potentially be used for bone tissue engineering . Compared to other printing technologies , the requirements of 3D bioprinting are even more sig - niﬁcant . On the one hand , it is necessary to ensure the printability of the printing inks , and on the other hand , it is essential to meet the printing process at room temperature curing , while ensuring the cellular activity in the scaffold . Although there have been considerable cases where other printing methods have been utilized to match the strength of natural bone . Most of 3D bioprinting currently employed for bone repair has the disadvantage whose mechanical properties are much lower than natural bone . The 12694 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 reason was that no hydrogel could reach about bone strength level with suitable structure and ensure cellular activity . Moreover , achieving vascularization is a major challenge in current BTE , and it requires the synergistic cooperation of scaffolds , cells , and growth factors . Ideally , implants should rapidly release pro - vascular growth factors early in implan - tation to enhance healing of necrotic tissues , while slow - releasing osteogenic factors at designated sites in a controlled manner to prevent ectopic osteogen - esis . It remains a challenge to design the ideal bioactive 3D bioprinting scaffold under the condition of cost - controlled production process . With the update of 3D printing fabrication and materials , several high - strength hydrogels exist for applications in orthopedic ﬁeld . 3D printing materials Understanding of the preparation and performance of printing inks is crucial in 3D printing . Printing ink is the foundation of 3D printing . In general , 3D printing ink should have the following characteris - tics , such as : good biocompatibility ( because of its role as a temporary carrier of cells and tissues ) , speciﬁc mechanical strength ( the mechanical strength of the human brain is about 0 . 2 – 5 kPa , while the mechanical strength of bone is 15 , 000 kPa ) , suit - able structural characteristics ( Pore size and porosity have an impact on material properties , such as mechanical strength and degradation . Furthermore , it provides a space for inter - tissue nutrient , oxygen transport , and waste metabolism . ) , and a suit - able degradation rate and non - toxic degradation products [ 32 , 88 ] . These characteristics are related to the source , composition , and concentration of the ink itself [ 89 ] . Therefore , the selection and preparation of printing ink materials have been the crucial aspect of 3D printing . Moreover , the selection of the printing method is also closely related to the printing ink , such as : the viscosity , surface tension , cross - linking mechanism , etc . For example , in inkjet printing and SLA , the viscosity of the printing ink greatly deter - mines whether the material can be printed [ 90 – 93 ] . The inks commonly utilized in 3D printing include : natural inks ( collagen , hyaluronic acid , sodium algi - nate , gelatin , etc . ) , polymers ( PLA , PLGA , PVA , etc . ) , metals , and alloys ( Ti and Ti alloys , degradable MgAl alloys , and NiTi memory alloys , etc . ) . Materials used as 3D printing inks for BTE was summarized in Table 2 . In the next chapters , we will introduce them in detail and mainly focus on high - strength hydrogels . Metal and alloy Metals and their alloys have been used in orthopedic surgery for a long time . Stainless steel , titanium , titanium alloys , and cobalt and cobalt alloys are widely used for the reconstruction of load - bearing bone because of their biocompatibility , mechanical strength , and excellent corrosion resistance [ 94 – 96 ] . However , most metallic materials owe higher mechanical strength than that of natural bone , which can lead to stress masking and consequent bone resorption , eventually leading to implant failure . ( The modulus of elasticity of cortical bone in human body is 3 – 30 GPa , that of cancellous bone is 0 . 02 – 2 GPa , while the modulus of elasticity of common metal alloys such as Ti6Al4V is 110 GPa and that of CoCrMo alloy is about 210 GPa [ 16 ] ) . Therefore , how to effectively reduce the mechanical strength of metallic materials to match natural bone is still an important research task . For now , the mechanical strength is mainly regulated by controlling the intrinsic structure of metals ( pore size , porosity ) and the alloy proportion content [ 97 ] . As mentioned in the previous section , current 3D printing for metals is mainly SLM , SLS , and EBM . 3D printing allows for better control of the intrinsic structural characteristics of metals and thus reduces their mechanical strength . Nune and co - workers [ 95 ] used EBM technology to prepare three Ti scaffolds with different pore sizes and porosities ( 700 , 1000 , and 1500 l m pore sizes and corresponding porosities of 76 . 1 % , 85 . 6 % , and 90 . 3 % , respectively ) for bone repair . It was found that the mechanical strength decreased signiﬁcantly with increasing pore size and porosity ( modulus of elasticity : 6 . 2 , 2 . 3 and 1 . 1 GPa , respectively ) , and in vitro cellular experiments also conﬁrmed that the different structures had no sig - niﬁcant effect on cell activity , value addition , adhe - sion , mineralization , and differentiation ability . Zheng et al . [ 98 ] have successfully prepared four Ti alloy scaffolds with interoperable structures and porosity over 70 % by SLM . The actual average pore sizes of the prepared scaffolds were 542 , 366 , 202 , and 134 l m , respectively . The in vitro characterization , in vivo experiments , and mechanics of the scaffolds J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12695 conﬁrmed that the Ti alloy scaffolds have the stron - gest osseointegration capacity at a diameter of 202 l m , and these ﬁndings provide a reference for clinical . Soro et al . [ 99 ] used SLM technology to pre - pare a porous Ti - 25Ta alloy . The results conﬁrmed that it has the same mechanical compatibility as Ti64 , but with lower elastic modulus and higher strength , which is more suitable for orthopedic implantation . Furthermore , despite the good biocompatibility of Ti and its alloys , it has been demonstrated that Ti has poor adhesion to surrounding tissues , which could lead to implant loosening , friction , and implant fail - ure [ 100 , 101 ] . Several researchers are currently using Ta instead of Ti as an orthopedic implant , which has the advantage of lower mechanical strength and better biocompatibility and corrosion resistance [ 102 – 104 ] . Zhao et al . [ 105 ] fabricated porous Ta metal plates via 3D printing technology to treat of tibial fractures . Clinical implantation results con - ﬁrmed that the obtained porous Ta scaffolds exhib - ited excellent mechanical and biological properties and improved the effectiveness of the treatment of non - healing tibial fractures . However , its higher density and melting point make it difﬁcult to prepare and mold , as well as Ta is more expensive [ 106 ] . Xiong et al . [ 107 ] used nano - Ta blended PCL with 3D printing to fabricate bone repair scaffolds . According to their results , the 5 % Ta - PCL presented the best mechanical and biological properties . In addition , traditional metal implants are poorly biodegradable , and many researchers have focused on the applica - tion of biodegradable metals in bone repair , such as Fe , Mg , Al , and Zn [ 108 – 111 ] . However , the rapid degradation rate of Mg and the slow degradation rate of Fe , as well as the toxicity of the related degradation products to the surrounding tissues , have limited the application of degradable alloys in human body . Martinez et al . [ 112 ] fabricated AZ 91 D Mg alloy ( 9 % Al and 1 % Zn ) by Wire and Arc Additive Manufac - turing ( WAAM ) for BTE . Current research also con - ﬁrms that surface modiﬁcation ( such as : heat treatment , acid and alkali corrosion , ion - sputtering , etc . ) may change the topology and chemical proper - ties of metals to improve their degradability as well Table 2 Overview of materials used as 3D printing inks for BTE 3D printing technology Materials adoption Printing temperature Mechanical property Ref SLA PNAGA - Clay \ 37 (cid:3) C Compressive strengths * 3 . 50 MPa [ 15 ] nHAMA , P7L2DMA , HEMA TEGDMA , PLA - PUA , layer graphene Compressive modulus * 40 to * 400 MPa [ 39 ] Flexural strength 115 MPa modulus 5 . 8 GPa [ 42 ] HA , HA - Tricalcium phosphate Room temperature , then 1125 (cid:3) C [ 53 ] Ti6Al4V Young’s moduli * 3 . 79 * 10 . 99 GPa [ 13 ] SLM Si - wollastonite Compressive strength 110 MPa [ 77 ] Ti Maximum compressive strength 247 . 73 MPa , [ 98 ] MgAl , ZrP * 190 (cid:3) C [ 12 ] PVA / b - TCP 175 (cid:3) C Maximum stress from 8 . 3 to 10 . 7 kPa [ 63 ] FDM PLA - BG 110 – 145 (cid:3) C Maximum compressive strength 18 ± 10 MPa elasticity modulus 0 . 7 ± 0 . 1 GPa [ 64 ] PTHMMA , b - TCP , PNAGA Robust tensile strength ( up to 0 . 41 MPa ) , compressive strength ( up to 8 . 4 MPa ) [ 142 ] Calcium phosphate nanoparticles , PCL / gelatin [ 71 ] Inject Printing PEGDMA , HA , BG Room temperature , Compressive modulus ( 358 . 91 ± 48 . 05 kPa ) [ 72 ] Fe , Mn 230 , 1200 (cid:3) C Young’s modulus ( GPa ) 32 . 47 ± 5 . 05 [ 111 ] 3D Bioprinting Alginate - PVA - HA Storage Modulus * 1154 Pa [ 31 ] PCL , RGD - c alginate , 60 (cid:3) C and 37 (cid:3) C [ 40 ] OPF 37 (cid:3) C [ 86 ] 12696 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 as biocompatibility [ 29 , 110 , 113 ] . Noteworthy , it is the fact that all these treatments need to be performed after 3D printing and molding . Bioceramic The structure and composition of bone has been elaborated in the previous section , in which HA , as the main inorganic component in bone , plays a fun - damental role in the mechanical support and struc - tural stability of the bone [ 114 , 115 ] . 3D - printed bioceramics have shown enhanced properties com - paring with traditional preparation processes . Cur - rent bioceramics include mainly degradable Ca / P and non - degradable ones such as aluminum oxide and zirconia [ 116 – 118 ] . In particular , Ca / P bioactive ceramics have been broadly employed in orthopedic repair and regeneration due to their similarity to natural bone components and their excellent bioac - tivity , bone growth induction and vascular regener - ation [ 47 , 119 , 120 ] . The existing approaches to 3D printing Ca / P bioactive ceramics include two main aspects : one is : low - temperature 3D printing such as inkjet and FDM , etc . It enables the mixing of cells and relevant active factors to achieve 3D bioprinting , but this printing method needs to ensure the viscosity and ﬂuidity of the liquid . Hence the Ca / P concen - tration is low , and it causes the mechanical strength to be low [ 32 , 88 , 121 ] . Alternatively , high - tempera - ture 3D printing is employed , in which the structure is ﬁrstly molded using 3D printing and then it is sintered at high temperatures to achieve good mechanical strength [ 122 ] . However , this method also has certain disadvantages ; ﬁrstly , during the sinter - ing process , the structure will be changed ( pore size and porosity are reduced ) , and secondly , this print - ing method is not able to print cells and active factors in a co - mix , but can only deposit the cells and active factors on the scaffold surface after molding . There - fore , it could only test their biological properties on the scaffold surface . Wei et al . [ 47 ] built osteoinduc - tive Ca / P ceramics with high precision and control - lable 3D structure by digital light processing ( DLP ) system applying in SLA printing . The average com - pressive strength of the ceramics with 64 . 5 % porosity reached to 9 . 03 MPa , and excellent biocompatibility and in vivo bone repair . Safonov et al . [ 52 ] designed ceramic implants , a commercial 3D mix alumina ( Al 2 O 3 ) ceramic paste , by SLA printing . The strength of the specimens improved from 7 . 4 to 65 . 1 MPa by changing the internal dimensions . Baumgartner et al . [ 119 ] printed a wide range of ceramics and glass by a specially developed DLP - based SLA printer , coupled with thermal debinding and sintering processes . The samples showed superior mechanical properties , with compressive strength of over 400 MPa , excellent translucency and accuracy , which demonstrated the potential applications in restorative dentistry . In order to further improve Ca / P bioceramics to satisfy 3D printability while better serving bone repair demands . Researchers have used metal ions such as Fe , Mg , Si , etc . to enhance their bioactivity and mechanical stability [ 123 – 125 ] . Chen and co - workers [ 125 ] manufactured Mg - HA nanocomposites and mixed them with chitosan and gelatin to prepare 3D - printed porous scaffolds . The results showed that replacing Ca ions with Mg ions reduced the crys - tallinity of HA crystals , but did not signiﬁcantly affect the size and structure of the nanocomposites . The more Ca 2 ? replaced by Mg 2 ? , the more Mg 2 ? was released from the samples and the pH value in the medium was more acidic . However , the Mg - HA scaffolds presented higher cell adhesion and prolif - eration rates , as well as osteogenic induction effects . Manganese ( Mn ) , as one of the trace elements in human body , has an important impact on human growth and metabolism , especially in protein syn - thesis in bone . Deng et al . [ 126 ] prepared b - TCP high - strength scaffolds with different Mn contents by 3D printing combined with sintering . It was conﬁrmed that the addition of Mn substantially increased the mechanical strength of b - TCP ( up to 15 MPa ) and promoted the cell proliferation and differentiation capabilities . In addition , polymers such as PCL , PVA , PLGA , etc . are also frequently applied to reinforce Ca / P bioceramics [ 127 – 130 ] . Hassanajili et al . [ 130 ] adopted indirect 3D printing approach to fabricate bone scaffolds from PLA / PCL / HA composites . The ﬁnd - ing proved that scaffolds consisting of PLA / PCL 70 / 30 w / w and 35 % HA has superior performance in terms of microstructure , porosity , pore size , as well as mechanical properties . It exhibited a porosity of 77 % , an average pore size of 160 l m , and a Young’s modulus of 1 . 35 MPa . The prepared composite scaf - fold was later conﬁrmed to have good cytocompati - bility as well as osteogenic induction rate by MG63 cells . J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12697 Polymers The usage of polymers is one of main bone repair materials for 3D printing . In terms of the origin of polymers , they can be classiﬁed into natural poly - mers ( e . g . , gelatin , sodium alginate , silk protein , chitosan , etc . ) and synthetic polymers ( e . g . , PCL , PVA , PLGA , etc . ) . Among them , artiﬁcial polymers , which are widely available , have good biocompati - bility and can be polymerized to improve their mechanical strength , are favored for orthopedic repair . SLM , SLS , and FDM are mostly used in 3D printing for molding of artiﬁcial polymers [ 130 – 133 ] . These high - temperature molding methods are easy to operate and inexpensive . Notably , most commonly used artiﬁcial polymers are insoluble in water and mostly soluble in organic solvents , resulting in lim - ited degree of toxicity . Furthermore , the products after degradation are mainly acidic , which are sus - ceptible to inﬂammatory reactions . Meanwhile , it is difﬁcult for cells to adhere due to their smooth sur - face structure . Belaid et al . [ 131 ] prepared a bone repair hydrogel with good biocompatibility , biodegradability and good mechanical properties by mixing exfoliated boron nitride ( EBN ) into PLA hydrogel by FDM 3D printing . By seeding with MG63 and MC3T3 cells , it was conﬁrmed that the composite hydrogel scaffold was non - cytotoxic and had good osteogenic induction . The incorporation of EBN increased the surface roughness of the com - posite hydrogel , which was more favorable for cell adhesion and proliferation . Nevertheless , natural polymers , which have excellent biocompatibility , non - toxic degradation products and better cell adhesion , are not suitable for high - temperature printing because of their tendency to deactivate under high - temperature conditions [ 134 ] . And they are mostly used for SLA , inkjet and extrusion printing . Thus , it is possible to achieve co - blending with cells and active factors to achieve 3D bioprinting . However , natural materials are difﬁcult and expensive to obtain , and the mechanical strength of pure natural polymers is much lower than that of natural bone . Moreover , the degradation rate is too fast to be used as bone repair materials , so they are mostly used as bioactive materials for addition [ 135 – 137 ] . Collagen and HA are of great interest to BTE as important components of natural bone . Amorphous HA is extremely accessible by precipi - tation methods . Ardelean and co - workers [ 89 ] have developed a composite contained with type I colla - gen and Ca ( OH ) 2 via 3D printing and mold prepa - ration , followed by cross - linking and HA generation in PBS solution containing glutaraldehyde . The results conﬁrmed that the newly generated HA was well dispersed in the hydrogel , while in vitro cellular experiments also conﬁrmed the good cytocompati - bility of the prepared specimens . This method pro - vides a new idea for 3D printing of collagen / HA . The application of composite materials in bone tissue repair is particularly critical in order to improve the disadvantages of single materials . Composites are mixture of two or more different materials that complement each other’s strengths to meet bone repair needs to a greater extent . For example , metals and bioceramics , polymeric materi - als and bioceramics , natural polymers , and artiﬁcial polymers , etc . [ 109 ] . PCL is extensively used for BTE for its excellent biocompatibility and mechanical strength . Nevertheless , the poor bioactivity and hydrophilicity of PCL make it difﬁcult to ﬁt tightly with new bone . Mg , as an important component of natural bone , exhibits good osteoinductivity and bioactivity . Therefore , PCL / Mg bone restoration scaffolds with different Mg content were prepared by 3D printing by Zhao and co - workers [ 109 ] . The physicochemical properties , in vivo and in vitro experiments of the scaffolds conﬁrmed that the addition of Mg particles enhanced the hydrophilicity as well as the cell adhesion of the composite scaf - folds . When the Mg content was 10 % , the PCL / 10 % Mg scaffold had good mechanical strength , bioactiv - ity , and early osteogenesis induction . This ﬁnding reveals the potential of this scaffold as an orthopedic clinical treatment . Studies have shown that the addition of bioceramics to polymers can enhance their bioactivity and improve their mechanical strength at the same time . On the other hand , in the study of composite materials , researchers have fur - ther compounded bioactive factors as needed to induce better bone regeneration in scaffolds . High - strength hydrogels Hydrogels are considered to be the most promising materials in the ﬁeld of TE , because of their intrinsic structure , composition , and high water content , which are similar to the human extracellular matrix [ 56 , 138 ] . At the same time , hydrogels are well bio - compatible and can be mechanically enhanced to 12698 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 better match the strength of the target tissue through a variety of means , such as : molecular weight poly - merization , concentration , cross - linking , and inor - ganic component addition [ 56 ] . However , one of the inevitable drawbacks of con - ventional hydrogels is low mechanical strength , which cannot be compared with natural tissues , especially in BTE . Although there are numerous applications of hydrogels , their mechanical strength is often far lower than that of bone tissues . The enhancement in the mechanical strength of hydrogels has been one of the focus areas of researchers , and the existing preparation methods for high - strength hydrogels mainly include slip rings , addition of nanocomposites , dual networks , super polymers , etc . [ 139 – 141 ] . Gao et al . [ 142 ] synthesized a high - strength thermoresponsive supramolecular copolymer hydrogel via one - step copolymerization of dual hydrogen bonding monomers , N - acryloylglyci - namide , N - [ tris ( hydroxymethyl ) methyl ] acrylamide . The results showed that the composite hydrogels owed superior mechanical properties - robust tensile strength ( up to 0 . 41 MPa ) , large stretchability ( up to 860 % ) , and high compressive strength ( up to 8 . 4 MPa ) . The development of 3D printing technol - ogy has given speciﬁc structures to hydrogels , enabling them to better play their expected role in tissue engineering . The current research combining 3D printing and high - strength hydrogels has become one of the important branches in the ﬁeld of bone tissue engineering , which we will elaborate on next . There are numerous applications for hydrogel 3D printing technologies , including inkjet printing , light - curing printing , laser - assisted printing , and extrusion printing . Inkjet printing requires a low viscosity ink and high light curing speed , which is more suit - able for printing simple structures of small size ; light curing printing needs a light sensitive ink to achieve curing ; laser assisted printing avoids nozzle clogging caused by high ink viscosity , but the high tempera - ture generated by the laser during the printing pro - cess is more damaging to cells [ 143 – 146 ] . Compared to the above - mentioned printing methods , extrusion printing is more suitable for hydrogel 3D molding , which is actually an improved fused deposition technology that enables the preparation of speciﬁc scaffolds by printing layer by layer using a combi - nation of multiple nozzles ( different materials can be placed in different parts of a single scaffold in a tar - geted manner , and cells , relevant active factors , and drug delivery can also be uniformly distributed ) [ 91 , 147 ] . Chitosan hydrogels gain much interest on account of their outstanding biocompatibility , antimicrobial activity , biodegradability , no toxicity and inexpensive cost [ 148 ] . Zhou et al . [ 149 ] reported high - strength chitosan hydrogel by direct ink writing 3D printing , the compressive strength reach up to 2 . 31 MPa . Dual network crosslinking is also one of the frequent approaches to enhance the mechanical strength of hydrogels . Jiang et al . [ 150 ] prepared PVA and CS dual physical cross - linked high - strength hydrogels using an extrusion - based 3D printing method . According to their research , the obtained hydrogel displayed a tensile strength of 12 . 71 ± 1 . 32 MPa at a strain of 302 . 27 ± 15 . 70 % , Young’s modulus of 14 . 01 ± 1 . 35 MPa . Supramolecular poly ( N - acryloyl glycinamide ) ( PNAGA ) hydrogel owes excellent mechanical properties for the multiple hydrogen bonding inter - actions among the dual amide motifs in the side chains [ 151 ] . However , the insurmountable difﬁculty in using 3D printing lies between ensuring its mechanical strength and printability . Higher con - centration results in better mechanical strength but poor printability and vice versa . Xu et al . [ 139 ] pre - pared 3D - printed PNAGA hydrogel scaffolds by a combination of fused deposition and pho - tocrosslinking through a self - reinforcement strategy . And their results conﬁrmed that the printed samples exhibited an excellent compressive strength ( 7 . 1 ± 0 . 29 MPa at 80 % strain ) and modulus ( 0 . 9 ± 0 . 01 MPa ) . Song et al . [ 152 ] fabricated poly ( ether etherketone ) ( PEEK ) scaffolds via FDM . The tensile strength , compressive max strength , and compressive yield strength of scaffolds were between 18 and 35 MPa , 197 . 83 , and 370 . 42 MPa , and 26 and 36 MPa , respectively , which could satisfy the loading requirements of human bones . In order to improve the low mechanical strength of natural hydrogels , researchers have used chemical modiﬁcations to give them chemical cross - linking functional groups such as double bonds . For exam - ple , through the acylation of methacrylic anhydride or methacryloyl chloride to introduce carbon – carbon double bonds in the main chain structure of natural polymers , and the grafting rate of the double bonds can be controlled by changing the addition percent - age to thus adjust the mechanical strength [ 153 – 155 ] . Methacrylated gelatin ( GelMA ) is a gelatin modiﬁed by double bonding , which is able to achieve J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12699 stable photocrosslinking under UV light [ 7 ] . It is widely used as a substrate for 3D printing because it maintains the good bio - destructibility and degrad - ability of gelatin while avoiding temperature depen - dence and better stability [ 156 , 157 ] . Ratheesh et al . [ 7 ] used bone particles ( BPs ) combined with GelMA to prepare a suitable 3D bioprinted bone repair scaffold by varying the ratio of each . The results conﬁrmed that this ( 10 % - 12 . 5 % ) GelMA composite hydrogel loaded with 15 % BCPs has favorable printability , together with good cellular activity and osteogenic differentiation capacity , which can be utilized as a potential application for large bone defects . It has been well documented that GelMA hydrogels have good printability and good mechan - ical strength at high concentrations ( [ 7 % ) , but the cell damage caused by high concentrations of GelMA hydrogels cannot be ignored . In order to improve its mechanical strength without affecting the cytocom - patibility , other natural polymers , inorganic sub - stances and artiﬁcial polymers are mostly added to GelMA [ 158 – 160 ] . In order to balance the printability and biocompatibility of GelMA hydrogels , Gao and co - workers [ 161 ] produced composite GelMA hydrogels by incorporating clay . It was shown that the addition of clay improved the mechanical strength and printability of the composite hydrogel ( allowing the preparation of hydrogels with complex porous structures ) , while decreasing its degradation rate , but the hydrogel still had good biocompatibility . Sodium alginate , as another natural polymer , is able to cross - link in Ca ? , and studies have conﬁrmed that GelMA and sodium alginate can effectively enhance the mechanical strength after double cross - linking [ 160 , 162 ] . Ansar et al . [ 163 ] prepared various hydrogel formulations based on alginate and GelMA , cultured with encapsulated gingival mesenchymal stem cells ( GMSCs ) or human bone marrow MSCs ( hBMMSCs ) . They demonstrated that addition of the GelMA to alginate hydrogel reduced the elasticity of the composite , while promoted the cell viability . An additional natural material that has been methacry - lated is hyaluronic acid ( HA ) . As an important component of natural cartilage , HA has good bio - compatibility and mechanical stability [ 164 , 165 ] . Compared with natural polymer hydrogels , syn - thetic polymer hydrogels generally have excellent mechanical strength . However , the biocompatibility and printability are poor , which requires the addition of other materials for improvement [ 39 ] . Yang et al . [ 39 ] fabricated a novel photocrosslinkable nanocom - posite ink composed of tri - block poly ( lactide - co - propylene glycol - co - lactide ) dimethacrylate and hydroxyethyl methacrylate ( HEMA ) - functionalized hydroxyapatite nanoparticles ( nHAMA ) for BTE at below 37 (cid:3) C . According to their research , the addition of nanocomposites into the composite would enhance mechanical performances signiﬁcantly compared to the control ( with compressive modulus from * 40 to * 400 MPa ) . Polycarbonate polyurethane ( PCU ) is a soft , tough biocompatible material that can be 3D printed into porous structures with controlled pore sizes . Abar et al . [ 166 ] fabricated porous ( pore sizes range from 0 to 800 l m ) PCU hydrogels by 3D printing . The pre - pared hydrogels had ultimate tensile strengths of 1 . 9 – 11 . 6 MPa , failure strains of 300 – 486 % , Young’s modulus of 0 . 85 – 12 . 42 MPa , and porosity of 13 – 71 % . Nanoscale zeolite imidazolium frame - 8 ( nanoZIF - 8 ) , a subclass of metal organic frameworks ( MOFs ) , was incorporated into composite scaffolds composed of PCL and dicalcium phosphate ( DCPD ) by an extru - sion - based 3D printing technique by Zhong et al . [ 167 ] . The results showed that the composite scaf - folds had higher mechanical strength ( 32 MPa ) and showed a uniform structure with highly intercon - nected macropores , which resulted in minimal cyto - toxicity of nanoZIFF - 8 , inhibited bacterial activity , and promoted osteogenesis in vitro and in vivo . Although there has been tremendous progress in research on high - strength hydrogels , materials that can achieve bone - weight strength with large 3D printability have not yet emerged . Taking inspiration from natural bone and wood , Wang et al . [ 168 ] sug - gested a biomimetic strategy to create highly aniso - tropic , ultra - stiff , and osteoconductive hydrogel composites by impregnating sodium alginate into deligniﬁed wood followed by in situ mineralization of hydroxyapatite ( HAp ) nanocrystals . Aligned cel - lulose nanoﬁbers imparted highly anisotropic struc - tural and mechanical properties to the composites . The strong intermolecular bonds of the aligned cel - lulose ﬁbers and hydrogel / wood interactions , as well as the HAp - reinforced nano - ﬁllers give the compos - ites a remarkable tensile strength of 67 . 8 MPa and an elastic modulus of 670 MPa . Furthermore , the bio - compatible hydrogels and well - aligned HAp nanocrystals can contribute effectively to osteogenic differentiation in vitro and induce bone formation in vivo . This study provides a low - cost , 12700 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 environmentally friendly , feasible , and scalable method for fabricating anisotropic , robust , stiff , hydrophilic , and osteoconductive hydrogel compos - ites for bone repair . As an important branch of hydrogels , the intelli - gent hydrogels have become one of the most hot - spots in BTE . Different from traditional hydrogels , the intelligent hydrogels were able to sense and respond under the certain environment , such as light , mechanical , temperature , pH , and so on [ 44 ] . For now , the intelligent hydrogels could be mainly divi - ded into high - strength hydrogels , shape memory hydrogels , self - healing , and self - transformation hydrogels [ 50 , 169 ] . Recently , a new paradigm called 4D printing in additive manufacturing has been reported widely , which was based on 3D printing and included with another dimension ‘‘time . ’’ In another words , 4D printing was consisted of 3D printing and intelligent hydrogels [ 170 – 172 ] . Senatov et al . [ 173 , 174 ] fabri - cated PLA / HA scaffolds with high strength and memory for bone repair by 3D printing . It was shown that the prepared scaffolds had a Young’s modulus of up to 1690 MPa and a maximum shape recovery rate of 98 % , and further cellular experiments also con - ﬁrmed the excellent cytocompatibility of the scaf - folds . 4D printing is still in the early stage of research , and there are still numerous unknown aspects of its intrinsic mechanism and future development poten - tial that need to be further explored . As a cross - dis - cipline , 4D printing has a high prospect of application in the ﬁeld of TE , robotics , medicine , and architecture . Outlook and conclusion This review analyzes the current issues and future trends of 3D printing , from 3D printing technologies and material selection to the application of high - strength 3D - printed hydrogels in BTE . 3D printing represents unique advantages for the development of TE , because of its ability to produce scaffolds with speciﬁc structures , speciﬁc shapes , adjustable me - chanical strengths , and compositions for different applications relatively quickly . 3D printing has evolved signiﬁcantly on both micro and macro scales , and 3D bioprinted skin , liver , and other tissues and organs have been successfully designed and implanted into the human body , but there is no clinical application of 3D bioprinting in the ﬁeld of bone defects reported . In the current clinical treat - ment , 3D scanning and printing technologies have been used in many cases to fabricate bone and dental implants , and these investigations have also con - ﬁrmed the accuracy and convenience of adopting 3D printing . However , the manufacturing period for 3D - printed prostheses tailored to speciﬁc bone defect patterns is relatively extended , and 3D - printed prosthesis assembly is still a pressing issue . Further - more , it is worth noting that all these applications are still similar to natural bone in terms of shape and mechanics , and that the majority of printed materials selected are metals or natural resins , which are bio - inert materials . As the ﬁelds of materials science and engineering continue to advance , an increasing number of advanced 3D printing technologies are being invented to produce more complex and body - speciﬁc implants . There are still various drawbacks of current 3D printing , such as : how to prepare multi - scale complex structures ( human tissues are mostly multi - scale complex structures , e . g . , bone , blood vessels ) , how to prepare prints with multiple mechanical strengths ( the mechanical strength of the same tissue varies signiﬁcantly in different parts ) , how to ensure that the printed body with suit - able structure , mechanical strength , while realizing the co - mingling of cells , growth factors , to truly achieve 3D bioprinting ; last but not least , the printing accuracy , printing efﬁciency , and the selection of printing materials , as well as the long - term effect of printing materials in the human body need our fur - ther research and improvement . Indeed , we are sure that with the further deepening of engineering , materials science , and human physiology research , 3D printing will eventually bring more beneﬁt to the ﬁeld of TE and regenerative medicine . Acknowledgements This work has been supported by the National Nat - ural Science Foundation of China ( Grant no : 11632013 , 11902214 , 82103147 ) and Shanxi - Zheda Institute of Advanced Materials and Chemical Engi - neering ( 2021SX - AT008 , 2021SX - AT009 ) . The support of Shanxi Provincial Key Research and Development Project , China ( Grant no : 201803D421060 , 201803D421076 ) and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province , China ( Grant no : 201901D111078 , J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12701 201901D111077 , 201801D121281 ) is also acknowl - edged with gratitude . Declarations Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or per - sonal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper . References [ 1 ] Marrella A , Lee TY , Lee DH et al ( 2018 ) Engineering vascularized and innervated bone biomaterials for improved skeletal tissue regeneration . Mater Today 21 ( 4 ) : 362 – 376 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mattod . 2017 . 10 . 005 [ 2 ] Zhang T , Wei Q , Zhou H et al ( 2021 ) Three - dimensional - printed individualized porous implants : a new ‘‘implant - bone’’ interface fusion concept for large bone defect treat - ment . Bioactive Mater 6 : 3659 – 3670 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 16 / j . bioactmat . 2021 . 03 . 030 [ 3 ] Nie L , Chen D , Suo J et al ( 2012 ) Physicochemical char - acterization and biocompatibility in vitro of biphasic cal - cium phosphate / polyvinyl alcohol scaffolds prepared by freeze - drying method for bone tissue engineering applica - tions . colloids and surfaces . B Biointerfaces 100 : 169 – 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . colsurfb . 2012 . 04 . 046 [ 4 ] Zhang Z , Jia B , Han Y et al ( 2021 ) Biodegradable ZnLiCa ternary alloys for critical - sized bone defect regeneration at load - bearing sites : in vitro and in vivo studies . Bioactive Mater 6 : 3999 – 4013 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 20 21 . 03 . 045 [ 5 ] Swanson W , Zhang Z , Xiu K et al ( 2020 ) Scaffolds with controlled release of pro - mineralization exosomes to pro - mote craniofacial bone healing without cell transplantation . Acta Biomater 118 : 215 – 232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actb io . 2020 . 09 . 052 [ 6 ] Shi R , Huang Y , Ma C et al ( 2018 ) Current advances for bone regeneration based on tissue engineering strategies . Front Med . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11684 - 018 - 0629 - 9 [ 7 ] Ratheesh G , Vaquette C , Xiao Y ( 2020 ) Patient - speciﬁc bone particles bioprinting for bone tissue engineering . Adv Healthc Mater 9 ( 23 ) : 2001323 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adh m . 202001323 [ 8 ] Lin K - F , He S , Song Y et al ( 2016 ) Low - temperature additive manufacturing of biomimic three - dimensional hydroxyapatite / collagen scaffolds for bone regeneration . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 8 ( 11 ) : 6905 – 6916 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 6b00815 [ 9 ] Jose M , Thomas V , Johnson K et al ( 2008 ) Aligned PLGA / HA nanoﬁbrous nanocomposite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . Acta Biomater 5 : 305 – 315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2008 . 07 . 019 [ 10 ] Nakano T , Ishimoto T , Matsugaki A et al ( 2020 ) Control of crystallographic orientation by metal additive manufactur - ing process of b - type Ti alloys based on the bone tissue anisotropy . MATEC Web of Conf 321 : 05002 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1051 / matecconf / 202032105002 [ 11 ] Schatkoski VM , doAmaralMontanheirodeMenezes TLBRC et al ( 2021 ) Current advances concerning the most cited metal ions doped bioceramics and silicate - based bioactive glasses for bone tissue engineering . Ceramics Int 47 ( 3 ) : 2999 – 3012 [ 12 ] Camara - Torres M , Duarte S , Sinha R et al ( 2021 ) 3D additive manufactured composite scaffolds with antibiotic - loaded lamellar ﬁllers for bone infection prevention and tissue regeneration . Bioactive Mater 6 ( 4 ) : 1073 – 1082 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 2020 . 09 . 031 [ 13 ] Yinze X , Gao R - N , Zhang H et al ( 2020 ) Rationally designed functionally graded porous Ti6Al4V scaffolds with high strength and toughness built via selective laser melting for load - bearing orthopedic applications . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 104 : 103673 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmbbm . 2020 . 103673 [ 14 ] Zhang H , Huang H , Hao G et al ( 2021 ) 3D Printing hydrogel scaffolds with nanohydroxyapatite gradient to effectively repair osteochondral defects in rats . Adv Funct Mater 31 ( 1 ) : 2006697 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202006697 [ 15 ] Zhai X , Ma Y , Hou C et al ( 2017 ) 3D - printed high strength bioactive supramolecular polymer / clay nanocomposite hydrogel scaffold for bone regeneration . ACS Biomater Sci Eng . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 7b00224 [ 16 ] Wang X , Xu S , Zhou S et al ( 2016 ) Topological design and additive manufacturing of porous metals for bone scaffolds and orthopaedic implants : a review . Biomaterials 83 : 127 – 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2016 . 01 . 012 [ 17 ] Bai L , Zhao Y , Chen P et al ( 2021 ) Targeting early healing phase with titania nanotube arrays on tunable diameters to accelerate bone regeneration and osseointegration . Small 17 ( 4 ) : 2006287 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 202006287 [ 18 ] Bai L , Liu Y , Du Z et al ( 2018 ) Differential effect of hydroxyapatite nano - particle versus nano - rod decorated titanium micro - surface on osseointegration . Acta Biomater 76 : 344 – 358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2018 . 06 . 023 [ 19 ] Koons G , Diba M , Mikos A ( 2020 ) Materials design for bone - tissue engineering . Nat Rev Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41578 - 020 - 0204 - 2 12702 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 [ 20 ] Wang Y , Huang X , Zhang X ( 2021 ) Ultrarobust , tough and highly stretchable self - healing materials based on cartilage - inspired noncovalent assembly nanostructure . Nature Commun . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 21577 - 7 [ 21 ] Hua M , Shuwang W , Ma Y et al ( 2021 ) Strong tough hydrogels via the synergy of freeze - casting and salting out . Nature 590 ( 7847 ) : 594 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s4158 6 - 021 - 03212 - z [ 22 ] Hua J , Ng PF , Fei B ( 2018 ) High - strength hydrogels : microstructure design , characterization and applications : high - strength hydrogels : a review of microstructure design , characterization and applications . J Polym Sci , Part B : Polym Phys 56 : 1325 – 1335 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / polb . 24725 [ 23 ] Hirsch M , Charlet A , Amstad E ( 2020 ) 3D printing of strong and tough double network granular hydrogels . Adv Func Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202005929 [ 24 ] Manavitehrani I , Le TYL , Daly S et al ( 2018 ) Formation of porous biodegradable scaffolds based on poly ( propylene carbonate ) using gas foaming technology . Mater Sci Eng , C . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2018 . 11 . 088 [ 25 ] Yao H , Kang J , Li W et al ( 2017 ) Novel b - TCP / PVA bilayered hydrogels with considerable physical and bio - functional properties for osteochondral repair . Biomed Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1748 - 605X / aa8541 [ 26 ] Nahanmoghadam A , Asemani M , Gooadrzi V et al ( 2020 ) Design and fabrication of bone tissue scaffolds based on pcl / phbvcontaining hydroxyapatite nanoparticles : dual - leaching technique . J Biomed Mater Res , Part A . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 37087 [ 27 ] Lan W , Zhang X , Xu M et al ( 2019 ) Carbon nanotube reinforced polyvinyl alcohol / biphasic calcium phosphate scaffold for bone tissue engineering . RSC Adv 9 : 38998 – 39010 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / C9RA08569F [ 28 ] Kazimierczak P , Benko A , Pałka K et al ( 2020 ) Novel synthesis method combining a foaming agent with freeze - drying to obtain hybrid highly macroporous bone scaffolds . J Mater Sci Technol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmst . 2020 . 01 . 006 [ 29 ] Bandyopadhyay A , Mitra I , Bose S ( 2020 ) 3D printing for bone regeneration . Curr Osteoporos Rep 18 : 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11914 - 020 - 00606 - 2 [ 30 ] Han X , Sun M , Chen B et al ( 2021 ) Lotus seedpod - inspired internal vascularized 3D printed scaffold for bone tissue repair . Bioactive Mater 6 ( 6 ) : 1639 – 1652 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 2020 . 11 . 019 [ 31 ] Bendtsen ST , Quinnell SP , Wei M ( 2017 ) Development of a novel alginate - polyvinyl alcohol - hydroxyapatite hydrogel for 3D bioprinting bone tissue engineered scaffolds . J Biomed Mater Res Part A 105 ( 5 ) : 1457 – 1468 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 36036 [ 32 ] Wang C , Huang W , Zhou Yet al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of bone tissue engineering scaffolds . Bioactive Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioactmat . 2020 . 01 . 004 [ 33 ] Maroulakos M , Kamperos G , Tayebi L et al ( 2018 ) Applications of 3D printing on craniofacial bone repair : a systematic review . J Dent . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jdent . 2018 . 11 . 004 [ 34 ] Lipian M , Kulak M , Stepien M ( 2019 ) Fast track integra - tion of computational methods with experiments in small wind turbine development . Energies 12 ( 9 ) : 1625 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / en12091625 [ 35 ] Zuo H , Liu Z , Zhang L et al ( 2021 ) Self - healing materials enable free - standing seamless large - scale 3D printing . Sci China - Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40843 - 020 - 1603 - y [ 36 ] Pasricha A , Greeninger R ( 2018 ) Exploration of 3D print - ing to create zero - waste sustainable fashion notions and jewelry . Fashion Text . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s40691 - 018 - 0152 - 2 [ 37 ] Kelly C , Miller A , Hollister S et al ( 2017 ) Design and structure - function characterization of 3d printed synthetic porous biomaterials for tissue engineering . Adv Healthcare Mater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 201701095 [ 38 ] Tay YWD , Panda B , Paul SC et al ( 2017 ) 3D printing trends in building and construction industry : a review . Virtual Phys Prototyp 12 ( 3 ) : 261 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 80 / 17452759 . 2017 . 1326724 [ 39 ] Yang Y , Zhang Q , Xu T et al ( 2020 ) Photocrosslinkable nanocomposite ink for printing strong , biodegradable and bioactive bone graft . Biomaterials . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2020 . 120378 [ 40 ] Daly AC , Cunniffe GM , Sathy BN et al ( 2016 ) 3D Bio - printing of developmentally inspired templates for whole bone organ engineering . Adv Healthcare Mater 5 ( 18 ) : 2353 – 2362 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 201600182 [ 41 ] Palmieri V , Lattanzi W , Perini G et al ( 2020 ) 3D - printed graphene for bone reconstruction . 2D Mater 7 ( 2 ) : 022004 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 2053 - 1583 / ab6a5d [ 42 ] Feng Z , Li Y , Hao L et al ( 2019 ) Graphene - reinforced biodegradable resin composites for stereolithographic 3d printing of bone structure scaffolds . J Nanomater 2019 : 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2019 / 9710264 [ 43 ] Xi L , Zhang Y , Gupta H et al ( 2020 ) A multiscale study of structural and compositional changes in a natural nanocomposite : Osteoporotic bone with chronic endoge - nous steroid excess . Bone 143 : 115666 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bone . 2020 . 115666 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12703 [ 44 ] Midha S , Dalela M , Sybil D et al ( 2019 ) Advances in three - dimensional bioprinting of bone : Progress and challenges . J Tissue Eng Regen Med 13 ( 6 ) : 925 – 945 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / term . 2847 [ 45 ] Tang A , Ji J , Li J et al ( 2021 ) Nanocellulose / pegda aerogels with tunable poisson’s ratio fabricated by stereolithography for mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell culture . Nanomaterials 11 ( 3 ) : 603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / na no11030603 [ 46 ] van Bochove B , Grijpma DW ( 2019 ) Photo - crosslinked synthetic biodegradable polymer networks for biomedical applications . J Biomater Sci - Polym Ed 30 ( 2 ) : 77 – 106 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09205063 . 2018 . 1553105 [ 47 ] Wei Y , Zhao D , Cao Q et al ( 2020 ) Stereolithography - based additive manufacturing of high performance osteoinductive calcium phosphate ceramics by a digital light - processing system . ACS Biomater Sci Eng 6 ( 3 ) : 1787 – 1797 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 9b01663 [ 48 ] Chen Y , Furukawa T , Ibi T et al ( 2021 ) Multi - scale micro - stereolithography using optical ﬁbers with a photocurable ceramic slurry . Optical Mater Express 11 ( 1 ) : 105 – 114 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1364 / ome . 404217 [ 49 ] ZhouFuHe L - YJY ( 2020 ) A review of 3D printing tech - nologies for soft polymer materials . Adv Functional Mater 30 ( 28 ) : 2000187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202000187 [ 50 ] Heinrich MA , Liu W , Jimenez A et al ( 2019 ) 3D Bio - printing : from benches to translational applications . Small . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 201805510 [ 51 ] Anandakrishnan N , Ye H , Guo Z et al ( 2021 ) Fast stere - olithography printing of large - scale biocompatible hydrogel models . Adv Healthc Mater 10 ( 10 ) : e2002103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 202002103 [ 52 ] Safonov A , Maltsev E , Chugunov S et al ( 2020 ) Design and fabrication of complex - shaped ceramic bone implants via 3d printing based on laser stereolithography . Appl Sci 10 ( 20 ) : 7138 [ 53 ] Le Guehennec L , Dorien VH , Plougonven E et al ( 2020 ) In vitro and in vivo biocompatibility of calcium - phosphate scaffolds three - dimensional printed by stereolithography for bone regeneration . J Biomed Mater Res , Part A 108 ( 3 ) : 412 – 425 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 36823 [ 54 ] Amler AK , Dinkelborg PH , Schlauch D et al ( 2021 ) Comparison of the translational potential of human mes - enchymal progenitor cells from different bone entities for autologous 3d bioprinted bone grafts . Int J Mol Sci 22 ( 2 ) : 796 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms22020796 [ 55 ] Thavasiappan K , Venkatesan MS , Ariffuddeen M et al ( 2020 ) Design , analysis , fabrication and testing of PC porous scaffolds using rapid prototyping in clinical applications . Biomedicine 39 ( 2 ) : 339 – 345 . https : / / doi . org / 1 0 . 51248 / . v39i2 . 204 [ 56 ] Chimene D , Kaunas R , Gaharwar AK ( 2020 ) Hydrogel bioink reinforcement for additive manufacturing : a focused review of emerging strategies . Adv Mater 32 ( 1 ) : 1902026 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 201902026 [ 57 ] Tromans G ( 2006 ) Rapid manufacturing : an industrial revolution for the digital age , pp 211 – 219 . [ 58 ] Truby RL , Lewis JA ( 2016 ) Printing soft matter in three dimensions . Nature 540 ( 7633 ) : 371 – 378 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature21003 [ 59 ] Nadgorny M , Ameli A ( 2018 ) Functional polymers and nanocomposites for 3d printing of smart structures and devices . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10 ( 21 ) : 17489 – 17507 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 8b01786 [ 60 ] Yang K , Grant JC , Lamey P et al ( 2017 ) Diels – alder reversible thermoset 3d printing : isotropic thermoset poly - mers via fused ﬁlament fabrication . Adv Functional Mater 27 ( 24 ) : 1700318 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 201700318 [ 61 ] Nowicki MA , Castro NJ , Plesniak MW et al ( 2016 ) 3D printing of novel osteochondral scaffolds with graded microstructure . Nanotechnology 27 ( 41 ) : 414001 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0957 - 4484 / 27 / 41 / 414001 [ 62 ] Alizadeh - Osgouei M , Li Y , Vahid A et al ( 2020 ) High strength porous PLA gyroid scaffolds manufactured via fused deposition modeling for tissue - engineering applica - tions . Smart Mater Med 2 : 15 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . smaim . 2020 . 10 . 003 [ 63 ] Chen G , Chen N , Wang Q ( 2019 ) Fabrication and proper - ties of poly ( vinyl alcohol ) / b - tricalcium phosphate com - posite scaffolds via fused deposition modeling for bone tissue engineering . Compos Sci Technol 172 : 17 – 28 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compscitech . 2019 . 01 . 004 [ 64 ] Distler T , Fournier N , Gruenewald A et al ( 2020 ) Polymer - bioactive glass composite ﬁlaments for 3d scaffold manu - facturing by fused deposition modeling : fabrication and characterization . Front Bioengin Biotechnol 8 : 552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fbioe . 2020 . 00552 [ 65 ] Yang C , Li J , Chongzun Z et al ( 2019 ) advanced antibac - terial activity of biocompatible tantalum nanoﬁlm via enhanced local innate immunity . Acta Biomater . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2019 . 03 . 027 [ 66 ] Nulty J , Freeman FE , Browe DC et al ( 2021 ) 3D bio - printing of prevascularised implants for the repair of criti - cally - sized bone defects . Acta Biomater 126 : 154 – 169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2021 . 03 . 003 [ 67 ] Ojansivu M , Rashad A , Ahlinder A et al ( 2019 ) Wood - based nanocellulose and bioactive glass modiﬁed gelatin - alginate bioinks for 3D bioprinting of bone cells . 12704 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 Biofabrication 11 ( 3 ) : 035010 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / ab0692 [ 68 ] Mandrycky C , Wang Z , Kim K et al ( 2016 ) 3D bioprinting for engineering complex tissues . Biotechnol Adv 34 ( 4 ) : 422 – 434 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biotechadv . 2015 . 1 2 . 011 [ 69 ] Okafor - Muo OL , Hassanin H , Kayyali R et al ( 2020 ) 3D Printing of solid oral dosage forms : numerous challenges with unique opportunities . J Pharm Sci 109 ( 12 ) : 3535 – 3550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . xphs . 2020 . 0 8 . 029 [ 70 ] Lv C , Zhu L , Shi J et al ( 2018 ) The fabrication of tissue engineering scaffolds by inkjet printing technology . Mater Sci Forum 934 : 129 – 133 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4028 / www . scie ntific . net / MSF . 934 . 129 [ 71 ] Rajzer I , Rom M , Menaszek E et al ( 2015 ) Conductive PANI patterns on electrospun PCL / gelatin scaffolds modi - ﬁed with bioactive particles for bone tissue engineering . Mater Lett 138 : 60 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matlet . 201 4 . 09 . 077 [ 72 ] Gao G , Schilling AF , Yonezawa T et al ( 2014 ) Bioactive nanoparticles stimulate bone tissue formation in bioprinted three - dimensional scaffold and human mesenchymal stem cells . Biotechnol J 9 ( 10 ) : 1304 – 1311 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 02 / biot . 201400305 [ 73 ] Cui X , Dean D , Ruggeri ZM et al ( 2010 ) Cell damage evaluation of thermal inkjet printed chinese hamster ovary cells . Biotechnol Bioeng 106 ( 6 ) : 963 – 969 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bit . 22762 [ 74 ] Vanderburgh JP , Fernando SJ , Merkel AR et al ( 2017 ) Fabrication of trabecular bone - templated tissue - engineered constructs by 3d inkjet printing . Adv Healthcare Mater 6 ( 22 ) : 1700369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 201700369 [ 75 ] Barui S , Panda AK , Naskar S et al ( 2019 ) 3D inkjet printing of biomaterials with strength reliability and cytocompati - bility : quantitative process strategy for Ti - 6Al - 4V . Bioma - terials 213 : 119212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2019 . 05 . 023 [ 76 ] Liao B , Xia RF , Li W et al ( 2021 ) 3D - Printed Ti6Al4V scaffolds with graded triply periodic minimal surface structure for bone tissue engineering . J Mater Eng Perform 30 : 4993 – 5004 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11665 - 021 - 05580 - z [ 77 ] Kamboj N , Aghayan M , Sara Rodrigo - Va´zquez C et al ( 2019 ) Novel silicon - wollastonite based scaffolds for bone tissue engineering produced by selective laser melting . Ceram Int . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceramint . 2019 . 08 . 208 [ 78 ] Hull SM , Lindsay CD , Brunel LG et al ( 2021 ) 3D Bio - printing using universal orthogonal network ( UNION ) bioinks . Adv Func Mater 31 ( 7 ) : 2007983 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202007983 [ 79 ] Kim SH , Yeon YK , Lee JM et al ( 2018 ) Precisely print - able and biocompatible silk ﬁbroin bioink for digital light processing 3D printing . Nat Commun 9 : 1620 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 04517 - w [ 80 ] He Y , Wang F , Wang X et al ( 2021 ) A photocurable hybrid chitosan / acrylamide bioink for DLP based 3D bioprinting . Mater Des 202 : 109588 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matdes . 2 021 . 109588 [ 81 ] Hong H , Seo YB , Kim DY et al ( 2020 ) Digital light pro - cessing 3D printed silk ﬁbroin hydrogel for cartilage tissue engineering . Biomaterials 232 : 119679 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1 016 / j . biomaterials . 2019 . 119679 [ 82 ] Ouyang L , Armstrong JPK , Lin Y et al ( 2020 ) Expanding and optimizing 3D bioprinting capabilities using comple - mentary network bioinks . Sci Adv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abc5529 [ 83 ] Duymaz BT , Erdiler FB , Alan T et al ( 2019 ) 3D bio - printing of levan / polycaprolactone / gelatin blends for bone tissue engineering : characterization of the cellular behavior . Eur Polymer J 119 : 426 – 437 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eurp olymj . 2019 . 08 . 015 [ 84 ] Micic M , Antonijevic D , Milutinovic - Smiljanic S et al ( 2020 ) Developing a novel resorptive hydroxyapatite - based bone substitute for over - critical size defect reconstruction : physicochemical and biological characterization and proof of concept in segmental rabbit’s ulna reconstruction . Biomed Eng Biomedizinische Technik 65 ( 4 ) : 491 – 505 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / bmt - 2019 - 0218 [ 85 ] Demirtas TT , Irmak G , Gumusderelioglu M ( 2017 ) A bioprintable form of chitosan hydrogel for bone tissue engineering . Biofabrication 9 ( 3 ) : 035003 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / aa7b1d [ 86 ] Liu X , Gaihre B , George MN et al ( 2021 ) 3Dbioprinting of oligo ( poly ethylene glycol fumarate ) for bone and nerve tissue engineering . J Biomed Mater Res Part A 109 ( 1 ) : 6 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 37002 [ 87 ] Anada T , Pan C - C , Stahl AM et al ( 2019 ) Vascularized bone - mimetic hydrogel constructs by 3d bioprinting to promote osteogenesis and angiogenesis . Int J Mol Sci 20 ( 5 ) : 1096 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms20051096 [ 88 ] Bose S , Vahabzadeh S , Bandyopadhyay A ( 2013 ) Bone tssue engineering using 3D printing . Mater Today 16 : 496 – 504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mattod . 2013 . 11 . 017 [ 89 ] Ardelean IL , Gudovan D , Ficai D et al ( 2018 ) Collagen / hydroxyapatite bone grafts manufactured by homogeneous / heterogeneous 3D printing . Mater Lett 231 : 179 – 182 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matlet . 2018 . 08 . 042 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12705 [ 90 ] Aldana A , Valente F , Dilley R et al ( 2020 ) Development of 3D bioprinted GelMA - alginate hydrogels with tunable mechanical properties . Bioprinting 21 : e00105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bprint . 2020 . e00105 [ 91 ] Chimene D , Lennox KK , Kaunas RR et al ( 2016 ) Advanced bioinks for 3d printing : a materials science per - spective . Ann Biomed Eng 44 ( 6 ) : 2090 – 2102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 016 - 1638 - y [ 92 ] Yang Yang , Song Xuan , Li Xiangjia et al ( 2018 ) Recent progress in biomimetic additive manufacturing technology : from materials to functional structures . Adv Mater 30 ( 36 ) : 1706539 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 201706539 [ 93 ] Ouyang L , Rui Yao Y , Zhao WS ( 2016 ) Effect of bioink properties on printability and cell viability for 3D bioplot - ting of embryonic stem cells . Biofabrication 8 ( 3 ) : 035020 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / 8 / 3 / 035020 [ 94 ] Siu TL , Rogers JM , Lin K et al ( 2018 ) Custom - made titanium 3 - dimensional printed interbody cages for treat - ment of osteoporotic fracture - related spinal deformity . World Neurosurg 111 : 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . wneu . 2017 . 11 . 160 [ 95 ] Nune KC , Misra RDK , Gaytan SM et al ( 2015 ) Interplay between cellular activity and three - dimensional scaffold - cell constructs with different foam structure processed by electron beam melting . J Biomed Mater Res Part A 103 ( 5 ) : 1677 – 1692 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 35307 [ 96 ] Yu W , Zhao H , Ding Z et al ( 2016 ) In vitro and in vivo evaluation of MgF2 coated AZ31 magnesium alloy porous scaffolds for bone regeneration . Colloids Surf B . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . colsurfb . 2016 . 10 . 037 [ 97 ] Dumas M , Terriault P , Brailovski V ( 2017 ) Modelling and characterization of a porosity graded lattice structure for additively manufactured biomaterials . Mater Des 121 : 383 – 392 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matdes . 2017 . 02 . 021 [ 98 ] Zheng Y , Han Q , Wang J et al ( 2020 ) Promotion of osseointegration between Implant and bone interface by titanium alloy porous scaffolds prepared by 3D printing . ACS Biomater Sci Eng 6 ( 9 ) : 5181 – 5190 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 0c00662 [ 99 ] Soro N , Attar H , Brodie E et al ( 2019 ) Evaluation of the mechanical compatibility of additively manufactured por - ous Ti – 25Ta alloy for load - bearing implant applications . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 97 : 149 – 158 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmbbm . 2019 . 05 . 019 [ 100 ] Kuo T - Y , Chin W - H , Chien C - S et al ( 2019 ) Mechanical and biological properties of graded porous tantalum coat - ings deposited on titanium alloy implants by vacuum plasma spraying . Surf Coat Technol 372 : 399 – 409 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . surfcoat . 2019 . 05 . 003 [ 101 ] Weng Z , Bai L , Liu Y et al ( 2019 ) Osteogenic activity , antibacterial ability , and Ni release of Mg - incorporated Ni - Ti - O nanopore coatings on NiTi alloy . Appl Surf Sci 486 : 441 – 451 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apsusc . 2019 . 04 . 259 [ 102 ] Lee JW , Wen HB , Battula S et al ( 2015 ) Outcome after placement of tantalum porous engineered dental implants in fresh extraction sockets a canine study . Int J Oral Max - illofac Implants 30 ( 1 ) : 134 – 142 [ 103 ] Liu S , Hu X , Ma X et al ( 2016 ) Promotion of osteointe - gration under diabetic conditions by tantalum coating - based surface modiﬁcation on 3 - dimensional printed porous tita - nium implants . Colloids Surf B . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . c olsurfb . 2016 . 09 . 018 [ 104 ] Bandyopadhyay A , Mitra I , Shivaram A et al ( 2019 ) Direct comparison of additively manufactured porous titanium and tantalum implants towards in vivo osseointegration . Addit Manuf 28 : 259 – 266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addma . 2019 . 04 . 025 [ 105 ] Zhao DW , Ma ZJ , Wang TN et al ( 2019 ) Biocompatible porous tantalum metal plates in the treatment of tibial fracture . Orthop Surg 11 ( 2 ) : 325 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 11 11 / os . 12432 [ 106 ] Zhao G , Li S , Chen X et al ( 2019 ) Porous tantalum scaffold fabricated by gel casting based on 3D printing and elec - trolysis . Mater Lett 239 : 5 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matle t . 2018 . 12 . 047 [ 107 ] Xiong Z , Liu W , Qian H et al ( 2021 ) Tantalum nanoparti - cles reinforced PCL scaffolds using direct 3D printing for bone tissue engineering . Front Mater 8 ( 10 ) : 3389 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fmats . 2021 . 609779 [ 108 ] Li Y , Zhou J , Pavanram P et al ( 2018 ) Additively manu - factured biodegradable porous magnesium . Acta Biomater 67 : 378 – 392 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2017 . 12 . 008 [ 109 ] Zhao S , Xie K , Guo Y et al ( 2020 ) Fabrication and bio - logical activity of 3D - printed polycaprolactone / magnesium porous scaffolds for critical size bone defect repair . ACS Biomater Sci Eng 6 ( 9 ) : 5120 – 5131 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 9b01911 [ 110 ] Bobby Kannan M , Chappell J , Khakbaz H et al ( 2020 ) Biodegradable 3D porous zinc alloy scaffold for bone fracture ﬁxation devices . Medi Dev Sens . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mds3 . 10108 [ 111 ] Chou D - T , Wells D , Hong D et al ( 2013 ) Novel processing of iron - manganese alloy based biomaterials by inkjet 3D printing . Acta Biomater 9 ( 10 ) : 1016 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 101 6 / j . actbio . 2013 . 04 . 016 [ 112 ] Martinez D , Han S , Kim N ( 2018 ) Magnesium alloy 3D printing by wire and arc additive manufacturing ( WAAM ) . MRS Adv 3 : 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1557 / adv . 2018 . 553 12706 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 [ 113 ] Xu W , Zhuang Y , Zhang X et al ( 2019 ) Preparation of medical magnesium matrix composite for bone defect and design method of 3D printed material . Sci Adv Mater 11 ( 6 ) : 824 – 834 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1166 / sam . 2019 . 3557 [ 114 ] Pei X , Ma L , Zhang B et al ( 2017 ) Creating hierarchical porosity hydroxyapatite scaffolds with osteoinduction by three - dimensional printing and microwave sintering . Bio - fabrication 9 ( 4 ) : 045008 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 509 0 / aa90ed [ 115 ] Driscoll JA , Lubbe R , Jakus AE et al ( 2020 ) 3D - printed ceramic - demineralized bone matrix hyperelastic bone composite scaffolds for spinal fusion . Tissue Eng Part A 26 ( 3 – 4 ) : 157 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / ten . tea . 2019 . 0166 [ 116 ] Gmeiner R , Mitteramskogler G , Stampﬂ J et al ( 2015 ) Stereolithographic ceramic manufacturing of high strength bioactive glass . Int J Appl Ceram Technol 12 ( 1 ) : 38 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ijac . 12325 [ 117 ] Tesavibul P , Felzmann R , Gruber S et al ( 2012 ) Processing of 45S5 bioglass ( R ) by lithography - based additive manu - facturing . Mater Lett 74 : 81 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matlet . 2012 . 01 . 019 [ 118 ] Hartmann M , Pfafﬁnger M , Stampﬂ J ( 2021 ) the role of solvents in lithography - based ceramic manufacturing of lithium disilicate . Materials 14 ( 4 ) : 1045 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ma14041045 [ 119 ] Baumgartner S , Gmeiner R , Schoenherr JA et al ( 2020 ) Stereolithography - based additive manufacturing of lithium disilicate glass ceramic for dental applications . Mater Sci Eng C - Mater Biol Appl 116 : 111180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 16 / j . msec . 2020 . 111180 [ 120 ] Li X , Yuan Y , Liu L et al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of hydrox - yapatite / tricalcium phosphate scaffold with hierarchical porous structure for bone regeneration . Bio - Des Manuf 3 ( 1 ) : 15 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42242 - 019 - 00056 - 5 [ 121 ] Raja N , Sung A , Park H et al ( 2021 ) Low - temperature fabrication of calcium deﬁcient hydroxyapatite bone scaf - fold by optimization of 3D printing conditions . Ceram Int 47 ( 5 ) : 7005 – 7016 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceramint . 2020 . 11 . 051 [ 122 ] Mirkhalaf M , Dao A , Schindeler A et al ( 2021 ) Personal - ized baghdadite scaffolds : stereolithography , mechanics and in vivo testing . Acta Biomater 15 ( 132 ) : 217 – 226 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2021 . 03 . 012 [ 123 ] Fernandes MH , Alves MM , Cebotarenco M et al ( 2020 ) Citrate zinc hydroxyapatite nanorods with enhanced cyto - compatibility and osteogenesis for bone regeneration . Mater Sci Eng C - Mater Biol Appl 115 : 111147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2020 . 111147 [ 124 ] Koksal OK , Wrobel P , Apaydin G et al ( 2019 ) Elemental analysis for iron , cobalt , copper and zinc decorated hydroxyapatite synthetic bone dusts by EDXRF and SEM . Microchem J 144 : 83 – 87 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . microc . 2018 . 08 . 050 [ 125 ] Chen S , Shi Y , Zhang X et al ( 2019 ) Biomimetic synthesis of Mg - substituted hydroxyapatite nanocomposites and three - dimensional printing of composite scaffolds for bone regeneration . J Biomed Mater Res Part A 107 ( 11 ) : 1549 – 3296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 36757 [ 126 ] Deng C , Yao Q , Feng C et al ( 2017 ) 3D printing of bilin - eage constructive biomaterials for bone and cartilage regeneration . Adv Func Mater 27 : 1703117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 201703117 [ 127 ] Inzana JA , Olvera D , Fuller SM et al ( 2014 ) 3D printing of composite calcium phosphate and collagen scaffolds for bone regeneration . Biomaterials 35 ( 13 ) : 4026 – 4034 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2014 . 01 . 064 [ 128 ] Huang T , Fan C , Zhu M et al ( 2019 ) 3D - printed scaffolds of biomineralized hydroxyapatite nanocomposite on silk ﬁbroin for improving bone regeneration . Appl Surf Sci 467 : 345 – 353 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apsusc . 2018 . 10 . 166 [ 129 ] Yao Q , Wei B , Guo Yet al ( 2015 ) Design , construction and mechanical testing of digital 3D anatomical data - based PCL – HA bone tissue engineering scaffold . J Mater Sci Mater Med . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10856 - 014 - 5360 - 8 [ 130 ] Hassanajili S , Karami - Pour A , Oryan A et al ( 2019 ) Preparation and characterization of PLA / PCL / HA com - posite scaffolds using indirect 3D printing for bone tissue engineering . Mater Sci Eng C - Mater Biol Appl 104 : 109960 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2019 . 109960 [ 131 ] Belaid H , Nagarajan S , Barou C et al ( 2020 ) Boron nitride based nanobiocomposites : design by 3d printing for bone tissue engineering . ACS Appl Bio Mater 3 ( 4 ) : 1865 – 1874 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsabm . 9b00965 [ 132 ] Grottkau BE , Hui Z , Yao Yet al ( 2020 ) Rapid fabrication of anatomically - shaped bone scaffolds using indirect 3D Printing and perfusion techniques . Int J Mol Sci 21 ( 1 ) : 315 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms21010315 [ 133 ] Li X , Wang Y , Wang Z et al ( 2018 ) Composite PLA / PEG / nHA / Dexamethasone scaffold prepared by 3D printing for bone regeneration . Macromol Biosci 18 ( 6 ) : e1800068 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mabi . 201800068 [ 134 ] Bose S , Koski C , Vu AA ( 2020 ) Additive manufacturing of natural biopolymers and composites for bone tissue engi - neering . Mater Horiz 7 ( 8 ) : 2011 – 2027 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1 039 / d0mh00277a [ 135 ] Hung BP , Naved BA , Nyberg EL et al ( 2016 ) Three - di - mensional printing of bone extracellular matrix for cran - iofacial regeneration . ACS Biomater Sci Eng J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12707 2 ( 10 ) : 1806 – 1816 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsbiomaterials . 6b00101 [ 136 ] Lee H , Yang GH , Kim M et al ( 2018 ) Fabrication of micro / nanoporous collagen / dECM / silk - ﬁbroin biocompos - ite scaffolds using a low temperature 3D printing process for bone tissue regeneration . Mater Sci Eng C - Mater Biol Appl 84 : 140 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2017 . 11 . 013 [ 137 ] Lohrasbi S , Mirzaei E , Karimizade A et al ( 2020 ) Colla - gen / cellulose nanoﬁber hydrogel scaffold : physical , mechanical and cell biocompatibility properties . Cellulose 27 ( 2 ) : 927 – 940 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10570 - 019 - 02841 - y [ 138 ] Drury J , Mooney D ( 2003 ) Hydrogels for tissue engineer - ing : scaffold design variables and applications . Biomateri - als 24 : 4337 – 4351 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 9612 ( 03 ) 00340 - 5 [ 139 ] Xu Z , Fan C , Zhang Q et al ( 2021 ) A self - thickening and self - strengthening strategy for 3d printing high - strength and antiswelling supramolecular polymer hydrogels as menis - cus substitutes . Adv Func Mater 31 : 2100462 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202100462 [ 140 ] Ni T , Liu M , Zhang Y et al ( 2020 ) 3D bioprinting of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell - laden silk ﬁbroin double network scaffolds for cartilage tissue repair . Bioconjug Chem 31 ( 8 ) : 1938 – 1947 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . bioco njchem . 0c00298 [ 141 ] Jiang P , Changyou Y , Yuxiong G et al ( 2019 ) Direct ink writing of high - strength and swelling - resistant biocompat - ible physical - crosslinking hydrogels . Biomater Sci 7 : 1805 – 1814 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / C9BM00081J [ 142 ] Gao F , Xu Z , Liang Q et al ( 2018 ) Direct 3D printing of high strength biohybrid gradient hydrogel scaffolds for efﬁcient repair of osteochondral defect . Adv Func Mater 28 ( 13 ) : 1706644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 201706644 [ 143 ] Daly R , Harrington TS , Martin GD et al ( 2015 ) Inkjet printing for pharmaceutics - a review of research and manufacturing . Int J Pharm 494 ( 2 ) : 554 – 567 . https : / / doi . or g / 10 . 1016 / j . ijpharm . 2015 . 03 . 017 [ 144 ] Lin H , Zhang D , Alexander PG et al ( 2013 ) Application of visible light - based projection stereolithography for live cell - scaffold fabrication with designed architecture . Bio - materials 34 ( 2 ) : 331 – 339 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomate rials . 2012 . 09 . 048 [ 145 ] Dybowska - Sarapuk L , Kielbasinski K , Arazna A et al ( 2018 ) Efﬁcient inkjet printing of graphene - based elements : inﬂuence of dispersing agent on ink viscosity . Nanomate - rials 8 ( 8 ) : 602 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nano8080602 [ 146 ] Zhong M , Zhang F , Youyi Yu et al ( 2018 ) Flexible micro - supercapacitors assembled via chemically reduced graphene oxide ﬁlms assisted by a laser printer . Nan - otechnology 29 ( 43 ) : 43LT01 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1361 - 6528 / aad886 [ 147 ] Kyle S , Jessop ZM , Al - Sabah A et al ( 2017 ) ‘Printability’ of candidate biomaterials for extrusion based 3d printing : state - of - the - art . Adv Healthc Mater 6 ( 16 ) : 1700264 . http s : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 201700264 [ 148 ] Shen Y , Tang H , Huang X et al ( 2020 ) DLP printing photocurable chitosan to build bio - constructs for tissue engineering . Carbohyd Polym 235 : 115970 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . carbpol . 2020 . 115970 [ 149 ] Zhou L , Ramezani H , Sun M et al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of high - strength chitosan hydrogel scaffolds without any organic solvents . Biomater Sci 8 ( 18 ) : 5020 – 5028 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / d0bm00896f [ 150 ] Jiang P , Lin P , Yang C et al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of dual - physical cross - linking hydrogel with ultrahigh strength and toughness . Chem Mater 32 ( 23 ) : 9983 – 9995 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . chemmater . 0c02941 [ 151 ] Li Q , Xu Z , Zhang D et al ( 2020 ) T - shaped trifunctional crosslinker - toughening hydrogels . Sci China - Technol Sci 63 ( 9 ) : 1721 – 1729 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11431 - 020 - 153 7 - 6 [ 152 ] Song X , Shi D , Song P et al ( 2021 ) Fused deposition modeling of poly ( ether ether ketone ) scaffolds . High Temp Mater Process ( London ) 40 ( 1 ) : 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 151 5 / htmp - 2021 - 0009 [ 153 ] Bertassoni LE , Cardoso JC , Manoharan V et al ( 2014 ) Direct - write bioprinting of cell - laden methacrylated gelatin hydrogels . Biofabrication 6 ( 2 ) : 024105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1 088 / 1758 - 5082 / 6 / 2 / 024105 [ 154 ] Billiet T , Gevaert E , De Schryver T et al ( 2014 ) The 3D printing of gelatin methacrylamide cell - laden tissue - engi - neered constructs with high cell viability . Biomaterials 35 ( 1 ) : 49 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2013 . 0 9 . 078 [ 155 ] Liu W , Heinrich MA , Zhou Y et al ( 2017 ) Extrusion bio - printing of shear - thinning gelatin methacryloyl bioinks . Adv Healthc Mater 6 ( 12 ) : 1601451 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 100 2 / adhm . 201601451 [ 156 ] Gasek N , Weiss DJ ( 2020 ) Effect of temperature on gela - tion and cross - linking of gelatin methacryloyl for biomed - ical applications . Phys Fluids 32 ( 3 ) : 033102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 5144896 [ 157 ] Avallone PR , Raccone E , Costanzo S et al ( 2021 ) Gelation kinetics of aqueous gelatin solutions in isothermal condi - tions via rheological tools . Food Hydrocoll 111 : 106248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . foodhyd . 2020 . 106248 [ 158 ] Yin J , Yan M , Wang Y et al ( 2018 ) 3d bioprinting of low - concentration cell - laden gelatin methacrylate ( GelMA ) 12708 J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 bioinks with a two - step cross - linking strategy . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10 ( 8 ) : 6849 – 6857 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 7b16059 [ 159 ] Xavier JR , Thakur T , Desai P et al ( 2015 ) Bioactive nanoengineered hydrogels for bone tissue engineering : a growth - factor - free approach . ACS Nano 9 ( 3 ) : 3109 – 3118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / nn507488s [ 160 ] Liu W , Zhong Z , Ning H et al ( 2018 ) Coaxial extrusion bioprinting of 3D microﬁbrous constructs with cell - favor - able gelatin methacryloyl microenvironments . Biofabrica - tion 10 ( 2 ) : 024102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / aa9d 44 [ 161 ] Gao Q , Niu X , Shao L et al ( 2019 ) 3D printing of complex GelMA - based scaffolds with nanoclay . Biofabrication 11 ( 3 ) : 035006 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / ab0cf6 [ 162 ] Wang Y , Huang X , Shen Y et al ( 2019 ) Direct writing alginate bioink inside pre - polymers of hydrogels to create patterned vascular networks . J Mater Sci 54 : 7883 – 7892 . h ttps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10853 - 019 - 03447 - 2 [ 163 ] Ansari S , Sarrion P , Hasani - Sadrabadi MM et al ( 2017 ) Regulation of the fate of dental - derived mesenchymal stem cells using engineered alginate - GelMA hydrogels . J Biomed Mater Res Part A 105 ( 11 ) : 2957 – 2967 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 36148 [ 164 ] Kesti M , Mueller M , Becher J et al ( 2015 ) A versatile bioink for three - dimensional printing of cellular scaffolds based on thermally and photo - triggered tandem gelation . Acta Biomater 11 : 162 – 172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbi o . 2014 . 09 . 033 [ 165 ] Duan B , Kapetanovic E , Hockaday LA et al ( 2014 ) Three - dimensional printed trileaﬂet valve conduits using biolog - ical hydrogels and human valve interstitial cells . Acta Biomater 10 ( 5 ) : 1836 – 1846 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbi o . 2013 . 12 . 005 [ 166 ] Abar B , Alonso Calleja A , Kelly A et al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of high - strength , porous , elastomeric structures to promote tissue integration of implants . J Biomed Mater Res Part A . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 37006 [ 167 ] Zhong L , Chen J , Ma Z et al ( 2020 ) 3D printing of metal - organic framework incorporated porous scaffolds to pro - mote osteogenic differentiation and bone regeneration . Nanoscale 12 ( 48 ) : 24437 – 24449 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / d 0nr06297a [ 168 ] Wang X , Fang J , Zhu W et al ( 2021 ) Bioinspired highly anisotropic , ultrastrong and stiff , and osteoconductive mineralized wood hydrogel composites for bone repair . Adv Func Mater 31 : 2010068 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 202010068 [ 169 ] Wan Z , Zhang P , Liu Y et al ( 2020 ) Four - dimensional bioprinting : current developments and applications in bone tissue engineering . Acta Biomater 101 : 26 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2019 . 10 . 038 [ 170 ] Kim SH , Seo YB , Yeon YK et al ( 2020 ) 4D - bioprinted silk hydrogels for tissue engineering . Biomaterials 260 : 120281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2020 . 120281 [ 171 ] Darabi MA , Khosrozadeh A , Wang Y et al ( 2020 ) An Alkaline based method for generating crystalline , strong , and shape memory polyvinyl alcohol biomaterials . Adv Sci 7 ( 21 ) : 1902740 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 201902740 [ 172 ] Hua M , Wu D , Wu S et al ( 2021 ) 4D printable tough and thermoresponsive hydrogels . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13 ( 11 ) : 12689 – 12697 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 0c 17532 [ 173 ] Senatov FS , Niaza KV , Zadorozhnyy MY et al ( 2016 ) Mechanical properties and shape memory effect of 3D - printed PLA - based porous scaffolds . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 57 : 139 – 148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmbb m . 2015 . 11 . 036 [ 174 ] Senatov FS , Zadorozhnyy MY , Niaza KV et al ( 2017 ) Shape memory effect in 3D - printed scaffolds for self - ﬁtting implants . Eur Polymer J 93 : 222 – 231 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 10 16 / j . eurpolymj . 2017 . 06 . 011 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations . J Mater Sci ( 2022 ) 57 : 12685 – 12709 12709