Biographical Prototypes : Reimagining Recognition and Disability in Design Cynthia L . Bennett , Burren Peil , Daniela K . Rosner University of Washington Seattle , USA { mailto : bennec3 , lapeil , dkrosner } @ uw . edu ABSTRACT This paper aims to elevate stories of design by people with disabilities . In particular , we draw from counter - storytelling practices to build a corpus of stories that prioritize disabled people as contributors to professional design practice . Across a series of workshops with disabled activists , de - signers , and developers , we developed the concept of bio - graphical prototypes : under - recognized first - person ac - counts of design materialized through prototyping practices . We describe how the creation of such prototypes helps po - sition disabled people as central contributors to the design profession . The artifacts engendered an expanded sense of coalition among workshop participants while prompting reflection on tensions between recognition and obligation . We end by reflecting on how the prototypes—and the prac - tices that produced them—complement a growing number of design activities around disability that reveal complexi - ties around structural forms of discrimination and the gen - erative role that personal accounts may play in their revi - sion . Author Keywords Disability , workshops , design methods , prototypes . CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Interaction design processes and methods INTRODUCTION “ Our founder created the first OXO peeler for a pair of hands he loved more than his own . When his wife struggled with a traditional metal peeler , he knew there was a better way , and he created it ” [ 47 ] . So says OXO’s website about Sam Farber , a founder of the popular kitchenware brand . Recently disabled design activ - ist Liz Jackson found the person to whom those hands be - long : architect Betsy Farber , who has arthritis . Reflecting on this story during their interview , Farber told Jackson , “ The general understanding was of the brilliance and kind - ness of Sam who made these tools for his poor crippled wife so she could function in the kitchen . I will probably go down in history as having arthritis rather than having the conceptual idea of making these comfortable for your hand ” [ 34 ] . Over the past decade , design pundits have celebrated the OXO kitchenware story as a paradigmatic case of disability and design gone right —illustrating how designing for someone with disabilities involves creating a product that appeals to everyone ( and consequently providing financial justification for the investment ) . But prior to Jackson , no one had thought to publicize an account by the person whose hands had been “designed for . ” With more research , the OXO case suggests that stories of designing for people with disabilities may well hide the fact that people with disabilities do the design—or , more accurately , they do the uncredited work that firms such as OXO professionalize as design . Stories like Sam Farber’s often circulate within the design profession . They tend to cast disabled bodies as nondesign - ing bodies and , conversely , designing bodies as nondisabled bodies [ 9 ] . They can position nondisabled people as the leading creators of technologies and design solutions . Scholars observe how this positioning further defines a sys - tematically disadvantaged population by the opposite char - acteristics of the dominant population [ 76 ] . In practice , this positioning also separates design work from the people with disabilities who make it possible , reinforcing a cultural pro - gram of exclusion . Figure 1 : Betsy Farber’s OXO biographical prototype could illustrate her work by depicting the handle of a conventional peeler covered in foam or Play - Doh paired with a vignette describing her firsthand experience coming up with the idea to adapt the peeler to be comfortable for her grip . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permis - sion and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ' 19 , June 24 - - 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA . © 2019 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5850 - 7 / 19 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322376 . Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 35 With this paper , we explore a partial response to these ex - clusions . In particular , we introduce the concept of bio - graphical prototypes : material demonstrations of how indi - viduals with disabilities have made , adapted , and repur - posed their environments and objects to work for them . For example , with the OXO story , a biographical prototype could be made to recognize the work of Betsy Farber by covering the handle of a conventional peeler in foam so that it’s larger and more comfortable , and then pairing it with her first - hand account of her role in the prototype’s incep - tion ( see Figure 1 and caption ) . We take up the language and practices of prototyping , and intentionally entangle them with first - hand stories to amplify historically silenced design contributions . With this intervention , we seek to do more than uncover omissions ; we also aim to bring under - recognized stories back into exclusionary professional de - sign processes . In the sections that follow , we describe the creation and sharing of biographical prototypes across a series of work - shops that we organized with disabled activists , designers , and technology developers in the downtown public library of Seattle , Washington . During the workshops , the proto - types became objects to think with , opening discussions about the types of stories that get told and suppressed with - in design settings . We discuss the potential consequences of elevating particular forms of work as contributions to pro - fessional design when the title “designer” feels unmerited or unwanted . Three central contributions follow from this analysis . First , we explore a form of coalition - building not typically con - sidered in technology design : learning to be with another rather than be like another [ 20 ] . Instead of instructing de - signers to “step into someone else’s shoes” ( and tacitly ap - prove stepping back out at will ) [ 48 ] , we aim to take seri - ously people with disabilities as meaningful contributors to professional design practice . Second , our work highlights the centrality of stories ( and particularly counter - stories ) in design and prototyping . We critique prototyping approaches by materializing forms of retelling as a praxis for designers to consider what and who contributes to their practice . Third , we expand conversations on participatory design by exposing the additional burden put on people systematically disadvantaged within the design process when they feel obligated to do or even take credit for design . BACKGROUND To contextualize our work , we turn to scholarship within disability activism , participatory design , and critical proto - typing—each offering approaches for getting at stories less told in design . Rather than an exhaustive survey , these liter - atures provide starting points for exploring alternative forms of design knowledge and recognition . Everyday and Participatory Design Design and HCI research has considered people’s ways of designing through incremental adjustments in their every - day environments . Scholars have considered the creative acts that become meaningful to people involved—such as family members rearranging clutter on their kitchen coun - ter— whether those acts occur within homes , parks , or workplaces [ 18 ] , [ 68 ] , [ 70 ] , [ 75 ] . Desjardins and Wakkary [ 18 ] and Taylor and Swan [ 70 ] show how such acts of adoption and reuse reflect mundane , invisible forms of creativity that are often only noticeable to the people doing the work . Other work has recognized the ways people with disabilities incrementally adjust their environments . Wheth - er by modifying prosthetics [ 8 ] or decorating hearing aids [ 51 ] , projects like these position people with disabilities as “everyday designers , ” rather than simply users of assistive technologies . Harnessing these mundane forms of creativity , scholars of participatory design ( PD ) have developed techniques for partnering with people with disabilities and other relevant stakeholders toward accessible design solutions [ 25 ] , [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] , [ 49 ] , [ 58 ] , [ 71 ] . Common among these approaches is a focus on futuring differently in order to account for diverse perspectives . Kristina Lindström and Åsa Stahl [ 38 ] recent - ly developed speculative workshops that invite people liv - ing near toxic waste to develop their own gardening prac - tices for environmental remediation . These and other pro - jects have called for design researchers to shift their gaze from individual problem - solving to addressing wider public concerns and activist programs [ 5 ] , [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 37 ] , [ 50 ] . Objects as Thinking Companions To inform methods of recognition within design research we turn to the role physical materials and objects have Figure 2 : Participants working together to create biographical prototypes in small groups at the downtown public library . Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 36 played in constructing stories about everyday life ( see [ 32 ] ) . Attending to the significance of objects in people’s lives , scholars have pointed to the importance of what theoretical archeologist Rosemary Joyce calls material traces [ 35 ] ( see also [ 56 ] ) , physical instantiations of time and activity that elucidate an object’s social life . Such readings extend an - thropological understandings of personhood to the objects we interact with [ 3 ] , positioning objects as personally and epistemically significant and agential [ 6 ] . Objects , in this sense , have social lives and , through their circulation , mobi - lize the people they encounter . Anthropologist Janet Hoskins [ 29 ] and science and technology studies scholar Sherry Turkle [ 73 ] separately explore how personally and culturally meaningful objects work as companions to think , feel , and develop with . For example , Hoskins introduced the concept of biographical objects to discern certain items that her Indonesian interlocutors prioritized as important in their storytelling [ 29 ] . For Turkle , intimacies with meaning - ful objects characterize ‘evocative’ relationships which might bring out cultural specificities or important events . By making theory - building concrete and material , Turkle explains , “evocative objects bring philosophy down to Earth” [ 73 ] p . 8 . To these scholars , relationships with and among objects can achieve deep personal as well as analytic significance ( see work on personal inventory , for example [ 45 ] ) . Prototyping as More - than - Futuring Other work has explored prototypes and prototyping prac - tices as a means of analysis . Indeed , approaches that span prototyping pasts [ 60 ] , critical making [ 53 ] , and design fabulations [ 55 ] . consider the ideological roots of design’s formal prototyping mechanisms . Pushing against a reduc - tive reading of prototyping as a solely technological achievement [ 74 ] , this work offers analytic footholds for using material production as a mode of scholarly critique . As Tim Sherratt argues , “There is power embedded in every CSV file , every API is an argument ” [ 63 ] ( also cited in [ 24 ] p . 44 ) . Examples include prototyping as argumentation [ 27 ] , prototyping as theorizing [ 52 ] , and , most relevant for our purposes , prototyping as archival analysis [ 60 ] . Naming this latter practice “prototyping pasts , ” Tiffany Chan , Mara Mills , and Jentery Sayers describe their recon - struction of the octophone , an early reading technology for blind people , and their use of this reconstruction to elevate the story of Mary Jamison , an under - recognized blind in - ventor of the technology [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] . In this and other pro - jects [ 28 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 59 ] , Sayers uses the practice of prototyping pasts to name patterns of minimizing and silencing key in - formants whose early contributions go under - recognized within dominant histories of technology development . In other work , sociologist Kat Jungnickel and her collabora - tors use patents to inform prototypes of the pioneering con - vertible bloomers that Victorian women cyclists created for moving through London , elucidating a pivotal yet under - examined inventive practice [ 36 ] . As Chan and colleagues write : “ Like translation more generally , prototyping does not seek a straightforward , 1 - to - 1 equivalency , nor does it seek to replicate past devices or embodied experiences . Instead , it highlights smaller gains or losses over time and across versions . That is , it foregrounds difference and ab - sences : what we cannot retrieve , repeat , or translate in the present ” [ 14 ] . We take up this interest in foregrounding difference and absence by figuring design as a generative mode of critical inquiry . Arguably the recent attention to labor within media studies scholarship works as a form of participatory story - telling and materialized biography , tethering media studies to participatory design [ 57 ] . As for Chan , Jungnickel , Ros - ner and others , our materials and prototypes are not re - placements , beginnings , or endings , but instead openings for elevating forgotten , untold , and uncredited design con - tributions . We weave this attention to absences into a focus on everyday and participatory design in contemporary life . This renewed attention to gaps in storytelling—a counter - storytelling—underpins our conceptual development of biographical prototypes . BIOGRAPHICAL PROTOTYPES Biographical prototypes are material manifestations of peo - ple’s oral or written personal stories of ‘making something work . ’ They combine the language and practices of proto - typing with a person’s under - recognized stories of design ( called counter - stories [ 65 ] ) to establish such work as meaningful to professional design practice . Notably , as for our inquiry , designers can use the prototypes to foreground people with disabilities as the fashioners of their own sto - ries and associated representations in design contexts . The prototypes take a wide variety of forms , from representa - tions of artifacts that people invent , to illustrations of rooms that people modify , to mock - ups of digital applications that people repurpose or put to a new use . Their form and con - tents range from provisional sketches to full replicas that reflect pasts and imagine futures ( see Figures 2 and 4 ) . To develop biographical prototypes , we borrow particularly from counter - storying practices within critical race theory [ 65 ] . For our purposes , counter - storytelling resists dominant narratives of people with disabilities ( such as Oxo’s version of their vegetable peeler’s invention [ 47 ] ) that depict disa - bled people in auxiliary roles and present disability as a deficit . Counter - stories like Betsy’s version [ 34 ] have be - come a powerful tool for disability activism . Using counter - stories to exhibit disabled people as dynamic protagonists and as meaningful contributors in sectors from which they have traditionally been left out , disability activists seek to nurture hopeful conditions of possibility for people with disabilities ( e . g . , see [ 12 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 22 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 54 ] , [ 77 ] ) . With biographical prototypes , we take up this form of coun - ter - storytelling as a tool to bring close and uplift stories by and about people with disabilities to complement other sto - rytelling taken up in HCI [ 21 ] , [ 33 ] , [ 39 ] , [ 62 ] , [ 64 ] , [ 69 ] . Closely aligned with PD approaches , particularly those of Ann Light [ 37 ] , Åsa Ståhl , and Kristina Lindström [ 38 ] , and Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 37 taking up Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng’s [ 11 ] call for PD to challenge wider structural practices , we use these collective material acts of representation to invite designers to consider what it means to be with [ 20 ] perspectives that challenge and open up dominant accounts about what counts as design . In short , this kind of prototyping offers a potential means of addressing longstanding challenges around conceptions of design and disability . Through collective prototyping based on personal experiences , we strive to step back from mis - conceptions that cast people with disabilities as auxiliary in design . As such , we describe our process of developing biographical prototypes in practice . The process enables us to explore what it might mean to be with people with disa - bilities while occupying our researcher and designer posi - tions complicit in upholding the marginalization we aim to dismantle . Our inquiry involved two main phases : ( 1 ) formative work including collecting stories by people with disabilities and developing a first round of biographical prototypes based on those stories , and ( 2 ) workshops during which people with disabilities collaboratively made biographical proto - types to illuminate their own experiences inventing , modi - fying , and repurposing in their everyday lives . FORMATIVE WORK Our project began with the goal of collecting stories of de - sign within the everyday lives of people with disabilities told by the people experiencing them . To inform this pro - cess , Bennett conducted one - on - one interviews with four people with distinct disabilities ( here , termed “narrators” in line with oral histories methods [ 46 ] ) during four months of 2018 . From the interviews we produced audio recordings and full transcripts . We complemented this material with a literature review on designers with disabilities . To learn how disability fit into their life experiences holisti - cally , interview questions inquired not into disability per se but into the objects and environments that narrators had made , adapted , or repurposed to work for them or make activities accessible . Bennett also asked for stories of un - successful attempts and ongoing challenges . She conducted the interviews in narrators’ own spaces where they often had access to the objects they spoke about at which point they could also demonstrate their use . We chose to not use the word design during the interviews with the hope that the narrators would tell any story related to material alteration or development ( and not feel limited by the elite cultural status of the design professional , as demonstrated by prior work [ 72 ] ) . Complementing the in - terviews , we curated a selection of stories derived from our review of related literature and popular media articles . We chose two stories from our review ( such as Betsy Farber’s ) for their depictions of people’s recent pasts from multiple perspectives , allowing us to contextualize for participants our motivation for taking up counter - storytelling practices . To create examples for our workshops , the research team , some of whom have disabilities , reviewed the collection of stories and developed an initial set of 14 biographical proto - types made of store - bought and found artifacts ( see Figure 3 and caption ) . Consider the six examples described below . Nikki’s Tupperware grabber comprises a backscratcher with tines . Nikki described using a backscratcher to hook onto the lipped lids of Tupperware they keep on high shelves . The tines helped them pull the items down . With relatively short arms , Nikki wanted to extend their reach . The backscratcher enabled skillful extension . Nikki’s embroidery holder comprises several embroidery samples including : a large wooden hoop , a broken wooden hoop , a large plastic hoop sewn to a cushion , and a small plastic hoop . Together these elements illustrate the story of effortful trial and error involved in Nikki’s work to learn embroidery with one hand . Describing their embroidery course , Nikki told us how their instructor held a large , wooden hoop in midair with one hand and stitched with the other . Following the instructor , Nikki first tried sitting on a similar wooden hoop to free their hand for stitching but , in the process , broke the wooden hoop . Nikki then tried a plas - tic hoop and found it more durable but not perfect : they sometimes embroidered into their wheelchair seat cushion while sitting on the hoop . They finally switched out the large plastic hoop for a much smaller one in order to neatly Figure 3 : Selection of prototyping materials and narrators’ biographical prototypes brought to the workshop . Nikki’s back scratcher on the far left ; Dianna’s jeggings and sequins and wax - covered pen in the middle ; and Nikki’s embroidery holder fea - tured on the far right . Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 38 balance the hoop between their torso and the wheelchair’s arm . Diana’s bead gatherer comprises a spatula wrapped in double sided tape with a box of beads . Diana , who has mo - tor disabilities and uses a wheelchair , enjoys crafting with beads . Once , after dropping beads , she found objects in her vicinity to collect them . She wrapped a spatula in double sided sticky tape to extend her reach and catch the beads as she swept . Diana’s rhinestone transporter comprises a wax - covered ballpoint pen with a plate of rhinestones . When Diana add - ed smaller beads such as rhinestones to her projects , she covered the ink end of a pen with wax . With this tool , Di - ana could lift the intricate items she wanted and place them precisely onto her work . Diana’s altered jeggings comprises a pair of stretchy jeans with hair ties sewn into either side of the waistband . With motor disabilities impacting her reach and grasp , Diana found it hard to pull up her pants . After a long day of not having access to a restroom , she sought out flexible pants in maternity sections . The maternity pants worked for a while , but Diana grew tired of unsolicited questions about preg - nancy . As jeggings were coincidentally gaining popularity , she tried on a pair and learned that she needed a bit more assistance than the stretchy material gave . In response , she altered jeggings with hair ties that she sewed into the left and right sides of the waist band for easier tugging . The adaptation represented moments of learning what clothing did not work for her over time . Julia’s calendar comprises both paper and digital sched - ules . Allocating time allowed Julia to prioritize her medical appointments and work first before choosing which social activities to attend . The structured documentation came in handy when she had difficulty remembering what she should do next . Toward Opportunities for Listening Contrasting with prototypes meant to solicit feedback , we intended the above artifacts to materialize a pathway toward listening to stories by people with disabilities . To accompa - ny and contextualize the artifacts , we created small cards displaying excerpts from our interview transcripts ( in both print - form and braille ) in preparation for workshop partici - pants with a range of disabilities to read and engage with the prototypes . We learned to see the provisional illustra - tions not as biographies in themselves , but as biographical moments . Generally ephemeral and short - lived , the experi - ences that narrators shared could never encompass a biog - raphy in full . Instead , they materialized particular , often deeply personal memories . In this form , they transcended the stories they told to transform clutter into situated objects [ 56 ] . We built on this concern while preparing for our workshops : holding onto a sense of provisionality by treat - ing connections between stories as incomplete as well as generative [ 60 ] . ANALYSIS : PROTOTYPING WORKSHOPS We developed and facilitated three workshops with a total of 27 people with disabilities for the sharing and creation of biographical prototypes . We held the workshops at the downtown public library , as it is a public place centrally located near public transportation and standard accessibility features . The workshops were grounded in the facilitators’ commitments to center access which shifts access from an achievement to a process [ 1 ] , [ 6 ] . This commitment began with preparations for reporting access needs before the workshops . Bennett communicated with each participant about their access needs , offering a summary of the work - shop program which helped to bring out and clarify addi - tional adjustments . Access commitments were overviewed at each workshop’s outset which helped establish access as a central and collective commitment for which all attendees had the responsibility to cultivate . These access considera - tions included : remaining scent free , having one person speaking at a time , offering ample time for participants to express themselves , directly conversing with people and not interpreters , using people’s pronouns , announcing one’s name before speaking , and returning items to their place to maintain organization . All workshops comprised four main parts : ( 1 ) introductions and set up , ( 2 ) encountering stories and autobiographical prototypes , ( 3 ) co - creating biographical prototypes , and ( 4 ) a concluding discussion . Methods Our methods draw from PD workshops as well as feminist approaches to situated inquiry ( detailed above ) [ 17 ] , [ 67 ] . Feminist traditions emphasized the contingent and embod - ied nature of knowledge productions , and traditions of par - ticipatory design foregrounded alliances across expertise . Informed by a feminist commitment to reflexivity , we con - Figure 4 : We held three workshops in the Seattle downtown public library where disabled activists , designers , and developers collaboratively developed a wide variety of biographical prototypes . Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 39 sider ourselves as participants in , rather than merely ob - servers of , the design asymmetries to which we sought to draw attention . Our team included three researchers and six volunteers working in engineering departments at the Uni - versity of Washington . We recruited participants by posting printed flyers in public and disability - centered spaces at the University of Wash - ington . We also circulated email notices to local list serves run by people with disabilities . We selected workshop par - ticipants to reflect a diversity of disabilities , gender identi - ties , and people from groups otherwise under - represented within professional design practice . Drawing on inductive techniques [ 15 ] , [ 17 ] , we analyzed our data thematically based on how they shed light on the role storytelling plays within prototyping , design , and disa - bility . Three questions organized our analysis : ( 1 ) How do participants engage with biographical prototypes ? ( 2 ) What types of biographical prototypes emerge from our partici - pants’ personal stories ? ( 3 ) How do biographical prototypes lend themselves to discussions of design , disability , and storytelling within and beyond the workshop ? To develop to these questions , we iteratively wrote and refined reflec - tive memos derived from our interview transcripts , field notes , biographical prototypes , and audio and visual record - ings . We then identified important themes that occurred across the three workshops through subsequent rounds of collective analysis by the research team . Our report reflects themes prominent in our synthetic analysis . Narrators and participants either chose a pseudonym or permitted the re - searchers to choose a name popular among people with the same gender identity and ethnicity . Lessons : At the Workshops People took their time to arrive , grab snacks , and find their place at a long conference table stationed in the middle of the room . Some attended carefully to where they sat in rela - tion to others . A few participants already knew one another through their disability communities . Those participants used the set - up period to rekindle connections and introduce themselves to new neighbors . Introductions and Set Up After establishing the aforementioned access commitments , we invited attendees to share their names , pronouns , and reasons for attending . At this point , facilitators announced themselves available to assist . We then asked participants to reflect on whether they felt they were outgoing or not and to step back or step up accordingly . ( We repeated these communication considerations before each group discus - sion , reminding participants that we sought everyone’s sto - ries and reflections . ) Facilitators noted when people shared and called on those who remained quiet , offering them time to share if interested . Encountering Stories and Biographical Prototypes Following participant introductions , we told a few directed stories including one about OXO founder Betsy Farber ( see introduction ) . We then drew participants’ attention to the narrators’ biographical prototypes displayed on the confer - ence table and felt the excitement in the room intensify . The prototypes’ proximity seemed to encourage participants to reach forward and explore the objects in front of them . To contextualize the stories , we guided participants through a few biographical prototypes before asking them to engage with the artifacts freely . However , we discovered this free engagement required additional scaffolding by circulating facilitators . We began to intentionally pass objects around to ensure that each participant learned about each biograph - ical prototype . With this passing along , we took care to give each examiner time to read the accompanying story . After participants had a chance to explore several prototypes passed around the table , we asked them to share with the whole group any biographical prototypes that resonated with them . These reflections often sparked personal and sometimes humorous anecdotes . We learned that this slow - er , reflexive process became an important part of centering access . For example , a biographical prototype prompted Tali—who uses a cane to assist with balance and who has difficulty reaching shelves—to share their recent experience grocery shopping and finding no employee available to assist them . They told the group : “I’ll have my cane with me , and I’ll be using one of those motor carts . If there is something on a high shelf , I’ll use the hook [ of cane ] and knock it into my cart . Sometimes the employees get a laugh out of it . ” Tali’s story emerged in response to Nikki’s Tupperware grabber prototype that we created from their interview . While de - scribing Nikki’s backscratcher , Tali found humor in their own everyday activity . During a similar moment in the first workshop , Ari men - tioned the eye strain they experience while engaging in their crafting hobbies . Ari shared this experience while pointing to Diana’s bead gatherer and rhinestone trans - porter , two biographical prototypes we created based on Diana’s interview . Learning from Diana’s prototypes , Ari speculated that similar workarounds might help reduce their own fatigue . Much like Tali and Ari , several workshop participants used the biographical prototypes to not only share personal sto - ries but also learn new ways that people with disabilities adapt their worlds to get by . Looking across the table , par - ticipants variously called the prototypes “remarkable” ( Ari ) , “impressive” ( Shay ) , “simple solutions” ( Carrie ) , “ingen - ious” ( Ray ) . “I’m blown away , ” said one participant ( Tai ) . Carrie captured this sentiment when she noted , “ One of the things I keep thinking about is [ that ] the way I was taught to talk about disability was about what accommodations do you need . But that didn’t come up here [ … ] . It feels like a set of skills that’s a bonus and not something to apologize Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 40 for . ” As conversation pieces , the prototypes and their exam - iners drew appreciation and praise from participants , and also began to help frame disability differently . Co - Creating Biographical Prototypes We divided participants in groups of two or three people and asked them to share something they made work for themselves as well as to collaboratively prototype that story ( the object made , the practice of making it , or associated emotions ) . We selectively intervened to encourage partici - pants to meet new people or to pair hesitant participants with participants who seemed to provide openings for oth - ers . In their small groups , participants dove into the variety of arts and craft supplies available on the table in front of them . Particularly useful items included the braille and print writing utensils and a variety of molding tools such as Play - Doh , Wikki Stix ( string covered in wax for easy sticking ) , pipe cleaners , tactile foam stickers , felt fabric , and Sensa - tional Blackboards that when drawn upon raise lines ( see Figure 3 ) . A number of prototypes showed how people put objects to use for purposes that were not explicitly intended by the manufacturer . Katherine—who has memory loss—sketched a dinner delivery subscription box out of Play - Doh . Pre - senting the prototype , Katherine described the chronologi - cal instructions and prepackaged ingredients made compre - hending recipes easier ; empty ingredients containers were useful reminders of whether steps were completed . Ahsoka and a few other participants made 2 and 3D drawings of calendars and notetaking apps that they repurposed as es - sential tools for staying focused and managing stress . Ah - soka’s choice of app was particularly informed by her sen - sitivity to alarm noises ; she preferred silent , color coded notifications . These participants repurposed existing objects to work with their access needs elevating these resources from convenient to essential tools for ‘making things work . ’ Other prototypes depicted objects participants invented . These stories often foregrounded provenance : the need or interest that instigated their interventions such as a scarcity of accessible objects or resources to obtain them . Alex— who uses a feeding tube and is Deaf—worked with their partner to create a prototype from a plastic water bottle and pipe cleaners to depict their inventive approach to eating . While waiting on insurance funding to purchase a pump that delivers food to their feeding tube automatically , they received a small syringe from a healthcare provider . Re - quiring manual filling , the syringe made eating more labo - rious and time - consuming . In response , Alex created their own interim feeding tube pump by incorporating the sy - ringe into a plastic water bottle . They cut the bottom off of the water bottle , punched a hole through the lid , and thread - ed the syringe through the hole , connecting it to their feed - ing tube . They then filled the upside - down water bottle with more food than could fit into their syringe so that , as the syringe emptied , food dripped into it . They additionally taped the bottle to a nearby surface making it possible for Alex to eat while multitasking . Using the prototype—and communicating through an American Sign Language inter - preter—they told their story of building the actual system . Another set of prototypes shared how participants rede - signed and reconfigured spaces to work for them . For ex - ample , Aaron and his group drew a map of his apartment demonstrating his strategic arrangement of furniture to align paths so that he can grasp sturdy objects while walk - ing . This rearrangement of furniture allows Aaron to forego using crutches at home , as they become cumbersome to manage in the small space . A similar story came from Ka - ren who cultivates several species of lavender , each of which requires unique care and harvesting . Being blind , Karen could not discern the different species since they had similar scents and textures . The garden’s spiral shape , pre - ferred for its aesthetic , meant she also could not identify plants by counting them . At the workshop she shared these challenges and worked with her group to produce a tactile representation of the garden from pipe cleaners and foam , re - materializing the paths she designed through each row of plants . Karen explained that she alternated materials as she laid down the curving paths ( one with brick , then one with stone , then one with brick , etc . ) so that she could discern species by associating them with the nearby path’s material . Together , these design choices helped her produce a desired affect while keeping care and harvest tasks accessible . For Aaron , Karen , and others , negotiating inaccessible spaces felt inevitable . As such , they reshaped spaces in their homes and gardens to work for them , and their biographical proto - types honored those spaces . Looking beyond physical material , a final set of prototypes depicted mental and emotional work . For instance , Raphael made a heart and hammer out of Play - Doh to represent the anxiety he felt not expressing his gender identity before transitioning . The hammer represented “tools” like therapy , coming out , and stress management , each of which he felt alleviated negative symptoms of mental health conditions . Grant made paper versions of the multiple schedules he creates and manages . Rather than feature the tools he lever - ages , Grant illustrated his creative and difficult processes for keeping responsibilities in check—both for himself and his caregivers . He allocates time between his classes to complete tasks requiring a caregiver . He then must examine three caregivers’ availability and schedule their work hours . For Raphael , Grant , and others , biographical prototypes of making things work augmented stories of expending mental and emotional energy . Although objects themselves , the prototypes also worked metaphorically . Concluding Discussions Upon completion of the prototypes , the small groups recon - vened as a larger group . We invited each participant to share their biographical prototype and we posed a series of reflection questions that set up a discussion around who counts as a designer . Questions included : Do you often Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 41 have opportunities to share stories of making things work for you in your own life ? What types of stories get told more often ? What stood out about the workshop ? Is the story you told today a design story ? Why or why not ? During these discussions , participants tended to vocalize appreciation for the example biographical prototypes and the sharing and honoring of personal stories . But some par - ticipants ( Andrea , Genevieve , Matt , Ray , Shiori and Viraj ) expressed difficulty thinking of a story from their own lives to share . Andrea , Matt , and Viraj preferred to come up with new designs more than revisiting existing experiences . Fur - ther reflecting on these responses , we now examine broader themes and limitations emerging across our encounters . WORKSHOP REFLECTIONS These concerns for producing stories echoed comments Bennett heard while circulating among participants before and during the prototyping phase of the workshop . For ex - ample , when asked to work with partners and share her own story , Genevieve explained , “ I’m looking at them [ bio - graphical prototypes ] and I’m thinking , ‘Oh , look at this ! ’ I feel like these people can do everything right and then there’s me . ” Hearing this concern , Bennett engaged with Genevieve one - on - one and learned she had not encountered Nikki’s embroidery biographical prototype , which featured setbacks and successes ( elaborated above ) . Together , they reviewed Nikki’s biographical prototype and Genevieve began describing the braille and tactile labels she prepares and adheres to home appliances and products . Her frustra - tion subsiding , she soon began writing braille in demonstra - tion to her partners . In this sense , the biographical proto - types didn’t foster an easy connection to a personal story for everyone evenly . Next we examine these limitations to help us calibrate the conditions for recognition that bio - graphical prototypes make possible . Challenging Confined Stories : On Pressure to Tell Hap - py Stories One of the most salient themes that emerged during both the prototyping and reflection phases of our workshops concerned the frequency and nature of the stories that their prototypes represented . Participants reflected on typical experiences of storytelling and agreed they were rarely asked to tell stories about getting by with disabilities . The opportunity to tell these plural stories of plural lives broke through the far narrower misconceptions others had about life with disabilities . However , they noted often feeling pressured to tell stories with happy endings . While proto - typing , we noticed that the workshops gave participants space to question that pressure and explore alternative types of stories . Many participants viewed the prototypes as marking a rare and welcome occasion for recognizing the personhood of people with disabilities . As Katherine explained , “ I don’t think I’ve ever—and I was injured 30 years ago—been asked to share around making things work for you with your disabilities . ” Katherine’s experience signified general agreement among participants that they seldom shared sto - ries about disability and ‘making things work . ’ Feeling sim - ilarly stripped of opportunity , Tali speculated about connec - tions between absent forms of storytelling and wider pat - terns of discrimination : “ [ Who is credited with design ] de - pends on who is given the most agency or seems to have the most . … If you assume that everyone else is doing some - thing for this person you won’t think of that person [ as ] possibly coming up with that [ design ] for themselves . ” For Katherine , Tali , and others , being asked to share stories about getting by with disabilities was rare . Informed by their personal experiences , they posited that they were not expected to tell such stories because many nondisabled people assumed that people with disabilities receive , not design , assistive technologies . However , when given the opportunity , participants appreci - ated sharing parts of their lives and personalities through biographical prototypes . Genevieve’s biographical proto - type , for instance , exemplified how storytelling could pre - sent multiple sides of our participants . It featured a book cover made from felt fabric inside which rested a page with a braille alphabet she created . The object symbolized a lit - eracy technique that she uses to access reading material and identify items around her house . But the biographical proto - type also created a means for her to share her ongoing ad - vocacy for braille despite text - to - speech alternatives which in her experience , have led to a misconception that braille may become obsolete . Genevieve went on to share that as a member of a civil rights organization of blind people , she raises awareness about braille to policy makers in order to preserve its instruction in schools . Genevieve’s biograph - ical prototype helped to pluralize her life experiences by offering not only one way she ‘makes things work , ’ but also provided her an opening to share how braille has become a passion which she channels through her community service . During discussions , participants conversed at length about a pressure to share stories with happy endings . Though well received by everyone , many stories took the form of Gene - vieve’s , ending with successful objects and techniques . But Trinh described how these stories might not be representa - tive . She mentioned strategically choosing among stories she could tell about her disabilities : “ When I tell stories about spinal cord injury , I tell [ people that ] I used to be in a wheelchair and now I use crutches . But then problems [ such as chronic illness ] I don’t talk about . It opens up vul - nerability . It isn’t an inspiration story . ” By telling an “in - spiration story” ( in Trinh’s case , focusing on transitioning from using a wheelchair to walking rather than on the ongo - ing challenges of managing a chronic illness ) , she and oth - ers could relieve what she felt to be a paternalistic desire to fix things on the part of nondisabled people , as well as po - tentially avoid feelings of vulnerability . Other participants with chronic illnesses especially connected with this strug - gle . Lee—who has motor disabilities and chronic pain— walked through a hypothetical conversation he avoids : “‘So , what have you been up to these days ? ’ [ people ask ] . I Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 42 hate that question , [ so I respond ] , ‘I only had 6 migraines this week instead of 7 , so one day I got out of my apart - ment . ’ " Despite what most people want to hear , he ex - plained , “None of my conditions are going to get better . They might get worse . ” Finally , Parker corresponded with Bennett after their workshop . While some participants felt comfortable sharing the messier aspects of disability , Parker realized they hadn’t included that in their retelling : “ A miss - ing part of my ' story ' was the drama - the pain , the loneli - ness , the despair , the failings that came before my victories . I ' m still learning to make and take space to illuminate the ' ugly ' parts and not just the wins . ” Though rarely asked to tell stories , participants felt pressure to share the “wins” when we invited them to tell their stories . Yet for Trinh , Lee , Parker , and others , these wins did not represent their experiences . Their experiences contained much pain and sadness in ways they may never want resolved ( or have the ability to resolve ) . They instead sought to complement this celebration of disabled creativity with invitations from oth - ers to be vulnerable . Disempowerment , Exhaustion , and Disinterest With biographical prototypes , we began to see not only the workings of recognition within design but also its potential pitfalls . While participants generally appreciated interacting with biographical prototypes , some also voiced skepticism . Telling their own stories of making things work and making space for such tellings could feel insufficient and obligato - ry . Some participants found the work they represented exhaust - ing and felt disinterested in calling the work ‘design . ’ Par - ker , who is autistic and visually impaired , shared that they decided not to do a variety of tasks such as wear makeup since devising an accessible solution felt too arduous . Dur - ing workshop discussions , they opened up about the fatigue that informed their decision not to wear makeup : “ it’s valid to be over it or exhausted . I can have all of the feelings that I have about it . As a disabled person it’s [ making things work ] compounded . ” Carrie—who uses a wheelchair - - similarly questioned whether people with disabilities should want to be cast as designers , elaborating , “ I don’t really want to be the designer , I want someone else to do the de - signing and I want to benefit from it . I think the Pollyanna part of it is , ‘well we’re all designers ! ’ But is that the opti - mum condition for people with disabilities ? Should I be making stools [ biographical prototype of using a stool as a lower cooking surface ] for myself forever ? That feels like a job title I don’t want . ” Parker and Carrie felt disinterested in being credited as designers , and instead preferred profes - sional designers to take on the task of prioritizing accessi - bility as standard design practice . A few participants felt biographical prototypes put too much of a stake in individuals’ hands . Andrea’s biograph - ical prototype relayed her difficulties viewing small screens on video cameras with a vision impairment , a task essential for her job filming and publishing disability rights cam - paigns . She prototyped a model camera with a new feature . The foldable LCD screen would remain compact for transport but enlarge to increase visibility during use . Dur - ing the final discussion , Andrea expressed that her urgent access needs would only be known inside the workshop . “ I guess I can start a social media campaign… , but I’m feel - ing a bit disempowered in that it’s not actually changes that I can make [ to cameras ] . ” Andrea found her strengths in activism as irrelevant to the development of a more acces - sible video camera . This sentiment resurfaced when Carrie offered a nuanced critique : “ I want to make a distinction between the power that comes from sharing the things we have to do versus the fact that we have to do them . [ These things we have to do ] shouldn’t have to happen . … Nobody [ when presenting their biographical prototype ] talked about systemic things or larger broader structure things . It’s all micro . How can we broaden that in thinking about linking all those things together as a process across all of us ? ” To Parker , Carrie , and Andrea , stories of invention , adaptation , and repurposing could foster negative feelings of inadequate skill and place too much focus on individuals with disabilities rather than wider structural forces that keep disabled people disadvantaged . Nuancing Disability with Plural Identities Finally , we consider the role of intersecting under - represented identities in widening our narrow conceptions of disability . While a majority of our discussions centered disability , interest in communicating across varying identi - ties organically emerged in conversation . What began as observations about participants’ comfort level in what they perceived as an environment of sameness became an oppor - tunity to mark generative difference . For example , Ahsoka , who is a cis woman explained , “ I think we can be more open with each other … because everyone’s kind of on the same playing field here . ” Tai who is genderqueer respond - ed , “ I don’t think we’re all on the same playing field , it’s that we’re all on different fields and we’re used to it . ” This conversation created an opportunity for several participants who identified as queer and / or trans to speculate about at - tendee unification occurring not through common identifi - cation but through workshop conditions , such access - centered commitments that anticipate difference . Not hav - ing to justify the legitimacy of their varying lived experi - ences , in Ray’s opinion , is what promoted vulnerable shar - ing . Ray who is a trans male summarized , “ Whether it be multiple disabilities , different marginalized communities , such as queer communities , people of color , we all have our separate groups , but we don’t really seem to come together and explain how those marginalization’s impact each other . And having to not have to explain multiple layers of issues [ at the workshop ] breaks down barriers to conversation . ” Connectedness emerged in this discussion from acknowl - edging layered , intersecting modes of minoritized life . We learned that recognizing contributions by disabled people could , with the help of queer and other lived experiences , rework our categorical attention to disability . Recognition Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 43 then did not just apply to biographical prototypes , but to the multifaceted identities that contributed to sensemaking around disabilities themselves . DISCUSSION Across our workshops , we illustrated a means of recogniz - ing design contributions by people with disabilities . We learned that oral or written stories interwoven with proto - typing worked not just as auxiliary materials , but also as mechanisms for contextualizing the artifacts produced . We revealed feelings of exhaustion associated with making things work , and the complexities of sharing individual stories that may understate institutionalized oppression . We found that biographical prototypes opened space for talking about less comfortable aspects of storytelling around disa - bility , such as unsolved or chronic challenges . Upon closer inspection , we saw that the workshops also signified a deeper transformation for design practice and research . By developing and facilitating the creation of bio - graphical prototypes , we took seriously the notion that dis - abled people are always already meaningful contributors to professional design practice . We materialized forms of counter - storytelling in order to change the circumstances by which the circulation of those stories might take place . Our workshops exposed how prototypes work not just as argu - ments [ 27 ] , but also as ways of memorializing [ 78 ] [ 79 ] — rehearsing particular forms of authorship ( see Sami Schalk on crip futuring through speculative fiction [ 61 ] and Tavio Nyong’o on Afro - fabulation [ 44 ] ) . Through engaging with varied personal stories , participants began to imagine what they did not experience and reflect on the limitations of their imagination . For those who engaged with them , bio - graphical prototypes helped shed aspects of a pejorative understanding of disability in favor of one that helped us sit with absences and obfuscation . They helped us challenge wider silencing in design research and even critique our methods of representing and recognition . The most poignant of these critiques cautioned that bio - graphical prototypes could focus narrowly on individuals in ways that risk asserting that people with disabilities should be responsible for their own adaptations . Celebrating design stories , then , may obscure the oppression underpinning their necessity and heighten the need for access as a stand - ardized , collective practice . In other words , recognition alone can still promote the assumption that people with disabilities want to be associated with the design profes - sion . Our attempt to address wider structural issues in pro - fessional design made some headway but left much work to be done [ 11 ] . Looking beyond our study , we reflect on these potentials and limitations of biographical prototypes in terms of how they help us shift the undue burden of access labor away from people with disabilities . In particular , we offer three insights for the work ahead : 1 . Foregrounding partiality : Most importantly , bio - graphical prototypes cannot work on their own . The prototypes hold onto partial connections and asymme - tries as articulated by contemporary feminist theorizing [ 3 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 25 ] , [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] . They reflect moments in someone’s life through rough representation rather than precise repetition or recreation . They are not meant to be comprehensive , authentic , or paradigmatic . Instead , they partner with their author for a brief and situated retelling . From the workshops , we learned the discom - forts of this partiality needed more explicit acknowl - edgement for more holistic contextualization . Com - plementing workshop programs and individual stories with disability history and disability justice activism may provide precedence and credence for negative , un - solved , and untold stories . 2 . Prioritizing access - centered , plural ( counter ) - stories : Biographical prototypes aim to bring close and uplift stories by systematically disadvantaged people to challenge commonly circulated stories — for example , accounts that portray people with disabilities as users , rather than possible inventors , of assistive technology . But design researchers must also take care to not en - force a particular counter - story . We learned our exam - ples were not relatable to everyone , and that plural life experiences reworked our conceptions of disability it - self . Insisting storytellers share a disability - centered story of making things work from their past may have silenced them . Instead , their biographical prototypes revealed much about themselves and prompted rich discussions both around and beyond design and disabil - ity . As such , we recommend centering access , not nec - essarily disability , so storytellers can choose which sto - ries to tell . 3 . Recognition over obligation : With biographical proto - types , we find it important not to assume that people historically under - recognized within design fields would be overjoyed ( or even willing ) to join the ranks of designers . We take up the language of contribution to mark a concern not for accomplishing a particular design goal , but for demonstrating acknowledgement and legitimation of the skillsets , intellect , and work that have been under - valued but have meaningfully scaf - folded and composed professional design . We offer these lessons as a means of emphasizing the sig - nificance of creating space for people with disabilities ( as designers or otherwise ) to learn about one another through prototyping . In helping us explore sites for recognizing of - ten - hidden design legacies , they lay the groundwork for the refinement and elaboration of biographical prototypes in domains of work . But the commitments also suggest that the work of recognition does not provide an easy or straightforward solution to longstanding inequities . Instead , this work comes with its own incongruencies . A few partic - ipants in our workshops voiced having no interest in being designers , and many made a simple request : that designers Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 44 should build things accessibly . We find it both profound and troubling that this small request is still simultaneously such a large one . As researchers of Design and HCI , we need to make room for discussing why exactly people might shy away from defining themselves as ‘designers’ and what this preference says about our field of practice . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank our workshop attendees for their lessons and counter - stories as well as Andrea Tartaro , Audrey Desjardins , Kristin Dew , Os Keyes , and Phoebe Clark for reviewing manuscripts and Microsoft Research and NSF awards DGE - 1256082 , 1453329 , 1423074 , 1523579 for funding parts of this work . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Access - Centered Movement . What Access - Centered Means . Retrieved January 10 , 2019 from https : / / accesscenteredmovement . wordpress . com / what - access - centered - means / [ 2 ] Sara Ahmed . 2018 . On Being Included : Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life . Duke University Press . [ 3 ] Sareeta Amrute . 2016 . Encoding Race , Encoding Class : Indian IT Workers in Berlin . Duke University Press . [ 4 ] Arjun Appadurai ed . 1988 . The social life of things : Commodi - ties in cultural perspective . Cambridge University Press . [ 5 ] Liam Bannon , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Susanne Bødker . 2018 . Reimagining participatory design . Interactions 26 , 1 ( January - February 2019 ) , 26 - 32 . [ 6 ] Karen Barad . 2003 . Posthumanist performativity : Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter . Signs : Journal of women in culture and society 28 , 3 ( March 2003 ) , 801 - 831 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 345321 [ 7 ] Cynthia L . Bennett , Erin Brady , and Stacy M . Branham . 2018 . Interdependence as a Frame for Assistive Technology Research and Design . In Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 161 - 173 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3234695 . 3236348 [ 8 ] Cynthia L . Bennett , Keting Cen , Katherine M . Steele , and Dan - iela K . Rosner . 2016 . An intimate laboratory ? : Prostheses as a tool for experimenting with identity and normalcy . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1745 - 1756 . [ 9 ] Cynthia L . Bennett and Daniela Rosner . 2019 . The Promise of Empathy : Design , Disability , and Knowing the ‘Other . ’ In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , to appear . [ 10 ] Eli Blevis¹ and Erik Stolterman¹ . 2007 . Ensoulment and sus - tainable interaction design . Proceedings of IASDR , Hongkong . [ 11 ] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng . 2018 . Participatory Design that Matters — Facing the Big Issues . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 1 , Article 4 ( February 2018 ) , 31 pages . DOI : 1 [ 12 ] Lydia X . Z . Brown , E . Ashkenazy , and Morénike Giwa Onaiwu , eds . 2017 . All the weight of our dreams : On living racialized autism . DragonBee Press . [ 13 ] Tiffany Chan . 2016 . The Reading Optophones Kit . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from http : / / maker . uvic . ca / rokit / [ 14 ] Tiffany Chan , Mara Mills , and Jentery Sayers . 2018 . Optophon - ic Reading , Prototyping Optophones . Amodern 8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 17613 / M6862BB1J [ 15 ] Kathy Charmaz . 2014 . Constructing grounded theory . Sage . [ 16 ] Belo Cipriana ( Ed ) . 2018 . Firsts : Coming of Age Stories by People with Disabilities . Oleb Books . [ 17 ] Adele E . Clarke . 2003 . Situational Analyses : Grounded Theory Mapping After the Postmodern Turn . Symbolic Interaction 26 , 4 ( November 2003 ) , 553 - 576 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1525 / si . 2003 . 26 . 4 . 553 [ 18 ] Negin Dahya . 2017 . Critical Perspectives on Youth Digital Me dia Production : ‘Voice’ and Representaiton in Educational Contexts . Learning , Media , and Technology 42 , 1 ( January 2017 ) , 100 - 111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17439884 . 2016 . 1141785 [ 19 ] Audrey Desjardins and Ron Wakkary . 2016 . Living In A Proto - type : A Reconfigured Space . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems ( CHI ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5274 - 5285 . DOI : 1 [ 20 ] Vinciane Despret . 2013 . Responding bodies and partial affini - ties in human – animal worlds . Theory , Culture & Society 30 , 7 - 8 ( August 2013 ) , 51 - 76 . 2 [ 21 ] Jill P . Dimond , Michaelanne Dye , Daphne Larose , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2013 . Hollaback ! : the role of storytelling online in a social movement organization . In Proceedings of the 2013 con - ference on Computer supported cooperative work ( CSCW ' 13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 477 - 490 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441831 [ 22 ] Disability Visibility Project . Creating , Sharing , and Amplifying Disability Media and Culture . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / disabilityvisibilityproject . com / [ 23 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design : Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments . In Proceedings of the 2016ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 656 - 671 . DOI : 1 [ 24 ] Bill Endres . 2018 . Literacies of Building in Making Things and Building Boundaries : Experiments in the Digital Humanities . Jentery Sayers ( ed ) . University of Minnesota Press . [ 25 ] Sarah Fox . 2018 . Maintaining the Menstruating Body : Feminist Interventions on Care Resources . Doctoral Dissertation , Univer - sity of Washington . [ 26 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . 2017 . Blending Methods : Developing Participatory De - sign Sessions for Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 39 - 49 . DOI : 7 [ 27 ] Alan Galey and Stan Ruecker . 2010 . How a prototype argues . Literary and Linguistic Computing 25 , 4 ( October 2010 ) , 405 - 424 . [ 28 ] Katherine Goertz . 2016 . Early Wearables Kit . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from http : / / maker . uvic . ca / ewkit / [ 29 ] Saidiya Hartman . 2019 . Wayward Lives , Beautiful Experi - ments : Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval . WW Norton and Company . [ 30 ] Anna Lauren Hoffman . 2018 . Making Data Valuable : Political , Economic , and Conceptual Bases of Big Data . Philosophy and Technology 31 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 209 - 212 . [ 31 ] Janet Hoskins . 2013 . Biographical objects : how things tell the stories of peoples ' lives . Routledge . [ 32 ] Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka , eds . 2011 . Media archaeolo - gy : Approaches , applications , and implications . Univ of Cali - fornia Press . [ 33 ] Lilly C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2016 . Stories We Tell About Labor : Turkopticon and the Trouble with " Design " . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4573 - 4586 . DOI : 2 [ 34 ] Liz Jackson . 2018 . We Are the Original Lifehackers . Retrieved January 15 , 2019 from Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 45 https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2018 / 05 / 30 / opinion / disability - design - lifehacks . html [ 35 ] Rosemary A . Joyce . 2006 . The monumental and the trace : Ar - chaeological conservation and the materiality of the past . Of the Past , for the Future : Integrating Archaeology and Conser - vation , Getty Conservation Institute , Los Angeles ( March 2006 ) : 13 - 18 [ 36 ] Kat Jungnickel . 2018 . Making Things to Make Sense of Things : DIY as Research and Practice . In The Routledge Companion to Media Studies and Digital Humanities , 512 - 522 . [ 37 ] Ann Light and Yoko Akama . 2018 . The nature of ‘obligation’ in doing design with communities : Participation , politics and care . Tricky Design : The Ethics of Things 131 . [ 38 ] Kristina Lindström and Åsa Ståhl . 2016 . Becoming response - able stakeholders : participatory design in times of uncertain - ties . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 ( PDC ' 16 ) , Claus Bossen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , Anne Marie Kanstrup , Janet McDonnell , Maurizio Teli , and Keld Bødker ( Eds . ) , Vol . 2 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 41 - 44 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948086 [ 39 ] Fei Lu , Feng Tian , Yingying Jiang , Xiang Cao , Wencan Luo , Guang Li , Xiaolong Zhang , Guozhong Dai , and Hongan Wang . 2011 . ShadowStory : creative and collaborative digital storytell - ing inspired by cultural heritage . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1919 - 1928 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979221 [ 40 ] Oussama Metatla , Nick Bryan - Kinns , Tony Stockman , and Fiore Martin . 2015 . Designing with and for people living with visual impairments : audio - tactile mock - ups , audio diaries and participatory prototyping . CoDesign 11 , 1 ( January 2015 ) , 35 - 48 . [ 41 ] Oussama Metatla and Clare Cullen . 2018 . “Bursting the Assi s - tance Bubble” : Designing Inclusive Technology with Children with Mixed Visual Abilities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Paper 346 , 14 pages . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173920 [ 42 ] Leroy Moore . 2017 . Black Disabled Art History 101 . Xochitl Justice Press , Nicola A . McClung and Emily A . Nusbaum ( Eds ) . [ 43 ] Danielle Morgan . 2016 . The Early Magnetic Recording Kit . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from http : / / maker . uvic . ca / emrkit / [ 44 ] Tavia Nyong ' o . 2018 . Afro - Fabulations : The Queer Drama of Black Life . NYU Press . [ 45 ] William Odom , James Pierce , Erik Stolterman , and Eli Blevis . 2009 . Understanding why we preserve some things and discard others in the context of interaction design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems ( CHI ' 09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1053 - 1062 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518862 [ 46 ] Oral History Association . 2009 . Principles and Best Practices . Retrieved January 18 , 2019 from http : / / www . oralhistory . org / about / principles - and - practices - revised - 2009 / [ 47 ] Oxo . About Us . Retrieved January 15 , 2019 from https : / / www . oxo . com / about [ 48 ] Carolyn Pedwell . 2014 . Affective relations : The transnational politics of empathy . Springer . [ 49 ] Liz Pellicano , Laura Crane , Katie Gaudion , and the Shaping Autism Research team . 2017 . Participatory autism research : A starter pack . London , UK : UCL Institute of Education . [ 50 ] Suvi Pihkala and Helena Karasti . 2018 . Politics of mattering in the practices of participatory design . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ' 18 ) , Liesbeth Huybrechts , Maurizio Teli , Ann Light , Yanki Lee , Carl Di Salvo , Erik Grönvall , Anne Marie Kanstrup , and Keld Bødker ( Eds . ) , Vol . 2 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 13 , 5 pages . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210616 [ 51 ] Halley P . Profita , Abigale Stangl , Laura Matuszewska , Sigrunn Sky , and Shaun K . Kane . 2016 . Nothing to hide : aesthetic cus - tomization of hearing aids and cochlear implants in an online community . In Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility , 219 - 227 . [ 52 ] Stephen Ramsay and Geoffrey Rockwell . 2012 . Developing Things : Notes Towards an Epistemology of Building in the Digital Humanities . In Debates in the Digital Humanities ( Mat - thew K . Gold Ed ) , 75 - 84 . [ 53 ] Matt Ratto and Megan Boler ( Eds ) . 2014 . DIY citizenship : Criti - cal making and social media . MIT Press . [ 54 ] Rooted in Rights . Storytellers Series . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / rootedinrights . org / get - involved / storytellers - about / [ 55 ] Daniela K . Rosner . 2018 . Critical Fabulations : Reworking the Methods and Margins of Design . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 56 ] Daniela K . Rosner , Miwa Ikemiya , Diana Kim , and Kristin Koch . 2013 . Designing with traces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1649 - 1658 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466218 [ 57 ] Daniela K . Rosner , Samantha Shorey , Brock R . Craft , and Hel - en Remick . 2018 . Making Core Memory : Design Inquiry into Gendered Legacies of Engineering and Craftwork . In Proceed - ings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu - ting Systems ( CHI ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Paper 531 , 13 pages . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174105 [ 58 ] Nuzhah Gooda Sahib , Tony Stockman , Anastasios Tombros , and Oussama Metatla . 2013 . Participatory design with blind users : a scenario - based approach . In IFIP Conference on Hu - man - Computer Interaction . Springer , 685 – 701 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 40483 - 2 _ 48 [ 59 ] Jentery Sayers . 2018 . Intimate Fields : Vol . 4 in the Kits Series . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from http : / / maker . uvic . ca / if / [ 60 ] Jentery Sayers . 2015 . Prototyping the Past . Visible Language 49 , 3 ( December 2015 ) . [ 61 ] Sami Schalk . 2018 . Bodyminds Reimagined : ( Dis ) ability , Race , and Gender in Black Women ' s Speculative Fiction . Duke Uni - versity Press . [ 62 ] Chia Shen , Neal B . Lesh , Frederic Vernier , Clifton Forlines , and Jeana Frost . 2002 . Sharing and building digital group histories . In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer sup - ported cooperative work ( CSCW ' 02 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 324 - 333 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 587078 . 587124 [ 63 ] Tim Sherratt . Invisible Australians : Living Under the White Australia Policy . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from http : / / invisibleaustralians . org / blog / author / tim - sherratt / [ 64 ] Thomas N . Smyth , John Etherton , and Michael L . Best . 2010 . MOSES : exploring new ground in media and post - conflict rec - onciliation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1059 - 1068 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 175348 [ 65 ] Daniel G . Solórzano , and Tara J . Yosso . 2002 . Critical race methodology : Counter - storytelling as an analytical framework for education research . Qualitative inquiry 8 , 1 23 - 44 . [ 66 ] Marilyn Strathern . 2005 . Partial connections . Rowman Altamira . [ 67 ] Lucy Suchman . 2007 . Human - machine reconfigurations : Plans and situated actions . Cambridge University Press . [ 68 ] Laurel Swan , Alex S . Taylor , and Richard Harper . 2008 . Making place for clutter and other ideas of home . ACM Trans . Com - Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 46 put . - Hum . Interact . 15 , 2 , Article 9 ( July 2008 ) , 24 pages . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1375761 . 1375764 [ 69 ] Andrea Tartaro . 2006 . Storytelling with a virtual peer as an intervention for children with autism . SIGACCESS Access . Comput . 84 ( January 2006 ) , 42 - 44 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1127564 . 1127573 [ 70 ] Alex S . Taylor and Laurel Swan . 2005 . Artful systems in the home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 641 - 650 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1054972 . 1055060 [ 71 ] Anja Thieme , Cecily Morrison , Nicolas Villar , Martin Grayson , and Siân Lindley . 2017 . Enabling Collaboration in Learning Computer Programing Inclusive of Children with Vision Im - pairments . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Design - ing Interactive Systems . ACM , 739 – 752 . [ 72 ] Jasper Tran O’Leary , Sara Zewde , Jennifer M ankoff and Dan - iela K . Rosner . 2019 . Who Gets to Future ? Race , Representa - tion , and Design Methods in Africatown . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems ( CHI ' 18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , to appear . [ 73 ] Sherry Turkle ( ED ) . 2007 . Evocative objects : Things we think with . MIT press . [ 74 ] Fred Turner . Prototype . In Digital keywords : a vocabulary of information society and culture . Peters , Benjamin , ed . Princeton University Press . [ 75 ] Ron Wakkary and Leah Maestri . 2007 . The resourcefulness of everyday design . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI con - ference on Creativity & cognition ( C & C ' 07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 163 - 172 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1254960 . 1254984 [ 76 ] Candace West and Don H . Zimmerman . 1987 . Doing gender . " Gender & society 1 , 2 ( June 1987 ) , 125 - 151 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0891243287001002002 [ 77 ] Alice Wong . 2018 . Resistance and Hope : Essays by Disabled People . Disability Visibility Project . [ 78 ] Sara Zewde . 2015 . Ecologies of Memory : Landscape Architec - tural Methods in an Expanded Under - standing of Culture . Mas ter’s thesis , Harvard University . [ 79 ] Sara Zewde . 2016 . Transatlantic Memory : Material and Imma - terial Design at the Valongo Wharf , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . In Landscript 5 : Material Culture : Assembling and Disassembling Landscapes , ed . Jane Hutton . Jovis . Story and Narrative DIS ' 19 , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 47