Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Robotics and Autonomous Systems journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / robot A survey of bio - inspired robotics hands implementation : New directions in dexterous manipulation Ebrahim Mattar ∗ , 1 Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering , College of Engineering , University of Bahrain , P . O . Box . 13184 , Bahrain a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 21 September 2010 Received in revised form 9 December 2012 Accepted 21 December 2012 Available online 18 January 2013 Keywords : BiomimeticsRoboticshandsDexterousmanipulationArtificialmusclesHandactuation a b s t r a c t Recently , significant advances have been made in ROBOTICS , ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE and other COGNITIVE related fields , allowing to make much sophisticated biomimetic robotics systems . In addition , enormous number of robots have been designed and assembled , explicitly realize biological oriented behaviors . Towards much skill behaviors and adequate grasping abilities ( i . e . ARTICULATION and DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION ) , a new phase of dexterous hands have been developed recently with biomimetically oriented and bio - inspired functionalities . In this respect , this manuscript brings a detailed survey of biomimetic based dexterous robotics multi - fingered hands . The aim of this survey , is to find out the state of the art on dexterous robotics end - effectors , known in literature as ( ROBOTIC HANDS ) or ( DEXTEROUS MULTI - FINGERED ) robot hands . Hence , this review finds such biomimetic approaches using a framework that permits for a common description of biological and technical based hand manipulation behavior . In particular , the manuscript focuses on a number of developments that have been taking place over the past two decades , and some recent developments related to this biomimetic field of research . In conclusions , the study found that , there are rich research efforts in terms of KINEMATICS , DYNAMICS , MODELING and CONTROL methodologies . The survey is also indicating that , the topic of biomimetic inspired robotics systems make significant contributions to robotics hand design , in four main directions for future research . First , they provide a genuine world test of models of biologically inspired hand designs and dexterous manipulation behaviors . Second , they provide novel manipulation articulations and mechanisms available for industrial and domestic uses , most notably in the field of human like hand design and real world applications . Third , this survey has also indicated that , there are quite large number of attempts to acquire biologically inspired hands . These attempts were almost successful , where they exposed more novel ideas for further developments . Such inspirations were directed towards a number of topics related ( HAND MECHANICS AND DESIGN ) , ( HAND TACTILE SENSING ) , ( HAND FORCE SENSING ) , ( HANDSOFTACTUATION ) and ( HANDCONFIGURATIONANDTOPOLOGY ) . FOURTH , intermsofemploying AI related sciences and cognitive thinking , it was also found that , rare and exceptional research attempts were directed towards the employment of biologically inspired thinking , i . e . ( AI , BRAIN AND COGNITIVE SCIENCES ) for hand upper control and towards much sophisticated dexterous movements . Throughout the study , it has been found there are number of efforts in terms of mechanics and hand designs , tactical sensing , however , for hand soft actuation , it seems this area of research is still far away from having a realistic muscular type fingers and hand movements . © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . Bio - inspired dexterous robotics hands manipulation As defined , robotics BIOMIMETIC is the study of the structure and function of biological systems , as models for the design and engineering of materials , machines , and mechanics for robotics applications . The accelerating swiftness of advancements ∗ Tel . : + 973 39632302 . E - mail addresses : ebrgallaf @ eng . uob . bh , ebmattar @ uob . edu . bh . 1 MIEEE , MIET . Author has earlier published previous articles under the name of ( Ebrahim . Al - Gallaf ) . in the field of biomimetics seems to make evident that the emergence of machines as our peers is imminent . Although this theme brings with it huge implications and new directions including , and not limited , to nature of progression and its role in technological progression . The technology is greatly benefited from different fields of knowledge as Psychology of Biomimetic Robots , Integrative Biology , Biomimetic Animated Creatures , Artificial Life , Functionality Elements of Biomimetic Robots , and Applications for Biologically Inspired Intelligent Robotics . In recent years , major progresses have been made in Control , Robotics , Artificial Intelligence and others disciplines allowing to make sophisticated biomimetic systems . Working together , aca - demicians , scientists and engineers are now reverse engineering 0921 - 8890 / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . robot . 2012 . 12 . 005 518 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 1 . Initialattemptstoemulatehumangrasps . Fingersmovementsareentirelycontrolledviatendondrivenjoints , withsolidfingersstructures . ( i ) : Belgrade / USCHand , [ 1 ] . ( ii ) : 1994 Reading University - Cybernetics Hand , CYBHAND , [ 5 ] . ( iii ) : Utah Hand , [ 6 ] . ( iv ) : JPL Hand , [ 7 ] . many of both animal’s and human’s performance characteristics using these advances . An interdisciplinary research has resulted in machines that can identify facial expressions , comprehend speeches , and locomotion in robust bipedal gaits , similar to a certain extent to humans movements and actions . Related to this context , advances in polymer sciences have also resulted in actua - tions based on Electro - active Polymers ( EAP ) , and are also known later as ARTIFICIAL MUSCLES . Artificial muscles are such materi - als that show functional characteristics remarkably similar to bio - logical muscles . Human like hands are important for robotics , and they are such of the most complex organs of the human body af - ter brain ; thus , it is clearly understood why its behavior had in - tensively interested former philosophers . Over the past decades , Human like hands have been object of study and research not only in the medical field , but also in the engineering field , Jimmy W . , Soto M . , and Gini G . , [ 1 ] . Robot Efforts have been directed towards multi - fingered robot hands because : ( i ) Parallel jaw grippers can assume a limited range of configura - tions , since having only one degree of freedom in a hand limits the choice of grasping configurations , Salisbury K . , [ 2 ] . ( ii ) It is unreasonable to expect large , massive links in a robot arm to be able to cover a large working volume and simultaneously have high bandwidth and sensitivity , Salisbury K . , [ 2 ] . ( iii ) Multi - fingered hands provide for a unique sensing modality , the cooperation of position , force , tactile , and proximity sensors provides an opportunity for obtaining information about the mechanical and physical attributes of objects and tasks . ( iv ) There is need for mechanical interfacing between the end - effector and the arm due to : ( a ) Robot oscillation . ( b ) Robot programming errors . ( c ) Unexpected environmental forces and displacements . ( d ) Part fixing errors , Salisbury K . , and Craig J . , [ 3 ] . ( v ) Dexterous hands can be used in direct human control , where they are utilized in hazardous locations . ( vi ) The versatility of robot hands arises from the fact that fine motion manipulation can be accomplished through relatively fast and small motions of fingers , as they can be used for different objects , Zexiang L . et al . , [ 4 ] . ( vii ) Contemporary industrial robots are not suited to operating in unstructured environments , and so the range and complexity of tasks they can perform is limited . Multi - fingered hands have the potential for improving on this deficiency , and their continued development holds the prospect of the application of robot technology to a wider variety of manufacturing tasks , Al Gallaf . , et al . [ 5 ] . Building biologically inspired intelligent robotics hands requires clear understanding of the biological models , as well as devel - opments in analytical modeling , graphic simulation , in addition , physical implementations of related technology . Research and en - gineering focus involved with the development of biologically - inspired intelligent robots are multidisciplinary . This involves the study of fingers materials , joints actuating , tactile sensing , hand kinematics structures , functionality , movements control , artificial intelligence , and hand autonomy . While the engineering chal - lenges are very interesting to address , however , there are also fundamental concerns that need attention . Some of such issues include self - defense , controlled - termination as well as many oth - ers . There are already extensive heritages of making { dexterous robots hands } over the past , that appear and function a similar to biological hand . In its original sense , the term hand manipu - lation applies to the process of directing a grasped object to its destination . Over the past two decades , large number of dexter - ous robotics hands have been developed that explicitly emulate human like hand shape and movements . However , it was clear that biological functionalities could not be fully emulated due to luck of the right technologies . In addition , over past few years , engineering such biomimetic intelligent creatures , such as robots , was hindered by physical and technological constraints and limi - tations . The use of artificial intelligence , effective artificial muscles and other biomimetic based technologies are expected to make the possibility of realistically looking and behaving robotics hands intomorepractical . Dexterousmulti - fingeredrobothandshavebe - come of great attention in robotics due to their advantages over conventional grippers in tasks requiring dexterous manipulation . Real - time grasping force optimization is also a difficult problem because the friction forces between the fingertips and a grasped object are nonlinear constrains . Literatures in this vital field have been focused since the early of 1990’s , at that time , when Bel - grade / USC , Utah , JPL , and Reading University - CybHand hand re - searchers published their research work in progress over earlier years , refer to Fig . 1 , [ 1 , 5 – 7 ] . In reality , an early survey was also conducted on 1993 , as docu - mentedinAlGallaf , etal . [ 5 ] . Withinthatparticularmanuscript , au - thors have presented a study that looked into some early attempts for robot hand designs . Due to lack of appropriate technologies on that early days , wholly bio - inspired hand designs were not easy tasks . Over the past few number of years , technology has devel - oped sufficiently , that has allowed more closer hand designs to bi - ological mechanisms , is much reachable . Belgrade / USC Hand [ 1 ] , Reading CybHand [ 5 ] , Utah Hand [ 6 ] , and JPL Hand [ 7 ] , are just considered as early attempts to emulate human grasps . Fingertips movements are entirely controlled through tendon driven joints , with solid fingers structures . Biomimetic robot hands , as indicated by Yoseph C . and Breazeal C . [ 8 ] , have been also introduced lately over the last decade . Such field of biologically inspired technology , having the moniker biomimetics , has evolved from making static copies of human and animals in the form of statues to the emer - gence of robots that operate with realistic behavior , [ 8 ] . This is due to a number of potential advantages of purely mechanical robot hands , as known here as the classical hand . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 519 1 . 2 . Article contribution Twenty years ago , i . e . in 1993 , the author has put a survey about articulated robotics hands , as in [ 5 ] . Over that time , technology was such emerging to build human like robot hands . With the advances in technology and computational powers , things are changing now . Within this manuscript , we are also surveying a number of attempts towards bio - inspired robot hand designs . There were a number of hand designs and dexterous manipulation early attempts . This is depicted and shown in Fig . 1 . Hand models for such robots are greatly inspired by science fiction ( books , movies , toys , animatronics , etc . ) . These science fiction attempts have originated perceptions and expectations that are far beyond the achievement of current engineering capabilities , which are constrained by physics laws and technology current state - of - the - art . Therefore , in this survey , we provide a background for describing hand manipulation phenomena which builds on up - to - date discussions in the biological literature . Furthermore , within this framework , we also provide an overview of efforts that have been undertaken so far in this field of biomimetic robot hand manipulation . Here we consider an approach as biomimetic if a researcher try to implement a robotics hand or mechanism described in the biological literature , and explicitly refer to the biological inspiration of their approach . In addition , within this manuscript , we shall survey a number of potential research frameworks that have been focused lately towards biologically - inspired technologies for robot hands design and implementation . Inreality , itisnotanobvioustasktosurveyallkindsoftechnologies related to the biomimetic based robot hands designs . However , we shall be dividing the manuscript to a number of robot hands demanding issues , and take account of a number of inter - related technologies . This includes , HANDS DESIGN , TACTILE SENSING , ACTUATION systems , and so forth of inter - related robot hand technologies . 1 . 3 . Article organization The survey looks in details at recent efforts towards dexterous robotics hands , and behavior of biological of human hands . We survey in details issues related to biomimetic systems and robotics hands experiences . The manuscript has six main Sections . In Section 1 , we present a focused introduction into the manuscript theme and objectives . Section 2 presents studies related to ( Bio - Inspired Dexterous Robotics Hands Topology And Designs ) , whereas Section 3 , it summaries efforts towards ( Hand bio - Inspired soft actuation materials ) . Tactile sensing is an important topic for hand designs . Hence , in Section 4 we overview ( Bio - Inspired Tactile Sensing ) . Bionic is also an essential topic for hand designs , hence we present in Section 5 specific experiences related to ( Bionic and Prosthetic Hands ) . Finally , in Section 6 , we summarize few conclusions , and place forward few remarks . In addition , we conclude the review with a discussion of technical and biological relevance of biomimetic approaches to robot hand manipulation . 2 . Bio - inspired dexterous robotics hands topology and designs 2 . 1 . Hand biomimetic compliance control structures of human finger In their challenge , Byoung K . et al . [ 9 ] , stated that , for an object grasped by a robotics hand to work in compliance control domain , they needed to analyze the necessary condition for suc - cessfulstiffnessmodulationinanoperationalspace . Theyproposed a new compliance control method for robot hands which con - sist of two steps . RIFDS ( Resolved Inter - Finger Decoupling Solver ) , through which to decompose a desired compliance characteristic specified in the operational space into the compliance characteris - tic in the fingertip space , without inter - finger coupling . RIJDS ( Re - solved Inter - Joint Decoupling Solver ) , and this to decompose the compliance characteristic in the ( fingertip space ) into the compli - ancecharacteristicinthe ( jointspace ) withoutinter - jointcoupling . It was found , a finger structure should be biomimetic in the sense thateitherkinematicredundancyorforceredundancyarerequired to implement the proposed compliance control scheme . This can be clearly seen in Fig . 2 . Byoung K . et al . [ 9 ] concluded that , the number of hand fingers and the structure of each finger are im - portant components for fulfillment of compliance control scheme . In addition , the geometric configuration of the given grasp should be carefully considered to stiffen the stiffness characteristic spec - ified in the operational space . It was also concluded that , for the introduced bio - inspired two steps control compliance algorithm ( RIFDS and RIJDS , Fig . 2 - ( ii ) ) , the number of fingers and the struc - ture of each finger are important for fulfillment of compliance con - trol scheme . In addition , the geometric configuration of a given grasp should be carefully considered to satisfy a stiffness charac - teristics specified over an operational space . 2 . 2 . Development of biomimetic robot hand using parallel mecha - nisms In [ 10 ] , Lee S . et al . , did describe a development of biomimetic robot hands and its control scheme . Each robot hand has four under - actuated fingers , which are driven by two linear actuators coupled , refer to Fig . 3 . Each fingertip can reach towards objects by curved surface workspace in 3D - space . The robot hand was designed considering the dexterity and the size suited for human tools and has tactile sensors equipped on the fingertips of each finger . The robot hand has four fingers with totally nine DOFs including two linear actuators and linkage knuckles . Computer simulations were used to show the performance of the robot hand to manipulate tools of various shapes . Lee S . et al . stated that , according to the study of the human hand , a noticeable point is that the motion of coupled muscles generates the finger movements . Like human hands , the designed robot hand has parallel mechanisms which are actuated by coupled - linear actuators . The mechanisms have high - efficiency , low inertia , large payload capacity and simple structures . In the compact linear actuator module , a motor , its driver , a microcontroller with communication chip and encoder are equipped . Lee S . et al . , [ 10 ] , have also presented the mechanism for an anthropomorphic robot hand which was designed by mimicking human hands . Their research also was based on a noticeable point is that the motion of coupled muscles generates the finger movements . Like human hands , the designed robot hand has parallel mechanisms which are actuated by coupled - linear actuators . The mechanisms have high - efficiency , low inertia , large payload capacity and simple structures . In the compact linear actuator module , a motor , its driver , a microcontroller with communication chip and encoder are equipped . Each finger is composed of two linear actuator modules and linkage knuckles . In contrast with other fingers , they have added one more degree of freedom on the palm of thumb . In addition , multi - point tactile sensors are equipped on the fingertips of each finger . The hand can grasp various objects unknown and knownthatcanbeseenfromourenvironment . Resultshaveshown that , it is possible to have good mix between the good mechanics and good instrumentations tools and probes . Also results have shown that , the hand can grasp various objects unknown and known that can be seen from the environment . 2 . 3 . Tendon and muscle force requirements for humanlike force capabilities in a robotic finger Tendon and muscle force requirements for humanlike hand is an important issue . Pollard N . and Richards G . , [ 11 ] , have found that adapting human examples to a robot manipulator is a complex 520 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 2 . Biomimetic compliance control , [ 9 ] . A closed - loop structured finger with redundant actuators , number of fingers , and the structure of each finger are important for fulfillment of compliance control scheme . ( i ) - ( Left ) : A finger with five - bar mechanism . ( i ) - ( Right ) : Compliance control by three - fingers . ( ii ) : Three fingers block diagram for compliance control . Fig . 3 . Biomimetic robot hand design . Parallel mechanisms approach , [ 10 ] . ( Left ) : Muscles of human hand and features of parallel actuated robot hand . ( Right ) : Kinematics of coupled linear actuated finger . issue . This is due to differences between human and robot hands . Force transmission mechanisms in robot fingers are generally symmetric about flexion / extension axes , but in human fingers they are focused towards flexion . Refer to Fig . 4 . Their research describes how a tendon driven robot finger can be optimized for force transmission capability equivalent to human index finger . It was shown that two distinct tendon arrangements that are similar to those that have been used in robot hands can achieve similar range of forces as human finger with minimal additional cost in total muscle requirements . This research was focused to examine : Can a two tendon - driven finger design , as in Fig . 4 - ( left ) , be tuned to have force capabilities equivalent to that of the human finger , as Fig . 4 - ( middle ) ? If so , do they represent higher or lower ‘‘cost’’ designs than that of the human finger ? Cost is formalized as the sum over all tendons of the maximum force that must be supplied to that tendon . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 521 Fig . 4 . Muscleforcerequirementsforhumanlikeforcecapabilities , [ 11 ] . ( Left ) : ( 2 n ) and ( n + 1 ) tendonfingers . ( Middle ) : IndexFlexorandextensortendons . ( Right ) : Human and optimized ( 2 n ) robot finger Force capabilities . Fig . 5 . TheZurich – Tokyohand , asinspiredbythemuscle – tendonsystemofthehumanhand , [ 12 ] . ( Left ) : Handstructure . ( MiddleandRight ) : Finalgraspofdifferentobjects . The control is the same , but the behavior is very different . In Fig . 4 - ( right ) , we show a table showing muscle forces for the initial and optimized designs of each robot finger . The initial designs are far from duplicating the force capabilities of the human finger model , while the optimized designs can duplicate these force capabilities . It was found that , human force capability can be matched in a robotics hand design . Matching this and other propertiessuchasstiffnessmaymakeiteasierforustosuccessfully imitate human grasps . Pollard N . and Richards G . , [ 11 ] , have both concluded that , muscle forces and moment arms of a dual tendon driven robot finger design was optimized , in such a way to duplicate the force capabilities of the human finger with very similar total muscle force requirements . The good match of both force capability ( Fig . 4 , here only ( x – z ) plane is shown ) , and cost sum of muscle forces is somewhat surprising given that the robot finger designs differ from the human finger and from each other in number of tendons , roles of each tendon , and tendon moment arms , with the robot fingers designed for simpler manufacture . It is remarkable to note that , the research was able to employ a linear programming problem optimization approach to select the best ( n + 1 ) tendon design as shown in Fig . 4 - ( left ) . There are eight plausible tendon arrangements for the ( n + 1 ) design : the long tendons can either flex or extend the PIP joint , the long and medium tendons can either flex or extend the MCP joint , and the long , medium , and short tendons can either abduct or adduct the MCP joint . Pollard N . and Richards G . [ 11 ] , also concluded that , different arrangements of tendons or additional tendons would make either system redundant . A number of alternative designs were therefore evaluated using the technique for redundant combinations of tendons a linear programming problem . 2 . 4 . Zurich – Tokyo hand : inspired by the muscle – tendon system of the human hand In collaboration with the Developmental Cognitive Machines Laboratory at the University of Tokyo , Pfeifer R . et al . , [ 12 ] , have developed a prosthetic robotic hand inspired by the muscle – tendon system of the human hand . This is known in literature as the ZURICH – TOKYO hand , or as the YOKOI Hand . The hand design with its actuation are shown in Fig . 5 . In this sense , the robotic hand has a total of ( 13 ) degrees of freedom , where each finger has been equipped with different types of sensors ( i . e . , flex / bend , angle , and pressure ) . At the Biomechatronics lab , medical system engineering department , at Chiba University in Japan , the same robotic hand has been used as a prosthetic device . For that purpose , few number of EMG signals can be used to interface the deigned robot hand non - invasively to a patient . Electrical stimulation can be used as a substitute for tactile feedback . This tendon driven robot Zurich – Tokyo hand is partly built from elastic , flexible and deformable materials . For example , the tendons are elastic , the fingertips are deformable and between the fingers there is also deformable material . The hand was designed to have up to ( 13 ) degrees of freedom movement . Such redundant DOF was achieved and are joints movements driven by ( 13 ) servomotors . Also the hand has a number of bending sensors , and they are placed on each finger . This will give an easy means and as a measure of the hand fingers space positions . The is also equipped with a set of standard FSR pressure sensors . Thesepressuresensorsdocoverthehanddifferent contact locations . This includes the areas of contacts on fingertips , on the back of each finger , in addition to area on the hand palm . As indicated before , the Zurich – Tokyo robotic hand has a total ( 13 ) degrees of freedom movements , this give the hand mechanics more space of movements . In addition to this , each finger has been equipped with different types of tactile and non - tactile contact sensors and devices . This would include ( i . e . , flex / bend , angle , and pressure ) . For testing and investigation purposes , more research was conducted at the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at the University of Tokyo . Hence , such a designed robotic hand was used to investigate the relationship between morphology , intrinsic body dynamics , generation of information , structure through sensorimotor coordinated activity , and LEARNING . They have also implemented biologically inspired learning mechanism to allow the robotic hand to explore its own movement capabilities . Moreover , by correlating the sensory input ( from the hand ) , as a result of its motor outputs , the Zurich – Tokyo robotics dexterous 522 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 6 . SQUSE lifelike robot hand , designed and implemented by squse company , [ 13 ] . Hand skeleton was covered by a skin which is made of soft silicone . The hand is powered by a series of ( 22 ) actuators , and has multiple joints and movable polycarbonate bones . hand can also learn to manipulate , move , and grasp objects by itself . In [ 12 ] , it was reported that , because of the morphology of the hand , the elastic tendons , and the deformable finger tips , the hand will automatically self - adapt to the object it is grasping . This assumes , there is no need for the agent to ‘‘know’’ beforehand what the shape of the to - be - grasped object will be . The shape adaptation is taken over by the morphology of the hand , the elasticity of the tendons , and the deformability of the finger tips , as the hand interacts with the shape of the object . In this setup , control of grasping is very simple , or in other words , very little ‘‘brain power’’ is required for grasping . 2 . 5 . Squse lifelike robot hand ; polycarbonate skeleton covered by a skin which is made of soft silicone A Japanese based company , known as ( Squse Company ) , as in [ 13 ] , has built an harshly life - like robotic hand . It was known as the Robot Hand H - Type . Details are given and depicted in Fig . 6 . The hand is powered by a series of actuators and has multiple joints and movable polycarbonate bones . The robotic hand , is covered with silicon rubber . Such type of hand cover allows the hand to give a skin - like look . The hand has the ability to lift and move small objects . In reference to [ 13 ] , the robot hand manufacturing company , says that the hand will mostly find its use in industrial applications . It has been also reported that , even though it resembles a lifelike hand in a great degree , its main functionisnotforprosthetics . TheKyoto - basedfactoryautomation company Squse , has developed the robotic hand , in such away it is dexterous and delicate enough to handle small delicate objects . The hand was built from a polycarbonate skeleton . Hand skeleton was covered by a skin which is made of soft silicone . Hand skeleton portion itself weights ( 220 g ) , and the silicone skin weights ( 120 g ) . The hand design was achieved in such away that , the hand can lift up to ( 1 . 5 kg ) . It is available in two variations . One is more human resembling , as this is known as the ( H - Type Squse Hand ) . The other , as known as the ( G - Type Squse Hand ) , is mounted on a base and resembles industrial robots . Both hands are powered by ( 22 ) actuators , as they represent pneumatically powered artificial muscles . They enable its fingers to move as the fingers of a human hand do . The entire arm is of 16 degrees of freedom . This permits the hand to move in a human - like manner . The hand dexterity allows it to have many ways to manipulate objects and different grips . This is ranging from a full - hand squeeze to a delicate two - finger pinch used to move delicate and soft objects . The hand can also handle delicate grips . This is because it is designed to pack , handle and even harvest fruits and vegetables without bruising them or to handle fragile goods or factory parts being processed . The entire hand weight is of a total of ( 340 g ) . This also allows the hand to be used as a prosthetic limb . 3 . Bio - inspired non rotary actuation materials 3 . 1 . Design and control of a shape memory alloy based dexterous hands In [ 14 ] , Price A . et al . , stated that modern externally powered upper - body prostheses are conventionally actuated by electric servomotors . It is true that such mechanical motors achieve reasonable kinematic performance , however , they are voluminous and heavy . Therefore , there are efforts to avoid using mechanical actuation . Deterring factors such as these lead to a substantial proportion of upper extremity amputees avoiding the use of their prostheses . It was found , it is apparent that there exists a need for functional prosthetic devices that are compact and lightweight . The realization of such a device requires an alternative actuation technology . Hence , biological inspiration suggests that tendon based systems are advantageous . In particular , shape memory alloys are a type of smart material that exhibit an actuation mechanism resembling the biological equivalent . As such , shape memory alloy enabled devices promise to be of major importance in the future of dexterous robotics , and of prosthetics in particular . For the Shape Memory Alloys ( SMA ) details , the potential application of several alternative lightweight actuators , such as artificial muscles , has been investigated including Electro - Active Polymers and pneumatic muscles with little success . Price A . et al . research framework did investigate issues surrounding the practical application of shape memory alloys as artificial muscles E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 523 Fig . 7 . Ashapememoryalloybasedroboticshanddesign , [ 14 ] . ( Left ) : SMAactuatedartificialhand . ( Middle ) : KinematicstructureoftheSMAartificialfinger . ( Right ) : Single finger control algorithm . inathree - fingeredrobothandintendedforprostheticapplications , as indicated to in Fig . 7 . This resulted in actuators that produce high output force , but are limited to low strain , while the latter configuration results in actuators that produce low force and achieve higher strains . Actuator strains of approximately ( 32 % ) have been demonstrated through the exploitation of SMA filament geometry which amplifies small localized SMA strains into large - scale actuator contraction . However , these high - strain actuators are prone to excessive power requirements and exhibit extremely limited fatigue life , and are therefore impractical for portable prosthetic applications , [ 14 ] . In their research outcomes , Price A . et al . [ 14 ] , have stated that the experience gained through the study has led to the following number of conclusions . First : Shape Memory Alloys have been shown to provide a feasible ‘‘alternative actuation’’ technology for lightweight robot hand applications by means of the shape memory effect . Second : The new nine - DOF prosthetic hand that has been designed and manufactured , has a mass comparable to a typical commercially available single - DOF prosthetic hand ( this can be useful in compensating for additional hand battery requirements ) . Finally : A new sigmoid based control algorithm has been proposed and evaluated for the position control of Shape Memory Alloy elements . In reality , such a position control , minimizes overshoot to avoid the slow time response inherent to the passive cooling necessary for SMA elongation . 3 . 2 . A shape memory alloy - based tendon - driven actuation According to Bundhoo V . et al . [ 15 ] , a new biomimetic tendon - driven actuation system for prosthetic and wearable robotic hand applications is presented . It is based on the combination of compli - ant tendon cables and one - way shape memory alloy ( SMA ) wires that form a set of agonist – antagonist artificial muscle pairs for the required flexion / extension or abduction / adduction of the fin - ger joints , as shown in Fig . 8 . The performance of the proposed actuation system is demonstrated using a 4 degree - of - freedom ( three active and one passive ) artificial finger test - bed , also devel - oped based on a biomimetic design approach . A microcontroller - based pulse - width - modulated proportional derivation ( PWM - PD ) feedback controller and a minimum jerk trajectory feed - forward controller are implemented and tested in an ad hoc fashion to eval - uate the performance of the finger system in emulating natural joint motions . The aim of such a research framework was to emu - late the biological features of the natural muscle – tendon arrange - mentinthehumanhandindevelopinganewactuationmechanismforabiomimeticartificialfinger , Fig . 8 . In that sense , the main fea - tures of the proposed biomimetic actuation and finger system can be summarized as : ( i ) anthropomorphically accurate size and ap - pearance ; ( ii ) kinematically accurate joint motion , ( iii ) compliant and tendon - driven muscle - like actuation , and ( iv ) biomimetic sen - sory feedback . 3 . 3 . Actuation via artificial muscles via electro - active polymers In 2000 , Cohen Y . [ 16 ] , has reported that , one of the important aspects of making biologically inspired robots , is the development of actuators that allow emulating the behavior and performance of real human - like muscles . Capability for human - like muscles actuators is increasingly becoming feasible with the emergence of the Electro - Active Polymers ( EAP ) . EAP are also known as artificial muscles [ 16 ] . EAP materials have functional similarities to biological muscles . In this regards , Cohen Y . [ 16 ] , has also given a detailed study about such materials . This is shown clearly in Fig . 9 - ( i ) , where over the left figure , it is illustrated the EAP infrastructure and areas needing attention , Over the right diagram , it is shown a schematic diagram of the basic components of an EAP - driven system , [ 16 ] . This includes flexibility , damage tolerance , and large actuation strains , stretching , contracting or even bending . The author’s view of this infrastructure , and areasneedingsimultaneousdevelopmentareshownschematically here . This involves the need for adequate understanding of EAP materials’ behavior and the necessity to assure their durability in service . Enhancement of the actuation force requires knowledge of the basic principles using computational chemistry models , comprehensive material science , electro - mechanics analytical tools and improved materials processes . Efforts are needed to gain a better understanding of the parameters that control the EAP electro - activation force and deformation . Construction of mobility or articulation system that is actuated by EAP requires components as shown in Fig . 20 ( i - Right ) as a block diagram . While each of the listed components is at various advanced research phases , EAP actuators are the least developed technology and extensive effort is required to bring it to a mature stage . On the other hand , EAP materials reach their elastic limit at lower stress levels compared to EAC , and their actuation stress falls far shorter than EAC and SMA actuators . Furthermore , in Fig . 9 - ( ii ) , a table of comparison of properties of some actuation materials are also listed are compared . In this table a comparison is given between EAP , EAC and SMA . From the table , it is very obvious to see the properties in which EAP offer superior capability . The most attractive feature of EAPs is their ability to emu - late biological muscles offering resilience , toughness , large ac - tuation strain and inherent vibration damping . This similarity gained them the name ‘‘Artificial Muscles’’ with the potential of developing biologically inspired robots . To observe the de - formation properties , in Fig . 9 - ( iii ) , middle , they have shown an electrostrictive grafted elastomer based bimorph actuator in an unexcited state , also they show one direction excited state ( left ) , and opposite direction excited state ( right ) . EAP can potentially afford further lifelike aesthetics , such as vibration and 524 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 8 . Memoryalloy - basedtendon - drivenactuation , [ 15 ] . ( i ) ( Left ) : Anatomyoftheindexfinger . ( i ) ( Right ) : Artificialfingertest - bedwithsixtendoncablesroutingthrough the finger core and attached to the corresponding six remotely placed SMA actuators . ( ii ) : Comparison between reference and actual minimum jerk flexion trajectories of artificial finger’s MCP using Visualeyez motion tracking system . ( Left ) : Placement of LEDs for Visualeyez system . ( Right ) : Closed - loop MCP joint following minimum jerk flexion trajectory . shock dampening , and more flexible actuator configurations . Fur - ther to this , EAP materials can add extra technological advance - ment to robotics . They can be used to compose mechanical devices and robots with no traditional components like gears , and bear - ings , which are responsible to their high costs , weight and prema - ture failures . EAP can produce large displacement , while using low mass , low power and , in some of these materials also low voltage . These characteristics make them attractive actuators for robotics applications . Capabilities of EAPs to emulate muscles offers robotic capabilitiesthathavebeenconsideredfarawayofimplementation , once relying on existing actuators . Exploiting the properties of arti - ficial muscles may enable even the movement of the covering skin to define the character of the robots and perform expressivity . Fi - nally , in Fig . 9 - ( iv ) , a conductive EAP actuator is being shown as bending itself , under stimulation of ( 2 V , 50 A ) excitation . Being ei - ther to the left or right , depending on the current direction , strong or week , depending on the current strength . Such bending proper - ties of such materials has made them very attractive for robotics use , and in particular for further studies on the area of artificial muscles for actuation . 3 . 4 . Dexterous robotics hands actuated by electro - active polymers , ( building a robot hand ) In [ 19 ] , Cohen Y . , stated that the capability of EAP materials to emulate muscles offers robotic capabilities that are still in the realm of science fiction when relying on existing actuators . The largedisplacementthatcanbeobtainedusinglowmass , lowpower and , ( in some of the EAPs ) , also low voltage , makes them attractive actuators for robotics use . In this respect , of an application , at JPL , EAP actuators that can induce bending and longitudinal strains , were used to design and construct a miniature robotic arm , refer to Fig . 10 . This robotic arm illustrates some of the unique capability of EAP , where its gripper consisted of four bending type EAP finger strips with hooks at the bottom emulating fingernails and it was made to grab rocks similar to human hand . To encourage the development of effective Electro - Active Polymers actuators for robotics applications , which will make an impact towards the future of robotics , toy industry , animatronics and others , two platforms were developed and are now available at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) . One of two platforms is an ARTIFICIAL HAND . At present , conventional electric motors are producing the required deformations to make relevant movement of the robotics hand . The new JPL robotic hand is equipped with tandems and sensors . This allows the functioning and movements of the various joints mimicking human hand . The hand index finger is currently being driven by conventional actuators ( motors ) . This allows to serve as a baseline , hence they will be substituted by EAP actuation when such materials are developed as effective actuators , [ 19 ] . Furthermore , in reference to [ 19 ] , Bar - Cohen Y . , pointedthatElectro - ActivePolymerscanbedividedintotwomajor categoriesbasedontheiractivationmechanismincludingionicand electronic , refer to Fig . 10 - ( ii ) . Coulomb forces drive the electronic EAP , which include electrostrictive , electrostatic , piezoelectric and ferroelectric . This type of EAP materials can be made to hold the induceddisplacementwhileactivatedunderaDCvoltage , allowing them to be considered for robotic applications . Such EAP materials have greater mechanical energy density and they can be operated E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 525 Fig . 9 . Artificial muscles : electro - active polymers , [ 16 ] . ( i ) - ( Left ) : EAP infrastructure and areas needing attention . ( i ) - ( Right ) : A schematic diagram of the basic components of an EAP - driven system . ( ii ) : Table of Comparison of the properties of some actuation materials , [ 17 ] . ( iii ) - ( Left ) : One direction excited state . ( iii ) - ( Middle ) : Electrostrictive grafted Elastomer based bimorph actuator in an unexcited state , ( iii ) - ( Right ) : and opposite direction excited state . ( iv ) : Conductive EAP actuator is shown bending under stimulation of ( 2 V , 50 A ) , [ 18 ] . 526 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 10 . Dexterous robotics hands actuated by electro - active polymers , [ 19 ] . ( i ) : Finger EAP gripper lifting a rock . Some of the unique capability of EAP . Gripper consisted of four bending type EAP finger strips with hooks at the bottom emulating fingernails and it was made to grab rocks similar to human hand . The miniature robotic arm using EAP actuators to provide the lifting / dropping of the arm and manipulate the gripper fingers . ( ii ) : List of the leading Electro - Active Polymers materials . in air with no major constraints . However , the electronic EAP require a high activation fields ( > 100 → V / µ m ) that may be close to the breakdown level . 3 . 5 . EAP electro - active polymers for robotics hand actuation : making robots actuated by artificial muscles To make use of Electro - Active Polymers as actuator for multi - fingered robotics hands , G . Whiteley ( Sheffield Hallam University ) have constructed a robotics hand driven by such promising materials . The hand was equipped with an actuator which was invented by G . Pioggia , from UNIVERSITY OF PISA , in Italy . More details on this can be found also in [ 20 ] . Refer to Fig . 11 for illustration . To stimulate a global research interest in Electro - Active Polymers actuators , Bar - Cohen [ 20 ] , have posed an ongoing challenge few years ago to scientists and engineers worldwide . The main challenge objective was focused in such a way to see if anyone could develop a robotic arm driven by artificial muscles . This challenge requires tackling the problem on all its fronts - from fundamental science and engineering , to robotic control and artificial intelligence . Even though such a challenge has not yet been fully met , scientists have made progress in finding ways to control a robotic arm with artificial muscles . In addition , researchers are now working hopes to see technology that will combine artificial muscles with prosthetics and allow disabled people to perform physical tasks independently . Scientists and engineers world - wide are now joining combined effort to make effective Electro - Active Polymers actuators the activators of choice in future devices and mechanisms . There are a number of new challenges in terms of using EAP for actuating robotics hands . The new technology has a number of excellentpotentials , however , therearealsoanumberofimportant issues to be looked into . One of such issues is the gripping power of such materials , since , studies do show a soft level of gripping once used for object lifting and movements . 3 . 6 . Shadow dexterous muscle hand air muscle robotics hand actuation Shadow hand dof and movements abilities : The Shadow Dexterous Hand [ 21 ] , is also another attempt to get closer to bio - inspired robotics hand . It was designed in such away to have a range of movement equivalent to that of a typical human being hand . In this respect , four fingers of the SHADOW hand , contain two one - axis joints connecting the distal phalanx , middle phalanx and proximal phalanx and one universal joint connecting the finger to the metacarpal . Furthermore , the little finger has an extra one - axis joint on the metacarpal . This is to provide the hand with a palm curl movement , as closed to the human being hand . For the thumb structure , it contains one one - axis joint connecting the distal phalanx to the proximal phalanx , one universal joint connecting the thumb to the metacarpal and one one - axis joint on the bottom of the metacarpal to provide a palm curl movement . The wrist contains two joints , providing flex / extend and adduct / abduct . This means that the SHADOW dexterous hand has ( 24 rotary joints ) all together , with 20 degrees of freedom . The hand total degrees of freedom , gives the hand more articulation , where movements are achieved as the hand contains an integrated bank of 40 air muscles actuating 24 joints . This is also allowing a direct mapping from a human to the robot . The fitted muscles are compliant in character , this would allow the hand to be used around soft or fragile objects . In terms movement and force control , the hand has integrated sensing and position control , using joint position and muscle pressure sensors to facilitate precise control from off - board computers , even it can be integrated into any existing robotic arm platform . This is depicted in Fig . 12 . The SHADOW Hand system incorporates all necessary control systems ( software provided under GNU GPL ) and documentation for research and teaching purposes , and fully integrates with the Robot Operating System ‘‘ROS’’ . In order for the hand to have precise control and to increase its level of interaction with its surroundings , the hand can be fitted with a number of touch sensing options . Shadowhandsensing : TheShadowHandcomeswithanalogcontact sensing regions on all fingertips . And it takes an open approach to fingertip sensing . As standard , the Dexterous Hand comes fitted with a PST contact sensor . We partner with ( SynTouch LLC ) to integrate their remarkable ( Syntouch BioTac ) sensor on the Hand . The standard PST tactile sensors is intended to provide a simple , robust , low - cost sensing solution for detecting contact . Theyprovidesaccuracyof ( 0 . 5Nacrossa0 → 10N ) rangeallowing the user to measure relative forces and to indicate contact . For sensing joints rotations , a hall effect sensor measured with typical resolution 0 . 2 degrees . Such analog data is sampled locally using a 12 - bit ADC’s . A typical sampling rate , can go up 180 Hz . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 527 Fig . 11 . Dexterous robotics hands actuated by EAP , electro - active polymers , [ 20 ] . ( i ) : EAP actuated finger link . ( ii ) : Artificial hand test bed to be equipped with tandems and sensors for the operation of the various joints mimicking human hand . The arm was made by G . Whiteley ( Sheffield Hallam University ) , U . K . Fig . 12 . The SHADOW robot hand , [ 21 ] . ( Left ) : Shadow muscle hand ( integrated system ) . ( Middle ) : Shadow hand kinematics configuration . ( Right ) : Comparison of the Shadow dexterous hand with a human hand . Fig . 13 . Details of shadow hand air muscle , [ 21 ] . Once actuated with a supply of compressed air , shadow hand air muscle contract by up to 40 % of its original length . In terms of hand actuation , the SHADOW hand is driven by up to ( 40 ) air driven muscles mounted on the forearm , as away from the fingers , Fig . 13 . For details of how the air driven muscles is operating , Fig . 13 shows some more details of how the muscles is reshaping to actuate the hand . These provide compliant movements , [ 21 ] . Following the biologically - inspired 528 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 design principle of the hand design , tendons couple the air muscles to the joints . Integrated electronics at the base of the hand system drive the pneumatic valves for each muscle and also manage corresponding muscle pressure sensors . There are two modes of actuation that are used for the hand control , in addition , two opposing muscles permit full control and variable compliance of the movement for most joints . To produce human movement characteristics , coupled sort of drive is used for the Middle and Distal phalanges of the fingers . For control purposes , the pressure in each muscle is sensed by a solid - state pressure sensor . This is mounted directly on the valve manifold , and measured with 12 - bit resolution across the range of ( 0 – 4 ) bar . In [ 21 ] , it was reported a number of advantages of employing such type of air muscles . They are lightweight air muscles , where the weigh as little as 10 grammes . In particular , they are particularly useful for weight - critical applications . They are also lower cost muscles , and cheaper to buy and install than other actuators and pneumatic cylinders . They are also smooth and have no ‘stiction’ and have an immediate response . Thiswouldresultinsmoothandnaturalmovement . They are also flexible air muscles , and can be operated when twisted axially , bent round a corner , and need no precise aligning . Also they are characterized to be powerful air muscles , with an ability to produce an incredible force especially when fully stretched . Furthermore , they are damped air muscles , this gives them a character of being self - dampening when contracting ( speed of motion tends to zero ) , and their flexible material makes them inherently cushioned when extending . In terms of hand electronics and control , there are up to ( 7 ) analog to digital converters distributed across the palm . This should be providing up to ( 26 ) active 12 - bit sensing channels . There are also a number of valves driver nodes at the base of forearm incorporating per - muscle pressure sensing and providing timed and PID control . The valve driver boards implement PID control of individual valves . This control can be flexibly configured to take set point and target data from a variety of sources . Such controllers can be configured via the standard robot interface and appropriate programs , scripts and graphical examples of this are provided . A standard X - 86 - compatible PC ( VIA Mini - ITX : others by arrangement ) running Debian GNU / Linux with the RTAI real - time . This can be used for initial set up , evaluation and operation , as well as serving as a template for your own control system . A dedicated PC used and is fitted with an external CANBUS interface . Software in the host PC provides sensor calibration and scaling , mappings from sensor names to hardware and permits easy access to all robot facilities from C code , shell scripts , or GUI . Microcontrollers ( PIC18F4580 ) micros are used for embedded control throughout the robot system . The firmware is provided as source on the host PC . All microcontrollers are connected to the robot CANBUS . In fact , the Shadow hand is also another attempt to emulate a human - like hand . The use of air - driven artificial muscles to actuate the hand fingers , gives the hand a momentum to be an excellent front for further research in using muscles for hands actuation . 3 . 7 . Ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMCs ) as biomimetic sensors , actuators and artificial muscles For a purpose of employing Smart Materials and Structures , such as Ionic polymer – metal composites , for sensing and actuation purposes , and robotics use in particular , a research was also conducted by Shahinpoor et al . [ 22 ] , through which they presented an introduction to ionic polymer – metal composites and some mathematical modeling pertaining to them . In this sense , they also further discussed a number of recent literatures and results in connectionwithion - exchangepolymer – metalcomposites ( IPMCs ) as biomimetic sensors and actuators . Some theoretical modeling on the mechanisms of sensing and actuation of such polymer composites were also discussed . They stated that , strips of such composites can undergo great bending and flapping displacement , once an electric field is imposed across their thickness , thus , in this sense they are large motion actuators that useful for robotics actuationpurposes . SuchabehaviorcanbedepictedinFig . 14 . Here in Fig . 14 - ( left ) , it shows a typical linear - type robotic actuators made with IPMC legs , whereas in Fig . 14 - ( right ) , it shows an IPMC actuator response for square and sawtooth wave input at ( 2 . 5 ) Volts rms and a current of about 20 milliamps . Shahinpoor et al . [ 22 ] have also reported that , it was also found that , conversely by bending the composite strip , either quasi - staticallyordynamically , avoltageisproducedacrossthethickness of the strip . Hence , they can also be enrolled as large motion sensors , where output voltage is to be calibrated for a standard size sensor and correlated to an applied stresses . Shahinpoor etal . [ 22 ] havealsopresentedanewtypeofsoftactuatorandmulti - fingered robotic hand were made from IPMC artificial muscles and reported that to be quite superior to conventional grippers and multi - fingered robotic hands . They have also reported that , conducted experiments confirmed that such types of composite muscles show remarkable bending displacement that follow input signal very closely . It was also found that once an applied signal frequency is changed , different displacement is produced , where to a point where large deformations were observed at a critical frequency , when maximum deformation was observed , beyond which the actuator response was diminished . Shahinpoor et al . [ 22 ] concluded that , the observed remarkable vibrational characteristics of ( IPMC ) composite artificial muscles clearly point to the potential of these muscles for biomimetics applications such as swimming robotic structures , wing flapping flying machines , slithering snakes , heart and circulation assist devices , peristaltic pumps and dynamic robotic cilia - worlds . The fact that they still operated at very low temperatures such as — ( 140 ° C ) shows their potential as cryogenic sensors and actuators . Their resistance increased with decreasing temperature , a property that is opposite to all metallic conductors , [ 22 ] . 4 . Bio - inspired robotics hand tactile sensing Throughout literature , tactile sensing is considered as an important integral part for robotics use and applications . It is describedasthedetectionandmeasurementofcontactparameters in a selected area . It has its use in robotics , haptics , rehabilitation and many other applications . Among some others , tactile sensing is also needed for exploration and precise manipulation of real world objects . The approach followed is , once a robotic hand interacts with a grasped object , is an important issue to sense the real - world objects rich physical parameters . A typical interaction behaviors depends on how heavy and hard a grasped object is , once held , how the surface feels once brought in contact , how it deforms on contact , and how it moves when pushed . In this respect , within this section , we look at some recent developments in terms of hand tactile sensing , that are useful for articulated robotics hands . 4 . 1 . Bio - inspired adaptive grasping by multi - fingered hand with tactical sensing capabilities Takahashi T . et al . [ 23 ] , have proposed a new robust force and position control method for property - unknown objects during grasping . The proposed control technique is capable of selecting the force control or position control , and smooth and quick switching according to the amount of the external force . The proposed method was also applied to adaptive grasping by three - fingered hand which has a total of ( 12 ) DOF . This is shown in Fig . 15 , where the experimental results revealed that the smooth collision process and the stable grasping is realized even if the E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 529 Fig . 14 . Ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMCs ) , [ 22 ] . ( Left ) : A typical linear - type robotic actuators made with IPMC legs . ( Right ) : IPMC actuator response for square and saw tooth wave input at ( 2 . 5 V rms ) and a current of about 20 milliamps . Fig . 15 . Bio - inspired adaptive grasping by multi - fingered hand , [ 23 ] . ( i ) - ( Left ) : Appearance of three - fingered hand . ( i ) - ( Right ) : The force and position controller for the adaptive grasping . ( ii ) - ( Left ) : Fingertip tactile sensing mechanism . ( ii ) - ( Right ) : Boiled egg ( 42 mm , 54 g , soft ) , and a Raw egg ( 43 mm , 63 g , hard ) . precise surface position , the mass and the stiffness are unknown . In addition , a new algorithm determines the grasp force according to the slippage , where ‘‘slip’’ was measured with the tactile sensor and the viscoelastic media on the fingertip . Takahashi T . et al . [ 23 ] have reported that , the proposed method was applied to the grasp control . Even if precise surface position , mass and stiffness are unknown , the proposed method makes stable grasp motion . Such an attempt and experimental setup shows a good model for integrating tactile , force , and position control . In this respect , Takahashi T . et al . [ 23 ] have also reported the grasp experiments for several kinds of objects whose size , mass and stiffness are different . While being grasped , these objects are moved by the manipulator controlled with position controller . In this respect , Fig . 15 - ( ii ) shows Boiled Egg without eggshell and raw eggaregraspedwithsameparameterforgraspcontrol , andcontact force at thumb is ( 1 . 5 N ) . In the proposed control methodology , the grasping force proportionate to mass is determined without mass - sensing , and the friction unknown object grasping was realized . The effect of the proposed method has proved , by experiments , a smooth grasping and moving of objects using the designed small three fingered hand . 4 . 2 . A robust , low - cost and low - noise artificial skin for human - friendly robots Bio - inspired tactile sensing has also received a substantial amount of research recently . In their recent novel research framework at the Center for Design Research , Stanford University , Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky , M . [ 24 ] , have introduced , a design and a test of a mechanically robust , low - noise , scalable capacitive force sensing array , that can used easily as a tactile sensing for robotics hands . The setup shown in Fig . 16 . The use of shielding around , and as part of the sensor , minimizes electrical noise and stray capacitance from coupling into the sensor signal . Ulmen J . and Cutkosky M . have indicated that , by placing individual 530 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 16 . Robust , low - cost and low - noise artificial skin for human - friendly , [ 24 ] . ( Left ) : A single sensing circuit . ( Middle ) : Physical tactile sensing layout . ( Right ) : Tactile display recorded from the 4 × 4 capacitive array prototype . ( Left ) ( Right ) Fig . 17 . Biomimetics and dexterous manipulation Lab , Stanford University , [ 25 ] . ( Left ) : Finished and installed sensor suite on the Robotic Adaptive Gripper . ( Right ) : CAD rendering of the hand and sensors showing taxel locations . small and low - cost processing circuits at each taxel , this allows immediate digitization of signals , further reducing noise coupling . Also it was reported that , interfacing with a large taxel array requires a minimal number of wires . With a serial addressing of memory technology case , a ( 100 ) sensor array could reasonably be scanned at ( 1 kHz ) rate with only five interface wires . The sensor is also constructed from physically rugged materials yet is soft enough to allow energy absorption in a collision . Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky , M . [ 24 ] have also reported that , with its low - cost and high scalability , this sensor design makes whole body sensor arrays feasible . The tactile sensing array was presented with application as a whole body artificial skin covering . Such a highly scalable design provides excellent noise immunity , low - hysteresis , in addition , it has the potential to be made flexible and formable . The presented tactile array in [ 24 ] , was useful for robotics and dexterous hand applications . In this sense , the UNIVERSITY OF STANFORD [ 25 ] , has reported a application of such tactile sensing for dexterous robotics hands . The work was focusing on grasping and manipulating blind , using only tactile feedback from such sensors . The various sensors are processed to determine tactile events , such as MAKING / BREAKING contact or SLIP between the hand and grasped objects , as well as CONTACT LOCATION and STATIC PRESSURE . Such grasping events , and the continuous contact information can then be used to control more complex manipulations . For validation purposes , few experiments were conducted also . In this sense , Stanford University biomimetics and dexterous manipulation laboratory , have taken a further step by building a custom tactile sensor suite for a multi - fingered robot hand , which is attached to an AdeptOne , ( 5 - DOF ) , SCARA industrial robot arm . The Stanford University multi - fingered robot hand , as equipped with tactile sensing . This is shown in Fig . 17 . The hand is an example of an under - actuated hand with three three - phalanx fingers . For actuation , each finger has a single motor to open / close it , with a spring - loaded transmission linkage . This would allow the fingers to wrap around large objects and pinch smaller objects . A fourth motor controls the spread of the index / middle fingers and can be used to pinch very small objects between them . In [ 25 ] , furthermore , for the tactile sensor suite , they have designed an adaptive gripper covers , virtually everysurfacewithnormal - pressure - sensingtaxels . Inaddition , the sensor on the distal phalange of each finger is equipped with a 3 - axis MEMS accelerometer to provide dynamic data at the fingertips at a rate of 800 Hz , [ 25 ] . Biomimetics and dexterous manipulation Laboratory , at Stan - ford University , has also reported that , there are a total of ( 132 ) pressure taxels in the suite , [ 25 ] . On average they are ( 1 . 5 → 2 cm 2 ) with ( 1 → 1 . 5 cm ) of an area center - to - center spacing , although their size and shapes vary . Such details can be seen in the CAD rendering , Fig . [ 17 ] . Since they are hand assembled the sen - sitivity varies , but the most sensitive taxels can distinguish forces E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 531 on the order of 20 mN ( ∼ 2 g weight ) and reach a saturation under forces in the ( 100 N ) range . The hand tactile sensors are sampled at arateof ( 100Hz ) . Thiswillbeallowingsensorstohaveabandwidth of ( 50 Hz ) , as this considered well within the range of ‘‘fast acting’’ human tactile sensors . In terms of hand dynamics and control , it was also reported by the Biomimetics and dexterous manipulation Laboratorythat , WillowGarage’sROSframeworkwasemployedfor controlling the arm , hand , and tactile sensors all together . Willow - Garage’s ROS have even put and coded custom hardware interface nodes for all three fingers . In a general sense , the development of this class of tactile sensing gives a good degree of indication , in which direction advanced tactile sensing is heading now . Efforts by Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky M . , [ 24 ] , can be considered as the most comprehensive research in terms building the right sensing capa - bility for robot hands . 4 . 3 . Cutkosky categorization of hand grasps , leading to new technolo - gies for force and tactile sensors For a purpose of building a more knowledgeable system , late of 1980’s , a comprehensive study by Cutkosky , M . [ 26 ] was conducted , where he described a theme for automated robotics grasping . He indicated that , while studying grasping and manipulation , it was found that , there are two very dissimilar approaches to the matter . ( i ) ( A Knowledge - Based Approaches ) , which is based primarily on empirical studies of human grasping and manipulation , and ( ii ) , ( Analytical Approaches ) , as based primarily on physical models of the manipulation process . He also indicated that , the current analytical models of grasping and manipulation with robotic hands contain simplifications and assumptions that limit their application to manufacturing environments . For the purpose of evaluating these models , a study was undertaken of human grasps used by machinists in a small batch manufacturing operation . Based on that particular study , a categorizationofgraspswasconstructed . Suchacategorizationcan be seen in Fig . 18 . An expert system was also developed to clarify the issues involved in human grasp choice . Comparisons of the grasp taxonomy , the expert system , and grasp - quality measures derived from the analytic models reveal that the analytic measures are useful for describing grasps in manufacturing tasks despite the limitations in the models . In addition , the grasp taxonomy provides insights for the design of versatile robotic hands for manufacturing , [ 26 ] . Therefore , the study Cutkosky , M . [ 26 ] , begins with a review of studies of human grasping , in particular our development of a grasp taxonomy and an expert system for predicting human grasp choice . These studies show how object geometry and task requirements ( as well as hand capabilities and tactile sensing ) combine to dictate grasp choice . The study by Cutkosky also considered analytic models of grasping and manipulation with robotic hands . To keep the mathematics tractable , these models require numerous simplifications which restrict their generality . Despite their differences , the two approaches can be correlated . This provides insight into why people grasp and manipulate objects as they do , and suggests different approaches for robotic grasp and manipulation planning . The results also bear upon such issues such as object representation and hand design . Within this review , the most useful contribution of the study of human grasps , from the standpoint of designing and controlling robot hands , has been a better appreciation of how task require - ments and object geometry combine to dictate grasp choice . The study has also resulted in a grasp taxonomy , which makes it possi - ble to identify particular grasps and to trace how they derive from generic grasp types . The fact that both task requirements and ge - ometry are important is clear from everyday experience . Table 1 Biomimetic control , [ 46 ] . Intention ↓ Site → T I L T TT TI TL I IT II IL L LT LI LL 4 . 4 . A recent classification of force and tactile sensors techniques In continuation to Cutkosky , M . [ 26 ] , almost twenty years , in year 2008 , Cutkosky M . and Howe R . has also extended the work towards hand sensing and presented a more comprehensive study about various efforts for designing tactile sensing , as documented in ‘‘Handbook of Robotics - 2008’’ , Cutkosky M . and Howe R . , [ 27 ] . The study has provided an overview of FORCE AND TACTILE sensing , with the primary emphasis placed on tactile sensing . The study began by presenting selected basic considerations in choosing a tactile sensor and then review of a wide variety of sensor types , including proximity , kinematic , force , dynamic , contact , skin deflection , thermal and pressure sensors , as given in [ 27 ] . They also reviewed various transduction methods , appropriate for each general sensor type . The study also considered interpretation of tactile information , hence describe the general problems and present two short illustrative examples . First , this involves intrinsic tactile sensing , i . e . estimating contact locations and forces from force sensors . Second , this involves contact pressure sensing i . e . estimating surface normal and shear stress distribution from an array sensors in an elastic skin . The study also concluded with a brief discussion of the challenges that remain to be solved in packaging and manufacturing damage - tolerant tactile sensors . Furthermore , Cutkosky M . and Howe R . , [ 27 ] , stated that , from the standpoint of hand design , it was found that , although the expert system contains a great deal more information than can be represented in a taxonomy , the taxonomy remainsusefulasadesignaidsinceitallowsonetoseeveryquickly where a particular grasp resides in the space of possible grasps . Cutkosky M . and Howe R . , [ 27 ] have concluded that , while choosing tactile sensors for a robot arm or hand , it is effective to begin with a consideration of which tactile quantities are most desired and for what purpose . For example , the main concern is to obtain accurate measurements of ( loads ) or ( contact forces ) at sufficient data rates for force servoing , then ( intrinsic tactile ) sensing may make the most sense . If manipulating objects with soft contacts and with sliding or rolling , curved array sensors for measuring pressure distributions , or perhaps local skin deflections , may be desirable . This can be seen in Table 2 . Cutkosky M . and Howe R . , [ 27 ] have also reported that , concluded that , if exploring objects to learn about their texture and material composition , dynamic tactile sensors and thermal sensors may be effective . This can be seen in Table 2 . In an ideal world , one would incorporate all these tactile sensors in a robotic end - effector without regard to cost , signal processing or wiring complexity . Fortunately , the cost and size of transducers suitable for tactile sensing are steadily dropping and the ability to perform localized processing is improving with surface - mounted devices on flexible circuits . In the near future it will be increasingly possible to fabricate dense arrays of transducers in - situ on contoured surfaces , using material depositionandlasermachiningtechniques . Inthisway , robotsmay finally start to approach the tactile sensitivity and responsiveness of the simplest of animals ( Table 2 ) . 4 . 5 . Bio - inspired tactile sensing arrays In [ 29 ] , Ravinder D . also presented another experience in a development of tactile sensing arrays . The design was also inspired by cutaneous sensing in humans , for the fingertips of a humanoid 532 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 18 . Cutkosky , an early and formal way to categorize grasps , [ 26 ] . Fig . 19 . Contact switch arrays fabricated from flexible printed circuits . , [ 29 ] . ( Left ) : A functional comparison of touch sensors and the receptors in the skin . ( Right ) : ( a ) 32 taxel MEA test chip ( left ) with enlarged view of a taxel ( right ) ; ( b ) Front and backsides of MEA test chip epoxy - adhered with 50 µ m PVDF - TrFE film ( left ) ; Packaged MEA chips ( right ) . robot . This is illustrated in Fig . 19 . The tactile sensing arrays and arrangements have been developed in two phases . Microelectrode arrays ( MEA ) , having up to ( 32 ) sensing elements — each epoxy adhered with ( 25 µ m ) thick piezoelectric polymer ( PVDF - TrFE ) film , were fabricated in the first phase . When connected to the gate of FET devices ( external to the chip ) , each element on MEA acts like an extended gate ; thereby facilitating modulation of charge in the induced channel by the charge generated in PVDF - TrFE film — as a result of applied force . By such transduction action , each sensing element converts force into voltage , as shown in Fig . 19 - ( left ) . The tactile sensing arrays developed in second phase work on the same principle , but are free from any extended gate . These arrays ( having 25 sensing elements ) use POSFET ( Piezoelectric Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistors ) touch sensing elements , in which , piezoelectric polymer film is directly spin coated on the gate area of the FET devices . Thus , a POSFET touch sensing element ‘senses and partially processes at same site’ as is done by receptors in human skin . It was found that , the spatial – temporal E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 533 Table 2 Tactile sensor modalities and common transduction types , [ 27 ] . Sensormodality Sensor type and attributes Advantages Disadvantages Normalpressure 1 Piezoresistivearray Piezoresistive array Array of piezoresistive junctions Simple signal conditioning Temperature sensitive Embedded in a elastomeric skin Simple design Frail Cast or screen printed Suitable for mass production Signal drift and hysteresis 2 CapacitiveArray Array of capacitive junctions Good sensitivity Complex circuitry Row and column electrodes separated by elastomeric dielectric Moderate hysteresis , depending on construction 3 PiezoresistiveMEMSArray Silicon micro - machined array with doped silicon strain gauged flexures Suitable for mass production Frail 4 Optical Combined tracking of optical markers with a constitutive model No interconnects to break Requires PC for computing applied forces Skindeformation 5 Optical Fluid - filled elastomeric membrane Compliant membrane Complex computations Hard to customize sensor Tracking of optical markers inscribed on membrane coupled with energy minimization algorithm No electrical interconnects to be damaged 6 Magnetic Array of hall effect sensors Complex computations Hard to customize sensor 7 Resistivetomography Array of conductive rubber traces as electrodes Robust construction Ill - posed inverse problems 8 Piezoresistive ( Curvature ) Employs an array of strain gauges Directly measure curvature Frailty of electrical interconnects Hysteresis DynamicTactileSensing 9 Piezoelectric ( stressrate ) PVDF embedded in elastomeric skin High bandwidth Frailty of electrical junctions 10 Skinacceleration Commercial accelerometer affixed to robot skin Simple No spatially distributed Content Sensed vibrations tend to be dominated by structural resonant frequency performance of these chips is similar to that of skin in the human fingertips . The study has also exposed a linear response over range of forces ( 0 . 15 → 5 N ) , which is much wider than the forces ex - perienced by humans in normal manipulative tasks . In addition to sensing and processing at same site and the improved perfor - mance , the POSFET devices as an integral ‘‘sensotronic’’ unit offer practical advantages . Example of which , is reduction in number of wires , which is a key issue in robotics . This is shown in Fig . 19 - ( right ) . The performance , utility and local processing capability of POSFET touch sensors can be further improved by including com - plex circuitry and following a System on Chip / System in Package approach . Though primarily designed for robotic applications , due to the fact that impedance of PVDF - TrFE matches well with human tissues , these devices can also be suitable for various medical ap - plications . 4 . 6 . A biologically inspired tactile sensor array via phase - based computation Another approach based on computation of phase was intro - duced by Cassidy A . and Ekanayake V . , [ 30 ] . They show a new mechanism for tactile sensing . They have proposed a biologically inspired tactile sensor array based on neural spike processing . Asynchronous data processing is integrated on - chip with the sen - sor array and converts the high - bandwidth raw input data into higher - level information with lower bandwidth requirements . Us - ing PHASE - BASED computation primitives , as opposed to tradi - tional rate - based neural spike codes , the array can compute the point - of - contact , force magnitude , force direction , and the pres - ence or absence of slips , all in real time . Simulations demonstrate a reduction in the number of computations by up to three orders of a magnitude over a comparable synchronous approach . In this re - spect , Fig . 20 - ( i ) shows a schematic diagram for sensor single mo - dem , the associated block diagram for the entire tactile sensor . It shows a front - end consisting of a pressure sensitive array that gen - erates binary force events corresponding to spikes in a biological system , [ 30 ] . In Fig . 20 - ( i ) , we also show how an individual sensor node generates a spike due to a threshold crossing . As described in Cassidy A . and Ekanayake V . , [ 30 ] , phase - based encoding maps naturally to an event - driven computation approach , since compu - tation only occurs when spikes are observed . The entire system blocks are shown in Fig . 20 - ( i ) . The system has a front - end consist - ing of a pressure sensitive array that generates binary force events corresponding to spikes in a biological system . The novel idea behind the presented design , is that it is , an intelligent tactile sensor array , that it can accurately measure the magnitude and direction of incident force , as well as determine if a slip has occurred . The computation in the array is based on the behavior of the FA - I afferents and time - to spike , thus encoding of neural spikes in the human somatosensory system . Cassidy A . and Ekanayake V . , [ 30 ] , also simulated the system usingasynchronouslogic , anddemonstratedtheefficiencyoftime - domain - based computing primitives . In future work , the plan to quantify the accuracy of the system , with regard to jitter from unmatched circuit delays . It is intend to update the slip detection block to include magnitude and direction of slip calculations . Also , 534 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 20 . A Biologically inspired tactile sensor array utilizing phase - based computation , [ 30 ] . ( i ) - ( Left ) : Typical sensor node diagram . ( i ) - ( Right ) : System block diagram . ( ii ) ( Right ) : Increasingforcenormaltoskin : ( a ) x = 0 , y = 0 , z = 2 . 0 , ( b ) x = 0 , y = 0 , z = 4 . 0 ; Angledforceactingontheskinmodel : ( c ) x = − 20 , y = 10 , z = 4 . 0 ; ( d ) x = 20 , y = − 10 , z = 4 . 0 . ( iii ) - ( Left ) : Neighbor array diagram ( 12 nodes ) . ( iii ) - ( Right ) : Sensor array spike codes , ( top ) rate - based encoding ( bottom ) phase based encoding . multiple points of force incident on the array will be accounted for . The final research goal is to implement and fabricate the tactile sensor array as a custom integrated circuit . 4 . 7 . Closingtheloop : biomimeticsensorforcontrolofgrip ( impedance change detection ) In [ 31 ] , Wettels N . et al . , have developed a novel robust tactile sensor array that mimics the human fingertip and its distributed set of touch receptors , as in Fig . 21 ( i ) - ( left ) . The mechanical com - ponents are similar to a human fingertip , with a rigid foundation surrounded by a weakly conductive fluid contained within an elas - tomeric skin , refer to Fig . 21 . It uses the deformable properties of the finger pad as part of the transduction process . Multiple elec - trodes are mounted on the surface of the rigid core and connected to impedance measuring circuitry within the core . External forces deform the fluid path around the electrodes , resulting in a dis - tributed prototype of impedance changes containing information about those forces and the objects that applied them . Wettels N . et al . have also reported initial results with prototypes of the sen - sor , and proposed strategies for extracting features related to the mechanical inputs and using the information for reflexive grip con - trol . The research has also observed the impedance changes once deformations occur around the electrode . This would demonstrate the ability to sense deformations outside the electrode’s immedi - ate vicinity . This is consistent with the hypothesis regarding the flat probe behavior previously described . Fig . 21 ( i ) - ( right ) , shows that the highest impedance value was measured when the probe deflected the skin directly above the electrode of interest . As illus - trated in Fig . 21 - ( ii ) , the rolling motion caused global deformations that were observable at both electrodes . This is not unlike the be - havior of the human finger pad when a human uses a precision grip to lift a small object . In general sense , the research has shown an ability to build a bio - type tactile fingertip sensing for fingers , that could be useful for objects dexterous manipulation . In general sense , the presented tactile hand sensing , does provide a mechan - ically robust and informatically rich set of sensors , that bears some resemblance to the biological tactile sensors . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 535 Fig . 21 . Biomimetic tactile sensor , [ 31 ] . ( i ) - Left : ( a ) Drawing of biomimetic tactile sensor . ( b ) Sensor prototype core with ‘‘skin’’ removed . ( i ) - Right : Log impedance ( 1 – 100 k (cid:127) ) versus static deflection of skin applied by three probes with different curvatures . Three distinct operating regions ( labeled A , B & C ) are present for each curve and discussed in text . ( ii ) : Two electrode sensor output during a roll . 4 . 8 . Grip control using biomimetic materials for tactile sensing systems : ( triaxial force sensing ) Wettels N . et al . in [ 32 ] , have also presented a proof - of - concept for controlling the grasp of an anthropomorphic mechatronic prosthetic hand by using a biomimetic tactile sensor , Bayesian inference and simple algorithms for that involves estimation and control . The sensor takes advantage of its compliant mechanics to provide a triaxial force sensing end - effector for grasp control , Fig . 22 . By calculating normal and shear forces at the fingertip , the prosthetic hand is able to maintain perturbed objects within the force cone to prevent slip . Here a KALMAN filter is used as a noise - robust method to calculate tangential forces . Biologically - inspired algorithms and heuristics are presented . They can also be implemented on - line to support rapid , reflexive adjustments of grip . The approach followed by Wettels N . et al . [ 32 ] , is to make a simple on - line grip control algorithm , ( refer to Fig . 22 - ( ii ) for the proposed flowchart ) , that can be calculated quickly and to be consistent with the short latencies needed in grasp management without object or plant knowledge . The sensor is compliant to support grip and its design is such that simple algorithms can be implemented in real - time to calculate normal and tangential forces regardless of point of contact . To convert force to voltages , Wettels N . et al . developed a simple state estimation using K - Filter , with initial state being zero tangential force when no forces are being applied . A Kalman filter was chosen , because this particular sensor configuration produces noisy signals and K - Filter filters act as low - pass filters . This sensor noise has since been mitigated by refining the texture applied to the internal surface of the skin . Furthermore , the K - Filter integrates signals from a population of sensors to a produce a force output . This is necessary because the voltage to force relationship calculation cannot be direct like the normal force . Fig . 22 shows a typical normal force sensor verses force - plate output after calibration trials . 4 . 9 . Biomimetic sensing for robotics manipulation : nonholonomic constraints ( lie brackets approach for nonholonomic grip constraints ) In manipulation tasks by articulated hands , we need to con - sider that , humans have the advantage over machines due to an unparalleled ability to process information from various inputs , including touch . A set of four robot end - effectors was equipped with ( force sensors ) to provide haptic feedback to aid in perform - ing the manipulation tasks of rotating a sphere and a cube , was presented by Petroff N . , [ 33 ] . The motion planning algorithm used to compute the robots’ joint angles is known as ( Steering - Using - Piecewise - constant - inputs ) and is applicable to under - actuated , nonlinear , nonholonomic , driftless systems . Nonholonomic con - straints arise during contact , requiring the fingers to only roll rel - ative to the object without slippage . However , the algorithm gives rise to new Vector Fields called { Lie Brackets } that allow the fin - gers to be reconfigured without releasing the object , effectively in - creasing the workspace of the manipulation system . Experiments were conducted with fixed - point manipulation to produce a base - line for comparing reconfigurable manipulation experiments , refer to Fig . 23 . Both ( open loop ) and ( closed loop ) , reconfigurable ma - nipulation experiments were conducted on a spherical object , as in Fig . 23 - ( Middle ) . Three geometric parameters are then be used to define the contact evolution equations . This is expressed in terms of geometry as in Eq . ( 1 ) : ˙ α f = M − 1 f  K f + ˆ K o  − 1  − ω y + ω x  − ˆ K o  υ x υ y  536 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 22 . Biomimetic tactile sensing systems , [ 32 ] . ( i ) ( Left ) : Otto bock M 2 hand . ( i ) ( Right ) : TAC prototype sensor array . ( ii ) ( Left ) : Grip adjustment algorithm flow chart . ( ii ) ( Right ) : Normal force sensor vs . force - plate output after calibration trials . Fig . 23 . Biomimetic sensing , [ 33 ] . ( Left ) : Robotic fingertip sensors . ( Middle ) : Beginning and ending configuration of ball under fixed - point rotation about its z - axis . ( Right ) : Schematic of robotic manipulation test bed with reference frames . ˙ α o = M − 1 o R ψ  K f + ˆ K o  − 1  − ω y + ω x  − K f  υ x υ y  ( 1 ) ˙ ψ = ω z + T f M f ˙ α f + T o M o ˙ α o υ z = 0 . In conclusions , Petroff N . reported that , when starting such a class of research , it was believed tactile feedback would relax the accu - racy requirements in calibrating the zero position of the robots . In retrospect , however , it must be concluded that calibration of the zero position is more important with tactile sensing than with vi - sion . It was concluded also that , the method used to compute the object’s contact coordinates is a slave to the zero configuration . This is not necessarily the case for a vision system . Vision could be used to adjust the joint angles since the actual contact coordi - nates can be known from a global frame of reference . A calibration scheme using tactile sensors which parallels those for vision sys - tems could be developed , however . 4 . 10 . Bio - inspired sensorization of a biomechatronic robot hand for a grasp - and - lift task ( triaxial force sensor ) In [ 34 ] , Edinc B . et al . , have also presented a study investigating issues related to bio - inspired systems , tactile sensory system for robotic hand and robotic fingers . They concluded from numerous ( Neuro - physiological ) studies , that humans rely on detecting discrete mechanical events that occur when grasping , lifting and E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 537 Fig . 24 . Bio - inspired sensorization of a biomechatronic robot hand , [ 34 ] . ( Left ) : Characterization of the static and dynamic response properties of the three - axial force sensor . ( Right ) : Grasp - and - lifting trial . Fig . 25 . Contact switch arrays fabricated from flexible printed circuits , [ 28 ] . ( Left ) : The three - axis force sensor ( A ) reference system for the sensor ; ( B ) fabricated aluminum sensor . ( Right ) : Contact switch array embedded in the skin of a prosthetic hand . replacing an object , i . e . , during a prototypical manipulation task . Such events represent transitions between phases of the evolving manipulationtasksuchasobjectcontact , lift - off , etc . , andappearto provide critical information required for the sequential control of the task as well as for corrections and parametrization of the task . They have sensorized a biomechatronic anthropomorphic hand with a goal to detect such mechanical transients . The developed sensors were designed to specifically provide the information about TASK - RELEVANT discrete events , rather than to mimic their biological counterparts . To accomplish this , they have developed two classes of sensors . The first is a CONTACT SENSOR that can be applied to the surface of the robotic fingers and that show a sensitivity to indentation and a spatial resolution comparable to that of the human glabrous skin . The second is a SENSITIVE LOW - NOISE THREE - AXIAL FORCE sensor that was embedded in the robotic fingertips and showed a frequency response covering the range observed in biological tactile sensors . They have also described the design and fabrication of these sensors , their sensory properties , and show representative recordings from the sensors during grasp - and - lift tasks . Refer to Fig . 24 - ( left ) for more details about the characterization of the static and dynamic response properties of the three - axial force sensor . It was concluded that , the proposed artificial biomimetic tactile system could be helpful for developing and implementing a low - level embedded controller of a biomechatronic hand . Future work will consist in implementing algorithms for mechanical transients and slippage detection in a real - time hand controller , merging the proprioceptive and exteroceptive information from contact sensor arraysandthree - axialforcesensors , andallowinginvestigationnot only of sequential but also parallel coordination in manipulation . This line of research will be useful not only for the design of new biomechatronic limbs , but also improve our understanding of and allow testing of proposed biological control paradigms . In addition , Fig . 24 - ( right ) shows grasp - and - lifting trial . ( a ) The biomechatronic hand was controlled to grasp the cylindrical object , and after a few seconds delay , the hand was lifted vertically at ( 25 mm / s ) , held in position for ( 2 s ) , and then again lowered to the support whereupon the grasp was released . Both a slip that occurred during the start of the vertical movement ( b ) and the transient deceleration indicating the beginning of hold phase ( c ) were clearly discernable in the recorded force signals and correctly detected over 10 ms , Edinc B . et al . [ 34 ] . The physical characterization and fabrication process of the work presented in , Edinc B . et al . , [ 34 ] , was already put forward by Edinc B . et al . , [ 28 ] . In reference to Fig . 25 , it shows the initial research work that was conducted towards building such tactical sensing . The Triaxial Force Sensor was designed to detect the three components of the contact force occurring at the finger - object interface . Moreover , the sensor was designed to detect the contact between the object and the environment and to be sufficiently sensitive to sudden surface tangential force changes in order to detect slippage . Edinc B . et al . , [ 28 ] have also reported that , the force sensor was dimensioned by means of FEA tools ( ANSYS 5 . 7 ) in order to identify the maximum strain levels and to choose the strain gauge elements accordingly . The calculated maximum loads were ( 4 . 5 , 6 , and 4 . 5 N ) along the ( x , y and z axis ) , respectively ( Fig . 25 ) . Moreover , the triaxial force sensor was calculated to sufficient bandwidth . Sensor mechanical , Fig . 25 , was made of an elastic aluminum alloy . In order to detect the three components of anappliedforce , astraingauge ( N3K - 06 - S022H - 50C , VishayMicro - Measurements , Vishay Intertechnology Inc . , USA ) was attached located to the root of each of the three tethers of the sensor ( Fig . 25 ) , Edinc B . et al . , [ 28 ] . 538 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 26 . Bio - inspired grasp control in a robotic hand , [ 35 ] . ( Left ) : Tactile modules can be seen around the distal phalanges of the index and thumb fingers . ( Right ) : Dashed line tactile stimulus , as the finger pushing oscillatory on the sensor array ( intensity plot over time as recorded by the CNN chip ) , in correspondence of the pixel in row 21 and column 24 ; solid line filter output ( corresponding pixel brightness on the output image ) . 4 . 11 . Bio - inspired grasp control in a robotic hand ; massive sensorial input In [ 35 ] Ascari L . et al . , have reported that , capability of grasping and lifting an object in a suitable , stable and controlled way is an outstanding feature for a robotics system . However , no robotic tools able to perform an advanced control of a grasp as , for instance , like the human hand does . In their research paper a ( bio - inspired approach ) to tactile data processing was followed in order to design and test a hardware – software robotic architecture that works on the parallel processing of a large amount of tactile sensing signals . They reported that ; the working principle of the architecture bases on the cellular nonlinear / neural network paradigm , while using both hand shape and spatial – temporal features obtained from an array of micro - fabricated force sensors , in order to control the sensory - motor coordination of the robotic system . Fewtypicalgraspingtaskswereselected , thisistomeasure the system performances applied to a computer interfaced robotic hand . Successful grasps of several objects , ( completely unknown to the robot ) , e . g . , soft and deformable objects like plastic bottles , soft balls , and Japanese tofu , have been demonstrated as well , Fig . 26 - ( left ) . Ascari L . et al . [ 35 ] , have also presented a complete system for reactive real - time safe grasp of unknown objects , based on the detection of spatial – temporal events , the core of the software platform being a topological analog filter , designed and implemented in a CNN processor . The proposed filter can be completely parametrized : its sensitivity , latency , robustness to noise , can be easily tuned to adapt to several sensors , covering materials , and thicknesses . The approach could appear oversized , given the limited amount of sensors ( 54 ) exploited in this work ; the intention was indeed to present and validate an architecture conceived with in mind . Hence , performed experiments showed that all the computed features are important for the task to be completed , but with different weights , depending on the particular object being grasped . This could be seen as an indirect evidence of the demonstrated coexistence of both bottom - up and top - down control strategies in biological grasp control . Secondarily , this puts into evidence a limitation of the current implementation , i . e . the static use of the tactile features , whose relative importance is now manually selected : if an average setting is suitable for the majority of objects , particularly challenging ones such Japanese tofu require some parameters tuning to be successfully grasped . In addition , Ascari L . et al . , [ 35 ] , have presented a hardware / software platform , which is considered as a biorobotic tool , allowing both to investigate on strategies for solving complex sensory - motor tasks . To the validate neuro - scientific models , this requires the presence of many sensors and biomimetic processing , as in Fig . 26 - ( right ) , hypothesizing that the very first spike in ensembles of human skin afferents may encode complex mechanical events such as the directionofforceonthefingertiporthelocalshapeatthefingertip - object interface . 5 . Bionic and prosthetic hands In terms of BIONIC hands , as this field of research is moving in parallel with robotics hands , the survey efforts described within this Section is targeting a study of BIO - INSPIRED BIONIC AND PROSTHETIC HANDS . This is starting from an analysis of some of state of the art of artificial hands , designed either for prosthetics or for robotics applications . Practically , there are a number of commercially available prosthetic devices and human like artificial hands . Examples are Otto Bock SensorHand TM , [ 36 ] , and iLIMB Hand [ 45 ] , in addition , to multifunctional hand designs [ 37 – 43 ] are far from providing the grasping capabilities of the human hand [ 44 ] . In prosthetic hands active bending is restricted to two or three joints , which are actuated by a single motor drive acting simultaneously on the metacarpo - phalangeal ( MP ) joints of the thumb , of the index and of the middle finger , while other joints can bend only passively . Looking at the other side of the prosthetic designs , recently designed robotics hands have achieved high level performance in grasping and manipulation . However , such designs do make use of large controllers which are not applicable in prosthetics or humanoid robotics where it is necessary to provide the user with a wearable artificial hand . This section looks into an example of commercially available robotics hand . 5 . 1 . Bionic and prosthetic hands : the ( ILIMB ) hand In reference to recent hand designs , literature has also revealed that BIONIC hands have also emerged as a new frontier for advanced research recently . Bionic hands can be used as means to help human to restore some of grasping functionalities [ 45 ] . In order to give a realistic backgrounds about Bionic hands , we shall present the design of the ( iLIMB Hand ) . iLIMB Hand has been introduced lately as an specimen of such most advanced bionic hand . It looks just like a real hand with four fingers and a thumb . All hand digits can be moved to permit grabbing actions . The i - limb ultra hand is the most versatile prosthetic hand available , it is providing the ability to customize the hand for a broad range of activities . Two different versions of the hand designs are given in Fig . 27 . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 539 Fig . 27 . ( I - LIMB ULTRA ) hand , a formal way to categorize grasps , [ 45 ] . ( Left ) : Regular size I - limb ultra hand skeleton . ( Middle ) : Early version , the ( I - LIMB ) . ( Right ) : A picture of the ( I - LIMB ULTRA ) hand . Fig . 28 . TAH , Tendon - activatedpneumatichand , [ 46 ] . ( Left ) : Linearactuatorsprovidedmovementof3independentfingers . Fingershaving ≈ 30 ° offlexion , withamaximum of about 4 N of force . ( Middle ) : Signals derived from TAP sensors , 9 - s period of repetitive finger flexions . ( Right ) : Sensitivity of TAP System . Sensitivity data was summarized as the percentage of true positives for each diagonal sensor on each subject . Bars represent ‘‘diagonal’’ values ( D i ) for each subject . Sensitivity was ( 100 % ) for all subjects on at least two channels . In reference to [ 45 ] , it was reported that the hand has two main unique features . The first feature is that , each finger is independently driven and can articulate , as each finger is moved via a separate motor . The second feature is that , the thumb is rotatable through ( 90 degrees ) , in the same way as the human thumbs are . There are two electrodes that sit on the skin that pick up myoelectric signals . They are used by the computer in the back of the hand , which does two things : it interprets those signals and itcontrolsthehand . Whatthistranslatestoisthewearerbeingable to control the grabbing function of their hand with the muscles in their arm making for quite a natural mechanism . Bionic hands are getting very popular , as it gives more articulation . For instant , the i - LIMB has been fitted to over ( 200 ) patients . The i - Limb Ultra . Just like the previous i - Limb Pulse , it has five individually powered articulating fingers and manually rotatable thumb and wrist , plus exercising strength proportional to the input signal with pulsing for increased grip force . On top of that the device incorporates a few squeezes , such as variable grip strength for digits , improved software , and better power management . 5 . 2 . Control of a multi - finger prosthetic hand Available hand prostheses are either ‘body powered’ , or ‘my - oelectric’ devices that restore prehension , Craelius W . et al . [ 46 ] . Here , Craelius W . et al . [ 46 ] , have developed a control scheme for multi - finger prosthetic hand . The prosthetic hand is controlled by extrinsic flexor muscles and tendons of the metacarpal - phalangeal joints . This is illustrated in Fig . 28 . The hand uses Tendon - Activated Pneumatic control , and has provided most subjects , including am - putees and those with congenital limb absence , control of multiple fingers of the hand . Hand biomimetic control : A signal response matrix was generated for each subject , consisting of three rows , representing requested finger motions , and three columns , representing the three sensor locations . This is illustrated below in Table 1 : the levels of signals received from the requested ( diagonal ) channels and the cross - talk ( off - diagonal ) channelswerecompared . Ratiosofenergylevels were expressed in decibels ( dB ) , as computed by Eq . ( 2 ) : R ji = ( 10 ) log  ( D i )  ( O ij ) for i = 1 , 2 , 3 & j = 1 , 2 . ( 2 ) In Eq . ( 2 ) , R ji is signal energy of sensor ( i ) with respect to sensor ( j ) , ( D i ) is the energy of diagonal sensor i , and ( O ij ) is the energy of the off - diagonal sensors with respect to each diagonal . In Table 1 , ( TT ) represents signal energy from the hand thumb sensor for an intended thumb movement ; ( IT ) is from the same sensor for an intended index movement . To maximize the diagonals , subjects were instructed to use less force to help avoid cross signals . Several response matrices were obtained from each patient . An example is shown in Fig . 28 ( middle ) . All subjects were able to produce at least one matrix comparable to the one shown . In conclusion , the Tendon - Activated Pneumatic Hand gives amputees control of finger flexion using natural motor pathways . Most subjects , including those with relatively short and scarred residua , quickly gained control over several mechanical fingers . Slow typing and piano playing were demonstrated by the hand . Furthermore , beyond providing dexterity , the Tendon - Activated Pneumatic Hand controller may facilitate the transition to more complete hand restorations over the future . 540 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 Fig . 29 . Under - actuatedprosthetichand . Power , precisionandlateralgrasp , [ 47 ] . ( i ) : Systemblockdiagram . ( ii ) : ( A ) Powergrasp : allpalmarsurfacesoffingersareinvolved , and the thumb is in opposition to other fingers . ( B ) Precision grasp : thumb , index and middle fingertips are involved with the thumb in opposition space . ( C ) Lateral grasps : the thumb opposes to the volar aspect of the index . 5 . 3 . PCA based control of a multi - DOF under actuated prosthetic hand An under - actuated prosthetic hand controlled by means of non - invasive interfaces based on electromyography ( EMG ) was pre - sented by Matrone G . et al . [ 47 ] . Driving the designed multi degrees of freedom ( DoF ) hand for achieving hand dexterity , implies to se - lectively modulate many different EMG signals in order to make each joint move independently . Hence , this could require signifi - cant cognitive effort to the user . A principal components analysis based algorithm is used to drive a 16 DOFs under actuated pros - thetic hand prototype with a two dimensional control input , in order to perform the three prehensile forms mostly used in Ac - tivities of Daily Living ( ADLs ) . Principal components set has been derived directly from the artificial hand by collecting its sensory data while performing 50 grasps , and subsequently used for con - trol . This is shown in Fig . 29 . ( i ) Power grasp : all palmary surfaces of the fingers ( as well as the palm ) are involved and the thumb is in opposition to other fingers . ( ii ) Precision grasp : thumb , index and middle fingertips are involved with the thumb in opposition space . ( iii ) Lateral grasps : the thumb opposes to the volar aspect of the index , [ 47 ] . In general , principal components analysis is a mathe - matical approach , and is always used for dimensionality reduction , just inverting its algorithm and neglecting the less significant ( low weight ) principalcomponents . Whileworkingwitha m - DOFshand and specific postures data set , they obtain ( m ) PCs constituting the ( m ) columns of the PCs matrix , ordered according to their weight . It was supposed that only the two first PCs are significant , two in - puts ( In 1 & In 2 ) , which represent the two principal hand DOFs in the new space , can be coupled to the first two PCs and remapped to hand original ( m ) - DOFs using the PCs matrix obtained from ex - perimental data . This is expressed in Eq . ( 3 ) :  → PC 1 → PC 2 . . . → PC m     In 1 In 2 0 . . .    =   Out 1 Out 2 Out 3 . . . Out m   . ( 3 ) In Eq . ( 2 ) , output vector consists of the desired ( m ) - DOFs of the hand . The remaining components of the input vector , which are to be multiplied by the last PCs , are set to zero , in order to ne - glect the less significant PCs contribution . This strategy could be exploited with a myoelectric hand prosthesis , where only few sig - nals are available for control , but dexterity is desirable . By using inverse PCA algorithm , [ 48 ] , all DOFs of a dexterous robotic hand maybecontrolledinsynergybymeansofasimpletwo - signalscon - trol interface , e . g . two independent EMG channels tapped from the residual limb . Trials have shown that two independent input signals can be successfully used to control the posture of a real robotic hand and that correct grasps ( in terms of involved fingers , stability and posture ) may be achieved . Their research work demonstrated an effectiveness of a bio - inspired system successfully conjugating the advantages of an underactuated , anthropomorphic hand with a PCA - based control strategy . This will open up promising possibilities for a development of an intuitively controllable hand prosthesis . 5 . 4 . Biomimetic grasp planning for cortical control of a robotic hand : synthesizing stable grasps In [ 49 ] , Ciocarlie M . et al . , and in their research framework manuscript , they outlined a grasp planning system designed to augment the cortical control of a prosthetic arm and hand . A key aspect of this task is a presence of an on - line user input . Such an arrangement is shown Fig . 30 . The line user input is ultimately be obtained by identifying and extracting the relevant signals from brain activity . The grasping system can combine partial or noisy user input and autonomous planning to enable the robot to perform stable grasping tasks . Ciocarlie M . et al . [ 49 ] have used principal component analysis applied to the observed kinematics of physiologic grasping to reduce the dimensionality of hand posture space and simplify the planning task for on - line use . E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 541 Fig . 30 . Planning for cortical control of a robotic hand , [ 49 ] . ( Left ) : Experimental setup and object set used for recording primate grasps . ( Right ) : Examples of interactive grasp planning using input provided by an operator . Fig . 31 . Planningforcorticalcontrolofarobotichand , [ 49 ] . ( Left ) : Graspplannedwithoutusingreferencepose . ( Right ) : Differencebetweenplannedgraspsandinputgrasps , shown as normalized distance between the variables that define the grasp : solid line shows the difference in the amplitude of the first eigengrasp , while dashed line shows the difference in wrist orientation . Theplanneracceptscontrolinputinthisreduced - dimensionality space , and uses it as a seed for a ( Hand Posture Optimization Algo - rithm ) based on simulated annealing . Two applications of such an algorithm were presented , using data collected from both primate and human subjects during grasping , to demonstrate its ability to synthesize stable grasps using partial control input in real or near - real time . This is also clearly shown in Fig . 30 . Difference between plannedgraspsandinputgrasps , shownasnormalizeddistancebe - tween the variables that define the grasp : solid line shows the dif - ference in the amplitude of the first eigengrasp , while dashed line shows the difference in wrist orientation . A value of ( − 0 . 2 ) was used as a starting point for the Input Confidence axes to represent the case where planning was carried out without any kind of in - put , [ 49 ] ( as can be seen in Fig . 31 ) . 6 . Conclusion and future developments Recently , significant advances have been made in robotics , ar - tificial intelligence and other cognitive related fields , allowing to make much sophisticated biomimetic robotics systems . Building bio - inspireddexterousroboticshands , thatareactuatedbyfeasible artificial muscles , and controlled by high level cognitive artificial intelligence related techniques , would enable engineering reality , that used to be considered far from reality . Within this scope , the intention of this manuscript , is to look into and to survey a num - ber of research efforts towards building biomimetically inspired dexterous robotics hands . This depth study has indicated that , there are tremendous number of efforts towards building dexter - ous robotics multi - fingered hand with biomimetic based ideas and initiatives . In addition , it was shown that , current research direc - tions are even moving towards muscles type hand fingers . This means moving totally from the current concept of motor driven joints movements and towards much delicate and noiseless actua - tors , such as muscles . Building robots that are actuated and driven by artificial muscles and controlled by a sort of intelligence , would create a novel and creative reality with enormous potentials to the industrial and domestic employment of robotics technology these days . The survey has also indicated that , there are substantial ef - forts and potentials , related to articulated hands . All such efforts were directed towards improving robot hands dexterity and per - formance . This involves branches including , HAND DESIGN AND ARTICULATION , MECHANICS OF MOVEMENT , HAND DEXTERITY , TACTILE SENSING . In addition , at the lower end of the hierarchy we look at ( skillfully fingertip movement ) , and AI related manipu - lation at the higher end . First : bio - inspired dexterous robotics : Since the early eighties , building bio - inspired robotics hands has been a focus for quite large number of researchers world wide . The study has also shown that , development and technologies that permit developing biologically inspired system and , in particularly , humanlike robots are increasingly emerging recently . There are a number of successful stories in that regards . As it was claimed earlier , an effective and smoothness of fingertips movements are very valued , once considering multi - fingered robotics hands and robotics dexterous manipulation . Although , literature has shown successful hand design stories , it can be easily claimed that , previous , and to a certain extent , CURRENT METHODOLOGY 542 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 of building dexterous robot hands are hindering high level of dexterous and manipulation skills . Before a biomimetic survey of dexterousmanipulationsystemcanbedocumentedhere , obstacles of topological dexterous manipulation has to be taken . Though dexterous manipulation demanding issues are well understood , and well documented within the robotics literature , there is currently no robotics hands system that autonomously have full dexterous manipulation ability for smaller scale environment . Some other opinions have indicated that , reliable bio - oriented dexterous robotics hands could be the challenge of the near future . Once this is achieved , a number of interesting questions concerning reliable bio - oriented dexterous robotics hands can be addressed ; for instance , how new technologies can be integrated to manufacture robotics hands with some desired behaviors . This will include ( hand kinematics and configurations ) , ( hand dynamics and mechanics of movement ) , ( hand control ) , and ( AI related hand behavior ) . Second : bio - inspired dexterous robotics hands oriented topology and human hand like designs : Within this scope of area , building articulated hands has also continued for a while , since some early attempts of the Belgrade / USC [ 1 ] , Utah [ 5 ] , JPL [ 6 ] , and CybHand [ 7 ] , in addition to other attempts from time to time . In general , while surveying such techniques and trends , it was very obvious that attempts by Byoung K . et al . [ 9 , 10 ] , Lee S . et al . , Pollard N . and Richards G . , [ 11 ] , ZURICH – TOKYO HAND by Pfeifer R . et al . , [ 12 ] , and the ( Squse Company ) , as in [ 13 ] , are targeting a more functional hand designs like human hands . This is due to the identical reasons for such a direction , as human hands are more articulated and dexterous for achieving complicated robotics defined tasks . This survey has indicated that , there are quite large number of attempts to acquire biologically inspired hands . Such inspirations were directed towards a number of topics related hand design , hand tactile sensing , hand actuation and hand configuration and topology . Very rear research was directed towards the employment of brain and cognitive sciences towards robotics hand control . Although still numerous biological examples remain to be explored , the number of well - studied biological mechanisms suitable for robot implementation is relatively small . Consequently , the current state of the art development cannot go on infinitely . It is very clear that future biomimetic systems will have to be designed in close collaboration with on - going biological research . This will permit technical results to straightly influence the course of empirical research , thus providing an innovative , synthetic approach to biology . It will be very practical to have a robotics hand design inspired by the compliance characteristics , as it was advised by Byoung K . et , al . [ 9 ] . However , building a robust and accurate controller for a typical design , is a complicated task . Third : bio - inspired soft actuation materials : Following researches efforts by Price A . et al . [ 14 ] , Bundhoo V . et al . [ 15 ] , Cohen G . Y . [ 16 – 19 ] , and [ 20 ] , the Shadow Dexter - ous Hand design [ 21 ] , and the introduction to ( Ionic Polymer - MetalComposites ( IPMC ) ) , as given by the study of Shahinpoor et al . [ 22 ] , indicate with very clear and obvious reasons , that new technologies of actuation are coming over the nearest future . Throughout the review , it can be concluded that ; EAP , Electro - Active Polymers Emergence is a new direction for robotics actu - ation . Hence , muscular type hand actuation is not a far target . Electro - Active polymers have emerged with great promise and en - abledthe improvementofunique mechanismsthatare biologically inspired . The development of an effective infrastructure for this field is also critical to the commercial availability of robust EAP ac - tuators and the emergence of practical applications . For the case of buildingreliablebio - orienteddexterousroboticshands , challenges are enormous , but the recent trend of international cooperation , the greater visibility of the field and the surge in funding of related research are offering great hope for the future of making new ex - citing new materials that will help in design and implementation of bio - oriented robotics hands . It was found that technologies that permit developing biologically inspired system are increasingly emerging . This includes robots that carry out such movement tech - niques as walking , hopping , swimming , diving , crawling , grasping , and manipulation . Bundhoo V . et al . [ 15 ] workout an integration of ( compliant tendon cables ) and one - way shape memory alloy ( SMA ) wires in an agonist – antagonist artificial muscle pair config - uration for the required flexion / extension or abduction / adduction of the finger joints . Hence , the proposed biomimetic actuation and finger system has a number of features . ( i ) anthropomorphically accurate size and appearance ; ( ii ) it is also kinematically accurate joint motion , ( iii ) compliant and tendon - driven muscle - like actua - tion , and ( iv ) biomimetic sensory feedback . Fourth : bio - inspired tactile sensing : There have been excellent efforts in terms of building artic - ulated robot hands with bio - inspired tactile sensing . Within this study we have looked into ten new trends and efforts for achieving such a directions . This includes , Takahashi T . et al . [ 23 ] , Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky , M . [ 24 ] , Cutkosky , M . [ 26 ] , Ravinder D . [ 29 ] , Cas - sidy A . , [ 30 ] and Ekanayake V . , [ 31 ] , Wettels N . et al . , Wettels N . et al . in [ 32 , 33 ] , Petroff N . , [ 34 ] Edinc B . et al . , [ 34 ] , and Ascari L . et al . , [ 35 ] . However , the most attractive effort was the one intro - duced by Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky , M . [ 31 ] . They have introduced a more realistic force sensing , with electronics processing power . Through such area sensor , a robot hand was able to detect an event of slippage while grasping . The attempt and experimental setup by Takahashi T . et al . [ 23 ] shows a good model for integrating tactile , force , and position control . Ulmen , J . and Cutkosky , M . [ 24 ] have reported in their paper [ 24 ] , that with its low - cost and high scala - bility , thepresentedsensordesignmakeswholebodysensorarrays feasible . Also , the tactile sensing array was presented with appli - cation as a whole body artificial skin covering . In [ 25 ] , they employed results of a study , already presented in [ 24 ] , with various sensors , hence processed to determine tactile and touching events , such as MAKING / BREAKING contact or SLIP between the hand and grasped objects , as well as CONTACT LOCATION and STATIC PRESSURE . Such grasping events , and the continuous contact information can then be used to control more complexmanipulations . Inageneralsense , thedevelopmentofthis class of tactile sensing and its use for a robotics hand , as in [ 24 , 25 ] , gives a good degree of indication , in which direction advanced tactile sensing is heading now . In their valuable surveying research frame work , Cutkosky M . and Howe R . , [ 27 ] , indicated that , in the near future , it will be increasingly possible to fabricate dense arrays of transducers in - situ on contoured surfaces , using material deposition and laser machining techniques . In this way , robots may finally start to approach the tactile sensitivity and responsiveness of the simplest of animals . Another successful effort for building a bio - inspired tactile sensing was introduced by Ascari L . et al . [ 35 ] . They have reported in their research paper a ( bio - inspired approach ) , the working principle of the architecture bases on the cellular nonlinear / neural network paradigm , while using both hand shape and spatial – temporal features obtained from an array of micro - fabricated force sensors , in order to control the sensory - motor coordination of the robotic system . The novel idea behind the presented design of Cassidy A . and Ekanayake V , [ 30 ] , is that it is , an intelligent tactile sensor array , that it can accurately measure the ( magnitude ) and ( direction ) of incident force , aswellasdetermineifasliphasoccurred . Theyalsoindicated that , a final research goal , is to implement and fabricate the tactile sensor array as a custom integrated circuit . For the presented work of Wettels N . et al . in [ 32 ] , it was found that , the sensor is compliant to support grip , and its design is such that simple algorithms can be implemented in real - time to calculate normal and tangential E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 543 forces regardless of point of contact . Nonholonomic constraints ariseduringcontact , requiringthefingersto onlyrollrelativeto the object without slippage . This issue was discussed by Petroff N . [ 33 ] . However , the algorithm gives rise to new Vector Fields called { Lie Brackets } that allow the fingers to be reconfigured without releasing the object , effectively increasing the workspace of the manipulation system . Fifth : bionic and prosthetic hands : The study has also looked into a current demanding issue , that has also new research directions , and has almost a similar area of use as for robotics use . This is related to bionic and prosthetic hands . A point that we need to consider is that , there is a technological overlap between dexterous robotics and bionic and prosthetic hands . This is due to the similar area of demand and use . This area of research is also receiving a considerable attention . Even some products are already put as commercial products . For such trends , the survey has looked into four cases for bionic and prosthetic hands . We looked into four research efforts , this include the I - Limb Ultra Prosthetic Hand TM [ 45 ] , Craelius W . et al . [ 46 ] , Matrone G . et al . [ 47 ] , Ciocarlie M . et al . , [ 49 ] . In reality , the iLIMB Hand has been introduced lately as an example of the most advanced bionic hand . It presents also an example of how far commercial artificial hands can move . In terms of recent research outcomes , there have been also a number of efforts to use and integrate EMG body signals for controlling finger movements . This can be seen clearly form the research outcome of Craelius W . et al . [ 46 ] . The overall design goal was to use natural tendon movements in the forearm to actuate virtual finger movement . Finally , in a summary , it is essential to mention that , this survey have been focusing on efforts related to robotics articulated hands . The study has been more focused on design issues , and few number of developments that have been taking place lately . Through this study , the survey has been kept a distance of hand mathematics and models ( this include articulated hands dynamics , kinematics , grasping forces and distributions , and configuration optimizations ) , the mathematical issues . The intention for such a tendency , is that , such mathematical backgrounds , have been already reported and appeared in robotics literature for a quite a while . It is worth to mention that , Bicchi A . [ 50 ] , has already put forward a study about the modeling issues relating robotics hands and a grasping dynamics and modeling , another literature can also be found in Murray R . et al . [ 51 ] , in addition to a comprehensive literature found in [ 52 , 53 ] . However , with emerging new hand designs , actuating mechanisms , and sensory feedbacks , such grasping models need to be revisited in terms of extracting new models . Not only updated hand models are needed , however , laying out much appropriate controllers algorithms to take care of such new building materials , are essential emerging demands for articulated hands . Throughout the study , it has been found there are number of efforts in terms of mechanics and hand designs , tactical sensing , however , for hand soft actuation , it seems this area of research is still far away from having a realistic muscular type fingers and hand movements . References [ 1 ] W . Jimmy , G . Gini , Robotic hands : design review and proposal of new design process , World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology 26 26 ( 17 ) ( 2007 ) 85 – 90 . [ 2 ] K . Salisbury , Design and control of an articulated hand , in : Proccedings of 1st International Symposium on Design and Synthesis , Tokyo , 1984 . [ 3 ] K . Salisbury , J . Craig , Articulatedhands : forcecontrolandkinematicissues , The International Journal of Robotics Research 1 ( 1 ) ( 1982 ) 04 – 17 . [ 4 ] L . Zexiang , H . Ping , S . Shankar , Grasping and coordinated manipulation by a multifingeredrobothand , TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch8 ( 4 ) ( 1989 ) 33 – 50 . [ 5 ] E . AlGallaf , A . Allen , K . Warwick , Asurveyofmulti - _ ngeredrobothands : issues and grasping achievements , Journal of Mechatronics 3 ( 4 ) ( 1993 ) 465 – 491 . [ 6 ] C . Jacobsen , E . Wood , F . Knutti , B . Biggers , The UTAH / M . I . T . dextrous hand : work in progress , International Journal of Robotics Research 3 ( 1984 ) 21 – 50 . [ 7 ] M . Matthew , K . Salisbury , Robot Hands and the Mechanics of Manipulation , The MIT Press , USA , 1985 . [ 8 ] B . Yoseph , C . Breazeal , Biologically inspired intelligent robotics , in : Proceed - ings of the SPIE Smart Structures Conference , Paper 5051 - 02 , San Diego , CA , 2003 . [ 9 ] K . Byoung , Y . Byung , O . Hong , H . Sang , S . Yeh , Biomimetic compliance control of robot hand by considering structures of human finger , Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 4 ( 2000 ) 3879 – 3886 . [ 10 ] S . Lee , S . Noh , Y . c Lee , J . Park , Development of bio - mimetic robot hand using parallel mechanisms , in : Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics , Guilin , China , 2009 . [ 11 ] N . Pollard , G . Richards , Tendon arrangement and muscle force requirements for humanlike force capabilities in a robotic finger , in : Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , ICRA 2002 , Washington , DC , USA , 2002 . [ 12 ] R . Pfeifer , F . Iida , G . Gómez , Designingintelligentrobotsontheimplicationsof embodiment , Journal of Robotics Society of Japan 24 ( 7 ) ( 2006 ) 9 – 16 . ( Review article ) . [ 13 ] Squse Company Ltd . http : / / www . squse . co . jp / business / robothand . html . [ 14 ] A . Price , A . Jnifene , H . Naguib , Design and control of a shape memory alloy based dexterous robot hand , Journal of Smart Materials and Structures 16 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) . [ 15 ] V . Bundhoo , E . Haslam , B . Birch , E . Park , A shape memory alloy - based tendon - driven actuation system for biomimetic artificial fingers , part i : design and evaluation , Journal of Robotica ( 2008 ) 01 – 16 . [ 16 ] Y . Bar - Cohen ( Ed . ) , ElectroactivePolymer ( EAP ) ActuatorsasArtificialMuscles — Reality , Potential and Challenges , vol . PM98 , SPIE Press , 2001 , pp . 1 – 671 . [ 17 ] Y . Bar - Cohen ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the SPIE’s Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices , in : 8th Smart Structures and Materials Symposium , vol . 4329 , 2001 , pp . 01 – 524 . [ 18 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , Electro - activepolymers : currentcapabilitiesandchallenges , in : Proceedings of the SPIE Smart Structures and Materials Symposium , EAPAD Conference , San Diego , CA , March 18 – 21 , Paper No . 4695 - 02 , 2002 . [ 19 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , Human - likeroboticinspectors : sciencefictionandreality , in : IV Conferencia Panamericana de END Buenos Aires , 2007 , pp . 2 – 9 . [ 20 ] Y . Bar - Cohen ( Ed . ) , 2nd edition , Electroactive Polymer ( EAP ) Actuators as Artificial Muscles — Reality , Potential and Challenges , vol . PM136 , SPIE Press , Bellingham , Washington , ISBN : 0 - 8194 - 5297 - 1 , 2004 , pp . 1 – 765 . [ 21 ] Shadow Dexterous Hand C5 : SHADOW ROBOT COMPANY LTD . Technical Specification , TECHNICAL REPORT , Specification Release Date : 14 / 5 / 2008 . Shadow Robot Company Limited is a registered Company in England and Wales . [ 22 ] M . Shahinpoor , Y . Bar - Cohen , J . Simpson , J . Smith , Ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMCs ) as biomimetic sensors , actuators and artificial muscles — a review , International Journal of Smart Materials and Structures 7 ( 6 ) ( 1998 ) 01 – 27 . [ 23 ] T . Takahashi , T . Tsuboi , T . Kishida , Y . Kawanami , S . Shimizu , M . Iribe , T . Fukushima , M . Fujita , Adaptive grasping by multi fingered hand with tactile sensor , basedon robust forceand positioncontrol , in : 2008IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , Pasadena , CA , USA , 2008 . [ 24 ] J . Ulmen , M . Cutkosky , A robust , low - cost and low - noise artificial skin for human - friendly robots , in : IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) , 3 – 7 May , 2010 , pp . 4836 – 4841 . [ 25 ] Biomimetics And Dextrous Manipulation Laboratory Website Report . Univer - sity of Stanford , 2012 . http : / / bdml . stanford . edu / Main / MobileManipulationHome . [ 26 ] M . Cutkosky , On grasp choice , grasp models , and the design of hands for manufacturing tasks , IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 5 ( 3 ) ( 1989 ) 269 – 279 . [ 27 ] M . Cutkosky , R . Howe , W . Provancher , Forceandtactilesensors , in : B . Siciliano , O . Khatib ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Robotics : Handbook of Robotics , Springer Publishing , ISBN : 978 - 3 - 540 - 23957 - 4 , 2008 , ( Chapter 19 , Part C ) . [ 28 ] B . Edin , L . Beccai , L . Ascari , S . Roccella , J . Cabibihan , M . Carrozza , Abio - inspired approach for the design and characterization of a tactile sensory system for a cybernetic prosthetic hand , in : Proceedings of the IEEE Robotics and Automation , International Conference , 2006 , pp . 1354 – 1358 . [ 29 ] R . Dahiya , V . Maurizio , M . Giorgio , L . Leandro , Bio inspired tactile sensing arrays ravinder , in : Ángel B . Rodríguez - Vázquez , Ricardo A . Carmona - Galán , Gustavo Liñán - Cembrano ( Eds . ) , Bioengineered and Bioinspired Systems IV , in : Proc . of SPIE , vol . 7365 , 2009 , p . 73650D . [ 30 ] Andrew Cassidy , Virantha Ekanayake , A biologically inspired tactile sensor array utilizing phase - based computation ( xxx to be conti ) . [ 31 ] N . Wettels , D . Popovic , V . Santos , G . Loeb , Biomimetictactilesensorforcontrol of grip , in : IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics , 2007 . [ 32 ] N . Wettels , A . Parnandi , J . Moon , G . Loeb , G . Sukhatme , Grip control using biomimetictactilesensingsystems , mechatronics , IEEE / ASMETransactions14 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 718 – 723 . 544 E . Mattar / Robotics and Autonomous Systems 61 ( 2013 ) 517 – 544 [ 33 ] N . Petroff , Biomimetic sensing for robotics manupulation , A Dissertation Submitted to the Graduate School of the University of Notre Dame in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirementsfor the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy , Indiana , 2006 . [ 34 ] B . Edinc , L . Ascarib , L . Beccaia , S . Roccellaa , J . Cabibihana , M . Carrozza , Bio - inspired sensorization of a biomechatronic robot hand for the graspand — lift task , JournalofRoboticsandNeuroscience75 ( 6 ) ( 2008 ) 785 – 795 . Specialissue on Brain Research Bulletin . [ 35 ] L . Ascari , U . Bertocchi , P . Corradi , C . Laschi , P . Dario , Bio - inspired grasp control in a robotic hand with massive sensorial input , Journal of Biological Cybernetics 100 ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) . [ 36 ] Two Ottobock , http : / / www . ottobock . com / cps / rde / xchg / ob _ com _ en / hs . xsl / 49809 . html . [ 37 ] P . J . Agnew , Functional effectiveness of a myo - electric prosthesis compared with a functional split - hook prosthesis : a single subject experiment , International Journal of Prosthetics And Orthottics 5 ( 2 ) ( 1981 ) 92 – 96 . [ 38 ] S . - E . Baek , S . - H . Lee , J . - H . Chang , Design and control of a robotic finger for prosthetic hands , Proceedings of Internatinational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems ( 1999 ) 113 – 117 . [ 39 ] M . E . Cupo , S . J . Sheredos , Clinical evaluation of a new , above elbow , body poweredprostheticarm : afinalreport , JournalofRehabilitationResearchand Development 35 ( 1998 ) 431 – 446 . [ 40 ] R . Doshi , C . Yeh , M . LeBlanc , The design and development of a gloveless en - doskeletal prosthetic hand , Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Develop - men 35 ( 1998 ) 388 – 395 . [ 41 ] P . J . Kyberd , O . E . Holland , P . H . Chappel , S . Smith , R . Tregidgo , P . J . Bagwell , M . Snaith , MARCUS : a two degree of freedom hand prosthesis with hierarchical grip control , IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering 3 ( 1995 ) 70 – 76 . [ 42 ] D . H . Silcox , M . D . Rooks , R . R . Vogel , L . L . Fleming , Myoelectric prostheses , Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery 75 ( 1993 ) 1781 – 1789 . [ 43 ] R . Vinet , Y . Lozac’h , N . Beaundry , G . Drouin , Design methodology for a multifunctional hand prosthesis , Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development 32 ( 1995 ) 316 – 324 . [ 44 ] M . Cutkosky , Robotic Grasping and Fine Manipulation , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , 1985 . [ 45 ] Touch bionics introduces i - Limb ultra prosthetic hand , http : / / www . medgadget . com / 2011 / 09 / touch - bionics - introduces - i - limb - ultra - prosthetic - hand . [ 46 ] W . Craelius , R . Abboudi , N . Nicki , Control of a multifintere prosthestic hand , in : ICORR ’99 : International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics , Stanford , CA , 1999 . [ 47 ] G . Matrone , C . Cipriani , E . Secco , G . Magenes , G . Carrozza , Principal components analysis based control of a multi - DOF underactuated prosthetic hand , Journal of Neuro Engineering and Rehabilitation 7 ( 16 ) ( 2010 ) 1 – 13 . [ 48 ] G . Matrone , C . Cipriani , E . L . Secco , M . C . Carrozza , G . Magenes , Bio - inspired controller for a dexterous prosthetic hand based on principal components analysis , in : Proc IEEE - EMBS Intl Conf 2009 , 2009 , pp . 5022 – 5025 . [ 49 ] M . Ciocarlie , S . Clanton , M . Spalding , P . Allen , Biomimetic grasp planning for cortical control of a robotic hand , in : Proc IEEE / RJS International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2008 , pp . 2271 – 2276 . [ 50 ] A . Bicchi , Hands for dexterous manipulation and robust grasping : a difficult road towards simplicity , IEEE Transactions in Robotics and Automation 6 ( 16 ) ( 2000 ) 652 – 662 . [ 51 ] R . Murray , L . Zexiang , S . Sastry , A Mathematical Introduction to Robotic Manipulation , 1994 , CRC Press , ISBN : 9780849379819 , 1994 , March . [ 52 ] B . Siciliano , O . Khatib , in : B . Siciliano , O . Khatib ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Robotics , in : Handbook of Robotics , Springer Publishing , ISBN : 978 - 3 - 540 - 23957 - 4 , 2008 . [ 53 ] M . Cutkosky , I . Kao , Computing and controlling compliance of a robotic hand , IEEE Transactions in Robotics and Automation 5 ( 2 ) ( 1989 ) 151 – 165 . Dr . EbrahimMattar isanAssociateProfessorofIntelligent Control and Robotics at University of Bahrain . Mattar is also a candidature for a Professor rank . He has received BSc . in Electrical Engineering ( from University of Bahrain in1986 ) , doneMSc . inElectronicsin1989 ( fromUniversity of Southampton , UK ) , and in 1994 he received University of Reading Ph . D . in Cybernetics and Robotics Control . Dr . Mattar has interests in Computational Intelligence , Robotics Control , Modeling and Control . This includes clustering with fuzzy , Neural Networks , Evolutionary Computation , and their real applications in Robotics and Control . Now he is working in Hinf optimal robotics control system , intelligent controllersforMulti - fingerRoboticsHands , HandVisualServosystem , activevision dexterous hands manipulation , and hybrid systems for uncertainty analysis for robotics modeling . Mattar is a member of a number of professional societies locally and internationally . Locally , he is a member of Bahrain Society of Engineers ( BSE ) , board member of the Academic Society in Bahrain , board member of the Technology Transfer Society . Internationally , Mattar is a member of the IEEE , memberofIEEEControlEducationalSociety , IEEERoboticsandAutomationSociety ( RAS ) , an active IET member , IET — Bahrain Network Honorary Chair , X - IET EMEA Regional Board Member , IET Knowledge Programme Advisory Member , and member of some control societies world - wide . Dr . Mattar has published a number of journal and conferences articles in the area of dexterous robotic hands , Control , Optimal robotic hand forces , Neural multi - finger robot hand grasping and control , optimal fuzzy control , and Neuro - fuzzy systems , intelligent control . Dr . Mattar has been a responsible body for two major conferences in Bahrain , including the IET ICIS - 2008 ( International Conference on Intelligent Systems , December 2008 ) , and a responsible body for three IET symposiums in Bahrain , including ( New Directions in Automatic Control : Theories and Applications , April 2010 . Dr . Mattar has also organized large number of IET events in Bahrain since 2006 till this moment . Dr . Mattar is also an ABET accreditation expert , as has been leading a team for a positive full Electrical and Electronics Engineering Programsaccreditationovertheperiodfrom2005 – 2010 , forCollegeofEngineering at Bahrain University . Run up to 18 short Courses in the Area of Engineering Control . These Short Courses have been serving different industries in Bahrain Elected Honorary Chair for the IEE and IET for two Sessions , Bahrain Local Network Committee . Written and still writing ( In Arabic ) a number of newspaper articles about Higher Education , Research and Engineering History . Organizing Head for the International Conference on ( Millennium Dawn in Training and Continuing Education ) , 16 – 18th of April 2001 . A responsible organizer for a Power Forum : ( Trends Towards Power System Networks Enhancement ) , 26th February . 2008 . A responsible organizer for a Communication Forum : Challenges and Trends in Modern Communication ) , 7th May 2008 . A responsible organizer for an IET International Conference on Intelligent Systems ( ICIS - 2008 ) , 1 – 3rd December 2008 . A responsible organizer for an IET Control Symposium : ( New Directions in Automatic Control : Theories and Applications ) , 26th of April 2010 . Chairing Continuing Engineering Education Program , University of Bahrain ( 1998 – 2002 ) . Chairing Electrical and Electronics Engineering Department , University of Bahrain ( 2004 – 2009 ) , also seconded from UOB as the Director General of the Bahrain Training Institute ( 2011 – 2012 ) . Head of ABET Accreditation Committee ( DAC ) for two terms , ( 2005 – 2012 ) . Awarded University of Bahrain , Deanship Best Research Project award in 2001 . University of Bahrain , College of Engineering Research Award , 2002 . University of Bahrain , College of Engineering best graduation Project Award ( 2001 ) . ( 2001 – 2002 ) University of Bahrain , President Achievement Awards , ( 2002 ) . UniversityofBahrain , CollegeofEngineeringbestgraduationProjectAward , ( 2003 ) . ( 2005 – 2006 ) University of Bahrain , College of Engineering best graduation ProjectAward . UniversityofBahrain , CollegeofEngineeringbestgraduationProject Award , ( 2006 ) . Bahrain Society of Engineers Award for two successive terms 2007 & 2008 . A responsible organizer for an IET Robotics Forum , 21st of December 2011 . A fully responsible organizer for an IET Control Symposium : ( New Directions in AutomaticControl : TheoriesandApplications ) , 29thofMay2012 . NowIamheading as the third time of duty with University of Bahrain .