UC San Francisco UC San Francisco Previously Published Works Title Considering protonation as a posttranslational modification regulating protein structure and function Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 7n8038fg Journal Annual Review of Biophysics , 42 ( 1 ) ISSN 1936 - 122X Authors Schönichen , A Webb , BA Jacobson , MP et al . Publication Date 2013 - 05 - 01 DOI 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 050511 - 102349 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 Considering Protonation as a Posttranslational Modiﬁcation Regulating Protein Structure and Function Andr´e Sch ¨onichen , 1 Bradley A . Webb , 1 Matthew P . Jacobson , 2 and Diane L . Barber 1 1 Department of Cell and Tissue Biology and 2 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , University of California , San Francisco ; email : diane . barber @ ucsf . edu Annu . Rev . Biophys . 2013 . 42 : 289 – 314 First published online as a Review in Advance on February 28 , 2013 The Annual Review of Biophysics is online at biophys . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 050511 - 102349 Copyright c (cid:2) 2013 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved Keywords pH sensor , protonation , intracellular pH , posttranslational modiﬁcation , coincidence detection , conformational change , ionization , histidine Abstract Posttranslational modiﬁcation is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for regulating protein activity , binding afﬁnity , and stability . Compared with es - tablished posttranslational modiﬁcations such as phosphorylation or ubiqui - tination , posttranslational modiﬁcation by protons within physiological pH ranges is a less recognized mechanism for regulating protein function . By changingthe chargeofamino acid sidechains , posttranslationalmodiﬁcation by protons can drive dynamic changes in protein conformation and function . Addition and removal of a proton is rapid and reversible and , in contrast to most other posttranslational modiﬁcations , does not require an enzyme . Sig - naling speciﬁcity is achieved by only a minority of sites in proteins titrating within the physiological pH range . Here , we examine the structural mecha - nisms and functional consequences of proton posttranslational modiﬁcation of pH - sensing proteins regulating different cellular processes . 289 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290 PROTONS AS POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291 MODES OF PROTEIN REGULATION BY PROTON POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 294 pH - SENSING ACTIN REGULATORY PROTEINS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296 ADF / Coﬁlin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296 Talin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 298 Hisactophilin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299 Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300 AMYLOIDOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301 Prion Protein and Spongiform Encephalopathies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301 Islet Amyloid Polypeptide Protein and Type II Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301 pH SENSORS IN PATHOGENS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302 Hemagglutinin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302 M2 Pump . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304 Gag and Matrix Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306 ENGINEERING pH - SENSITIVE SWITCHES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306 INTRODUCTION Intracellular pH ( pH i ) dynamics is conventionally viewed as a homeostatic mechanism to protect cells from alkaline and acidic loads . Consistent with this view , cytosolic pH is tightly regulated at near neutral ( 11 ) . For example , increased generation of metabolic acids is generally accompanied by increased H + efﬂux by plasma membrane electroneutral ion transport proteins , such as the monocarboxylate lactate - H + exchangers MCT1 and MCT4 , the Na + - H + exchanger NHE1 , and the Na + - dependent Cl - HCO 3 transporter NBCn2 . However , an emerging view is that pH i dynamics also functions as a signaling mechanism to regulate a number of cell processes . In mammalian cells a seemingly small increase in pH i from 0 . 2 to 0 . 3 units promotes cell proliferation and cell cycle progression ( 111 , 121 ) and is now recognized to be necessary for directional cell migration , includingcellpolarity , actinﬁlamentassemblies , andfocaladhesionremodeling ( 34 , 35 , 128 , 130 ) . Decreased pH i contributes to apoptosis , in part by activation of cytochrome c , caspases ( 85 ) , and the proapoptotic protein BAX ( 65 ) . Dysregulated pH i dynamics is also a hallmark of diseases , including a constitutive increased pH i in cancers of different tissue origins and genetic backgrounds ( 18 , 147 ) andaconstitutivedecreasedpH i inanumberofneurodegenerativedisorders ( 48 , 133 ) . In this review we present recent evidence supporting the view of pH i dynamics as a signaling mechanism and propose that this is best understood at the molecular level by considering protonation as a reversible posttranslational modiﬁcation . Central to the view of signaling by pH i is an understanding of how physiological changes in pH regulate the function of selective proteins , termed pH sensors , by changing activities and binding afﬁnities ( 127 , 139 ) . There is abundant structure - based evidence on how pH dynamics regulates activities of ion channels ( 56 , 78 , 117 ) , ion transport proteins and pumps ( 58 , 96 ) , and enzymes ( 43 , 61 , 91 ) . The protonation state of titratable residues also regulates the electrostatic energy of interactions to change binding afﬁnities , including protein - protein , protein - phospholipid , and macromolecular assemblies . Protein - protein binding can also be accompanied by proton uptake 290 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 or release , leading to changes in the protonation states of ionizable residues ( 69 , 84 , 89 ) . Also , pH regulationofbindingafﬁnitiesisasignalingmechanisminducingdynamicchangesinproteinlocal - ization , including the recruitment of cytosolic proteins to the plasma membrane or to intracellular membranes by pH - dependent binding to membrane - speciﬁc phospholipids ( 35 , 54 , 72 ) . In turn , localization puts a constraint on the pH dependence of proteins to match subcellular differences in pH i ( 20 ) . In mammalian cells , the cytoplasm , nucleus , and endoplasmic reticulum have a near - neutral pH ; mitochondria are more basic ; and lysosomes , endosomes , and the Golgi network are more acidic ( 19 ) . As recently noted ( 37 ) , the plausible adaptation of protein - protein interactions to the pH in subcellular compartments has generally escaped the attention of researchers . Although there are limited structural analyses of pH - dependent protein - DNA binding ( 79 ) , given the im - portance of electrostatics in protein - DNA binding , the protonation state of titratable residues could markedly affect interactions with the negatively charged phosphate backbone of DNA . We propose that the molecular basis for how physiological changes in pH regulate protein activities and binding afﬁnities can be viewed by protonation as a posttranslational modiﬁcation . PROTONS AS POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS As a mechanism for protein regulation , protons have much in common with small chemical post - translational modiﬁcations , particularly those that change protein charge in a site - speciﬁc man - ner , including phosphorylation and Lys acetylation . Although the proton is a particularly small chemical modiﬁcation , its addition nonetheless increases the charge by one unit and changes a hydrogen - bond acceptor to a group that can serve as a hydrogen - bond donor . Like phosphor - ylation , acetylation , and ubiquitination , posttranslational modiﬁcation by protons can directly modulate binding to other macromolecules or small molecules , or it can drive changes in protein conformation and dynamics that then modulate some aspect of function ( 99 ) . Moreover , changes in protonation state are rapid and reversible . One major difference com - pared with other posttranslational modiﬁcations is that protonation or deprotonation does not need to be enzymatically catalyzed , such as transferases for adding methyl groups or kinases and phosphatases for adding and removing phosphate groups , respectively . ( Although we know of no such examples , it is intriguing to speculate that protonation state changes could effectively be cat - alyzedif , e . g . , bindingofapartnerproteincausedconformationalchangesthatcausedthepK a value of a titratable group to change dramatically , and the resulting change in protonation state then regulated other aspects of function . ) Accordingly , an enzyme - mediated transfer cascade analogous to mitogen - activated protein kinase modules likely does not occur with pH - driven signaling . The protonation state of any titratable residue is not in general uniquely deﬁned . Rather , pH and pK a values together determine the probability of being in a particular protonation state or the fraction of a population of protein molecules in a particular state . This property is similar to other posttranslational modiﬁcations such as phosphorylation in that the fraction of proteins modiﬁed on a site can vary dramatically at any given time . However , single titratable groups can also rapidly change protonation states over time , with the fractional occupancy determined by pH and pK a values . Virtually all proteins have titratable groups , and one major challenge of studying their regula - tion by pH is determining which sites could potentially serve as functionally relevant pH sensors in vivo . A similar challenge exists for other posttranslational modiﬁcations ; identifying a site of modiﬁcation by mass spectroscopy does not guarantee that it has any signiﬁcant functional role . Recent analyses of posttranslational modiﬁcations by phosphorylation or acetylation suggest that only a fraction of identiﬁed modiﬁcation sites likely have a signiﬁcant biological role ( 9 , 70 ) . The challenge is magniﬁed for protons because they are labile and cannot be detected directly www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 291 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 by mass spectroscopy or by antibodies . Hence , large - scale proteomics analyses that have been used to identify phosphorylation , methylation , or ubiquitination are not feasible for protonation state . Although bioinformatics searches based on isoelectric points have attempted to identify pH sensors , they have not detected meaningful correlations ( 37 ) . However , unbiased systematic analyses of protein - protein complexes using the Protein - Protein Docking Benchmark database ( http : / / zlab . bu . edu / zdock / ) have generated more global predictions on binding afﬁnities depen - dent on physiological pH ( 84 , 89 ) . Although any titratable site is in principle a candidate pH sensor , among the many titratable sites in proteins only a minority titrates signiﬁcantly within the normal cytosolic pH range . Histidine side chains are the most obvious candidates , with a nominal pK a of ∼ 6 . 5 , which in many cases can be modestly upshifted owing to the protein environment . Phosphate groups have a similar pK a value , but the pK a values of other common side chains are mostly far from 7 , meaning that they are potentially relevant to cytoplasmic regulation only when the protein environment , including desolvation or the local electrostatic potential , dramatically shifts the pK a value . Computational methods for predicting pK a values , including multi - conformer continuum elec - trostatics ( MCCE ) , constant pH molecular dynamics ( CpHMD ) ( 145 ) , and the software package PROPKA ( http : / / propka . ki . ku . dk ) , have been developed over several decades ( 1 ) . Although still imperfect , these methods are nonetheless powerful tools for helping to identify potential pH - sensing residues . Other computational methods such as molecular dynamics can make predictions about how pH - driven changes in protonation states may affect the structure and dynamics of a protein ( 90 ) , as has also been done for posttranslational modiﬁcations such as phosphorylation and acetylation ( 99 ) . The most powerful biophysical methods for studying these effects in vitro are based on nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) , which can directly monitor titrating protons , and provide information about resulting changes in dynamics and conformation . However , advances in neutron diffraction crystallography may facilitate structural biology studies of pH sensors ( 156 ) . In contrast to X - ray diffraction , which detects electron density , neutron diffraction can provide direct information on the positions of nuclei including protons and especially deuterons , which have a larger scattering cross - section . As with other posttranslational modiﬁcations , the most straightforward route to establishing the biological role of a particular titrating site is to mutate it to a nontitrating side chain . For exam - ple , Asn and Gln are reasonable isosteres for neutral His because their sizes are approximately the same and they contain one hydrogen bond donor and one acceptor in similar positions ( Figure 1 ) . Mimicking the positively charged form of His is more problematic in that Lys and Arg are substantially longer . In a similar way , Glu is an imperfect isostere for phosphorylated side chains such as pSer ( 82 ) ; thus , the results of such mutational experiments must be interpreted cautiously . Progress in our understanding of the molecular basis for pH regulation faces important con - ceptual challenges . A very fundamental one is the meaning of pH i in cells with small volumes . For example , in a typical prokaryotic cell with a volume of approximately 1 femtoliter ( 10 − 15 liters ) and a pH of 7 ( H + concentration 10 − 7 M ) , there are only approximately 60 free protons . Such low numbers raise the question of whether the pH can be precisely deﬁned in such a small volume , either theoretically or practically , for example , by using pH - sensitive ﬂuorescent dyes ( BCECF , SNARF ) or genetically encoded biosensors ( pHluorin , pHTomato ) . However , the number of labile protons—those on titratable site of macromolecules or metabolites—is many orders of magnitude larger , and these will exchange rapidly with those in the bulk . Thus , a pH reporter or a pH - sensing protein is responding to the chemical potential of the overall pool of labile protons , not just those that are free in solution . Eukaryotic cells of course typically have dramatically larger volumes , although similar issues arise for deﬁning pH in small subcellular compartments . Somewhat more problematic is the 292 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 OH O P O O O O P OH O O Kinase Phosphatase Low pH High pH ATP ADP H 2 O P i H + N HN NH HN NH 3 Acetylase Deacetylase Acetyl - CoA Acetate CoA HN O O O O O O O O O H OH – a b c d Lysine Histidine Aspartate Serine H 2 O H 2 O Low pH High pH H + OH – H 2 O Low pH High pH H + OH – H 2 O Figure 1 Examples of amino acid posttranslational modiﬁcations associated with changes in charge . ( a ) Phosphorylation of , e . g . , serines ( shown ) , threonines , tyrosines , and histidines leads to the addition of a negative charge at weakly basic conditions ( 151 ) . ( b ) Lysine acetylation shields the lysine amino group , e . g . , to decrease the afﬁnity to DNA ( 126 ) . ( c ) Histidines can quickly abstract protons to shuttle protons or to function as a pH sensor site , ( d ) When pK a values are upshifted , protonation of carboxyl groups of glutamate or aspartate ( shown ) can lead to the formation of new hydrogen bonds important for conformational changes of proteins . www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 293 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 concept of pH gradients within a cellular compartment , such as local pH near a membrane , which is postulated to be modulated by electrostatic effects from lipid headgroups , or pH gradients due to large localized ﬂuxes of protons by transporters ( 86 ) . Although these are intriguing concepts , signiﬁcant practical challenges are associated with measuring such effects . With respect to pH gradients , a key parameter is the effective diffusion rate of protons . In pure water , protons diffuse exceptionally rapidly , aided by the Grotthuss mechanism ( 27 ) . In water containing large con - centrations of titratable sites ( buffer ) , Grotthuss - based diffusion likely still occurs , but diffusion is highly hindered in that the effective path length for a free proton is small , and the effective diffusion rate of protons is limited by the rate of diffusion of the buffering sites ( 132 ) . In cells , this effective rate of diffusion would likely remain rather high ( higher than the diffusion rate of macromolecules ) owing to relatively high concentrations of metabolites with titrating groups , such as carnosine . As such , protons rapidly equilibrate between different portions of a cell not segregated by membranes , and maintaining a stable pH gradient requires large ﬂuxes of protons . Hence , hydrogen ions are not generally free in the cytosol but rather complexed or with proteins and metabolites . MODES OF PROTEIN REGULATION BY PROTON POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATION Although changes in pH i are pleiotropic , speciﬁcity of pH sensing is achieved by many of the mechanisms described above . Notably , among the many titratable sites in proteins only a small minority titrates signiﬁcantly within the physiological pH range . Comparing structurally related proteins or protein domains reveals a number of examples of speciﬁcity in pH sensing ( Figure 2 a ) . The pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain of several guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) , including GRP1 ( general receptor for 3 - phosphoinositides 1 ) ( 50 ) and Dbs ( Dbl’s big sister ) ( 35 ) , contains pH - sensitive His switches for phosphoinositide binding . As discussed below , speciﬁcity of pH - sensitive PH domains is determined by critical His residues at phosphoinositide - binding sites that confer pH - dependent electrostatic interactions with negatively charged phospholipids . There are also examples of members of similar protein families having opposite regulatory responses to physiological changes in pH . The related actin - severing proteins coﬁlin and twinﬁlin are activated by increased ( 34 , 109 ) and decreased pH ( 93 ) , respectively . The focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and therelated familymemberproline - richtyrosinekinase 2 ( Pyk2 ) are structurallysimilarpHsensors ; however , autophosphorylation of FAK increases at pHi > 7 . 2 ( 64 , 137 ) and autophosphorylation of Pyk2 increases at pHi < 7 . 2 ( 75 , 110 ) . Posttranslational modiﬁcation by protons can also allosterically regulate protein function ( Figure 2 b ) . The Bohr effect of pH - driven changes for the afﬁnity of hemoglobin for oxygen binding is the classic example of proton - induced allosteric regulation ( 39 ) . The charge interaction of a His - Asp salt bridge ( His146 and Asp94 in human hemoglobin ) is disrupted when His146 is deprotonated with increased blood pH , which induces conformational changes that increase oxygen - binding afﬁnity at a distant site . In the sections below , we describe how protonation of pH - sensing residues allosterically regulates talin binding to actin ﬁlaments ( 127 ) ( Figure 2 b ) and unmasks a myristoyl moiety in the HIV matrix ( MA ) protein ( 33 ) . Although not included in examples described below , the structural basis for allosteric regulation by pH has been determined for a number of functionally distinct membrane ion transport proteins and channels . Examples include System A ( SNAT2 ) and System N ( SNAT5 ) amino acid transporters ( 7 ) ; many K + channels , including but not limited to Kir1 . 1 ( 112 , 117 ) , KcsA ( 134 , 136 , 161 ) , and Kv1 ( 78 ) ; Ca 2 + - ATPase ( SERCA ) ( 96 ) ; and NhaA , a Na + - H + exchanger in Escherichia coli . The pH i regulation of NhaA , which in turn maintains pH i homeostasis , is a feedback mechanism 294 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 Dbs PH domain Phosphoinositide Histidine H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + pH i Inactive Active H + H + H + H + pH i H + pH i Specificity a Coincidence detection c Cooperativity d Allostery b Examples : Hemagglutinin pH - sensitivepatch Cofilin Dephosphorylationof Ser3 Deprotonationof His133 H + pH i Activity Signal A Signal A pH i Activity pH i Activity F - actin - bindingsite pH sensor site Talin Figure 2 Signaling modes regulated by pH i . ( a ) Protonation can regulate speciﬁcity , e . g . , protonation of a histidine , in some but not all Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) required for stereospeciﬁc interaction with phosphoinositides . ( b ) An allosteric regulation mode occurs when protonation of a distinct site induces a conformational change in a remote site , such as talin , that has an actin - binding side ∼ 40 ˚A away from the pH sensor site ( PDB ID : 2jsw ) . ( c ) In coincidence detection , two distinct and generally unrelated input signals are necessary for the output of protein function , as shown for coﬁlin , which requires dephosphorylation of an N - terminal serine and deprotonation of a C - terminal histidine for increased activity . ( d ) Cooperativity occurs when several protonation sites act together with electrostatic coupling , affecting titration and sometimes pK a shifts , as occurs with disrupted interactions between hemagglutinin HA 1 domain and the HA 2 domain . that is achieved by clusters of electrostatically coupled amino acids with shifted pK a values near a negatively charged ion funnel that regulate long - range conformational changes affecting a distinct H + exchange site ( 58 , 101 ) . Similar pH - dependent allosteric regulation of mammalian Na + - H + exchangers and other ion transport proteins controlling pH i homeostasis , such as the proton - pumping V - ATPase , is predicted , although not structurally conﬁrmed . Another regulatory mode becoming increasingly apparent is the role of protonation in coincidence detection with other posttranslational modiﬁcations , including phosphorylation or binding of membrane phospholipids ( Figure 2 c ) . Coincidence detectors require multiple inputs for a regulated output . In the section on pH - sensing actin regulatory proteins , we describe the structural mechanisms for coincidence regulation of coﬁlin by phosphorylation of an N - terminal www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 295 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 serine and protonation of a C - terminal histidine ( Figure 2 c ) . Other examples include activity and trafﬁcking of the gap junction protein connexin - 43 , which require changes in protonation state and ubiquitination ( 73 ) , and dimer dissociation of dynein light chain LC8 , which is regulated by a phosphorylation - dependent increase in the pK a value of a critical histidine ( 154 ) . Coincidence regulation by protonation allows integration of regulatory circuits , and viewed from the perspective of pH i dynamics being pleiotropic , provides spatial discrimination by a locally restricted second regulator , such as a kinase or ubiquitinating enzyme . In the sections below we describe examples with structural evidence for distinct modes of protein regulation by proton posttranslational modiﬁcation . Several of these examples highlight two additional properties of regulation by protons . The ﬁrst is cooperativity involving electrostatic coupling of multiple proton - or ligand - binding sites . For example , protonation of one amino acid can induce changes in the pK a value or cation binding of nearby residues , as described below for the inﬂuenza virus protein hemagglutinin ( Figure 2 d ) . The second is the ability to regulate multiple proteins in unison to control a complex cell behavior . This latter property is achieved by the pleiotropic nature of pH i dynamics , independence from enzymes , signaling speciﬁcity , and coincidence regulation and is best exempliﬁed by pH sensors that collectively mediate pH i - dependent actin cytoskeleton remodeling during cell migration . pH - SENSING ACTIN REGULATORY PROTEINS The assembly of globular ( G ) actin to ﬁlamentous ( F ) actin and higher - order ﬁlament structures and the reverse process of ﬁlament disassembly drive many cell processes , such as migration , contraction , vesicle trafﬁcking , motility of pathogens in host cells , and cancer cell invasion and metastasis . Although intrinsic actin assembly rates in vitro are faster at acidic pH ( 146 , 162 ) , likely due to electrostatic effects , de novo actin assembly in mammalian cells requires pH i > 7 . 2 ( 147 ) . Hence , the intrinsic pH characteristics of puriﬁed actin are overridden in cells by selective pH - sensing actin regulatory proteins , which respond to small changes ( of 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 units ) in pH i to induce dramatic differences in actin ﬁlament assemblies and architectures . ADF / Coﬁlin Membersoftheactindepolymerizingfactor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin ( AC ) family , includingADF , nonmuscle coﬁlin - 1 and muscle coﬁlin - 2 , are pH sensors that sever and nucleate actin ﬁlaments ( 3 ) . In migrating cells , the severing activity of coﬁlin increases ﬁlament disassembly at the rear of actin networksandgeneratesnew , freebarbedendsfornucleationandassemblyattheplasmamembrane ( 10 ) ( Figure 3 a ) . The severing activity of coﬁlin requires a coincidence activation mechanism of dephosphorylation of an N - terminal serine residue and deprotonation of a C - terminal histidine residue ( Figure 3 b ) . These two distinct mechanisms are independently regulated ( 34 ) . For severing activity , two sites in A / C proteins bind to actin ﬁlaments . A G site includes an N - terminal region from the β 1 - strand , an N - terminal portion of the α 1 - helix , and a central region from helices α 4 to α 5 . An F site comprises an N - terminal portion of β 5 and a region spanning from the C - terminal half of α 6 to β 7 ( Figure 3 b ) . For coﬁlins , a phosphate group on Ser3 , which is added by LIM ( Lin - 11 , Isl - 1 , Mec - 3 ) or testis - speciﬁc serine ( TES ) kinase and removed by chronophin or slingshot 1L phosphatases , prevents actin binding at the G site ( 10 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation was previously speculated to cause extensive perturbations that affect critical residues in the G site ( 42 , 109 ) . Subsequently , molecular dynamics simulations suggested a plausible mechanism ( 34 ) whereby phosphorylated Ser3 interacts with Lys126 and Lys127 in the α 4 helix , which sterically blocks actin ﬁlament binding at the G site . Dephosphorylation disrupts this interaction and allows direct binding of the charged Lys126 and Lys127 to actin . 296 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 P P P P P P P P P His133His133His133 Ser3 N C Asp98 Cofilin Low pH i Membrane association and dissociation PhosphorylationDephosphorylation Active cofilin High pH i Actin filament disassembly Actin filament assembly ( + ) ( – ) PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Cofilin Actin ( – ) F - actin pointed end ( + ) F - actin barbed end a b α - helix β - sheet Figure 3 Coincidence regulation of coﬁlin . ( a ) Model for coincidence detection of coﬁlin near the plasma membrane . At pH i less than 7 . 2 , the afﬁnity of coﬁlin is higher , increasing binding to plasma membrane PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( red ) . At pH i greater than 7 . 2 , less coﬁlin is bound to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , increasing the cytosolic pool of active coﬁlin if Ser3 is dephosphorylated . At higher pH i , actin assembly is increased due partly to higher coﬁlin concentration . ( b ) Schematic representation structure of human coﬁlin structure ( PDB ID : 1q8x ) ( 109 ) . The ﬁve α - helices are colored cyan and the six β - sheets are colored purple . Side chains of Ser3 , Asp98 , and His133 are shown . N - terminal Ser3 is modiﬁed by phosphorylation . A salt bridge between Asp98 and His133 is formed under slight acidic conditions . His133 closely interacts with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 when doubly protonated ( 34 ) . Severing activity also requires an alkaline pH ( 10 ) . However , pH dependence differs among family members and acts through different mechanisms . Of the three mammalian isoforms , ADF is the most pH sensitive ( 143 ) , and severing activity of yeast coﬁlin and the Acanthamoeba coﬁlin homolog actophorin is relatively pH insensitive ( 80 ) . A structural basis for these differences is indicated by an NMR study of human coﬁlin ( 109 ) , which suggests a pH - dependent salt bridge at the F site between His133 and Asp98 in the β 4 - strand ( Figure 3 a ) . The salt bridge is stable at slightly acidic conditions but likely disrupted at higher pH values , leading to partial unfolding of the F site and presumably increased actin binding . The relatively pH - independent actophorin and yeast coﬁlin lack the spatially conserved histidine found in mammalian A / C proteins . Differences www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 297 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 in pH sensitivity of ADF and coﬁlin are due likely to coﬁlin being more stable because of tighter packing of its C terminus to the central β - sheet ( 49 , 109 ) . Hence , because coﬁlin has more noncovalent interactions than ADF , disruption of the salt bridge by increasing pH has a more destabilizing effect on the ADF structure . However , NMR analysis of coﬁlin at pH 7 . 5 compared with pH 6 . 5 shows minimal chemical shift differences in residues within the F site ( 34 ) , suggesting an alternative mechanism inde - pendent of conformational changes for pH - dependent activity . Two recently reported alternative mechanisms include binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in the plasma membrane ( 34 ) and binding to cortactin in invadopodia ( i . e . , invasive plasma membrane protrusions of cancer cells ) ( 81 ) . Binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 maintains coﬁlin inactive at the plasma membrane but locally available for the rapid assembly of actin ﬁlaments ( 74 , 141 ) ( Figure 3 a ) . How coﬁlin is inactive when bound to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 was resolved by an NMR study ( 42 ) showing that the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site includes His133 and basic residues at the F site . Hence , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and actin binding are mutually exclusive . We showed that coﬁlin binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is pH dependent , with increased binding at lower pH ( 34 ) . Computational docking simulations suggest that doubly protonated His133 but not neutral His133 interacts with terminal phosphates of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . However , both phosphates in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 have pK a values close to neutral ( 68 ) , and coﬁlin includes alternative PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding sites at basic residues near His133 ( 34 , 160 ) , which could contribute to ﬁne - tuning binding avidity and maintaining a membrane - sequestered pool of coﬁlin ( Figure 3 a ) . Binding to cortactin also sequesters inactive coﬁlin at the distal membrane of invadopodia . The binding afﬁnity of coﬁlin for cortactin decreases at higher pH ( 81 ) . Whether a pH i gradient occurs , higher at the distal margin of membrane protrusions as suggested ( 81 ) , to locally disrupt cortactin - coﬁlin binding and increase coﬁlin activity is unclear ; however , we propose that with coincidence activation by locally regulated dephosphorylation of Ser3 , a uniform increase in cytosolic pH may be sufﬁcient . Talin Changes in pH i also regulate dynamic remodeling of actin ﬁlaments at cell substrate ( focal ) adhe - sion sites . This regulatory mechanism is particularly critical at the leading edge of migrating cells where increased pH i is necessary for cycles of focal adhesion disassembly ( 128 , 130 ) . The effect of pH i on focal adhesion remodeling is mediated in part by talin binding to F - actin , which tethers actin ﬁlaments to focal adhesions . The N - terminal FERM domain of talin binds the cytosolic domain of β - subunits of integrin receptors and contains a pH - insensitive F - actin - binding site ( 26 ) . The C - terminal I / LWEQ module , which is conserved in huntingtin interacting protein - 1 ( Hip1 ) , Hip1 - related proteins ( Hip1R / Hip12 ) , and yeast protein Sla2 , also binds F - actin but with established pH dependence ( 26 ) ( Figure 4 a ) . As a pH sensor , talin highlights three of the properties described above on signaling modes , including cooperativity , allostery , and the ability of pH i dynamics to regulate multiple proteins in unison to control a complex cell behavior . As an example of cooperativity , the I / LWEQ module includes a ﬁve - helix bundle ( 40 ) that contains a cluster of residues , Glu2337 , Glu2342 , His2418 , Glu2481 , and Asp2482 , with markedly upshifted pK a values ( 128 ) ( Figure 4 a ) . As an example of allostery , NMR and CpHMD simulations indicate that protonation of residues in the pH sensor induces signiﬁcant changes in the structure and dynamics of a remote actin - binding site to increase actin binding ( 128 ) ( Figure 4 a ) . A mutant talin - His2418Phe has reduced and pH - insensitive actin binding , indicating a critical role of His2418 in pH - dependent allosteric regulation ( 128 ) . As an example of coordinated actions of pH sensors , in addition to talin - actin binding dynamics , focal adhesion remodeling also requires FAK activity , which increases at pH values greater than 7 . 2 ( 64 , 137 ) . 298 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 b a Hisactophilin top view Histidines Talin I / LWEQ module Hisactophilin side view with exposed myristoyl moiety pH 8 . 0 pH 6 . 0 F - actin - binding site pH sensorsite Membrane Myristoyl moiety Phosphoinositides Integrin Central rod domain Talin F - actin USH I / LWEQ FERM α β Figure 4 Allosteric regulation of talin binding to actin by pH . ( a ) Domain organization of talin ( upper panel ) , including an N - terminal FERM domain ( which binds the β - subunit of integrin receptors and F - actin ) , a central rod domain ( gray ) , and a C - terminal I / LWEQ ( red ) actin - binding module that binds F - actin . F - actin binding by the I / LWEQ module but not by the FERM domain is pH sensitive , with more binding occurring at lower pH . ( Lower panel ) Surface representation of the C - terminal actin - binding domain of talin . Residues Glu2337 , Glu2342 , His2418 , and Asp2482 form a pH sensor that induces pH - dependent conformations to allow actin binding only at lower pH . ( b ) Schematic representation of the hisactophilin structure and model of membrane attachment of hisactophilin ( PDB ID : 1hcd ) . ( Upper panel ) Histidines ( shown as sticks ) in loops and turns are equally distributed around the protein . ( Lower panel ) However , these histidines point toward the cytoplasm and the β - sheets point toward the membrane when the N - terminal myristoyl moiety is exposed partly by PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Hisactophilin The slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum expresses the unique , remarkably pH - sensitive actin - binding proteins hisactophilin I and hisactophilin II . Both isoforms contain 118 amino acids and nearly one - third of the residues are histidines . Hisactophilins bind to actin only at pH values below 7 . 2 , suggesting that protonation of histidines promotes binding to actin in a switch - like manner ( 119 ) . Hisactophilins function in osmoprotection . In response to hyperosmolarity , the D . discoideum cytosol acidiﬁes and acid - increased hisactophilin - actin binding generates a rigid osmoprotective actin cytoskeletal network ( 108 ) . The structure of hisactophilin has a β - trefoil fold consisting of 12 β - strands connected by turns and loops ( 44 ) ( Figure 4 b ) . The β - trefoil www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 299 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 fold is shared by a number of diverse proteins with unrelated amino acid sequence , including interleukin - 1 β ( 32 ) and the mammalian actin - bundling protein fascin , which consists of four β - trefoil domains ( 60 ) . In hisactophilin almost all the histidines are located in loops and are at one side of the asymmetric protein , and the other side of the protein forms a tight β - barrel structure inserted into the plasma membrane by myristoylation ( 8 ) , a common posttranslational modiﬁcation with a C 14 fatty acyl chain at the N - terminal glycine residue . Myristoylation is required but energetically not sufﬁcient for membrane targeting ( 104 ) . Hisactophilin oscillates between a cytosolic form at pH 7 . 5 and a membrane - bound form at pH 6 . 5 ( 46 ) , regulated by a cluster of charged amino acids adjacent to the myristoyl moiety ( 47 ) . These two forms differ in the pH - dependent orientation of the myristoyl moiety , which can be either bound to a hydrophobic pocket or exposed to bind membranes ( 125 ) . A similar pH - dependent myristoyl switch regulates multimerization and membrane targeting of the HIV Gag and MA proteins ( 33 ) and is described in more detail below . Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors Several GEFs show speciﬁcity of pH - dependent binding of their PH domains to membrane phosphoinositides . One example is Dbs , a Dbl family Rho GEF that activates the Rho GTPase Cdc42 at the leading edge of migrating cells to control polarized movement . Dbs contains a PH domain that binds PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 with higher afﬁnity at lower pH ( 35 ) . However , other Dbl family Rho GEFs , such as intersectin , contain a similar PH domain that has pH - independent binding to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . The PH domain in Dbl family Rho GEFs is adjacent and C - terminal to the catalytic Dbl homology ( DH ) domain ( 115 ) , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding can allosterically inhibit GEF activity ( 116 ) . Dbs but not intersectin has a histidine ( His843 ) at the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding site of the PH domain , which determines pH - sensitive binding ( 35 ) , similar to pH - dependent binding of coﬁlin to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 described above . Although pH - dependent phosphoinositide binding has been shown for only a limited number of Rho GEFs , the shared feature of a binding site histidine could be used to predict pH sensing and hence pH - dependent GEF localization and activity . The PH domain of Grp1 , a GEF for Arf GTPases , also has pH - dependent binding to phosphoinositides . In contrast to Dbs , Grp1 binds PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 at endosomal membranes , with higher afﬁnity binding at lower pH ( 50 ) , and phosphoinositide binding increases Grp1 ac - tivity ( 29 ) . Increased binding afﬁnity is directly determined by protonation of a histidine ( His355 ) located in a 20 - residue insertion within the loop between β 6 and β 7 of Grp1 that contacts the phosphate group 4 of inositol 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 - tetrakisphosphate ( IP 4 ) , a soluble ana - log of PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( 50 , 77 ) . Arf GTPases localize at acidic endosomes and regulate endoso - mal trafﬁcking and actin dynamics ( 30 ) . A predicted lower pH at the cytoplasmic side of endosomes ( 100 ) possibly regulates Grb1 localization and activity by increasing afﬁnity for PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . Recent ﬁndings indicate physiological pH sensing by a number of other common phosphoinositide - binding domains . The FYVE ( Fab1p , YOTB , Vac1p , and EEA1 ) domain ( 72 ) , the ENTH and ANTH ( Epsin and AP180 N - terminal ) domains ( 54 ) , and the PH domain of FAPP1 ( four - phosphate - adaptor protein 1 ) ( 51 ) have increased phosphoinositide binding afﬁni - ties at physiological pH values below neutral . A common feature of these domains is at least one histidine is essential for stereospeciﬁc phosphoinositide recognition . Although not experimen - tally conﬁrmed , proteins containing these domains likely have pH - dependent membrane local - ization and activity and , if associated with the actin cytoskeleton , could coordinately regulate the pH - sensitive actin ﬁlament dynamics at membranes . 300 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 AMYLOIDOSIS Although extreme pH alterations affect the folding and stability of most proteins , physiological pH alterations induce partial or full unfolding in selective proteins due to changes in electrostatic interactions . Proteinmisfolding plays a role in pathological conditions such as amyloidosis , a group of more than 20 disparate human diseases including Alzheimer’s disease , Parkinson’s disease , and type II diabetes ( 45 , 105 ) . Amyloid ﬁbril formation is due to the folding of the secondary structure of an endogenous protein or protein fragment into a cross - β - sheet quaternary structure that oligomerizes into unbranched ﬁlaments . As folding is dependent on the sequence of the protein , misfolding induced by physiological changes in pH is highly speciﬁc . For example , low pH can enhance , in the case of prion protein , or inhibit , in the case of islet amyloid polypeptide protein ( IAPP ) , amyloid formation through the protonation of speciﬁc histidine residues . In contrast to pathologicalamyloidformation , organismsalsousehighlyregulatedamyloidassemblyforadiverse set of normal biological functions , including proteins involved in the production of mammalian melanosomes , E . coli bioﬁlms , malarial coat proteins , and silk ﬁbrils from some spider species ( 45 ) . Prion Protein and Spongiform Encephalopathies Spongiform encephalopathies , including scrapie , mad cow , Kuru , and Creutzfeldt - Jacob disease ( CJD ) , are characterized by aggregation of the misfolded prion protein ( PrP ) , a 209 - amino - acid protein on the surface of neuronal cells ( for review , see Reference 94 ) . The normal PrP C form ( for common or cellular ) of the protein misfolds into an aggregation - prone , protease - resistant , and infectious PrP Sc form ( for scrapie ) that accumulates in the brain as amyloid plaques . The structure of PrP C includes a disordered , unfolded N terminus and a well - structured C terminus , which is composed of three α - helices ( A – C ) and a short antiparallel β - sheet ( 113 , 159 ) . Although the atomic structure of PrP Sc has not been resolved , low - resolution structural analyses indicate a signiﬁcant change in folding between PrP C and PrP Sc , speciﬁcally a marked increase in β - sheet content and a decrease in α - helix content ( 87 , 102 ) . What triggers misfolding of PrP C is not known ; however , because ( a ) low pH induces the formation of alternatively folded variants of PrP and ( b ) both PrP C and PrP Sc are cycled through the endocytic pathway , the conversion of PrP C to PrP Sc is suggested to occur in the acidic environment of endosomes ( 17 , 28 , 144 ) . Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that protonation of a critical His residue , His187 , is important for the stability of PrP C ; deprotonation at neutral pH increases β - sheet content and conformational mobility within PrP C ( 55 , 140 ) . His187 , positioned between the three helixes , is partially buried and has a signiﬁcantly downshifted pK a of ∼ 4 ( 6 , 55 ) . At neutral pH , His187 is hydrogen - bonded to the backbone carbonyl of Arg156 ( 4 , 66 , 140 ) . This salt bridge is not seen upon protonation of His187 or in a mutant PrP - H187R found in familial CJD . The positively charged Arg substitution results in a β - sheet - rich , aggregation - prone molecule . Because stabilizing the His187 - Arg156 salt bridge at low pH would prevent misfolding of PrP C , it could be an effective therapeutic strategy to decrease infectivity of PrP Sc . Islet Amyloid Polypeptide Protein and Type II Diabetes IAPP ( or amylin ) , a protein secreted from pancreatic β cells , is the predominant component of amyloid ﬁbrils found in a majority of patients with type II diabetes ( 150 ) . Human IAPP ( hIAPP ) is a 37 - amino - acid peptide that is stored in the insulin secretory granule ( pH ∼ 6 ) and cosecreted into the extracellular space ( pH ∼ 7 . 4 ) with insulin ( 24 , 53 , 150 ) . The progression of soluble , monomeric hIAPP to a misfolded amyloid ﬁbril is pH dependent—inhibited at the acidic pH of www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 301 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 thesecretorygranuleandenhancedatthehigherextracellularpH ( 13 , 67 , 88 ) . Althoughtheprecise mechanism of pH - dependent aggregation is unknown , one hint comes from rat IAPP ( rIAPP ) , which in contrast to hIAPP does not form ﬁbrils in solution . However , a single point mutant in rIAPP , Arg18His ( Figure 5 a ) , is necessary and sufﬁcient to induce ﬁbrillogenesis ( 153 ) . At pH values above the pK a value of His18 , peptides encoding residues 10 to 19 of hIAPP aggregate to form amyloid , whereas aggregation is slower at pH values below the pK a value . Substitution of His18toAlaabolishespH - dependentaggregation ( 138 ) . Further , insulinbinding , whichmaintains an α - helical conformation of hIAPP and inhibits ﬁbril formation , is dependent on the charged state of the amino acid residue at position 18 . Introducing a charge either by protonation of His18 in hIAPP or by an Arg18 substitution in rIAPP induces the formation of hydrogen bonds and salt bridges with the insulin β - chain ( 62 , 148 ) . Deprotonation of His18 at neutral pH reduces the polar interactions , destabilizes the α - helical motif of insulin - bound hIAPP , and decreases the afﬁnity of hIAPP for insulin ( 148 ) . Similarly , the hIAPP - membrane interaction , which facilitates hIAPP aggregation and amyloid toxicity , is regulated by pH . Using a truncated hIAPP construct ( residues 1 – 19 ) , investigators have demonstrated that introduction of a charge at His18 by either protonation or mutation to Arg changes the hIAPP - membrane topology from buried to a surface - associated conformation ( 12 , 98 ) . The structure of membrane - bound hIAPP has a kinked helix motif , with a neutral pH having a much more pronounced interhelical angle ( 30 ◦ at pH ∼ 4 . 6 compared with 85 ◦ at pH ∼ 7 . 3 ) ( 97 , 103 ) ( Figure 5 b ) . The change in membrane topology and conformation is linked to a reduced ability to disrupt phospholipid vesicles and cell membranes ( 12 , 98 ) . Taken together , these data suggest that when hIAPP is released from the acidic insulin secretory granule into the neutral pH of the cytoplasm or extracellular space , His18 becomes deprotonated , which decreases afﬁnity for insulin and enhances misfolding to promote amyloid ﬁbril formation and cytotoxicity . pH SENSORS IN PATHOGENS The pH - dependent dynamic structure of many bacterial and viral proteins is well characterized , and examples highlight many principles of posttranslational modiﬁcation by protons , including allostery , speciﬁcity , and cooperativity . A mechanism shared by bacterial toxins and enveloped and nonenveloped viruses is spatial and temporal disassembly to transit host cells membranes . Most common is disassembly at endosomal membranes , which is triggered by acidic pH . One example is the anthrax toxin component PA63 , which undergoes a dramatic acidic pH - induced conformational change in the endosomal compartment . Protonation in the loop between β 2 and β 3 of PA63 causes structural reorganization and formation of a pore required for translocation of anthrax toxin subunits to the cytosol ( 157 ) . Other toxins with conﬁrmed pH - induced confor - mational changes include diphtheria toxin ( 106 , 114 ) , botulinum toxin ( 124 ) , and cholera toxin B ( 31 ) . Here , we describe well - characterized pH - regulated structural changes necessary for the function of three viral proteins , hemagglutinin and the M2 pump in inﬂuenza virus and the Gag MA proteins in HIV . Hemagglutinin The inﬂuenza glycoprotein hemagglutinin ( HA ) mediates receptor binding and membrane fusion and is an example of cooperativity in pH sensing . Pathogenesis of the enveloped inﬂuenza virus that causes seasonal ﬂu requires dramatic structural changes of HA driven by transition from neutral to acidic pH ( 15 ) . The precursor form HA 0 contains protease cleavage sites to generate the subunits HA 1 and HA 2 that form protein complexes on the surface of the inﬂuenza virus . 302 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 Human IAPP Rat IAPP Rat IAPP Arg18His b a i ii iii Increased pH Aggregation Misfolding , amyloidformation H + iv Human IAPP Propensity for fibrilation High Low Hexapeptides predicted to form fibrils – 20 . 0 – 23 . 0 – 25 . 0 – 26 . 0 – 15 . 0 k c a l m o l – 1 1 11 21 31 – 20 . 0 – 23 . 0 – 25 . 0 – 15 . 0 k c a l m o l – 1 1 11 21 31 KCNTATCATQRLANFLVHSSNNLGPVLPPTNVGSNTY – 20 . 0 – 23 . 0 – 25 . 0 – 15 . 0 k c a l m o l – 1 1 11 21 31 KCNTATCATQRLANFLVHSSNNFGAILSSTNVGSNTY KCNTATCATQRLANFLVRSSNNLGPVLPPTNVGSNTY Figure 5 Structural regulation of human islet amyloid polypeptide protein ( IAPP ) by pH . ( a ) IAPP sequences and segment propensity for ﬁbril formation . The predicted energy for ﬁbrillation of every six - residue segment of human IAPP , rat IAPP , and rat IAPP Arg18His is shown . Warmer colors represent a greater propensity for ﬁbrillation , with red histogram bars representing hexapeptides that are predicted to form ﬁbrils . Owing to variations in the sequence , human IAPP has a much higher propensity to form ﬁbrils than mouse IAPP does . Mutation of Arg18 to His increases the propensity of rat IAPP to form ﬁbrils . Graphs were generated using ZipperDB ( http : / / services . mbi . ucla . edu / zipperdb / ) ( 41 ) and modiﬁed from Reference 153 . ( b ) Potential model of pH - dependent amyloid formation by IAPP . ( i ) Human IAPP , located in the insulin secretory granules , is bound to insulin β - chain ( not shown ) or to the membrane surface in an extended kinked helix conformation . ( ii ) As IAPP is released from the acidic environment of the vesicle to the neutral pH of the cytoplasm or extracellular space , His18 becomes deprotonated , weakening the insulin – human IAPP interaction and promoting insertion of human IAPP into the membrane by inducing a change in conformation . Membrane - associated human IAPP ( iii ) aggregates and ( iv ) undergoes further conformational changes leading to the formation of β - sheet - rich amyloid ﬁbrils . Low pH structure : 2kb8 ( 103 ) . Neutral pH structure : 2l86 ( 97 ) . In both structures , the N terminus is located at the bottom of the ﬁgure . Figure adapted from References 97 and 150 . www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 303 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 HA 1 is important for recognition of sialic acid receptors but also keeps HA 2 in a prestressed conformation until exposure to acidic pH , which induces a large conformational change in HA 2 to drive membrane fusion ( 21 ) . Native HA is a trimer , with HA 1 and HA 2 linked by a disulﬁde bond . The C terminus of HA 2 is anchored in the viral membrane , and a triple coiled - coil formation of the helical segments C and D confers formation of a homotrimer of HA 2 . At neutral pH , helix A packs against segments C and D connected by a 20 - residue loop B ( 149 ) and the hydrophobic N terminus of helix A , which contains the fusion peptide , is buried within the overall structure ( Figure 6 a ) . However , at acidic pH , loop B adopts a helical structure that induces a change in the orientation of helix A from antiparallel to the end of a now elongated helix comprising A , B , and C ( 15 ) . With this structural rearrangement , the fusion peptide moves 100 ˚A and drives insertion of the fusion peptide into the host cell mem - brane ( Figure 6 a ) . Another consequence is that helical segment D now packs against the triple - stranded coiled coil , producing a new hydrophobic core that stabilizes this conformation . The HA 2 C - terminal helix H close to the viral membrane transitions becomes unstructured , which gives the HA complex the necessary ﬂexibility for membrane fusion ( 15 ) . These conformational changes require cooperativity in pH regulation by histidine - rich patches throughout HA 1 and HA 2 ( patch 1 includes HA 1 residues His18 and His38 and HA 2 residue His111 ; patch 2 includes HA 1 residues His47 , His275 , His / Lys285 , His298 , Lys46 , and Lys50 ) that are highly conserved despite a high viral mutagenesis rate ( 129 ) . Protonation of these histidines disrupts a number of contacts between HA 1 and HA 2 , as well as an interaction of HA 1 histidine residues with a basic region at the base of the globular domain . Although the fusion conformation of HA 2 is thermodynamically favored , interactions with HA 1 maintain HA 2 in a metastable prefusion conformation that is relieved at low pH . In the absence of HA 1 , the HA 2 domain spontaneously adopts the fusion conformation at neutral pH ( 22 , 23 ) . M2 Pump The inﬂuenza virus also expresses a pH - sensitive proton channel—the M2 pump , which is a splice variant of mRNA encoding the matrix ( M ) protein . Formation of a homotetramer of the 96 - amino - acid polypeptide M2 generates a minimalistic proton - selective channel activated by cooperative proton posttranslational modiﬁcations in the host cell endosome to acidify the virion for virus release ( 120 , 131 ) . Assembly and activity are regulated by the protonation state of −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Figure 6 Low pH induces a large conformational change of the inﬂuenza HA 2 protein ( only one monomer is shown ) . ( a ) The structure of prefusion complex ( left ) of HA 1 ( gold , PDB ID : 2hmg ) and HA 2 ( multicolored , PDB ID : 1htm ) and HA 2 at the fusion pH ( right ) structure is shown as schematic representations . In the prefusion complex , HA 2 has a metastable conformation and HA 1 acts as a clamp to keep HA 2 in this conformation . The hydrophobic fusion peptide ( highlighted in orange ) is buried in a hydrophobic core distant from the tip of the protein complex . Low pH leads to protonation of several charged residues throughout HA 1 and HA 2 , and HA 1 dissociates partly . This leads to a spontaneous conformational change of region B ( magenta ) that becomes an α - helix to form a new continuous helix comprising A ( blue ) , B , and C ( red ) . The fusion peptide moves ∼ 100 ˚A from the core to the tip for insertion into the target membrane . Helix D ( cyan ) now packs against helix A , and a new hydrophobic core is formed . The C terminus moves more toward the new N terminus and has more ﬂexibility necessary for membrane fusion . ( b ) Schematic representation showing multimerization events of HIV Gag and MA proteins as a function of pH . Decreasing pH promotes myristoyl exposure membrane targeting and formation of multimers of both Gag and MA proteins , critical mediators for HIV assembly . Figure reprinted with permission from Reference 33 . Abbreviations : MA , matrix ; CA , capsid ; NC , nucleocapsid . 304 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 a single histidine residue ( His37 ) in the transmembrane ( TM ) domain of each M2 monomer ( 16 ) . When the M2 pump is assembled in a lipid bilayer , the pK a values of these four histidines change to 8 . 2 , 8 . 2 , 6 . 3 , and < 5 . 0 , with the third imidazole ring crucial for channel activation ( 57 ) . Recent structural studies using solid - state NMR spectroscopy identiﬁed low pH ( pH 4 . 5 ) and high pH ( pH 8 . 5 ) states of the M2 pump ( 56 ) . At high pH , the four histidines are neutral ( 57 ) and their imidazole rings pack in an edge - face stacked fashion , creating an electron - rich region HA2 C HA2 C Neutral pH Basic pH NC MA CA Acidic pH A B Exposureto low pH a b D C HA 2 N Target membrane Viral membrane HA 2 C Viral membrane Influenza hemagglutinin C D HA 2 C HA 2 N A B HA 1 HA 2 Membrane association of HIV Gag / MA HA 2 www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 305 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 that prevents formation of a hydrogen - bonded water chain and disrupts Grotthuss hopping ( 56 ) . At low pH , three of the four histidines are protonated and the imidazolium rings repel each other , causing backbone conformational changes that result in a wider pore . In this model , water molecules in the C - terminal part of the pore are protonated after proper alignment with charged imidazoliums , which then ﬂip back to bind another proton . Microsecond reorientations of the histidine actively transport protons into the viral interior . Here , cooperative protonation of histidines leads to activation of the M2 pump by requiring a proton threshold determined by the pK a value of the third histidine present in the assembled pump . Gag and Matrix Proteins HIV expresses a Gag protein that has protonation - induced allosteric unmasking of an N - terminal myristoyl moiety ( 33 ) . Assembly of the polyprotein HIV Gag at punctate sites on the plasma or endosomal membrane is necessary for the formation of immature virions . Gag is cleaved by viral proteases to generate the proteins matrix ( MA ) , capsid ( CA ) , nucleocapsid ( NC ) , spacer peptides 1 and 2 , and P6 during or soon after budding . Subsequently , these proteins reorganize and intrinsically form virus - like particles . Myristoylation is required but not sufﬁcient for targeting Gag and MA to the membrane ( 14 , 25 ) and requires a cluster of conserved basic residues ( 158 ) . Gag and MA proteins can expose or sequester the myristoyl moiety , similar to hisactophilin as described above . The pH - dependent myristoyl switch requires the conserved histidine residue His89 , which forms a salt bridge with Glu12 when protonated . Deprotonation destabilizes the salt bridge , increases sequestration of the myristoyl moiety by MA , and leads to monomer formation of MA ( Figure 6 b ) . Importantly , mutation of His89 impairs correct targeting of Gag and MA and signiﬁcantly reduces virus production ( 36 ) . As a critical mediator of HIV - 1 virus assembly ( 52 ) , Gag and MA could be considered a coincidence detector because , in addition to pH - dependent myristoyl exposure , their function is also regulated by binding to plasma membrane PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , oligomerization of MA , the presence of CA , and calmodulin binding ( 38 ) . ENGINEERING pH - SENSITIVE SWITCHES Structural design principles we learn from understanding the biology of endogenous pH sen - sors can be applied to engineering pH - sensitive switches . Engineered protein or small - molecule switches can use environmental triggers to generate a predicted behavior ( 95 ) , including ligand binding , membrane permeability , and changes in protein stability and lifetime . One important application is drug delivery . A strategy currently under intensive investigation is exploiting pH changes during the process of endocytosis to facilitate the escape of biological therapeutics from the endosome into the cytosol ( 142 ) . To exploit the trigger of pH i dynamics or changes in pH between subcellular compartments , engineering changes in the ionization state of surface residues is a feasible approach that has been used for many applications . More difﬁcult is designing changes in the pK a value and ionization state of buried residues , although recent evidence with the E . coli protein thioredoxin ( 107 ) shows this can also be achieved . However , because the pK a value of residues is highly dependent on the structural environment , predicting the sensitivity of ionizable groups to physiological pH is chal - lenging , even with sufﬁcient structural or simulation data . One solution to this challenge is using a combinatorial histidine library , as recently described for sampling every possible combination of histidine and wild - type residues in a model anti - RNase A single - domain VHH antibody ( 95 ) . The majority of validated pH - sensitive engineered switches involve histidines , although target - ing modiﬁcation of phosphorylated residues such as Tyr ( 83 , 92 , 135 ) can be achieved , particularly 306 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 because the pK a value of phosphorylated serine , threonine , and tyrosine is generally near neutral . Switches using residues that are normally uncharged at physiological pH have also been gener - ated , such as amphiphilic peptides rich in Glu and Leu designed to confer pH - dependent transit in different membrane compartments ( 71 ) . A few examples of generated histidine switches include a modiﬁed cytokine granulocyte colony - stimulating factor to alter its endosomal trafﬁcking and increase its half - life and efﬁcacy ( 118 ) , an interleukin receptor antibody to retain antigen binding in acidic compartments ( 59 ) , and a Lys → His iso - 1 - cytochrome c mutant to increase the electron transfer gate ( 5 ) . Switches engineered to respond to the dysregulated pH in disease have been developed for direct therapeutic efﬁcacy or for therapeutic targeting and stability . Most common are switches designed for the more acidic extracellular pH and more alkaline pH i of cancer cells . A number of peptides have been developed to exploit the low extracellular pH in tumors for site - speciﬁc drug delivery . Examples include soluble pH ( low ) insertion peptides ( pHLIPs ) , which fold and insert across a membrane to form a stable transmembrane α - helix under acidic conditions ( 2 , 152 ) , and GALA , a pH - responsive peptide that converts from a random coil to an amphipathic α - helix at acidic pH to bind bilayer membranes ( 76 ) . Engineered pH - responsive substrates such as polymers ( 122 , 123 , 155 ) and lipid micelles ( 63 ) have also been used as a strategy to release carried drugs at sites of tumor or intracellular vesicle acidity . Although therapeutic approaches to alter pH sensing by endogenous proteins have not been reported , one example would be a strategy to inhibit the pH - dependent activation of coﬁlin in alkaline cancer cells to limit metastatic progression . Albeit technically challenging , approaches such as this may be feasible as we attain an increased understanding of how protonation acts as a posttranslational modiﬁcation to regulate protein function . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . How physiological changes in intracellular and extracellular pH regulate protein func - tions is best understood at the molecular level by considering protonation as a re - versible posttranslational modiﬁcation , analogous to phosphorylation , methylation , and ubiquitination . 2 . Signaling speciﬁcity by proton posttranslational modiﬁcation is achieved by only a mi - nority of sites in selective proteins termed pH sensors that titrate within the physiological pHrange . Inadditiontospeciﬁcity , modesofregulationbyposttranslationalmodiﬁcation include allostery , coincidence detection , and cooperativity . 3 . Structure - based evidence is emerging for how proton posttranslational modiﬁcation af - fects dynamic protein conformations to regulate activity , binding afﬁnity , stability , and localization . 4 . With dysregulated pH being an enabling feature of many diseases and pathologies , en - gineered pH - sensitive switches that target proton posttranslational modiﬁcation offer therapeutic promise . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 307 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankmembersoftheDianeBarberandtheTorstenWittmanngroupsforhelpfulsuggestions ; Bree Grillo - Hill for help creating Figure 2 ; Jamil S . Saad for providing the HIV Gag and MA proteins graphic ( Figure 6 b ) . Work on the structure and function of actin - binding pH sensors was supported by a Research Fellowship of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( SCHO 1410 / 1 - 1 ) to A . S . , a Canadian Institutes of Health Research Postdoctoral Fellowship to B . A . W . , and National Institutes of Health grant GM58642 to D . L . B . M . P . J . is a consultant to Schrodinger LLC . We apologize to those in the ﬁeld whose work we were unable to cite because of space limitations . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Alexov E , Mehler EL , Baker N , Baptista AM , Huang Y , et al . 2011 . Progress in the prediction of pKa values in proteins . Proteins 79 : 3260 – 75 2 . Andreev OA , Engelman DM , Reshetnyak YK . 2010 . pH - sensitive membrane peptides ( pHLIPs ) as a novel class of delivery agents . Mol . Membr . Biol . 27 : 341 – 52 3 . AndrianantoandroE , PollardTD . 2006 . Mechanismofactinﬁlamentturnoverbyseveringandnucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 : 13 – 23 4 . Antonyuk SV , Trevitt CR , Strange RW , Jackson GS , Sangar D , et al . 2009 . Crystal structure of human prion protein bound to a therapeutic antibody . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 2554 – 58 5 . Baddam S , Bowler BE . 2005 . Conformationally gated electron transfer in iso - 1 - cytochrome c : engineer - ing the rate of a conformational switch . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 127 : 9702 – 3 6 . BaeSH , LegnameG , SerbanA , PrusinerSB , WrightPE , DysonHJ . 2009 . Prionproteinswithpathogenic and protective mutations show similar structure and dynamics . Biochemistry 48 : 8120 – 28 7 . Baird FE , Pinilla - Tenas JJ , Ogilvie WL , Ganapathy V , Hundal HS , Taylor PM . 2006 . Evidence for allosteric regulation of pH - sensitive System A ( SNAT2 ) and System N ( SNAT5 ) amino acid transporter activity involving a conserved histidine residue . Biochem . J . 397 : 369 – 75 8 . Behrisch A , Dietrich C , Noegel AA , Schleicher M , Sackmann E . 1995 . The actin - binding protein his - actophilin binds in vitro to partially charged membranes and mediates actin coupling to membranes . Biochemistry 34 : 15182 – 90 9 . Beltrao P , Alban ` ese V , Kenner LR , Swaney DL , Burlingame A , et al . 2012 . Systematic functional prior - itization of protein posttranslational modiﬁcations . Cell 150 : 413 – 25 10 . Bernstein BW , Bamburg JR . 2010 . ADF / coﬁlin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 20 : 187 – 95 11 . Boron WF . 2004 . Regulation of intracellular pH . Adv . Physiol . Educ . 28 : 160 – 79 12 . Brender JR , Hartman K , Reid KR , Kennedy RT , Ramamoorthy A . 2008 . A single mutation in the nonamyloidogenic region of islet amyloid polypeptide greatly reduces toxicity . Biochemistry 47 : 12680 – 88 13 . Brender JR , Lee EL , Hartman K , Wong PT , Ramamoorthy A , et al . 2011 . Biphasic effects of insulin on islet amyloid polypeptide membrane disruption . Biophys . J . 100 : 685 – 92 14 . Bryant M , Ratner L . 1990 . Myristoylation - dependent replication and assembly of human immunodeﬁ - ciency virus 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 : 523 – 27 15 . Bullough PA , Hughson FM , Skehel JJ , Wiley DC . 1994 . Structure of inﬂuenza haemagglutinin at the pH of membrane fusion . Nature 371 : 37 – 43 16 . Cady SD , Luo W , Hu F , Hong M . 2009 . Structure and function of the inﬂuenza A M2 proton channel . Biochemistry 48 : 7356 – 64 17 . Campos SR , Machuqueiro M , Baptista AM . 2010 . Constant - pH molecular dynamics simulations reveal a β - rich form of the human prion protein . J . Phys . Chem . B 114 : 12692 – 700 18 . Cardone RA , Casavola V , Reshkin SJ . 2005 . The role of disturbed pH dynamics and the Na + / H + exchanger in metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 5 : 786 – 95 19 . Casey J , Grinstein S , Orlowski J . 2010 . Sensors and regulators of intracellular pH . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 50 – 61 20 . Chan P , Warwicker J . 2009 . Evidence for the adaptation of protein pH - dependence to subcellular pH . BMC Biol . 7 : 69 308 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 21 . Chen J , Lee KH , Steinhauer DA , Stevens DJ , Skehel JJ , Wiley DC . 1998 . Structure of the hemagglutinin precursorcleavagesite , adeterminantofinﬂuenzapathogenicityandtheoriginofthelabileconformation . Cell 95 : 409 – 17 22 . Chen J , Skehel JJ , Wiley DC . 1999 . N - and C - terminal residues combine in the fusion - pH inﬂuenza hemagglutinin HA 2 subunit to form an N cap that terminates the triple - stranded coiled coil . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 8967 – 72 23 . Chen J , Wharton SA , Weissenhorn W , Calder LJ , Hughson FM , et al . 1995 . A soluble domain of the membrane - anchoring chain of inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin ( HA 2 ) folds in Escherichia coli into the low - pH - induced conformation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 : 12205 – 9 24 . CooperGJ , WillisAC , ClarkA , TurnerRC , SimRB , ReidKB . 1987 . Puriﬁcationandcharacterizationof a peptide from amyloid - rich pancreases of type 2 diabetic patients . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 84 : 8628 – 32 25 . Copeland NG , Jenkins NA , Nexo B , Schultz AM , Rein A , et al . 1988 . Poorly expressed endogenous ecotropic provirus of DBA / 2 mice encodes a mutant Pr65gag protein that is not myristylated . J . Virol . 62 : 479 – 87 26 . CritchleyDR . 2009 . Biochemicalandstructuralpropertiesoftheintegrin - associatedcytoskeletalprotein talin . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 38 : 235 – 54 27 . Cukierman S . 2006 . Et tu , Grotthuss ! and other unﬁnished stories . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1757 : 876 – 85 28 . DeMarco ML , Daggett V . 2005 . Local environmental effects on the structure of the prion protein . C . R . Biol . 328 : 847 – 62 29 . DiNittoJP , DelpratoA , GabeLeeMT , CroninTC , HuangS , etal . 2007 . Structuralbasisandmechanism of autoregulation in 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent Grp1 family Arf GTPase exchange factors . Mol . Cell 28 : 569 – 83 30 . Donaldson JG , Jackson CL . 2011 . ARF family G proteins and their regulators : roles in membrane transport , development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 362 – 75 31 . Falnes PO , Sandvig K . 2000 . Penetration of protein toxins into cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 407 – 13 32 . Finzel BC , Clancy LL , Holland DR , Muchmore SW , Watenpaugh KD , Einspahr HM . 1989 . Crystal structure of recombinant human interleukin - 1 β at 2 . 0 ˚A resolution . J . Mol . Biol . 209 : 779 – 91 33 . Fledderman EL , Fujii K , Ghanam RH , Waki K , Prevelige PE , et al . 2010 . Myristate exposure in the human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 matrix protein is modulated by pH . Biochemistry 49 : 9551 – 62 34 . Frantz C , Barreiro G , Dominguez L , Chen X , Eddy R , et al . 2008 . Coﬁlin is a pH sensor for actin free barbed end formation : role of phosphoinositide binding . J . Cell Biol . 183 : 865 – 79 35 . Frantz C , Karydis A , Nalbant P , Hahn KM , Barber DL . 2007 . Positive feedback between Cdc42 activity and H + efﬂux by the Na - H exchanger NHE1 for polarity of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 403 – 10 36 . Freed EO , Orenstein JM , Buckler - White AJ , Martin MA . 1994 . Single amino acid changes in the human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 matrix protein block virus particle production . J . Virol . 68 : 5311 – 20 37 . Garcia - Moreno B . 2009 . Adaptations of proteins to cellular and subcellular pH . J . Biol . 8 : 98 38 . Ghanam RH , Samal AB , Fernandez TF , Saad JS . 2012 . Role of the HIV - 1 matrix protein in Gag intracellular trafﬁcking and targeting to the plasma membrane for virus assembly . Front . Microbiol . 3 : 55 39 . Giardina B , Mosca D , De Rosa MC . 2004 . The Bohr effect of haemoglobin in vertebrates : an example of molecular adaptation to different physiological requirements . Acta Physiol . Scand . 182 : 229 – 44 40 . Gingras AR , Bate N , Goult BT , Hazelwood L , Canestrelli I , et al . 2008 . The structure of the C - terminal actin - binding domain of talin . EMBO J . 27 : 458 – 69 41 . Goldschmidt L , Teng PK , Riek R , Eisenberg D . 2010 . Identifying the amylome , proteins capable of forming amyloid - like ﬁbrils . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 3487 – 92 42 . Gorbatyuk VY , Nosworthy NJ , Robson SA , Bains NP , Maciejewski MW , et al . 2006 . Mapping the phosphoinositide - binding site on chick coﬁlin explains how PIP2 regulates the coﬁlin - actin interaction . Mol . Cell 24 : 511 – 22 43 . Gorfe AA , Caﬂisch A . 2005 . Functional plasticity in the substrate binding site of β - secretase . Structure 13 : 1487 – 98 44 . Habazettl J , Gondol D , Wiltscheck R , Otlewski J , Schleicher M , Holak TA . 1992 . Structure of hisac - tophilin is similar to interleukin - 1 β and ﬁbroblast growth factor . Nature 359 : 855 – 58 45 . Hammer ND , Wang X , McGufﬁe BA , Chapman MR . 2008 . Amyloids : friend or foe ? J . Alzheimer’s Dis . 13 : 407 – 19 www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 309 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 46 . Hanakam F , Albrecht R , Eckerskorn C , Matzner M , Gerisch G . 1996 . Myristoylated and non - myristoylatedformsofthepHsensorproteinhisactophilinII : intracellularshuttlingtoplasmamembrane and nucleus monitored in real time by a fusion with green ﬂuorescent protein . EMBO J . 15 : 2935 – 43 47 . HanakamF , GerischG , LotzS , AltT , SeeligA . 1996 . BindingofhisactophilinIandIItolipidmembranes is controlled by a pH - dependent myristoyl - histidine switch . Biochemistry 35 : 11036 – 44 48 . Harguindey S , Reshkin SJ , Orive G , Arranz JL , Anitua E . 2007 . Growth and trophic factors , pH and the Na + / H + exchangerinAlzheimer’sdisease , otherneurodegenerativediseasesandcancer : newtherapeutic possibilities and potential dangers . Curr . Alzheimer Res . 4 : 53 – 65 49 . Hatanaka H , Ogura K , Moriyama K , Ichikawa S , Yahara I , Inagaki F . 1996 . Tertiary structure of destrin and structural similarity between two actin - regulating protein families . Cell 85 : 1047 – 55 50 . He J , Haney RM , Vora M , Verkhusha VV , Stahelin RV , Kutateladze TG . 2008 . Molecular mechanism of membrane targeting by the GRP1 PH domain . J . Lipid Res . 49 : 1807 – 15 51 . He J , Scott JL , Heroux A , Roy S , Lenoir M , et al . 2011 . Molecular basis of phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate and ARF1 GTPase recognition by the FAPP1 pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 18650 – 57 52 . Hearps AC , Jans DA . 2007 . Regulating the functions of the HIV - 1 matrix protein . AIDS Res . Hum . Retrovir . 23 : 341 – 46 53 . Higham CE , Jaikaran ET , Fraser PE , Gross M , Clark A . 2000 . Preparation of synthetic human islet amyloid polypeptide ( IAPP ) in a stable conformation to enable study of conversion to amyloid - like ﬁbrils . FEBS Lett . 470 : 55 – 60 54 . Hom RA , Vora M , Regner M , Subach OM , Cho W , et al . 2007 . pH - dependent binding of the Epsin ENTHdomainandtheAP180ANTHdomaintoPI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containingbilayers . J . Mol . Biol . 373 : 412 – 23 55 . HosszuLL , TattumMH , JonesS , TrevittCR , WellsMA , etal . 2010 . TheH187Rmutationofthehuman prion protein induces conversion of recombinant prion protein to the PrP ( Sc ) - like form . Biochemistry 49 : 8729 – 38 56 . Hu F , Luo W , Hong M . 2010 . Mechanisms of proton conduction and gating in inﬂuenza M2 proton channels from solid - state NMR . Science 330 : 505 – 8 57 . Hu J , Fu R , Nishimura K , Zhang L , Zhou HX , et al . 2006 . Histidines , heart of the hydrogen ion channel from inﬂuenza A virus : toward an understanding of conductance and proton selectivity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 6865 – 70 58 . HunteC , ScrepantiE , VenturiM , RimonA , PadanE , MichelH . 2005 . StructureofaNa + / H + antiporter and insights into mechanism of action and regulation by pH . Nature 435 : 1197 – 202 59 . Igawa T , Ishii S , Tachibana T , Maeda A , Higuchi Y , et al . 2010 . Antibody recycling by engineered pH - dependent antigen binding improves the duration of antigen neutralization . Nat . Biotechnol . 28 : 1203 – 7 60 . Jansen S , Collins A , Yang C , Rebowski G , Svitkina T , Dominguez R . 2011 . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament bundling by fascin . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 30087 – 96 61 . Ji CG , Zhang JZ . 2011 . Understanding the molecular mechanism of enzyme dynamics of ribonuclease A through protonation / deprotonation of HIS48 . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 133 : 17727 – 37 62 . JiangP , WeiL , PervushinK , MuY . 2010 . pH - dependentinteractionsofhumanisletamyloidpolypeptide segments with insulin studied by replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations . J . Phys . Chem . B 114 : 10176 – 83 63 . Karve S , Bandekar A , Ali MR , Sofou S . 2010 . The pH - dependent association with cancer cells of tun - able functionalized lipid vesicles with encapsulated doxorubicin for high cell - kill selectivity . Biomaterials 31 : 4409 – 16 64 . Karydis A , Jimenez - Vidal M , Denker SP , Barber DL . 2009 . Mislocalized scaffolding by the Na - H exchanger NHE1 dominantly inhibits ﬁbronectin production and TGF - β activation . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 2327 – 36 65 . Khaled AR , Kim K , Hofmeister R , Muegge K , Durum SK . 1999 . Withdrawal of IL - 7 induces Bax translocation from cytosol to mitochondria through a rise in intracellular pH . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 : 14476 – 81 66 . Knaus KJ , Morillas M , Swietnicki W , Malone M , Surewicz WK , Yee VC . 2001 . Crystal structure of the human prion protein reveals a mechanism for oligomerization . Nat . Struct . Biol . 8 : 770 – 74 310 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 67 . Knight JD , Williamson JA , Miranker AD . 2008 . Interaction of membrane - bound islet amyloid polypep - tide with soluble and crystalline insulin . Protein Sci . 17 : 1850 – 56 68 . Kooijman EE , King KE , Gangoda M , Gericke A . 2009 . Ionization properties of phosphatidylinositol polyphosphates in mixed model membranes . Biochemistry 48 : 9360 – 71 69 . KundrotasPJ , AlexovE . 2006 . Electrostaticpropertiesofprotein - proteincomplexes . Biophys . J . 91 : 1724 – 36 70 . Landry CR , Levy ED , Michnick SW . 2009 . Weak functional constraints on phosphoproteomes . Trends Genet . 25 : 193 – 97 71 . Lee HM , Chmielewski J . 2005 . Liposomal cargo unloading induced by pH - sensitive peptides . J . Pept . Res . 65 : 355 – 63 72 . Lee SA , Eyeson R , Cheever ML , Geng J , Verkhusha VV , et al . 2005 . Targeting of the FYVE domain to endosomal membranes is regulated by a histidine switch . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 13052 – 57 73 . Leithe E , Rivedal E . 2007 . Ubiquitination of gap junction proteins . J . Membr . Biol . 217 : 43 – 51 74 . Leyman S , Sidani M , Ritsma L , Waterschoot D , Eddy R , et al . 2009 . Unbalancing the phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - coﬁlin interaction impairs cell steering . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 4509 – 23 75 . Li S , Sato S , Yang X , Preisig PA , Alpern RJ . 2004 . Pyk2 activation is integral to acid stimulation of sodium / hydrogen exchanger 3 . J . Clin . Investig . 114 : 1782 – 89 76 . Li W , Nicol F , Szoka FC Jr . 2004 . GALA : a designed synthetic pH - responsive amphipathic peptide with applications in drug and gene delivery . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 56 : 967 – 85 77 . Lietzke S , Bose S , Cronin T , Klarlund J , Chawla A , et al . 2000 . Structural basis of 3 - phosphoinositide recognition by pleckstrin homology domains . Mol . Cell 6 : 385 – 94 78 . Liu B , Westhead DR , Boyett MR , Warwicker J . 2007 . Modelling the pH - dependent properties of Kv1 potassium channels . J . Mol . Biol . 368 : 328 – 35 79 . Lundback T , van Den Berg S , Hard T . 2000 . Sequence - speciﬁc DNA binding by the glucocorticoid receptorDNA - binding domainis linked to a salt - dependent histidine protonation . Biochemistry 39 : 8909 – 16 80 . Maciver SK , Pope BJ , Whytock S , Weeds AG . 1998 . The effect of two actin depolymerizing factors ( ADF / coﬁlins ) on actin ﬁlament turnover : pH sensitivity of F - actin binding by human ADF , but not of Acanthamoeba actophorin . Eur . J . Biochem . 256 : 388 – 97 81 . Magalhaes MA , Larson DR , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Gil - Henn H , et al . 2011 . Cortactin phos - phorylation regulates cell invasion through a pH - dependent pathway . J . Cell Biol . 195 : 903 – 20 82 . Mandell DJ , Chorny I , Groban ES , Wong SE , Levine E , et al . 2007 . Strengths of hydrogen bonds involving phosphorylated amino acid side chains . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 129 : 820 – 27 83 . Marttila AT , Hytonen VP , Laitinen OH , Bayer EA , Wilchek M , Kulomaa MS . 2003 . Mutation of the important Tyr - 33 residue of chicken avidin : functional and structural consequences . Biochem . J . 369 : 249 – 54 84 . Mason AC , Jensen JH . 2008 . Protein - protein binding is often associated with changes in protonation state . Proteins 71 : 81 – 91 85 . Matsuyama S , Llopis J , Deveraux QL , Tsien RY , Reed JC . 2000 . Changes in intramitochondrial and cytosolic pH : early events that modulate caspase activation during apoptosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 318 – 25 86 . McLachlan GD , Cahill SM , Girvin ME , Almo SC . 2007 . Acid - induced equilibrium folding intermediate of human platelet proﬁlin . Biochemistry 46 : 6931 – 43 87 . Meyer RK , McKinley MP , Bowman KA , Braunfeld MB , Barry RA , Prusiner SB . 1986 . Separation and properties of cellular and scrapie prion proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 83 : 2310 – 14 88 . Mishra R , Geyer M , Winter R . 2009 . NMR spectroscopic investigation of early events in IAPP amyloid ﬁbril formation . Chembiochem 10 : 1769 – 72 89 . Mitra RC , Zhang Z , Alexov E . 2011 . In silico modeling of pH - optimum of protein - protein binding . Proteins 79 : 925 – 36 90 . Mongan J , Case DA . 2005 . Biomolecular simulations at constant pH . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 15 : 157 – 63 91 . Mongan J , Case DA , McCammon JA . 2004 . Constant pH molecular dynamics in generalized Born implicit solvent . J . Comput . Chem . 25 : 2038 – 48 www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 311 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 92 . Morag E , Bayer EA , Wilchek M . 1996 . Reversibility of biotin - binding by selective modiﬁcation of tyrosine in avidin . Biochem . J . 316 ( Pt . 1 ) : 193 – 99 93 . MoseleyJB , OkadaK , BalcerHI , KovarDR , PollardTD , GoodeBL . 2006 . Twinﬁlinisanactin - ﬁlament - severing protein and promotes rapid turnover of actin structures in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 1547 – 57 94 . Murphy RM . 2002 . Peptide aggregation in neurodegenerative disease . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 4 : 155 – 74 95 . MurtaughML , FanningSW , SharmaTM , TerryAM , HornJR . 2011 . Acombinatorialhistidinescanning library approach to engineer highly pH - dependent protein switches . Protein Sci . 20 : 1619 – 31 96 . MusgaardM , ThogersenL , SchiottB . 2011 . Protonationstatesofimportantacidicresiduesinthecentral Ca 2 + ion binding sites of the Ca 2 + - ATPase : a molecular modeling study . Biochemistry 50 : 11109 – 20 97 . Nanga RP , Brender JR , Vivekanandan S , Ramamoorthy A . 2011 . Structure and membrane orientation of IAPP in its natively amidated form at physiological pH in a membrane environment . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1808 : 2337 – 42 98 . Nanga RP , Brender JR , Xu J , Veglia G , Ramamoorthy A . 2008 . Structures of rat and human islet amyloid polypeptide IAPP ( 1 - 19 ) in micelles by NMR spectroscopy . Biochemistry 47 : 12689 – 97 99 . Narayanan A , Jacobson MP . 2009 . Computational studies of protein regulation by post - translational phosphorylation . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 19 : 156 – 63 100 . Nichols JW , Deamer DW . 1980 . Net proton - hydroxyl permeability of large unilamellar liposomes measured by an acid - base titration technique . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 77 : 2038 – 42 101 . Olkhova E , Hunte C , Screpanti E , Padan E , Michel H . 2006 . Multiconformation continuum electrostat - ics analysis of the NhaA Na + / H + antiporter of Escherichia coli with functional implications . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 2629 – 34 102 . Pan KM , Baldwin M , Nguyen J , Gasset M , Serban A , et al . 1993 . Conversion of α - helices into β - sheets features in the formation of the scrapie prion proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 : 10962 – 66 103 . Patil SM , Xu S , Sheftic SR , Alexandrescu AT . 2009 . Dynamic α - helix structure of micelle - bound human amylin . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 11982 – 91 104 . Peitzsch RM , McLaughlin S . 1993 . Binding of acylated peptides and fatty acids to phospholipid vesicles : pertinence to myristoylated proteins . Biochemistry 32 : 10436 – 43 105 . Pepys MB . 2006 . Amyloidosis . Annu . Rev . Med . 57 : 223 – 41 106 . Perier A , Chassaing A , Raffestin S , Pichard S , Masella M , et al . 2007 . Concerted protonation of key histidines triggers membrane interaction of the diphtheria toxin T domain . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 24239 – 45 107 . Pey AL , Rodriguez - Larrea D , Gavira JA , Garcia - Moreno B , Sanchez - Ruiz JM . 2010 . Modulation of buried ionizable groups in proteins with engineered surface charge . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 132 : 1218 – 19 108 . Pintsch T , Zischka H , Schuster SC . 2002 . Hisactophilin is involved in osmoprotection in Dictyostelium . BMC Biochem . 3 : 10 109 . Pope BJ , Zierler - Gould KM , Kuhne R , Weeds AG , Ball LJ . 2004 . Solution structure of human coﬁlin : actinbinding , pHsensitivity , and relationshiptoactin - depolymerizing factor . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 4840 – 48 110 . Preisig PA . 2007 . The acid - activated signaling pathway : starting with Pyk2 and ending with increased NHE3 activity . Kidney Int . 72 : 1324 – 29 111 . Putney LK , Barber DL . 2003 . Na - H exchange - dependent increase in intracellular pH times G2 / M entry and transition . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 44645 – 49 112 . Rapedius M , Haider S , Browne KF , Shang L , Sansom MS , et al . 2006 . Structural and functional analysis of the putative pH sensor in the Kir1 . 1 ( ROMK ) potassium channel . EMBO Rep . 7 : 611 – 16 113 . Riek R , Hornemann S , Wider G , Billeter M , Glockshuber R , Wuthrich K . 1996 . NMR structure of the mouse prion protein domain PrP ( 121 – 231 ) . Nature 382 : 180 – 82 114 . Rodnin MV , Kyrychenko A , Kienker P , Sharma O , Posokhov YO , et al . 2010 . Conformational switching of the diphtheria toxin T domain . J . Mol . Biol . 402 : 1 – 7 115 . Rossman K , Der C , Sondek J . 2005 . GEF means go : turning on RHO GTPases with guanine nucleotide - exchange factors . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 167 – 80 116 . Russo C , Gao Y , Mancini P , Vanni C , Porotto M , et al . 2001 . Modulation of oncogenic DBL activity by phosphoinositol phosphate binding to pleckstrin homology domain . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 19524 – 31 117 . Sackin H , Nanazashvili M , Palmer LG , Krambis M , Walters DE . 2005 . Structural locus of the pH gate in the Kir1 . 1 inward rectiﬁer channel . Biophys . J . 88 : 2597 – 606 312 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 118 . Sarkar CA , Lowenhaupt K , Horan T , Boone TC , Tidor B , Lauffenburger DA . 2002 . Rational cy - tokine design for increased lifetime and enhanced potency using pH - activated “histidine switching” . Nat . Biotechnol . 20 : 908 – 13 119 . Scheel J , Ziegelbauer K , Kupke T , Humbel BM , Noegel AA , et al . 1989 . Hisactophilin , a histidine - rich actin - binding protein from Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 2832 – 39 120 . Schnell JR , Chou JJ . 2008 . Structure and mechanism of the M2 proton channel of inﬂuenza A virus . Nature 451 : 591 – 95 121 . Schreiber R . 2005 . Ca 2 + signaling , intracellular pH and cell volume in cell proliferation . J . Membr . Biol . 205 : 129 – 37 122 . Seo K , Chung SW , Byun Y , Kim D . 2012 . Paclitaxel loaded nano - aggregates based on pH sensitive polyaspartamide amphiphilic graft copolymers . Int . J . Pharm . 424 : 26 – 32 123 . ShengH , NiuB , SunH . 2009 . Metabolictargetingofcancers : frommolecularmechanismstotherapeutic strategies . Curr . Med . Chem . 16 : 1561 – 87 124 . Simpson LL . 2004 . Identiﬁcation of the major steps in botulinum toxin action . Annu . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 44 : 167 – 93 125 . Smith MT , Meissner J , Esmonde S , Wong HJ , Meiering EM . 2010 . Energetics and mechanisms of folding and ﬂipping the myristoyl switch in the β - trefoil protein , hisactophilin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 20952 – 57 126 . Soppa J . 2010 . Protein acetylation in archaea , bacteria , and eukaryotes . Archaea 2010 : 820681 127 . Srivastava J , Barber DL , Jacobson MP . 2007 . Intracellular pH sensors : design principles and functional signiﬁcance . Physiology 22 : 30 – 39 128 . SrivastavaJ , BarreiroG , GroscurthS , GingrasAR , GoultBT , etal . 2008 . Structuralmodelandfunctional signiﬁcance of pH - dependent talin - actin binding for focal adhesion remodeling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 14436 – 41 129 . Sriwilaijaroen N , Suzuki Y . 2012 . Molecular basis of the structure and function of H1 hemagglutinin of inﬂuenza virus . Proc . Jpn . Acad . Ser . B Phys . Biol . Sci . 88 : 226 – 49 130 . Stock C , Schwab A . 2009 . Protons make tumor cells move like clockwork . Pﬂugers Arch . 458 : 981 – 92 131 . StoufferAL , Acharya R , SalomD , LevineAS , DiCostanzoL , etal . 2008 . Structural basisforthefunction and inhibition of an inﬂuenza virus proton channel . Nature 451 : 596 – 99 132 . Swietach P , Leem CH , Spitzer KW , Vaughan - Jones RD . 2005 . Experimental generation and computa - tional modeling of intracellular pH gradients in cardiac myocytes . Biophys . J . 88 : 3018 – 37 133 . Syntichaki P , Samara C , Tavernarakis N . 2005 . The vacuolar H + - ATPase mediates intracellular acidi - ﬁcation required for neurodegeneration in C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 15 : 1249 – 54 134 . Takeuchi K , Takahashi H , Kawano S , Shimada I . 2007 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of the slowly exchanging pH - dependent conformational rearrangement in KcsA . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 15179 – 86 135 . Tawﬁk DS , Chap R , Eshhar Z , Green BS . 1994 . pH on - off switching of antibody - hapten binding by site - speciﬁc chemical modiﬁcation of tyrosine . Protein Eng . 7 : 431 – 34 136 . Thompson AN , Posson DJ , Parsa PV , Nimigean CM . 2008 . Molecular mechanism of pH sensing in KcsA potassium channels . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 6900 – 5 137 . Tominaga T , Barber DL . 1998 . Na - H exchange acts downstream of RhoA to regulate integrin - induced cell adhesion and spreading . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 : 2287 – 303 138 . Tracz SM , Abedini A , Driscoll M , Raleigh DP . 2004 . Role of aromatic interactions in amyloid formation by peptides derived from human amylin . Biochemistry 43 : 15901 – 8 139 . Tresguerres M , Buck J , Levin LR . 2010 . Physiological carbon dioxide , bicarbonate , and pH sensing . Pﬂugers Arch . 460 : 953 – 64 140 . van der Kamp MW , Daggett V . 2010 . Inﬂuence of pH on the human prion protein : insights into the early steps of misfolding . Biophys . J . 99 : 2289 – 98 141 . van Rheenen J , Song X , van Roosmalen W , Cammer M , Chen X , et al . 2007 . EGF - induced PIP2 hydrolysis releases and activates coﬁlin locally in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 1247 – 59 142 . Varkouhi AK , Scholte M , Storm G , Haisma HJ . 2011 . Endosomal escape pathways for delivery of biologicals . J . Control . Release 151 : 220 – 28 www . annualreviews . org • Modiﬁcation of Proteins by Protonation 313 A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42CH13 - Barber ARI 6 April 2013 16 : 4 143 . Vartiainen MK , Mustonen T , Mattila PK , Ojala PJ , Thesleff I , et al . 2002 . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlins evolved to fulﬁll cell - type - speciﬁc requirements for actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 183 – 94 144 . Veith NM , Plattner H , Stuermer CA , Schulz - Schaeffer WJ , Burkle A . 2009 . Immunolocalisation of PrPSc in scrapie - infected N2a mouse neuroblastoma cells by light and electron microscopy . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 45 – 63 145 . Wallace JA , Shen JK . 2009 . Predicting pKa values with continuous constant pH molecular dynamics . Methods Enzymol . 466 : 455 – 75 146 . Wang F , Sampogna RV , Ware BR . 1989 . pH dependence of actin self - assembly . Biophys . J . 55 : 293 – 98 147 . Webb BA , Chimenti M , Jacobson MP , Barber DL . 2011 . Dysregulated pH : a perfect storm for cancer progression . Nat . Rev . Cancer 11 : 671 – 77 148 . Wei L , Jiang P , Yau YH , Summer H , Shochat SG , et al . 2009 . Residual structure in islet amyloid polypeptide mediates its interactions with soluble insulin . Biochemistry 48 : 2368 – 76 149 . Weis WI , Brunger AT , Skehel JJ , Wiley DC . 1990 . Reﬁnement of the inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin by simulated annealing . J . Mol . Biol . 212 : 737 – 61 150 . Westermark P , Andersson A , Westermark GT . 2011 . Islet amyloid polypeptide , islet amyloid , and diabetes mellitus . Physiol . Rev . 91 : 795 – 826 151 . Westheimer FH . 1987 . Why nature chose phosphates . Science 235 : 1173 – 78 152 . WijesingheD , EngelmanDM , AndreevOA , ReshetnyakYK . 2011 . Tuningapolarmoleculeforselective cytoplasmic delivery by a pH ( low ) insertion peptide . Biochemistry 50 : 10215 – 22 153 . Wiltzius JJ , Landau M , Nelson R , Sawaya MR , Apostol MI , et al . 2009 . Molecular mechanisms for protein - encoded inheritance . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 : 973 – 78 154 . Xiao F , Weng J , Fan K , Wang W . 2010 . Mechanism of Ser88 phosphorylation - induced dimer dissocia - tion in dynein light chain LC8 . J . Phys . Chem . B 114 : 15663 – 72 155 . Xu P , Van Kirk EA , Murdoch WJ , Zhan Y , Isaak DD , et al . 2006 . Anticancer efﬁcacies of cisplatin - releasing pH - responsive nanoparticles . Biomacromolecules 7 : 829 – 35 156 . Yokoyama T , Mizuguchi M , Nabeshima Y , Kusaka K , Yamada T , et al . 2012 . Hydrogen - bond network and pH sensitivity in transthyretin : neutron crystal structure of human transthyretin . J . Struct . Biol . 177 : 283 – 90 157 . YoungJA , CollierRJ . 2007 . Anthraxtoxin : receptorbinding , internalization , poreformation , andtranslo - cation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 : 243 – 65 158 . YuanX , YuX , LeeTH , EssexM . 1993 . MutationsintheN - terminalregionofhumanimmunodeﬁciency virus type 1 matrix protein block intracellular transport of the Gag precursor . J . Virol . 67 : 6387 – 94 159 . Zahn R , Liu A , Luhrs T , Riek R , von Schroetter C , et al . 2000 . NMR solution structure of the human prion protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 145 – 50 160 . Zhao H , Hakala M , Lappalainen P . 2010 . ADF / coﬁlin binds phosphoinositides in a multivalent manner to act as a PIP ( 2 ) - density sensor . Biophys . J . 98 : 2327 – 36 161 . Zimmer J , Doyle DA , Grossmann JG . 2006 . Structural characterization and pH - induced conformational transition of full - length KcsA . Biophys . J . 90 : 1752 – 66 162 . Zimmerle CT , Frieden C . 1988 . Effect of pH on the mechanism of actin polymerization . Biochemistry 27 : 7766 – 72 314 Sch¨onichen et al . A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Annual Review of Biophysics Volume 42 , 2013 Contents Doing Molecular Biophysics : Finding , Naming , and Picturing Signal Within Complexity Jane S . Richardson and David C . Richardson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Structural Biology of the Proteasome Erik Kish - Trier and Christopher P . Hill (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 29 Common Folds and Transport Mechanisms of Secondary Active Transporters Yigong Shi (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 51 Coarse - Graining Methods for Computational Biology Marissa G . Saunders and Gregory A . Voth (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 73 Electrophysiological Characterization of Membrane Transport Proteins Christof Grewer , Armanda Gameiro , Thomas Mager , and Klaus Fendler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 95 Entropy - Enthalpy Compensation : Role and Ramiﬁcations in Biomolecular Ligand Recognition and Design John D . Chodera and David L . Mobley (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 121 Molecular Mechanisms of Drug Action : An Emerging View James M . Sonner and Robert S . Cantor (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 143 The Underappreciated Role of Allostery in the Cellular Network Ruth Nussinov , Chung - Jung Tsai , and Buyong Ma (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 169 Structural Insights into the Evolution of the Adaptive Immune System Lu Deng , Ming Luo , Alejandro Velikovsky , and Roy A . Mariuzza (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 191 Molecular Mechanisms of RNA Interference Ross C . Wilson and Jennifer A . Doudna (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 217 Molecular Trafﬁc Jams on DNA Ilya J . Finkelstein and Eric C . Greene (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 241 vii A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Advances , Interactions , and Future Developments in the CNS , Phenix , and Rosetta Structural Biology Software Systems Paul D . Adams , David Baker , Axel T . Brunger , Rhiju Das , Frank DiMaio , Randy J . Read , David C . Richardson , Jane S . Richardson , and Thomas C . Terwilliger (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 265 Considering Protonation as a Posttranslational Modiﬁcation Regulating Protein Structure and Function Andr´e Sch¨onichen , Bradley A . Webb , Matthew P . Jacobson , and Diane L . Barber (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 289 Energy Functions in De Novo Protein Design : Current Challenges and Future Prospects Zhixiu Li , Yuedong Yang , Jian Zhan , Liang Dai , and Yaoqi Zhou (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 315 Quantitative Modeling of Bacterial Chemotaxis : Signal Ampliﬁcation and Accurate Adaptation Yuhai Tu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 337 Inﬂuences of Membrane Mimetic Environments on Membrane Protein Structures Huan - Xiang Zhou and Timothy A . Cross (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 361 High - Speed AFM and Applications to Biomolecular Systems Toshio Ando , Takayuki Uchihashi , and Noriyuki Kodera (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 393 Super - Resolution in Solution X - Ray Scattering and Its Applications to Structural Systems Biology Robert P . Rambo and John A . Tainer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 415 Molecular Basis of NF - κ B Signaling Johanna Napetschnig and Hao Wu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 443 Regulation of Noise in Gene Expression Alvaro Sanchez , Sandeep Choubey , and Jane Kondev (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 469 Evolution in Microbes Edo Kussell (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 493 Protein Structure Determination by Magic - Angle Spinning Solid - State NMR , and Insights into the Formation , Structure , and Stability of Amyloid Fibrils Gemma Comellas and Chad M . Rienstra (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 515 Structural Studies of RNase P Alfonso Mondrag´on (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 537 On the Universe of Protein Folds Rachel Kolodny , Leonid Pereyaslavets , Abraham O . Samson , and Michael Levitt (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 559 viii Contents A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BB42 - Frontmatter ARI 13 April 2013 7 : 12 Torque Measurement at the Single - Molecule Level Scott Forth , Maxim Y . Sheinin , James Inman , and Michelle D . Wang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 583 Modeling Gene Expression in Time and Space Pau Ru´e and Jordi Garcia - Ojalvo (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 605 Mechanics of Dynamin - Mediated Membrane Fission Sandrine Morlot and Aur´elien Roux (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 629 Nanoconﬁnement and the Strength of Biopolymers Tristan Giesa and Markus J . Buehler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 651 Solid - State NMR of Nanomachines Involved in Photosynthetic Energy Conversion A . Alia , Francesco Buda , Huub J . M . de Groot , and J¨org Matysik (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 675 Index Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 38 – 42 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 701 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biophysics articles may be found at http : / / biophys . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml Contents ix A nnu . R e v . B i ophy s . 2013 . 42 : 289 - 314 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - S a n F r a n c i s c o U C SF on 05 / 21 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .