Probing the Stochastic , Motor - Driven Properties of the Cytoplasm Using Force Spectrum Microscopy Ming Guo , 1 Allen J . Ehrlicher , 1 , 2 , 8 Mikkel H . Jensen , 1 , 3 Malte Renz , 4 Jeffrey R . Moore , 3 Robert D . Goldman , 5 Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz , 4 Frederick C . Mackintosh , 6 and David A . Weitz 1 , 7 , * 1 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 2 Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 3 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , Boston University , Boston , MA 02118 , USA 4 Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA 5 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL 60611 , USA 6 Department of Physics and Astronomy , VU University , 1081 HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands 7 Department of Physics , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 8 Present address : Department of Bioengineering , McGill University , Montreal , H3A 0C3 Canada * Correspondence : weitz @ seas . harvard . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 06 . 051 SUMMARY Molecular motors in cells typically produce highly directed motion ; however , the aggregate , incoherent effect of all active processes also creates randomly ﬂuctuating forces , which drive diffusive - like , non - thermal motion . Here , we introduce force - spec - trum - microscopy ( FSM ) to directly quantify random forces within the cytoplasm of cells and thereby probe stochastic motor activity . This technique com - bines measurements of the random motion of probe particles with independent micromechanical mea - surements of the cytoplasm to quantify the spectrum of force ﬂuctuations . Using FSM , we show that force ﬂuctuations substantially enhance intracellular movement of small and large components . The ﬂuc - tuations are three times larger in malignant cells than in their benign counterparts . We further demonstrate that vimentin acts globally to anchor organelles against randomly ﬂuctuating forces in the cytoplasm , with no effect on their magnitude . Thus , FSM has broad applications for understanding the cytoplasm and its intracellular processes in relation to cell phys - iology in healthy and diseased states . INTRODUCTION The cytoplasm of living cells is not a static environment but is instead subjected to a wide variety of forces ( Howard , 2001 ) . For example , molecular motors such as kinesin and dynein generate forces that directionally transport cargo along micro - tubule tracks , while myosin II motors actively contract actin ﬁl - aments ( Vale , 2003 ) . These active processes all have clearly established functions in the cell , and their individual forces have been precisely quantiﬁed ( Svoboda and Block , 1994 ; Vale , 2003 ) . Collectively , these forces have important conse - quences in the cytoplasm : several motors operating coher - ently can generate large forces for directional transport ( Hendricks et al . , 2012 ; Rai et al . , 2013 ) . On an even larger scale , the cooperative activity of a large number of motors and other active processes collectively drive critical functions at the level of the whole cell , such as division , migration , and contraction ( Doyle and Yamada , 2010 ; Dufreˆne et al . , 2011 ; Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Gundersen and Worman , 2013 ; Heisen - berg and Bellaı¨che , 2013 ) . However , the aggregate effect of all the motors and active processes also contribute an inco - herent background of ﬂuctuating forces , and the ensemble aggregate of the forces from the incoherent effects of all cellular activities is directly associated with the functional efﬁ - ciency and the overall metabolic state of the cell ( Doyle and Yamada , 2010 ) . In the cytoplasm , these ﬂuctuating forces can give rise , for instance , to random motion of vesicles , mito - chondria , and signaling proteins ( Ananthanarayanan et al . , 2013 ; Brangwynne et al . , 2008a ; del Alamo et al . , 2008 ; Ham - mar et al . , 2012 ; Han et al . , 1999 ; Jaqaman et al . , 2011 ; Kyoung and Sheets , 2008 ) and may drive an even broader range of intracellular dynamics . Because the motion that arises from ﬂuctuating forces in the cytoplasm is random , little previous effort has been made to quantify these forces . Indeed , many researchers have inter - preted random cytoplasmic motion as arising primarily from thermally - induced diffusion , not recognizing the role of overall , aggregate forces . The ensemble forces from overall cellular ac - tivity are likely to have a large effect on overall motion within the cytoplasm and would change as the biochemical processes giving rise to these forces are altered during different cell condi - tions . These forces could thus be a critical readout of the dy - namic state of the cell . Because of this , we sought out a direct way to measure aggregate forces within the cytoplasm , aiming to devise methodology for quantifying these forces and testing how they impact different cell states and control motion of cyto - plasmic components . 822 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Toward this end , we introduce force spectrum microscopy ( FSM ) , an approach that probes the frequency dependence of the aggregate , incoherent cytoplasmic forces within a cell . To accomplish this , we combine independent measurements of the intracellular ﬂuctuating movement of injected particles with measurements of the mechanics of the cytoplasm performed with active microrheology using laser tweezers . With these measurements , we determine the temporal spectrum of the ensemble of the random , ﬂuctuating forces , demonstrating that this ubiquitous ﬂuctuating motion in cells is not thermally induced , but is instead a consequence of random forces . We then exploit FSM to probe the intracellular micromechanical behavior of malignant and benign cells , and show that cancer cells exhibit a signiﬁcantly enhanced level of forces , albeit with the same frequency dependence , as predicted by our model . Moreover , we show that these active forces strongly dominate thermal Brownian forces in the cellular interior , impacting motion of objects from nanometers to microns in scale , and providing a fundamental mechanism for transport of objects of all scales . Thus , FSM is a valuable new tool for characterizing the dynamic state of a cell . RESULTS Random Intracellular Movement Appears Diffusive To measure the ﬂuctuating motion in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells , we microinjected submicron colloidal particles into A7 mel - anoma cells ( Cunningham et al . , 1992 ) and measured their time - dependent motion with confocal microscopy . The particles were rendered inert by attaching a short polyethylene - glycol ( PEG ) brush layer to their surface to eliminate interactions with biopoly - mers or proteins ( Valentine et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , because they were microinjected , the particles were not surrounded by a lipid membrane . Unlike smaller tracers that travel freely through the cytoskeletal network , the injected submicron particles were larger than the typical cytoskeletal mesh size , which is about 50 nm ( Luby - Phelps , 2000 ; Luby - Phelps et al . , 1987 ) . Thus , their motion reﬂects the ﬂuctuations of the cytoplasm itself . To avoid cell - boundary effects , we imaged particles that are greater than (cid:1) 1 m m deep within the cell ; we also imaged particles away from both the thin lamellar region and the nucleus to avoid any inter - actions with the mechanically distinct cell cortex and nucleus ( Extended Results ) . Particle centers were determined in each im - age with an accuracy of 22 nm . We tracked their trajectories and calculated the time - and ensemble - averaged mean - square displacement ( MSD ) , < D r 2 ( t ) > , where D r ( t ) = r ( t + t ) - r ( t ) . At shorter timescales ( t % 0 . 1 s ) , the MSD of the probe parti - cles was nearly constant in time ; however , the ﬂuctuations were always at least ﬁve times larger than the noise ﬂoor . At longer timescales ( t R 0 . 1 s ) , the MSD increased approximately linearly with time , as shown in Figure 1 and Figure S1 , available online . Particles of different size , d , exhibited a similar time dependence , as shown in Figure 1B . Moreover , the amplitude of the ﬂuctuations scaled as 1 / d , as shown in Figure 1C ; this is consistent with motion in the continuum viscoelastic environ - ment of the cytoplasm ( Hoffman et al . , 2006 ) . Such motion is often interpreted as thermal Brownian motion ( Baker et al . , 2010 ; del Alamo et al . , 2008 ; Gupton et al . , 2005 ; Hale et al . , 2009 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ; Yamada et al . , 2000 ) . However , a MSD that increases linearly with time is only consistent with Brownian motion in a purely viscous liquid and at thermal equilibrium , neither of which applies to the cytoplasm ( Brangwynne et al . , 2008a ; Bursac et al . , 2005 ; Hoffman et al . , 2006 ; MacKintosh , 2012 ; Wilhelm , 2008 ) . As the cytoplasm is neither a pure viscous liquid or at thermal equilibrium , we concluded that the observed cytoplasmic ﬂuctuations must derive from some other sources other than thermal - based diffusion . Cytoplasmic Diffusive - like Movement Results from Active Processes To clarify the active character of the cytoplasmic ﬂuctuating motion , we examined the effect of inhibiting myosin II activity A B C Figure 1 . Movements of Microinjected Tracer Particles in Living Cells ( A ) Bright - ﬁeldimageofanA7cellwithmicroinjected 200 - nm - diameterﬂuorescenceparticles ( green ) and 2mintrajectories ( black ) superimposedontop . PEG - coated particles are microinjected into cells grown on collagen - I - coated , glass - bottom dishes . Particle trajectories in the cytoplasm look very similar to thermal Brownian motion . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( B ) Two - dimensional ensemble - averaged mean - square displacement ( MSD ) < D r 2 ( t ) > of PEG - coated tracer particles of various sizes are plotted against lag time on a log - log scale , in living A7 cells . Red , green , and blue symbols and lines represent particles that are 100 , 200 , and 500 nm in diameter , respectively . Dashed lines indicate a logarithmic slope of 1 . Measurements are done with more than 200 tracer particles in about 25 individual cells for each particle size . ( C ) Ensemble - averaged MSD scaled with particle diameter , in untreated ( solid symbols ) , blebbistatin treated ( open symbols ) , and ATP - depleted ( solid lines ) A7 cells . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 823 in cells . Myosin II is a nonprocessive motor protein that binds to actin ﬁlaments and undergoes a power stroke upon ATP hydro - lysis ( Howard , 2001 ) . We treated cells with 10 m M blebbistatin , which inhibits myosin II motor activity . After inhibition , we observed a marked decrease in the MSD of injected particles in the diffusive - like regime ( t R 0 . 1 s ) , while the shorter timescale movement remained essentially unchanged . When we inhibited general motor and polymerization activity by depleting cells of ATP using 2 mM sodium azide and 10 mM 2 - deoxyglucose , the MSD became nearly time independent over our experimental timescales ( Figure 1C ; Figure S1A ; Movie S1 ) . Thus , the motion of the particles is driven by active , ATP - dependent processes . Such active behavior is not limited to the cytoplasm or to eukary - otic cells ; ATP - dependent random ﬂuctuating motion has also been observed in prokaryotic cells and yeast ( Parry et al . , 2014 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ) . To account for this active behavior , we adapted recent theo - retical work suggesting that diffusive motion in the cytoskeleton can arise from random motor activity ( Lau et al . , 2003 ; MacKin - tosh and Levine , 2008 ) : In a ﬁlamentous actin network , acto - myosin contractile forces exerted by myosin II motors can drive ﬂuctuating deformations . These myosin motors do not act indi - vidually but form aggregates , or miniﬁlaments , which bind to the actin network and act as ‘‘disordered muscle ﬁbers , ’’ applying random contractile forces in the network ( Koenderink et al . , 2009 ) . These forces can result in random ﬂuctuations of the network , similar to that observed in reconstituted networks ( Brangwynne et al . , 2008b ; Mizuno et al . , 2009 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . However , the theoretical framework of actively driven ﬂuctuations requires a network to be nearly elastic , rather than viscous , to account for the diffusive - like motion observed for t R 0 . 1 s . Thus , a direct measure of the intracellular mechanics is essential to ascertain whether the observed particle motion is due to thermal or active effects ( MacKintosh , 2012 ) . The Cytoplasm Is a Weak Elastic Solid To directly measure the micromechanical properties of the cyto - plasm , we performed active microrheology measurements using optical tweezers to impose a sinusoidal oscillation as a function of frequency , y , on a 500 - nm - diameter probe particle within a cell . The trap stiffness was 0 . 05 pN / nm as determined using the equipartition theorem to describe Brownian motion of a bead trapped in water ( Veigel et al . , 1998 ) . By measuring the resultant displacement of the bead , x ( y ) , subjected to an applied sinusoidal trap oscillation with a force F at frequency y , we ex - tracted the effective spring constant , K ( y ) = F ( y ) / x ( y ) , for the intra - cellular environment ( Guo et al . , 2013 ; Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . The complex shear modulus G = G’ + iG’’ is related to the spring con - stant through a generalization of the Stokes relation K = 3 p Gd . Thus , we can determine the full frequency - dependent modulus of the cytoplasm . Our active measurements yielded a resultant displacement that was almost in phase with the applied force ; therefore , the micromechanical response of A7 cells was predominantly elastic rather than viscous ( Figure 2 ) . Consistent with this , the measured elastic modulus G’ was signiﬁcantly larger than the loss modulus G’’ over the frequency range from 0 . 3 to 70 Hz ( Figure S2 ) . The elastic modulus follows a power - law form , j G ( y ) j(cid:1) y b , with b z 0 . 15 , in agreement with other measurements ( Fabry et al . , 2001 ; Guo et al . , 2013 ) . We also noted that the measured cyto - plasmic modulus is approximately 1 Pa ( Figure S2 ) , much lower than that measured on the actin cortex ( Fabry et al . , 2001 ) ; pre - sumably this reﬂects the denser crosslinked actin structure in the cell cortex , whereas the beads probe the cytoplasm which is much more dilute and hence lower in elasticity . Thus , our twee - zers measurements conﬁrmed that the cytoplasm is an elastic solid across the measured timescales . Model of Diffusive - like Motion in a Nearly Elastic Medium The motion of tracer particles directly reﬂects the ﬂuctuations driven by random motor activity throughout the cell . This pro - vides a basis for an assay that characterizes the average effect of all motor forces ; this cannot be done with any other existing technique . To develop this assay , a quantitative description of the random ﬂuctuating motion is required . To do this , we adop - ted the fundamental force - displacement relationship of any me - dium , Hooke’s law , f = Kx , where f and x are the driving force and A C B optical trap position trapped bead position 300 200 100 0 - 100 - 200 0 1 2 Time ( sec ) 3 4 T r ap and bead d i s p l a c e m en t s ( n m ) 10 0 10 1 S p r i ng C on s t an t K ( P a µ m ) 10 - 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 Frequency ( Hz ) K ' K ' ' K ' K ' ' Figure 2 . Optical - Tweezer Active Micro - rheology Measurement Shows that the Cytoplasm Is a Weak Elastic Gel ( A ) Schematic showing the experimental setup used to measure the intracellular mechanics . ( B ) Typical displacements of the trapped bead and the optical trap oscillating at 1 Hz . ( C ) Effective spring constant K 0 of the intracellular environment measured directly with active micro - rheology using optical tweezers shows that the intracellular elastic stiffness ( solid symbols ) domi - natesoverthedissipativeresistance ( opensymbols ) . Blue circles , gray squares , and light gray triangles represent untreated , 10 m M blebbistatin - treated , and ATP - depleted A7 , respectively . Both the blebbistatin treatment and ATP depletion reduce the cytoplasmic stiffness by about 2 - fold . Error bars represent standard deviation ( n = 15 ) . The corresponding shear moduli of the cytoplasm are shown in Figure S2 . See also Figures S2 and S3A . 824 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . the resulting displacement . The material properties are fre - quency dependent , and the forces are stochastic ; thus we consider the quadratic form of the averaged quantities in the fre - quency domain , < x 2 ( y ) > = < f 2 ( y ) > / j K ( y ) j 2 . The MSD , < D x 2 ( t ) > , is obtained through the Fourier transform of < x 2 ( y ) > . To illustrate the application of the formalism , we consider the simple case of thermally induced Brownian motion in a viscous ﬂuid . In this case , the stochastic thermal forces exerted on the particle are equivalent to white noise and independent of fre - quency . Furthermore , for a viscous ﬂuid j K j 2 f y 2 , since K’’ f hy , with h denoting the ﬂuid viscosity . Therefore , < x 2 ( y ) > f y - 2 ; after Fourier transform , the MSD becomes < D x 2 ( t ) > f t , as ex - pected for thermally driven Brownian diffusion in a viscous ﬂuid . However , the laser - tweezer measurements reveal that the cytoplasm is not a simple ﬂuid , but is instead a weak elastic gel ; thus , the tracer particle movement directly reﬂects the average motor activity . Within this picture , the effect of uncorre - lated molecular motors , such as those of myosin ﬁlament con - tractions , is to generate random intracellular forces ; these drive ﬂuctuating deformations of the elastic network . This in turn drives the ﬂuctuating motion of objects embedded within the network , as illustrated schematically in Figure 3A . Molecular mo - tors generate force during their processivity time , t p , which char - acterizes the typical period of binding and coherent motion of a motor ; at times longer than this , the motor unbinds , and the ten - sion is instantaneously released , as sketched by the time evolu - tion of the force , f ( t ) , in the inset of Figure S1B . A force with this step - like behavior in time leads to a power spectrum of force ﬂuctuations , < f 2 ( y ) > , that varies with frequency as y - 2 ( Lau et al . , 2003 ; MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ) . For a purely elastic medium , K is independent of frequency , leading to < x 2 ( y ) > f y - 2 , which again becomes < D x 2 ( t ) > f t . Interestingly , this tem - poral dependence of x is the same as that of thermal motion in a viscous ﬂuid ; however , in this case , the motion reﬂects the random active motor forces in an elastic medium , rather than stochastic thermal agitation in a viscous ﬂuid . The laser - tweezer measurements of the elastic modulus ( Fig - ures 2 , S2 and S3A ) show that the local micromechanical envi - ronment experienced by probe particles is in fact not purely elastic , but is instead viscoelastic , with a frequency - dependent spring constant j K ( y ) j = K 0 y b , where b z 0 . 15 . Furthermore , in the measured frequency range , we ﬁnd no apparent change in the time behavior of the spring constant ; therefore , we assume the same time dependence persists . In this case , the frequency - and force - dependent displacement spectrum becomes < x 2 ( y ) > f y - 2 ( 1 + b ) . Thus , for times less than the processivity time t p , the MSD becomes < D x 2 ( t ) > f t 1 + 2 b / K 02 . This is in stark contrast to the thermal motion expected in such a viscoelastic environ - ment as < D x 2 ( t ) > f t b kT / K 0 . Indeed , the observed plateau in the MSD at short timescales ( Figure 1B ) is consistent with < D x 2 ( t ) > f t b with b z 0 . 15 , indicating that the short time regime can be understood as thermal motion in a nearly elastic medium . Force Spectrum Microscopy Probes Ensemble Aggregate Intracellular Forces The ﬂuctuating motion of the tracer particles is a direct readout of the average random ﬂuctuations due to the aggregate motor ac - tivity in the cell . If both the particle motion and the cytoplasmic Figure 3 . Conceptual Basis of FSM ( A ) Schematic illustration of cytoplasmic ﬂuctuating forces enhancing in - tracellular motion . The aggregate effect of all the motors and active processes working at random directions and random times contribute an incoherent background of ﬂuctuating forces . These active forces drive ﬂuctuating de - formations of the cytoplasmic network and substantially enhance intracellular movement over a broad range of length scales , from submicron organelles to nanometer - sized proteins . ( B ) Basic procedure of FSM . ( i ) A sound wave in the time domain can be represented in the frequency domain by taking its Fourier transform , thereby revealing its frequency composition . ( ii ) By analogy to the sound wave , we Fourier transform the MSD and express it in the frequency domain . ( iii ) The cytoplasmic material property , speciﬁcally the spring constant , is measured directly using opticaltweezers , also inthe frequency domain . ( iv ) Analogous to a stretched spring , if the spring deformation and spring constant are known , the stretching force can be calculated ; in cells , the randomly ﬂuctuating force at each frequency is calculated as < f 2 ( y ) > = j K ( y ) j 2 < x 2 ( y ) > . Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 825 viscoelasticity are measured , the spectrum of the average ﬂuctu - ating force due to these motors , which drives this motion , can be directly determined , through < f 2 ( y ) > = j K ( y ) j 2 < x 2 ( y ) > . This pro - vides a new tool for characterizing the frequency - dependent spectrum of the average force , which is due to the aggregate , yet random effects of all active processes in the cell . While these forces are inherently time - dependent , it is more convenient to describe their frequency - dependent spectrum . We call this new assay Force Spectrum Microscopy ( FSM ) , as summarized schematically in Figure 3B . To demonstrate the applicability of FSM , we quantiﬁed the average aggregate cytoplasmic forces due to active processes in A7 cells . The resultant force spectrum exhibited two distinct frequency regimes , as shown by the red data in Figure 4A : In the low - frequency range , corresponding to timescales t R 0 . 1 s , < f 2 ( y ) > is proportional to y (cid:3) 2 ; by contrast , in the high - fre - quency range , corresponding to t % 0 . 1 s , < f 2 ( y ) > has a weaker frequency dependency . These observations are consistent with a low - frequency regime dominated by active forces and a high - frequency regime dominated by thermal forces ( Brangwynne et al . , 2008a ; Lau et al . , 2003 ; MacKintosh and Levine , 2008 ; Miz - uno et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , based on our model , we estimate that a density of myosin ﬁlaments of (cid:1) 1 / m m 3 , each generating a force of order 10 pN , can account for the observed force spec - trum ( see details in Extended Results ) . This is the ﬁrst experi - mental assessment of this important global measurement of the overall enzymatic activity in the cell . To further establish the applicability of FSM in quantifying active forces in the cell , we suppressed the level of actin - based cytoskeletal forces by inhibiting myosin II motors through the addition of 10 m M blebbistatin to the cell culture medium . As a result , the low - frequency , active component of the force spec - trum was suppressed , although the same overall y - 2 dependence remained , as shown by the blue data in Figure 4A . Furthermore , when we depleted cells of ATP through addition of 2 mM sodium azide and10mM2 - deoxyglucose , weobserved a force spectrum that is consistent with purely thermal ﬂuctuations over the full fre - quency range for the viscoelasticy medium measured directly for these cells , as shown by the black data in Figure 4A . This sug - gested that , while actomyosin contractions are a signiﬁcant source of intracellular forces , other enzymatic activities also contribute to the forces and hence the motion experienced by intracellular objects . Moreover , above 10 Hz , the force spectra measured in all cases had the same time dependence and nearly the same amplitudes , consistent with a common thermal origin of the motion in this regime ( Figure 4A ) . These results demon - strate the ability of FSM to quantify the degree of motor activity ina cellandtodistinguish these active forces fromthermal forces . To further explore the utility and sensitivity of FSM , we increased the cytoplasmic stiffness by applying osmotic stress to compress cells ( Zhou et al . , 2009 ) . We observe a marked reduction in the amplitude of particle ﬂuctuations , although the frequency dependence remains unchanged , reﬂecting the con - sequences of the increased cytoplasmic stiffness ( Figure S3 ) . Surprisingly , however , when the force spectrum was calculated , we found that the amplitude of intracellular forces did not change , at least within the range of osmotic pressures applied ( see details in Extended Results ) . FSM Reveals Differences in the Intracellular Forces within Benign and Malignant Cells SinceFSM probestheconsequencesofthe aggregateforcesdue to active processes in the cell , it can be used to directly quantify changes in intracellular activity and the dynamic state of the cytoplasm in response to changes in conditions such as drug treatment , external stimuli , or even the disease state of a cell . To illustrate this , we compared the force spectrum of malignant and benign cells . Malignant cells exhibit reduced cell stiffness ( Cross et al . , 2007 ; Plodinec et al . , 2013 ) and increased traction forces ( Kraning - Rush et al . , 2012 ) , which may provide potential biophysical markers for metastatic progression . Using FSM , we compared the force spectrum in benign ( MCF - 10A ) to that in - 2 Tracer particle Vesicle and protein complex Mitochondria Untreated cells - 0 . 85 - 2 10 - 29 10 - 28 10 - 27 10 - 26 10 - 25 10 - 24 10 - 29 10 - 28 10 - 27 10 - 26 10 - 25 10 - 24 < f 2 > ( N 2 s ) Frequency ( Hz ) 10 0 10 - 1 10 1 10 2 A < f 2 > ( N 2 s ) Frequency ( Hz ) 10 0 10 - 1 10 1 B Theory UntreatedMyosin II inhibited ATP depleted Active fluctuations only , thermal effect excluded Exp . Figure 4 . Ensemble Aggregate Intracellular Force Spectrum Probed by FSM ( A ) Cytoplasmic force spectrum calculated from spontaneous ﬂuctuations of tracer particles and the active microrheology measurement , through < f 2 ( y ) > = j K ( y ) j 2 < x 2 ( y ) > , inside control untreated ( red ) , myosin II inhibited ( blue ) and ATP - depleted ( black ) A7 cells . For comparison , theoretical pre - dictionsareshownforanelasticmediumwithashear modulus as shown in Figure S2 , with three levels of activities ; the red solid line corresponds to about 1 / m m 3 densityofmyosinIIﬁlamentsapplyingaforce (cid:1) 10 pN , the blue solid line corresponds to a 90 % reduction of myosin motor activity by 10 m M bleb - bistatin ( Kova´csetal . , 2004 ) , andtheblacksolidline corresponds to no active motors . The yellow dash dotted line represents the theoretical prediction of only active contributions and excludes thermal effects . Dashed lines indicate logarithmic slopes of (cid:3) 0 . 85 and (cid:3) 2 . Vertical bars represent standard error ( n = 15 ) . ( B ) Comparison of force spectra probed by FSM in untreated A7 cells , using the spontaneous ﬂuctuations of injected tracer particles ( red dotted line , same as that in Figure 4A ) , endogenous vesicles and protein complexes ( black circle ) , and mitochondria ( blue triangle ) . The spring constant is measured by active microrheology with probe particles , as shown in Figure 2 . The force spectrum measured with vesicles and protein complexes is in excellent accord with that measured for probe particles . The force spectrum for mitochondria exhibits the same frequency dependence as that for probe particles , but is larger in amplitude ; this is consistent with mitochondria are also occasionally directly transported by speciﬁc motors within the cell . 826 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . malignant ( MCF - 7 ) breast cancer cells , which are known to exhibit enhanced motility ( Chan et al . , 2008 ; Nagaraja et al . , 2006 ) . Tracer - particle motion is signiﬁcantly enhanced in malig - nant MCF - 7 cells relative to benign cells , as shown in Figure 5A , whereas the cytoplasmic stiffness was only (cid:1) 30 % smaller in the malignant MCF - 7 cells ( Figure 5B ) . When we calculated the force spectrum , we indeed found a signiﬁcant difference between ma - lignant and benign cells , with malignant cells having a force spec - trum with approximately three times larger magnitude than the benign cells ; however , the frequency dependence of the spectra remained unchanged ( Figure 5C ) . A similar behavior was observed for another pair of malignant and benign cells , M6C and M28 ( Holzer et al . , 2003 ) , as shown in Figure S4 . The results suggested , therefore , that highly motile cancer cells have a more active cytoplasm . The enhanced motor activity reﬂected by the larger magnitude in the force spectrum measured with FSM is consistent with cancer cells exerting increased traction force on the extracellular matrix ( Agus et al . , 2013 ) , despite their decreased stiffness ; this observation also ﬁts well with biochem - ical studies showing changes in metabolic and proliferative rates of cancer cells ( Deberardinis et al . , 2008 ; Sherr , 1996 ) . Therefore , FSM provides a tool to identify changes in ensemble intracellular forces and dynamic states of the cytoplasm , even though the origin of these changes is complex . Moreover , our results with malignant cells provide an additional metastatic signature at the subcellular scale and may help elucidate the physical and chem - ical forces that shape and govern the progression of cancer . Force Spectrum Microscopy Reveals that Expression of Vimentin Intermediate Filaments Does Not Affect Intracellular Forces Force spectrum microscopy can identify the contribution of speciﬁc cellular components to the overall level of intracellular activity . To demonstrate this , we apply FSM to measure the ef - fect of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments ( VIFs ) in mesenchymal cells . Vimentin is a type III IF protein that is typically expressed in cells of mesenchymal origin and is widely used as a marker of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . VIFs have been shown to induce changes in cell shape , motility , and adhe - sion during EMT ( Mendez et al . , 2010 ) ; however , the role of VIFs in the level of aggregate intracellular forces is unknown because no technique has been able to quantify this property . We used FSM to probe intracellular force spectrum in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( mEFs ) from wild - type ( WT ) and vimentin knockout ( Vim (cid:3) / (cid:3) ) mice ; we found no signiﬁcant difference in the intracel - lular force spectrum between WT and Vim (cid:3) / (cid:3) mEFs , as shown in Figure S5 . In contrast , the force spectrum was markedly reduced when we depolymerize actin ﬁlaments with 5 m g / ml cytochalasin D in WT mEFs . These results suggested that vimentin IFs are mainly structural polymers that are an important contributor to the internal stiffness of cells , but do not affect the aggregate intracellular forces . Force Spectrum Reveals Motor Processivity Time The frequency spectrum can quantify additional important , but heretofore unresolved , features of motor activity . This is seen in a more precise investigation of the time dependence of the MSD . Atlongtimes , t R 0 . 1s , weobserveanapproximatelylinear time dependence in the MSD averaged over many particles . By contrast , our model predicts a stronger time dependence , as given by < D x 2 ( t ) > f t 1 + 2 b / K 02 . This difference arises from the ensemble averaging over different trajectories ; indeed when we examine the MSDs of individual particles , we ﬁnd that most tra - jectories exhibit a markedly largermaximum local slope reﬂecting a stronger time dependence . However , they also exhibit clear ev - idence of a roll - off or saturation at the longest times , on the order of 10 s , as shown in Figures 6A and S1B . This roll - off behavior is consistent with the ﬁnite processivity of motor contractions , at a processivity time , t p ; processive forces are generated by motors with an average duration , t p , and result in ﬁnite displacements in the cytoplasm over corresponding timescales . To quantify this , we measure the distribution of logarithmic slopes of the MSD andﬁnda peaknear 1 . 2 , as shown in Figure 6B ; this is in excellent agreement with the prediction of < D x 2 ( t ) > f t 1 + 2 b with b z 0 . 15 . Moreover , the distribution of processivity times is peaked around 5 s , as shown in Figure 6C ; this is an experimental measure of A C B Figure 5 . Intracellular Mechanics , Dy - namics and Forces in Benign and Malignant Tumor Cells ( A ) Two - dimensional MSD < D r 2 ( t ) > of 500 nm tracer particles are plotted against lag time on a log - log scale , in the benign breast cells MCF - 10A ( red circle ) and malignant breast tumor cells MCF - 7 ( black triangle ) , respectively . The ﬂuctuating movement of tracer particles is stron - ger in the malignant cells , as compared to the benign cells . ( B ) Cytoplasmic mechanics measured by active microrheology using optical tweezers . The effec - tive spring constant of the cytoplasm is larger in the MCF - 10A ( red circle ) , as compared to the MCF - 7 ( black triangle ) ; this suggests that the cytoplasm of benign cells is stiffer than malignant cells . ( C ) The spectrum of intracellular forces calcu - lated based on the ﬂuctuating movement of tracer particles and the cytoplasmic mechanics measurement . The intracellular forces are stronger in the malignant tumor cells MCF - 7 ( black triangle ) , than the benign cells MCF - 10A ( red circle ) . Error bars represent standard deviation ( n = 6 ) . See also Figures S4 and S5 . Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 827 processivity times for the ensemble aggregate forces . The proc - essivity timeis not apparent in the ensemble average data , due to the large distribution in processivity times , t p , obscures the effect of individual turnover . Active Force Fluctuations Increase Vesicle and Organelle Motion FSM provides a powerful assay to probe the consequences of the aggregate random forces due to motor activity within cells . In particular , it can be used to explore the consequences of these forces on the motion of vesicles , protein complexes , and organ - elles within the cell , providing insight into the origin of their random motion . We used FSM to probe the effects of random forces on the overall movements of these various structures . The motion of vesicles and protein complexes were tracked us - ing bright - ﬁeld microscopy in A7 cells . Occasionally , the move - ment was directed , with these structures moving along a straight path at a constant velocity ; however , the majority of the motion was random in nature , with the MSD increasing approximately linearly in time ( Figure 6D ) . We inferred the force spectrum acting on these vesicles and protein complexes using a combination of their MSD and the cytoplasmic mechanics measured with active microrheology using laser tweezers on tracer beads . We found that the force spectrum was in excellent accord , both in magni - tude and frequency dependence , with that measured for injected probe particles ( Figure 4B ) . Moreover , when we suppressed the random cytoplasmic force by inhibiting acto - myosin contraction with 10 m M blebbistatin , we observed a marked decrease in their movements in direct analogy to the behavior observed for probe particles ( Figure 6D ; Movie S2 ) . These results show that the random aggregate motor forces within the cell act on endoge - nous cytoplasmic structures in the exact same fashion as they do on the probe particles . This illustrates the ubiquity of the ef - fects of the active random forces , and suggests that they may also contribute to intracellular transport . We also applied FSM to probe the movement of mitochondria within the cell ( see details in Extended Results ) . Interestingly , we observed a force spectrum that exhibits the same frequency dependence as that of the probe particles , but is larger in ampli - tude by about a factor of 2 , as shown in Figure 4B . By carefully observing the shape of mitochondria over time , we identiﬁed sig - niﬁcant changes in their local conﬁguration . This has an effect of shifting the center of the mitochondria identiﬁed during the tracking , thereby adding to the ﬂuctuations , and is likely to contribute to the additional amplitude of the force spectrum . Moreover , it is known that mitochondria are occasionally trans - ported by speciﬁc motors along microtubules ( Wang and Schwarz , 2009 ) . Therefore , the observed movement includes contributions from both random force ﬂuctuations and effects from mitochondria speciﬁc motors ; this is also consistent with larger amplitude of forces observed on mitochondria . Thus , FSM is also able to probe the consequences of shape changes of the objects induced by the random forces and might also pro - vide a way to distinguish the speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc effects of motor activity on certain organelles . Active Force Fluctuations Increase Protein Movement The force spectra revealed by FSM show that active processes dominate the ensemble cytoplasmic forces at relatively low fre - quencies ( Figure 4A ) , which corresponds to long timescales . In contrast to micron - sized organelles and particles , smaller ob - jects such as nanometer - sized proteins that are smaller than the typical cytoplasmic mesh size , are much more mobile , and the role of the random forces on individual proteins is unclear . To investigate this , we examined both short and long timescale diffusive - like behavior of nanometer - sized proteins . To examine short timescale behavior , we transfected HeLa cells with GFP , and perform ﬂuorescent correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) to mea - sure the local dynamics of GFP , over timescales of tens of micro - seconds . At this scale , we did not resolve signiﬁcant differences A B C D E F Figure 6 . Logarithmic Slope and Processiv - ityTimeAnalyzedfromMSDofSingleTracerParticlesandCytoplasmicOrganelles ( A ) Individual MSD curves of single 100 nm parti - cles . Colored lines highlight representative de - viations from the ensemble average . The full data set is shown in Figure S1B . ( B ) Distribution of the average logarithmic slopes of each particle’s MSD curve in untreated A7 cells , calculated between 1 to 2 s lag time as indicated by the red dashed lines in the inset . The mean and standard deviation of the slopes are 1 . 1 and 0 . 26 , respectively , and the mode is about 1 . 2 . ( C ) Distribution of processivity times t p associ - ating with the random intracellular ﬂuctuations , calculated from the transition between the diffu - sive - like regime and the long time saturation of the time - averaged MSD of each single particle , as pointed by a red arrow in ( A ) . Inset , schematic of the time - dependent force due to activity of myosin ﬁlament . ( D ) Two dimensional MSD of the movement of intracellular vesicles and protein complexes , in untreated ( solid squares ) and blebbistatin treated ( open squares ) A7 cells , tracked by bright - ﬁeld microscopy . ( E and F ) Logarithmic slopes ( E ) and distribution of processivity times ( F ) are calculated from MSD curves of single vesicle and protein complex in the untreated cells . See also Movie S2 . 828 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . in the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient of GFP between untreated and ATP depleted cells ( Figure S6 ) , implying that the random active forces do not affect the motion of individual proteins on short timescales . Since many signaling proteins and even nutrients travel across larger parts of the cell , over timescales of seconds , this is likely to be affected by the active ﬂuctuating forces at long timescales . To investigate this , we transfected HeLa cells with Dendra2 , a 26 - kDa ﬂuorescent protein that switches from green GFP - like ﬂuorescence to red RFP - like ﬂuorescence when ﬂashed with 405 nm light ( Chudakov et al . , 2007a ) . By tracking the RFP signal after local photoconversion , we visualize the Dendra2 - protein movement throughout the cell , which takes a few seconds ; we observe a marked decrease of the spreading of the RFP signal in the ATP - depleted cells as compared to the untreated cells ( Figure 7A ; Movie S3 ) . This is conﬁrmed by plotting the time dependence of the ﬂuorescence intensity proﬁle of the proteins . In the presence of ATP , the proﬁle spreads more rapidly ( Fig - ure 7B ) with the width of the proﬁle exhibiting more rapid expan - sion with time ( Figure 7C ) . This result conﬁrms that active forces contribute to the large - scale transport of individual proteins , suggesting that even the transport of small molecules or nutri - ents can be enhanced by random active processes . DISCUSSION We introduce a new assay , force spectrum microscopy ( FSM ) , which directly quantiﬁes the magnitude and frequency - depen - dence of the aggregate random active processes in the cell . We determine the force spectrum by tracking the random ﬂuctu - ations of objects combined with the micromechanical character - ization of the intracellular environment . This technique provides a direct measure of the forces within cells , which is very chal - lenging by comparison to making measurements of position or motion using microscopy . Furthermore , FSM provides a direct measure of the random aggregate forces attributable to active processes inside the cell and enables these to be distinguished from purely mechanical effects . This provides insight into the consequences of the overall activity within the cell . Using FSM , we show that malignant cancer cells have signiﬁcantly larger intracellular activity as compared to benign cells , demonstrating its utility in probing the internal dynamic state of cells . We conﬁrm that vimentin IFs contribute mainly to structural me - chanics , and not to the forces within the cell . These results demonstrate the ability of FSM to isolate the effects of cellular activity and distinguish it from the effects of cytoplasmic visco - elastic properties on intracellular dynamics . We further show that FSM can be performed on intracellular organelles to inves - tigate random forces experienced by organelles or different ob - jects in cells . These results suggest that FSM may be used as a general assay to quantify the role of the random forces in driving many cellular and developmental processes , such as prolifera - tion and the epithelial to mesenchymal transition . In addition , the information provided by FSM on both the amplitude and fre - quency spectrum of the random aggregate forces in the cell may yield new insights into the dynamic nature of the cytoplasm , which may help resolve some long - standing issues in disease development and progression and may provide the basis for new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches . Furthermore , our ﬁndings alter the way that we view the cyto - plasm of eukaryotic cells . We demonstrate that force ﬂuctua - tions driven by motor activity play an important , even dominant role in intracellular motion over a broad range of length and timescales , from micron - sized organelles to nanometer - sized proteins and nutrients . These results also conﬁrm that random motion , so ubiquitous in cells , is not a result of thermally - induced ﬂuctuations , but is instead the result of the random forces due to the aggregate motor activity in cells . Thus , interpretation of Figure 7 . Movement of Dendra2 in Cells Is Increased with ATP ( A ) Typical confocal ﬂuorescence images of the red - channel of Dendra2 during photoconversion by a 405 nm pulse . Before photoconversion , cells have low background red ﬂuorescence ; the ﬂashed region rapidly converts to red and begins to move throughout the cell over several seconds . Comparing the untreated and ATP depleted con - ditions , we see that red ﬂuorescence spreads more quickly in cells with ATP . ( B ) Byquantifyingtheredﬂuorescenceintensityas a function of distance ( along the red dashed line in A ) at several different times , we see that ATP approximately doubles Dendra2 transport over longer length scales . ( C ) Plotting the spatial width of the red ﬂuores - cence intensity as afunction oftime demonstrates that , without ATP , photoconverted Dendra2 spreads more slowly . Inset : Replotting in log - log format shows that with or without ATP Dendra2 spreads proportional to t 1 / 2 , demonstrating that in both cases movement appears random . Error bars , 145 ms ( based on measurement uncertainty from limited imaging frequency ) . See also Figure S6 and Movie S3 . Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 829 intracellular motion based on equilibrium thermal ﬂuctuations , such as is done for passive microrheology ( Baker et al . , 2010 ; del Alamo et al . , 2008 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ; Yamada et al . , 2000 ) is incorrect . Moreover , this random motion driven by intracellular force ﬂuctuations can have important consequences for many aspects of cell physiology . For example , many cellular compo - nents , such as protein ﬁlaments and complexes , storage gran - ules , and intracellular organelles , will be impacted by these active ﬂuctuations in the cytoplasm ; these components are involved in processes that are essential for life in natural environ - ments , and their functions depend on their ability to move in the cytoplasm . More speciﬁcally , these random ﬂuctuations are likely to be crucial for spatially distributing key cellular machin - eries , such as ribosomes and proteasomes , to facilitate efﬁcient translation and degradation of proteins . They also could be vital for quick removal of enzyme products from their site of synthesis in metabolic reactions to avoid local concentration effects . Finally , growth and remodeling of the cytoskeleton may depend on these random force ﬂuctuations , which may help ensure , for example , that actin monomers are in continual supply to rapidly growing ﬁlaments in the cell periphery . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture , Microinjection , and Pharmacological Interventions Cellsare maintained under 5 % CO2at37 (cid:4) C inahumidiﬁed incubator . A7 cells ( Cunningham et al . , 1992 ) ( gift from Tom Stossel’s lab at Harvard Medical School ) are cultured in Dulbecco’s minimal essential medium ( DMEM ) supple - mented with 2 % fetal calf serum , 8 % newborn calf serum ( Invitrogen ) , 10 mM HEPES buffer , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 m g / ml streptomycin . WT and Vim (cid:3) / (cid:3) mEFs ( Guo et al . , 2013 ) are cultured in DMEM with 10 % fetal calf serum , 5 mM nonessential amino acids , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 m g / ml streptomycin . MCF - 10Acellsarecultured in1 : 1DMEM : F12media ( Invitrogen ) with 5 % house serum ( Invitrogen ) , 20 mM HEPES , 10 m g / ml insulin , 0 . 1 m g / ml Cholera Toxin , 500 ng / ml hydrocortisone , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 m g / ml streptomycin . MCF - 7cellsandHeLacellsareculturedinDMEMwith10 % fetal calf serum . Cells are plated on collagen I coated MatTek dishes at a density of 20 per mm 2 overnight before experiment . MicroinjectionisperformedusingaglassneedleandaFemtoJetmicroinjec - tor ( Eppendorf ) mounted on a bright - ﬁeld microscope . About 50 cells are injected per dish ; each cell is injected up to 50 tracer particles to eliminate the interference to cell function . Cells are then allowed to recover in culture medium for 6 hr , and are imaged on a confocal microscope at 37 (cid:4) C and 5 % CO 2 . Organelles and injected tracer particles are imaged with bright - ﬁeld or confocal microscopy using a 63 3 / 1 . 2NA water immersion lens on a Leica TSC SP5 . Please refer to Extended Experimental Procedures for more details . To inhibit myosin II motor activity , blebbistatin ( Toronto Research Chemi - cals ) is dissolved in DMSO and added to cell culture media to a 10 m M ﬁnal concentration , incubating for 30 min . ATP depletion is achieved by incubating cells with 2 mM NaN 3 and 10 mM 2 - deoxyglucose in PBS for 1 hr . Particle Surface Chemistry Fluorescent carboxylate - modiﬁed polystyrene spherical particles ( 100 , 200 , and 500 nm , from Molecular Probes ) are rendered inert by grafting short amine - terminated methoxy - poly ( ethylene glycol ) to the surface of carboxyl - ated microspheres , as described previously ( Valentine et al . , 2004 ) . PEG coatedparticles arestoredat4 (cid:4) Cand usedwithin2weeks . Bothyellow - green and far red particles for each size are used in this study . Particle Tracking and Analysis Thetrajectories oftheﬂuorescentparticles arerecordedevery10msforabout 2 min . The images are processed with particle tracking software written by J . Crocker , D . Grier and E . Weeks , in IDL ( http : / / www . physics . emory . edu / (cid:1) weeks / idl / ) . Particle centers are found in each image with an accuracy of 22 nm . The MSD of the probe particles is nearly constant in time at short time - scales ( t % 0 . 1 s ) , and is about an order of magnitude greater than the noise ﬂoor , as shown in Figure S1A . Please refer to Extended Experimental Proce - dures for more details . Optical Tweezers Setup To optically trap and manipulate 500 nm beads in the cytoplasm of living cells , the beam from a variable - power Nd : YAG solid - state laser ( 4 W , 1064 nm ; Spectra Physics ) is steered through a series of Keplerian beam expanders to overﬁll the back aperture of a 100 3 1 . 3 numerical aperture microscope objec - tive ( Nikon S - ﬂuor ; Nikon ) . To steer the beam and manipulate the trapped bead , two acousto - optic deﬂectors ( NEOS Technologies ) are used to manip - ulate the beam in the plane of the microscope glass slide . For detection , the bead is centered on a high - resolution position detection quadrant detector ( MBPS ; Spectral Applied Research ) and illuminated using brightﬁeld illumina - tionfroma75WXelamp . Thelinearregionofthedetectoriscalibratedbytrap - ping a bead identical to those used in the cells in water and moving it across the detector using the acousto - optic deﬂectors in known step sizes . The trap stiffness is calibrated to 0 . 05 pN / nm using the mean - squared Brownian motion of a trapped bead in water at various laser power settings using the principle of energy equipartition as previously described ( Veigel et al . , 1998 ) . A trapped bead is oscillated across a frequency range of 0 . 3 – 70 Hz using the acousto - optic deﬂectors , and the laser position and bead displacement are recorded simultaneously , from which the elastic and viscous shear moduli are determined . Osmotic Stress Hyperosmotic stress isappliedby adding polyethyleneglycol300 ( PEG300 ) to isotonic culture medium . Cells are then allowed to equilibrate for 10 min at 37 (cid:4) C and 5 % CO 2 , before we perform the imaging or optical - tweezer mea - surement . The cell size and mechanics equilibrate in 2 min after adding PEG , based on our imaging and previous studies ( Zhou et al . , 2009 ) . Measurement of Protein Movement with Photoconvertable Dendra2 To measure the large length scale movement of small proteins , we use the photonically switchable ﬂuorescent proteins Dendra2 , a photoconvertible ﬂuorescent protein which irreversibly switches from green ( GFP - like ) to red ( RFP - like ) when exposed to a brief ﬂash of 405 nm light ( Chudakov et al . , 2007a ) . Wetransfect HeLa cells with Dendra2 ( Evrogen ) , then perform ﬂuores - cence loss after photoconversion ( FLAC ) measurements as described previ - ously ( Ehrlicher et al . , 2011 ) . In FLAC measurements using Dendra2 , we start with the green ﬂuorescence of unconverted Dendra2 , which allows us to iden - tify cells with high expression that are bright . We then ﬂash the cell with a brief ( (cid:1) 50ms ) ﬂashof405nmlight , whilemonitoringboththegreenandredﬂuores - cence . A dip in the green ﬂuorescence is observed , but a bright spot of red ﬂuorescence in the pulsed region is clearly visible . By monitoring the increase ofredﬂuorescenceatdifferentdistancesfromthepulsedregion , wecanquan - tify the movement of the Dendra2 probe throughout the cell . Please refer to Extended Experimental Procedures for more details . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION SupplementalInformation includes Extended Results , Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and three movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 06 . 051 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank A . Rowat , S . Lindstro¨m , K . Kasza for helpful discussions ; we thank F . Deng and A . Pegoraro for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by the NIH ( PO1GM096971 ) , the Harvard Materials Research Sci - ence and Engineering Center ( DMR - 0820484 ) , the NSF ( DMR - 1310266 ) . A . J . E . was supported by NIH grant DK083592 ; M . H . J . and J . R . M . were sup - ported by NIH grants HL86655 and HL077280 ; F . C . M . was supported in part by FOM / NWO . R . D . G . was supported by NIH PO1GM096971 and Hannah’s Hope Fund . 830 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Received : December 17 , 2013 Revised : April 28 , 2014 Accepted : June 29 , 2014 Published : August 14 , 2014 REFERENCES Agus , D . B . , Alexander , J . F . , Arap , W . , Ashili , S . , Aslan , J . E . , Austin , R . H . , Backman , V . , Bethel , K . J . , Bonneau , R . , Chen , W . C . , et al . ; Physical Sciences - Oncology Centers Network ( 2013 ) . A physical sciences network characteriza - tion of non - tumorigenic and metastatic cells . Sci Rep 3 , 1449 . Ananthanarayanan , V . , Schattat , M . , Vogel , S . K . , Krull , A . , Pavin , N . , and Toli (cid:1) c - Nørrelykke , I . M . ( 2013 ) . Dynein motion switches from diffusive to directed upon cortical anchoring . Cell 153 , 1526 – 1536 . Baker , E . L . , Lu , J . , Yu , D . H . , Bonnecaze , R . T . , andZaman , M . H . ( 2010 ) . Cancer cell stiffness : integrated roles of three - dimensional matrix stiffness and trans - forming potential . Biophys . J . 99 , 2048 – 2057 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Koenderink , G . H . , MacKintosh , F . C . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2008a ) . Cytoplasmic diffusion : molecular motors mix it up . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 583 – 587 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Koenderink , G . H . , Mackintosh , F . C . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2008b ) . Nonequilibrium microtubule ﬂuctuations in a model cytoskeleton . Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 118104 . Bursac , P . , Lenormand , G . , Fabry , B . , Oliver , M . , Weitz , D . A . , Viasnoff , V . , But - ler , J . P . , and Fredberg , J . J . ( 2005 ) . Cytoskeletal remodelling and slow dy - namics in the living cell . Nat . Mater . 4 , 557 – 561 . Chan , S . W . , Lim , C . J . , Guo , K . , Ng , C . P . , Lee , I . , Hunziker , W . , Zeng , Q . , and Hong , W . J . ( 2008 ) . A role for TAZ in migration , invasion , and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res . 68 , 2592 – 2598 . Chudakov , D . M . , Lukyanov , S . , and Lukyanov , K . A . ( 2007a ) . Tracking intracel - lularproteinmovementsusing photoswitchableﬂuorescentproteinsPS - CFP2 and Dendra2 . Nat . Protoc . 2 , 2024 – 2032 . Cross , S . E . , Jin , Y . S . , Rao , J . , and Gimzewski , J . K . ( 2007 ) . Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nat . Nanotechnol . 2 , 780 – 783 . Cunningham , C . C . , Gorlin , J . B . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Hartwig , J . H . , Janmey , P . A . , Byers , H . R . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 1992 ) . Actin - binding protein requirement for cortical stability and efﬁcient locomotion . Science 255 , 325 – 327 . Deberardinis , R . J . , Sayed , N . , Ditsworth , D . , andThompson , C . B . ( 2008 ) . Brick bybrick : metabolismandtumorcellgrowth . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 18 , 54 – 61 . delAlamo , J . C . , Norwich , G . N . , Li , Y . S . J . , Lasheras , J . C . , andChien , S . ( 2008 ) . Anisotropic rheology and directional mechanotransduction in vascular endo - thelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 15411 – 15416 . Doyle , A . D . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2010 ) . Cell biology : Sensing tension . Nature 466 , 192 – 193 . Dufreˆne , Y . F . , Evans , E . , Engel , A . , Helenius , J . , Gaub , H . E . , and Mu¨ller , D . J . ( 2011 ) . Five challenges to bringing single - molecule force spectroscopy into living cells . Nat . Methods 8 , 123 – 127 . Ehrlicher , A . J . , Nakamura , F . , Hartwig , J . H . , Weitz , D . A . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 2011 ) . Mechanical straininactin networksregulatesFilGAP and integrinbind - ing to ﬁlamin A . Nature 478 , 260 – 263 . Fabry , B . , Maksym , G . N . , Butler , J . P . , Glogauer , M . , Navajas , D . , and Fred - berg , J . J . ( 2001 ) . Scaling the microrheology of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 148102 . Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . B . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 . Gundersen , G . G . , and Worman , H . J . ( 2013 ) . Nuclear positioning . Cell 152 , 1376 – 1389 . Guo , M . , Ehrlicher , A . J . , Mahammad , S . , Fabich , H . , Jensen , M . H . , Moore , J . R . , Fredberg , J . J . , Goldman , R . D . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2013 ) . The role of vimen - tin intermediate ﬁlaments in cortical and cytoplasmic mechanics . Biophys . J . 105 , 1562 – 1568 . Gupton , S . L . , Anderson , K . L . , Kole , T . P . , Fischer , R . S . , Ponti , A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Danuser , G . , Fowler , V . M . , Wirtz , D . , Hanein , D . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration without a lamellipodium : trans - lation of actin dynamics into cell movement mediated by tropomyosin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 619 – 631 . Hale , C . M . , Sun , S . X . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2009 ) . Resolving the role of actoymyosin contractility in cell microrheology . PLoS ONE 4 , e7054 . Hammar , P . , Leroy , P . , Mahmutovic , A . , Marklund , E . G . , Berg , O . G . , andElf , J . ( 2012 ) . The lac repressor displays facilitated diffusion in living cells . Science 336 , 1595 – 1598 . Han , W . P . , Ng , Y . K . , Axelrod , D . , and Levitan , E . S . ( 1999 ) . Neuropeptide release by efﬁcient recruitment of diffusing cytoplasmic secretory vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 14577 – 14582 . Heisenberg , C . - P . , and Bellaı¨che , Y . ( 2013 ) . Forces in tissue morphogenesis and patterning . Cell 153 , 948 – 962 . Hendricks , A . G . , Holzbaur , E . L . F . , and Goldman , Y . E . ( 2012 ) . Force measure - ments on cargoes in living cells reveal collective dynamics of microtubule mo - tors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 18447 – 18452 . Hoffman , B . D . , Massiera , G . , Van Citters , K . M . , and Crocker , J . C . ( 2006 ) . The consensusmechanicsofculturedmammaliancells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10259 – 10264 . Holzer , R . G . , MacDougall , C . , Cortright , G . , Atwood , K . , Green , J . E . , and Jor - cyk , C . L . ( 2003 ) . Development and characterization of a progressive series of mammary adenocarcinoma celllines derived from theC3 ( 1 ) / SV40 Large T - an - tigen transgenic mouse model . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . 77 , 65 – 76 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) . Mechanicsofmotorproteinsandthecytoskeleton ( Sunder - land , MA : Sinauer Associates ) . Jaqaman , K . , Kuwata , H . , Touret , N . , Collins , R . , Trimble , W . S . , Danuser , G . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2011 ) . Cytoskeletal control of CD36 diffusion promotes its receptor and signaling function . Cell 146 , 593 – 606 . Koenderink , G . H . , Dogic , Z . , Nakamura , F . , Bendix , P . M . , MacKintosh , F . C . , Hartwig , J . H . , Stossel , T . P . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2009 ) . An active biopolymer network controlled by molecular motors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 15192 – 15197 . Kova´cs , M . , To´th , J . , Hete´nyi , C . , Ma´lna´si - Csizmadia , A . , and Sellers , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Mechanism of blebbistatin inhibition of myosin II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 35557 – 35563 . Kraning - Rush , C . M . , Califano , J . P . , and Reinhart - King , C . A . ( 2012 ) . Cellular traction stresses increase with increasing metastatic potential . PLoS ONE 7 , e32572 . Kyoung , M . , and Sheets , E . D . ( 2008 ) . Vesicle diffusion close to a membrane : intermembraneinteractionsmeasuredwithﬂuorescence correlationspectros - copy . Biophys . J . 95 , 5789 – 5797 . Lau , A . W . C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Davies , A . , Crocker , J . C . , and Lubensky , T . C . ( 2003 ) . Microrheology , stress ﬂuctuations , and active behavior of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 198101 . Luby - Phelps , K . ( 2000 ) . Cytoarchitecture and physical properties of cyto - plasm : volume , viscosity , diffusion , intracellular surface area . Int . Rev . Cytol . 192 , 189 – 221 . Luby - Phelps , K . , Castle , P . E . , Taylor , D . L . , andLanni , F . ( 1987 ) . Hindereddiffu - sion of inert tracer particles in the cytoplasm of mouse 3T3 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 4910 – 4913 . MacKintosh , F . C . ( 2012 ) . Active diffusion : the erratic dance of chromosomal loci . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 7138 – 7139 . MacKintosh , F . C . , and Levine , A . J . ( 2008 ) . Nonequilibrium mechanics and dy - namics of motor - activated gels . Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 018104 . Mendez , M . G . , Kojima , S . I . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 2010 ) . Vimentin induces changes in cell shape , motility , and adhesion during the epithelial to mesen - chymal transition . FASEB J . 24 , 1838 – 1851 . Mizuno , D . , Tardin , C . , Schmidt , C . F . , and Mackintosh , F . C . ( 2007 ) . Nonequi - librium mechanics of active cytoskeletal networks . Science 315 , 370 – 373 . Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 831 Mizuno , D . , Bacabac , R . , Tardin , C . , Head , D . , and Schmidt , C . F . ( 2009 ) . High - resolution probing of cellular force transmission . Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 168102 . Nagaraja , G . M . , Othman , M . , Fox , B . P . , Alsaber , R . , Pellegrino , C . M . , Zeng , Y . , Khanna , R . , Tamburini , P . , Swaroop , A . , and Kandpal , R . P . ( 2006 ) . Gene expressionsignatures andbiomarkersofnoninvasiveandinvasivebreastcan - cer cells : comprehensive proﬁles by representational difference analysis , mi - croarrays and proteomics . Oncogene 25 , 2328 – 2338 . Parry , B . R . , Surovtsev , I . V . , Cabeen , M . T . , O’Hern , C . S . , Dufresne , E . R . , and Jacobs - Wagner , C . ( 2014 ) . The bacterial cytoplasm has glass - like properties and is ﬂuidized by metabolic activity . Cell 156 , 183 – 194 . Plodinec , M . , Loparic , M . , Monnier , C . A . , Obermann , E . C . , Zanetti - Dallenbach , R . , Oertle , P . , Hyotyla , J . T . , Aebi , U . , Bentires - Alj , M . , Schoenenberger , C . A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The Nanomechanical Signature of Breast Cancer . Biophys . J . 104 , 321A – 321A . Rai , A . K . , Rai , A . , Ramaiya , A . J . , Jha , R . , and Mallik , R . ( 2013 ) . Molecular ad - aptationsallowdyneintogeneratelargecollectiveforcesinsidecells . Cell 152 , 172 – 182 . Sherr , C . J . ( 1996 ) . Cancer cell cycles . Science 274 , 1672 – 1677 . Svoboda , K . , and Block , S . M . ( 1994 ) . Force and velocity measured for single kinesin molecules . Cell 77 , 773 – 784 . Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular transport . Cell 112 , 467 – 480 . Valentine , M . T . , Perlman , Z . E . , Gardel , M . L . , Shin , J . H . , Matsudaira , P . , Mitch - ison , T . J . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Colloid surface chemistry critically affects multiple particle tracking measurements of biomaterials . Biophys . J . 86 , 4004 – 4014 . Veigel , C . , Bartoo , M . L . , White , D . C . S . , Sparrow , J . C . , and Molloy , J . E . ( 1998 ) . The stiffness of rabbit skeletal actomyosin cross - bridges determined with an optical tweezers transducer . Biophys . J . 75 , 1424 – 1438 . Wang , X . , and Schwarz , T . L . ( 2009 ) . The mechanism of Ca2 + - dependent regulation of kinesin - mediated mitochondrial motility . Cell 136 , 163 – 174 . Weber , S . C . , Spakowitz , A . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Nonthermal ATP - dependent ﬂuctuations contribute to the in vivo motion of chromosomal loci . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 7338 – 7343 . Wilhelm , C . ( 2008 ) . Out - of - equilibrium microrheology inside living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 028101 . Wu , P . H . , Hale , C . M . , Chen , W . C . , Lee , J . S . H . , Tseng , Y . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2012 ) . High - throughput ballistic injection nanorheology to measure cell mechanics . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 155 – 170 . Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . , and Kuo , S . C . ( 2000 ) . Mechanics of living cells measured by laser tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 78 , 1736 – 1747 . Zhou , E . H . , Trepat , X . , Park , C . Y . , Lenormand , G . , Oliver , M . N . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Hardin , C . , Weitz , D . A . , Butler , J . P . , and Fredberg , J . J . ( 2009 ) . Universal behavior of the osmotically compressed cell and its analogy to the colloidal glass transition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 10632 – 10637 . 832 Cell 158 , 822 – 832 , August 14 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc .