RNA polymerase II and PARP1 shape enhancer - promoter contacts Gilad Barshad 1 , James J . Lewis 1 , Alexandra G . Chivu 1 , Abderhman Abuhashem 2 , 3 , 4 , Nils Krietenstein 5 , Edward J . Rice 1 , Oliver J . Rando 6 , Anna - Katerina Hadjantonakis 2 , 4 and Charles G . Danko 1 , 7 , * 1 Baker Institute for Animal Health , College of Veterinary Medicine , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA . 2 Developmental Biology Program , Sloan Kettering Institute , Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , New York , NY 10065 , USA . 3 Weill Cornell / Rockefeller / Sloan Kettering Tri - Institutional MD - PhD Program , New York , NY 10065 4 Biochemistry Cell and Molecular Biology Program , Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences , Cornell University , New York , NY 10065 , USA . 5 The Novo Nordisk Center for Protein Research ( CPR ) , Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark . 6 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01605 , USA . 7 Department of Biomedical Sciences , College of Veterinary Medicine , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA . * Correspondence : dankoc @ gmail . com Abstract How enhancers control target gene expression over long genomic distances remains an important unsolved problem . Here we studied enhancer - promoter contact architecture and communication by integrating data from nucleosome - resolution genomic contact maps , nascent transcription , and perturbations to transcription - associated proteins and thousands of candidate enhancers . Contact frequency between functionally validated enhancer - promoter pairs was most enriched near the + 1 and + 2 nucleosomes at enhancers and target promoters , indicating that functional enhancer - promoter pairs spend time in close physical proximity . Blocking RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) caused major disruptions to enhancer - promoter contacts . Paused Pol II occupancy and the enzymatic activity of poly ( ADP - ribose ) polymerase 1 ( PARP1 ) stabilized enhancer - promoter contacts . Based on our findings , we propose an updated model that couples transcriptional dynamics and enhancer - promoter communication . Main Text Much of metazoan cellular diversity is encoded by cis - regulatory elements known as enhancers , which regulate the rate of mRNA production from distal promoters ( 1 ) . Since the landmark discovery of the SV40 enhancer more than 40 years ago ( 2 – 4 ) a key goal has been to understand the molecular basis by which enhancers and promoters communicate across long stretches of DNA sequence . The predominant model proposes that enhancers and promoters ‘loop’ into close physical proximity in the 3D space within the nucleus . These loop interactions are frequently represented as a physical bridge by which the enhancer and promoter are connected via highly stereotyped protein - protein interactions involving transcription factors , Pol II , mediator , cohesin and other proteins ( 5 , 6 ) . Indeed , chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) based methods such as in - situ Hi - C ( 7 ) and Micro - C ( 8 ) , which measure the frequency of ligation between DNA sequences that are close together in 3D space ( 9 ) , can be used to predict the functional impact of enhancers on a target genes ( 10 – 12 ) . Moreover , changes in enhancer - promoter loops ( 13 , 14 ) , as well as preestablished loops ( 10 , 15 ) are associated with activation of target promoters . Despite some support , however , several recent observations are not compatible with the looping model . Measurements of enhancer - promoter distances in several fly and mouse developmental loci , using microscopy in both living and fixed cells , have revealed that enhancers and promoters are hundreds of nanometers apart at the time of gene activation ( 16 – 18 ) . In one well - characterized locus , the physical distance between the Shh promoter and several developmental enhancers increased following gene activation ( 16 ) . Finally , depletion of proteins proposed to constitute a physical bridge , such as mediator and cohesin , have minimal impact on either Hi - C maps or transcription ( 19 , 20 ) . These studies have demonstrated that we still lack complete answers to long - standing questions about enhancer - promoter communication : Do active enhancers “linger” close to their target promoters in order to activate transcription ? And which molecules play a role in facilitating enhancer - promoter communication ? Here we leverage the new high - resolution 3C method , Micro - C ( 8 , 21 – 23 ) , nascent RNA sequencing ( 24 – 26 ) , and perturbations to Pol II , PARP1 , and thousands of candidate enhancers ( 27 , 28 ) , to study the interplay between transcription and enhancer - promoter contact dynamics . We used CRISPR interference ( CRISPRi ) experiments testing nearly six thousand candidate enhancers ( 27 , 28 ) to demonstrate that functional interactions between enhancers and their target promoter were associated with increased Micro - C contact frequency compared with those lacking an impact on gene expression , suggesting that functional enhancer - promoter pairs spend more time in very close physical proximity . Manipulation of transcription - related proteins revealed a crucial role for Pol II and its transcriptional dynamics affecting enhancer - promoter contact frequency . We also found that the enzymatic activity of poly ( ADP - ribose ) polymerase 1 ( PARP1 ) , which creates a web of post - translational modifications and transient interactions via PAR chains that connect transcription and chromatin proteins , had a stabilizing effect on enhancer - promoter contacts . These observations lead us to an updated model that integrates the effects of transcription and chromatin in enhancer - promoter communication . Results Enhancer function correlates with enhancer - promoter contacts We asked whether functional enhancer - promoter pairs , in which enhancers are actively stimulating gene expression , spend more time in close physical proximity compared to nonfunctional pairs . To detect interactions between candidate enhancers and promoters , we generated a ~ 1 . 7 billion contact Micro - C dataset in K562 cells ( Fig . 1A ) . We defined enhancer function as the effect an enhancer has on target gene expression or activity using CRISPRi to knock down candidate enhancers ( 11 , 27 – 29 ) . We first analyzed seven CRISPRi - defined enhancers that regulate MYC expression in K562 cells ( 28 ) , all of which fall within the same topologically associated domain ( TAD ) as the MYC protein - coding gene . Each of the seven active MYC enhancers was located near a transcription initiation region ( TIR ) , representing the transcription start site of an enhancer RNA ( eRNA ) , identified from dREG ( 30 , 31 ) analysis of K562 PRO - seq data ( 32 ) ( Fig . 1A ) . We calculated the number of contacts observed between each TIR and the MYC promoter , normalized for the local background and the linear distance between each enhancer - promoter pair ( Fig . S1A ; see Methods ) . Contacts between the seven CRISPRi - validated enhancers and the MYC promoter ( functional enhancer - promoter pairs ) were significantly higher than those observed for the other TIRs within the same TAD that had no detectable effect on MYC ( nonfunctional pairs , ~ 2 . 46 fold increase in median normalized contacts for functional pairs , p = 0 . 015 ; Mann - Whitney U - test ) ( Fig . 1B ) . As the MYC locus in K562 cells is unusual in many respects , we next examined the relationship between enhancer function and enhancer - promoter contacts genome - wide . We used data from a CRISPRi screen that tested the function of 5 , 920 candidate enhancers in K562 cells ( 27 ) . We defined 620 functional enhancers that are located between 5kb and 1Mb away from their target promoter and that elicited a significant decrease in target gene expression following CRISPRi knockdown ( empirical p - value < 0 . 05 and expression fold change < 0 . 9 ) . As a control , we defined 3 , 375 nonfunctional pairs in which the enhancer had no effect on a particular target gene ( empirical p - value > 0 . 9 and expression fold change within 0 . 95 - 1 . 05 ) . We found a significantly higher number of contacts in functional enhancer - promoter pairs ( ~ 17 % increase in median normalized contacts for functional pairs , p < 1X10 - 10 ; Mann Whitney U test ) ( Fig . S1B ) . Next we curated a subset of 196 functional and 196 nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs , in which we controlled for the confounding effects of linear distance , target gene transcription levels , and chromatin accessibility ( Fig . S1C ) . Here too , we found a significantly higher number of contacts in functional enhancer - promoter pairs ( ~ 12 % increase in median normalized contacts for functional pairs , p = 0 . 028 ; Mann Whitney U test ) ( Fig . 1C ) . We conclude that functionally active enhancer - promoter pairs , in which the enhancer is actively controlling expression from the target promoter , have a higher interaction frequency in Micro - C data than nonfunctional pairs . We next investigated whether functional enhancer - promoter pairs spend more time close together in 3D space . Micro - C requires chromatin to be close enough to crosslink in a confirmation and at a distance that the free ends of DNA exiting each nucleosome can ligate to one another ( 9 ) . We reasoned that if enhancer - promoter pairs are predominantly ~ 100 - 200 nm apart during communication , as observed in live and fixed cell imaging studies ( 16 – 18 ) , increased Micro - C signal between functional pairs will be most prominent further from the transcription start site ( TSS ) where chromatin can reach out through the intervening nuclear space , crosslink and ligate . By contrast , increased signal near the TSS at both the enhancer and promoter implies that enhancer - promoter pairs can be close enough that crosslinked chromatin can swing around and ligate directly to one another . We therefore examined the enrichment of functional contacts as a function of distance from the TSS . Active enhancers and promoters consist of a nucleosome - free core region flanked by bidirectional transcription initiation and well - positioned + 1 and + 2 nucleosomes downstream of the most - used TSS ( 33 – 35 ) that are readily observed in Micro - C data after aligning on coPRO TSSs ( 32 , 36 ) ( Fig . S2 ) . Aggregated peak analysis ( APA ) between all candidate enhancer and promoter pairs ( 5kb - 100kb ) showed that contacts between + 1 ( promoter ) / + 1 ( enhancer ) nucleosomes were most prominent ( Fig . 1D ) . Next , we examined the difference in contact frequency between the CRISPRi functional and nonfunctional enhancer promoter pairs . The difference was highest near the TSS , especially involving the + 1 and + 2 nucleosomes , and decayed as a function of distance to ~ 5kb from the TSS ( Pearson’s R = - 0 . 81 , p = 9 . 6X10 - 7 ) ( Fig . 1E , F ) . We conclude that contact frequency between functional enhancer - promoter pairs was most enriched within the first ~ 1 kb from the TSS . This result indicates that enhancer activation of a target promoter was associated with a relatively high probability of the enhancer - promoter pair being in close proximity in 3D space . Enhancer - promoter contacts depend on active transcription We asked which cellular factors mediate the increased contacts observed between enhancers and their target promoters . One model of interaction involves the aggregation of transcription proteins into clusters that contain both enhancers and promoters and act to facilitate communication ( 37 – 43 ) . Both the C - terminal domain ( CTD ) of the large subunit of RNA Pol II and nascent RNA are reported to form macromolecular clusters with other transcription - related proteins ( 40 , 44 , 45 ) . These results imply that Pol II itself may play a role in mediating enhancer - promoter contacts . Although perturbing Pol II was reported to have modest effects on enhancer - promoter contacts ( 22 , 46 ) , previous studies have generally not accounted for global changes in the proportion of the entire Micro - C library ( i . e . , 1D signal ) that map to enhancer - or promoter - regions , and thereby may have underestimated the effects of Pol II depletion . We set out to test the hypothesis that Pol II is required for enhancer and promoter regions to come into close proximity . To accommodate global changes in the distribution of contacts , we devised APAs that adjust for local background near enhancer - and promoter - anchors between different treatment conditions ( Fig . 2A ; see Methods ) . Using this strategy to re - analyze Micro - C data after blocking either Pol II initiation ( triptolide - TRP ) or release from pause ( flavopiridol - FLV ) ( 22 ) showed that the largest effect of Pol II transcriptional inhibition occurred near the TSS ( Fig . 2B ) , consistent with the hypothesis that actively elongating Pol II plays a pivotal role in holding enhancers and promoters in physical proximity . Moreover , by blocking release from pause , FLV not only prevents actively elongating Pol II from entering the gene body , but also leaves paused Pol II near the TSS at most promoters ( 47 ) . We hypothesized that the presence of paused Pol II may retain some of the interactions that are depleted in TRP , in which all Pol II is depleted from chromatin . Indeed , inhibition of Pol II recruitment to promoters and enhancers by TRP had a stronger effect on enhancer - promoter contacts compared with the effect of inhibiting pause release by FLV ( Fig . 2B , lower panel ; p < 10 - 100 ; Wilcoxon signed - rank test ) , suggesting that Pol II occupancy at the pause site may have a stabilizing effect on these contacts . To complement the normalization performed in APAs , we also devised an alternative local normalization scheme that is specific to each candidate enhancer - promoter pair ( Fig 2C ; see Methods ) . Consistent with the APA analysis , we found that following transcription inhibition enhancer - promoter contacts dropped by ~ 30 % ( Fig . 2D ) . Additionally , more than 70 % of enhancer - promoter pairs showed lower contact frequency following acute transcriptional inhibition ( Fig . 2D ) . To explore the specificity of the effect of Pol II inhibition on enhancer - promoter contacts , we analyzed its effect on CTCF - associated contacts . CTCF binding sites often exhibit strong focal contacts in Hi - C and Micro - C maps ( 21 ) but did not show the same decreased contact frequency observed between enhancer - promoter pairs ( Fig . 2E ) . We conclude that focal contacts between enhancers and promoters , but not CTCF - CTCF contacts , are substantially depleted following acute transcriptional inhibition , indicating a role for Pol II in facilitating contacts . Rates of Pol II initiation and pause correlate with enhancer - promoter contacts We next asked how different steps in the transcription cycle correlate with contacts . At steady - state , the rate of transcription initiation is proportional to gene body transcription levels , whereas the rate of release of paused Pol II into productive elongation is proportional to the pausing index ( 48 ) . We divided human gene promoters into 4 quartiles based on their gene body transcription levels ( initiation ) , the gene body - normalized PRO - seq signal at the first 250bp downstream of the TSS ( pausing index ) or the PRO - seq signal at the first 250bp downstream of the TSS alone ( pausing signal ) in K562 cells ( Fig 3A , B ) . The largest change in overall promoter contacts with the surrounding enhancers was associated with gene body transcription levels , in - line with previous findings ( 11 , 14 , 49 ) . Increased enhancer - promoter contacts were also associated with pausing signal and pausing index . However , whereas the increase in contacts associated with gene body transcription spread across the regions surrounding enhancers and promoters , the pause - associated correlation was more specific to focal ( TSS - TSS ) enhancer - promoter contacts near the location at which paused Pol II resides ( Fig 3B , S3 ) . To further isolate the effect of Pol II pausing from productive elongation , we compared changes in transcription and contacts between different cell types . We generated new Micro - C data from Jurkat T - cells ( ~ 1 . 18 billion contacts ) and compared it to our K562 Micro - C data . Both Jurkat and K562 are cultured cell lines of human origin , but they model different cell types in the hematopoietic lineage ; While K562 show similar properties to cells of the common myeloid progenitor lineage , Jurkats model human T - cells . Overall , transcriptional differences between the cell lines were associated with differences in enhancer - promoter contacts ( Fig 3C ) . Differential transcription of gene bodies , and differences in the abundance of paused Pol II near promoters , were both positively correlated with enhancer - promoter contacts ( Fig 3D , Fig . S4A ) . To isolate the effects of paused Pol II on contact frequency , we compared gene promoters associated with a similar and significant change in gene body transcription , which differ because they were either associated with a change or no associated change in paused Pol II levels ( Fig . S4B ; PC = Pause change ; NPC = No pause change ) . We found that genes with a significant increase in productive elongation but no associated change in paused Pol II showed either no increase or a smaller increase in enhancer - promoter contacts , relative to genes associated with increased paused Pol II ( Fig . 3E , Fig . S4C ) . Hence , we conclude that paused Pol II has a significant effect on enhancer - promoter contacts that is independent of initiation or productive elongation rates . NELF degradation depletes enhancer - promoter contacts To further explore the role of Pol II pausing , we next asked whether depleting paused Pol II removed enhancer - promoter contacts . Although previously published triptolide and flavopiridol experiments alter Pol II pausing , they also appear to have a substantial inhibitory effect on transcription initiation ( 50 ) . To focus on the effect of Pol II pausing , we used a mouse embryonic stem cell ( mESC ) system in which both copies of the negative elongation factor complex submit B ( NELFB ) were tagged with FKBP12 F36V , allowing the rapid and reversible degradation of the NELF complex in the presence of a dTAG ligand ( 51 , 52 ) ( Fig . 4A ) . Following 30 minutes of NELFB depletion , Pol II density in TSSs decreased . However , by 60 minutes of NELFB depletion , Pol II signal near the TSS was partially regained ( Fig . 4B ) . Notably , it was recently shown that this recovery of Pol II near the TSS represents transcriptionally inactive Pol II that cannot productively elongate in the absence of NELF ( 53 , 54 ) . This suggests that while Pol II pausing was depleted following NELFB depletion , transcription initiation rates were intact or may even increase ( 50 ) . To ask if such a drop in Pol II pausing results in a loss of enhancer - promoter contacts , we generated Micro - C libraries ( ~ 300 million contacts each ) following a time - course of NELFB depletion and dTAG washout . We found a small but highly reproducible drop in enhancer - promoter contacts beginning at 30 minutes and decreased further at 60 minutes of NELFB depletion ( Fig . 4C ; Fig . S6 ) . This suggests that the accumulation of improperly paused Pol II ( 53 , 54 ) cannot rescue the loss of contacts associated with paused Pol II loss . Washout of the dTAG ligand over 8 and 24 hours , corresponding to a ~ 20 - 40 % restoration of NELFB levels ( 54 ) , increased enhancer - promoter contacts back to the levels observed in untreated cells ( Fig . 4C ; Fig . S6 ) . The effect of dTAG was specific to enhancer - promoter contacts and was not observed at transcriptionally inactive CTCF binding sites ( Fig 4D ) . Finally , the magnitude of decrease in contact frequency correlated with the magnitude of paused Pol II loss at 30 minutes ( Pearson’s R = 0 . 24 ; p = 0 . 018 ; taking median of 1 - percentiles , see Methods ) , such that candidate enhancer - promoter pairs which lost more paused Pol II also lost more contacts . A good example is the ZRS enhancer of the Shh gene , which had a large drop in paused Pol II signal as well as a large loss of contacts with the Shh promoter following 30 minutes of NELFB depletion ( Fig . S5 ) . Hence , we conclude that paused Pol II contributes to enhancer - promoter contact levels ( Fig 4E ) . PARP1 enzymatic activity has two opposite effects on enhancer - promoter contact stability The effect of paused Pol II highlighted another protein known to be involved in interactions between transcription - related proteins , PARP1 , as a potential regulator of enhancer - promoter contacts . PARP1 is an enzyme which catalyzes the formation of poly ( ADP - ribose ) ( PAR ) chains , a post - translational modification added to transcription and chromatin - associated proteins ( which are said to be “PARylated” ) near active enhancer and promoter regions ( 55 – 61 ) . PAR chains play a critical role in driving the formation of molecular clusters through interactions with intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) of proteins ( 62 ) . Finally , inhibiting the enzymatic activity of PARP1 prevented changes in 3D distance between the Shh promoter and developmental enhancers in mouse embryos ( 16 ) . We asked whether PARP1 enzymatic activity impacts enhancer - promoter contacts . We inhibited PARP1 enzymatic activity using the small molecule inhibitor Olaparib , which is relatively specific to PARP1 and leaves catalytically inactive PARP1 on chromatin ( 63 ) . We generated Micro - C libraries following 90 minutes of Olaparib or DMSO - treatment in K562 cells ( > 900 million contacts ) ( Fig . 5A ) . PARP1 inhibition by Olaparib decreased the contact frequency between putative enhancer - promoter pairs ( p < 1X10 - 100 ; Wilcoxon signed - rank test ) ( Fig . 5B - C ) . The effect of Olaparib did not affect contacts between CTCF binding sites , indicating that it was specific to enhancer - promoter contacts . ( Figs . 5C and S7A ) . Hence , we conclude that PARP1 enzymatic activity has a role in stabilizing enhancer - promoter contacts . PARP1 promotes the escape of paused Pol II by PARylating NELFE , a subunit of the NELF protein complex ( 55 ) . Indeed , ChRO - seq data in Olaparib treated K562 cells showed a global increase in paused Pol II near TSSs relative to a DMSO control ( Fig . S7B ) . To understand the impact of PARP1 on Pol II pausing , we prepared high - resolution PARP1 CUT & Tag ( 64 ) data in K562 cells . PARP1 CUT & TAG revealed distinct binding patterns of PARP1 in promoter and enhancer TSSs : whereas PARP1 bound at similar levels both upstream and downstream of the TSS at enhancers , PARP1 binding downstream of the TSS varited significantly between different promoters ( Fig . S7B ) . At steady state , binding of PARP1 downstream of promoter TSSs was correlated with the abundance of both paused Pol II and NELFE ( Fig . S7B ) . Following Olaparib treatment , promoters with a large downstream signal for PARP1 had a substantial increase in paused Pol II ( Cluster I ; Fig . 5C ) . This additional downstream PARP1 peak , unique to promoters that correlated with increased pausing , is located roughly at the + 1 nucleosome , near where paused Pol II and NELFE reside on the chromatin ( Fig . 5C ) ( 55 ) . Notably , the effect of PARP1 inhibition on Pol II signal was strongly positively correlated with baseline levels of PARP1 binding near the TSS ( Fig . S7C ) . Collectively , these findings indicate that while PARP1 is located at most active promoter regions , we see substantial variability in the effect of PARP1 on paused Pol II between different promoters . We reasoned that increased Pol II pausing , which increases enhancer - promoter contact frequency , may partially mask other effects of PARP1 that lead to decreased contact frequency observed following Olaparib . Consistent with this model , we found that changes in paused Pol II density near promoter TSSs were correlated with changes in enhancer - promoter contact frequency ( Pearson’s R = 0 . 30 , p = 0 . 003 ; taking median of 1 - percentiles , see Methods ) , such that candidate enhancer - promoter pairs which accumulated more paused Pol II tended to lose fewer contacts . These findings suggest that PARP1 has at least two effects on enhancer - promoter contacts : The main effect , a stabilizing one , is independent of Pol II pausing and may depend on the contribution of PAR chains to macromolecular clustering ( 62 ) . A weaker , destabilizing effect of PARP1 activity on enhancer - promoter contacts depends on PARylating NELFE ( 55 ) and accelerating Pol II escape from pause ( Fig . 5E ) . Discussion Currently two alternative models are proposed to explain how enhancer and promoter regions communicate . The looping model holds that enhancer and promoter DNA come into close physical contact , perhaps through a structural bridge formed by proteins involved in transcriptional activation ( 5 , 6 ) . More recently , an alternative model ( which we will call the “hub” model , following ( 37 , 43 ) ) has come into favor which predicts that enhancer and promoter regions form malleable “hubs” , in which very high local concentrations of transcription - associated proteins facilitate transcriptional bursts . The hub model was proposed to address several recent findings which did not appear compatible with a loop model , including long physical distance between enhancers and promoters upon gene activation ( 16 , 17 , 65 ) , the apparent ability of enhancers to activate transcription from multiple promoters simultaneously ( 66 ) , multi - way interactions of enhancer clusters ( 67 ) , and observations that transcription - associated proteins , proposed to compose a structural enhancer - promoter bridge , have modest effects on enhancer - promoter interaction frequency ( 20 , 22 , 46 ) . A key difference between the loop and hub models is that the loop model predicts a short physical distance between enhancers and promoters upon interaction . We used the nucleosome - level resolution of Micro - C in conjunction with a large - scale CRISPRi screen to demonstrate that functional pairs of enhancers and promoters are most enriched in contacts near the TSS , with a peak at interactions between the + 1 ( enhancer ) / + 1 ( promoter ) and the + 2 / + 2 nucleosomes . Micro - C only detects contacts that are close enough to be crosslinked and ligated ( 9 ) , suggesting that functional enhancer - promoter pairs are enriched for very short interaction distances . Precisely how close enhancer and promoter regions are remains difficult to say ( our findings highlight the need for new 3C - based methods that measure distance directly ) . Although nucleosomes are 10 nm in diameter ( 68 ) the free ends of DNA sequence are even closer together than 10 nm when they exit the nucleosome at the dyad axis ( 69 ) . This implies that DNA encoding enhancer - promoter elements can come in close proximity at some point during or around transcriptional activation . We caution that our findings do not mean the loop model is correct ; rather our findings may alternatively imply that distances between functionally interacting enhancers and promoters may not be as large as previous estimates appear to suggest . We propose that short - distance enhancer - promoter interactions are functional , but are more malleable than predicted by the looping model ( 5 , 6 ) . A key prediction of both models is that transcription - associated proteins , including transcription factors , mediator and Pol II play key roles in enhancer - promoter communication . For this reason , the muted effect that degrading key transcription proteins , including mediator and Pol II , was reported to have on contact frequency was unexpected ( 20 , 22 , 46 ) . Chromatin at enhancers and promoters undergoes substantial changes when Pol II or other transcription proteins are depleted ( 70 , 71 ) , and these changes must be controlled for when measuring changes in contact frequency . Normalizing to the local changes in background contacts highlight Pol II as a major factor that contributes to enhancer - promoter interaction frequency . Notably , our results are consistent with very new preprints that make use of the higher - resolution MNase - based 3C analyses following depletion of Pol II or Mediator ( 72 , 73 ) . Several aspects of Pol II may help facilitate interactions , especially under a hub model : First , the C - terminal heptad repeats on RPB1 , the largest subunit of Pol II , have been shown to aid in macromolecular clustering ( 38 , 41 , 42 , 65 , 74 , 75 ) . Second , the nascent RNA emerging from the exit channel may also contribute to clustering ( 76 , 77 ) . We present several independent lines of evidence that highlight a role for paused Pol II in stabilizing enhancer - promoter interactions . Paused Pol II can be stable over durations estimated between 1 - 10 minutes ( 47 , 78 ) . Given its stable attachment to DNA through the transcription bubble , it is possible that paused Pol II may serve as one of the tethers connecting promoter or enhancer DNA into an enhancer - promoter interaction . Under a hub model , paused Pol II initiated from multiple TSSs within a transcription initiation domain ( 36 ) may serve to keep both enhancer and promoter DNA tethered to the hub . Indeed , paused Pol II tethering enhancers into a hub may serve as one way in which enhancer - templated RNAs ( eRNAs ) have a sequence - independent biological function . This type of multivalent interaction across multiple Pol II molecules within a narrow window is more difficult to imagine in a loop model , which posits physical interactions between molecules at the enhancer and target promoter . Our observation that PAR chains catalyzed by PARP1 appear to stabilize enhancer - promoter contacts may be most compatible with a hub model . PAR chains facilitate macromolecular clustering via transient interactions between IDRs ( 62 , 79 ) . PARP1 also has an additional role in releasing paused Pol II into productive elongation by parylating NELFE ( 55 ) . Our finding that PARP1 inhibition increased paused Pol II is consistent with this previous report . At first glance , this result appears incompatible with our observations that paused Pol II stabilizes contacts , but that inhibition of PARP1 reduces contacts . The most parsimonious explanation is that PARP1 has multiple effects on enhancer - promoter contacts : some of which stabilize interactions between transcription related proteins , and at least one which reduces contacts by releasing paused Pol II . The correlation observed between increased paused Pol II and contact frequency appears to support this multi - function model . In summary , our work suggests several important changes to the prevailing models of enhancer - promoter interactions . First , we found that functionally active enhancer - promoter pairs are more likely to reside in close physical proximity . Second , we provide direct evidence for the effect of Pol II on enhancer - promoter contacts . Our work emphasizes an important effect of Pol II pausing in metazoan cells and sheds light on the evolution of this trait alongside long - range enhancer - promoter interactions . Third , we show that PARP1 , a major chromatin modulator and transcriptional regulator , affects enhancer - promoter communication in several ways ( Fig . 5 ) . Thus , considering transcription as a modulator of enhancer - promoter contacts may help future studies to better define the temporal correlation between the two . Materials and methods Cell culture Cells were cultured in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5 % CO2 . K562 and Jurkat cells were grown in RPMI - 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and 1X penicillin streptomycin antibiotic . For the PARP1 inhibition experiment , cells were treated with either 10 μM Olaparib , initially diluted in DMSO , or DMSO only , for 90 min before immediately crosslinked for Micro - C or lysed in NUN buffer ( 0 . 3 M NaCl , 1 M Urea , 1 % NP - 40 , 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 7 . 5 mM MgCl2 , 0 . 2 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 20 units per ml SUPERase In RNase Inhibitor ( Life Technologies , AM2694 ) , 1X Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ( Roche , 11 873 580 001 ) ) for ChRO - seq . mECSs harboring a homozygous endogenous NELFB - FKBP12 F36V fusion protein were cultured on 0 . 1 % gelatin ( Millipore ) in PBS + / + coated tissue - culture grade plates . For routine culture , cells were grown in Serum / LIF conditions : DMEM ( Gibco ) , supplemented with 2 mM L - glutamine ( Gibco ) , 1x MEM non - essential amino acids ( Gibco ) , 1 mM sodium pyruvate ( Gibco ) , 100 U / ml penicillin and 100 U / ml streptomycin ( Gibco ) , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ( Gibco ) , 15 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( Gibco ) , and 1000 U / ml of recombinant leukemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) . To induce NELFB degradation , dTAG - 13 ( Bio - Techne ) was reconstituted in DMSO ( Sigma ) at 5 mM . dTAG - 13 was diluted in maintenance medium to 500 nM and added to cells with medium changes for the specified amounts of time . For dTAG washes , the cells were washed 4 times , twice with PBS + / + and twice with maintenance medium following the treatment time to ensure complete removal of the dTAG ligand . At the end of each dTAG - 13 treatment time point , cells were detached using Trypsin - EDTA ( 0 . 05 % ) ( Gibco ) and counted before crosslinking for Micro - C . Micro - C Micro - C for K562 , Jurkat and mESCs was performed by following the published protocol for mammalian Micro - C ( 21 , 22 , 80 ) . Cells were crosslinked with 1 ml per million cells of 1 % formaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature and quenched by 0 . 25 M Glycine for 5 min . After spin - down for 5 minutes at 300Xg at 4 °C , cells were washed at a density of 1 ml per million cells in ice cold PBS . Cells were crosslinked a second time , with 1 ml per 4 million cells of 3 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate ( DSG ) ( ThermoFisher Scientific , 20593 ) for 40 min at room temperature and quenched by 0 . 4 M Glycine for 5 min . Following two washes with ice cold PBS , cells were flash - frozen and kept at - 80°C until further use . For MNase digestion , cells were thawed on ice for 5 min , incubated with 1ml MB # 1 buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 50 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 2 % NP - 40 , 1x Roche cOmplete EDTA - free ( Roche diagnostics , 04693132001 ) ) and washed twice with MB # 1 buffer . MNase concentration for each cell type was predetermined using MNase titration experiments exploring 2 . 5 - 20U of MNase per million cells . We selected the MNase concentration that gives ~ 90 % mononucleosomes . Chromatin was digested with MNase for 10 min at 37 °C and digestion was stopped by adding 8 ul of 500 mM EGTA and incubating at 65 °C for 10 min . Following dephosphorylation with rSAP ( NEB # M0371 ) and end polishing using T4 PNK ( NEB # M0201 ) , DNA polymerase Klenow fragment ( NEB # M0210 ) and biotinylated dATP and dCTP ( Jena Bioscience # NU - 835 - BIO14 - S and # NU - 809 - BIOX - S , respectively ) , ligation was performed in a final volume of 2 . 5 ml for 3h at room temperature using T4 DNA ligase ( NEB # M0202 ) . Dangling ends were removed by a 5 min incubation with Exonuclease III ( NEB # 0206 ) at 37 °C and biotin enrichment was done using 20 ul Dynabeads TM MyOne TM Streptavidin C1 beads ( Invitrogen # 65001 ) . Libraries were prepared with the NEBNext Ultra II Library Preparation Kit ( NEB # E7103 ) . Samples were sequenced on a combination of Illumina’s NovaSeq 6000 and HiSeq 2500 at Novogene . Micro - C data mapping and visualization All Micro - C mapping was done using the mirnylab / distiller - nf : v0 . 3 . 3 pipeline ( 81 ) . Raw data were mapped to the hg38 human genome assembly ( K562 and Jurkat ) or mm10 mouse genome assembly ( mESCs ) . For analysis of contacts in the MYC locus , data was mapped to hg19 human genome assembly due to a large gap present in this locus when mapping K562 sequencing data to hg38 . For data visualization by contact maps , multi cool ( mcool ) files , balanced by iterative correction and eigenvector decomposition ( ICE ) for resolutions of 200 bp to 10 Mb were generated from contacts with both ends having a mapq score > 30 . Micro - C data visualization as contact maps in genome - browser shots with available PRO - seq , dREG , CRISPRi and histone marks tracks was done using the HiCExplorer tool ( 82 ) and pyGenomeTracks ( 83 ) . Virtual 4C tracks were prepared as described previously ( 49 ) . 1D signal near enhancer and promoter TSSs ( Fig . S2 ) was calculated based on the distiller - nf output pairs files , filtered for intra - chromosomal with mapq > 30 . Contacts assigned to the 5’ of single reads were shifted 75bp downstream , based on their orientation , to the probable center of the nucleosome . ChRO - seq For chromatin isolation from cultured K562 cells , we added 1 ml of 1X NUN buffer and vigorously vortexed the samples for 1 min . An additional 500 µl of NUN buffer was added and samples were vigorously vortexed for an additional 30 s . The samples were then incubated on ice for 30 min with a brief vortex every 10 min and centrifuged at 12 , 500g for 30 min at 4 °C , after which the NUN buffer was removed from the chromatin pellet . The chromatin pellet was washed 3 times with 1 ml of 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , supplemented with 40 U / ml of RNase inhibitor , centrifuged at 10 , 000Xg for 5 min at 4 °C , and the supernatant discarded . After washing , 100 µl of chromatin storage buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 25 % glycerol , 5 mM Mg ( CH 3 COO ) 2 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , 5 mM DTT , 40 U / ml Rnase inhibitor ) was added to each sample . The samples were loaded into a Bioruptor and sonicated with the power setting on high , with a cycle time of 10 min with cycle durations of 30 s on and 30 s off . The sonication was repeated up to three times , as needed , to get the chromatin pellet into suspension . Samples were stored at −80 °C . ChRO - seq library preparation was performed following a published protocol ( 24 ) , with minor modifications . Chromatin from 1 million K562 cells in 25 µl chromatin storage buffer was mixed with 25 µl of 2X chromatin run - on buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 300 mM KCl , 10 μM Biotin - 11 - ATP ( Perkin Elmer , NEL544001EA ) , 40 μM Biotin - 11 - CTP ( Perkin Elmer , NEL542001EA ) , 10 μM Biotin - 11 - GTP ( Perkin Elmer , NEL545001EA ) , 40 μM Biotin - 11 - UTP ( Perkin Elmer , NEL543001EA ) , 2ng / μl Yeast tRNA ( VWR , 80054 - 306 ) , 0 . 8 U / μl RNase inhibitor , 1 % Sarkosyl ( Fisher Scientific , AC612075000 ) ) . The run - on reaction was incubated in a thermomixer at 37 °C for 5 min at 750 RPM . The reaction was stopped by adding 300 μl of Trizol LS ( Life Technologies , 10296 - 010 ) . To clean up the reaction prior to base hydrolysis , 40 μl of 1 - bromo - 3 - chloropropane ( BCP ) ( Sigma , B9673 ) was added to the samples and samples were vortexed for 20 sec , incubated for 3 min at RT and centrifuged at 17 , 000Xg at 4°C for 5 min . ~ 250 μl of aqueous phase was transferred to a new 1 . 5 ml tube and samples were pelleted at 17 , 000Xg at 4°C for 15 min in 650 ml ice - cold 100 % EtOH with GlycoBlue ( 2 . 5 μl ) ( Ambion , AM9515 ) to visualize the RNA pellet . The pellet was further washed with 0 . 5 ml ice - cold 75 % by vortex - mixing and centrifugation at 17 , 000Xg at 4°C for 5 min . Any residual EtOH was removed by air - drying the pellet for 5 min in RT . The RNA pellet was resuspended in 20 μl of diethylpyrocarbonate ( DEPC ) - treated water and heat denatured at 65 °C for 40 sec . For base hydrolysis , 5 μl of 1N NaOH was added to the RNA sample to get 0 . 2N NaOH , and samples were incubated on ice for 8 min . Base hydrolysis was stopped by adding 25 μl of Tris - HCl pH 6 . 8 and gently mixing . 3′ Adapter ligation was done using T4 RNA Ligase 1 ( NEB , M0204L ) . A first binding to streptavidin beads ( NEB , S1421S ) and washed as described ( 24 ) . RNA was removed from beads by Trizol ( Life Technologies , 15596 - 026 ) and followed by a 5′ decapping with RNA 5′ pyrophosphohydrolase ( RppH , NEB , M0356S ) . The 5′ end was phosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase ( NEB , M0201L ) . A second bead binding was performed , followed by an on - beads 5′ adapter ligation . After bead washes , RNA was removed from beads by adding 300 μl of TRI reagent ( MRC , TR 118 ) . 40 μl of BCP were added to the samples and samples were vortexed for 20 sec , incubated for 3 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 17 , 000Xg at 4°C for 5 min . ~ 180μl of aqueous phase was transferred to a new 1 . 5 ml tube and samples were pelleted at 17 , 000Xg at 4 °C for 15 min in 450 ml ice - cold 100 % EtOH with GlycoBlue ( 2 . 5 μl ) to visualize the RNA pellet . The pellet was further washed with 0 . 4 ml ice - cold 75 % EtOH by vortex - mixing and centrifugation at 17 , 000Xg at 4 °C for 5 min . Any residual EtOH was removed by air - drying the pellet for 5 min in RT . A reverse transcription reaction using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase ( Life Technologies , 18080 - 044 ) was used to generate cDNA . cDNA was then amplified using Q5 High - Fidelity DNA Polymerase ( NEB , M0491L ) to generate the ChRO - seq libraries following the protocol provided by NEB . Libraries were sequenced using Illumina’s HiSeq 4000 at Novogene . ChRO - seq , PRO - seq and GRO - seq data processing and analysis Processing for ChRO - seq data ( as well as PRO - seq and GRO - seq available raw data ) in this study was done using the Proseq2 . 0 pipeline available from GitHub ( https : / / github . com / Danko - Lab / proseq2 . 0 ) ( 84 ) . Differential expression analyses between K562 and Jurkat cells for pausing signal and gene body transcription levels was performed by DEseq2 ( 85 ) either on signal between the TSS and 250bp downstream ( pause signal ) or signal downstream to the first 250 bp through the annotated ( GENCODE V29 ) polyadenylation cleavage site ( gene body signal ) . For visualization of the changes , fold change in expression following NELFB - dTAG in mESCs or PARP1 inhibition in K562 was performed by deepTools bigwigCompare command at 1bp resolution , using 0 . 25 as pseudocount . For the NELFB - dTAG PRO - seq visualization , fold - change and normalized PRO - seq signal matrices were calculated in a stranded manner , followed by a contacennation of the two strands’ matrices to generate a single , stranded matrix ( Fig . 4B ) . Definition of TIRs , enhancers , promoters and transcription start sites For mESCs we first defined TIRs genome - wide as detected by dREG ( 30 , 31 ) using available GRO - seq data from mESCs ( 47 , 86 ) . To finely and unbiasedly define the position of transcription initiation at each of these TIRs , we used the position with the most 5’ mapped GRO - seq reads within the dREG peak ( maxTSN ) . For the analyses of K562 cells , we first called TIRs using dREG from available PRO - seq data ( 31 ) . The center of these TIRs was defined as the center of enhancers and promoters for the analysis comparison of contacts between functional and nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs , based on CRISPRi data . For any further analyses the center of enhancers and promoters was defined as the maxTSNs , called using the data from coPRO with enrichment for 5’ capping ( coPRO - capped ) ( 36 ) . For the comparison between K562 and Jurkat cell lines , we called TIRs in both K562 and Jurkat using PRO - seq data ( 31 ) and dREG and determined maxTSN based on coPRO - capped from K562 cells . We defined promoters based on the existence of any known human ( K562 and Jurkat ) of mouse ( mESCs ) stable 5’ mapped transcripts from CAGE ( 87 ) within 5kb away in the direction of maximum initiation . In analyses including Jurkat and K562 cell lines , we considered only shared promoters based on proximity to the best transcription start site defined by the deconvolution of expression for nascent RNA - sequencing data ( DENR ) , based on GENCODE V29 annotations , in both cell types . We used a combined set of enhancers from TIRs detected in both cell lines to define enhancers . Since promoters make a relatively small fraction of all TIRs found in the data and can act as enhancers for other distal genes ( 88 ) we included promoters under the definition for enhancers whenever we calculated enhancer - promoter contacts genome - wide . Micro - C contact normalization and comparison between CRISPRi - defined functional and nonfunctional pairs Comparison between functional and nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs was based either on CRISPRi genetic screens for enhancer function either in the MYC locus , based on cell viability ( 28 ) or based on expression from single - cell RNA sequencing analysis ( 27 ) . In addition to the seven active enhancers in the K562 MYC locus , we also detected 54 other TIRs that were marked by DNase - I hypersensitivity sites ( DHSs ) and histone modifications , were located in the same TAD , and were tested by CRISPRi , but which did not affect the growth rate of K562 cells . These TIRs were considered nonfunctional and compared to the seven functional MYC enhancers . For the genome wide - analysis based on data from ( 27 ) , we defined functional pairs as pairs where CRISPR inhibition of the enhancer resulted in a loss of a minimum of 10 % of gene expression , with an empirical p - value < 0 . 05 . nonfunctional pairs were defined as pairs with less of 5 % effect on gene expression and empirical p - value > 0 . 9 . To remove possible confounding effect , we filtered the functional and nonfunctional pairs to have similar distributions of enhancer - promoter contacts ( limited between 5kb and 1Mb ) , accessibility ( by ATAC - seq ) and gene body transcription levels ( by PRO - seq ) in the target gene ( Fig . S1C ) . All CRISPRi - targeted enhancers and target promoters were reassigned to their nearest dREG peak center , within 5kb , on the same strand . Enhancer - promoter contacts were defined as contacts that map to a 5kb window near the promoter on one end and the enhancer on the other hand . Contacts were normalized to the expected based on a non - parametric LOWESS smoothing of the contacts - by - distance function in a region corresponding to a 1Mb in the orientation of the promoter , relative to the enhancer ( Fig . S1A ) . Observed over expected ratios were then compared between functional and nonfunctional pairs ( Fig . 1B , C , Fig . S1B ) . Differences in contacts between CRISPRi - defined functional and nonfunctional pairs were calculated based on cell - by - cell differences between APA matrices for all functional and all nonfunctional pairs , normalized for the number of pairs . The differences were calculated as the medians of the differences based on 1000 bootstrapping iterations of the functional and nonfunctional pairs , to remove outlier background . These differences were presented as the number of contact differences per 1000 pairs ( Fig . 1E and F ) . The APA matrices were centered on the coPRO - based maxTSN as the TSS assigned for each TIR . Aggregated Peak Analysis ( APA ) and APA matrices normalization for comparison between samples We expected significant changes in chromatin after manipulating Pol II transcription ( 70 , 71 ) . As such , not only are enhancer - promoter contacts expected to change , but the background contacts with at least one end originating at enhancer - and promoter - regions may be affected between conditions . As APAs are often used to characterize contacts ( 7 , 22 , 46 ) , we devised an APA that normalizes enhancer - promoter contacts to all contacts associated with enhancers and promoters . We calculated changes in aggregated 1D signal mapped to the same windows around enhancers and promoters , as used in the APA . We calculated the expected change in each pixel based on the ratios between the sample - specific sum of the 1D signal in each treatment condition ( Fig . 2A ) . For all other , intra - sample APA analysis we used the aggregated raw counts . For APAs calculated at windows of 20kb around the anchors , we considered all possible anchor pairs within a genomic distance of 25 - 150kb . For higher resolution APAs with 2kb window around enhancer and promoter TSSs ( Fig . 1D and Fig . S3 ) , we considered all possible enhancer - promoter pairs within a genomic distance of 5 - 100kb . Individual contact comparison between samples and treatments We also devised an alternative normalization scheme which compares the number of contacts between enhancer - promoter pairs to the local background near each enhancer and promoter anchor . We calculated the number of contacts between each pair of anchors ( enhancer - promoter or CTCF binding sites ) using a 5kb window around each anchor . As a background , we counted the number of contacts between each anchor ( in a 5kb window ) and regions 10 - 150 kb from the second anchor ( Fig . 2C ) . The ratio between the anchor - to - anchor contacts and background contacts was presented in scatterplots or used to calculate the statistical significance of changes between treatments and samples . To avoid the impact of noise , we analyzed only contacts that met a minimum baseline of anchor - to - anchor contacts ( at least 8 contacts per billion contacts ( CPB ) ) in one of the treatment conditions . Since TSS calling data ( PRO - seq and coPRO - capped ) was more abundant for K562 than Jurkat , when comparing K562 and Jurkat libraries we considered enhancer - promoter pairs with at least 8 CPB in both cell lines , to avoid ascertainment bias . The distribution of ratios between enhancer - promoter and background contacts in treated samples ( Olaparib \ TRP \ FLV or dTAG treated cells ) was compared to the median ratio in the respective control samples ( Figs 2D - E , 4C - D , 5B and S6A ) . For comparison between cell lines , enhancer - promoter contacts at promoters with increased gene body transcription and \ or Pol II pausing signal in one cell line , were compared to their median at the other cell line ( Figs . 3D - E and S4A , C ) . Definition of CTCF binding sites Contacts between CTCF binding sites were used as a control to determine whether the effects of a treatment were specific to enhancer - promoter contacts . We defined pairs of CTCF binding sites as CTCF motifs that were shown to bind CTCF based on ENCODE ChIP - seq data , within the same minimum and maximum allowed genomic distances as for enhancers and promoters . We focused only on CTCF sites that show no overlap with any dREG - defined TIR within 5kb . PARP1 CUT & Tag 24h prior to the experiment , cells were split at a final concentration of 0 . 5 million cells / mL in fresh RPMI supplemented with 10 % FBS and 1X penicillin streptomycin antibiotic . PARP1 CUT & Tag was done in two replicates with 250 , 000 K562 cells each for baseline control and anti - PARP1 CUT & Tag . Experiments were done according to the bench top CUT & Tag V . 3 protocol ( 89 ) , using CUTANA™ Concanavalin A Conjugated Paramagnetic Beads ( EpiCypher , SKU : 21 - 1401 ) and pAG - Tn5 for CUT & Tag ( EpiCypher , SKU : 15 - 1017 ) , with the following exceptions : ( A ) cells were not cross - linked and ( B ) NE1 buffer was used to extract and permeabilize nuclei . For anti - PARP1 CUT & Tag , we used an antibody against the N - terminal of PARP1 ( Active Motif , AB _ 2793257 ) . An anti - IgG antibody ( Cell signaling , Normal Rabbit IgG # 2729 ) was used as baseline control . CUT & Tag data processing fastq files were trimmed from Nextera adaptor - associated sequences using cutadapt ( 90 ) and mapped to hg38 human genome assembly using bowtie2 ( 91 ) . We then used bedtools genomecov to generate bedgraph files and calculated background - normalized PARP1 binding using macs2 bdgcmp command ( 92 ) . Statistical analysis Throughout the manuscript , Mann - Whitney U test is used for independent samples , such as comparison of changes between different sets of genomic loci or pairs . Wilcoxon signed - rank test is used for paired samples , usually being the same loci \ pairs compared between samples \ conditions . For assessment of trends in our data , such as the changes in the difference in contacts between functional and nonfunctional pairs , or assessing the effect of changes in paused Pol II occupancy on changes in enhancer - promoter contacts , we used Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( R ) . The confidence intervals for the medians throughout the manuscript were calculated using 1000 iterations of bootstrap . Data and code availability Micro - C , CUT & Tag and ChRO - seq data generated in this study were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) database under accession number GSE206133 . H3K27ac and H3K4me2 ChIP - seq data from K562 cells were downloaded from GSE163043 . K562 data for ATAC - seq ( ENCSR868FGK ) , CTCF ChIP - seq ( ENCSR447BSF ) , MNase - seq ( ENCSR000CXQ ) and NELFE ChIP - seq ( ENCSR000DOF ) were downloaded from ENCODE . DMSO , TRP and FLV treated mESCs Micro - C data ( 22 ) were downloaded from GSE130275 . PRO - seq data ( 30 , 33 ) for Jurkat T - cells were downloaded from GSE66031 and for K562 from GSE60455 . PRO - seq data for mECSs harboring a homozygous endogenous NELFB - FKBP12 F36V fusion protein , treated and untreated with dTAG - 13 ( 93 ) , were downloaded from GSE196653 . GRO - seq data for mESCs ( 47 , 86 ) were downloaded from GSE43390 and GSE48895 . Positions for human ( hg38 ) and mouse ( mm10 ) CAGE peaks were downloaded from the FANTOM5 database ( https : / / fantom . gsc . riken . jp / 5 / ) . All data normalization and visualization code is available at https : / / github . com / Danko - Lab / E - P _ contacts . Acknowledgements We thank E . Apostolou and members of her lab for commenting on a manuscript draft as well as members of the Danko , Lis , and Yu labs for valuable discussions and suggestions throughout the life of this project . Work in this publication was supported by R01 - HG010346 and R01 - HG009309 ( NHGRI ) to CGD . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the US National Institutes of Health . Some of the figures in this manuscript were created using BioRender . Figure legends Figure 1 . Micro - C contacts are enriched in functional enhancer - promoter pairs . ( A ) Genome browser tracks showing Micro - C contact maps , CRISPRi - associated changes in cell viability , dREG - defined TIRs and input PRO - seq signal , H3K4me2 , H3K27ac and CTCF ChIP - seq signal and a 2D representation ( virtual 4C ) of Micro - C contacts with the MYC promoter , along the MYC locus . Green arrows point to the regions in the contacts map representing interaction between the seven CRISPRi - validated MYC enhancers and the MYC promoter ( B ) Box - plot comparing the observed contact frequency relative to expected by a local distance - decay function of the seven validated functional enhancers in the MYC locus ( functional pairs ) compared to the rest of the dREG - detected TIRs in the TAD ( nonfunctional pairs ) with the MYC promoter . ( C ) Box - plot comparing contact levels relative to expected by a local distance - decay function of functional versus the nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs in the genome , matched for genomic distance , accessibility and target gene expression distributions . ( * Mann - Whitney p - value < 0 . 05 ) . ( D ) An APA for enhancer - promoter contacts at 2kb around the TSSs . Pixel size is 20bp square and color scale represents contacts per billion contacts ( CPB ) . ( E ) Top panel - APA for the differences in contacts between functional and nonfunctional pairs based on CRISPRi . The APA represents smoothed contact differences at a region of 20kb around the TSS with original pixel size of 100bp square . Red and blue rectangles represent the regions where contacts are plotted at the bottom panel . Bottom panel - metaplot of the differences in contacts between functional and nonfunctional pairs in a 2kb window around the TSS ( the TSS region ) . As indicated in the red and blue rectangles over the APA map , at the metaplot the red line represents the differences in contacts between functional and nonfunctional pairs associated with the promoter TSS region and 20kb around enhancer TSSs ( promoter contacts ) . The blue line represents the differences in contacts between functional and nonfunctional pairs associated with the enhancer TSS region and 20kb around promoter TSSs ( enhancer contacts ) . ( F ) Blue - dot and error plot showing the median difference between functional and nonfunctional pairs ( dot ) and the associated 95 % confidence interval of the median based on 1000 bootstrap iterations ( error - bars ) in enhancer - promoter contacts associated with enhancers’ and promoters’ + 1 and + 2 nucleosomes ( 0 - 400bp downstream to the TSS ) . Contact differences in windows of 200 bp from the TSS are shown at the center coordinate for each window . Black - one dimensional contact signal downstream to enhancers and promoters . Signal is calculated for intra - chromosomal contacts with both sides having mapping quality ( mapq ) > 30 . Total median signal was smoothed using a sliding window of 100bp . Figure 2 . Enhancer - promoter contacts depend on active transcription . ( A ) Schematic representation of the strategy used to compute APAs comparing between different conditions . ( B ) APA heatmap representation of the change in contacts compared to DMSO control for mESCs treated with FLV or TRP ( top ) and box - plots showing the observed over the expected change at the dot , the different stripes and the edges of the APA change matrices in each of the TRP and FLV treatments ( * * * Wilcoxon signed - rank test p - value < 1X10 - 100 ) . ( C ) Schematic representation of ratio calculation between enhancer - promoter contacts ( solid arrows ) and background contacts ( dashed arrows ) . ( D ) Scatterplot comparing the enhancer - promoter contacts over background ratio between FLV - treated ( top ) or TRP - treated ( bottom ) and DMSO - treated ( control ) mESCs . Box - plots show the ratio distribution relative to the median control ( DMSO ) ratio . ( E ) Boxplots showing the ratio distribution relative to the median control ( DMSO ) ratio for enhancer - promoter pairs and transcriptionally inactive bound CTCF motifs ( * * * Mann - Whitney p - value < 1X10 - 100 ) . Figure 3 . Changes in Pol II pausing and gene body density correlate with enhancer - promoter contacts . ( A ) Schematic representation of gene transcription from initiation , pausing and productive elongation at the gene body . The definitions for the PRO - seq signal at the pause peak ( 250bp downstream to the TSS - pausing signal ) and gene body , as well as the calculated pausing index for this analysis , are illustrated . ( B ) APA maps show enhancer - promoter contacts associated with promoters of the four gene body transcription ( left ) , pausing index ( middle ) and pause peak signal ( right ) quartiles . The color scale represents contacts per billion contacts ( CPB ) and bar - plots demonstrate the ratios between the dot - and stripe - associated contacts in the APAs . ( C ) Genome - browser shot of a 1 . 1Mb region containing the TOX and NSMAF genes . The Micro - C contact map pixel size is 10kb . Arrows indicate differential contacts associated with differential transcriptional activity in K562 and Jurkat T - cells . ( D ) Scatter plots and boxplots examine how changes in enhancer - promoter contacts are associated with promoters of genes with significantly higher gene body transcription ( top ) and pausing signal ( bottom ) at K562 compared to Jurkat ( * * * Wilcoxon signed - rank test p - value < 1X10 - 100 ) . ( E ) Boxplot shows the relative increase of enhancer - promoter contacts associated with promoters of genes with upregulated gene body transcription in K562 with a corresponding significant increase in pausing signal ( pause change - PC ) and without a change in pausing signal ( no pause change - NPC ) . ( * * * Mann - Whitney p - value < 1X10 - 100 ) Figure 4 . NELFB depletion and recovery correlates with changes in enhancer - promoter contacts . ( A ) Illustration of the NELFB - dTAG system and the corresponding effect on the NELF complex . Following NELFB depletion with dTAG , the NELF complex dissociates and is no longer found bound to chromatin ( 93 ) ( B ) Heatmaps showing PRO - seq signal in untreated ( control ) mESCs ( left ) , the fold - change in PRO - seq signal following 30 minutes of dTAG treatment and after 60 minutes of dTAG treatment near TSSs as well as the fold change in PRO - seq signal at 30 minutes and 60 minutes of dTAG treatment compared to untreated control and at 60 minutes compared to 30 minutes of dTAG treatment . ( C ) A line plot showing the median enhancer - promoter contacts over background ratio change relative to the untreated ( T = 0 ) control . Gray shadow represents the 95 % confidence interval for the median , based on 1000 bootstrap iterations . ( D ) Dot and error plot demonstrating the median contact change and the 95 % confidence interval of the median based on 1000 bootstrap iterations , after 60 minutes of NELFB depletion , for enhancer - promoter ( purple ) and transcriptionally inactive CTCF motif contacts ( gray ) . ( E ) Model shows the effect of properly paused ( in the presence of NELF ) and improperly paused Pol II on enhancer - promoter contacts . Figure 5 . PARP1 inhibition results in a global loss of enhancer - promoter contacts . ( A ) Illustration of the experiment using Olaparib to inhibit PAR chain formation by PARP1 . ( B ) Boxplot comparing the distribution of enhancer - promoter contacts over background relative to the median of the DMSO control ( left ) . ( C ) APA heatmap represents the change in contacts compared to DMSO control for K562 cells following PARP1 inhibition for enhancer - promoter contacts ( left ) and contacts between transcriptionally inactive boud CTCF motifs ( right ) . ( D ) Heatmaps and metaplots showing signal from PARP1 CUT & Tag , PRO - seq , and NELFE ChIP - seq as well as the fold change in Pol II density following PARP1 inhibition , calculated from ChRO - seq at K562 promoters . Heatmaps are clustered based on the fold - change in ChRO - seq signal following PARP1 inhibition . ( E ) Model showing the bidirectional effect of PARP1 enzymatic activity on enhancer - promoter contacts : PARP1 catalyzes the formation of PAR chains that , along with paused Pol II , promote the formation of clusters of transcription - associated proteins near enhancer and promoter TSSs . On the other hand , the PARylation of NELFE promotes Pol II escape from pause , reducing local concentrations of paused Pol II and destabilizing enhancer - promoter contacts . Figure S1 . Supplementary details for the comparison between functional and nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs . ( A ) Schematic representation of the LOWESS - based normalization for enhancer - promoter contacts . ( B ) Box - plot comparing contact levels relative to expected by local distance - decay function of functional versus the nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs in the genome , before matching for enhancer - promoter distance , accessibility or target gene expression ( * * Mann - Whitney p - value < 1X10 - 10 ) . ( C ) Histograms demonstrating the distribution of functional and nonfunctional enhancer - promoter pairs in terms of PRO - seq target gene transcription signal in reads per kilobase per million reads ( RPKM ) ( top ) , accessibility by mean ATAC - seq signal ( middle ) and enhancer - promoter genomic distance ( bottom ) , after matching for these confounding effects . Figure S2 . Micro - C 1D signal near TSS genome - wide . One dimensional contact signal for intra - chromosomal contacts with both sides having mapping quality ( mapq ) > 30 . Total median signal was smoothed using a sliding window of 100bp . Shown are signals around promoter TSSs ( orange ) , enhancer TSSs ( purple ) and all TSSs genome - wide ( black ) . Figure S3 . High resolution representation of changes in enhancer - promoter contact architecture associated with gene body transcription and pausing at promoters . APA maps showing enhancer - promoter contacts associated with promoters of the four gene body transcription ( left ) , pausing index ( middle ) and pause peak signal ( right ) quartiles . Color Scale represents contacts per billion contacts ( CPB ) . Pixel size is 20bp square . Figure S4 . Distribution of fold change in gene body transcription for K562 and Jurkat upregulated genes . ( A ) Scatterplots and boxplots demonstrating changes in enhancer - promoter contacts associated with promoters of genes with significantly higher gene body transcription ( top ) and pausing signal ( bottom ) at Jurkat T - cells compared to K562 ( * * * Wilcoxon signed - rank test p - value < 1X10 - 100 ) . ( B ) Boxplots showing the distributions of fold change in gene body signal in genes with no associated paused Pol II change ( NPC ) and associated significant paused Pol II change ( PC ) ( “ns” - Mann - Whitney p - value > 0 . 5 ) . ( C ) Boxplot depicting the relative increase of enhancer - promoter contacts associated with promoters of genes with upregulated gene body transcription in Jurkat T - cells with a corresponding significant increase in pausing signal ( pause change - PC ) and without a change in pausing signal ( no pause change - NPC ) . ( * * Mann - Whitney p - value < 1X10 - 10 ) Figure S5 . Changes in ZRS - Shh contacts following NELFB depletion . Micro - C contact maps in 10kb resolution along with the associated virtual 4C signal and PRO - seq signal in mESCs not treated ( top ) or treated ( bottom ) with the dTAG ligand for 30 minutes to degrade NELFB . The positions of the ZRS enhancer and the Shh promoter are indicated in red rectangles . Figure S6 . Changes in enhance - promoter contacts architecture following NELFB depletion . ( A ) APA maps of the observed over expected ( log2 ) changes in enhancer - promoter contacts at 20kb around TSSs . Pixel size is 200bp square . ( B ) Line plot of the median observed / expected changes at the dot ( blue ) , stripes ( red ) and edges ( gray ) relative to T = 0 at the different time points of dTAG treatments and following dTAG washout . Figure S7 . The effect of PARP1 inhibition on enhancer - promoter contacts and transcription at enhancers and promoters . ( A ) Dot and error plot demonstrating the median contact change and the 95 % confidence interval of the median based on 1000 bootstrap iterations for enhancer - promoter ( purple ) and transcriptionally inactive CTCF motif contacts ( gray ) , following PARP1 inhibition . ( B ) Heatmaps and metaplots showing signal from PARP1 CUT & Tag , PRO - seq , and NELFE ChIP - seq as well as the fold change in Pol II density following PARP1 inhibition , calculated from ChRO - seq at promoter ( top ) and enhancer ( bottom ) TSSs . ( C ) Dot and error plot demonstrating the median contact change and the 95 % confidence interval of the median based on 1000 bootstrap iterations for mean Pol II fold change ( log 2 scale ) in the four quartiles of mean PARP1 binding in pairs of enhancers and promoters . References 1 . M . Levine , R . Tjian , Transcription regulation and animal diversity . Nature . 424 , 147 – 151 ( 2003 ) . 2 . J . Banerji , S . Rusconi , W . Schaffner , Expression of a beta - globin gene is enhanced by remote SV40 DNA sequences . Cell . 27 , 299 – 308 ( 1981 ) . 3 . P . Gruss , R . Dhar , G . Khoury , Simian virus 40 tandem repeated sequences as an element of the early promoter . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 , 943 – 947 ( 1981 ) . 4 . C . Benoist , P . Chambon , In vivo sequence requirements of the SV40 early promoter region . Nature . 290 , 304 – 310 ( 1981 ) . 5 . S . Schoenfelder , P . Fraser , Long - range enhancer - promoter contacts in gene expression control . Nat . Rev . Genet . 20 , 437 – 455 ( 2019 ) . 6 . M . I . Robson , A . R . Ringel , S . Mundlos , Regulatory Landscaping : How Enhancer - Promoter Communication Is Sculpted in 3D . Mol . Cell . 74 , 1110 – 1122 ( 2019 ) . 7 . S . S . P . Rao , M . H . Huntley , N . C . Durand , E . K . Stamenova , I . D . Bochkov , J . T . Robinson , A . L . Sanborn , I . Machol , A . D . Omer , E . S . Lander , E . L . Aiden , A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping . Cell . 159 , 1665 – 1680 ( 2014 ) . 8 . N . Krietenstein , O . J . Rando , in Chromatin : Methods and Protocols , J . Horsfield , J . Marsman , Eds . ( Springer US , New York , NY , 2022 ) , pp . 321 – 332 . 9 . G . Fudenberg , M . Imakaev , FISH - ing for captured contacts : towards reconciling FISH and 3C . Nat . Methods . 14 , 673 – 678 ( 2017 ) . 10 . J . Ray , P . R . Munn , A . Vihervaara , J . J . Lewis , A . Ozer , C . G . Danko , J . T . Lis , Chromatin conformation remains stable upon extensive transcriptional changes driven by heat shock . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 19431 – 19439 ( 2019 ) . 11 . C . P . Fulco , J . Nasser , T . R . Jones , G . Munson , D . T . Bergman , V . Subramanian , S . R . Grossman , R . Anyoha , B . R . Doughty , T . A . Patwardhan , T . H . Nguyen , M . Kane , E . M . Perez , N . C . Durand , C . A . Lareau , E . K . Stamenova , E . L . Aiden , E . S . Lander , J . M . Engreitz , Activity - by - contact model of enhancer - promoter regulation from thousands of CRISPR perturbations . Nat . Genet . 51 , 1664 – 1669 ( 2019 ) . 12 . J . Zuin , G . Roth , Y . Zhan , J . Cramard , J . Redolfi , E . Piskadlo , P . Mach , M . Kryzhanovska , G . Tihanyi , H . Kohler , M . Eder , C . Leemans , B . van Steensel , P . Meister , S . Smallwood , L . Giorgetti , Nonlinear control of transcription through enhancer - promoter interactions . Nature ( 2022 ) , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04570 - y . 13 . J . A . Beagan , E . D . Pastuzyn , L . R . Fernandez , M . H . Guo , K . Feng , K . R . Titus , H . Chandrashekar , J . D . Shepherd , J . E . Phillips - Cremins , Three - dimensional genome restructuring across timescales of activity - induced neuronal gene expression . Nat . Neurosci . 23 , 707 – 717 ( 2020 ) . 14 . L . J . Mateo , S . E . Murphy , A . Hafner , I . S . Cinquini , C . A . Walker , A . N . Boettiger , Visualizing DNA folding and RNA in embryos at single - cell resolution . Nature . 568 , 49 – 54 ( 2019 ) . 15 . A . J . Rubin , B . C . Barajas , M . Furlan - Magaril , V . Lopez - Pajares , M . R . Mumbach , I . Howard , D . S . Kim , L . D . Boxer , J . Cairns , M . Spivakov , S . W . Wingett , M . Shi , Z . Zhao , W . J . Greenleaf , A . Kundaje , M . Snyder , H . Y . Chang , P . Fraser , P . A . Khavari , Lineage - specific dynamic and pre - established enhancer - promoter contacts cooperate in terminal differentiation . Nat . Genet . 49 , 1522 – 1528 ( 2017 ) . 16 . N . S . Benabdallah , I . Williamson , R . S . Illingworth , L . Kane , S . Boyle , D . Sengupta , G . R . Grimes , P . Therizols , W . A . Bickmore , Decreased Enhancer - Promoter Proximity Accompanying Enhancer Activation . Mol . Cell . 76 , 473 – 484 . e7 ( 2019 ) . 17 . J . M . Alexander , J . Guan , B . Li , L . Maliskova , M . Song , Y . Shen , B . Huang , S . Lomvardas , O . D . Weiner , Live - cell imaging reveals enhancer - dependent Sox2 transcription in the absence of enhancer proximity . Elife . 8 ( 2019 ) , doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 41769 . 18 . H . Chen , M . Levo , L . Barinov , M . Fujioka , J . B . Jaynes , T . Gregor , Dynamic interplay between enhancer - promoter topology and gene activity . Nat . Genet . 50 , 1296 – 1303 ( 2018 ) . 19 . S . S . P . Rao , S . - C . Huang , B . Glenn St Hilaire , J . M . Engreitz , E . M . Perez , K . - R . Kieffer - Kwon , A . L . Sanborn , S . E . Johnstone , G . D . Bascom , I . D . Bochkov , X . Huang , M . S . Shamim , J . Shin , D . Turner , Z . Ye , A . D . Omer , J . T . Robinson , T . Schlick , B . E . Bernstein , R . Casellas , E . S . Lander , E . L . Aiden , Cohesin Loss Eliminates All Loop Domains . Cell . 171 , 305 – 320 . e24 ( 2017 ) . 20 . L . El Khattabi , H . Zhao , J . Kalchschmidt , N . Young , S . Jung , P . Van Blerkom , P . Kieffer - Kwon , K . - R . Kieffer - Kwon , S . Park , X . Wang , J . Krebs , S . Tripathi , N . Sakabe , D . R . Sobreira , S . - C . Huang , S . S . P . Rao , N . Pruett , D . Chauss , E . Sadler , A . Lopez , M . A . Nóbrega , E . L . Aiden , F . J . Asturias , R . Casellas , A Pliable Mediator Acts as a Functional Rather Than an Architectural Bridge between Promoters and Enhancers . Cell . 178 , 1145 – 1158 . e20 ( 2019 ) . 21 . N . Krietenstein , S . Abraham , S . V . Venev , N . Abdennur , J . Gibcus , T . - H . S . Hsieh , K . M . Parsi , L . Yang , R . Maehr , L . A . Mirny , J . Dekker , O . J . Rando , Ultrastructural Details of Mammalian Chromosome Architecture . Mol . Cell . 78 , 554 – 565 . e7 ( 2020 ) . 22 . T . - H . S . Hsieh , C . Cattoglio , E . Slobodyanyuk , A . S . Hansen , O . J . Rando , R . Tjian , X . Darzacq , Resolving the 3D Landscape of Transcription - Linked Mammalian Chromatin Folding . Mol . Cell . 78 , 539 – 553 . e8 ( 2020 ) . 23 . T . - H . S . Hsieh , G . Fudenberg , A . Goloborodko , O . J . Rando , Micro - C XL : assaying chromosome conformation from the nucleosome to the entire genome . Nat . Methods . 13 , 1009 – 1011 ( 2016 ) . 24 . D . B . Mahat , H . Kwak , G . T . Booth , I . H . Jonkers , C . G . Danko , R . K . Patel , C . T . Waters , K . Munson , L . J . Core , J . T . Lis , Base - pair - resolution genome - wide mapping of active RNA polymerases using precision nuclear run - on ( PRO - seq ) . Nat . Protoc . 11 , 1455 – 1476 ( 2016 ) . 25 . T . Chu , E . J . Rice , G . T . Booth , H . H . Salamanca , Z . Wang , L . J . Core , S . L . Longo , R . J . Corona , L . S . Chin , J . T . Lis , H . Kwak , C . G . Danko , Chromatin run - on and sequencing maps the transcriptional regulatory landscape of glioblastoma multiforme . Nat . Genet . 50 , 1553 – 1564 ( 2018 ) . 26 . L . J . Core , J . J . Waterfall , J . T . Lis , Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent initiation at human promoters . Science . 322 , 1845 – 1848 ( 2008 ) . 27 . M . Gasperini , A . J . Hill , J . L . McFaline - Figueroa , B . Martin , S . Kim , M . D . Zhang , D . Jackson , A . Leith , J . Schreiber , W . S . Noble , C . Trapnell , N . Ahituv , J . Shendure , A Genome - wide Framework for Mapping Gene Regulation via Cellular Genetic Screens . Cell . 176 , 377 – 390 . e19 ( 2019 ) . 28 . C . P . Fulco , M . Munschauer , R . Anyoha , G . Munson , S . R . Grossman , E . M . Perez , M . Kane , B . Cleary , E . S . Lander , J . M . Engreitz , Systematic mapping of functional enhancer - promoter connections with CRISPR interference . Science . 354 , 769 – 773 ( 2016 ) . 29 . A . Field , K . Adelman , Evaluating Enhancer Function and Transcription . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 89 , 213 – 234 ( 2020 ) . 30 . C . G . Danko , S . L . Hyland , L . J . Core , A . L . Martins , C . T . Waters , H . W . Lee , V . G . Cheung , W . L . Kraus , J . T . Lis , A . Siepel , Identification of active transcriptional regulatory elements from GRO - seq data . Nat . Methods . 12 , 433 – 438 ( 2015 ) . 31 . Z . Wang , T . Chu , L . A . Choate , C . G . Danko , Identification of regulatory elements from nascent transcription using dREG . Genome Res . 29 , 293 – 303 ( 2019 ) . 32 . Z . Wang , A . Chivu , L . Choate , E . Rice , D . Miller , T . Chu , S . - P . Chou , N . Kingsley , J . Petersen , C . Finno , R . Bellone , D . Antczak , J . Lis , C . Danko , Interdependence between histone marks and steps in Pol II transcription . Research Square ( 2021 ) , , doi : 10 . 21203 / rs . 3 . rs - 149042 / v1 . 33 . L . J . Core , A . L . Martins , C . G . Danko , C . T . Waters , A . Siepel , J . T . Lis , Analysis of nascent RNA identifies a unified architecture of initiation regions at mammalian promoters and enhancers . Nat . Genet . 46 , 1311 – 1320 ( 2014 ) . 34 . B . S . Scruggs , D . A . Gilchrist , S . Nechaev , G . W . Muse , A . Burkholder , D . C . Fargo , K . Adelman , Bidirectional Transcription Arises from Two Distinct Hubs of Transcription Factor Binding and Active Chromatin . Mol . Cell . 58 , 1101 – 1112 ( 2015 ) . 35 . R . Andersson , A . Sandelin , C . G . Danko , A unified architecture of transcriptional regulatory elements . Trends Genet . 31 , 426 – 433 ( 2015 ) . 36 . J . M . Tome , N . D . Tippens , J . T . Lis , Single - molecule nascent RNA sequencing identifies regulatory domain architecture at promoters and enhancers . Nat . Genet . 50 , 1533 – 1541 ( 2018 ) . 37 . B . Lim , M . S . Levine , Enhancer - promoter communication : hubs or loops ? Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 67 , 5 – 9 ( 2020 ) . 38 . W . - K . Cho , J . - H . Spille , M . Hecht , C . Lee , C . Li , V . Grube , I . I . Cisse , Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcription - dependent condensates . Science . 361 , 412 – 415 ( 2018 ) . 39 . K . Shrinivas , B . R . Sabari , E . L . Coffey , I . A . Klein , A . Boija , A . V . Zamudio , J . Schuijers , N . M . Hannett , P . A . Sharp , R . A . Young , A . K . Chakraborty , Enhancer Features that Drive Formation of Transcriptional Condensates . Mol . Cell . 75 , 549 – 561 . e7 ( 2019 ) . 40 . J . - H . Lee , R . Wang , F . Xiong , J . Krakowiak , Z . Liao , P . T . Nguyen , E . V . Moroz - Omori , J . Shao , X . Zhu , M . J . Bolt , H . Wu , P . K . Singh , M . Bi , C . J . Shi , N . Jamal , G . Li , R . Mistry , S . Y . Jung , K . - L . Tsai , J . C . Ferreon , F . Stossi , A . Caflisch , Z . Liu , M . A . Mancini , W . Li , Enhancer RNA m6A methylation facilitates transcriptional condensate formation and gene activation . Mol . Cell . 81 , 3368 – 3385 . e9 ( 2021 ) . 41 . B . R . Sabari , A . Dall’Agnese , A . Boija , I . A . Klein , E . L . Coffey , K . Shrinivas , B . J . Abraham , N . M . Hannett , A . V . Zamudio , J . C . Manteiga , C . H . Li , Y . E . Guo , D . S . Day , J . Schuijers , E . Vasile , S . Malik , D . Hnisz , T . I . Lee , I . I . Cisse , R . G . Roeder , P . A . Sharp , A . K . Chakraborty , R . A . Young , Coactivator condensation at super - enhancers links phase separation and gene control . Science . 361 ( 2018 ) , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aar3958 . 42 . A . Boija , I . A . Klein , B . R . Sabari , A . Dall’Agnese , E . L . Coffey , A . V . Zamudio , C . H . Li , K . Shrinivas , J . C . Manteiga , N . M . Hannett , B . J . Abraham , L . K . Afeyan , Y . E . Guo , J . K . Rimel , C . B . Fant , J . Schuijers , T . I . Lee , D . J . Taatjes , R . A . Young , Transcription Factors Activate Genes through the Phase - Separation Capacity of Their Activation Domains . Cell . 175 , 1842 – 1855 . e16 ( 2018 ) . 43 . D . C . Di Giammartino , A . Polyzos , E . Apostolou , Transcription factors : building hubs in the 3D space . Cell Cycle . 19 , 2395 – 2410 ( 2020 ) . 44 . Y . E . Guo , J . C . Manteiga , J . E . Henninger , B . R . Sabari , A . Dall’Agnese , N . M . Hannett , J . - H . Spille , L . K . Afeyan , A . V . Zamudio , K . Shrinivas , B . J . Abraham , A . Boija , T . - M . Decker , J . K . Rimel , C . B . Fant , T . I . Lee , I . I . Cisse , P . A . Sharp , D . J . Taatjes , R . A . Young , Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates . Nature . 572 , 543 – 548 ( 2019 ) . 45 . A . A . Sigova , B . J . Abraham , X . Ji , B . Molinie , N . M . Hannett , Y . E . Guo , M . Jangi , C . C . Giallourakis , P . A . Sharp , R . A . Young , Transcription factor trapping by RNA in gene regulatory elements . Science . 350 , 978 – 981 ( 2015 ) . 46 . Y . Jiang , J . Huang , K . Lun , B . Li , H . Zheng , Y . Li , R . Zhou , W . Duan , C . Wang , Y . Feng , H . Yao , C . Li , X . Ji , Genome - wide analyses of chromatin interactions after the loss of Pol I , Pol II , and Pol III . Genome Biol . 21 , 158 ( 2020 ) . 47 . I . Jonkers , H . Kwak , J . T . Lis , Genome - wide dynamics of Pol II elongation and its interplay with promoter proximal pausing , chromatin , and exons . Elife . 3 , e02407 ( 2014 ) . 48 . A . Siepel , A Unified Probabilistic Modeling Framework for Eukaryotic Transcription Based on Nascent RNA Sequencing Data . bioRxiv ( 2022 ) , p . 2021 . 01 . 12 . 426408 . 49 . J . Ray , P . R . Munn , A . Vihervaara , A . Ozer , C . G . Danko , J . T . Lis , Chromatin conformation remains stable upon extensive transcriptional changes driven by heat shock . bioRxiv ( 2019 ) , , doi : 10 . 1101 / 527838 . 50 . W . Shao , J . Zeitlinger , Paused RNA polymerase II inhibits new transcriptional initiation . Nat . Genet . 49 , 1045 – 1051 ( 2017 ) . 51 . B . Nabet , J . M . Roberts , D . L . Buckley , J . Paulk , S . Dastjerdi , A . Yang , A . L . Leggett , M . A . Erb , M . A . Lawlor , A . Souza , T . G . Scott , S . Vittori , J . A . Perry , J . Qi , G . E . Winter , K . - K . Wong , N . S . Gray , J . E . Bradner , The dTAG system for immediate and target - specific protein degradation . Nat . Chem . Biol . 14 , 431 – 441 ( 2018 ) . 52 . A . Abuhashem , A . S . Lee , A . L . Joyner , A . - K . Hadjantonakis , Rapid and efficient degradation of endogenous proteins in vivo identifies stage - specific roles of RNA Pol II pausing in mammalian development . Dev . Cell ( 2022 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2022 . 03 . 013 . 53 . Y . Aoi , E . R . Smith , A . P . Shah , E . J . Rendleman , S . A . Marshall , A . R . Woodfin , F . X . Chen , R . Shiekhattar , A . Shilatifard , NELF Regulates a Promoter - Proximal Step Distinct from RNA Pol II Pause - Release . Mol . Cell . 78 , 261 – 274 . e5 ( 2020 ) . 54 . A . Abuhashem , A . G . Chivu , Y . Zhao , E . J . Rice , A . Siepel , C . G . Danko , A . - K . Hadjantonakis , RNA Pol II pausing facilitates phased pluripotency transitions by buffering transcription . bioRxiv ( 2022 ) , p . 2022 . 04 . 21 . 489065 . 55 . B . A . Gibson , Y . Zhang , H . Jiang , K . M . Hussey , J . H . Shrimp , H . Lin , F . Schwede , Y . Yu , W . L . Kraus , Chemical genetic discovery of PARP targets reveals a role for PARP - 1 in transcription elongation . Science . 353 , 45 – 50 ( 2016 ) . 56 . X . Luo , K . W . Ryu , D . - S . Kim , T . Nandu , C . J . Medina , R . Gupte , B . A . Gibson , R . E . Soccio , Y . Yu , R . K . Gupta , W . L . Kraus , PARP - 1 Controls the Adipogenic Transcriptional Program by PARylating C / EBPβ and Modulating Its Transcriptional Activity . Mol . Cell . 65 , 260 – 271 ( 2017 ) . 57 . H . Fu , R . Liu , Z . Jia , R . Li , F . Zhu , W . Zhu , Y . Shao , Y . Jin , Y . Xue , J . Huang , K . Luo , X . Gao , H . Lu , Q . Zhou , Poly ( ADP - ribosylation ) of P - TEFb by PARP1 disrupts phase separation to inhibit global transcription after DNA damage . Nat . Cell Biol . 24 , 513 – 525 ( 2022 ) . 58 . Z . Li , Z . Guo , R . Lan , S . Cai , Z . Lin , J . Li , J . Wang , Z . Li , P . Liu , The poly ( ADP - ribosyl ) ation of BRD4 mediated by PARP1 promoted pathological cardiac hypertrophy . Acta Pharm Sin B . 11 , 1286 – 1299 ( 2021 ) . 59 . M . Y . Kim , S . Mauro , N . Gévry , J . T . Lis , W . L . Kraus , NAD + - dependent modulation of chromatin structure and transcription by nucleosome binding properties of PARP - 1 . Cell . 119 , 803 – 814 ( 2004 ) . 60 . S . J . Petesch , J . T . Lis , Activator - induced spread of poly ( ADP - ribose ) polymerase promotes nucleosome loss at Hsp70 . Mol . Cell . 45 , 64 – 74 ( 2012 ) . 61 . R . Krishnakumar , W . L . Kraus , PARP - 1 regulates chromatin structure and transcription through a KDM5B - dependent pathway . Mol . Cell . 39 , 736 – 749 ( 2010 ) . 62 . K . Rhine , M . Dasovich , J . Yoniles , M . Badiee , S . Skanchy , L . R . Ganser , Y . Ge , C . M . Fare , J . Shorter , A . K . L . Leung , S . Myong , Poly ( ADP - ribose ) drives condensation of FUS via a transient interaction . Mol . Cell . 82 , 969 – 985 . e11 ( 2022 ) . 63 . J . Murai , S . - Y . N . Huang , B . B . Das , A . Renaud , Y . Zhang , J . H . Doroshow , J . Ji , S . Takeda , Y . Pommier , Trapping of PARP1 and PARP2 by Clinical PARP Inhibitors . Cancer Res . 72 , 5588 – 5599 ( 2012 ) . 64 . H . S . Kaya - Okur , S . J . Wu , C . A . Codomo , E . S . Pledger , T . D . Bryson , J . G . Henikoff , K . Ahmad , S . Henikoff , CUT & Tag for efficient epigenomic profiling of small samples and single cells . Nat . Commun . 10 , 1930 ( 2019 ) . 65 . S . Chong , C . Dugast - Darzacq , Z . Liu , P . Dong , G . M . Dailey , C . Cattoglio , A . Heckert , S . Banala , L . Lavis , X . Darzacq , R . Tjian , Imaging dynamic and selective low - complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription . Science . 361 ( 2018 ) , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aar2555 . 66 . T . Fukaya , B . Lim , M . Levine , Enhancer Control of Transcriptional Bursting . Cell . 166 , 358 – 368 ( 2016 ) . 67 . R . A . Beagrie , A . Scialdone , M . Schueler , D . C . A . Kraemer , M . Chotalia , S . Q . Xie , M . Barbieri , I . de Santiago , L . - M . Lavitas , M . R . Branco , J . Fraser , J . Dostie , L . Game , N . Dillon , P . A . W . Edwards , M . Nicodemi , A . Pombo , Complex multi - enhancer contacts captured by genome architecture mapping . Nature . 543 , 519 – 524 ( 2017 ) . 68 . A . L . Olins , D . E . Olins , Spheroid chromatin units ( v bodies ) . Science . 183 , 330 – 332 ( 1974 ) . 69 . Z . Adhireksan , D . Sharma , P . L . Lee , C . A . Davey , Near - atomic resolution structures of interdigitated nucleosome fibres . Nat . Commun . 11 , 4747 ( 2020 ) . 70 . Z . Wang , A . G . Chivu , L . A . Choate , E . J . Rice , D . C . Miller , T . Chu , S . - P . Chou , N . B . Kingsley , J . L . Petersen , C . J . Finno , R . R . Bellone , D . F . Antczak , J . T . Lis , C . G . Danko , Prediction of histone post - translational modification patterns based on nascent transcription data . Nat . Genet . 54 , 295 – 305 ( 2022 ) . 71 . B . J . E . Martin , J . Brind’Amour , A . Kuzmin , K . N . Jensen , Z . C . Liu , M . Lorincz , L . J . Howe , Transcription shapes genome - wide histone acetylation patterns . Nat . Commun . 12 , 210 ( 2021 ) . 72 . S . Zhang , N . Uebelmesser , M . Barbieri , A . Papantonis , Enhancer - promoter contact formation requires RNAPII and antagonizes loop extrusion . bioRxiv ( 2022 ) , p . 2022 . 07 . 04 . 498738 . 73 . S . Ramasamy , A . Aljahani , M . A . Karpinska , T . B . Ngoc Cao , J . Neos Cruz , A . Marieke Oudelaar , The Mediator complex regulates enhancer - promoter interactions . bioRxiv ( 2022 ) , p . 2022 . 06 . 15 . 496245 . 74 . S . F . Banani , H . O . Lee , A . A . Hyman , M . K . Rosen , Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 285 – 298 ( 2017 ) . 75 . A . R . Strom , A . V . Emelyanov , M . R . Mir , D . V . Fyodorov , X . R . Darzacq , G . H . Karpen , Phase separation drives heterochromatin domain formation . Biophys . J . 114 , 445a ( 2018 ) . 76 . S . J . Nair , L . Yang , D . Meluzzi , S . Oh , F . Yang , M . J . Friedman , S . Wang , T . Suter , I . Alshareedah , A . Gamliel , Q . Ma , J . Zhang , Y . Hu , Y . Tan , K . A . Ohgi , R . S . Jayani , P . R . Banerjee , A . K . Aggarwal , M . G . Rosenfeld , Phase separation of ligand - activated enhancers licenses cooperative chromosomal enhancer assembly . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 26 , 193 – 203 ( 2019 ) . 77 . A . R . Barutcu , B . J . Blencowe , J . L . Rinn , Differential contribution of steady - state RNA and active transcription in chromatin organization . EMBO Rep . 20 , e48068 ( 2019 ) . 78 . T . Henriques , D . A . Gilchrist , S . Nechaev , M . Bern , G . W . Muse , A . Burkholder , D . C . Fargo , K . Adelman , Stable pausing by RNA polymerase II provides an opportunity to target and integrate regulatory signals . Mol . Cell . 52 , 517 – 528 ( 2013 ) . 79 . D . Huang , W . L . Kraus , The expanding universe of PARP1 - mediated molecular and therapeutic mechanisms . Mol . Cell ( 2022 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2022 . 02 . 021 . 80 . T . - H . S . Hsieh , C . Cattoglio , E . Slobodyanyuk , A . S . Hansen , X . Darzacq , R . Tjian , Enhancer - promoter interactions and transcription are maintained upon acute loss of CTCF , cohesin , WAPL , and YY1 . bioRxiv ( 2021 ) , p . 2021 . 07 . 14 . 452365 . 81 . A . Goloborodko , S . Venev , N . Abdennur , azkalot , P . Di Tommaso , mirnylab / distiller - nf : v0 . 3 . 3 ( 2019 ; https : / / zenodo . org / record / 3350937 ) . 82 . F . Ramírez , V . Bhardwaj , L . Arrigoni , K . C . Lam , B . A . Grüning , J . Villaveces , B . Habermann , A . Akhtar , T . Manke , High - resolution TADs reveal DNA sequences underlying genome organization in flies . Nat . Commun . 9 , 189 ( 2018 ) . 83 . L . Lopez - Delisle , L . Rabbani , J . Wolff , V . Bhardwaj , R . Backofen , B . Grüning , F . Ramírez , T . Manke , pyGenomeTracks : reproducible plots for multivariate genomic datasets . Bioinformatics . 37 , 422 – 423 ( 2021 ) . 84 . T . Chu , Z . Wang , S . - P . Chou , C . G . Danko , Discovering transcriptional regulatory elements from run - on and sequencing data using the web - based dREG gateway . Curr . Protoc . Bioinformatics . 66 , e70 ( 2019 ) . 85 . S . Anders , W . Huber , Differential expression analysis for sequence count data . Derm . Helv . , 1 – 1 ( 2010 ) . 86 . L . H . Williams , G . Fromm , N . G . Gokey , T . Henriques , G . W . Muse , A . Burkholder , D . C . Fargo , G . Hu , K . Adelman , Pausing of RNA polymerase II regulates mammalian developmental potential through control of signaling networks . Mol . Cell . 58 , 311 – 322 ( 2015 ) . 87 . S . Noguchi , T . Arakawa , S . Fukuda , M . Furuno , A . Hasegawa , F . Hori , S . Ishikawa - Kato , K . Kaida , A . Kaiho , M . Kanamori - Katayama , T . Kawashima , M . Kojima , A . Kubosaki , R . - I . Manabe , M . Murata , S . Nagao - Sato , K . Nakazato , N . Ninomiya , H . Nishiyori - Sueki , S . Noma , E . Saijyo , A . Saka , M . Sakai , C . Simon , N . Suzuki , M . Tagami , S . Watanabe , S . Yoshida , P . Arner , R . A . Axton , M . Babina , J . K . Baillie , T . C . Barnett , A . G . Beckhouse , A . Blumenthal , B . Bodega , A . Bonetti , J . Briggs , F . Brombacher , A . J . Carlisle , H . C . Clevers , C . A . Davis , M . Detmar , T . Dohi , A . S . B . Edge , M . Edinger , A . Ehrlund , K . Ekwall , M . Endoh , H . Enomoto , A . Eslami , M . Fagiolini , L . Fairbairn , M . C . Farach - Carson , G . J . Faulkner , C . Ferrai , M . E . Fisher , L . M . Forrester , R . Fujita , J . - I . Furusawa , T . B . Geijtenbeek , T . Gingeras , D . Goldowitz , S . Guhl , R . Guler , S . Gustincich , T . J . Ha , M . Hamaguchi , M . Hara , Y . Hasegawa , M . Herlyn , P . Heutink , K . J . Hitchens , D . A . Hume , T . Ikawa , Y . Ishizu , C . Kai , H . Kawamoto , Y . I . Kawamura , J . S . Kempfle , T . J . Kenna , J . Kere , L . M . Khachigian , T . Kitamura , S . Klein , S . P . Klinken , A . J . Knox , S . Kojima , H . Koseki , S . Koyasu , W . Lee , A . Lennartsson , A . Mackay - Sim , N . Mejhert , Y . Mizuno , H . Morikawa , M . Morimoto , K . Moro , K . J . Morris , H . Motohashi , C . L . Mummery , Y . Nakachi , F . Nakahara , T . Nakamura , Y . Nakamura , T . Nozaki , S . Ogishima , N . Ohkura , H . Ohno , M . Ohshima , M . Okada - Hatakeyama , Y . Okazaki , V . Orlando , D . A . Ovchinnikov , R . Passier , M . Patrikakis , A . Pombo , S . Pradhan - Bhatt , X . - Y . Qin , M . Rehli , P . Rizzu , S . Roy , A . Sajantila , S . Sakaguchi , H . Sato , H . Satoh , S . Savvi , A . Saxena , C . Schmidl , C . Schneider , G . G . Schulze - Tanzil , A . Schwegmann , G . Sheng , J . W . Shin , D . Sugiyama , T . Sugiyama , K . M . Summers , N . Takahashi , J . Takai , H . Tanaka , H . Tatsukawa , A . Tomoiu , H . Toyoda , M . van de Wetering , L . M . van den Berg , R . Verardo , D . Vijayan , C . A . Wells , L . N . Winteringham , E . Wolvetang , Y . Yamaguchi , M . Yamamoto , C . Yanagi - Mizuochi , M . Yoneda , Y . Yonekura , P . G . Zhang , S . Zucchelli , I . Abugessaisa , E . Arner , J . Harshbarger , A . Kondo , T . Lassmann , M . Lizio , S . Sahin , T . Sengstag , J . Severin , H . Shimoji , M . Suzuki , H . Suzuki , J . Kawai , N . Kondo , M . Itoh , C . O . Daub , T . Kasukawa , H . Kawaji , P . Carninci , A . R . R . Forrest , Y . Hayashizaki , FANTOM5 CAGE profiles of human and mouse samples . Sci Data . 4 , 170112 ( 2017 ) . 88 . G . Li , X . Ruan , R . K . Auerbach , K . S . Sandhu , M . Zheng , P . Wang , H . M . Poh , Y . Goh , J . Lim , J . Zhang , H . S . Sim , S . Q . Peh , F . H . Mulawadi , C . T . Ong , Y . L . Orlov , S . Hong , Z . Zhang , S . Landt , D . Raha , G . Euskirchen , C . - L . Wei , W . Ge , H . Wang , C . Davis , K . I . Fisher - Aylor , A . Mortazavi , M . Gerstein , T . Gingeras , B . Wold , Y . Sun , M . J . Fullwood , E . Cheung , E . Liu , W . - K . Sung , M . Snyder , Y . Ruan , Extensive promoter - centered chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation . Cell . 148 , 84 – 98 ( 2012 ) . 89 . H . Kaya - Okur , S . Henikoff , Bench top CUT & Tag . protocols . io ( 2020 ) , ( available at https : / / www . protocols . io / view / bench - top - cut - amp - tag - kqdg34qdpl25 / v3 ) . 90 . M . Martin , Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high - throughput sequencing reads . EMBnet J . 17 , 10 ( 2011 ) . 91 . B . Langmead , S . L . Salzberg , Fast gapped - read alignment with Bowtie 2 . Nat . Methods . 9 , 357 – 359 ( 2012 ) . 92 . J . M . Gaspar , Improved peak - calling with MACS2 . bioRxiv ( 2018 ) , , doi : 10 . 1101 / 496521 . 93 . A . Abuhashem , A . - K . Hadjantonakis , Rapid and efficient adaptation of the dTAG system in mammalian development reveals stage specific requirements of NELF . bioRxiv ( 2021 ) , p . 2021 . 11 . 30 . 470581 . A B * * CRISPRi M i c r o - C H3K4me2 PRO - seq H3K27ac CTCF Virtual 4C dREG MYC CASC11 MIR1208 PVT1 LINC00977 GSDMCCCDC26 130 . 8 Mb 128 . 7 Mb chr8 C MYC locus Genome - wide Figure 1 10Kb - 10Kb - 10Kb E nhan c e r T SS 10Kb Promoter TSS Distance to TSS ( Kb ) - 10 - 7 . 5 - 5 - 2 . 5 0 2 . 5 5 7 . 5 10 60 40 80 100 0 5 M ed i an f un c t i on a l D i ff e r en c e ( 10 - 3 ) F un c t i ona l D i ff e r en c e pe r 103 P a i r s E 1Kb - 1Kb - 1Kb 1Kb E nhan c e r T SS Promoter TSS 100 300 A gg r ega t ed C PB D 20 F F un c t i ona l D i ff e r en c e pe r 10 3 P a i r s Distance to TSS ( bp ) 1 D M i c r o - C s i gna l FunctionalPairs NonfunctionalPairs FunctionalPairs NonfunctionalPairs e1 e3 e4 e2 e5 e7 e6 e1e2e3 , 4 e5 e6 , 7 Enhancer contacts Promoter contacts O b s / E x p ( l og2 ) 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 O b s / E x p ( l og2 ) 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 E nhan c e r Promoter Triptolide Flavopiridol Enhancers Promoters Non anchors Sample I ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = = Observed Change Expected Change Chromosome Sample II Enhancer Promoter Specific Contacts Background A B C D Figure 2 T SS TSS T SS 30 , 986 79 , 828 Promoter TSS E nhan c e r E 79 , 745 31 , 070 K562 PRO - seq Jurkat PRO - seq 58 . 3 Mb 59 . 4 Mb N o r m a li z ed c on t a c t s K562 Micro - C Jurkat Micro - C 10 - 2 10 - 2 10 - 3 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 2 10 - 3 10 - 3 4 D i s t an c e t o E nhan c e r T SS Gene BodyTxn Pausing Index 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 10kb - 10kb 200 1000 C PB Gene Body transcription Pausing index Pausing signal D o t / S t r i pe I n t en s i t y Gene Body transcription Pausing index Pausing signal Distance to Promoter TSS 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th K 562 Jurkat K562 > Jurkat Gene Body Transcription Pausing Gene Body Transcription Pausing signal Pausing index = Pausing signal Gene Body Transcription Figure 3 543 380 1 . 8 1 . 7 1 . 6 1 . 5 1 . 4 n = 173 n = 167 E nhan c e r - p r o m o t e r s pe c i f i c c on t a c t c hange r e l a t i v e t o J u r k a t K 562 Jurkat K562 > Jurkat Gene Body Transcription Pausing 4 , 829 2 , 676 543 380 n = 173 n = 167 E nhan c e r - p r o m o t e r s pe c i f i c c on t a c t c hange r e l a t i v e t o J u r k a t 1st 2nd 3rd 4th K562 Jurkat K562 Jurkat K 562 Jurkat K 562 Jurkat A C B D E A B C / D E FKBP HA dTAG A C / D E A NELF Complex Figure 4 T r a n sc r i p t i o n S t a r t S i t e s No dTAG 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 30 min 60 min 60 / 30 FC 60 / 0 FC 30 / 0 FC − 0 . 15 0 . 00 0 . 15 C B D - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 Distance to TSS ( kb ) C on t ac t s Fo l d C h a ng e E M e d i a n C on t ac t s Fo l d C h a ng e Wild Type ( no dTAG ) NELFB depletion Wild Type ( no dTAG ) NELFB depletion - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 PARP1 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 10 20 30 PRO - seq - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 ChRO - seq Fold - Change - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 NELFE Cluster I C l u s t e r I - 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS TSS TSS TSS 1 . 0 1 . 0 1 . 0 1 . 0 C l u s t e r II Distance to TSS ( kb ) 1 . 3 1 . 5 0 20 - 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 1 . 0 1 . 8 A Figure 5 Cluster II D C on t ac t s Fo l d C h a ng e E Obs / Exp ( log2 ) 10Kb - 10Kb - 10Kb E nhan c e r T SS 10Kb Promoter TSS 10Kb - 10Kb - 10Kb B ound C T C F m o t i f 10Kb Bound CTCF motif - 0 . 15 0 . 15 B C Nicotinamide PAR chains NAD + Olaparib 90 ' PARP1 Enhancer Me Ac Ac Promoter Me Ac Ac Enhancer - Promoter Distance Figure S1 N u m be r o f P a i r s Distance ( Mbp ) C A 1Mb C on t a c t P r obab ili t y C on t a c t s A r ound E nhan c e r s High Obs / Exp Low Obs / Exp B Distance to TSS ( bp ) Figure S2 D i s t an c e t o E nhan c e r T SS 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb 1kb - 1kb Distance to Promoter TSS Gene Body transcription Pausing index Pausing signal 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 0 400 A gg r ega t ed C PB Figure S3 K562 > Jurkat Jurkat > K562 Figure S4 K 562 Jurkat K 562 Jurkat Jurkat > K562 Gene Body Transcription Pausing A 1 , 696 2 , 375 150 202 E nhan c e r - p r o m o t e r s pe c i f i c c on t a c t c hange r e l a t i v e t o K 562 C B n = 64 n = 43 Figure S5 ZRS Shh No dTAG PRO - seq Virtual 4C Micro - C 30 min dTAG PRO - seq Virtual 4C Micro - C dTAG 30 min Figure S6 A B dTAG 60 min 8h post washout 24h post washout D i s t a n c e t o E nhan c e r T SS Distance to Promoter TSS Figure S7 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 5 10 15 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 1 . 25 1 . 50 Promoters Enhancers P r o m o t e r s - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 Enh a n c e r s 0 0 . 8 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 12 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 Distance to TSS ( kb ) − 0 . 04 0 0 . 04 - 1 . 0 TSS 1 . 0 0 1 . 5 PARP1 PRO - seq ChRO - seq Fold - Change NELFE M e d i a n C on t ac t s Fo l d C h a ng e P o l II m e d i a n f o l d c h a ng e a t T SS s ( l og 2 ) B C A