The Ethics of Knowledge Transfers and Conversions : Property or Privacy Rights ? R ICHARD B ASKERVILLE Computer Information Systems Georgia State University baskerville @ acm . org A LINA D ULIPOVICI Computer Information Systems Georgia State University adulipovici @ gsu . edu Abstract Closely related to organizational learning , knowledge creation , knowledge codification , and knowledge reuse , knowledge transfers of tacit knowledge between individuals and conversions of tacit knowledge to explicit knowledge raise important issues regarding the use of ethics and self - interest as counter determinants . Do organizations “own” the knowledge of their employees , or is this knowledge an “attribute” of an autonomous individual and subject to protection under human rights to privacy or security - of - person ? This paper explores these opposite viewpoints from the perspectives of knowledge management and human rights . Consequently , organizational knowledge may fall under the intellectual property theory and organizations have the right to buy , sell and use their corporate knowledge as it suits their needs , while personal knowledge may fall under the personal privacy theory and individuals have the right to protect the security of their personal knowledge . Thus , knowledge management practices may differ with regard to the two types of knowledge . . Introduction Based on the works in innovation transfer and diffusion , knowledge transfer is closely related to organizational learning , knowledge creation , knowledge codification , and knowledge reuse . However , knowledge transfer is distinguished by several unique characteristics : ( 1 ) knowledge , in an articulated or unarticulated form , is already possessed by a knowledge - source ; ( 2 ) it involves either conversion of knowledge to an articulated form , or a direct transfer from the knowledge - source to the knowledge - recipient ; ( 3 ) the knowledge - recipient is different from the knowledge - source . This last characteristic has sparked a debate in the knowledge management literature because it portrays ‘knowledge reuse’ as a special case of ‘knowledge transfer’ ( i . e . the knowledge - recipient is also the knowledge - source ) when in fact , there is absolutely no difference in the challenges raised by these two activities [ 15 ] . With regard to the types of knowledge transfer , researchers have created various frameworks and classifications . For instance , Dixon [ 6 ] identifies five knowledge transfer situations usually seen in practice : serial transfer , near transfer , far transfer , strategic transfer , and expert transfer . Adopting a different perspective based on the actors involved in the process of knowledge transfer , Markus [ 15 ] discerns four types , namely shared - work producers , shared - work practitioners , expertise - seeking novices , and secondary knowledge miners . These frameworks , however , focus primarily on concepts such as the purpose of knowledge transfer , the actor involved ( knowledge consumer , knowledge intermediary , or knowledge provider ) , the kind of knowledge needed , and challenges in finding and selecting knowledge . Research and commentary around the issue of ethics in knowledge transfer usually doesn’t distinguish between knowledge transfer and knowledge sharing ; however , the former has an instrumental connotation while the latter has a social connotation . This research has regarded the creation of ethical environments that promote sharing [ 16 ] ; utopian organizational cultures and communities of knowledge sharing [ 31 ] ; the paradox of the trade - off between holding personal tacit knowledge for individual productivity versus sharing that knowledge for organizational productivity [ 25 ] ; and the use of ethics and self - interest as counter determinants of knowledge sharing [ 29 ] . Given that knowledge management often involves conversion of tacit knowledge to explicit , or the direct transfer of tacit knowledge between individuals , such conversion creates intellectual property for the employer and the transfer shifts ownership from the individual to the collective . An example in this sense is the “Evan Brown” case . In 1997 , DSC Communications , which later merged with Alcatel USA , sued a former employee , Evan Brown , for withholding an idea for a software product Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 1 0 - 7695 - 2507 - 5 / 06 / $ 20 . 00 ( C ) 2006 IEEE [ 14 ] . DSC / Alcatel claimed it owned Brown ' s idea because of an employment contract requiring the disclosure of any invention while working for the company . On the other side , Brown alleged that , by the time he joined DSC , 80 % of his idea was already developed and the rest was done mentally while vacationing . Additionally , Brown stated that he had asked for a release from DSC / Alcatel in order to pursue his idea and when the negotiations proved to be fruitless , the company fired him and then sued him . The Evan Brown case , which was won by DSC / Alcatel , raises an important issue : companies may own employee thoughts . Thus , the ethics of knowledge transfers and conversions become extremely important because the individual loses sole rights to the knowledge . This loss raises a fundamental question with ethical dimensions : Is this a transfer of property or personal worth ? The former transfer falls clearly under human rights regarding property . The latter may engage other human rights , such as the right to protection of personal data . Human rights recognize the inherent dignity of the human family as the foundation of freedom , justice and peace in the world . Among the human rights declared by the United Nations ( UN ) in 1948 are several that might be relevant to the issue of ethics and knowledge management . Articles 17 and 27 of the UN Declaration of Human Rights deal with rights of property ownership ( such as intellectual property ) , and could apply if knowledge is viewed as an economic good . Articles 3 and 12 deal with rights of security - of - person and privacy , which could apply if knowledge is viewed as a person’s private attribute [ 26 ] . As an individual’s private attribute , organizational programs that aim to forcibly develop knowledge - sharing cultures could violate individual privacy rights . Such violations could become central in the ongoing debate that protection of human rights is the responsibility of multinational companies as well as governments . This protection involves not only the corporate code of ethics , but policies , such as social auditing , that ensure such practices are implemented [ 28 ] . The UN Declaration of Human Rights is universal in terms of content and application . Although technically it is not legally binding , it is a driving force behind some human rights - based legislation . Such Charters and Conventions are generally in harmony albeit some differences still exist in the enforcement of certain human rights . For instance , Article 7 of The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union defines a right to respect for an individual’s private and family life , going further in Article 8 to extend this to the protection of personal data [ 7 ] . In the US , there is more limited protection for a " right to privacy " . The law limits access to an individual ' s property for the purpose of learning things about the individual , but does not limit the communication of things that have been lawfully learned [ 27 ] . In the common law tort , “invasion of privacy” involves a form of law called " civility rules " that convert social norms into workable legal doctrine . Such laws enable individuals to become autonomous persons [ 20 ] . Do organizations “own” the knowledge of their employees , or is this knowledge an “attribute” of an autonomous individual and subject to protection under human rights to privacy or security - of - person ? Is the development of knowledge - sharing organizational structures the rightful exercise of organizational intellectual property rights , or is it an invasion of worker privacy ? Must there be an explicit employment contract that defines these intellectual property rights ( e . g . , Evan Brown case ) ? Figure 1 illustrates the various sources of ethical conflict that we will draw into our discussion of these questions . Knowledge exists in different forms , and different forms may involve different conflicts . The conflicts sometimes pit organizational rights to knowledge against individual rights to knowledge . These rights arise from accepted human rights frameworks that include property rights and privacy rights . Overall this conflict is framed by cultural values that are shaped by national boundaries and organizational norms . Organization’sRights to Knowledge Individual’s Rights to Knowledge Forms of Knowledge OrganizationalKnowledge PersonalKnowledge Human Rights Property Rights ( Individually or with others ) Privacy Rights Cultural Values Figure 1 : Sources of ethical conflict in knowledge management This paper explores these contrasting viewpoints and the underlying sources of conflicting ethical positions from a knowledge management and human rights perspective . Next , we will look at different definitions Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 2 and forms of knowledge . Following this , we elaborate on the ethics of two forms of knowledge : organizational knowledge and personal knowledge . Concluding the paper is a discussion on the issues and challenges raised by the ethics of knowledge transfers . Forms of Knowledge : Organizational and Personal There is a debate whether knowledge can exist beyond the individual . This question seems to rests on how we define knowledge . Some definitions of knowledge emerge from the field of expert systems [ e . g . , 33 ] , encompassing structures beyond just information to include the rules for processing information . Other definitions arise from the viewpoint of knowledge as an organizational property , similar to a knowledge base , that encompasses routines and processes that contextualize information and enable action . Still others characterize knowledge as an innately human attribute , something that resides in the living mind of a person , because the mind must “identify , interpret and internalize knowledge” [ 17 , p . 2 ] . These definitions may in fact represent different kinds of knowledge . An example is the distinction between tacit knowledge and articulated knowledge [ 11 , 18 ] . Tacit knowledge is non - verbalized , intuitive and unarticulated , in contrast to articulated knowledge expressed in some written or spoken form . However , this distinction is made ambiguous given the subsequent difficulty in distinguishing articulated knowledge from “information” [ 31 ] . Further , there is difficulty in distinguishing whether tacit knowledge is strictly the property of an individual , or potentially the property of a group or organization [ 11 ] . Given the hodgepodge of definitions , firstly , we will distinguish “organizational knowledge” as being embedded in organizational processes , procedures , routines and structures [ 24 ] . Such knowledge may be articulated or tacit in the view of some authorities [ 11 ] . This article is mainly concerned with the tacit form of the organizational knowledge , although we note that a recent study [ 10 ] defines social knowledge as tacit organizational knowledge and organizational knowledge as articulated knowledge that is captured in technologies , structures , and routines ( e . g . , Artificial Intelligence Systems ) . Secondly , “personal knowledge” is that form of knowledge that resides in the living mind of an individual person as an innately human attribute of that person [ 17 ] . Personal knowledge is either tacit or codifiable and thus , possible to transform it into articulated knowledge . It is in this last definition that we encounter knowledge as a personal characteristic . Knowledge is a fluid mix of framed experience , values , contextual information , and expert insight that provides a framework for evaluating and incorporating new experiences and information . It originates from , and is applied through , the minds of “knowers” [ 5 , p . 5 ] . The Ethics of Organizational Knowledge “Everyone has the right to own , use and bequeath his or her lawful acquired possessions . No one may be deprived of his of her possessions , except in the public interest and in the cases and under the conditions provided by the law , subject to fair compensation being paid in good time by their loss . The use of property may be regulated by law in so far as is necessary for the general interest ” . In addition , “Intellectual property shall be protected . ” ( Article 17 – Right to property ) from the Charter of fundamental rights of the European Union Researchers have usually examined knowledge creation and knowledge transfer as activities that take place in a social environment thus , falling under the umbrella of the social capital theory . Indeed , social capital is based on the relationships between the employees and their organization and therefore it explains pro - social behaviors , including collective action and community involvement [ 30 ] . However , knowledge can also be interpreted as an organizational resource that resides in the mind of employees . In this context , the intellectual capital theory explains the concepts underlying the management of knowledge by valuing “soft” organizational assets [ 21 ] . Specifically , intellectual capital is concerned with managing organizational assets such as assets that help maintain or increase the market share ( e . g . trademarks and customer loyalty ) , assets that create property rights ( e . g . patents and copyrights ) , assets that create organizational cohesion ( e . g . culture , structure and IT style ) , or assets that support organizational processes ( e . g . employee knowledge and personal networks ) [ 3 ] . Derived from the concepts of the intellectual capital theory , the intellectual property theory deals with the legal rights of what people create or invent and which has a commercial value as a property . The World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) established in 1967 that “intellectual property shall include rights relating to : • literary , artistic and scientific works ; • performances of performing artists , phonograms , and broadcasts ; • inventions in all fields of human endeavor ; Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 3 • scientific discoveries ; • industrial designs ; • trademarks , service marks , and commercial names and designations ; • protection against unfair competition ; and all other rights resulting from intellectual activity in the industrial , scientific , literary or artistic fields” [ 32 ] . Intellectual property rights allow owners to protect their property by restricting the access and the use of the property , for example through patents and copyrights . With regard to organizational knowledge , which is knowledge about organizational processes , procedures , routines and structures , it clearly falls under the protection of intellectual property rights and , ethically , it is subject to human rights regarding property . This means that it can be contracted , sold , traded , or given away . From a different perspective , organizational knowledge is also a knowledge asset or the “firm - specific resources that are indispensable to create values for the firm” [ 18 , p . 20 ] . Given their unique characteristics , knowledge assets cannot be immediately sold or bought . This is especially valid if knowledge assets are not in an articulated form but rather in the employees’ minds or as know - how [ 24 ] . Consequently , buying and selling organizational knowledge involves transferring groups of individuals with established patterns of working together . Such transactions can be achieved not only through knowledge alliances , joint ventures , mergers and acquisitions . The potential for hostile mergers and acquisitions opens avenues for the seizure of rights to individual knowledge by organizations whose ethical posture might contravene the moral beliefs of some of these individuals . For example , in 2002 Pharmacia was acquired by Pfizer , a company under investigation at that time by U . S . government agencies for the alleged abuse of patents in order to hinder generic drug manufacturers that market lower cost medicines [ 22 ] . Pharmacia employees who might be morally opposed to such business practices may have suddenly found the rights to their individual knowledge have passed to a firm under investigation for such practices . Moreover , organizational knowledge has a limited commercial value if it is not embedded in a particular setting . For instance , managerial experience and knowledge about customers , suppliers and competitors is “trapped inside the minds of key - employees” [ 24 , p . 38 ] and therefore , such knowledge may be useless . However , when it is provided to the right people at the right time , it may become a competitive advantage . This observation offers additional support to our argument that an organization has the right of property over the employees’ organizational knowledge . Hence , organizations depend on employees’ behavior to create and to transfer knowledge [ 2 ] . Any organizational control system will have a “zone of discretion” within which conformity is a question of motivation rather than coercion [ 1 ] . The Evan Brown case might not have existed , if he had not asked for a release from DSC / Alcatel . Indeed , some of the organization’s rights are also protected by the human rights . As previously mentioned , DSC / Alcatel won the case against Evan Brown arguing that the employment contract required employees to share ideas and inventions developed during their employment at DSC . Under the human rights , such employment contracts are viewed as collective rights and organizations may be treated as a “collection of people” . From this viewpoint , the conflict arises between the rights of the individual person versus the rights of the collective ( corporation ) of persons . In summary , according to the intellectual property theory , organizational knowledge is mainly protected by property rights and thus , owned by the organization . Only as a “collection of people” , are organizations’ rights ( such as employment contracts ) earn protection under typical human rights frameworks . As a knowledge asset , organizational knowledge cannot be quickly sold or bought , and such transfers of property rights are accomplished at the organizational level by creating knowledge alliances and joint ventures , or by setting up mergers and acquisitions of business units . Nevertheless , the paradox of knowledge is still unsolved . On the one hand , organizations may purposely limit knowledge transfer to prevent industrial espionage or overloading employees . On the other hand , employees who believe that transferring knowledge diminishes their professional value may hinder knowledge transfer [ 30 ] . The former is directly related to the organizational knowledge culture , while the latter is closely related to the concept of personal knowledge , which is discussed in the next section . As a result , modern organizations need to be not only knowledge - generating and knowledge - integrating , but also knowledge - protecting organizations [ 24 ] . The Ethics of Personal Knowledge Personal knowledge may be excluded from manageable knowledge . For example , KPMG defines intellectual property as “not just patents , trade marks , copyrights , database rights and other " pure " IP , but other forms of articulated knowledge , such as business processes , methodologies and know how” [ 13 ] . This means that some organizations will not consider personal knowledge as intellectual property . Personal knowledge is part of the individual , and represents an important characteristic of the person . In an Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 4 information age where “knowledge - workers” are well compensated , personal knowledge represents a sizable portion of the personal worth of an individual to their society . Personal knowledge represents a source of income , because individuals are often hired or contracted on the basis of their particular expertise and skills . Personal knowledge can bring respect and stature in communities , especially where this knowledge is unique and important to society . For example , the extensive and specialized personal knowledge of physicians is highly valued in most societies , and is the source of income and social stature in these societies . Knowledge , like information , is most valuable when it is both unique and useful . For example , the surgical knowledge necessary to transplant a human heart was initially the sole attribute of South African surgeon Christiaan Barnard . However , he quickly shared his knowledge , as have many subsequent heart surgeons , to the point where thousands of such transplants are performed each year . While the knowledge necessary to transplant a heart is still very specialized and valuable , it would be even more valuable if it was unique to fewer individual surgeons . It follows then , that personal knowledge , like information or other forms of knowledge , is liable to be less valuable when transferred to others . Given that it may be source of wealth and social stature , we can recognize that the individual person is diminished through such transfers . The source of personal knowledge may be through life’s experience , and a transfer of this kind of knowledge is not quite the same as the development of some item of intellectual property . The transfer of personal knowledge is not well understood , and is often regarded by economists and social scientists using a “cost - free” assumption . Instead , the transfer of tacit knowledge is known to be difficult without the transfer of people . Such personal knowledge is trapped in the minds of people . In some ways , personal knowledge is regarded as more easily managed , since it can be “more readily bought and sold” by hiring and firing individuals [ 24 , p . 38 ] . Thus , the transfer of personal knowledge engages ethical decisions that regard the personal worth of the individual with such knowledge . Personal knowledge may be used to create intellectual property ( for example , to write a book ) . However , the personal knowledge embraces the characteristics that enable the individual to create such a work . Sharing this kind of personal knowledge is a deeper diminishment of personal value . Not surprisingly , a circumspect employee might withhold personal knowledge and avoid sharing knowledge . An employee might hold back his personal knowledge in the interest of maintaining job security [ 25 ] . Such withholding also arises out of self - interest when the organizational culture views knowledge sharing in a setting of reciprocity [ 4 ] or strong competition for performance among workers within the organization [ 29 ] . Personal knowledge transfer is more complicated than a simple commodity exchange . Because knowledge is framed by an individual ' s experience and values , the passing of knowledge between individuals will result in possession by each individual of unique and discrete forms of knowledge . The personal knowledge shared by a sender is , of course , modified by the experience and values of the receiver as it is acquired . Foucault referred to this unique adjustment of thought as a genealogy of knowledge [ 9 ] . With each transfer knowledge takes on distinct new forms as a result of the context of the individuals . As a consequence , it is not clear that personal knowledge can be ethically treated as a commodity to be bought , owned , and sold ; there are currently no human rights declarations with regard to personal knowledge , such as those developed around property . The nature of personal knowledge as a property of an individual does bear some similarity to the nature of personal data as a property of an individual . In a manner similar to the rights of the individual to control the disclosure of their private data , there may be an innate human right of individuals to control the transfer and use of their personal knowledge . Ethically , this proposition would distinguish personal knowledge from information or organizational knowledge and regard such personal knowledge as a private characteristic of an individual person . According to this proposition , the transfer of personal knowledge fits poorly within the human rights frameworks for property ownership . Such a proposition would lead to an ethical position that would be similar to that of human rights ethics regarding privacy . If disclosure of private data diminishes the individual in a manner similar to the diminishment that follows transfer of personal knowledge , then a more appropriate frame for ethics might be similar to privacy rights or the protection of personal data : “Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her . Such data must be process fairly for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law . Everyone has the right of access to data which has been collected concerning him or her and the right to have it rectified . Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 5 independent authority” . ( Article 8 – protection of personal data ) from the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union If such a fundamental human right were extended to include personal knowledge , then ethical limitations would necessarily be imposed on organizations wishing to transfer personal knowledge from one individual to another . Under Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , it would be a violation of human rights to attempt such a transfer without the permission of the knowledge sending individual . In summary , according to the personal privacy theory , personal knowledge is protected by privacy rights , and is owned by the individual . Although , as a knowledge asset , personal knowledge can be quickly bought and sold through the hiring and dismissal of employees , transfers of personal knowledge could only be accomplished with the permission of the individual who currently possesses this personal knowledge . Organizations face a quite different knowledge paradox under privacy theory . The paradox lies in the right of an individual to retain their personal knowledge in order to assure job security , since the transfer of personal knowledge to another individual could lead to the redundancy of the sender . The rights to privacy would protect the individual from being required to provide services to their employer that ultimately eliminates the individual ' s employment . Of course the individual could provide such service to the employer provided that the individual gives permission . This agreement is consistent with the terms of Article 8 . Discussion As with many discussions of ethics or moral reasoning , clear determinations are complicated by conflicting rights . Under the intellectual property theory , organizations such as companies , universities and governments are entitled to manage their corporate knowledge , and institute knowledge sharing activities and structures with little restraint . Under personal privacy theory , individuals are entitled to protect the security of their personal knowledge , and knowledge sharing institutions must be governed by the voluntarism of the individuals . The conflict in rights arises in most organizational settings as an economic conflict . Knowledge sharing , at least so far as personal knowledge , represents a transfer of economic value from the individual to other individuals in the organization . Such transfers can be viewed from four alternative paradigms of economic theory [ 23 ] . Under classical and neoclassical economic theory , individuals realize economic benefits at the same time benefits accrue to other actors . From this viewpoint , the individual realizes benefits from knowledge sharing because the organization of which the individual is a member also benefits . The economic benefits of being a member of a more knowledgeable and knowledge of sharing organization may be equivalent to the economic benefits of retaining personal knowledge . Under decisionist economic theory , rationality prevails . From this viewpoint , it may become a rational decision to join the organization’s network and share knowledge because this provides a greater job security than withholding personal knowledge . Under institutional economic theory , individuals may choose to share their personal knowledge in accordance with instituted practices , norms , values , morals , and beliefs . Such motivations may also be driven by long - term relations and social capital . Under managerial economic theory , organizational governmentality prevails . Individuals share their personal knowledge in recognition of the rights of the organization to control organizational resources , including the personal knowledge of workers . Styhre [ 23 ] suggests that these economic paradigms represent mindsets in which organizational resources such as knowledge are managed in an economy of accumulation . Individuals achieve benefits from their knowledge by accumulating wealth . Such economic views are consistent with the notion that employers have certain rights and expecting that their employees will willingly share their personal knowledge for the benefit of the employer . Compensation paid by the employer to the employee justifies such expectations within an economy of accumulation . An alternative economy , an economy of sharing , is one component of an organizational culture of sharing . Such an economy provides a different foundation for determining knowledge rights . Under this economy , workers share knowledge as a form of self - expression . The prevailing mode is one of giving and the exchange of information products represents a form of public goods , and results from a culture of good citizenship [ 4 , 23 ] . The determination as to whose are the rights in such conflicts as the one between organizational rights and individual rights to personal knowledge is a moral judgment that is likely to be influenced by cultural values . An example in this sense is a Taiwanese study on the intention to share knowledge . The study found that ethics and self - interest are the two major determinants [ 29 ] . On Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 6 the other hand , European values , as reflected in the rights to privacy and security of person , appear to contrast an assumption that behaviour rooted in self - interest is by definition unethical . Even Western organizational theorists assume that self - interested behaviour plays a negative role in the organization [ 4 ] . Such ethical values may not only be determined by national and regional boundaries , but may also be shaped by organizational norms . With regard to the rights of the individual versus the rights of the organization , there would appear to be ethical differences for knowledge management that are determined both by the type of knowledge and the prevailing cultural values . Table 1 lists the different types of knowledge distinguished in this paper , the dominant human rights and the nature of the knowledge in relation to the individual . Personal knowledge may be regarded as a personal attribute and is affected by the individual’s right to privacy . Organizational knowledge may be regarded as an organizational asset to be managed like other economic properties . Table 1 . Types of knowledge and consequent rights . Type of knowledge Dominant rights EU human rights Nature of knowledge Personal knowledge Right to privacy Article 8 Personal attribute Organizational knowledge Right to property Article 17 Organizational asset These positions appear orthogonal : whereas the right to privacy ignores the organizations’ rights such as the employment contract , the right to property ignores the knowledge acquired from outside the organization . However these are also two sides of the same coin . For instance , in the Evan Brown case , Brown could have shared his idea with his colleagues from the beginning . Another option was to share his idea in an open - source software ( OSS ) community , such as Linux , as an anonymous contribution to the knowledge stock of the community . He could have also chosen not only to share his idea with his team - mates at Alcatel but also to sell it to another company once his employment contract at Alcatel was over . Perhaps he could abstain from thinking altogether , but that might not be feasible for every person . In sum , sharing knowledge can often be a win - win situation without diminishing an individual’s knowledge assets . OSS communities illustrate how short term sharing knowledge in an OSS community is a win - win strategy . However , if one is a constant source of many ingenious ideas over time , selling those ideas might be a more financially rewarding alternative . Financial rewards are not necessarily the sole motivator behind knowledge sharing ; other motives might be of a more pragmatic , norm - oriented , socio - political or even hedonistic nature [ 12 ] . All such alternatives arise partly because the knowledge economy is a semi - public good . Fast diffusion of knowledge generates endogenous growth and common wealth in society . In this context , knowledge “spills over” from the originators into this public exchange . These knowledge spillovers [ 8 ] enable vast amounts of knowledge to be acquired outside of the organization , often serendipitously . Knowledge spillovers are neither instantaneous nor uniform , making identification and ownership a significant challenge . Knowledge spillovers complicate the individual knowledge brought from the outside of the organization and create an allocation issue . This issue regards the proportion ( as well as the cost ) of organizational knowledge attributable to the organization’s planned activity rather than the individual’s social interactions . For instance , the continual emergence of new technologies can keep IT professionals permanently off balance . In fact , there is not enough time to keep one’s skill - set continuously up to date . Organizations may be responsible for supporting knowledge sharing through formal training , but may well expect IT employees to acquire knowledge independently through self - development . Therefore , Knowledge Management practices may in some cases differ with regard to the two types of knowledge because organizational or cultural values may distinguish different norms about the ownership of the knowledge . While organizational knowledge might be viewed universally as organizational property , personal knowledge may be viewed in some cultures as an organizational “public good” , and in other cultures as an individual attribute that may only be shared voluntarily ( perhaps through specific compensation ) by the individual . In the latter ethical setting , such voluntary sharing would be similar to voluntarily sharing personal data . Because these positions are morally defined and culturally dependent , it is not possible to declare which position is “correct” . We have discovered a dialectic view rather than a uniform view . Organizational knowledge is usually seen as a property thus falling under the Intellectual Property theory . There is an alternative view under which it may also be a personal attribute belonging to an individual . Further , such a distinction may be meaningless if knowledge is seen as neither a “thing” to be possessed nor an “attribute” characterizing a person . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 7 This alternative view of organizational knowledge originates in Polanyi’s [ 19 ] interpretation of knowledge and its ‘tacit dimension’ , which does not exist separately from an explicit form of knowledge . Because people may choose to respond to different assumptions about personal knowledge , we can assert that it is inaccurate to assume that workers in all cultural value systems will view their own decision not to share their personal knowledge , or a decision to act out of self - interest in the face of internal competition , as unethical or immoral . In such settings , workers may view knowledge management as an attempt to deprive them of valuable personal attributes . Such knowledge management activities may indeed fall under the definitions of the invasion of privacy , and thereby possibly violate the human rights of the workers . As a result , in some cultures , management of organizational knowledge vis - à - vis personal knowledge may respond to distinctly different ethical frameworks and require distinctly different management practices . Acknowledgements This paper was significantly improved with thanks to the insightful comments of several anonymous reviewers . References [ 1 ] Barnard , C . I . The Functions of the Executive . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1938 . [ 2 ] Bock , G . - W . , Zmud , R . W . , Kim , Y . - G . and Lee , J . - N . Behavioral intention formation in knowledge sharing : examining the roles of extrinsic motivators , social - psychological forces , and organizational climate . MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 1 ) , 2005 , 87 . [ 3 ] Brooking , A . The management of intellectual capital . Long Range Planning , 30 ( 3 ) , 1997 , 364 - 365 . [ 4 ] Constant , D . , Kiesler , S . and Sproull , L . What ' s mine is ours , or is it ? A study of attitudes about information sharing . Information Systems Research , 5 ( 4 ) , 1994 , 400 - 421 . [ 5 ] Davenport , T . H . , De Long , D . W . and Beers , M . C . Successful knowledge management projects . Sloan Management Review , 39 ( 2 ) , 1998 , 43 - 57 . [ 6 ] Dixon , N . M . Common knowledge : how companies thrive by sharing what they know . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA , 2000 . [ 7 ] European Union . The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , The Presidents of the European Parliament , the Council , and the Commission , Nice , 2000 . [ 8 ] Foray , D . Economics of knowledge . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2004 . [ 9 ] Foucault , M . The archaeology of knowledge . Pantheon Book ( Original published 1969 ) , New York , 1971 . [ 10 ] Griffith , T . L . , Sawyer , J . E . and Neale , M . A . Virtualness and Knowledge in Teams : managing the love triangle of organizations , individuals , and information technology . Mis Quarterly , 27 ( 2 ) , 2003 , 265 - 287 . [ 11 ] Hedlund , G . A model of knowledge management and the N - form corporation . Strategic Management Journal , 15 ( ( Summer Special Issue ) ) , 1994 , 73 - 90 . [ 12 ] Hertel , G . , Niedner , S . and Herrmann , S . Motivation of software developers in open source projects : An Internet - based survey of contributors to the Linux kernel . Research Policy , 32 ( 7 ) , 2003 , 1159 . [ 13 ] KPMG . Intellectual Gold - KPMG ' s European Intellectual Property Survey reveals the value hidden in Europe ' s leading companies , KLegal - London , UK , 2002 . [ 14 ] Lehrer Goldman , E . Idea in Former Employee ' s Head Belongs to Alcatel , Law . com , 2002 . [ 15 ] Markus , M . L . Toward a theory of knowledge reuse : Types of knowledge reuse situations and factors in reuse success . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 ( 1 ) , 2001 , 57 - 93 . [ 16 ] McDaniel , C . Theoretical issues in organizational ethics . in Organizational Ethics : research and ethical environments , Ashgate , Cornwall , UK , 2004 . [ 17 ] Myers , P . S . Knowledge Management and Organizational Design : An Introduction . in Myers , P . S . ed . Knowledge Management and Organizational Design , Butterworth - Heinemann , Boston , Mass . , 1996 , 1 - 6 . [ 18 ] Nonaka , I . , Toyama , R . and Konno , N . SECI , ba and leadership : a unified model of dynamic knowledge creation . Long Range Planning , 33 ( 1 ) , 2000 , 5 - 34 . [ 19 ] Polanyi , M . The Tacit Dimension . Anchor Books , Garden City , NY , 1967 . [ 20 ] Post , R . C . The Social Foundations of Privacy : Community and Self in the Common Law Tort . California Law Review , 77 ( 5 ) , 1989 , 957 - 1010 . [ 21 ] Roos , J . and von Krogh , G . The epistemological challenge : Managing knowledge and intellectual capital . European Management Journal , 14 ( 4 ) , 1996 , 333 - 337 . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 8 [ 22 ] Sententia , W . Blockbuster Depression : Drug Deals for Drug Makers , Center for Cognitive Liberty & Ethics , Davis , California , 2002 . [ 23 ] Styhre , A . The knowledge - intensive company and the economy of sharing : rethinking utility and knowledge management . Knowledge and Process Management , 9 ( 4 ) , 2002 , 228 - 232 . [ 24 ] Teece , D . J . Strategies for managing knowledge assets : the role of firm structure and industrial context . Long Range Planning , 33 ( 1 ) , 2000 , 35 - 54 . [ 25 ] Trauth , E . M . , Who owns my soul ? The paradox of pursing organizational knowledge in a work culture of individualism . in Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGCPR conference on Computer personnel research , ( New Orleans , Louisiana , 1999 ) , ACM Press , 159 - 163 . [ 26 ] United Nations . Universal Declaration of Human Rights , United Nations General Assembly , New York , 1948 . [ 27 ] Volokh , E . Personalization and privacy . Association for Computing Machinery . Communications of the ACM , 43 ( 8 ) , 2000 , 84 - 88 . [ 28 ] Wah , L . Treading the sacred ground . Management Review , 87 ( 7 ) , 1998 , 18 - 22 . [ 29 ] Wang , C . - C . The Influence of Ethical and Self - Interest Concerns on Knowledge Sharing Intentions among Managers : An Empirical Study . International Journal of Management , 21 ( 3 ) , 2004 , 370 - 381 . [ 30 ] Wasko , M . M . and Faraj , S . Why should I share ? Examining social capital and knowledge contribution in electronic networks of practice . MIS Quarterly , 29 ( 1 ) , 2005 , 35 . [ 31 ] Wilson , T . D . The nonsense of ' knowledge management ' . Information Research , 8 ( 1 ) , 2002 . [ 32 ] WIPO . The Concept of Intellectual Property in " WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook : Policy , Law and Use " , World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO Publication No . 489 ( E ) ) , 2005 . [ 33 ] Zeleny , M . Management support systems : Towards integrated knowledge management . Human Systems Management , 7 ( 1 ) , 1987 , 59 - 70 . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 9