AI + Co - Design : Developing a Novel Computer - supported Approach to Inclusive Design Greg Walsh Digital Whimsy Lab , University of Baltimore Baltimore , Maryland , USA gwalsh @ ubalt . edu Eric Wronsky Digital Whimsy Lab , University of Baltimore Baltimore , Maryland , USA eric . wronsky @ ubalt . edu ABSTRACT In this report , we review our early steps in leveraging the promise of Artificial Intelligence to potentially create more inclusive co - design experiences for marginalized populations . We discuss our research agenda and the first phases where we utilized Wizard of Oz prototypes to engage participants in an online co - design environment . We found that the types of interactions between the facilitator and participant determined the amount of engagement with the co - design process . INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND Our lab’s work is focused on the inclusion of people in the design process . Previously , researchers have identified that including members of the community in the design of technology for that community strengthens the design [ 9 ] . Often , the inclusion of those community members happens at centrally located areas [ 10 ] . These meetings may occur in evenings or weekends . But what happens when members of the community cannot partake in those design sessions ? In those cases , we may employ asynchronous co - design techniques to be as inclusive as possible . Previous research [ 12 ] showed that distributed co - design requires an extra level of facilitation that is often taken for granted in co - located Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CSCW ’19 Companion , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA © 2019 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6692 - 2 / 19 / 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3359456 Poster Abstract CSCW ' 19 , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA 408 sessions . Facilitation can include reviewing design goals , adding new ideas , and asking clarifying questions about the design session . In order to be most inclusive , asynchronous co - design should support a participant when they are able to aid in a co - design session . But , if co - design facilitators are not available because of differences in time , it leaves participants with the potential of being excluded and not engaged with the design process . In order to address this concern , the authors of this paper have begun a new research agenda that looks at artificial intelligence and machine learning to support novice designers in asynchronous co - design sessions . This research has the potential to open up co - design to people who could usually not participate and therefore create more opportunities for inclusive participation . There has been some work in the area of AI and design . Most notably , [ 7 ] combined drawling tools and generative AI to collaboratively create an illustration . That work itself was inspired by [ 1 ] where an artificial agent with the ability to recognize sketches adds to drawings . Philosophically , our work is inspired by [ 2 , 8 ] which demonstrated that computers should augment human workers in design tasks through dialog with computer - supported tools and be thought of as “texts” . Beyond the author’s work [ 11 , 12 ] , the work around distributed co - design in the name of participa - tory design [ 3 – 6 ] focuses on the tools that enable direct human to human collaboration . Our work seeks to extend previous work by combining AI and co - design . This document seeks to introduce our research agenda and report on very preliminary results from the first phase of our project . METHODS Overall Research Agenda The research design of this project is mixed methods . In the full research project , participants will ultimately engage with a chat - bot that is contextually aware of what they’re doing on the screen . In order to achieve this goal , the project has been split up into three phases . In phase one , participants interact with a Wizard of Oz prototype in which they complete design tasks with a human acting as a facilitator who only communicates through a chat window . The data collected in phase one will be analyzed for common threads and to identify the tactics that the human facilitator uses to elicit design ideas . In phase two , these tactics will be configured into “templates” or canned text responses that a human facilitator will use to interact with participants . Ultimately , in phase three , a context aware chat - bot programmed from the data collected in phase one and two will interact with a participant co - designer to explore the experiences and the effectiveness of this environment in enabling co - design . Poster Abstract CSCW ' 19 , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA 409 This report focuses on the very preliminary results from phase one and explores how the types of text - based facilitation affects the engagement of participants ( measured in time ) in an online co - design environment . Figure 1 : Screenshot of the co - design envi - ronment . In this design , a participant cre - ated a dog house . Participants Participants for this phase of the research were recruited from the University of Baltimore’s student population . There were five participants ( P1 – P5 ) in the exploratory phase and five participants ( P6 – P10 ) in the pilot phase . See Table 1 for more information on the participants . Exploratory Protocol To understand the phenomenon of computer supported co - design , the researchers created an environ - ment in which participants could create two - dimensional design ideas with an on - screen drawing tool and would interact with an online co - design facilitator through speaking . The facilitator could communicate back through a chat window in the lower right corner of the interface ( See Figure 1 ) . When users came to our lab , they were greeted by a researcher and the person that would be the text - based facilitator for the design session . The researcher and the participant went to a work room where they reviewed the research protocol and signed the informed consent to participate . After that , participants were asked demographic questions . They were also asked to define “Design” and describe , on a scale of one to five , how much experience they had with it . They were also asked to describe on a scale of one to five how much experience they had with using online collaborative tools . After that data was collected , the researcher in the room explained the online co - design system and the participant tried talking to the co - design facilitator who answered back via a chat window on the screen . The first five participants interacted with the facilitator without any limitations through three design tasks : a dog house , a playground , and a family car . Taking an exploratory approach , we analyzed the interactions during those 15 design sessions in order to understand what kinds of discussions prompted design ideas . After an initial informal analysis , we determined that the way in which the facilitator interacted with the participants , for example asking questions or just conversing , was important . One theme that emerged was that some questions about a target audience triggered the participant to add features to their design . For example , when several different participants designed the playground , they failed to think about children with special needs . The facilitator would ask , “How can we make this for all children ? ” as a way to prompt more thoughtful design . To examine this idea , the next five participants were each given one of three conditions for each of the same design challenges as before : full interaction , only questions , or no interaction at all . The conditions and order of design challenge were randomized for each participant to prevent order bias . The full interaction was chosen because it mirrored the first five participants . The “only questions” condition was created Poster Abstract CSCW ' 19 , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA 410 because we felt that a number of interesting design decisions and continued engagement were directly influenced through questioning . And finally , because some participants said their design was “done” but then continued as the facilitator asked questions , we wanted to see what would happen if the facilitator didn’t interact with them at all . After the data was collected , we reviewed the video to determine how long in seconds ( a proxy for overall engagement with a design task ) participants engaged in the design process . This data was collected for all ten participants . With that data , we performed Kruskal - Wallis tests between the design goals and the time , between the condition of the facilitator and the time , and the users and the time . Table 1 : Table listing participant ages , ex - perience designing , and experience collab - orating online . Participant Age Design Collaboration P1 18 4 3 P2 20 4 2 P3 18 1 3 P4 25 1 4 P5 21 2 4 P6 25 3 1 P7 31 1 2 . 5 P8 23 2 4 P9 50 3 . 5 3 . 5 P10 21 1 5 PRELIMINARY RESULTS The preliminary results showed that the type of engagement , or more specifically , the lack of engage - ment , influenced the time of engagement with the co - design task . The results of the Kruskal - Wallis tests showed there was no significant difference in time of engagement between the five participants who were in different facilitator conditions ( p = . 564 ) . There was no significant difference in time be - tween design goals ( p = . 403 ) . There was a significant difference in time between the different facilitator conditions ( p = . 009 ) . See Table 2 for more information on the findings . Table 2 : The mean , standard deviation , and median times ( in seconds ) of partici - pant co - design engagement per condition . Condition Mean Standard Dev Median full 535 . 4 88 . 22 585 none 212 . 4 87 . 80 253 questions 536 . 8 72 . 08 564 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK Although the sample size is small , this work shows that the engagement of the text - based facilitator influences the amount of time participants engage with an online co - design task . This is important for two reasons . First , improving engagement with users may lead to more inclusive co - design with communities who are typically excluded from the design process . Second , having a full chat interaction between the facilitator and the user seems to encourage the same amount of engagement as the facilitator only asking questions . This helps us design future templates for Wizard of Oz scenarios as well as develop automated chat - bots to take on the role of co - design facilitator . As mentioned , these are the preliminary results of a new research agenda . Our plan is to have at least ten more participants in the multiple conditions to see if what we found continues to hold true . Using qualitative analysis techniques , we are reviewing the transcripts and chat logs to further understand the nature of the facilitator and participant interactions in order to better model them in future prototypes . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the University of Baltimore’s Interaction Design and Information Architecture graduate program for supporting this work . We would also like to thank Joel Chan for the advice and all those that participated in this study . Thank you ! Poster Abstract CSCW ' 19 , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA 411 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Nicholas Mark Davis , Chih - Pin Hsiao , Kunwar Yashraj Singh , and Brian Magerko . 2016 . Co - creative drawing agent with object recognition . In Twelfth artificial intelligence and interactive digital entertainment conference . [ 2 ] Gerhard Fischer and Kumiyo Nakakoji . 1992 . Beyond the macho approach of artificial intelligence : empower human designers•do not replace them . Knowledge - Based Systems 5 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 15 – 30 . [ 3 ] Matthias Heintz and Effie Lai - Chong Law . 2018 . Pdotcapturer and Pdotanalyser : participatory design online tools for asynchronous idea capturing and analysis . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . ACM , 622 – 633 . [ 4 ] Matthias Heintz , Effie L - C Law , Sten Govaerts , Adrian Holzer , and Denis Gillet . 2014 . Pdot : participatory design online tool . In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2581 – 2586 . [ 5 ] Carlos Alberto Joia Lazarin and Leonelo Dell Anhol Almeida . 2016 . Distributed participatory design web - based groupware : gathering requirements through braindraw . In Proceedings of the 15th Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3 . [ 6 ] Pirjo Näkki and Maria Antikainen . 2008 . Online tools for co - design : User involvement through the innovation process . New Approaches to Requirements Elicitation 96 ( 2008 ) . [ 7 ] Changhoon Oh , Jungwoo Song , Jinhan Choi , Seonghyeon Kim , Sungwoo Lee , and Bongwon Suh . 2018 . I Lead , You Help but Only with Enough Details : Understanding User Experience of Co - Creation with Artificial Intelligence . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI •18 . ACM Press , 1•13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174223 [ 8 ] Paul A Rodgers and Avon P Huxor . 1998 . The role of artificial intelligence as text within design . Design Studies 19 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 143 – 160 . [ 9 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - design 4 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . [ 10 ] Greg Walsh . 2018 . Towards equity and equality in American co - design : a case study . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , 434 – 440 . [ 11 ] GregWalsh , CraigDonahue , andZacharyPease . 2016 . InclusiveCo - DesignwithinaThree - DimensionalGameEnvironment . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , 1 – 10 . [ 12 ] Greg Walsh , Allison Druin , Mona Leigh Guha , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Elizabeth Foss , Jason C . Yip , Evan Golub , Tamara Clegg , Quincy Brown , Robin Brewer , Asmi Joshi , and Richelle Brown . 2012 . DisCo : a co - design online tool for asynchronous distributed child and adult design partners . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307099 Poster Abstract CSCW ' 19 , November 9 – 13 , 2019 , Austin , TX , USA 412