EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 32 W e thank Joseph Maxwell ( this issue of Educational Researcher , pp . 28 – 31 ) for accepting our invitation to examine the roles and expectations of dissertation literature reviews . We agree that most are inadequate but disagree why . Maxwell argues that dissertations should emulate research articles and include a conceptual framework that only discusses relevant literature . Candidates need not present a thorough analy - sis and synthesis of the scholarship and research , Maxwell argues , or justify claims made about the literature . Finally , he asserts that we misunderstand the relationship between literature and research , leading to an accusation of “foundationalism . ” However , these speciﬁc disagreements ignore fundamental differences about the purposes of the doctoral dissertation and the relationship between those purposes and doctoral program goals . In this rejoinder , we brieﬂy explore these conceptual and normative differences . Research Report or Capstone Achievement ? While the ostensive purpose of Maxwell’s article is to criticize our recommendations for dissertation literature reviews and propose his own , the article reveals fundamental differences . Our recom - mendations addressed major problems with doctoral programs and the ﬁeld and enterprise of education . For example , we recom - mended a comprehensive literature review that justiﬁes knowledge claims about the literature to address several problems : many doctoral graduates have a narrow view of education ; the ﬁeld is marked by a lack of generativity ; and naïve educational beliefs and practices persist . By contrast , Maxwell justiﬁes his claims by presuming that the dissertation is only a research report and it is important that candidates learn to report research in accordance with accepted norms . All other goals and problems are of sec - ondary importance . Those who accept that dissertations should be only research reports , and that the norms of research reporting would not be improved by including more sophisticated literature reviews , may be attracted to Maxwell’s argument . We believe the argument is inadequate . As the capstone of the highest academic degree , one tradi - tional purpose of the doctoral dissertation was an opportunity and requirement for the candidate to “display” his or her knowl - edge of the ﬁeld . Unfortunately , this once meaningful purpose has become a hollow ritual , and the traditional literature review is “something of an anachronism” ( Krathwohl & Smith , 2005 , cited in Maxwell , this issue ) . But if Maxwell believes we were On “Literature Reviews of , and for , Educational Research” : A Response to the Critique by Joseph Maxwell by David N . Boote and Penny Beile defending the traditional purpose of merely displaying informa - tion or including “irrelevant” literature , then we did not make our point clearly . Instead , we were trying to articulate expectations of a disserta - tion literature review as a distinct genre of writing , “repurposing” it ( Swales , 2004 ) to align better with the goals of doctoral programs . Austin ( 2002 , p . 4 ) argues that research on doctoral programs shows a “lack of systematic preparation for the full array of pro - fessional responsibilities” and that our assessment strategies should help graduate students develop toward these often implicit program goals . Dissertation assessment criteria provide focal expectations for this developmental trajectory . Rather than hoping candidates will absorb these skills by osmosis , we need to teach them ex - plicitly what we want them to learn , assess the development of these skills throughout their programs , and expect these skills to be demonstrated in their dissertations . Unfortunately , because Maxwell chose not to explain how his recommendations address other program goals , we are uncertain whether he believes these goals are unimportant or that they should not be assessed in the dissertation . At least four related goals of doctoral programs are not reducible to producing a good research report : understand the research and scholarship in the field ; develop intellectual independence ; develop information ﬂuency ; 1 and systematically and continually reappraise ideas and practices . We want doctoral candidates to formally understand the literature in their ﬁeld . Shulman ( 2002 , p . 40 ) argues that “ [ i ] n contrast to knowledge and information , understanding connotes a form of ownership . ” Formal knowledge claims require epistemic warrants , which are valued elsewhere in dissertations . We not only expect candidates to detail their data collection and analysis methods , but also to justify and defend their methodological choices . In addition to ensuring that can - didates understand the epistemic basis of their knowledge claims , these justiﬁcations better enable readers to trust candidates’ empir - ical claims . Although we value epistemic warrants in methodology , candidates ( and other researchers ) routinely make knowledge claims about the literature without epistemic warrants . Without developing such warrants , candidates are merely borrowing their literature review or conceptual framework . Why should we trust them ? Understanding , in Shulman’s sense , implies the other three goals . The ability to develop and defend epistemic warrants about the literature enables candidates to develop intellectual indepen - dence . Someone with a doctorate ought to be able to make a rea - sonable range of intellectual decisions , including what to include Educational Researcher , Vol . 35 , No . 9 , pp . 32 – 35 and how to present his or her dissertation , in consultation with a supervisor and committee . Making such decisions , in turn , requires candidates purposefully to ﬁnd , evaluate , analyze , and synthesize that literature—the skills and knowledge of informa - tion ﬂuency . Finally , it is not enough for a publication to sit on a library shelf or on a server . Educationists must read it , discuss it , and continually re - evaluate it to understand it : “there can be no knowledge without a knower . Knowledge does not exist . . . in an abstract sense” ( Shera , 1970 , quoted in Budd , 2004 ) . Every member of an academic and professional community is obliged to engage in this difficult work . Without such ongoing engagement with the literature , we are neither an academic nor a professional community . If we value understanding , intellectual independence , infor - mation fluency , and ongoing reappraisal in our doctoral pro - grams , as we should , we should also expect these skills to be demonstrated in our dissertations . By contrast , if we take the research article as our exemplar for the dissertation , we must ask whether it requires everything we expect candidates to demon - strate at the end of their terminal degree , and whether the accepted norms of research reporting are adequate for the complexities of educational scholarship . Doctoral program faculty and dis - sertation supervisors must remember that these choices affect not only individual candidates , but also affect the broader educa - tion community . Research Report or Cultural Tool ? At several points Maxwell questions our understanding of the relationship between literature and research , most pointedly with the suggestion that we “clearly hold a foundationalist conception of the place and function of literature reviews in research” ( p . 30 ) . Unfortunately , Maxwell does not provide a citation or even an explanation of what he means by “foundationalism . ” We presume that he means the epistemological belief that knowledge claims can only be justiﬁed from “foundational” knowledge . The sugges - tion that our metaphor revealed this epistemological position is baffling . We did suggest the literature review is a foundation of a study , and we agree that this metaphor , like any metaphor , is inadequate to express all aspects of this relationship . We also bor - rowed Shulman’s ( 1999 ) notion of generativity to assert that good educational research builds from and learns from prior research and scholarship . We then went on to enumerate several ways that prior research and scholarship can be used to improve a study . Nowhere did we argue or assume that prior research and schol - arship provides “foundational” beliefs that provide the only basis to make or judge knowledge claims . Instead , our analysis and recommendations assumed a social epistemology . We assumed that earning a doctorate is at least as much a social achievement as it is an individual achievement—the graduate earns the honoriﬁc “Doctor” and nominally becomes a peer of university faculty . Doctoral programs also socialize students into the practices , values , tools , language , and problems of an academic community . More importantly , however , our arguments assumed that it is useful and important to see that the assembled practices , values , tools , languages , and even the research problems “are themselves culturally and historically situated , carrying the wisdom and hidden assumptions that went into their design . 33 DECEMBER 2006 Thus they form a learning system with the learner , reorganizing action and determining what can be carried out” ( Salomon & Perkins , 1998 , p . 5 ) . By engaging in social and communicative practices with the intellectual resources of research and scholarly literatures , the candidate participates in the knowledge construc - tion of those intellectual communities . The dissertation is , or at least ought to be , one of the key cultural artifacts of academic learning , and our expectations of this genre of writing ( structure , style , content , and purpose ) express our practices and values ( Swales , 2004 ) . In turn , the citations and arguments assembled in a dissertation have the potential to become the “epistemic community” ( Knorr Cetina , 1999 ; Cronin , 2005 ) of the candidate , creating in his or her mind an ideal audience—the people who are best capable of judging the merits and contributions of a dissertation . For a small percentage of candidates with dissertation committees pop - ulated by leading experts , or who actively write for major confer - ences or journals , their ideal audience approximates their real audience . Their participation in the social life of the profession shapes their thinking and writing . For most , however , the ideal audience is replaced with the real audience of their dissertation committee . Without a clear epistemic community , preexisting or assembled by the candidate , the dissertation becomes a “pseudo - communicative task” ( Shaw , 1991 ) without clear structure , style , content , or purpose . Candidates are trapped between their ideal and real audiences , not understanding what or to whom they should be writing . A thorough , sophisticated literature review can enable a can - didate to transcend the local academic community , as scholars have always used predecessors’ writings to transcend personal experience and local community . If candidates often have dif - ficulty transitioning to academic values ( Labaree , 2003 ) , then a repurposed literature review may be the ideal cultural tool to enable this transition . Can a conceptual framework that dis - cusses relevant prior publications do this ? A myopic focus on the dissertation as a research study , detached from the broader purposes of the doctoral program and academic community , forestalls this potential . More generally , Fullar’s ( 1988 ) program of social epistemol - ogy encourages us to inquire into the social conditions that must prevail before normative epistemological criteria should apply . Simply , it is unreasonable to have epistemic expectations of someone who is culturally unable to achieve them . If we look , for example , at the epistemic expectation that a dissertation make an original contribution to the literature , we should ask whether doctoral candidates have adequate cultural resources to make an original contribution . The dissertations we have examined lead us to believe that for most candidates the answer is “no . ” Not only do their literature reviews fail to provide adequate intellectual resources to make an original contribution , they are inadequate even to judge what would constitute an original contribution . Relevant or Thorough ? Limiting the dissertation to discussing “relevant” prior studies in a “conceptual framework” and eliminating the hoary label “literature review” are appealing suggestions . Maxwell then suggests several criteria of relevance : “contribut [ ing ] an important concept , ﬁnd - ing , or method” ; “provid [ ing ] a necessary piece of the argu - search ( p . 29 ) . Unfortunately , this notion of relevance and these criteria , while well intentioned , obfuscate more than they illu - minate and add nothing to our analysis . The criterion of relevance confuses the processes of ﬁnding and selecting the literature , the processes of analyzing and syn - thesizing the selected pieces , and the decisions about rhetorical presentation in the dissertation . Maxwell criticizes us for recom - mending a thorough literature review , suggesting that candidates need only include “all” relevant literature . This is tautological and amounts to recommending candidates include everything they should include and nothing else . Who would argue to include “irrelevant” literature ? Relevance is subjective and contextual , and decisions about relevance must be justiﬁed when producing formal knowledge claims . A candidate cannot judge pieces he or she does not know and cannot evaluate their relevance until the candidate understands the whole literature . Thus , in one sense , “relevance” is another way of saying decisions about “criteria for inclusion and exclusion” during the search , and such decisions are ongoing and continually revised as more is learned about what has been written ( Foster , 2003 ) . In a second sense , “relevance” is a way of saying decisions made about how to analyze and synthe - size the literature . As the candidate better understands the liter - ature , his or her notions of relevance may shift or change entirely . In a third sense , “relevance” is a way of saying decisions about the rhetorical structure of the literature review , which pieces to include , and how to present them . We can see no advantage to reducing these many decisions to a single criterion . Maxwell’s articulation of the relationship between literature and research has at least one additional limitation . Because he limits the discussion of previous literature to those pieces that support and justify a study , there is seemingly no place for criti - cal evaluation of that literature or the study , though he values it nonetheless . Bad ideas and practices are endemic in education : practices that do not work , practices that achieve questionable goals , ideas that confuse , unexamined ideologies , good ideas used inappropriately . Several of our criteria that Maxwell dismissed— thoroughness , critical gaps in the literature , situating the literature in its scholarly and historical context , methodological and practical weaknesses—help candidates avoid such “degenerative” research traditions and steer toward productive projects ( Lakatos , 1978 ) . A repurposed literature review is an antibiotic that kills the bad ideas that infect education , and the scholarly habits candidates learn help to strengthen our collective immune system . WeappreciateMaxwell’sreminderthatpersonalandprofessional experience can provide what we call a “productive insight , ” as can ideas and methods borrowed from other literatures . In turn , a “productive insight” can be developed into an integrated set of concepts , theories , and empirical and normative claims gleaned from the literature . Developing such a “conceptual framework” is one useful strategy for critically evaluating and synthesizing the literature , but it cannot replace a thorough review of the literature . We hope these arguments show why a discussion of relevant literature in a conceptual framework is inadequate . Yet Maxwell’s concerns remind us that thoroughness is not itself a virtue , but EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 34 serves other purposes . Relevance implies intentionality . Like an intentionally chosen rhetorical structure , an intentionally chosen and justified strategy for searching , selecting , evaluating , and synthesizing the literature is ( usually 2 ) not an end unto itself . However , we differ with Maxwell concerning whether the research project is the only purpose served in the dissertation . Looking Forward It is likely that Maxwell will believe that we misunderstood his arguments , just as we think that we were misunderstood at sev - eral points . His critique and our rejoinder have explored some of the conceptual and normative issues at play as we attempt to repurpose the dissertation literature review speciﬁcally , and dis - sertations and doctoral programs in education generally . However , these conceptual and normative discussions will be greatly limited if left as abstractions and not examined in empirical studies and substantiated in detailed examples . Such studies and concrete exemplars not only will help us to understand further the roles the literature review can and should play , they will also help students , candidates , and faculty understand what they are working toward . NOTES 1 Although there is ongoing discussion about the differences between “information literacy” and “information ﬂuency , ” both focus on the ability to ﬁnd , select , organize , evaluate , analyze , and synthesize a vari - ety of kinds of information , and the ability to use various tools and tech - nologies accomplish these tasks ( Association of College and Research Libraries , 2000 ) . 2 A suitably sophisticated systematic review can serve as a dissertation and too rarely does , as can theory , philosophy , and other scholarly forms of educational inquiry . Many educationists don’t do “research , ” as Maxwell seemingly presumes . REFERENCES Association of College and Research Libraries ( 2000 ) . Information liter - acy competency standards for higher education . Retrieved October 8 , 2006 , from http http : / / www . ala . org / ala / acrl / acrlstandards / information literacycompetency . htm Austin , A . E . ( 2002 , November ) . Assessing doctoral students’ progress along developmental dimensions . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher Education , Sacramento , CA . Budd , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Academic libraries and knowledge : A social episte - mology framework . Journal of Academic Librarianship , 30 ( 5 ) , 361 – 367 . Cronin , B . ( 2005 ) . The hand of science : Academic writing and its rewards . Lanham , MD : Scarecrow Press , Inc . Foster , A . ( 2003 ) . A nonlinear model of information - seeking behavior . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol - ogy , 55 ( 3 ) , 228 – 267 . Fullar , S . ( 1988 ) . Social epistemology . Bloomington , IN : Indiana Uni - versity Press . Knorr Cetina , K . ( 1999 ) . Epistemic cultures : How the sciences make knowledge . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Labaree , D . F . ( 2003 ) . The peculiar problems of preparing educational researchers . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 1 ) , 13 – 22 . Lakatos , I . ( 1978 ) . The methodology of scientiﬁc research programmes . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1998 ) . Individual and social aspects of learning . Review of Research in Education , 23 , 1 – 24 . Shaw , P . ( 1991 ) . Science research students’ composing process . English for Speciﬁc Purposes , 10 ( 2 ) , 189 – 206 . ment that explains and justiﬁes this study” ; answering any important potential questions ; and explaining the value of the re - 35 DECEMBER 2006 Shulman , L . S . ( 1999 ) . Professing educational scholarship . In E . C . Lagemann & L . S . Shulman ( Eds . ) , Issues in education research : Prob - lems and possibilities ( pp . 159 – 165 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Shulman , L . ( 2002 ) . Making a difference : A table of learning . Change , 34 ( 6 ) , 36 – 44 . Swales , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Research genres : Explorations and applications . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . AUTHORS DAVID N . BOOTE is an Associate Professor of Curriculum Studies and Coordinator of the Ed . D . program in the College of Education , University of Central Florida , Orlando , FL , 32816 - 1250 ; dboote @ mail . ucf . edu . His interests include how people learn to do research and solve problems , and how school culture affects curriculum and professional discretion . PENNY BEILE is an Associate Librarian at the University of Central Florida , P . O . Box 162666 , Orlando , FL , 32816 - 2666 ; pbeile @ mail . ucf . edu . Her research focuses on education students’ information - seeking behavior and continued reﬁnement of the construct of informa - tion literacy . Manuscript received August 10 , 2006 Revision received October 9 , 2006 Accepted October 10 , 2006 Erratum In the August / September 2006 issue of Educational Researcher , the article “Race , Class , and Disproportionality : Reevaluating the Relationship Between Poverty and Special Education Placement , ” by Carla O’Connor and Sonia DeLuca Fernandez , con - tains an incorrect source citation . On page 8 , column 2 , the second block quotation was accidentally attributed to Griffin and Case ( 1997 ) . In fact , the quotation is from the National Research Council report ( NRC , 2002 ) that had been quoted imme - diately above , and it represents the report’s interpretation of the ﬁndings of Griffin and Case . We regret this error .