Washington University School of Medicine Digital Commons @ Becker Open Access Publications 3 - 24 - 2008 The Drosophila CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue Cindr regulates junctions and cytoskeleton dynamics during tissue patterning Ruth I . Johnson Mount Sinai Medical School Midori J . Seppa Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis Ross L . Cagan Mount Sinai Medical School Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs Part of the Medicine and Health Sciences Commons This Open Access Publication is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Becker . It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access Publications by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Becker . For more information , please contact engeszer @ wustl . edu . Recommended Citation Johnson , Ruth I . ; Seppa , Midori J . ; and Cagan , Ross L . , , " The Drosophila CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue Cindr regulates junctions and cytoskeleton dynamics during tissue patterning . " The Journal of Cell Biology . 180 , 6 . 1191 - 1204 . ( 2008 ) . https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs / 564 T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : ARTICLE © The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 180 , No . 6 , March 24 , 2008 1191 – 1204 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / JCB 1191 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706108 Correspondence to R . Cagan : Ross . Cagan @ mssm . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : AJ , adherens junction ; APF , after puparium for - mation ; Arp , actin - related protein ; Chic , Chickadee ; Cort , Cortactin ; Cpa , cap - ping protein alpha ; Cpb , capping protein beta ; DE - Cad , Drosophila E - cadherin ; GMR , glass multimer reporter ; Hbs , Hibris ; IPC , interommatidial precursor cell ; IR , inverted repeat ; OMS , ommatidial mispatterning score ; qrt - PCR , quantitative real - time PCR ; Rst , Roughest ; SCAR , suppressor of cAR ; shg , shotgun ; TAP , tandem afﬁ nity puriﬁ cation ; Tsr , Twinstar ; WASp , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . The online version of this paper contains supplemental material . Introduction By recruiting proteins into complexes , adaptor proteins create nodes of regulation and activity . The founding member of the CD2AP / CIN85 family of adaptor proteins was initially isolated in a yeast interaction screen as a binding partner of the T cell re - ceptor CD2 ( Dustin et al . , 1998 ) , independently from the kidney ( MET - 1 ; Lehtonen et al . , 2000 ) and as a ligand for p130Cas ( Kirsch et al . , 1999 ) . The homologue CIN85 was identifi ed as a partner of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl ( Take et al . , 2000 ) and separately as SETA and Ruk ( Bogler et al . , 2000 ; Gout et al . , 2000 ) . Many roles have been ascribed to the CD2AP / CIN85 family but its function in situ remains poorly understood . Here , we examine the sole Drosophila melanogaster CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue , cindr . The phenotype of CD2AP knockout mice is chiefl y one of tissue degeneration : cardiac hypertrophy , splenic and thymic atrophy , glomerular sclerosis , and a loss of podocyte foot pro - cesses ( Shih et al . , 1999 ) . The CD2AP / CIN85 family is primarily proposed to function in endocytosis to down - regulate receptor tyrosine kinase activity ( Dikic , 2003 ) . This model arises from coimmunoprecipitation and interaction experiments that have identifi ed a wealth of CD2AP / CIN85 interactors , colocalization studies performed in culture or tissue , and in vitro assays . CIN85 constitutively associates with endophilin and , on growth factor stimulation , complexes with Cbl to mediate receptor down - regulation . Furthermore , interactions between CD2AP / CIN85 and other traffi cking proteins have been described including AP - 2 , Dab2 , Rab4 , PAK2 , ALIX , and ESCRT - 1 ( Chen et al . , 2000 ; Brett et al . , 2002 ; Cormont et al . , 2003 ; Kowanetz et al . , 2003 ; Kurakin et al . , 2003 ; Schmidt et al . , 2003 ; Usami et al . , 2007 ) . Recent work has also suggested a relationship between CD2AP / CIN85 proteins and actin . They have been detected in actin - rich regions of podocytes and cultured cells and have been found to bind actin in vitro to promote actin bundling ( Kirsch et al . , 2001 ; Welsch et al . , 2001 , 2005 ; Lehtonen et al . , 2002 ; Cormont et al . , 2003 ; Schmidt et al . , 2003 ; Schiwek et al . , 2004 ; Gaidos et al . , 2007 ; Gauthier et al . , 2007 ) . CD2AP has also been reported to bind the actin - capping protein CP (cid:2) / (cid:3) D eveloping tissues require cells to undergo intri - cate processes to shift into appropriate niches . This requires a functional connection between adhesion - mediating events at the cell surface and a cyto - skeletal reorganization to permit directed movement . A small number of proteins are proposed to link these processes . Here , we identify one candidate , Cindr , the sole Drosophila melanogaster member of the CD2AP / CIN85 family ( this family has been previously implicated in a variety of processes ) . Using D . melanogaster retina , we demonstrate that Cindr links cell surface junctions ( E - cadherin ) and adhesion ( Roughest ) with multiple com - ponents of the actin cytoskeleton . Reducing cindr activity leads to defects in local cell movement and , consequently , tissue patterning and cell death . Cindr activity is required for normal localization of Drosophila E - cadherin and Roughest , and we show additional physical and func - tional links to multiple components of the actin cytoskele - ton , including the actin - capping proteins capping protein alpha and capping protein beta . Together , these data demonstrate that Cindr is involved in dynamic cell re - arrangement in an emerging epithelium . The Drosophila CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue Cindr regulates junctions and cytoskeleton dynamics during tissue patterning Ruth I . Johnson , 1 Midori J . Seppa , 2 and Ross L . Cagan 1 1 Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology , Mount Sinai Medical School , New York , NY 10029 2 Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO 63110 on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 http : / / jcb . rupress . org / content / suppl / 2008 / 03 / 24 / jcb . 200706108 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1192 During early pupariation , each ommatidial core is enwrapped by two 1 ° pigment cells . Shortly afterward , 2 ° and 3 ° pigment cells , along with sensory bristles , rearrange into an interweav - ing hexagonal lattice that organizes the ommatidia into a precise honeycomb ( Fig . 1 ) . These patterning events occur 18 – 42 h after puparium formation ( APF ) . These precise movements require the junction - associated protein DE - Cad and the adhesion protein Rst , raising the ques - tion as to how these surface proteins can infl uence cell move - ments . In our search for new factors that regulate this patterning process , we identifi ed CG31012 in silico as the single D . melano - gaster orthologue of vertebrate CD2AP and CIN85 and christened the locus cindr ( CIN85 and CD2AP orthologue ) . The annota - tion of this locus predicts four isoforms ( Fig . S1 A , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 ) . We identifi ed at least two isoforms using a rabbit polyclonal antibody generated against the common central region . Antibody specifi city was confi rmed by Western analysis of a defi ciency that overlaps cindr ( Fig . S1 B ) and by detection of ectopic or reduced Cindr levels in the third larval instar wing disc and pu - pal eye ( Figs . S2 and S3 ) . In tissue , Cindr transcript and protein was expressed ubiq - uitously at all stages examined ( Fig . 1 , E and F ) . The protein itself was found primarily at the apical surface and in vesicles near the surface . For example , undifferentiated embryonic and larval tissue contained puncta of Cindr in close association with the adherens junctions ( AJs ; Fig . S2 and not depicted ) . As cells emerged from the IPC pool , the concentration of puncta increased in the emerging 2 ° and 3 ° cells 18 – 41 h APF but remained low in emerging 1 ° cells ( Figs . 1 E , S3 C , and S5 , B (cid:4) – H (cid:4) , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 ) . Cindr levels were high in the photoreceptor neurons and cone cells as well as the sensory bristles ( Figs . 1 and S3 ) . Low levels were also observed near the fenestrated basement membrane at the base of the retina ( Fig . S3 E ) . Reducing Cindr activity leads to junctional instability The available D . melanogaster cindr P insertion – mediated al - leles did not suffi ciently perturb the locus to generate signifi cant phenotypes . We therefore targeted the locus using RNAi . We gen - erated multiple transgenic fl y lines with inverted repeat ( IR ) transgenes ( Fig . S2 A ) that specifi cally targeted the long ( PC , cindr - IR 1 ) , long plus mediate ( PC and PD , cindr - IR 2 ) , or all three transcripts ( cindr - IR 3 ) when expressed using the GAL4 / UAS system ( Brand and Perrimon , 1993 ) . Based on quantita - tive real - time PCR ( qrt - PCR ; Table I ) , immunocytochemistry ( Fig . S2 ) , and phenotype ( see Fig . 1 , I – M ) , cindr - IR 2 was the most effective at reducing transcript and protein levels . Ubiqui - tous expression of cindr - IR 2 and cindr - IR 3 led to embryonic and early larval lethality , respectively ; cindr - IR 1 generated no ob - servable adult phenotype . When both cindr - IR 2 and cindr - IR 3 transgenes ( glass mul - timer reporter [ GMR ] > cindr - IR 2 + 3 ) were driven together in the eye for at least 24 h , virtually no Cindr was detected as the animal progressed to pupal stages ( Fig . S3 B (cid:4) ) . GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 di - rected less decrease in Cindr protein during larval development dimer and inhibit its function in vitro ( Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Bruck et al . , 2006 ) and anillin at the actin - rich cleavage fur - row ( Monzo et al . , 2005 ) . CD2AP activity is required for mi - gration of rat gastric mucosal cells ( Mustonen et al . , 2005 ) and polarization of the cytoskeleton during T cell receptor activa - tion ( Dustin et al . , 1998 ) . The role and mechanism by which CD2AP / CIN85 regulates cytoskeletal dynamics within an epi - thelium in situ remains unclear . Furthermore , the CD2AP / CIN85 family has also been reported to bind the adhesion molecules E - cadherin and nephrin ( Shih et al . , 1999 , 2001 ; Palmen et al . , 2002 ; Lehtonen et al . , 2004 ; Mustonen et al . , 2005 ) . Nephrin and NEPH - 1 form the backbone of the slit diaphragm , a specialized junction that tra - verses podocyte foot processes in the mammalian kidney ( Huber and Benzing , 2005 ; Patari - Sampo et al . , 2006 ) . Direct interac - tions between CD2AP , nephrin , and podocin and between CD2AP and the podocyte - specifi c actin - bundling protein synaptopodin are essential for slit diaphragm integrity . In addition , a protein complex containing nephrin , cadherin , p120 - catenin , ZO - 1 , and CD2AP has been isolated from Madin - Darby canine kidney cells and mouse glomerular lysates ( Lehtonen et al . , 2004 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that CD2AP may have a role in anchoring junctions to the cytoskeleton or in regulating actin dynamics at this important intersection . The challenge remains to understand how different roles of CD2AP / CIN85 are integrated in the organism , which interac - tors are recruited into CD2AP / CIN85 complexes , and how these are regulated . Here , we show that targeted reduction of cindr in the pupal fl y eye resulted in defects in overall patterning due to aberrant local cell movements . We link these defects to misregu - lation of actin dynamics and mislocalization of Drosophila E - Cadherin ( DE - Cad ) and the fl y NEPH - 1 orthologue Roughest ( Rst ) which , with its binding partner Hibris ( Hbs ; a D . melano - gaster Nephrin orthologue ) , is a central mediator of cell – cell adhesion in the pupal retina . We link Cindr functionally and physi - cally to orthologues of capping protein alpha ( Cpa ) and capping protein beta ( Cpb ) and further explore the role of Cindr in modu - lating the actin cytoskeleton during eye maturation . Our data support a primary role for cindr in linking junction and actin regulation and help account for many of the phenotypes as - cribed to mutations in mammalian CD2AP / CIN85 . Results Expression and localization of cindr The developing D . melanogaster pupal eye is one of the most thoroughly characterized developing epitheliums , and it pro - vides a useful model to explore the role of CD2AP / CIN85 pro - teins . Emergence of the pupal eye is shown in Fig . 1 ( A – D ) . Ommatidia emerge in the larval eye as photoreceptor neurons and ( glial - like ) “ cone cells ” form the ommatidial core . Between the ommatidia lies an initially undifferentiated pool of “ inter - ommatidial precursor cells ” ( IPCs ) . From the IPCs emerge 1 ° , 2 ° , and 3 ° ( primary , secondary , and tertiary ) pigment cells , which are support cells that will eventually optically insulate each om - matidium . These pigment cells fi nd their niche through cell re - arrangements , and we focus on their movements in this work . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1193 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . and GMR > cindr - IR 3 eyes ; GMR > cindr - IR 1 eyes exhibited a lower level of defects ( Fig . 1 , H – M ) . Cells were misplaced , pat - tern elements within the ommatidial fi eld were misoriented , and the number of pigment cells was variable . Quantitation of these defects at 41 h APF , when pigment cell patterning is completed , emphasized the broad nature of the patterning defects . For example , an additional one to two pigment cells surrounded 23 % of GMR > cindr - IR 1 ommatidia and no developmental defects were observed , which suggests that the protein can show signifi cance perdurance ( unpublished data ) . Therefore , we cannot rule out a role for Cindr during the larval stages of eye development . In wild - type pupal eyes , the process of patterning IPCs into a precise arrangement of 1 ° , 2 ° , and 3 ° pigment cells is mostly complete by 28 h APF ( Fig . 1 B ) . This process was de - layed or lost when cindr activity was reduced in GMR > cindr - IR 2 Figure 1 . Patterning the D . melanogaster pupal retina requires Cindr . ( A – C and E – G ) Wild - type Canton S retinae dissected at the indicated time points . DE - Cad marks AJs . ( D ) Illustration of ommatidia from A - C showing 1 ° cells ( orange ) , 2 ° and 3 ° cells ( green ) , cone cells ( blue ) , photoreceptors ( gray ) , and bristles ( brown ) . AJs are illustrated in black . Lateral view was inspired by Tepass and Harris ( 2007 ) . ( E ) 28 - h - APF Canton S retina with Cindr ( red ) and DE - Cad ( green ) shown . ( E (cid:4) ) Cindr ﬁ lls the cytoplasm of lattice and cone cells and localizes to AJs ; the arrow indicates membrane between two 1 ° cells . ( F ) In situ analysis at 24 h APF to detect cindr transcripts ; broken line indicates a single ommatidium . ( G ) Control sense probe . Retinae dissected at 28 ( H – J ) and 41 h ( K – M ) APF expressing cindr - IR transgenes as indicated . DE - Cad marks AJs . Mutant phenotypes include failure of IPCs to resolve into single ﬁ le ( circled ) , excess IPCs ( asterisks ) , discontinuous DE - Cad ( arrow - heads ) , and ommatidial misrotation ( arrows ) . Bars 10 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1194 Initial recruitment of 1 ° cells in GMR > cindr - IR2 2 + 3 eyes com - menced normally and many , though not all , fl edgling 1 ° cells successfully encircled a central cone cell quartet ( Video 2 ) . However , these emerging 1 ° cells commonly failed to maintain their niches : 1 ° cells often lost contact with their partners , a loss typically coupled with dissolution of their shared junction . As a result , one proto - 1 ° cell was often replaced by another cell to generate a new 1 ° cell . Remarkably , this instability of the 1 ° – 1 ° interface continued throughout the stages of IPC patterning , hours after 1 ° cells have normally completed their movements ( Fig . 3 , A and B ; and Video 3 ) . Similar junctional instability and 1 ° cell replacements were rarely observed in control eyes . These results are consistent with a model in which loss of cindr activ - ity permits cell movement but prevents cells from maintaining their niche through stable junctions . We note that cells that are not undergoing cell movements , such as cone cells , do not show similarly destabilized junctions . A failure to maintain proper position and stable junctions was also observed in the emerging arrays of 2 ° and 3 ° pigment cells . The movement of the IPCs in these older cindr - IR2 2 + 3 – expressing retinae was similarly stochastic : excessive switching of cell – cell contacts , severe alterations in apical cell profi les , and a failure of IPCs to stably rearrange stepwise into single fi le ( Video 3 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 ) . The result was a failure to achieve coher - ent patterning . In contrast , in control eyes , IPCs moved smoothly and with small local movements to gradually establish the hex - agonal array of 2 ° and 3 ° cells ( Video 4 ) . These abnormal cell movements and contacts were again suggestive of unstable and transient junctions in cindr - IR2 2 + 3 retinae and also indicate a failure of proper morphogenesis . We observed further evidence of unstable junctions by ex - amining small clonal patches of cells expressing cindr - IR2 2 + 3 . Isolated cindr - IR2 2 + 3 1 ° cells were consistently smaller than their wild - type neighbors ( Fig . 3 , C , D , and G ) . Paired cindr - IR2 2 + 3 1 ° cells frequently retracted , permitting a neighboring wild - type IPC direct contact with the central cone cells ( Fig . 3 , E – G ) and often leading to an ectopic third 1 ° cell . Cindr is functionally linked to DE - Cad Our results indicate a role for Cindr in mediating surface events . A subset of Cindr protein was found associated with DE - Cad ( Figs . 1 E , S3 , and S5 ) , a central component of the AJ , and loss of cindr activity led to unstable junctions and ab - normal cell movements . What is the relationship between Cindr and DE - Cad ? Modifying a phenotype by removing one genomic copy of a gene is a standard and powerful technique to demonstrate that two loci function together in a common process . DE - Cad is encoded by the shotgun ( shg ) locus : the GMR > cindr - IR 2 mispatterning phenotype ( OMS = 7 . 2 ) was enhanced in a heterozygous shg R69 / + background ( OMS = 10 . 8 ; Figs . 4 D and 2 ) . In addition , large patches of black tissue were observed in the eyes of 68 . 3 % ( n = 97 ) of these adult fl ies ( Fig . 4 G ) ; this was a signifi cant enhancement of the pene - trance and extent of degenerative tissue that was observed in GMR > cindr - IR 2 alone ( 12 . 6 % , n = 254 ; Fig . 4 E ) . This black - ened eye phenotype is suggestive of late epithelial cell death ( n = 159 ) and 46 % of GMR > cindr - IR 2 ommatidia ; 16 % of GMR > cindr - IR 3 ommatidia were surrounded by an additional three to fi ve cells ( n = 204 ) . The most posterior fi fth of GMR > cindr - IR 2 retinae showed still more severe defects : 81 % of ommatidia had a shortfall of one to fi ve surrounding IPCs ( n = 86 ; compare Figs . 1 L and 5 A ) . To further quantitate these phenotypes , we developed a mean “ ommatidial mispat - terning score ” ( OMS ) system that accounted for errors in patterning , cell number , and rotation ( Fig . 2 ) . Focusing on om - matidia at the center of the eye for consistency , we found that reducing cindr activity ( GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 ) led to defects in each of these aspects ( Fig . 2 ) . Control GMR > lacZ eyes were scored with an OMS of 0 . 9 errors per ommatidial cluster ( n = 75 ) ; the OMS for cindr - IR 2 + 3 ommatidia was 9 . 7 errors per omma - tidium ( n = 75 ) and the OMS for cindr - IR 2 was 6 . 4 ( n = 1 , 310 ) . This analysis highlights the requirement by retinal cells for normal cindr activity during their maturation into a func - tional neuroepithelium . Reducing cindr activity led to instability of cells within the pupal eye Our analysis with fi xed tissue indicated a requirement for Cindr as pigment cells moved into their proper niches . How - ever , the patterning process in the pupal eye is rapid , progres - sive , and highly dynamic . Unlike cell culture , exploring the role of factors such as Cindr during epithelial maturation is diffi cult to achieve in situ , especially dynamically and with subcellular resolution . For example , the cindr patterning de - fects we observed could be accounted for by cell movements that are reduced , increased , unstable , or misdirected . An im - portant advantage to using the fl y eye as a model for exploring Cindr function is the recent establishment of live imaging to observe events in situ ( Larson et al . , 2008 ) , and we took ad - vantage of this technology to answer several questions about the role of Cindr in the patterning process . We used fluo - rescently labeled (cid:2) - catenin – GFP , a protein associated with DE - Cad , to visualize junctions in situ . As expected , in live imaging movies of control eyes , we observed two emerging 1 ° cells enwrapping each ommatid - ium as each 1 ° cell formed a stable junction with its 1 ° partner . The result was a stereotypical “ collar ” of two 1 ° cells surrounding each ommatidium ’ s central cone cell quartet ( Video 1 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 ) . Table I . qrt - PCR analysis of relative reduction of cindr transcripts using RNAi Mean relative expression a ( SD b ) primer set Genotype c B D K da > cindr - IR 1 d 0 . 45 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 71 ( 0 . 04 ) da > cindr - IR 2 0 . 31 ( 0 . 15 ) Not done d Not done da > cindr - IR 3 0 . 76 ( 0 . 25 ) Not done 0 . 68 ( 0 . 31 ) a Compared to control cDNA isolated from da > GFP tissue . b n = 3 per two independent cDNA preparations . c da , daughterless - GAL4 . d Primer set recognizes cindr - IR transgene . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1195 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . restored after cell patterning is completed and cell movements end ( Fig . 5 F (cid:4) ) . This progressive loss of DE - Cad between 2 ° and 3 ° cells was disrupted when cindr activity was decreased ( GMR > cindr - IR 2 and GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 ) : abnormally weakly stained and discontinuous DE - Cad was observed in all cell types and all time points examined ( Figs . 1 I and 5 , A , C , and E ) . Later , at 41 h APF , mildly discontinuous DE - Cad was still ob - served in over (cid:2) 25 % of the retina , most often in posterior re - gions corresponding with the most severe patterning defects and indicates that the relationship between Cindr and DE - Cad extends to later stages of development . In wild - type pupal eye tissue , DE - Cad protein is found at high continuous levels between all apical cell profi les . An ex - ception is between emerging 2 ° and 3 ° cells when the level of DE - Cad present at AJs decreases during their rearrangement into a hexagonal lattice ( Fig . 5 , B (cid:4) and D (cid:4) ; Bao and Cagan , 2005 ) . This decrease may represent a necessary step to allow for local cell rearrangements ; higher levels of DE - Cad are normally Figure 2 . Analysis of patterning defects observed in retinae dissected at 41 h APF . The OMS ( boxed in red ) is the mean of the total number of defects observed per ommatidium . These defects include ( a ) errors in the arrangement of cone cells ( number of cone cell defects ; cone cells are pseudo - colored green in examples ) ; aberrant ( b ) number , ( c ) size , and ( d ) junctional integrity of 1 ° cells ( number of 1 ° cell defects ; 1 ° cells are pseudo - colored blue in examples ) ; ( e ) errors in ommatidial rotation ( see examples in Fig . 1 M ) ; ( f ) incorrect number or position of bristles ( note bristle misplacement in Fig . 1 L ) ; ( g ) errors in the number or speciﬁ cation of 3 ° cells ; and number of ( h ) additional IPCs ( pseudo - colored green ) or ( i ) missing IPCs ( see Fig . 1 L ) . The total number of IPCs per ommatidium is also given separately for each genotype analyzed . Since the number of rotation errors ( 0 . 1 per hexagon ; n = 1 , 310 ) , bristle errors ( ~ 1 . 5 per hexagon ) , and 3 ° cell errors ( ~ 2 . 4 per hexagon ) observed in GMR > cindr - IR2 retinae were unmodiﬁ ed in all genetic interactions , these values are not shown separately . Bars , 10 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1196 were localized normally when similarly expressed ( Fig . S4 , avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 , and not depicted ) . This suggests that Cindr ’ s SH3 domains are required specifi cally for membrane localization . Further consistent with this view , a complimentary N - terminal construct ( Cindr - (cid:5) PB ) that includes the three SH3 domains was nor - mally localized including to the AJs ( Fig . S4 and not depicted ) . Although this data suggests that Cindr may interact directly with DE - Cad through its SH3 domains , we failed to detect a Cindr – DE - Cad interaction in conditions that permitted binding to other proteins ( see Materials and methods ) . Two additional observations are notable regarding the relationship between Cindr and DE - Cad . First , in addition to rescuing the GMR > cindr - IR 2 phenotype , ectopic DE - Cad accumulated at the apical membrane , which became elaborated ( Fig . 4 B ) . The mammalian orthologue CIN85 has been impli - cated in regulating endocytosis of receptors such as those for EGF and PDGF ( Dikic and Giordano , 2003 ) . The membrane elaboration of ectopic DE - Cad may refl ect a role for Cindr in its endocytosis ; however , this model would not account for the ( Figs . 1 L and 5 E ) . This discontinuous localization of DE - Cad was enhanced in a heterozygous shg background ( Fig . 4 D and not depicted ) , most markedly at the “ tricellular junctions ” where three cells interface . Our localization studies indicate that Cindr acts to both permit dynamic regulation of DE - Cad during cell movement and to stabilize its presence at the cell surface . If this view is correct , expressing ectopic DE - Cad should rescue cindr - IR pat - terning defects . Importantly , ectopic DE - Cad strongly rescued the GMR > cindr 2 mispatterning phenotype and reduced the cindr - IR 2 OMS from 7 . 2 to 5 . 6 ( Figs . 2 and 4 B ) . This provides further evidence that a central role for Cindr in situ is to mediate events at the AJs . Previous work reported that CD2AP can interact in vitro with E - cadherin via its SH3 domains ( Lehtonen et al . , 2004 ; Mustonen et al . , 2005 ) . We found that ubiquitous expression of a Cindr - PB construct , which retained only the C - terminal half of the full - length protein but lacked SH3 domains , was distrib - uted in a striking perimembrane pattern but was apparently ex - cluded from the AJ ; full - length Cindr - PC or Cindr - PD isoforms Figure 3 . Cindr is required to stabilize cells during patterning . ( A and B ) Progressive views of single ommatidia from Video 3 ( available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 ) ; (cid:2) - catenin – GFP marks AJs . ( A – A (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) ) A ﬂ uctuating 1 ° – 1 ° interface is highlighted in pink . ( B – B (cid:4) (cid:4) ) Selected cells are pseudo - colored ; arrows indicate the direction of membrane protrusion as a pre - 1 ° cell is dis - placed . ( C – F ) Small clones of cells express - ing cindr - IR 2 + 3 ( labeled with GFP ) . DE - Cad is shown in red . Broken lines outline mutant 1 ° cells . ( G ) Cartoons illustrating the expected phenotypic outcomes if one or both 1 ° cells are mutant for cindr . Bars , 5 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1197 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . physical interaction with Hbs , which is expressed in 1 ° cells ( Bao and Cagan , 2005 ) . Cindr protein colocalized with Rst at the AJ ( Fig . S3 C ) . Reducing Cindr blocked the dynamic redistribution of Rst protein : In GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 pupal eyes , Rst remained at steady diffuse levels at the junctions of most IPC – IPC contacts through the stages of hexagonal lattice emergence ( Fig . 5 , C (cid:4) (cid:4) and E (cid:4) (cid:4) ) . We also observed abnormally high levels of diffuse cytoplasmic Rst . Similar to shg , Western analysis indicated that Rst protein was present at normal levels and that reducing the gene dosage of rst or hbs did not restore proper Rst protein localization ( unpublished data ) . This indicates that levels of Rst protein are not responsible for the observed cindr - IR defects in Rst localization . Our genetic modifi er data also supported a functional interaction between Cindr and Rst / Hbs . Pupae heterozygous for hbs 361 , hbs 459 , rst 3 , or rst CT exhibited mild but consistent suppression of the GMR > cindr - IR 2 phenotype ( Fig . 4 , H , I , and J ; and not depicted ) . The prevalence of cone and 1 ° cell defects was decreased ( Fig . 2 ) and the number of 2 ° and 3 ° cells was reduced to slightly below normal . Together , these data provide a functional link between Cindr and the surface proteins DE - Cad and Rst during the stages of dynamic AJ and adhesion remodeling and cell movement . loss of endogenous DE - Cad at the surface when cindr activity was reduced ( Fig . 5 ) . Second , Western analysis did not detect any changes in overall levels of DE - Cad ( or Rst , see following section ) in GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 pupal eyes ( unpublished data ) , again supporting the view that Cindr acts primarily on DE - Cad ’ s localization and not its stability . Together , our data indi - cate that Cindr acts in situ in part by regulating dynamic junctional remodeling and DE - Cad function during a period of dynamic cell movement . Cindr is functionally linked to the adhesion protein Rst In addition to regulating AJs we found a functional link between Cindr and Rst , a transmembrane protein and NEPH - 1 ortho - logue that mediates cell – cell adhesion during IPC patterning ( Schneider et al . , 1995 ) . Rst acts with its binding partner Hbs to play a central role in directing the cell movements required for 2 ° / 3 ° patterning ( Bao and Cagan , 2005 ) . Initially expressed at all IPC – IPC boundaries ( Fig . 5 B (cid:4) (cid:4) ) by 22 h APF , Rst protein becomes expressed primarily in 2 ° and 3 ° cells as the 2 ° / 3 ° hex - agonal lattice emerges ( Reiter et al . , 1996 ) . Rst protein is local - ized predominantly to AJs and , to a greater extent than DE - Cad , becomes progressively capped to the interface between 2 ° / 3 ° cells and 1 ° cells ( Fig . 5 , D (cid:4) (cid:4) and F (cid:4) (cid:4) ; and Fig . S3 C ) due to its Figure 4 . cindr interacts with adhesion loci . ( A ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 retina ; DE - Cad was discon - tinuous ( arrows ) . ( B ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 , de - cad . Mispatterning was rescued by expression of de - cad ; cell membranes are elaborated and “ frilly ” ( circled ) . ( C ) GMR > de - cad . Ecto - pic DE - Cad alone did not affect patterning . ( D ) shg R69 / + / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . Enhanced mispat - terning and discontinuous DE - Cad ( arrows ) . ( E – G ) Adult eyes with black regions indicating tissue degeneration ; genotypes are indicated . ( H – J ) Mild enhancement of cindr - IR 2 in hbs or rst heterozygotes . ( H ) hbs 459 / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . ( I ) rst 3 / + ; GMR > cindr - IR 2 . ( J ) rst CT / + ; GMR > cindr - IR 2 . All tissue was dissected at 41 h APF ; DE - Cad detection is shown . Adults were photo - graphed 1 d after eclosion . Bars : ( A – D and H – J ) 10 μ m ; ( E – G ) 100 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1198 and levels of Cpb were not detectably altered in a cindr - IR con - text ( not depicted ) . Further , mass spectrometry analysis of embryonic protein precipitates identifi ed Cpa and Cpb as physically interacting with a tandem affi nity purifi cation ( TAP ) - tagged isoform of Cindr ( Fig . 6 E ) . This is consistent with recent work indicating that mammalian CP (cid:2) and CP (cid:3) binds CD2AP ( Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Bruck et al . , 2006 ) and , indeed , a potential CP (cid:2) / CP (cid:3) binding site has been partly conserved in Cindr ( Fig . S1 C ) . These results strongly link Cindr function to actin re - modeling , and genetic tests with other components of the actin remodeling machinery support this view . We examined Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) , suppressor of cAR ( SCAR ) , profi lin ( Chickadee [ Chic ] , required for the addition of actin monomers to fi laments ) , cofi lin ( Twinstar [ Tsr ] , promotes F - actin depolymerization ) , and the tyrosine kinase Abelson ( Siripala and Welch , 2007a , b ) . The cindr - IR 2 phenotype was enhanced in reti - nae heterozygous for mutations in each of these loci ( Figs . 2 and 7 , and not depicted ) . The small GTPases Rho and Rac are central regulators of actin - based cytoskeletal dynamics ( Hall , 2005 ) and we also observed an enhancement of GMR > cindr - IR 2 in individuals heterozygous for Rho1 72 or a Rac1 J11 Rac2 (cid:2) Mtl (cid:2) triple mutation ( Figs . 2 and 7 , F and G ) . Mutations in each of these seven loci increased the mean IPC number and enhanced the number of cone and / or 1 ° cell errors in the pres - ence of GMR > cindr - IR2 2 and mildly but detectably increased the OMS value . Cindr acts with regulators of the actin cytoskeleton In the course of searching for binding partners for Cindr that are active in the eye , we identifi ed components of the actin cyto - skeleton . Of note , the patches of dead tissue we observed in eyes of GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 adults ( Fig . 4 E ) phenocopied those reported for alleles of the actin - related loci cpa and cpb ( Delalle et al . , 2005 ) . We also note a similarity between the twisted , thick - ened , short , and bent thoracic macrochaetea observed when cindr activity was reduced ( see Fig . 8 I ) and similar defects found for actin regulatory loci such as cpb ( Hopmann et al . , 1996 ; Hopmann and Miller , 2003 ; Frank et al . , 2006 ) . CP (cid:2) / CP (cid:3) heterodimers reversibly bind barbed , fast - grow - ing ends of actin fi laments to prevent further elongation or de - polymerization ( Isenberg et al . , 1980 ; Hopmann et al . , 1996 ) . Demonstrating a functional link between cindr and the D . mela - nogaster orthologues cpa / cpb , we found that multiple alleles of either cpa or cpb strongly and dominantly enhanced the pattern - ing defects of GMR > cindr - IR 2 ( Figs . 2 and 5 , B , C , F , and G ) . Similarly , we observed an enhancement of the cindr - IR pheno - type when ectopic cpa or cpb was concurrently expressed ( Fig . 6 H and not depicted ) ; neither protein gave rise to a detectable phenotype when misexpressed alone ( not depicted ) . The ability of both increased and decreased cpa / cpb activity to enhance cindr - dependent phenotypes indicates that the balance of Cindr and Cpa / Cpb is important . Cpb protein was expressed in all cell types within the pupal eye ( Fig . 6 D ) and the distribution Figure 5 . Deregulation of DE - Cad and Rst dis - tribution when Cindr is reduced . ( A , C , and E ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 retina processed to detect DE - Cad ( green in overlay panel ) and Rst ( red ) dissected at 25 , 30 , and 41 h APF . DE - Cad was irregularly distributed ( green arrows ) . Rst remains strongly localized to IPC – IPC membranes ( red arrows ) and , by 41 h APF , was cytoplasmic in IPCs except for a subset that have large apical proﬁ les resembling those of 1 ° cells ( asterisks ) . These cells may have temporarily contacted cone cells earlier and received 1 ° - inductive signals ( Miller and Cagan , 1998 ) . ( B , D , and F ) Control GMR > lacZ ommatidia showing wild - type distribution of DE - Cad and Rst . Bars 10 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1199 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . been previously described in the pupal eye . We therefore used phalloidin to explore the role of actin dynamics in patterning and its regulation by Cindr ( Figs . 8 and S5 ) . During early devel - opment stages ( 18 – 22 h APF ) , fi lamentous F - actin was found predominantly at cell membranes in pre - 1 ° cells and IPCs ( Fig . S5 A (cid:4) (cid:4) ) ; as development progressed , the levels of membrane - and AJ - associated F - actin increased ( Fig . S5 , B (cid:4) (cid:4) – G (cid:4) (cid:4) ) , reach - ing a peak 27 – 30 h APF ( Fig . 8 B ) . Importantly , Cindr foci were observed to colocalize with enriched phalloidin staining at the AJ ( Fig . S5 ) . Concurrently , numerous bundles of F - actin formed within the IPCs and eventually the 1 ° cells , radiating from the AJs to densely fi ll the apical cytoplasm ( Figs . 8 E and S5 , B (cid:4) (cid:4) – H (cid:4) (cid:4) ) . Membrane - associated actin decreased after 30 h APF , and by 41 h APF , little or no membrane - associated F - actin remained between IPCs and 1 ° cells , though it remained at AJs of other cell types ( Fig . 8 E ) . In summary , actin showed stereotyped and dynamic poly - merization and AJ localization during the period of maximal IPC Conversely , ectopic expression of the actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 component arp66B led to strong rescue of GMR > cindr - IR2 2 ; interestingly , errant localization of Rst to IPC – IPC mem - brane interfaces was not corrected in this genetic context despite its phenotypic rescue ( Figs . 2 and 7 , H and H (cid:4) ) . Expression of arp66B alone did not disrupt patterning ( unpublished data ) . This result further emphasizes that reducing cindr activity leads to reduction of actin regulation . In mammalian systems , the interaction between CD2AP and the Arp2 / 3 complex is indirect and mediated by association with Cortactin ( Cort ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) but the cindr - IR retinal phenotype was unmodifi ed in a cort M7 or cort D4 heterozygous background ( unpublished data ) . Cindr regulates actin dynamics In addition to regulating events at the surface , our genetic and biochemical data strongly indicated that Cindr is used by retinal cells to regulate actin cytoskeleton remodeling during the pat - terning process . The dynamics of actin remodeling have not Figure 6 . cindr interacts with cpb and cpa . ( A ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 retina probed for DE - Cad ( green , A (cid:4) ) and Rst ( red , A (cid:4) (cid:4) ) . ( B ) cpb F - 19 / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . Mispatterning was strongly enhanced . ( C ) cpb bnd1 / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . ( D ) In wild - type retinae , Cpb ( green ) and Cindr ( blue ) colocalized . DE - Cad is shown in red . ( E ) Western analysis of ﬁ nal eluants of coimmunoprecipta - tions from embryos expressing cindr - PC TAP or TAP only probed with (cid:2) - Cindr ( top ) or (cid:2) - Cpb ( bottom ) . ( F – H ) cindr - IR 2 was strongly enhanced in trans to cpa heterozygotes or when cpa was overexpressed . ( F ) cpa scrd1 / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . ( G ) cpa 69E / GMR > cindr - IR 2 . ( H ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 , cpa . All tissue was dissected at 41 h APF ; DE - Cad is only shown in C , F , G , and H . Bars , 10 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1200 unstable cell junctions , and severe mispatterning observed when Cindr activity was reduced . To further assess this model , we compared IPCs ’ requirement for Cindr with their requirement for capping proteins , which have been previously demonstrated to regulate F - actin dynamics . We examined discrete clones of tissue that were homozygous mutants for null alleles of cpa or cpb . Abnormally high levels of F - actin were observed to radiate from the membranes of mutant cells , extending with apparent continu - ity into neighboring wild - type cells ( Fig . 8 J , and not depicted ) . When generated early , clones showed errors in photoreceptor and cone cell organization , reduced cell viability , and pools of undif - ferentiated cells ( unpublished data ) . When generated later to circumvent differentiation defects , DE - Cad was localized dis - continuously around the cell circumference ( Fig . 8 J and unpub - lished data ) . These phenotypes were similar to , though more severe than , those observed in cells with a partial reduction of cindr activity ( e . g . , Figs . 5 and 8 C ) and confi rm that a disorga - nized cytoskeleton can disrupt both the AJ and IPC patterning . Discussion Our evidence indicates that Cindr provides a functional link be - tween dynamically regulated surface adhesion and the cytoskel - etal changes required for normal pupal eye patterning . Loss of cindr activity led to misplacement of retinal support cells , which adopted shapes uncharacteristic for their niche in the retinal fi eld . The reasons for this became apparent when we examined movement , and the dynamics of Cindr localization roughly mir - rored F - actin throughout this period . This coevolving of F - actin and Cindr localization was also observed in other cell types including the cone cells and sensory bristles ( Figs . 8 and S5 ) . The emerging bristles were especially instructive : as the tip of each bristle shaft emerged , F - actin bundles are generated from successive short linear actin modules that form at the growing tip of each bristle and elongate to graft together ( Guild et al . , 2003 ) . Cindr puncta colocalized along the length of these elongating F - actin shafts but particularly at newer distal ends , which sug - gests a role for Cindr in active actin polymerization ( Fig . 8 G ) and was refl ected in malformed thoracic macrochaetae when Cindr was reduced during their development ( Fig . 8 I ) . Strongly reducing cindr activity ( GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 ) had a marked effect on F - actin during IPC patterning : at 28 h APF , the density of F - actin fi brils and spikes fi lling the cytoplasm of cindr - IR IPCs was markedly increased ( Fig . 8 C ) . At later stages of patterning , a more dense and disorganized cytoskeletal net - work was observed in IPCs and the radiating arrangement of actin fi brils in 1 ° cells was absent at 41 h APF ( Fig . 8 F ) . Within cone cells , F - actin levels were mildly elevated at 28 h APF , and distinct F - actin spikes failed to radiate from cell membranes ( Fig . 8 C ) . These data directly support a role for Cindr in regu - lating dynamic actin organization rather than regulating actin polymerization per se . This failure of proper dynamic changes to the actin cyto - skeleton presumably accounts for the abnormal cell movements , Figure 7 . cindr interacts with many actin regulatory loci . DE - Cad shown in A – G and is shown in green in H . ( A ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 ret - ina . Mispatterning was modiﬁ ed by removing a single copy of loci for ( B ) WASp , ( C ) SCAR , ( D ) chic , ( E ) tsr , ( F ) Rho , or ( G ) rac . DE - Cad was often spotty or absent where 1 ° cells from neighboring ommatidia made contact ( green arrows ) . ( H ) Ectopic expression of arp66B rescued aberrant patterning but Rst ( H and H (cid:4) , red ) remained at IPC – IPC boundaries ( red arrows ) . All tissues were dissected at 41 h APF . Bars , 10 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1201 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . to the entire IPC circumference . Such mislocalization would impede the generation of a preferential adhesive force , disrupt - ing the direction or fl ow of cell movement and subsequent pat - terning . We also detected irregularities in the localization of DE - Cad around the circumference of retinal cells when Cindr was reduced . This presumably resulted in uneven or unreliable junctional stability that further destabilized the dynamic switch - ing of cell positions . Genetic interactions with the loci for rst , hbs , and shg confi rmed that these loci cooperate with cindr dur - ing patterning . We also demonstrate that the actin cytoskeleton is dynam - ically remodeled during pupal eye patterning and that reducing cindr activity led to a change in the details of cytoskeletal dynam - ics . In wild - type tissue , polymerized actin was initially detected almost exclusively at AJs of pre - 1 ° cells and IPCs . These actin rings intensifi ed as cells became rearranged and then , remarkably , cell behavior in live tissue . Reducing cindr prevented 1 ° cells from maintaining enwrapment of the cone cells ; instead , cindr 1 ° cells were unable to fi rmly establish this niche and frequently retracted , allowing neighboring IPCs to have direct contact with the cone cells . Similar instability was observed in the remaining IPCs fated to establish the 2 ° / 3 ° hexagonal lattice . Histology demonstrated further changes both to AJ components and the actin cytoskeleton . Although we cannot rule out additional roles for Cindr such as regulation of endocytosis , we did not observe evidence for such a role during cells ’ rearrangements . In wild - type tissue , Hbs and Rst are localized exclusively to 1 ° – IPC interfaces during IPC patterning ; heterophilic inter - actions between these molecules are thought to direct the re - arrangement of IPCs into single rows around each ommatidium ( Reiter et al . , 1996 ; Bao and Cagan , 2005 ; Grzeschik and Knust , 2005 ) . In cindr - IR tissue , we observed a mislocalization of Rst Figure 8 . Cindr localizes to and regulates F - actin . ( A , B , D , and E ) Canton S retinae dissected at times as indicated . Tissue was in - cubated in phalloidin to detect F - actin ( white ) . Insets show detection of Cindr ( green ) , DE - Cad ( blue ) , and F - actin ( red ) in selected ﬁ elds . ( C and F ) GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 retina ; phalloidin is shown . ( G ) High - magniﬁ cation image of a single protruding ommatidial bristle at 41 h APF . The retina was torn before imaging to re - move tissue below the bristle ( top right ) . Cindr ( green ) is concentrated at the tip of the protrud - ing bristle . Phalloidin ( red ) and DE - Cad ( blue ) are also shown . ( H ) Dorsal thorax of adult Canton S ﬂ y . ( I ) apterous > cindr IR 2 + 3 adult thorax . Macrochaetea are missing , hooked , thickened , or stunted ( arrows ) . ( J ) 28 - h - APF pupal eye mosaic for cpa scrd1 . The lack of nuclear GFP labels mispatterned mutant cells . DE - Cad ( blue , J (cid:4) ) was discontinuous ( arrows ) and phalloidin ( red , J (cid:4) (cid:4) ) detects extremely elevated levels of polymerized actin . Bars : ( A – G and J ) 5 μ m ; ( H and I ) 100 μ m . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1202 mature tissue , eventually leading to degeneration of mutant tis - sue . This may be analogous to the degeneration of mammalian podocytes that has been associated with mutations in CD2AP ( Schiffer et al . , 2004 ; Peters et al . , 2006 ; Woroniecki et al . , 2006 ) . How Cindr itself is regulated during development remains an open question . Materials and methods D . melanogaster stocks The following stocks were used ( described in Flybase , http : / / ﬂ ybase . bio . indiana . edu / ) : a belson 2 ; arp66B EP3640 ; UAS – (cid:3) - catenin – GFP ; UAS – de - cadherin – GFP , and shg R69 ( gifts from R . Carthew , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL ) ; chic 221 ; cort M7 , and cort D4 ( gifts from P . Rorth , Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory Limited , National University of Singapore , Kent Ridge , Singapore ) ; cpa 69E , cpa 1074E , and UAS - cpa ( gifts from F . Janody , Instituto Gulbenkian , Oeiras , Portugal ) ; cpa scrd1 , cpa scrd2 , and cpb bnd1 ( gifts from I . Hariharan , University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA ) ; cpb M14 and UAS - cpb ( gifts from P . Garrity , Brandeis University , Waltham , MA ) ; cpb 6 - 15 ; cpb F19 ; Df ( 3R ) 8194 ; hbs 459 ; hbs 361 ; UAS - hbs - IR , UAS - rst - IR , and UAS - rst ( gifts from S . Bao , Mount Sinai School of Medicine , New York , NY ) ; rac1 J11 rac2 (cid:2) mtl (cid:2) ; Rho1 72 ; rst 3 ; rst CT ; SCAR (cid:2) 37 ; SCAR K03107 ; tsr N96A ; tsr N121A ; WASp 3 and the WASp deﬁ ciency Df ( 3R ) 3450 ( gifts from E . Schejter , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel ) ; UAS - GFP and UAS - lacZ ; apterous - GAL4 ( gift from S . Cohen , Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory Limited , National University of Singapore ) ; daughterless - GAL4 ( gift from J . Zallen , Sloan Kettering Institute , New York , NY ) ; GMR - GAL4 ; patched - GAL4 ; and tubulin - GAL4 . The progeny of hsFLP ; cindr - IR 2 + 3 ( see following section ) crossed to Act5C > y + > GAL4 , UAS - GFP S65T , and hsFLP ; FRT42D , cpa scrd1 / CyO crossed to FRT42D , Ubi - GFP S65T were heat - shocked to gener - ate FLP / FRT - mediated mitotic clones ( Xu and Rubin , 1993 ) . Transgenic lines For cindr - PC expression constructs , we ampliﬁ ed a 2 . 7 - kb fragment from cDNA clone RH08284 ( Drosophila Genomics Resource Center ) using GAATCGCGGCCGCCATGGAAAAC ( 5 (cid:4) / 631 ) and GATTCATC - TAGACTCAAACTTGC ( 3 (cid:4) / 3 , 306 ) . These introduced Not1 – Xba1 sites for insertion into pUAST N - T TAP ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) or pUAST - EGFP ( Parker et al . , 2001 ) . For GFP - tagged cindr - PD and cindr - PB , CGGC - AGCGGCCGCCATGTTGCCAC or GCACCGCGGCCGCCATGACCA - CAAC were paired with 3 (cid:4) / 3 , 306 ; for cindr - (cid:2) PB , we used 5 (cid:4) / 631 and GAGTTCGTTCTAGACTAGTGGCTGG . Fragments of cindr were ampliﬁ ed from genomic Canton - S cDNA , to generate UAS - cindr - IR constructs as previously described ( Bao and Cagan , 2006 ) targeting 472 – 1 , 022 bp ( cindr - IR 1 ) , 1 , 016 – 1 , 518 bp ( cindr - IR 2 ) , and 1 , 664 – 2 , 246 bp ( cindr - IR 3 ) . Transgenic lines were generated by stan - dard P element – mediated transformation methods . In this paper , we used lines carrying multiple transgenes : cindr - IR 1 . 18 + 18 , cindr - IR 2 . 21 + 23 , cindr - IR 3 . 73 + 81 , and cindr - IR 2 . 21 + 23 , 3 . 63 + 76 , which we refer to as cindr - IR 1 , cindr - IR 2 , cindr - IR 3 , and cindr - IR 2 + 3 , respectively . qrt - PCR Efﬁ cacy of the cindr - IR transgenes was assayed by qrt - PCR of two inde - pendent preparations of cDNA from embryos or L1 larvae in which RNAi transgenes were driven using da - GAL4 . Primers sets were : B , once patterning was established , membrane - associated F - actin strongly diminished . The functional signifi cance of these changes is likely linked to concurrent modifi cation of Rst - and AJ - mediated adhesion . For example , the levels of both DE - Cad and Armadillo ( (cid:3) - catenin ) decrease between IPCs as they are re arranged , which would serve to facilitate Rst - mediated IPC move - ments toward 1 ° cells ( Fig . 9 , middle ; Bao and Cagan , 2005 ) . We show data indicating that the actin cytoskeleton is coordi - nately reinforced at AJs as adhesion is weakened . This may serve to maintain the surface integrity of the retinal cells while junctional strength decreases and the tissue is remodeled . Once patterning is achieved , the BMP receptor Thickvein then acts to restrengthen AJs ( Cordero et al . , 2007 ) ; the reduction of F - actin may refl ect the reduced need for a dense actin ring . Throughout this process , Cindr acts as a pivotal regulator to coordinate AJ modifi cation and actin polymerization . Several data presented in this paper suggest that Cindr acts directly to regulate actin . First , the intensity and distribu - tion of cytoplasmic Cindr puncta in retinal cells tracks that of F - actin in IPCs during development . Second , the striking dy - namics of F - actin polymerization are lost , presumably helping account for their abnormal cell movements . Third , strong ge - netic interactions were observed between cindr - IR and multi - ple components of the actin regulatory machinery . Fourth , we coimmunoprecipitated the two capping protein subunits Cpa and Cpb together with Cindr from D . melanogaster embryos . And , fi nally , several phenotypes are shared between tissue mutant for cindr - IR and tissue mutant for cpa or cpb : pupal eye mispatterning , gaps in the distribution of DE - Cad around the circumference of retinal cells , bristle malformation , and tissue degeneration . Our results also emphasize the important role of the actin cytoskeleton in regulating or maintaining AJ integrity ( Mege et al . , 2006 ) . However , our data also argue that Cindr regulates the localization of transmembrane adhesion proteins at least in part independently of the cytoskeleton ( Fig . 7 ) : reducing the ge - netic component of actin regulators enhanced the patterning de - fects of cindr - IR but not the disruption to DE - Cad , and ectopic Arp66B rescued cindr - IR mispatterning but did not rescue aber - rant localization of Rst . In the absence of Cindr , miscoordina - tion of the actin machinery together with aberrant localization of junctional complexes is likely the underlying cause of tissue mispatterning during development . Similarly , deregulation of actin and junction instability is apparently cell lethal in more Figure 9 . Model of proposed Cindr regulatory network . Cindr shifts from the membrane to the cytoplasm to connect evolving events at the surface to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . The result is coordinated cell movement . The ligands for Rst ( Hbs ) and Thickvein ( Dpp ) are not depicted . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 1203 CINDR REGULATES DROSOPHILA PUPAL EYE PATTERNING • JOHNSON ET AL . We thank all members of the Cagan Laboratory for lively discussion . We give thanks to David Larson for perfecting the live imaging protocol and Sujin Bao for advice on RNAi . We thank Andrey Shaw and Serawit Bruck for discussion , Jim Skeath for the use of his confocal microscope , Reid Townsend and Petra Gilmore for MS - SPEC analysis , and numerous fellow Drosophilists for gener - ously sending reagents , often across international borders . We apologize to authors whose work could not be cited due to space constraints . This work was funded by National Institutes of Health grant R01 EY1149 . Submitted : 18 June 2007 Accepted : 27 February 2008 References Bao , S . , and R . Cagan . 2005 . Preferential adhesion mediated by Hibris and Roughest regulates morphogenesis and patterning in the Drosophila eye . Dev . Cell . 8 : 925 – 935 . Bao , S . , and R . Cagan . 2006 . Fast cloning inverted repeats for RNA interference . RNA . 12 : 2020 – 2024 . Bogler , O . , F . B . Furnari , A . Kindler - Roehrborn , V . W . Sykes , R . Yung , H . J . Huang , and W . K . Cavenee . 2000 . SETA : a novel SH3 domain - containing adapter molecule associated with malignancy in astrocytes . Neuro . Oncol . 2 : 6 – 15 . Brand , A . H . , and N . Perrimon . 1993 . Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes . Development . 118 : 401 – 415 . Brett , T . J . , L . M . Traub , and D . H . Fremont . 2002 . Accessory protein recruitment motifs in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Structure . 10 : 797 – 809 . Bruck , S . , T . B . Huber , R . J . Ingham , K . Kim , H . Niederstrasser , P . M . Allen , T . Pawson , J . A . Cooper , and A . S . Shaw . 2006 . Identifi cation of a novel in - hibitory actin - capping protein binding motif in CD2 - associated protein . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 19196 – 19203 . Chen , B . , S . C . Borinstein , J . Gillis , V . W . Sykes , and O . Bogler . 2000 . The glioma - associated protein SETA interacts with AIP1 / Alix and ALG - 2 and modulates apoptosis in astrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 19275 – 19281 . Cordero , J . B . , D . E . Larson , C . R . Craig , R . Hays , and R . Cagan . 2007 . Dynamic decapentaplegic signaling regulates patterning and adhesion in the Drosophila pupal retina . Development . 134 : 1861 – 1871 . Cormont , M . , I . Meton , M . Mari , P . Monzo , F . Keslair , C . Gaskin , T . E . McGraw , and Y . Le Marchand - Brustel . 2003 . CD2AP / CMS regulates endosome morphology and traffi c to the degradative pathway through its interaction with Rab4 and c - Cbl . Traffi c . 4 : 97 – 112 . Delalle , I . , C . M . Pfl eger , E . Buff , P . Lueras , and I . K . Hariharan . 2005 . Mutations in the Drosophila orthologs of the F - actin capping protein alpha - and beta - subunits cause actin accumulation and subsequent retinal degenera - tion . Genetics . 171 : 1757 – 1765 . Dikic , I . 2003 . Mechanisms controlling EGF receptor endocytosis and degrada - tion . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 31 : 1178 – 1181 . Dikic , I . , and S . Giordano . 2003 . Negative receptor signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 128 – 135 . Dustin , M . L . , M . W . Olszowy , A . D . Holdorf , J . Li , S . Bromley , N . Desai , P . Widder , F . Rosenberger , P . A . van der Merwe , P . M . Allen , and A . S . Shaw . 1998 . A novel adaptor protein orchestrates receptor patterning and cyto - skeletal polarity in T - cell contacts . Cell . 94 : 667 – 677 . Frank , D . J . , R . Hopmann , M . Lenartowska , and K . G . Miller . 2006 . Capping pro - tein and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate nonbundle actin fi lament assembly to indirectly control actin bundle positioning during Drosophila melano - gaster bristle development . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 3930 – 3939 . Gaidos , G . , S . Soni , D . J . Oswald , P . A . Toselli , and K . H . Kirsch . 2007 . Structure and function analysis of the CMS / CIN85 protein family identifi es actin - bundling properties and heterotypic - complex formation . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 2366 – 2377 . Gauthier , N . C . , P . Monzo , T . Gonzalez , A . Doye , A . Oldani , P . Gounon , V . Ricci , M . Cormont , and P . Boquet . 2007 . Early endosomes associated with dy - namic F - actin structures are required for late traffi cking of H . pylori VacA toxin . J . Cell Biol . 177 : 343 – 354 . Gout , I . , G . Middleton , J . Adu , N . N . Ninkina , L . B . Drobot , V . Filonenko , G . Matsuka , A . M . Davies , M . Waterfi eld , and V . L . Buchman . 2000 . Negative regulation of PI 3 - kinase by Ruk , a novel adaptor protein . EMBO J . 19 : 4015 – 4025 . Grzeschik , N . A . , and E . Knust . 2005 . IrreC / rst - mediated cell sorting during Drosophila pupal eye development depends on proper localisation of DE - cadherin . Development . 132 : 2035 – 2045 . GAGCTGGATCTCCAGAAAGG and CGTTGCCATTGCTACTGACT ; D , GCCACAGCCACAGTACCA and CTCCCGATCCCGAAACTAT ; and K , GATCACCAGTAGCTCCCACA and AGGCGAAACACTTCGTTGAT . Each qrt - PCR experiment was repeated three times . Melt curve analysis showed a single peak for all samples and PCR products were veriﬁ ed using restriction analysis . Two primer sets recognizing rp49 were used as internal controls . Cindr antibody A fragment of Cindr common to all isoforms was ampliﬁ ed from RH08284 using GACCGGGAGCAGTAGCAATAGC and GTCGTTGAGAATTCCA - CAAACAT and inserted into pGEX - 2T . The GST - Cindr 384 – 740 fusion protein was raised in BL - 21 cells for generation of a rabbit polyclonal antibody ( Proteintech Group , Inc ) . Western analysis of embryos 50 embryos homozygous for Df ( 3R ) Exel8194 ( a deletion encompassing cindr ) and 50 heterozygous embryos were gathered 6 – 8 h after egg lay - ing , homogenized in sample buffer , and separated on a NuPage 4 – 12 % gradient SDS - polyacrylamide gel ( Invitrogen ) . Rabbit anti - Cindr was used at 1 : 1 , 000 and HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies were used at 1 : 5 , 000 ( Cell Signaling Technology ) . Coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry cindr - PC TAP ( or for controls , TAP only ) was expressed using tubulin - GAL4 and isolated from embryos 2 – 24 h after egg laying . Dechorionated em - bryos were washed , lysed in a modiﬁ ed Tris buffer ( Veraksa et al . , 2005 ) , and incubated for 20 min on ice . The lysate was then cleared by a 5 - min centrifugation at 5 , 500 rpm and processed as described previously ( Rigaut et al . , 1999 ) . Protein isolated from 2 . 5 ml of embryos was sufﬁ cient for LC - MS mass spectrometry ( Siteman Cancer Center Proteomics Core Facility , Washington University ) . Coimmunoprecipitation of Cpb / Cpa with Cindr was conﬁ rmed by Western analysis of the ﬁ nal eluant ; rat anti - Cpb was used at 1 : 50 ( Hopmann et al . , 1996 ) . In situ hybridization , immunoﬂ uorescence , and live imaging Pupae were collected at 0 h APF and maintained at 25 ° C until dissection as described previously ( Bao and Cagan , 2005 ) . For in situ hybridiza - tion , digoxin - labeled RNA probes were synthesized from the entire cindr - coding region from RH08284 . For immunoﬂ uorescence , primary antibodies were rabbit anti - Cindr ( 1 : 100 ) , rat anti – DE - Cad2 ( 1 : 20 , DSHB ) , mouse anti - Armadillo N2 7A1 ( 1 : 10 ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) , mouse anti - Rst Mab24A5 . 1 ( 1 : 50 ; Schneider et al . , 1995 ) , and rat anti - Cpb ( 1 : 50 ) . To visualize polymerized actin , rhoda - mine phalloidin was included in primary antibody incubations ( 1 : 100 ; Invitrogen ) . Secondary antibodies were conjugated Alexa 488 and 568 ( Invitrogen ) and Cy5 ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) . The mount - ing media was Vectashield ( Vector Laboratories ) . Samples were analyzed at RT with either an objective microscope ( Axioplan2 ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) using a Plan - Apochromat 63 × 1 . 40 NA oil objective ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) , camera ( Quantix ; Photometrics ) , and Image - Pro Plus 5 . 1 software ( Media Cybernetics , Inc ) or using a confocal system ( TCS SP2 ; Leica ) with con - stituent software and Plan - Apochromat 63 × 1 . 32 NA or Plan - Apochro - mat 100 × 1 . 40 NA oil objective lenses ( Leica ) . Results were processed for publication using Photoshop ( Adobe ) with minimal adjustment of brightness or contrast applied to the whole image and analyzed for mis - patterning errors as described in Fig . 2 . Live imaging was performed as described previously ( Larson et al . , 2008 ) for GMR - GAL4 / cindr - IR 3 ; UAS - (cid:3) - catenin - GFP / cindr - IR 2 ( experimental ) and GMR - GAL4 / + ; UAS - (cid:3) - catenin - GFP / UAS - lacZ ( control ) pupae . Images were gathered every 15 min at multiple focal planes using an Axiophot microscope ( Carl Zeiss Inc . ) and composite images for each time point were assembled in Photo - shop , from which QuickTime ( Apple ) movies were generated . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows predicted Cindr isoforms , sequence , and Western analysis of embryos . Fig . S2 illustrates the cindr - IR transgenes and qrt - PCR primer sets and shows veriﬁ cation of the Cindr antibody and IR transgenes in the wing disc . Fig . S3 shows detection of Cindr in GMR > cindr - IR 2 + 3 retinae and at the apical , basal , and rhabdomere planes in a 41 - h - APF Canton - S ommatidium . Fig . S4 shows localization of GFP - tagged Cindr isoforms . Fig . S5 shows F - actin over a time course of development . Videos 1 and 4 are time lapse studies of control retina from 18 – 22 and 23 – 27 h APF , re - spectively . Videos 2 and 3 are of experimental cindr - IR retinae from 18 – 22 and 24 – 28 h APF , respectively . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200706108 / DC1 . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008 JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 6 • 2008 1204 Schiffer , M . , P . Mundel , A . S . Shaw , and E . P . Bottinger . 2004 . A novel role for the adaptor molecule CD2 - associated protein in transforming growth factor - beta - induced apoptosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 37004 – 37012 . Schiwek , D . , N . Endlich , L . Holzman , H . Holthofer , W . Kriz , and K . Endlich . 2004 . Stable expression of nephrin and localization to cell - cell contacts in novel murine podocyte cell lines . Kidney Int . 66 : 91 – 101 . Schmidt , M . H . , B . Chen , L . M . Randazzo , and O . Bogler . 2003 . SETA / CIN85 / Ruk and its binding partner AIP1 associate with diverse cytoskeletal elements , including FAKs , and modulate cell adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 2845 – 2855 . Schneider , T . , C . Reiter , E . Eule , B . Bader , B . Lichte , Z . Nie , T . Schimansky , R . G . Ramos , and K . F . Fischbach . 1995 . Restricted expression of the irreC - rst protein is required for normal axonal projections of columnar visual neurons . Neuron . 15 : 259 – 271 . Shih , N . Y . , J . Li , V . Karpitskii , A . Nguyen , M . L . Dustin , O . Kanagawa , J . H . Miner , and A . S . Shaw . 1999 . Congenital nephrotic syndrome in mice lacking CD2 - associated protein . Science . 286 : 312 – 315 . Shih , N . Y . , J . Li , R . Cotran , P . Mundel , J . H . Miner , and A . S . Shaw . 2001 . CD2AP localizes to the slit diaphragm and binds to nephrin via a novel C - terminal domain . Am . J . Pathol . 159 : 2303 – 2308 . Siripala , A . D . , and M . D . Welch . 2007a . SnapShot : actin regulators I . Cell . 128 : 626 . Siripala , A . D . , and M . D . Welch . 2007b . SnapShot : actin regulators II . Cell . 128 : 1014 . Take , H . , S . Watanabe , K . Takeda , Z . X . Yu , N . Iwata , and S . Kajigaya . 2000 . Cloning and characterization of a novel adaptor protein , CIN85 , that inter - acts with c - Cbl . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 268 : 321 – 328 . Tepass , U . , and K . P . Harris . 2007 . Adherens junctions in Drosophila retinal mor - phogenesis . Trends Cell Biol . 17 : 26 – 35 . Usami , Y . , S . Popov , and H . G . Gottlinger . 2007 . Potent rescue of human immuno - defi ciency virus type 1 late domain mutants by ALIX / AIP1 depends on its CHMP4 binding site . J . Virol . 81 : 6614 – 6622 . Veraksa , A . , A . Bauer , and S . Artavanis - Tsakonas . 2005 . Analyzing protein com - plexes in Drosophila with tandem affi nity purifi cation - mass spectrom - etry . Dev . Dyn . 232 : 827 – 834 . Welsch , T . , N . Endlich , W . Kriz , and K . Endlich . 2001 . CD2AP and p130Cas localize to different F - actin structures in podocytes . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 281 : F769 – F777 . Welsch , T . , N . Endlich , G . Gokce , E . Doroshenko , J . C . Simpson , W . Kriz , A . S . Shaw , and K . Endlich . 2005 . Association of CD2AP with dynamic actin on vesicles in podocytes . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 289 : F1134 – F1143 . Woroniecki , R . P . , M . Schiffer , A . S . Shaw , F . J . Kaskel , and E . P . Bottinger . 2006 . Glomerular expression of transforming growth factor - beta ( TGF - beta ) isoforms in mice lacking CD2 - associated protein . Pediatr . Nephrol . 21 : 333 – 338 . Wu , C . , Y . P . Wairkar , C . A . Collins , and A . DiAntonio . 2005 . Highwire function at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction : spatial , structural , and tempo - ral requirements . J . Neurosci . 25 : 9557 – 9566 . Xu , T . , and G . M . Rubin . 1993 . Analysis of genetic mosaics in developing and adult Drosophila tissues . Development . 117 : 1223 – 1237 . Guild , G . M . , P . S . Connelly , L . Ruggiero , K . A . Vranich , and L . G . Tilney . 2003 . Long continuous actin bundles in Drosophila bristles are constructed by overlapping short fi laments . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1069 – 1077 . Hall , A . 2005 . Rho GTPases and the control of cell behaviour . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 : 891 – 895 . Hopmann , R . , and K . G . Miller . 2003 . A balance of capping protein and pro - fi lin functions is required to regulate actin polymerization in Drosophila bristle . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 118 – 128 . Hopmann , R . , J . A . Cooper , and K . G . Miller . 1996 . Actin organization , bristle morphology , and viability are affected by actin capping protein mutations in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 1293 – 1305 . Huber , T . B . , and T . Benzing . 2005 . The slit diaphragm : a signaling platform to regulate podocyte function . Curr . Opin . Nephrol . Hypertens . 14 : 211 – 216 . Hutchings , N . J . , N . Clarkson , R . Chalkley , A . N . Barclay , and M . H . Brown . 2003 . Linking the T cell surface protein CD2 to the actin - capping protein CAPZ via CMS and CIN85 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 22396 – 22403 . Isenberg , G . , U . Aebi , and T . D . Pollard . 1980 . An actin - binding protein from Acanthamoeba regulates actin fi lament polymerization and interactions . Nature . 288 : 455 – 459 . Kirsch , K . H . , M . M . Georgescu , T . Shishido , W . Y . Langdon , R . B . Birge , and H . Hanafusa . 2001 . The adapter type protein CMS / CD2AP binds to the proto - oncogenic protein c - Cbl through a tyrosine phosphorylation - regulated Src homology 3 domain interaction . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 4957 – 4963 . Kowanetz , K . , J . Terzic , and I . Dikic . 2003 . Dab2 links CIN85 with clathrin - mediated receptor internalization . FEBS Lett . 554 : 81 – 87 . Kurakin , A . V . , S . Wu , and D . E . Bredesen . 2003 . Atypical recognition consensus of CIN85 / SETA / Ruk SH3 domains revealed by target - assisted iterative screening . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 34102 – 34109 . Larson , D . E . , Z . Liberman , and R . L . Cagan . 2008 . Cellular behavior in the devel - oping Drosophila pupal retina . Mech . Dev . 125 : 223 – 232 . Lehtonen , S . , A . Ora , V . M . Olkkonen , L . Geng , M . Zerial , S . Somlo , and E . Lehtonen . 2000 . In vivo interaction of the adapter protein CD2 - associated protein with the type 2 polycystic kidney disease protein , polycystin - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 32888 – 32893 . Lehtonen , S . , F . Zhao , and E . Lehtonen . 2002 . CD2 - associated protein directly interacts with the actin cytoskeleton . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 283 : F734 – F743 . Lehtonen , S . , E . Lehtonen , K . Kudlicka , H . Holthofer , and M . G . Farquhar . 2004 . Nephrin forms a complex with adherens junction proteins and CASK in podocytes and in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells expressing nephrin . Am . J . Pathol . 165 : 923 – 936 . Lynch , D . K . , S . C . Winata , R . J . Lyons , W . E . Hughes , G . M . Lehrbach , V . Wasinger , G . Corthals , S . Cordwell , and R . J . Daly . 2003 . A Cortactin - CD2 - associ - ated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 21805 – 21813 . Mege , R . M . , J . Gavard , and M . Lambert . 2006 . Regulation of cell - cell junctions by the cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 541 – 548 . Miller , D . T . , and R . L . Cagan . 1998 . Local induction of patterning and pro - grammed cell death in the developing Drosophila retina . Development . 125 : 2327 – 2335 . Monzo , P . , N . C . Gauthier , F . Keslair , A . Loubat , C . M . Field , Y . Le Marchand - Brustel , and M . Cormont . 2005 . Clues to CD2 - associated protein involve - ment in cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 2891 – 2902 . Mustonen , H . , A . Lepisto , S . Lehtonen , E . Lehtonen , P . Puolakkainen , and E . Kivilaakso . 2005 . CD2AP contributes to cell migration and adhe - sion in cultured gastric epithelium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 332 : 426 – 432 . Palmen , T . , S . Lehtonen , A . Ora , D . Kerjaschki , C . Antignac , E . Lehtonen , and H . Holthofer . 2002 . Interaction of endogenous nephrin and CD2 - associated pro - tein in mouse epithelial M - 1 cell line . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 13 : 1766 – 1772 . Parker , L . , S . Gross , and L . Alphey . 2001 . Vectors for the expression of tagged proteins in Drosophila . Biotechniques . 31 : 1280 – 1282 , 1284 , 1286 . Patari - Sampo , A . , P . Ihalmo , and H . Holthofer . 2006 . Molecular basis of the glomerular fi ltration : nephrin and the emerging protein complex at the podocyte slit diaphragm . Ann . Med . 38 : 483 – 492 . Peters , I . , I . Tossidou , J . Achenbach , R . Woroniecki , M . Mengel , J . K . Park , M . Paschy , K . de Groot , H . Haller , and M . Schiffer . 2006 . IGF - binding pro - tein - 3 modulates TGF - beta / BMP - signaling in glomerular podocytes . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 17 : 1644 – 1656 . Reiter , C . , T . Schimansky , Z . Nie , and K . F . Fischbach . 1996 . Reorganization of membrane contacts prior to apoptosis in the Drosophila retina : the role of the IrreC - rst protein . Development . 122 : 1931 – 1940 . Rigaut , G . , A . Shevchenko , B . Rutz , M . Wilm , M . Mann , and B . Seraphin . 1999 . A generic protein purifi cation method for protein complex characteriza - tion and proteome exploration . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 : 1030 – 1032 . on N o v e m be r 8 , 2011 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published March 24 , 2008