Cell , Vol . 108 , 233 – 246 , January 25 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Control of Actin Reorganization by Slingshot , a Family of Phosphatases that Dephosphorylate ADF / Cofilin et al . , 1997 ; Borisy and Svitkina , 2000 ; Chen et al . , 2000 ; Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . Among actin binding proteins , ADF / cofilin is the most - characterized stimulus - responsive mediator of actin dy - namics ( Moon and Drubin , 1995 ; Yahara et al . , 1996 ; Ryusuke Niwa , 1 , 2 Kyoko Nagata - Ohashi , 3 Masatoshi Takeichi , 4 Kensaku Mizuno , 3 and Tadashi Uemura 1 , 5 , 6 1 Department of Molecular Genetics The Institute for Virus Research Theriot , 1997 ; Bamburg , 1999 ; Bamburg et al . , 1999 ) . Kyoto University In response to insulin and lysophosphatidic acid , LIM - Kyoto 606 - 8507 kinases ( LIMKs ) , activated by effectors of Rho family Japan GTPases , phosphorylate ADF / cofilin specifically at Ser - 3 , 2 Graduate School of Science and thereby inhibit filament - severing and monomer 4 Graduate School of Biostudies binding activities of ADF / cofilin proteins ( Agnew et al . , Kyoto University 1995 ; Moriyama et al . , 1996 ; Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et Kitashirakawa , Sakyo - ku al . , 1998 ; Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ; Amano Kyoto 606 - 8502 et al . , 2001 ) . Testicular protein kinases ( TESKs ) also Japan phosphorylate Ser - 3 of ADF / cofilin and inhibit its activ - 3 Department of Biomolecular Science ity , although upstream pathways of TESKs activation Graduate School of Life Sciences appear to be separate from that of LIMKs ( Toshima et Tohoku University al . , 2001a , 2001b , 2001c ) . ADF / cofilin undergoes rapid Aoba dephosphorylation as well in response to several extra - Sendai 980 - 8578 cellular stimuli , which could result from downregulation Japan of the kinases , upregulation of a phosphatase ( s ) , or both 5 Core Research for Evolutional Science ( Moon and Drubin , 1995 ) . In contrast to characterization and Technology ( CREST ) of the kinases , however , much less is known about the Japan Science and Technology Corporation phosphatases that reactivate ADF / cofilin . Actin dynamics in vivo have been studied genetically in several systems including Drosophila ( Sutherland and Summary Witke , 1999 ) . Bristles and hairs on appendages are ac - tin - based protrusions exposed on body surfaces ; there - The ADF ( actin - depolymerizing factor ) / cofilin family is fore , theyareeasilyscoredlandmarksforisolatingmuta - a stimulus - responsive mediator of actin dynamics . In tions that cause malformations ( Overton , 1967 ; Tilney contrast to the mechanisms of inactivation of ADF / et al . , 1995 , 1996 , 2000 ) . In fact , loci reported to be cofilin by kinases such as LIM - kinase 1 ( LIMK1 ) , much involved in such malformations include chickadee ( chic ) less is known about its reactivation through dephos - encoding profilin ( Cooley et al . , 1992 ; Verheyen and phorylation . Here we report Slingshot ( SSH ) , a family Cooley , 1994 ) , cpb encoding the (cid:1) subunit of CP ( Hop - of phosphatases that have theproperty of F actin bind - mann et al . , 1996 ) , and twinstar ( tsr ) encoding ADF / ing . In Drosophila , loss of ssh function dramatically cofilin ( Edwards et al . , 1994 ; Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ; Chen increased levels of both F actin and phospho - cofilin et al . , 2001 ) . Here we report another locus , which we ( Pcofilin ) anddisorganizedepidermalcellmorphogen - named slingshot ( ssh ) after the bifurcation phenotypes esis . In mammalian cells , human SSH homologs of the bristles and hairs in its mutants . The ssh gene ( hSSHs ) suppressed LIMK1 - induced actin reorganiza - encodes a phosphatase that is conserved among sev - tion . Furthermore , SSH and the hSSHs dephosphory - eral animal species . Loss of ssh function dramatically lated P cofilin in cultured cells and in cell - free assays . increased the level of actin filaments , which is similar Our results strongly suggest that the SSH family plays to a phenotype of tsr mutant cells ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; a pivotal role in actin dynamics by reactivating ADF / Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) . In cultured mammalian cells , cofilin in vivo . such a strong enhancement of actin polymerization is induced by overproduction of LIMKs or TESKs ( Arber Introduction et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Toshima et al . , 2001a , 2001b ) . Regulation of the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton is One hypothesis would be that SSH and these kinases fundamental in the construction and remodeling of a share the same substrate , ADF / cofilin , regulate its phos - variety of polarized subcellular structures . The reorgani - phorylation level , and consequently control its actin - zation of the actin cytoskeleton is controlled at multiple depolymerizing activity . To pursue this possibility , we levels . When focused on elongation of actin filaments , took multiple approaches . We present evidence here profilin promotes the elongation at barbed ends , and thatlossof ssh functionin Drosophila increasedthelevel capping protein ( CP ) stabilizes the barbed ends ; a mem - of phospho - cofilin ( P cofilin ) and that ssh genetically ber of the ADF ( actin - depolymerizing factor ) / cofilin fam - interacted with the Drosophila LIMK gene in actin - based ily accelerates depolymerization at pointed ends and cell morphogenesis . In cultured cells , expression of ei - severs long actin filaments ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Welch ther of two human SSH homologs ( hSSHs ) with LIMK1 or TESK1 suppressed actin reorganization induced by those kinases ; and SSH or hSSHs expression reduced 6 Correspondence : tuemura @ virus . kyoto - u . ac . jp Cell234 thelevelof Pcofilin . Finally , SSHand thehSSHsdephos - ward pNPP , and its expression did not reduce the level phorylated P cofilin as judged from the results of cell - of P cofilin in COS - 7 cells , either . free assays . Our results suggest that the SSH family Besides the catalytic domain , there are two other do - plays a critical role in controlling actin dynamics , pre - mains conserved between SSH and hSSHs ( domains A sumably through dephosphorylating and thus reactivat - and B in Figures 2B and 2C ) that did not have known ing cofilin in cellular and developmental contexts . motifs and were unique to the SSH family . Both SSH and hSSH - 1L had long C tails of 530 and 609 residues , Results respectively ( Figure 2B ) , although their sequences were not very similar to each other . We found EST sequences ssh Mutations Caused Malformations of Essentially ofascidian , seaurchin , andzebrafishthatcorrespondedto All Actin - Based Cellular Extensions on Adult domainsA and / orB ( AV383773 , BG780592 , andAI153680 , Drosophila Epidermis respectively ) . On the other hand , neither domain A nor B In the course of genetic screening for loci that affect was found in predicted proteins in Saccharomuces cere - bristle number and / or morphology , we focused on visae , Caenorhabditis elegans , or Arabidopsis under stan - l ( 3 ) 01207 , which has one copy of PZ inserted into dardconditionsforsearching databases , suggesting that CG6238 ( Adams et al . , 2000 ; see details in Experimental those species may not have ssh orthologs . RNA in situ Procedures ) . Lethality of l ( 3 ) 01207 was due to loss of hybridization showed the ssh transcripts to be mater - CG6238 function , as shown by the facts that the lethality nally supplied in the embryo and to be expressed was recovered by remobilization of the P element and broadly in embryonic and imaginal tissues ( data not by CG6238 cDNA expression using a widely expressed shown ) . GAL4 driver , daughterless ( da ) - GAL4 ( Wodarz et al . , 1995 ) . Throughsubsequentanalysis , wefoundthatadult SSH ( wt ) , But Not SSH ( CS ) , Rescued ssh Mutants escapers of hypomorphic alleles had bifurcated and from Morphological Defects twisted bristles ( Figure 1 ) . We renamed this locus sling - To assess the importance of the phosphatase activity shot ( ssh ) . of SSH during development , we examined whether ex - Wing hairs made by ssh null cells were much thicker pression of a catalytically inactive form could rescue than normal , twisted , and sometimes bifurcated at their the lethality of ssh strong mutants and the hair / bristle tips ( Figure 1A ) . In hypomorphs , hairs were much better phenotype in hypomorphs . To design such an inactive shaped ; nevertheless , they exhibited the terminal split - form , we followed previous studies on protein tyrosine ting phenotype ( Figure 1B ) . The splitting phenotype was phosphatases and the MKPs , in which the conserved also seen in bristles ( Figures 1E and 1F ) and lateral Cys residue in the catalytic pocket is replaced by Ser branches of the arista , which is the terminal segment ( Streulietal . , 1989 ; Guanetal . , 1991 ; Keyse , 1995 ; Figure of theantenna ( Figures1J and1K ) . Closerobservation of 2C ) . SSH ( wt ) expression rescued ssh mutants from both surfaces of wild - type bristles revealed parallel striation the lethality and the hair / bristle phenotype , whereas patterns , which are known to reflect alignments of actin SSH ( CS ) did not ( Figures 1C , 1D , 1H , and 1I ) . In wings bundles underneath pupal cuticles ( Figure 1E ; Overton , of the hypomorph examined , 89 hairs out of 392 ( n (cid:2) 1967 ; Tilney et al . , 1995 , 1996 ) . This pattern was dis - 4 ) showed the tip splitting ; this phenotype was recov - torted in mutant bristles ( Figure 1G ) . Compound eyes , ered by SSH ( wt ) expression ( 2 out of 401 ; n (cid:2) 4 ) , but which were derived from ssh clones , showed disorgani - not by SSH ( CS ) expression ( 101 out of 390 ; n (cid:2) 4 ) . zation of the regular ommatidia pattern and had lost Subcellular localization of SSH ( wt ) and that of SSH ( CS ) many interommatidial bristles ( Figures 1L – 1Q ) . were indistinguishable , and both proteins had the ability to bind F actin , as explained later . These results support SSH and Its Human Homologs Are Members our view that the catalytic activity of SSH is required for of a Phosphatase Family its in vivo roles . In the wild - type background , expression Our cDNA analysis predicted that ssh encodes a protein of either SSH ( wt ) or SSH ( CS ) by using da - GAL4 had no of 1045 amino acids ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . The SSH pro - effect on hair / bristle morphogenesis ( data not shown ) . tein had a phosphatase domain whose amino acid se - quences were distantly related to those of the family of ssh Function Is Required to Prevent Excessive MAP kinase phosphatases ( MKPs ; Figures 2B and 2C ; Actin Polymerization Keyse , 1995 ) . The protein made from our cDNA con - To study exactly how actin reorganization is affected struct comigrated with endogenous SSH ( Figure 2D ) , by ssh mutations , we stained ssh mutant clones with supporting that the cDNA spanned the entire open read - dye - conjugated phalliodin . Loss of ssh function caused ing frame . Three human homologs of ssh were identified a dramatic increase in the level of F actin in a cell - in the draft sequences , and our analysis of transcripts autonomous manner ( Figure 3 ) . We found this pheno - suggested that at least six different polypeptides would type in mutant clones in larval imaginal discs ( Figures be produced from these three loci ( Figure 2B ) . Two of 3A – 3F , 3N , and 3O ) , pupal wings ( Figures 3G – 3L ) , and the human proteins ( hSSHs ) , hSSH - 1L and hSSH2 , were follicle epithelia of the egg chamber ( Figure 3M ) . Along enzymatically active when reacted with an artificial sub - the apico - basal cell axis , overaccumulation of actin fila - strate , p - nitrophenyl phosphate ( pNPP ; Figure 2E ) . For ments was not necessarily restricted to the apical sub - unknownreasons , wehaddifficultiesindetectingpNPP - cellular region ; basolateral positions were also brightly hydrolyzing activity of SSH ( data not shown ) ; neverthe - stained ( Figures 3D – 3F ) . At 30 – 36 hr after puparium for - less , we showed that SSH dephosphorylated P cofilin , mation ( h APF ) at 25 (cid:3) C , each epidermal cell in the wing which we considered to be a bona fide substrate , as explained later . hSSH3 did not exhibit any activity to - localizes an assembly of actin bundles to its distal - most Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 235 Figure 1 . Morphological Defects of Actin - Based Cellular Extensions ( A – D ) Wing hairs observed with a scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) . ( A ) The broken line indicates a border between a clone ( above the line ) for a null allele ssh 1 - 11 and wild - type cells . Wing hairs made by the ssh null cells are much thicker than those of wild - type structures ; they are also twisted and often bifurcated at their tips ( arrow ) . ( B ) In an adult escaper homozygous for ssh 51 , wing hairs split near their distal tips ( arrow ) . ( C and D ) SSH ( wt ) expression rescued flies from the splitting phenotype in ssh 2 - 4 / ssh P01207 , whereas SSH ( CS ) expression did not ( arrows in D ) . ( E – I ) Sensory bristles on the notum . Wild - type straight bristles appear with striation patterns ( E ) . A bristle within a ssh 1 - 11 clone was distorted and showed the split - tip phenotype ( F ) and a disrupted striation pattern ( [ G ] , high - power image of [ F ] ) . As in ( C ) and ( D ) , the bristle phenotype was rescued by production of SSH ( wt ) ( H ) , but not by that of SSH ( CS ) ( I ) . ( J and K ) Arista , a terminal segment of the antenna , in a ssh 51 homozygote . The arista contains a central core ( CC ) and a series of lateral side branches ( L ) . These lateral branchesare formed from outgrowths of individual core cells ( He and Adler , 2001 ) . The boxed area inJ is highlighted in K , showing split laterals ( arrow ) , fine abnormal branches ( double arrows ) , and wavy distal tips ( arrowhead ) . ( L – Q ) A wild - type eye ( L and O ) and rough eyes that were made by a ssh 26 - 1 clone ( M and P ) or by a ssh P01207 clone ( N and Q ) . Scale bar equals 7 (cid:4) m for ( A ) – ( D ) , 20 (cid:4) m for ( E ) and ( F ) , 10 (cid:4) m for ( G ) – ( I ) , 70 (cid:4) m for ( J ) , 17 (cid:4) m for ( K ) , 200 (cid:4) m for ( L ) – ( N ) , and 10 (cid:4) m for ( O ) – ( Q ) . vertex , producing a single prehair in the wild - type cessive actin polymerization is caused by overproduc - tion of LIMKs or TESKs ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et ( Mitchell et al . , 1990 ) . Prehairs of the mutant cells were much more intensely stained with dye - conjugated phal - al . , 1998 ; Toshima et al . , 2001a , 2001b ) . Therefore , we examined the possibility that those kinases and the SSH liodin than those of normal cells , indicating that individ - ual mutant hairs contained more actin filaments ( Figures family share the same substrate , ADF / cofilin , and thus control the level of phospho - ADF / cofilin in vivo . 3J – 3L ) . ssh null cells seemed to show no obvious defect inproliferationorcell - celladhesionwhencomparedwith We addressed whether loss of ssh function increased thelevelofphosphorylated Drosophila cofilin ( PDcofilin ) cells in wild - type twin spots ( see also Figure 1A ) . in fly tissues . For this purpose , we first verified binding and specificity of anti - P cofilin antibody , which was orig - An Increase in the Phosho - Cofilin Level in ssh Clones and Genetic Interaction between ssh inally made against a phosphopeptide of mammalian cofilin ( Toshima et al . , 2001a ) , to P Dcofilin ( Figures 4A and the Drosophila LIM - Kinase Gene A dramatic increase in the F actin level is also reported and 4B ) . When ssh 1 – 11 clones were analyzed by staining or Western blotting with this anti - P cofilin antibody , the in twinstar ( tsr ) / cofilin clones ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) ; in cultured mammalian cells , ex - endogenous P Dcofilin level in ssh / ssh mutant cells was Cell236 Figure 2 . The SSH Family ( A ) Exon / intron organization of the ssh locus and genomic structures of mutant alleles are illustrated . Closed boxes indicate the open reading frame . Two arrows on the wild - type genome show positions of two independent transposon - insertions , ssh 26 - 1 and ssh P01207 , which are 429 bp and 245 bp upstream from the initiation codon , respectively . Deleted genomic regions or lengths of insertions in individual alleles are shown with allelenumbers . On the basisof lethal phasesand phenotypes eitherof clones or ofescaper adults , werecorded the alleleswith decreasing strength in the following series of allele numbers : 1 - 11 (cid:2) 1 - 63 (cid:2) 2 - 33 (cid:5) P01207 (cid:5) 26 - 1 (cid:5) 51 (cid:2) 39 (cid:5) 26 - 1 - 7 (cid:2) 1 - 9 (cid:2) 1 - 6 (cid:5) 2 - 4 . The null alleles , ssh 1 - 11 , ssh 1 - 63 , and ssh 2 - 33 ( as homozygotes or heteroallelic heterozygotes ) hatched but died at early larval stages , whereas hypomorphic alleles , except for the two P insertion alleles , gave rise to adult escapers . ( B ) Schematic representation of predicted polypeptides that are produced from ssh and three human genes . Percentages represent amino acid identities between each domain of SSH and that of a human molecule . Also indicated are total numbers of residues of individual proteins . ( C ) Multiple alignments of amino acid sequences within each of the three domains . Identical amino acid residues between SSH and the other proteins are shown in black boxes . The catalytic domains of the SSH family share an active site sequence HCxxGxxR ( asterisks ) of protein tyrosine phosphatases ( PTPases ) and dual - specificity phosphatases ( DSP ; Keyse , 1995 ) ; also aligned are sequences of two DSPs , human MKP - 1 / CL100 ( NP _ 004408 ) and Drosophila Puckered ( PUC , CAA11282 ) . Consensus sequences of the SSH family are HCKMGVSR , which are unique when compared to those of known PTPases and DSPs . Cys - 468 of SSH and equivalent Cys residues in hSSHs were replaced by Ser to construct catalytically inactive forms . Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 237 Figure 3 . Loss of ssh Function Caused a Prominent Increase in the Level of F Actin ( A – M ) Clones of cells homozygous for a ssh null allele , ssh 1 - 11 , were generated by the Flp - FRT technique . Tissues were imaged for GFP fluorescence to detect the ssh clones ( A , D , G , J , and green in M ) and for F actin ( B , E , H , K , and red in M ) . ( A – L ) Mutant clones in a wing imaginal disc ofathird - instarlarva ( A – F ) andinpupalwings [ ( G – I ) 30 hr after puparium formation ( h APF ) ; ( J – L ) 36 h APF ] . ( D ) – ( F ) are images of vertical sections . ( M ) A ssh 1 - 11 clone in the follicle epithelium of an egg chamber . ( C , F , I , L , and M ) Merged images . Clones of ssh mutant cells ( ssh / ssh ) are recognized by their absence of GFP fluo - rescence , whereas cells in its twin spot ( (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) have two copies of the GFP marker , and thus they emit stronger fluorescence than ssh / (cid:6) cells . ( N and O ) Phalliodin staining of eye imaginal discs in third - instar larvae . ( N ) Wild - type eye disc . ( O ) A large ssh P01207 clone was made as in Figures 1N and 1Q . Confocal images were collected and processed with identical pa - rameters for ( N ) and ( O ) . The scale bar equals 10 (cid:4) m for ( A ) – ( L ) , 15 (cid:4) m for ( M ) , and 80 (cid:4) m for ( N ) and ( O ) . significantly elevated compared with that in the sur - first expressed double - stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) of ssh sequences in dorsal cells of the wing , which phenoco - rounding ssh / (cid:6) and (cid:6) / (cid:6) wild - typecells ( Figures4D – 4F ) , whereas the total amount of cofilin was not altered ( Fig - pied a hypomorphic ssh condition through a phenome - noncalledRNAinterference ( RNAi ; Figure4J ; Kennerdell ure 4C ) . This result is consistent with the hypothesis that a physiological expression level of SSH is required and Carthew , 2000 ) . DLIMK production of its own , whether the wild - type form ( wt ) or a kinase - inactive form for dephosphorylating P Dcofilin in vivo . We also showed genetically that loss of ssh function ( KI ) , did not give detectable phenotypes under the ex - perimental conditions employed ( Figures 4G – 4I ; see de - and expression of Drosophila LIMK ( DLIMK ) exerted synergistic effects on wing hair morphogenesis and on tails in Experimental Procedures ) . The weak RNAi phe - notype of ssh was strongly enhanced by expression of the levels of F actin and P Dcofilin ( Figures 4G – 4O ) . We ( D ) Detection of endogenous SSH in Drosophila embryos . Extracts were made from embryos that overproduced HA - SSH ( left ) or from wild - type Oregon R embryos ( right ) . Following incubation with either a preimmune serum or an antibody to domain B , immunoprecipitated materials were run in gels and blotted with either anti - HA ( left ) or anti - C - terminal antibodies ( right ) . A band of 125 kDa was recovered from the wild - type lysate ( arrow on the right ) , which almost comigrated with the tagged protein ( arrowhead on the left ) . The amount of proteins in each lane was equivalent to (cid:1) 50 (cid:4) l embryos . ( E ) ( Top ) Wild - type forms ( wt ) and catalytically inactive forms ( CS ) of hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , and hSSH - 3 were assayed for pNPP - hydrolyzing activity . All forms were ( Myc (cid:6) His ) tagged . GFP was a negative control . Reactions were stopped at either 30 min ( left bars ) or 60 min ( right bars ) . ( Bottom ) Immunoprecipitates were blotted with an anti - Myc antibody , showing that amounts of wt forms and their CS counterparts were comparable . Cell238 Figure 4 . An Increase in the P Cofilin Level in ssh Clones and Genetic Interaction between ssh and the Drosophila LIM - Kinase Gene ( A – C ) Western blot analysis of exogenously expressed Drosophila cofilin / Twinstar ( Dcofi - lin ) in S2 cells ( A and B ) and endogenous one in eye imaginal discs ( C ) . ( A and B ) Binding and specificity of anti - P cofilin antibody to phospho - Dcofilin ( P Dcofilin ) . ( A ) His - Dcofilin was expressed in S2 cells , purified , run in two - dimensional gel electro - phoresis , and immunoblotted with anti - His antibody ( top ) and anti - P cofilin antibody ( bottom ) . ( B ) The purified Dcofilin was incubated with or without lambda phosphatase and immu - noblotted as in ( A ) . ( C ) Proteins were extracted from eye discs of the wild - type third instar larva ( wt ) and those consisting mostly of ssh 1 - 11 mutant cells . The total amount of Dcofilin ( top ) and the P Dcofi - lin level ( bottom ) were studied using an anti - body to the C - terminal of Dcofilin and anti - P cofilin antibody , respectively . In the lane of the mutant sample , most molecules comi - grated with those in wt ( arrow ) ; in addition , a slow migrating band was detected faintly ( arrowhead ) . Thisslow mobilityform presum - ably represents P Dcofilin . ssh clones were madeasinFigure3O . Theamountofproteins in each lane was equivalent to ten discs . ( D – F ) A ssh 1 - 11 clone in the pupal wing ( 30 hr APF ) was visualized by loss of GFP fluores - cence ( D ) and stained for P cofilin ( E ) . ( F ) Merged image . ( G – L ) SEM pictures of adult wing hairs . Using apterous - GAL4 , we expressed the following molecules in the wild - type background : GFP as a negative control ( G ) ; Drosophila LIMK ( DLIMK - wt , [ H ] ) ; its kinase - inactive form ( DLIMK - KI , [ I ] ) ; hairpin - type double - stranded RNA of ssh sequences ( ssh - dsRNA , [ J ] ) ; both ssh - dsRNA and DLIMK - wt ( K ) ; and both ssh - dsRNA and DLIMK - KI ( L ) . DLIMK - wt and DLIMK - KI were HA - tagged , and their expres - sion levels were comparable as shown by staining wing discs for the tag ( data not shown ) . ( M – O ) Phalloidin staining of pupal wings ( 30 hr APF ) that expressed ssh - dsRNA alone ( M ) , and those that coexpressed ssh - dsRNA and DLIMK - wt ( N and O ) . Images were collected and processed with identical parameters for ( M ) and ( N ) ; in ( O ) , a much lower gain was set to observe how actin filaments had accumulated . All the crosses were done at 17 (cid:3) C . The scale bar equals 15 (cid:4) m for ( D ) – ( F ) and ( M ) – ( O ) and 4 (cid:4) m for ( G ) – ( L ) . DLIMK - wt ( Figure 4K ) , but DLIMK - KI did not show this hSSH dephosphorylatesP cofilin , coexpression ofhSSH together with LIMKs or TESKs is expected to counter - enhancement ( Figure 4L ) . Similarly , drastic increases in F actin and P Dcofilin levels resulted from coexpression balance the promotion effect of those kinases on actin polymerization . To evaluate thedegree of actin polymer - of the dsRNA and DLIMK - wt ( Figures 4M and 4N , data of P Dcofilin not shown ) . In those cells , unusually thick ization , we classified F actin patterns into three catego - ries ( Figures 5A – 5D , see details in the legend ) . In control actin bundles were observed when images were col - lected with a low gain ( Figure 4O ) . Cells on ventral sur - cells expressing GFP alone , strong F actin signals were seen infrequently and most of the cells were scored as faces were not affected , where the transgene was silent ( data not shown ) . class 3 ( Figures 5D and 5E ) , whereas LIMK1 or TESK1 expression made classes 1 and 2 dominant ( Figures 5A – 5C and 5E ) . Coexpression of hSSH - 1L ( wt ) or hSSH - hSSH Suppressed LIMK1 - or TESK1 - Induced Actin Reorganization 2 ( wt ) with either kinase restored class 3 to a dominant category ( Figures 5E and 5F – 5I ) ; however , the CS forms In addition to experiments using Drosophila , we also took the approach of transfecting mammalian cell lines failed to counteract the kinases ( Figures 5E and 5J – 5M ) . These results support that the hSSH phosphatase activ - with hSSH plasmids to test the following hypothesis : if Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 239 Figure 5 . hSSH - 1L and hSSH - 2 Suppressed LIMK1 - or TESK1 - Induced Actin Reorganization ( A – D ) Classification of patterns of LIMK1 - or TESK1 - induced actin reorganization . HeLa cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding either HA - tagged LIMK1 or TESK1 and then stained for F actin and the tag . F actin patterns of kinase - expressing cells ( arrowheads ) fell into three categories : class 1 , a punctate appearance ( A ) ; class 2 , strong signals at the cell periphery and / or in the cytoplasm ( B and C ) ; and class 3 , no detectable change compared with nontransfected cells ( D ) . ( A ) – ( D ) are examples of cells that expressed LIMK1 . ( E ) Quantitative analysis of F actin patterns . F actin patterns were examined in cells that produced either GFP ( a negative control ) , the kinase ( LIMK1 or TESK1 ) , hSSH , or both the kinase and hSSH . LIMK1 ( T508EE ) represents a phosphomimetic form of LIMK1 . The images were scored blind by two people , and data of three separate experiments were summed up and displayed ( n (cid:5) 200 ) . ( F – M ) Cells expressing LIMK1 and hSSH - 1L ( wt ) ( F – I ) , and those expressing LIMK1 and hSSH - 1L ( CS ) ( J – M ) . Cells were stained for HA - LIMK1 ( F and J ) , ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - hSSH - 1L ( G and K ) , and F actin ( H and L ) . hSSH - 1L ( wt ) expression inhibited actin reorganization induced by LIMK1 ( compare arrow and arrowhead in [ F ] – [ I ] ) . In contrast , coexpression of hSSH - 1L ( CS ) and LIMK1 evoked a robust actin reorganization ( arrow in [ J ] – [ M ] ) . ( I and M ) Merged images of hSSH - 1L distributions and F actin patterns . The scale bar equals 30 (cid:4) m for ( A ) – ( D ) and 20 (cid:4) m for ( F ) – ( M ) . Cell240 ityinhibited LIMK1 - orTESK1 - dependent actinreorgani - strates , which contained phosphorylated forms , were subject to in vitro reactions . Each wild - type form of the zation . hSSHs or SSH dephosphorylated P cofilin , but the CS The above results of the coexpression could be ex - forms did not ( Figures 6D and 6E ) , supporting that cofilin plained by our hypothesis that P cofilin is a direct target is a substrate of hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , and SSH . In our cell - of the hSSHs ; however , another interpretation is also free assay , 90 % of P cofilin was dephosphorylated by possible . The kinase activity of LIMK1 is enhanced by SSH after 15 min reaction ( Figure 6F ) . phosphorylation at Thr - 508 ( Ohashi et al . , 2000b ) ; there - Under our experimental conditions , hSSH - 2 was re - fore , the hSSHs might have dephosphorylated LIMK1 producibly less active than hSSH - 1L ( Figure 6D ) . When and made it less active . This second hypothesis was comparable amounts of hSSH - 1L ( wt ) and hSSH - 2 ( wt ) less likely because of the result obtained when we used were reacted with the same amount of P cofilin , over a phosphomimetic form of LIMK1 , LIMK1 ( T508EE ) . 99 % of the substrate was dephosphorylated by hSSH - LIMK1 ( T508EE ) , which is no longer phosphorylated 1L ( wt ) , whereas only 60 % was by hSSH - 2 ( wt ) . ADF ( also at the residue of 508 , induced actin polymerization ; called destrin ) is a close relative of cofilin in the verte - nevertheless , hSSH - 1L was still able to counteract brate ADF / cofilin family and is also phosphorylated at LIMK1 ( T508EE ) as it did LIMK1 ( wt ) , as shown in Ser - 3 by LIMKs and TESKs ( Amano et al . , 2001 ; Toshima Figure 5E . et al . , 2001a ) ; we showed that hSSH - 1L dephosphory - We found that coexpression of hSSH - 1L ( CS ) with lated phospho - ADF as well ( Figure 6G ) . LIMK1 evoked robust assembly of actin filaments in a We attempted to exclude the possibility that cofilin , way that was hardly induced by LIMK1 expression alone isolated from cultured cells , was contaminated by some ( Figures 5J – 5M ) . When compared to F actin patterns in endogenous phosphatase that is unrelated to the SSH LIMK1 - expressing cells ( Figures 5A – 5C ) , it looked as if family . For this purpose , we prepared cofilin that had almost all actin filaments in the coexpressing cell were been made in E . coli and 32 P - labeled by LIMK1 as a assembled to build a limited number of thick bundles substrate . Dephosphorylation reactions were monitored ( arrow in Figure 5L ) . These F - actin patterns were by autoradiography , and we confirmed the enzymatic counted as class 2 in Figure 5E . These unusual struc - activity of hSSH - 1L toward 32 P - labeled cofilin ( Figure 6H ) . tures were also induced by expressing hSSH - 1L ( CS ) Ser / Thr phosphatases PP1 and PP2A were shown to alone , but not at all by expressing the wild - type form . dephosphorylate P cofilin in vitro ( Ambach et al . , 2000 ) ; This abnormal assembly of the filaments was reminis - therefore , we compared pharmacological features of cent of the consequence of coexpression of ssh - dsRNA hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , and SSH with those of PP1 and PP2A and DLIMK in Drosophila epidermal cells ( Figure 4K ) , ( Figures 6D and 6E ) . The activities of the SSH family suggestingthepossibilitythathSSH - 1L ( CS ) overexpres - members were not inhibited in the presence of 1 (cid:4) M sion exerted a dominant - negative effect . hSSH - 2 ( CS ) okadaic acid or 1 (cid:4) M calyculin A , each of which inhibited also tended to induce actin reorganization , as shown PP1 and PP2A almost completely , as previously estab - by a slight expansion of the class 2 population when lished ( Cohen , 1990 ) . Sodium vanadate has a broad compared with the effect of its wild - type expression ( Fig - specificity toward tyrosine and dual - specific phospha - ure 5E ) ; however , unlike hSSH - 1L ( CS ) , hSSH - 2 ( CS ) could tases , and a 1 mM concentration of it blocked the activi - not generate the thick actin bundles ( data not shown ) . ties of the SSH members . hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , and SSH Dephosphorylated F Actin Binding Property of the SSH Family P Cofilin in Cultured Cells In our transfection experiment in Figure 5 , we found that A straightforward prediction of the above results would hSSH - 1L ( CS ) were predominantly colocalized with F ac - be that expression of hSSH - 1L ( wt ) , hSSH - 2 ( wt ) , or tin ( Figures 5K – 5M ) . This result prompted us to investi - SSH ( wt ) reduces the P ADF / cofilin level in cells . This gate whether hSSHs and SSH had the property of bind - was indeed found to be the case ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . ing F actin . Tagged hSSHs and SSH were incubated Expression ofhSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , or SSH causeda prom - with actin filaments and centrifuged to examine whether inent decrease in the level of P cofilin or P Dcofilin ; in each of them cosedimented with F actin or not ( Fig - contrast , hSSH - 3 ( wt ) expressionwasineffective . Neither ure 7A ) . Both wild - type and CS forms of hSSH - 1L and CS forms nor MKP - 5 , which shows a limited sequence SSH preferentially cosedimented with actin filaments , similarity to the catalytic domain of the SSH family , was whereas hSSH - 2 ( wt ) , hSSH - 2 ( CS ) , and hSSH - 3 ( wt ) ex - able to decrease the P cofilin level ( Figure 6A ) . Comple - hibited weaker binding capabilities . A fraction of hSSH - mentary experiments indicated that hSSH - 1L was un - 3 ( CS ) precipitated in the absence of actin filaments ; able to dephosphorylate p38 (cid:7) and JNK2 , which are effi - thus , whether hSSH - 3 ( CS ) binds F actin or not was diffi - ciently inactivated by MKP - 5 ( Figure 6C ; data of JNK2 cult to address with this method . Consistent with the not shown ; Tanoue et al . , 1999 ) . These results suggest result of the cosedimentation assay , SSH ( wt ) and that the SSH family displays distinct substrate specific - SSH ( CS ) appeared to colocalize with cortical actin in ity from the MKP family . wing epithelia at 30 h APF ( Figures 7B – 7D , data of SSH ( CS ) not shown ) . Dephosphorylation of P Cofilin by the SSH Family in Cell - Free Systems Discussion Whether hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , andSSH dephosphorylateP cofilin was directly assayed in cell - free systems ( Figures SSH , hSSH - 1L , and hSSH - 2 Are Most Likely 6D – 6F ) . The hSSHs and cofilin were expressed in COS - 7 Cofilin Phosphatases cells ; SSH and Dcofilin were expressed in S2 cells . The Drosophila Slingshot ( SSH ) belongs to a family of phos - phatases . Our studies using the whole animal and cell immunoprecipitated enzymes and the purified sub - Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 241 Figure 6 . hSSH - 1 , hSSH - 2 , and SSH Dephosphorylated P Cofilin in Cells and in Cell - Free Assays ( A – C ) Cell transfection experiments . ( A and B ) hSSH or SSH expression reduced the level of P cofilin in COS7 or S2 cells . ( A ) COS7 cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding one of ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - hSSH forms or 3xMyc - MKP - 5 . The cells were lysed and analyzed by immunoblotting for P cofilin , both phospho - and nonphospho - cofilin , and hSSHs or MKP - 5 . ( B ) His - Dcofilin was expressed in S2 cells with or without HA - SSH . Dcofilin was precipitated and analyzed by immunoblotting to detect P Dcofilin and Dcofilin . Aliquots of the cell lysates were blotted to monitor SSH expression . ( C ) COS7 cells were transfected with HA - p38 (cid:7) with or without hSSH - 1L or MKP - 5 and then stimulated by 0 . 5 M NaCl for 20 min to activate p38 (cid:7) . Cell lysates were immunoblotted to detect phospho - p38 (cid:7) ( p - p38 (cid:7) ) , p38 (cid:7) , and hSSH - 1L or MKP - 5 . MKP - 5 dephosphorylated p38 (cid:7) , but hSSH - 1L did not . ( D – H ) Cell - free assays to monitor dephosphorylation of P cofilin or phospho - ADF ( P ADF ) . ( D ) Purified His - cofilin was reacted with the immunoprecipitated ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - hSSH and then analyzed with anti - P cofilin antibody and with anti - His antibody to confirm comparable amounts of cofilin and hSSH in the reactions . Reactions were performed in the presence or absence of each of the following phosphatase inhibitors : okadaic acid ( okada , 1 (cid:4) M ) , calyculin A ( CA , 1 (cid:4) M ) , and sodium vanadate ( vana , 1 mM ) . ( E ) Purified His - Dcofilin was reacted with HA - SSH , and the reactions were analyzed essentially as in ( D ) . ( F ) The purified Dcofilin was incubated with SSH ( wt ) , SSH ( CS ) , or GFP for the indicated minutes and analyzed as in ( E ) . The band intensity was measured , and the ratio of P Dcofilin to the total amount of Dcofilin was plotted against the reaction time , with the ratio at zero time taken as 100 % . ( G ) Purified His - ADF was reacted with hSSH - 1L , and its dephosphorylation was monitored with anti - P cofilin antibody , which also binds to P ADF ( Toshima et al . , 2001a ) . ( H ) Recombinant His - cofilin , which was made in E . coli and phosphorylated by LIMK1 in vitro , was reacted with hSSH - 1L and then analyzed by autoradiography ( top ) and immunoblotting ( bottom ) . In the autoradiograph are indicated relative values of [ 32 P ] cofilin band intensity with the level in the reaction without hSSH - 1L taken as 100 . Cell242 Figure 7 . Actin Binding Properties of hSSHs and SSH ( A ) ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - hSSHs and - SSH , which were expressed in COS - 7 cells , were incubated with actin filaments and centrifuged to study whether each SSH family member cosedimented with F actin or not . Abbreviations are as follows : P , pellet ; S , supernatant ; (cid:6) and (cid:8) indicate whether individual SSH family member was incubated with or without F actin , respectively . Actin was visualized by amido black staining . BSA did not coprecipitated with F actin ( a negative control ) . ( B – D ) HA - SSH ( wt ) was expressed by using sca - GAL4 . Pupae were fixed at 30 hr APF and stained for the HA tag ( B ) and F actin ( C ) . ( D ) Merged image . The scale bar equals 10 (cid:4) m ( B – D ) . lines demonstrated that SSH and two human homologs totally inhibits PP1 and PP2A . Finally , we prepared cofi - lin , which was made in E . coli and phosphorylated by ( hSSH - 1L and - 2 ) prevented excessive actin polymeriza - tion and that those SSH family members reduced the P LIMK1invitro , andreproducedthephosphataseactivity . It is difficult to completely rule out that the in vitro activi - cofilin level in cells . We also showed in cell - free assays that SSH and the hSSHs possessed the activities of ties we measured were derived from some other phos - phatases that were coimmunoprecipitated with SSH or dephosphorylating cofilin efficiently and binding to actin filaments . All of our results are consistent with the hy - hSSHs . However , if such enzymes should exist , they would associate only with the wild - type forms and not pothesis that SSH and the hSSHs control reorganization of actin cytoskeleton by reactivating cofilin . Both the with the CS forms ; alternatively , those coprecipitated enzymes would be dephosphorylated and activated by cofilin - phosphatase activity and the F actin binding abil - ity of hSSH - 2 were weaker than those of hSSH - 1L under the wild - type SSH or hSSHs . In genomes of S . cerevisiae , C . elegans , and Arabi - our experimental conditions . Extensive domain - swap - ping between hSSH - 1L and - 2 may answer if the two dopsis , we have found no ortholog of LIMK , TESK , and SSH encoded , although cofilin in any of these species activities are related to each other . In most of our cell - free assays , we prepared the sub - has a Ser - 3 or equivalent serine residue . This is sugges - tiveofamodelin whichtheactin - depolymerizingactivity strate and the SSH - family members by expressing tagged molecules in cultured cells and subsequent pre - of cofilin in those species may be regulated in vivo by a set of enzymes structurally distinct from LIMK , TESK , cipitation . It might be a concern that our preparations werecontaminatedbyanendogenousphosphatasethat and SSH . Alternatively , the activity may not be regulated by the serine phosphorylation , but by other means such is unrelated to the SSH family . We consider the possibil - ity that the substrate was contaminated unlikely for the as PIP2 binding or intracellular pH changes . The latter possibility is supported in S . cerevisiae and D . dis - following reasons . First , the cofilin phosphatase activity was detected when we exogenously added immunopre - coideum by the report that P cofilin was not detected in vegetatively growing cells ( Yahara et al . , 1996 ) . cipitates of the wild - type forms of the SSH family , but not when we added those of the CS mutants . Second , although PP1 and PP2A are reported to form physical Roles of SSH in Epithelial Cells Our analysis on ssh mutants showed that a critical role complexes with cofilin in T lymphoma cell lines ( Ambach et al . , 2000 ) , the activities we detected were resistant of SSH is in building wing hair , bristle , and arista , pre - sumably through reactivating P cofilin . These cellular to a dose of okadaic acid or calyculin A that almost Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 243 extensions in insects share a number of structural fea - of Pto non - P ADF / cofilin . Instead , what may becrucial is the turnover rate of the P ADF / cofilin pools or differential tures with those found throughout the animal kingdom , such as the brush border of intestinal epithelial cell ( Bar - distributions of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation spots within cells ( Meberg et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . tles , 2000 ; DeRosier and Tilney , 2000 ) . Formation of all those protrusions on apical cell surfaces requires pack - Our studies raise an obvious question to be addressed , that is , whether the SSH family is involved in the above ing of parallel filaments through actin - bundling proteins . Therefore , thickening and / or splitting phenotypes in ssh stimuli - driven actin reorganizations . It is thus necessary to explore whether the activity of the SSH family is regu - mutants are most likely due to overaccumulated fila - ments that were not arranged in a normal array . SSH lated in response to the stimuli , and if so , to determine the components of such regulatory mechanisms . did not appear to be required for cell proliferation or viability , which provides a contrast to an effect of loss Experimental Procedures of a generic enzyme PP1 or PP2A ( Axton et al . , 1990 ; Wassarman et al . , 1996 ) . All these results are consistent Molecular Cloning with our hypothesis that cofilin is the major substrate Full - length ssh cDNA ( GenBank accession number AB036834 ) was of SSH and that SSH does not display broad substrate constructed by screening embryonic cDNA libraries by using specificity . LD17262 ( Rubin et al . , 2000 ; purchased from Genome Systems ) as a probe , and also by 5 (cid:9) - RACE - PCR , using embryonic cDNA as a It is worth noting that mutations of some other loci template . Transcriptsof4 . 5kbweredetectedinembryonicpoly ( A ) (cid:6) - caused phenotypes similar to or reminiscent of those RNAbyNorthernblotanalysis . Toinactivate ssh byRNAi ( Kennerdell of ssh and twinstar ( tsr ) / cofilin . In act up ( acu ) / caplet and Carthew , 2000 ) , we designed a hairpin - type double - stranded ( capt ) clones in imaginal discs and follicle cells , the level RNA ( dsRNA ) , in which 0 . 7 kb antisense and sense strands ( nucleo - of actin filaments is elevated as in ssh clones , and bristle tides 623 – 1353 ) were connected by 0 . 7 kb GFP sequences . For malformation is described ( Baum et al . , 2000 ; Benlali et expression in Drosophila and S2 cells , inserted into pUAST ( Brand and Perrimon , 1993 ) were cDNA for HA - SSH ( wt ) or SSH ( CS ) , the al . , 2000 ) . acu / capt encodes cyclase - associated protein ssh - dsRNA construct , HA - tagged Drosophila LIM - kinase cDNA ( CAP ) , and CAP limits filament formation catalyzed by ( Ohashi et al . , 2000a ) , and ( His ) 6 - Drosophila cofilin cDNA ( Ohashi Ena at apical cell junctions ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) . et al . , 2000a ) . Exon / intron organization of ssh was determined by The splitting or branching of wing hair , bristle , and arista comparing cDNA and genomic sequences of our own as well as is caused by loss of tricornered ( trc ) or furry ( fry ) ( Geng those of the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project ( BDGP ; Adams et al . , 2000 ; Cong et al . , 2001 ) . The TRC protein is an et al . , 2000 ) . Genomic organization of ssh alleles was characterized by PCR using a pair of primers ( nucleotides 8 – 31 and 4220 – 4242 ) . evolutionally conserved kinase ; FRY is also conserved A plasmid of UAS - GFP . RN3 was previously described ( Usui et al . , amongspecies , butitsbiochemicalfunctionisunknown . 1999 ) . Itwouldbeintriguingtoexplorewhether trc or fry pheno - Human ssh homologswereidentifiedinthedraftsequenceofBAC types are associated with altered levels of actin fila - clones , NT _ 009660 ( chromosome12 ) , NT _ 010808 ( chromosome17 ) , ments and P cofilin . and NT _ 008940 ( chromosome 11 ) . Open reading frames were pre - Our current studies did not focus on pursuing whether dicted on the basis of sequences of RACE - PCR - amplified cDNA clones and of the following EST clones ( purchased from Research or not SSH regulates cofilin functions in cell behaviors Genetics ) : BG479594 and BG397630 for hSSH - 1L and - 1S , respec - other than epithelial cell morphogenesis . For example , tively ; AA344694 for hSSH - 1B ; AI272231 for hSSH - 2 ; AW247270 one of important functions of ADF / cofilin is the dynamic for hSSH - 2A ; and AA368162 for hSSH - 3 . Using the expression vec - regulation of the cortical ring at the cleavage furrow to tor pcDNA3 . 1 / Myc - His ( (cid:6) ) ( Invitrogen ) , we made constructs of complete cytokinesis ( Nagaoka et al . , 1995 ; Abe et al . , ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - tagged versions of hSSH - 1L , hSSH - 2 , hSSH3 , and SSH . 1996 ) . During ana / telophase in tsr mutants , aberrantly Plasmids coding for mammalian cofilin / ADF and the kinases are as follows : mouse cofilin ( Moriyama et al . , 1996 ) , human ADF ( Toshima large actin - based structures appear at the site of con - etal . , 2001a ) , ratTESK1 ( Toshimaetal . , 1999 ) , humanLIMK1 ( Ohashi tractile ring formation and fail to disassemble at the et al . , 2000b ) , and LIMK1 ( T508EE ) ( Ohashi et al . , 2000b ) . Plasmids end of telophase ( Gunsalus et al . , 1995 ) . The apparent used to express Myc - MKP - 5 and HA - p38 (cid:7) were as described ( Ta - dispensability of SSH in mitosis in the wing could be noue et al . , 1999 ) . GenBank accession numbers for nucleotide se - explained by the possibility that only a small fraction of quences of cDNA clones are AB072355 ( hSSH - 1L ) , AB072356 active cofilin molecules are required for dynamics of ( hSSH - 1S ) , AB072357 ( hSSH - 1B ) , AB072358 ( hSSH - 2 ) , AB072359 ( hSSH - 2A ) , and AB072360 ( hSSH - 3 ) . the contractile ring and / or that a cofilin - phosphatase ( s ) other than SSH is responsible for the progression of Drosophila Strains cytokinesis . Baculovirus p35 is an inhibitor of caspases and its expression in Drosophila suppresses apoptosis ( Hay et al . , 1994 ) . p35 expression Is the SSH Family Involved in Stimuli - Driven in wing discs increased the number of bristles in the scutellum , and those supernumerary bristles were often malformed . In our search Actin Reorganization ? for genetic modifiers of this p35 - induced phenotype , we isolated In response to extracellular stimuli , some cells are l ( 3 ) 01207 , which had been generated by the BDGP ( Spradling et al . , known to undergo rapid dephosphorylation of ADF / cofi - 1995 , 1999 ) and has one copy of PZ inserted into ssh at band 96B of lin ( Moon and Drubin , 1995 ) ; all of these stimuli result the third chromosome . l ( 3 ) 01207 was provided by the Bloomington in cytoskeletal reorganization , possibly by way of reacti - Stock Center , and it was cleaned up by crossing ry through five vation of ADF / cofilin . During semaphorin - 3A ( Sema - 3A ) - generations to segregate out background mutations . As a result , it turned out that the modifier was not linked to the PZ insertion . We induced growth cone collapse , a rapid increase and renamed this PZ - insertion allele ssh P01207 . One of our p [ UAS - ssh ] subsequent decrease in P cofilin occurred in growth transgeniclinesdidnotcomplementthelethalityof ssh P01207 , indicat - cones within 5 min after exposure to Sema - 3A ( Aizawa ing that the transgene was inserted into the ssh locus in that line ; et al . , 2001 ) . This supports a mechanism of local and it was designated as ssh 26 - 1 . By remobilizing each transposon by transient regulation of phosphorylation - dephosphoryla - (cid:10) 2 - 3 ( Robertson et al . , 1988 ) , precise and imprecise jumpers were tion cycling . In some systems , stimulation of cortical made from ssh P01207 and ssh 26 - 1 . Transgenes were expressed by using the GAL4 - UAS system actin dynamics occurs without a net change in the ratio Cell244 ( Brand and Perrimon , 1993 ) , such as apterous ( ap ) - GAL4 ( Lu et al . , lysate were loaded into one lane . Employed antibodies were anti - cofilin antibody , MAB - 22 ( Abe et al . , 1989 ) , anti - P cofilin antibody 1999 ) , daughterless ( da ) - GAL4 ( Wodarz et al . , 1995 ) , and scabrous ( sca ) - GAL4 ( Klaes et al . , 1994 ) . Drosophila embryos of OregonR and ( Toshima et al . , 2001a ) , anti - His antibody ( Qiagen or MBL ) , anti - phospho - p38 antibody ( NEB ) , or anti - HA antibody , 16B12 ( BAbCO ) . p [ da - Gal4 ] / p [ UAS - ssh ] were homogenized in TBS containing 1 % NP - 40 and 1 % Triton X - 100 and used for immunoprecipitating en - Signals were detected with ECL or ECL plus ( Amersham ) , and band intensity was measured by using Image Gauge ( Fuji Film ) or Fluor - S dogenousandoverproducedSSH , respectively . Lethalityandvisible phenotypes were rescued in animals of p [ da - Gal4 ] ssh 26 - 1 / p [ UAS - MultiImager ( BioRad ) . N - terminal acetylation of cofilin is required for binding of the anti - P cofilin antibody ; thus , this antibody does ssh ] ssh P01207 andp [ da - Gal4 ] ssh 2 - 4 / p [ UAS - ssh ] ssh P01207 , respectively . ssh clonesweremadewiththe Flp - FRT system . Relevantgenotypes not recognize cofilin that is made in E . coli and phosphorylated by LIMK1 in vitro . were hsp - 70 - flp / (cid:6) ; p [ FRT ] 82B ssh / p [ FRT ] 82B p [ hs - GFP ] ( Xu and Rubin , 1993 ; Jiang and Struhl , 1998 ) and eyFLP / (cid:6) ; p [ FRT ] 82B ssh / p [ FRT ] 82B Minute ( Newsome et al . , 2000 ) . Drosophila was usually Cosedimentation Assay grownat25 (cid:3) CexceptforcrossestoexpressDLIMK ( Figure4 ) , which Purified rabbit muscle actin ( Sigma ) was polymerized in F buffer ( 50 were done at 17 (cid:3) C . DLIMK ( wt ) expression using ap - GAL4 caused mM Tris - HCl [ pH 6 . 8 ] , 100 mM NaCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 2 lethality at 25 (cid:3) C . mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 ) . ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - SSH and - hSSHs , expressed in COS - 7 cells in a 100 mm dish , were purified by using Ni - NTA agarose , eluted in 15 (cid:4) l of the imidazole elution buffer , and then Transfection of Cultured Cells centrifugedat100 , 000 (cid:11) gfor10mintoremoveaggregates . Cosedi - HeLa , COS - 7 , and S2 cells were transfected with plasmids by using mentation assay was performed by addition of 6 (cid:4) l of SSH eluate Effectene Transfection Reagent ( Qiagen ) or LipofectAMINE2000 re - to 60 (cid:4) l of F buffer containing 10 (cid:4) M F actin and 0 . 1 mg / ml BSA . agent ( Lifetech ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Dro - After incubation for 60 min at 20 (cid:3) C , the mixture was centrifuged at sophila cofilinandSSHwereexpressedinS2cellsbycotransfecting 100 , 000 (cid:11) g for 30 min . The pellet was rinsed once with F buffer . the cells with actin5C - Gal4 ( a gift from Yasushi Hiromi ) and the Both supernatant and pellet were dissolved in an equivalent volume appropriate pUAST construct . Cells were either fixed for staining at of SDS sample buffer and analyzed by 9 % SDS - PAGE . 36 hr or solubilized at 48 hr after transfection . Histological Analyses Phosphatase Assays Procedures for immunostaining of HeLa cells were essentially as Cell lysates were made in lysis buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES described ( Toshima et al . , 2001a ) . Drosophila tissues were fixed in ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 2 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % NP - 40 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 3 . 7 % formaldehyde / PBS at room temperature for 20 min or at 4 (cid:3) C 10 % glycerol , and Complete - mini EDTA - free ( Roche Diagnostics ) . overnight and stained with Alexa 594 - conjugated phalliodin ( Molec - His - cofilin was purified through binding to Ni - NTA agarose ( Qiagen ) ularProbes ) , purifiedanti - Pcofilinantibody , and / oranti - tagantibod - and subsequent elution with imidazole elution buffer ( 500 mM imid - ies . Images were collected by using confocal microscopes ( BioRad azole [ pH 7 . 5 ] , 1 mM DTT , and 0 . 1 mg / ml BSA ) . HA - SSH and and Zeiss ) . Adult flies were dehydrated in isoamyl alcohol , dried ( Myc (cid:6) His ) - hSSH were precipitated by using anti - HA ( Y - 11 , Santa using a critical point drier , and observed with a scanning electron Cruz ) and anti - Myc ( 9E10 , Santa Cruz ) or Ni - NTA agarose , respec - microscope ( SEM ) 5800LV ( JEOL ) . Alternatively , flies were quickly tively , and suspended in dephosphorylation reaction buffer ( 50 mM frozen in liquid nitrogen and observed with another SEM XL30 imidazole [ pH 7 . 5 ] for SSH or 50 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 4 ] for hSSH , both ( Philips ) . containing 1 mM DTT , and 0 . 1 mg / ml BSA ) . Each reaction mixture in Figures 6D and 6G consisted of (cid:1) 1 / Acknowledgments 5 – 1 / 3 of the total hSSH precipitate prepared from COS - 7 cells in a 100 mm dish and 1 / 100 of mouse cofilin or human ADF produced We thank H . Ando , H . Oda , M . Sone , K . Takeyasu , J . C . Yasuhara , on the same culture scale . Each reaction in Figure 6E included 1 / 2 and Y . Nabeshima for allowing R . N . to perform microinjection in of the total SSH immunoprecipitate from S2 cells in a 60 mm dish theirlaboratory ; S . Ishiguro , N . Matsumoto , K . K . Shimizu , R . Tsugeki , and1 / 10ofthetotal Drosophila cofilinproducedonthesameculture Y . Machida , and K . Okada for use of their scanning electron micro - scale . Each reaction was performed in 30 (cid:4) l at 25 (cid:3) C for SSH or at scope ; and H . Kazama and S . Yohehara for use of their microplate 30 (cid:3) C for hSSH for 2 hr except for those in Figure 6F . 32 P - labeled reader . We are also grateful to B . A . Hay , Y . Hiromi , T . Obinata , T . cofilin , used in Figure 6H , was prepared as previously reported Tabata , the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project , the Bloomington ( Toshima et al . , 2001a ) and reacted with the hSSH precipitate ; the StockCenter , andtheGeneticStockResearchCenterattheNational radioactivitywasmeasuredusingBAS1800Bio - imageAnalyzer ( Fuji Institute of Genetics for reagents . We acknowledge the Human Ge - Film ) . The purified Dcofilin was reacted with or without 200 units nomeCenterattheInstituteofMedicalSciencesofTokyoUniversity of lambda protein phosphatase ( NEB ) in a buffer supplied by the for use of its databases . Finally , we thank very much M . Adachi , T . manufacturer . Okadaic acid and Calyculin A were purchased from Fukuhara , K . Ohashi , T . Tanoue , S . H . Yoshimura , and E . Nishida for Calbiochem and Sigma , respectively . technical advice and encouragement . This work was supported by For measurement of the pNPP - hydrolyzing activity of individual grants to T . U . from Toray Foundation ( Japan ) for the Promotion molecules ( Figure 2E ) , each immunoprecipitate obtained with anti - of Science and from Core Research for Evolutional Science and Myc was suspended in 200 (cid:4) l of 25 mM sodium acetate ( pH 5 . 0 ) , Technology . R . N . and K . N . - O . are recipients of a Fellowship of the 10 mM pNPP , 1 mM DTT , and 20 % glycerol . Reactions were per - Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for Junior Scientists . formed at 30 (cid:3) C for 30 min or 60 min and stopped by adding NaOH ; pNPP hydrolyzed was measured by absorbance at 405 nm with a Received October 12 , 2001 ; revised December 19 , 2001 . microplate reader ( Wallac ) . References Antibodies and Western Blot Analysis Antibodies to SSH were rabbit antisera against a synthetic peptide Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , and Obinata , T . ( 1989 ) . A cofilin - like protein ( residues 276 – 295 within domain B ) and rat antisera to a fusion is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in developing skeletal proteincontainingtheCterminus ( residues586 – 1045 ) . Anti - Dcofilin / muscle . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) 106 , 696 – 702 . Twinstar antibody was raised against a C - terminal peptide CREAVE Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1996 ) . EKLRATDRQ . To monitor the level of phospho - cofilin ( P cofilin ) or Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilin : a phosphoryla - - ADF in COS - 7 cells , we solubilized hSSH - expressing cells in the tion - regulated protein essential for development . J . Cell Biol . 132 , lysis buffer described in “Phosphatase Assays” and placed the ly - 871 – 885 . sates on ice for 30 min . Then , the lysates were boiled in the sample solution for SDS - PAGE , separated on 7 . 5 % or 15 % gels , and trans - Adams , M . D . , Celniker , S . E . , Holt , R . A . , Evans , C . A . , Gocayne , J . D . , Amanatides , P . G . , Scherer , S . E . , Li , P . W . , Hoskins , R . A . , Galle , R . F . , ferred to PVDF ( for blotting cofilin or ADF ) or nitrocellulose mem - brane . Typically , a 1 ml lysate was made from COS - 7 cells that were et al . ( 2000 ) . The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster . Science 287 , 2185 – 2195 . grown in a 100 mm dish and proteins equivalent to 15 (cid:4) l of the Dephosphorylation of ADF / Cofilin by Slingshot 245 Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . , andBamburg , J . R . ( 1995 ) . Reactivation Geng , W . , He , B . , Wang , M . , and Adler , P . N . ( 2000 ) . The tricornered gene , whichisrequiredfortheintegrityofepidermalcellextensions , of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identification of the regulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17582 – 17587 . encodesthe Drosophila nuclear DBF2 - relatedkinase . Genetics 156 , 1817 – 1828 . Aizawa , H . , Wakatsuki , S . , Ishii , A . , Moriyama , K . , Sasaki , Y . , Ohashi , K . , Sekine - Aizawa , Y . , Sehara - Fujisawa , A . , Mizuno , K . , Goshima , Guan , K . L . , Broyles , S . S . , and Dixon , J . E . ( 1991 ) . A Tyr / Ser protein Y . , and Yahara , I . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase phosphatase encoded by vaccinia virus . Nature 350 , 359 – 362 . is necessaryfor semaphorin 3A - induced growthcone collapse . Nat . Gunsalus , K . C . , Bonaccorsi , S . , Williams , E . , Verni , F . , Gatti , M . , and Neurosci . 4 , 367 – 373 . Goldberg , M . L . ( 1995 ) . Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila gene Amano , T . , Tanabe , K . , Eto , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . encoding a cofilin / ADF homologue , result in defects in centrosome LIM - kinase2inducesformationofstressfibres , focaladhesionsand migration and cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1243 – 1259 . membrane blebs , dependent on its activation by Rho - associated Hay , B . A . , Wolff , T . , and Rubin , G . M . ( 1994 ) . Expression of baculovi - kinase - catalysed phosphorylation at threonine - 505 . Biochem . J . rus P35 prevents cell death in Drosophila . Development 120 , 2121 – 354 , 149 – 159 . 2129 . Ambach , A . , Saunus , J . , Konstandin , M . , Wesselborg , S . , Meuer , He , B . , and Adler , P . N . ( 2001 ) . Cellular mechanisms in the develop - S . C . , and Samstag , Y . ( 2000 ) . The serine phosphatases PP1 and ment of the Drosophila arista . Mech . Dev . 104 , 69 – 78 . PP2A associate with and activate the actin - binding protein cofilin Hopmann , R . , Cooper , J . A . , and Miller , K . G . ( 1996 ) . Actin organiza - in human T lymphocytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 30 , 3422 – 3431 . tion , bristle morphology , and viability are affected by actin capping Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , protein mutations in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1293 – 1305 . C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynam - Jiang , J . , and Struhl , G . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of the Hedgehog and ics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , Wingless signalling pathways by the F - box / WD40 - repeat protein 805 – 809 . Slimb . Nature 391 , 493 – 496 . Axton , J . M . , Dombradi , V . , Cohen , P . T . , and Glover , D . M . ( 1990 ) . Kennerdell , J . R . , and Carthew , R . W . ( 2000 ) . Heritable gene silencing One of the protein phosphatase 1 isoenzymes in Drosophila is es - in Drosophila using double - stranded RNA . Nat . Biotechnol . 18 , sential for mitosis . Cell 63 , 33 – 46 . 896 – 898 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential Keyse , S . M . ( 1995 ) . An emerging family of dual specificity MAP regulatorsof actindynamics . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 15 , 185 – 230 . kinase phosphatases . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1265 , 152 – 160 . Bamburg , J . R . , McGough , A . , and Ono , S . ( 1999 ) . Putting a new Klaes , A . , Menne , T . , Stollewerk , A . , Scholz , H . , and Klambt , C . twist on actin : ADF / cofilins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell ( 1994 ) . The Ets transcription factors encoded by the Drosophila Biol . 9 , 364 – 370 . gene pointed direct glial cell differentiation in the embryonic CNS . Bartles , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Parallel actin bundles and their multiple actin - Cell 78 , 149 – 160 . bundling proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 72 – 78 . Lu , B . , Usui , T . , Uemura , T . , Jan , L . , and Jan , Y . N . ( 1999 ) . Flamingo Baum , B . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2001 ) . Spatial control of the actin cy - controls the planar polarity of sensory bristles and asymmetric divi - toskeleton in Drosophila epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 883 – 890 . sion of sensory organ precursors in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1247 – Baum , B . , Li , W . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2000 ) . A cyclase - associated 1250 . proteinregulatesactinandcellpolarityduringDrosophilaoogenesis Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwa - and in yeast . Curr . Biol . 10 , 964 – 973 . matsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . Benlali , A . , Draskovic , I . , Hazelett , D . J . , and Treisman , J . E . ( 2000 ) . ( 1999 ) . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein act up controls actin polymerization to alter cell shape and restrict kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 – 898 . Hedgehog signaling in the Drosophila eye disc . Cell 101 , 271 – 281 . Meberg , P . J . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . S . , Takahashi , M . , andBamburg , Borisy , G . G . , and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and cofilin phosphorylation the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Brand , A . H . , and Perrimon , N . ( 1993 ) . Targeted gene expression as Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes . Mitchell , H . K . , Edens , J . , and Petersen , N . S . ( 1990 ) . Stages of cell Development 118 , 401 – 415 . hair construction in Drosophila . Dev . Genet . 11 , 133 – 140 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Moon , A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1995 ) . The ADF / cofilin proteins : stimu - Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing lus - responsivemodulatorsofactindynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1423 – factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implica - 1431 . tion in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of Chen , H . , Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Regulating Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells actin - filament dynamics in vivo . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 19 – 23 . 1 , 73 – 86 . Chen , J . , Godt , D . , Gunsalus , K . , Kiss , I . , Goldberg , M . , and Laski , Nagaoka , R . , Abe , H . , Kusano , K . , andObinata , T . ( 1995 ) . Concentra - F . A . ( 2001 ) . Cofilin / ADFisrequired forcellmotilityduring Drosophila tion of cofilin , a small actin - binding protein , at the cleavage furrow ovary development and oogenesis . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 204 – 209 . during cytokinesis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 30 , 1 – 7 . Cohen , P . ( 1990 ) . The structure and regulation of protein phospha - Newsome , T . P . , Asling , B . , and Dickson , B . J . ( 2000 ) . Analysis of tases . Adv . Second Messenger Phosphoprotein Res . 24 , 230 – 235 . Drosophila photoreceptor axon guidance in eye - specific mosaics . Cong , J . , Geng , W . , He , B . , Liu , J . , Charlton , J . , and Adler , P . N . Development 127 , 851 – 860 . ( 2001 ) . The furry gene of Drosophila is important for maintaining the Ohashi , K . , Hosoya , T . , Takahashi , K . , Hing , H . , and Mizuno , K . integrity of cellular extensions during morphogenesis . Development ( 2000a ) . A Drosophila homologof LIM - kinase phosphorylates cofilin 128 , 2793 – 2802 . and induces actin cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Cooley , L . , Verheyen , E . , and Ayers , K . ( 1992 ) . chickadee encodes Res . Commun . 276 , 1178 – 1185 . a profilin required for intercellular cytoplasm transport during Dro - Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and sophila oogenesis . Cell 69 , 173 – 184 . Mizuno , K . ( 2000b ) . Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - DeRosier , D . J . , and Tilney , L . G . ( 2000 ) . F - actin bundles are deriva - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation tives of microvilli : what does this tell us about how bundles might loop . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 3577 – 3582 . form ? J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1 – 6 . Overton , J . ( 1967 ) . The fine structure of developing bristles in wild Edwards , K . A . , Montague , R . A . , Shepard , S . , Edgar , B . A . , Erikson , type and mutant Drosophila melanogaster . J . Morphol . 122 , R . L . , andKiehart , D . P . ( 1994 ) . Identificationof Drosophila cytoskele - 367 – 379 . tal proteins by induction of abnormal cell shape in fission yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 4589 – 4593 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular Cell246 mechanismscontrollingactinfilamentdynamicsinnonmusclecells . Welch , M . D . , Mallavarapu , A . , Rosenblatt , J . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 54 – 61 . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . Wodarz , A . , Hinz , U . , Engelbert , M . , and Knust , E . ( 1995 ) . Expression Robertson , H . M . , Preston , C . R . , Phillis , R . W . , Johnson - Schlitz , D . M . , of crumbs confers apical character on plasma membrane domains Benz , W . K . , and Engels , W . R . ( 1988 ) . A stable genomic source of of ectodermal epithelia of Drosophila . Cell 82 , 67 – 76 . P element transposase in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 118 , 461 – 470 . Xu , T . , and Rubin , G . M . ( 1993 ) . Analysis of genetic mosaics in devel - oping and adult Drosophila tissues . Development 117 , 1223 – 1237 . Rubin , G . M . , Hong , L . , Brokstein , P . , Evans - Holm , M . , Frise , E . , Sta - pleton , M . , and Harvey , D . A . ( 2000 ) . A Drosophila complementary Yahara , I . , Aizawa , H . , Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , DNA resource . Science 287 , 2222 – 2224 . E . , Hatanaka , H . , and Inagaki , F . ( 1996 ) . A role of cofilin / destrin in reorganization of actin cytoskeleton in response to stresses and Spradling , A . C . , Stern , D . M . , Kiss , I . , Roote , J . , Laverty , T . , andRubin , cell stimuli . Cell Struct . Funct . 21 , 421 – 424 . G . M . ( 1995 ) . Gene disruptions using P transposable elements : an integral component of the Drosophila genome project . Proc . Natl . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 10824 – 10830 . K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Na - Spradling , A . C . , Stern , D . , Beaton , A . , Rhem , E . J . , Laverty , T . , Moz - ture 393 , 809 – 812 . den , N . , Misra , S . , and Rubin , G . M . ( 1999 ) . The Berkeley Drosophila GenomeProjectgenedisruptionproject : singleP - elementinsertions mutating 25 % of vital Drosophila genes . Genetics 153 , 135 – 177 . Streuli , M . , Krueger , N . X . , Tsai , A . Y . , and Saito , H . ( 1989 ) . A family of receptor - linked protein tyrosine phosphatases in humans and Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 8698 – 8702 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Takai , Y . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1999 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation and actin cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by rho - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1519 – 1532 . Sutherland , J . D . , and Witke , W . ( 1999 ) . Molecular genetic ap - proaches to understanding the actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 142 – 151 . Tanoue , T . , Moriguchi , T . , and Nishida , E . ( 1999 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel dual specificity phosphatase , MKP - 5 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 19949 – 19956 . Theriot , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Accelerating on a treadmill : ADF / cofilin pro - motes rapid actin filament turnover in the dynamic cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1165 – 1168 . Tilney , L . G . , Tilney , M . S . , and Guild , G . M . ( 1995 ) . F actin bundles in Drosophila bristles . I . Two filament cross - links are involved in bundling . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 629 – 638 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . , Smith , S . , and Guild , G . M . ( 1996 ) . F - actin bundles in Drosophila bristles are assembled from modules com - posed of short filaments . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1291 – 1308 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . S . , Vranich , K . A . , Shaw , M . K . , and Guild , G . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin filaments and microtubules play different roles during bristle elongation in Drosophila . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1255 – 1265 . Toshima , J . , Tanaka , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1999 ) . Dual specificity pro - tein kinase activity of testis - specific protein kinase 1 and its regula - tionbyautophosphorylationofserine - 215withintheactivationloop . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12171 – 12176 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001a ) . Cofilinphosphorylationbyproteinkinasetesticu - larproteinkinase1anditsroleinintegrin - mediatedactinreorganiza - tion and focal adhesion formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1131 – 1145 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Takeuchi , K . , Mori , R . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001b ) . Cofilin phosphorylation and actin reorganization activities of testicular protein kinase 2 and its predominant expression in testicular Sertoli cells . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 31449 – 31458 . Toshima , J . Y . , Toshima , J . , Watanabe , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001c ) . Binding of 14 - 3 - 3beta regulates the kinase activity and subcellular localization of testicular protein kinase 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 43471 – 43481 . Usui , T . , Shima , Y . , Shimada , Y . , Hirano , S . , Burgess , R . W . , Schwarz , T . L . , Takeichi , M . , and Uemura , T . ( 1999 ) . Flamingo , a seven - pass transmembrane cadherin , regulates planar cell polarity under the control of Frizzled . Cell 98 , 585 – 595 . Verheyen , E . M . , and Cooley , L . ( 1994 ) . Profilin mutations disrupt multiple actin - dependent processes during Drosophila develop - ment . Development 120 , 717 – 728 . Wassarman , D . A . , Solomon , N . M . , Chang , H . C . , Karim , F . D . , Ther - rien , M . , and Rubin , G . M . ( 1996 ) . Protein phosphatase 2A positively and negatively regulates Ras1 - mediated photoreceptor develop - ment in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 10 , 272 – 278 .