Organization Science Vol . 17 , No . 4 , July – August 2006 , pp . 484 – 500 issn 1047 - 7039 ! eissn 1526 - 5455 ! 06 ! 1704 ! 0484 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1060 . 0200 ©2006 INFORMS When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives : A Field Study of Problem Solving at Work Andrew B . Hargadon , Beth A . Bechky Graduate School of Management , University of California , Davis , One Shields Avenue , Davis , California 95616 { abhargadon @ ucdavis . edu , babechky @ ucdavis . edu } T his paper introduces a model of collective creativity that explains how the locus of creative problem solving shifts , at times , from the individual to the interactions of a collective . The model is grounded in observations , interviews , informal conversations , and archival data gathered in intensive ﬁeld studies of work in professional service ﬁrms . The evidence suggests that although some creative solutions can be seen as the products of individual insight , others should be regarded as the products of a momentary collective process . Such collective creativity reﬂects a qualitative shift in the nature of the creative process , as the comprehension of a problematic situation and the generation of creative solutions draw from—and reframe—the past experiences of participants in ways that lead to new and valuable insights . This research investigates the origins of such moments , and builds a model of collective creativity that identiﬁes the precipitating roles played by four types of social interaction : help seeking , help giving , reﬂective reframing , and reinforcing . Implications of this research include shifting the emphasis in research and management of creativity from identifying and managing creative individuals to understanding the social context and developing interactive approaches to creativity , and from a focus on relatively constant contextual variables to the alignment of ﬂuctuating variables and their precipitation of momentary phenomena . Key words : creativity ; social cognition ; problem solving ; innovation Introduction Francis Jehl , one of Thomas Edison’s longtime assis - tants , once explained that , “Edison is in reality a col - lective noun and means the work of many men . ” He was referring to the group of engineers who worked together and with Edison in the one - room laboratory in Menlo Park ( Millard 1990 ) . However , while individuals often acknowledge the collective nature of their creative accomplishments , research on creativity has centered primarily on the individual . Kurtzberg and Amabile ( 2001 ) , for example , recently summarized the state of creativity research : In all of the [ current ] approaches , the focus has rested squarely on the individual , highlighting individual cog - nitive processing , stable individual difference , and the effects of the external environment on the individual . Rel - atively little attention has been paid to team level creative synergy , in which ideas are generated by groups instead of being generated by one mind . ( p . 285 ) Without denying the role of individual contributions , is it possible to recognize moments when the creative insight emerges not within a single individual , but rather across the interactions of multiple participants in the process ? This paper presents research that studied those moments in organizations when creative insights result from collective rather than individual efforts , and where no individual insight is by itself responsible for solving the problem . What turns collections of creative individuals into cre - ative collectives , where particular interactions yield cre - ative insights , yet those insights cannot be attributed to particular individuals ? An answer to this question is important because the need for individual creative genius is steadily being displaced in organizations . In today’s rapidly changing environments , the complexity of prob - lems requires solutions that combine the knowledge , efforts , and abilities of people with diverse perspectives ( Brown and Eisenhardt 1998 , Eisenhardt 1990 ) . When individuals do not have the necessary expertise , abil - ity , or motivation to generate creative solutions alone , they sometimes ﬁnd ways , through moments of collec - tive effort , to produce creative outcomes . This paper focuses on those moments of collective creativity and the factors that precipitate them . Such an approach differs from the existing research on creativ - ity and innovation along two dimensions . Rather than focusing on the group and organizational variables that make up the ongoing context for creativity , this per - spective recognizes the ﬂeeting coincidence of behaviors that triggers moments when creative insights emerge . And rather than viewing this eureka moment as the sole province of individual cognition , this perspective focuses on those insights that emerge in the interactions between individuals . The literature on creativity in organizations has , for ex - ample , generated signiﬁcant understanding of the effect 484 Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 485 of ongoing group and organizational context on indi - vidual creativity ( Amabile 1983 , 1995 ) , but is less concerned with action and interaction at the collec - tive level . Research on creativity and cognition focuses on the moments of individual insight and , similarly , does not address the phenomenon at the collective level ( Sternberg 1999 , Gentner and Markman 1997 ) . Finally , the literature on innovation primarily explores the cre - ative process at the collective level of organizations , yet is largely concerned with the ongoing organizational context associated with collective outputs and neglects those moments when creative insights occur . By con - trast , this paper explores the intersection between the momentary ( rather than the ongoing ) and the collective ( rather than the individual ) aspects of creativity—those moments when creative insights result from collective , rather than individual , efforts . The role of such moments of collective creativity is evident in the following example from Design Con - tinuum , one of the ﬁrms in our ﬁeld study . In 1988 , Reebok hired Design Continuum to develop a success - ful response to the introduction of the Nike Air line of basketball shoes . Rather than develop a product design that was similar to Nike’s concept , Design Continuum created the Pump shoe , a form - ﬁtting shoe that worked because of an inﬂatable air bladder built into its sides . This idea ﬁrst emerged in a brainstorming meeting when one of the designers , who had previously designed an inﬂatable splint , suggested that by building ankle sup - port into a basketball shoe such splints might prevent injuries . Another participant , who had worked on hos - pital equipment before , recognized that existing med - ical IV bags could be modiﬁed to provide the oddly shaped air bladders that would make this “splint - in - a - shoe” concept work . During a subsequent brainstorming meeting with several other designers , who had worked with diagnostic instruments ( and the little pumps , tub - ing , and valve components that made up those products ) , a solution emerged for how to inﬂate and deﬂate the shoe easily . In its ﬁrst year , the Reebok Pump shoe accounted for over $ 1 billion in revenue in the highly competitive athletic - shoe market and gained wide praise in the busi - ness press for its creativity . The series of events that created the Reebok Pump shoe idea at Design Continuum illustrates the collective moments of the creative process observable within orga - nizations . Within the project team , a few people knew about the client’s demands , another knew about inﬂat - able splints , another about IV bags , and others about pumps . The social interactions within these brainstorms enabled connecting these ideas across members of the organization . Only during these momentary interactions did the design team come to recognize how their dis - parate knowledge of inﬂatable splints , IV bags , valves , pumps , and other useful ideas could be relevant to designing a better basketball shoe . In studies of creativity , however , we rarely look at— let alone for—such ﬂeeting moments . For this reason , we explored such moments through a ﬁeld study of cre - ativity in organizations . The model is grounded in obser - vations of work , interviews , informal conversations , and archival data gathered in intensive ﬁeld studies of work in six professional service organizations . Analysis of the data from these studies identiﬁes four interrelating activ - ities that , together , appear to precipitate moments of col - lective creativity : help seeking , help giving , reﬂective reframing , and reinforcing . These activities constitute an alternative framework for understanding and managing the creative process within organizations—one that shifts the focus away from the relatively stable contextual vari - ables that surround creative individuals and to the behav - ioral inﬂuences on the momentary interactions between people . Creativity in Organizations To investigate collective creativity as a distinct phe - nomenon that emerges in interactions , we adopt the perspective that creative solutions are built from the recombination of existing ideas ( Amabile 1988 , Van de Ven 1986 , Weick 1979 , Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ) . Rather than focusing on those aspects of the cre - ative insight that represent the ex nihilo generation of new and valuable ideas , this perspective looks at how creative moments represent the conﬂuence of old ideas . By focusing on the creative insight as a conﬂuence of old ideas , we consider how individuals may contribute discrete “old” ideas within a particular social interac - tion , and observe how the “creative” value of those ideas evolves through their combination—conﬂuence— with others . While the ﬁeld of psychology provides insights into individual creativity within organizations , this research has traditionally focused closely on the individual insight . The perspective of creativity as the conﬂu - ence of an individual’s traits , behaviors , and motiva - tions remains a central assumption of modern creativity research ( Sternberg 1999 ) . As a result , the study of cre - ativity in organizational settings predominantly focuses on the ongoing contextual inﬂuences that shape individ - ual creative output ( Amabile 1983 , 1995 ; Csikszentmi - halyi 1988 ; Drazin et al . 1999 ; Oldham and Cummings 1996 ; Woodman et al . 1993 ) . For example , Woodman et al . ( 1993 ) outline an interactionist model that nests individual creativity within the group , which “consti - tutes the social context in which the creative behavior occurs” ( p . 303 ) . While this long tradition provides evi - dence of the ongoing inﬂuences of group context on individual creative behavior , it stops short of describ - ing how supraindividual creativity emerges in interac - tions to become a distinct and collective problem - solving phenomenon . Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 486 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS Research by cognitive psychologists , in contrast , of - fers potentially useful insights into how the creative pro - cess happens in the moments when individuals solve problems that may be applied to the collective level ( Gentner and Gentner 1983 ; Gentner and Markman 1997 ; Reeves and Weisberg 1993 , 1994 ) . This research describes how individuals facing problematic situations ﬁnd solutions through a process of analogical reason - ing , of trying to make sense of a new situation ( the tar - get analog ) by relating it to a more familiar one ( the source analog ) . Analogical problem solving occurs when an individual recognizes similarities in the new situa - tion to old problems ( and their solutions ) that he or she has learned in the past . Transferring these existing solu - tions from old problems provides a solution to the new problem . This research helps us understand the momen - tary processes of individual creativity , yet there is no guarantee that individuals will use their past knowledge , let alone the appropriate past knowledge , to generate novel and creative solutions . To arrive at creative insights requires actively reframing situations in ways that trigger more distant searches for solutions ( Schank and Abelson 1977 ) . This is because the same mechanisms that allow individuals to make sense of novel situations in terms of old ones often encourage them to recall more recent , familiar , or expected ideas and , as a result , to misinter - pret new situations as familiar old ones rather than see them as opportunities for creative insights ( Lave 1988 , Weick 1995 ) . Thus , ﬁnding novel solutions is inher - ently linked to the issue of deﬁning problems—which deﬁnition of the problem is recalled identiﬁes which set of solutions is considered relevant ( Getzels 1975 ) . However , because problems often arrive in organizations rooted in given contexts , individuals often have trouble reframing on their own . Organizations may therefore beneﬁt when people come together to collectively work on deﬁning and solv - ing problems , and we need to deepen our understand - ing of how such collective problem solving happens . Existing ﬁeld studies have shown that solving creative problems collectively in organizations relies on connect - ing past experiences to the problems of current situa - tions . For example , Hargadon ( 2002 , 1998 ; Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ) describes how organizations that span multiple industries are able to generate creative ideas by gaining access to ideas in one domain and applying them in others . Building on the theory of organizational memory ( Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) , these papers explain how these ﬁrms’ innovative accomplishments result from their work practices that transfer ideas over time and across projects . Similarly , Nonaka and Takeuchi ( 1995 ) describe innovation as taking place in the communi - cation and translation of knowledge from the individ - ual to the organization . However , while these studies focus on collective creativity as the conﬂuence of exist - ing ideas , they do not explore the nature and origins of those particular moments when such connections occur . Thus , to provide a parallel for how the creative process unfolds , both in organizational context and across rather than within individuals , we look to the literature on col - lective cognition . Collective Cognition and the Creative Moment Recent theoretical and empirical work has developed the notion of collective cognition in organizations ( Meindl et al . 1996 , Thompson et al . 1999 , Hutchins 1991 ) to explain supraindividual cognitive processes . Weick and Roberts ( 1993 ) , for example , outline the concept of collective mind as a means for understanding how indi - viduals working together perform effectively in high - reliability organizations , such as aircraft carrier ﬂight decks ( see also Weick et al . 1999 ) . That perspective requires a focus that is “at once on individuals and the collective , since only individuals can contribute to a col - lective mind , but a collective mind is distinct from an individual because it inheres in the pattern of interrelated activities among many people” ( p . 360 ) . High - reliability organizations are characterized by their emphasis on avoiding errors rather than pursuing efﬁciencies , where remaining mindful to deviations from expected events helps organizations respond rapidly to potentially haz - ardous problems . However , a perspective of collective mind may also help explain highly creative organi - zations , where the emphasis on novel solutions also requires mindful exploration . While there is potential for moments of collective mind to emerge in any group , Weick and Roberts ( 1993 ) identify the critical role of heedful interrelating , the mindful engagement of individuals in the social interre - lations of the organization , for shaping the nature and extent to which collective cognition occurs in a particu - lar moment . Mindfulness describes the amount of atten - tion and effort that individuals allocate to a particular task or interaction . Participation in group interactions , as a result , becomes a product not of membership or presence within a group , but of the attention and energy that an individual commits to a particular interaction with others in the group . Through the mindful interpre - tation by group members of an ongoing experience and the mindful generation of appropriate actions , collec - tive cognition connects individual ideas and experiences in ways that both redeﬁne and resolve the demands of emerging situations . The idea of collective cognition , joined with our understanding of creative problem solving , provides a framework for understanding moments of collective cre - ativity . Collective mind resides in the mindful inter - relations between individuals in a social system . One person’s action or comments , when considered by oth - ers , shapes theirs , which in turn ( when heeded ) shapes the next . A focus on the collective aspects of these inter - actions recognizes that one person’s past thinking and Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 487 action take on new meanings—to everyone involved—in the evolving context of subsequent thinking and action . Consider the case of the Reebok shoe described earlier . One designer’s suggestion of a shoe - as - a - splint might easily be dismissed as crazy , and ultimately forgotten . Or , the same crazy suggestion is considered and built on by others , becoming more realistic and , ultimately , leading to a creative solution . Here the original comment takes on new meanings—becoming creative—through the mindful interactions of participants in the problem - solving process . Rather than relying on each individual’s cognitive skills , collective creativity represents particular moments when people’s perspectives and experiences are brought together to bear on problematic situations in ways that create distinctly new solutions . At these points , what to think of as a problem and how to think of it become the products of a collective process . We examine such collective creativity by framing the phenomenon as a moment when individuals come together to ﬁnd , rede - ﬁne , and solve problems that no one , working alone , could have done as easily , if at all . From within this framework , the paper explores the behaviors that trig - ger such moments of collective creativity , how those behaviors interact , and how they are supported within the organization . Research Setting and Methods This research program began by asking how individuals in organizations redeﬁne and reuse their old knowledge and experiences in ways that provide the raw materials for solving new problems ( or solving old problems in new ways ) . Intensive case studies were conducted within six organizations whose work was almost wholly structured around generating novel solutions to novel problems . These organizations were professional service ﬁrms that did not provide a common or consistent work product , but rather attempted to solve problems that varied across applications and industries . Most clients engaged them expecting novel and valuable solutions to the particular problems they faced and , within each engagement , expected these solutions to draw from the combined knowledge and experiences of the entire ﬁrm . The evolution of McKinsey & Co . , one of the organiza - tions in this study , exempliﬁes these demands . Initially , McKinsey & Co . was created with the conﬁdence that bright , broadly - educated young consultants could cre - atively solve the problems that older and more parochial clients could not ( McKenna 1995 , 1996 ) . During the 1960s , as clients and competitors became more knowl - edgeable about business practices , the ﬁrm was forced to change its business model to one of presenting each con - sultant as a portal into the combined experiences of the entire ﬁrm . As one senior McKinsey partner explained , “We had to deliver on the implied promise that if you were engaging McKinsey , you were engaging a world - wide network of knowledge . ” To do that meant changing its organizational practices to reﬂect this new require - ment . Many professional service ﬁrms today share this approach , and in both marketing promises and manage - ment practices attempt to bring the full range of organi - zational knowledge and experiences to bear on any one client’s problems . Because of the dynamic nature of their clients and projects , these sites offered a unique glimpse into the problem - solving process in organizations . Few projects , if any , could be treated purely as replications of past projects because each new project and client demanded relatively novel solutions . 1 Within the organizations and groups studied , then , arriving at a creative solution was not a deviation from expected routine but rather was the expected routine . The participating organiza - tions consisted of two management consulting ﬁrms , two engineering design consulting ﬁrms , and two inter - nal consulting groups within multidivisional ﬁrms ( see Table 1 ) . These ﬁrms represent a theoretical , and not ran - dom , sample of the phenomenon of interest ( Dougherty and Hardy 1996 , Eisenhardt 1989 ) , in that all six ﬁrms provided creative products to their clients and were mea - sured and rewarded based solely on the creative value of their work product . Thus , they were chosen because their process and performance offered increased oppor - tunity to generate insights regarding the creative process . Moreover , these ﬁrms varied in terms of the type of project they worked on ( management solutions and prod - uct designs ) as well as the type of client they worked for ( external and internal ) . The case studies were not con - ducted to test how creative these ﬁrms were , but rather to understand how the creative problem - solving process takes place across a variety of project types and within different relational forms . The logic behind the selection of these sites follows . Management Consultants . Accenture ( then Andersen Consulting ) and McKinsey & Company participated in this study . These ﬁrms provide clients with help in identifying , adopting , and implementing management practices that are new to the client ﬁrm , for exam - ple , globalization strategies , reengineering efforts , and enterprise systems implementations . To these consult - ing ﬁrms , each project represents a novel problem and requires a solution that was mindful of the needs of that client . The research focused on the actions and perspec - tives of consultants who were attempting to bring the range of the organization’s experiences to bear on the problems of their particular client and project . Product - Design Consultants . The two product - design consulting ﬁrms were IDEO Product Development and Design Continuum . 2 These two ﬁrms are , in order , the two largest product - design consulting ﬁrms in the coun - try . Product - design consultants provide engineering or Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 488 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS Table 1 Participating Organizations in Study Management Consulting Firms Accenture Accenture’s 38 , 000 employees provide strategic business and technology solutions to clients . Examples of creative solutions include : • Demand chain solution provided to a client combining Internet infrastructure with SAP inventory - control software . • Solution for health - care company adapted from previous banking solution combining Internet and human - resource software . McKinsey & Company McKinsey & Company , with 4 , 000 employees , offers strategic business solutions to clients in almost all sectors of business . Examples of creative solutions include : • A strategic planning model for a client facing deregulation built on problems learned by working with past clients in another , previously deregulated industry . • A purchasing effectiveness program for one client built from an awareness of past solutions and problems with cost - cutting projects of previous clients in other industries . Internal Consultants Within Multidivisional Firms Hewlett - Packard : Strategic Processes and Modeling Group Hewlett - Packard develops and manufactures high - technology products for a wide variety of industries . The Strategic Processes and Modeling Group works with the 150 or so divisions within the ﬁrm to optimize their manufacturing and distribution processes . Examples of creative solutions include : • Supply chain management model continually combines problems and solutions of previous application environments . • Inventory - costing model combined marketing strategies from consumer - goods industries with traditional inventory models . Boeing Company : BCAG’s Operations Technology Center Boeing designs and builds commercial and military aircraft , helicopters , space and missile systems , and electronic and software systems . The Operations Technology Center works with the many factories of the Boeing Commercial Airplane group to support and advance their manufacturing process . Examples of creative solutions include : • Metal - stamping process improvement built from process solutions in other factories and from incorporating external materials . • Composite - materials production processes transferred technological knowledge from military divisions to within Boeing’s Commercial Airplane Group . Engineering Design Consulting Firms IDEO Product Development IDEO’s more than 300 employees provide engineering and design services to clients in over 40 industries and have contributed to the design of more than 3 , 000 new products and , at any one time , are involved in approximately 50 development projects . Examples of creative solutions include : • A blood analyzer that integrates the client’s chemical analysis equipment with technical components from the computer industry . • The mechanical whale for the movie “Free Willy , ” which combines traditional special effects with ideas from computers , hydraulics , and robotics . Design Continuum Design Continuum , with over 90 employees , has worked for more than 100 different clients in dozens of industries . Examples of creative solutions include : • Pulsed - lavage emergency room wound cleanser that integrates a low - cost pump from a toy squirt gun with medical product - design guidelines and materials . • Reebok pump shoe that combines the client’s shoe designs with inﬂatable splints , and technologies ( and suppliers ) from IV bag manufacturing . industrial design services , or both , to clients . This study focused primarily on the activities of those individu - als involved in engineering design , which in these ﬁrms ranges from conceptual work on possible new prod - ucts or technologies to detailed engineering drafting or analysis . Internal Consulting Groups Within Manufacturing Firms . Two internal consulting groups within Hewlett - Packard and Boeing also participated in this research . The size and multidivisional structure of these orga - nizations led to the formation of groups that act as independent consultants , working with many of the dif - ferent divisions on the particular problems they face . Within Hewlett - Packard , for example , the Strategic Pro - cesses and Modeling Group ( SPaM ) provides supply chain management solutions tailored to the needs of the different operating divisions that employ their services . Within Boeing , the Operations Technology Group ( Ops Tech ) specializes in providing manufacturing solutions across the production facilities of different divisions and different factories within divisions . In both cases , divi - sions contract for the services of these internal consult - ing groups , presenting them with problems related to their ongoing operations . Data Collection Methods and Analysis Observing creativity as it occurs naturally is extremely difﬁcult , particularly when key contributions are only Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 489 recognized later as they trigger new insights in others and are built upon . To understand how social interactions shape new perspectives on problematic situations and uncover potentially relevant past experiences , the ﬁeld study relied on ethnographic - research methods , which allow the researcher to uncover the perspectives of the people in the organization . Data were gathered from multiple sources within each organization ( Yin 1994 ) . Gathering evidence from multiple data sources addresses potential problems of construct validity within a case study because these different sources “provide for mul - tiple measures of the same phenomenon” ( Yin 1994 , p . 92 ) . While each source has particular beneﬁts , such as the narrative and insight provided by informant inter - view , each has particular problems as well , such as infor - mants’ individual biases and retrospective rationaliza - tions . Taken together , multiple measures allow for trian - gulation , a process of data evaluation that builds support for any ﬁndings or conclusions from the convergence of multiple , independent observations . The research design collected data from ﬁve sources : ( 1 ) interviews with key informants , ( 2 ) project postmortems , ( 3 ) observations of work , ( 4 ) tracking of particular projects ( whether “live” or retrospectively ) , and ( 5 ) documents and technologi - cal artifacts of the organization . For further details about each of these sources , please see the appendix . To develop the inferences about creativity from within the ﬁeldwork , we used an iterative process of cycling between the data , emerging theory , and relevant liter - ature . Following Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) and Miles and Huberman ( 1994 ) , we developed initial categories of actions related to collective creativity through several intensive passes through all the interview transcripts and ﬁeld notes . Then , to relate these categories , a set of iter - ations usually began with a hunch inspired by the data or literature . For example , an informant mentioned that asking others for help on a problem she was facing , often gave her new insights into the problem , suggesting that such social interactions shaped the creative process in ways that working alone did not . To see if such hunches could be grounded , we returned to the interview tran - scripts and to the ﬁeld notes and systematically compiled pertinent evidence from all six case studies by gather - ing related instances of how shared work practices might play a role in the individual creative process and how they might differ from existing conceptions of creativ - ity . Across the ﬁeld sites , if there was consistent support for a particular characteristic of collective interaction in the creative process , we retained the theme . When evi - dence contradicted an emerging theme , we abandoned it , returning to the theory to investigate and reﬁne the framework ( for example , in one ﬁrm such collective moments were viewed as fun , suggesting that collective moments are precipitated by positive affect on behalf of the participants ; the data from the other sites , however , did not support such a conclusion and it was abandoned ) . We then wrote up the inferences regarding each retained category , weaving together conceptual arguments , addi - tional evidence , and citations to pertinent literature . Precipitating Moments of Collective Creativity in Organizations This paper uses the evidence from these ﬁeld stud - ies to build a theoretical framework for understanding the moments when collective creativity occurs in orga - nizations . This framework highlights the role of col - lective cognition in transforming an organization’s old knowledge into creative alternatives for future action . In doing so , it provides an alternative framework for understanding and managing the creative process within organizations—one that shifts the focus from individ - uals to the interactions between them , and from a constant phenomenon ( i . e . , creative individuals and orga - nizations ) to a series of momentary , transient phenom - ena ( i . e . , creative moments in organizations ) . Below , we describe how such collective moments of creativity hap - pen in organizations , and explain the activities that make them possible . We can say that collective creativity has occurred when social interactions between individuals trigger new interpretations and new discoveries of distant analogies that the individuals involved , thinking alone , could not have generated . Such moments , in the ﬁrms studied , seemed to emerge from within social interactions that , like brainstorming , brought together those facing partic - ular new problems and those with potentially useful past experiences . For example , the CEO of Design Contin - uum recognized these effects of social interactions : You pick two people , with different experiences and maybe even different training and put them together and you’ve got that kind of a synergy , an exchange of ideas . Because whatever this person says will provoke a hun - dred different ideas in this other one and a hundred dif - ferent memories . However , we cannot yet say when such opportunities for collective creativity are missed , because there is still little understanding of these moments and what triggers them . Analysis of the ﬁeld data reveals four sets of interre - lating activities that play a role in triggering moments of collective creativity : ( 1 ) help seeking , ( 2 ) help giv - ing , ( 3 ) reﬂective reframing , and ( 4 ) reinforcing ( see Figure 1 ) . Help seeking describes activities that occur when an individual who either recognizes or is assigned a problematic situation actively seeks the assistance of others . Help giving , conversely , represents the willing devotion of time and attention to assisting with the work of others . Reﬂective reframing represents the mindful behaviors of all participants in an interaction , where each respectfully attends to and builds upon the com - ments and actions of others . And , reinforcing reﬂects Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 490 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS Figure 1 Interactions Precipitating Moments of Collective Creativity Help seeking Helpgiving Reflectivereframing Reinforc ing those activities that subtly ( and sometimes not so subtly ) reinforce the organizational values that support individ - uals as they engage in help seeking , help giving , and reﬂective reframing ; reinforcing happens as a direct con - sequence of engaging in these three activities ( e . g . , help giving as a response reinforces help seeking ) as well as through more indirect actions within the organiza - tion ( e . g . , increased status or promotions for those who engage in these activities ) . 3 We explain the role of these activities in greater detail . Help Seeking The ﬁeld data identiﬁed a set of actions that individuals used to induce others to join in efforts to resolve a par - ticular problematic situation—help - seeking behaviors— and that play a necessary role in enabling moments of collective creativity . In the organizations of this study , the set of actors and patterns of interactions surround - ing any one problematic situation were often ﬂuid . Thus , participation in a particular problem - solving pro - cess depended on who was invited to do so—who was assigned to a project team , who was invited to a brain - storming session , or even who was approached in the hallway . This differs from Weick and Roberts’s ( 1993 ) conception of collective mind in high - reliability organi - zations such as aircraft - carrier ﬂight decks , where the set of actors and patterns of interactions are relatively ﬁxed . As a result , help - seeking behaviors played a signiﬁcant role in determining who joined in any collective effort , and thus what knowledge and experiences were brought to bear on a problematic situation . These organizations had an array of formal means for soliciting interactions around a particular project or problem . IDEO and Design Continuum , for example , relied heavily on formal brainstorming meetings . IDEO also held regular and organizationwide Monday morn - ing meetings in which people would discuss the partic - ular projects and problems they were working on and any interesting solutions they might have found . Sim - ilarly , HP’s SPaM Group held weekly meetings where they would discuss the status of current projects , and people in these meetings would often solicit help that focused on coming to a collective understanding of their particular problems . Boeing’s Ops Tech group also met as a unit each month , but also gathered in smaller groups for coffee each morning in different factories and , in a fashion similar to Orr’s ( 1996 ) copier technicians , shared war stories and discussed work in ways that often iden - tiﬁed connections between past experiences and current projects . There were also many informal and unstructured meth - ods for soliciting help , and informants often described these methods as more important and useful than the for - mal means . As an engineer at Design Continuum stated , “There’s no consistent vehicle for people to share their ideas , problems , projects . Right now the only way that can happen meaningfully is face - to - face . ” In HP’s SPaM group , when people had problems ( or simply needed a break from their work ) they would walk the halls ask - ing questions and waiting for a head to pop up over a cubicle wall and begin a conversation . Similarly , a McKinsey partner explained how , rather than attempt to solve a problem by himself , he would ﬁrst seek out others’ ideas : What I would logically do is the most comfortable thing , which was to go to somebody who’s in the practice and who I know from the ofﬁce and say , “I’m running into some issues about IT cost production , how do you think about that ? Who’s the best person to call ? ” Traditional approaches associated with individual problem - solving efforts , like generating a solution alone or searching the organizational database , were ignored in favor of initiating hallway conversations , calling ad hoc meetings , and “tapping into personal networks . ” Also , these interactions would often spur further interactions , until they created a unique and often unexpected path across multiple ofﬁces within McKinsey that ended , for example , when someone in the Oslo ofﬁce was helping someone from San Francisco that they had just met on the phone . Such help - seeking behaviors created opportu - nities for social interactions that connected distant peo - ple within these organizations and , by doing so , helped move opportunities for creativity from the individual to the collective level . Help - seeking actions are often inhibited because they carry the stigma of ignorance and the implication of failure ( Lee 1997 , Ashford et al . 2003 ) . However , these repercussions were largely absent in the organizations studied , where the seeking out of help was perceived as a necessary means for bringing the organization’s knowledge to bear . For example , asking others in to work on new problems was codiﬁed in IDEO’s Design Methodology Handbook , which suggests that early in Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 491 projects designers should “Set up at least two introduc - tory brainstormers [ brainstorming meetings ] to get the best minds in the company , the collective consciousness of the ofﬁce , working on your problem . ” In words that also reﬂect reinforcing actions , described later in more detail , one senior engineer at IDEO described how blame for any particular design failure depended on whether the engineer had asked others for help or not : If they had not sought help , then they would be held individually responsible . Such help - seeking behaviors may be stig - matized in other organizations where problems are rel - atively routine , where individual roles are more clearly delineated , and where ignorance in those roles is more unexpected . In the ﬁrms studied , however , because most problematic situations differed from day to day , and because help seeking was a value that these ﬁrms rein - forced , such behaviors carried less stigma and brought more beneﬁts . The activities prompted sets of momen - tary interactions that connected those facing problematic situations and those with potentially relevant—though rarely obvious ex ante—knowledge and experience . Help Giving While help - seeking activities identify and invite other organizational members to participate in problem - solving efforts , such activities do not always ensure the collaboration of others . In traditional bureaucratic orga - nizations , for example , it is not uncommon for people to respond to requests for help that fall outside their exist - ing job assignments by asking for formal permission from their managers or requiring complex paperwork to ensure compensation ( through internal budget transfers ) for the time spent working for another team or manager . Such constraints on spontaneous responses to help seek - ing impede help giving . Social interactions that lead to moments of collective creativity , in contrast , require that those who are invited to help actually give help , and do so in a timely manner . For example , the McKinsey partner in Oslo not only returned the message from an unknown colleague in San Francisco that day , but spent considerable time helping with that colleague’s request despite an already busy schedule . This also happened in HP’s SPaM group when one day Katherine walked down the hall and asked , “Bob , I’m working on this thing and I’m kind of stumped . Can I borrow your brain ? ” Bob put down his work and the two of them found a nearby confer - ence room where they then spent an hour working on Katherine’s project . Bob’s willingness to give his time and attention ultimately led to recognizing that a sec - tion of software Bob had previously written could be adapted to help solve Katherine’s problem . In more for - mal interactions , such help giving is sometimes acknowl - edged through the routine use of project time cards . For example , at IDEO and Design Continuum , when some - one participates in a brainstorm on another project , they record that time and it is billed to the appropriate client . However , more often moments of collective creativity are products of hallway conversations and other ad hoc interactions , which would likely be inhibited by the efforts required for formally accounting for this help . The need for willing collaboration also shapes the choices people make when soliciting help . One McKinsey partner described how he would consciously decide whether to ask a more senior ( and busier ) partner who had potentially more relevant past experiences or ask someone more junior who , while not as experienced , had more time and inclination to respond : “You talk with whom you can . You explore until you ﬁnd peo - ple in the ﬁrm that are accessible , near enough in the time frame to talk about it . ” There were particular people who were considered thought leaders , experts , or gurus in these organizations—these were typically senior part - ners with established practice areas . However , because such experts were mostly very busy , people would often solicit help from others who might be less experienced but , importantly , more likely to respond and participate in the collective effort . Research into organizational citizenship behaviors— also described as extrarole behaviors or contextual performance—has suggested that such help giving is a critical behavior in organizations ( Motowidlo 2000 , Bateman and Organ 1983 ) . Such research has focused on the individual preconditions and individual returns for such behavior ( Motowidlo 2000 ) , but has not con - sidered these extrarole behaviors in relation to creativity in organizations . Here , we suggest that help giving plays a vital role in precipitating moments of collective cre - ativity within a larger web of activities that include help seeking , reﬂective reframing , and reinforcing . Such help - ful collaboration is central to collective efforts at creativ - ity in organizations because , as the evidence suggests , it is difﬁcult for individuals working alone to generate new interpretations of problematic situations or gener - ate novel insights ( Fiske and Taylor 1991 ) . There were certainly times when , for example , solicitations for help arrived as clear questions and could be easily returned with equally clear answers . There were also times , how - ever , when either people asked the wrong questions or when there were not yet clear questions to ask . Such times provided the clearest evidence for the third set of collective activities , reﬂective reframing . Reﬂective Reframing The moments when participants in social interactions make new sense of what they already know comprise a third important aspect of collective creativity that we call reﬂective reframing . For example , one manager at Accenture described his response when others sought his experience for their projects : Sometimes [ other consultants will ] just bring us a chal - lenge and say “it kind of sounds like X to me , that’s Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 492 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS what you guys know so can you help me ? ” And usually it’s not exactly what they describe but , hopefully , we can come up with something that does work for them . Rather than mindlessly answering the question as given , or deﬂecting it completely , moments of collective cre - ativity involve considering not only the original question , but also whether there is a better question to be asked . When participants come together in collective prob - lem - solving efforts , one person often has a good under - standing of the problematic situation , while others have potentially relevant ideas and experiences to contribute . The locus of creativity in the interaction moves to the collective level when each individual’s contributions not only give shape to the subsequent contributions of oth - ers , but , just as importantly , give new meaning to others’ past contributions . Recalling the Reebok Pump design team , a later recognition—that IV bags might be used to make the inﬂatable splint - in - a - shoe—turned a previously unrealistic idea into a realistic one . Such recognition of potentially relevant new ideas and insights and such reframing of a problematic situation come about not sim - ply because the right people were brought in to help on a project , or because they actively contributed , but also because the participants in the process were able to mindfully consider those contributions and change their previously held conceptions of both the problem and rel - evant solutions . These are the moments when creative output can no longer be accurately attributed to any one individual in the encounter—as each person’s insights shaped and were shaped by the interaction . Another brainstorming meeting at Design Continuum illustrates how reﬂective reframing enables collections of individuals to begin thinking collectively . In this meet - ing , designers were searching for alternative solutions for a complex valve mechanism for a gardening appli - cation . Nicole , a Design Continuum engineer , explained why she opted for a brainstorm to ﬁnd help for her prob - lem in designing a gardening tool : “The reason to have collaboration and brainstorming is because you could invite a bunch of people and not know what they’re going to bring from their experience and their kind of internalized data base and all that stuff . ” During the brainstorm , Nicole remembered a similar problem in another context , but did not remember the details of the solution . However , her comment triggered another engi - neer , Don , to remember the details , as she related : Well , I remember a product that you could just plug into the faucet , it wasn’t electric and it pulsed the water ﬂow . You know this Water Pik thing that you just shoved on the faucet . How did that work ? And Don [ said ] “Oh , it’s got a little spring mast thing in there and a valve that moves back and forth . ” Ultimately , Don’s suggestion redirected the team’s search for solutions and provided a key component to the ﬁnal solution . Nicole and Don , individually , may not have arrived at the potential value of a spring mast for solving the gardening project , but together , over a brief exchange , Nicole’s initial suggestion prompted Don to recall past experiences that had until then not seemed relevant . Even this connection emerged only after the prompting and new perspectives generated by previous analogies that arose over the course of the meeting . The interaction between Nicole and Don entailed more than an aggregation of two individuals listing potential problem deﬁnitions ; it required mindfully lis - tening and building on the contributions of the other ( Weick and Roberts 1993 , Weick et al . 1999 ) . Beyond just building on each others’ contributions , however , in reﬂective reframing , one person’s suggested framing of the problem shifted others’ awareness in ways that made new frames visible . Such shifts in the framing of a prob - lematic situation allow participants to recall details not easily recognized in the original framing of the problem ( Fiske and Taylor 1991 ) . In another case , the comments of someone from across the organization changed the way a project team at McKinsey working with a medical products com - pany had been framing the problem of inventory man - agement . A partner described how her reaction , after listening to the problem , was “Gee , by the way , this problem you’re facing is the same one we faced when working with frozen foods . ” Within such interactions , introducing an alternative frame— and reﬂecting upon it —makes new aspects of the situation salient to other participants , prompting them to view the relevance of their past experiences in a new light . Such a process can occur at the individual level , but group interactions may increase the ability of its participants to generate and shift between alternative frames of a given situation— when each participant is willing to reconsider their pre - vious assumptions . Within the organizations studied , individuals chose social interactions that retained the equivocality of past experiences—the multiple meanings that might be con - sidered and reapplied in a new context . As one Hewlett - Packard engineer described , When you read about somebody’s experience and then actually go and talk to them about it you ﬁnd the level of knowledge is so much deeper than what can be trans - ferred through a paper or an hour - long talk . There’s a wealth of hidden knowledge that’s a result of the strug - gles , the agonizing they went through to try to ﬁgure out what’s the right way to proceed rather than the wrong way . Just as Getzels ( 1975 ) suggests in the context of indi - vidual inventiveness , deﬁning a problem is a pivotal activity for creative production . Our informants recog - nized the importance of such struggles , and pursued them through interactions that encouraged reframing of the question . In these interactive moments , by mind - fully considering the possibility that past knowledge may Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 493 have alternative meanings , problem solvers maintained the ﬂexibility to see new connections between their past experiences and the current projects others faced . This ﬂexibility enabled them to explore a range of interpre - tations of any given situation and , from this range , col - lectively consider and pursue possibilities that might not have emerged otherwise . Reinforcing Reinforcing activities are those that support individuals as they engage in help seeking , help giving , and reﬂec - tive reframing and , as a result , they are also critical to enabling those moments when collective creativ - ity emerges . The social interactions that shape collec - tive efforts involve more than directly bringing people together ; the interactions that give meaning and value to these collective efforts were also important . In orga - nizations that value individual efforts and view creativ - ity as a fundamentally individual process , it is unlikely that people will seek help from others or , for that mat - ter , offer help in other people’s efforts . Moreover , help that is given may be viewed as criticism or an attempt to gain ownership of ideas—reducing opportunities for reﬂective reframing and also , ultimately , the likelihood of future help seeking or giving . We identiﬁed two types of reinforcing behaviors in the ﬁeld data . First , individuals pursuing such collec - tive moments are reinforced by any positive experiences that resulted from engaging in help seeking , help giv - ing , and reﬂective reframing . When during an interac - tion someone reﬂects upon and reframes a problem by using their past experiences—in frozen foods or IV bags , for instance—the person who sought out the interac - tion leaves with a positive outcome , a creative insight , that makes it more likely they will seek help again on their next problem . An engineer at Design Continuum , for example , described how positive experiences within brainstorming sessions came from the extent to which individuals reinforced the contributions—both help giv - ing and reframing—of all the participants : I ﬁnd that the most successful brainstorming sessions here are with folks who can let go and give full credit to almost every team member or who , as a team mem - ber , is not really concerned about people saying this was so - and - so’s idea , this was his idea or her idea . [ They’re ] more concerned about deﬁning and solving problems . She would invite those particular people to another brainstorming session based on her previous experiences with them—reinforcing both her help seeking and their help - giving behaviors . The CEO of IDEO even noted that individuals often left the ﬁrm when it became clear they were no longer being invited to such brainstorms . Invitations to brainstorms reinforced reﬂective reframing activities by encouraging those who were invited to con - tinue enthusiastically and mindfully participating , while sanctioning those who did not reﬂectively engage in the sessions . Second , the evidence suggests that reinforcing of these activities also comes from the shared values and beliefs of the organizations we studied ; these organizations viewed collective problem solving as more desirable and , as a result , taught , rewarded , and promoted indi - viduals based on those collective behaviors . These addi - tional actions were perceived by informants as directly reinforcing particular efforts at help seeking , help giv - ing , or reﬂective reframing , and ranged from rewards for seeking help or for helping on other people’s projects to punishments for not seeking help on their own projects . Thus , the reward structure of the organization , in terms of promotions or credit for outstanding work , reinforced the behaviors that precipitated moments of collective creativity . For instance , a consultant within McKinsey explained how she used help seeking as a means to communicate to senior partners the interesting and chal - lenging work she was doing , because those partners would later vote on her promotions . A promotion crite - rion that included rising to creative challenges therefore encouraged people to seek help to demonstrate that they met this hurdle , thus reinforcing help seeking . Addition - ally , one Design Continuum engineer explained that his organization rewarded good design work to the extent that people understood the particular challenges of each project . Thus he often sought others’ help as a way to get credit for his own work . If there was a problem and he spent the weekend in the ofﬁce solving it by himself , no one might ever know about either the problem or the solution . However , by asking others for help on his problems , they would see the difﬁculties he was facing and appreciate the solution he ultimately pulled together with the help of their reﬂective reframing . Our informants were clearly aware of the status , credit , and rewards that accrued to those who con - tributed to moments of collective creativity . For exam - ple , a McKinsey partner explained that he rarely put sufﬁcient information into the organizational database because others would not give him credit for these con - tributions—crediting themselves , instead , for ﬁnding the information . Therefore , he put only enough into the database to tease others into calling him directly , and into acknowledging the current value of his past experi - ences . In this way , mindful social interactions not only provided a means for sharing past experiences , they also provided the motive for doing so—as a way for individ - uals to demonstrate the difﬁculty of the problems they were working on and the value of their past experiences to others . Other , more asocial means of enabling knowl - edge sharing do not encourage people to participate in joint problem - solving efforts . Reinforcing behaviors acknowledged , sometimes openly , the importance of social interactions in the cre - ative process : People were expected to seek help from Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 494 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS others and , when asked , were expected to give help . Thus , reinforcing created shared beliefs about the impor - tance of these activities for the work of the organization . One Design Continuum engineer explained that “no one here works in a box”—everyone was expected to ask for help whenever they had a problem . Further , such interactions encouraged individuals to seek others’ help in framing and solving the problems they faced . One engineer at IDEO described how , when he arrived at IDEO , he learned to draw upon the ideas of others in the organization : Where I worked before , you just didn’t ask for help . It was a sign of weakness ! ! ! ! [ At IDEO ] we don’t have time to screw around . At the ﬁrst hint I don’t know something , I’ll ask , “Does anyone know about this ? ” The whole thing here is you’ve got to leverage as much as possible . You ask for help—you are expected to ask for help here . Also , a McKinsey consultant described how asking for help was not only accepted but expected of junior - level consultants : “ [ It’s ] a cultural thing . It is assumed that you will make those calls . ” Reinforcing and reward - ing social interaction worked in combination to encour - age the activities that created moments of collective creativity . These four activities—help seeking , help giving , re - ﬂective reframing , and reinforcing—provide a frame - work for understanding how moments of collective creativity are triggered in organizations . As Figure 1 illustrates , help seeking , help giving , and reﬂective reframing are all mutually reinforcing activities that usu - ally appear in combination and activate one another . Reﬂective reframing is the core of the creatively col - lective moment , as this activity is vital to drawing out prior experience and combining it in new ways . Also , in order for individuals to become a creative collective , help seeking and help giving must lead to moments of reﬂective reframing . However , we also might expect that these activities sometimes occur in the absence of the others : People might offer help without being asked , for instance . Finally , other reinforcing activities linked to organizational structures such as reward and credit play a key role in our model , as they create a shared belief in the importance of the three other activities . Discussion We have presented the ﬁndings of a ﬁeld study that con - siders how moments of collective creativity emerge in organizations , and we identiﬁed a set of activities that precipitate such moments . We now turn to the impli - cations of these ﬁndings for deepening our understand - ing of creativity , extending research in collective cogni - tion , and understanding the boundary conditions of such research on supraindividual cognition . Contributions to the Creativity Literature This research extends our understanding of organiza - tional creativity by highlighting the collective and tran - sient nature of those interactions that generate creative insights . For instance , rather than thinking of suprain - dividual creativity as a persistent organizational phe - nomenon with varying degrees of collectiveness , our research suggests that it is a rare and ﬂeeting phe - nomenon even in the most creative of organizations . Thus , this study presents a mesolevel picture of cre - ativity that is different from studies of ﬁrm - level inno - vation ( e . g . , Hargadon and Sutton 1997 , Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ) that focus on organizational structure , strategy , and ongoing practices . In highlighting the par - ticular actions that enable collections of creative indi - viduals to become a creative collective , we begin to see links between these actions and how they precipitate momentary shifts in the nature of interactions rather than alter persistent ﬁrm - level variables . This shift in focus suggests the effectiveness of larger and more explicit organizational practices ( e . g . , brainstorming , multifunc - tional teams , knowledge - sharing initiatives ) may depend on more subtle microinteractions and their embedded - ness within the social systems of the organization . Our ﬁndings also extend individual notions of prob - lem ﬁnding ( Getzels 1975 ) and analogical reasoning ( Gentner and Gentner 1983 ) to the mesolevel of analysis , by demonstrating how the process of reﬂective refram - ing happens during collective moments of interaction . Because people looking to solve their problems often cannot do so alone , these moments of reﬂective refram - ing are critical to the creative process in organizations . Our analysis suggests that it is not easy to predict when such moments might happen ; however , we have pro - posed a set of behaviors that play a key role in gen - erating the context for such moments , including help seeking , help giving , and reinforcing . Moreover , this study offers ideas for extending psycho - logical studies of creativity ( e . g . , Oldham and Cummings 1996 , Amabile 1995 ) , by highlighting how momentary collective efforts contribute to and are complementary with individual efforts . One of the prevailing models of individual creativity is the componential model devel - oped by Amabile and colleagues ( Amabile 1983 , 1988 ; Amabile et al . 1996 ; Mueller et al . 2000 ) . The compo - nential model of creativity suggests that creative behavior is the result of the conﬂuence of three individual - level components—domain - relevant skills , creativity - relevant skills , and task motivation ( Amabile 1995 ) —that shape the likelihood that an individual will be creative in that situation . Using the concept of collective creativity , we suggest three ways the componential model may be extended to ﬁt creative processes that take place at higher levels of organizing . The componential model would be enhanced by considering the role that particular social interactions Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 495 play in enabling participants to identify which of their knowledge domains are relevant to solving a particular problem . Domain - relevant skills encompass all the knowledge an individual possesses to develop , synthesize , and judge a creative solution ( Amabile 1995 , pp . 85 – 87 ) . Because collective creativity takes place in moments when any one individual does not hold all of the necessary knowledge to construct a creative solution , the potential for a creative solution requires the domain - relevant skills of multiple participants . One person might have a potentially valuable idea but not recognize its value , while another has enough knowledge of the prob - lem to value that idea but not know of it . One engi - neer’s expertise in medical IV bags , for instance , might not seem relevant to mention , nor another’s expertise in valves and pumps , until a third suggests reframing the idea of a sneaker as an inﬂatable splint . Existing research has shown how individuals in problem - solving groups are reluctant to explore and share their nonover - lapping knowledge ( e . g . , Stasser and Titus 1987 ) . Our ﬁndings suggest extending our conception of domain - relevant skills to consider the behaviors that encour - age such sharing of domain - relevant information : What inﬂuences when particular individuals are asked for help , when that help is voluntarily given , when individual con - tributions are reﬂectively reframed , and when these three activities are reinforced by others in the organization ? Our analysis also suggests opportunities to expand our conception of intrinsic motivation . Intrinsic motivation has been shown to be a central and critical component of creative behavior , and this motivation depends upon the individual’s sense of free choice and freedom from constraints ( Amabile 1995 , Koestler 1964 ) . While intrin - sic motivation is seen as an individual - level construct , the experiences gained in momentary interactions often shape its formation . For example , individuals learn what aspects of work life are important , how they should act , and how they will be evaluated by gathering verbal and nonverbal cues from the actions of others in their work environment ( Salancik and Pfeffer 1978 ) . Through moments spent interacting with respected others who are visibly engaged in and passionate about their work , new - comers may come to hold similar values regarding such work . Considering the moments in which help seeking , help giving , reﬂective reframing , and reinforcing behav - iors encourage motivation would help us to understand the role of intrinsic motivation in creativity processes . Finally , understanding the social nature of creative insights may shed light on the nature of creativity - relevant skills . One of the goals of the literature on collective cognition is to account for the inﬂuence of social systems on individual cognition , focusing on the social context of thought rather than on individ - ual mental processes ( Porac et al . 1996 ) . We demon - strate that momentary social interactions , although ﬂeet - ing and difﬁcult for visitors to observe , may carry signif - icant weight in shaping how participants pursue the cre - ative process . Because collective efforts at problem solv - ing are a more observable cognitive phenomenon than the same efforts carried out by individuals , the social interactions that make up the creative process in these ﬁrms may shape expectations for how individuals should work alone . Individuals participating in group problem - solving sessions may learn by observing others’ behav - iors , for example , by similarly looking for analogies and experimenting with alternative frames when they are later working alone . For instance , one Design Contin - uum engineer described how his environment shaped his approach to creativity : You have that different perspective partially through the experience of just being exposed to all different kinds of programs directly but also just getting in the habit of doing that . You can see that you need to apply other manufacturing processes to places that have never heard of them . In this way , our ﬁndings demonstrate that mindful inter - actions across individuals provide not only a collective mechanism for generating solutions , but can also shape the subsequent creativity - relevant skills of individuals working alone . Understanding Collective Cognition and Group Process In building on the literature of collective cognition and , in particular , of collective mind and heedful interrelat - ing , we hope to focus attention on how collective cre - ativity is a social process , solving problems by pooling the resources of people in the moment and , ultimately , across a series of moments . This is similar to the mind - ful processes seen in high - reliability organizations in the sense that reﬂective reframing , like heedful interrelat - ing , is necessary for creative interactions as well as reli - able ones , because in both cases participants must be aware that “any ‘familiar’ event is known imperfectly and is capable of novelty” ( Weick et al . 1999 , p . 91 ) . Our understanding of collective creativity differs from collective mind , however , in that our focus is on the pro - cesses that generate creative disruptions from the estab - lished order as opposed to maintaining order in the face of disruption . Therefore , we suggest that a different process of mind - fulness is called for in creative organizations . Mindful - ness in settings requiring high reliability depends upon people interrelating their actions with their representa - tions of the collective enterprise ( Weick and Roberts 1993 , pp . 362 – 363 ) ; in these organizations the ends of the enterprise are clear—to maintain order in the face of change . In contrast , in settings requiring creativity , the ends of the enterprise are not clear , as the goal of the process is to create new solutions—to maintain change in the face of order . Within creative organizations , mind - fulness may be better characterized by the process of Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 496 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS reﬂective reframing , which includes not only representa - tions of the existing order , but also the introduction and construction of frames , or representations , of potential new orders . So while the literature on collective mind calls our attention to the importance of managing sur - prises by being preoccupied with failure and committed to the resilient pursuit of the routine ( Weick et al . 1999 ) , our analysis suggests that future research on collective cognition might explore how mindfulness , characterized here as one aspect of reﬂective reframing , also pursues novelty out of the routine . Our understanding of the momentary processes of col - lective creativity may also help us delve more deeply into the behavior that underlies some of the ﬁndings in the literature on group process . The literature on brain - storming , for example , ﬁnds that individuals perform better than groups on creative tasks ( Diehl and Stroebe 1987 , 1991 ; Mullen et al . 1991 ; Paulus et al . 1996 ) and attributes this poor group performance to such factors as social loaﬁng , social anxiety , blocking , and down - ward comparison . On the other hand , minority dissent and high participation among group members has been found to increase innovation ( Carsten and West 2001 ) , as has performance pressure ( Paulus and Dzindolet 1993 ) . Our study illustrates that in social interactions that arise within stable and ongoing communities ( such as orga - nizations ) , these factors are themselves products of past social interactions and shared values . Therefore , in orga - nizations that reinforce behaviors of help seeking , help giving , and reﬂective reframing , we would expect that there would be little social anxiety , and normative pres - sures to participate in collectively creative interactions would enable increased group creativity . Our research demonstrates the importance of the so - cial and momentary nature of collective cognition and , as a consequence , provides insight into why knowledge - management systems often fail in organizations . Specif - ically , we believe this failure is related to the value people place on reﬂective reframing as an element of the collective creativity process . All of the ﬁrms stud - ied had invested , sometimes heavily , in formal databases and other means for storing the knowledge generated in past projects and other experiences . The intent of these knowledge - management systems was for individuals to access the organizations’ past knowledge and , individu - ally , solve the problems they faced in a project . However , as consistently as these organizations adopted such databases , informants described their inef - fectiveness . A Design Continuum engineer recounted the failure of such a database : We had this library where different people were supposed to maintain different things . This person was going to maintain a library of glues , this one a library of plastic parts . And it just completely fell apart ; it didn’t go two weeks before it had completely fallen apart . Considerable organizational investment had gone into capturing and codifying individual knowledge to make it available to all in the organization , yet these efforts were not valued by the very people they were intended to serve . An Accenture partner explained , “Everybody here has their own [ network ] in terms of just using voice mail and having your own set of personal contacts ! ! ! I don’t think anybody here actually peruses the Knowl - edge Exchange to get that type of information . ” And one Hewlett - Packard informant related , “It’s all in people’s heads . The model’s out there somewhere but there are so many models in the network drive that if you didn’t know , you’d spend days trying to ﬁnd out what you were looking for . ” Rather than search on their own through codiﬁed knowledge , the problem solvers of these orga - nizations relied on those social interactions that helped them recognize nonobvious connections between the organization’s knowledge and their current projects . Technical knowledge - management efforts may be ignored because these more asocial practices discourage the moments of interaction that lead to reﬂective refram - ing and reconsidering of old ideas in new contexts . Databases codify knowledge , storing it in ways that can be easily retrieved using known and expected keywords . When problems are well known , these systems provide effective access to the solutions that are typically associ - ated with those problems . However , the very efﬁciency of database deposit - and - withdrawal mechanisms makes them difﬁcult tools for ﬁnding nonobvious links between ideas . Databases rely on individuals who know what they want to do , where they want to look , and what they want to ﬁnd . In short , most databases neither reﬂect on questions nor make unanticipated connections between those questions and other ideas and experiences residing in the database . These connections are made , instead , in the reﬂective reframing that occurs through momentary interactions in organizations . Boundary Conditions The phenomenon of collective creativity depends on the actions of help seeking , help giving , reﬂective refram - ing , and reinforcing that take place before ( and after ) moments of collective insight . Such actions are often constrained or undermined in organizations , however , and keep problem solvers from tapping into each other’s past experiences . For example , in many organizations , seeking help from others has social costs , as it can reﬂect the tacit admission that one is unable to solve problems on one’s own , a confession of inadequacy that few are willing to make ( e . g . , Lee 2002 ) . As Edmondson ( 1996 , 1999 ) shows , these costs can be mitigated through the creation of a climate of psychological safety in which people trust that they can be open about making mistakes and asking questions . However , this type of openness in spontaneous gatherings requires behavioral reinforce - ment that extends beyond ( and before ) the “team . ” Such Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 497 reinforcement is provided for the creative organizations we studied through behaviors that rewarded and encour - aged collective problem - solving activities . Further , the actions that precipitate collective moments may be inhibited by the status hierarchy within organi - zations . While our ﬁeld sites were somewhat egalitarian professional organizations with a focus on creative ideas , we would expect that less - egalitarian organizations , such as those with strong occupational hierarchies , would pro - vide less opportunity for such moments . For instance , Lee’s ( 2002 ) study of feedback seeking in hospitals sug - gests that those with higher occupational status are not as likely to seek help . One would imagine that moments of collective creativity would occur less frequently in that type of organizational setting . It should also be noted that while creative solutions often reﬂect such collective efforts , the people in these organizations were aware of other times when the shar - ing of ideas and experiences did not happen . For exam - ple , one manager in Boeing’s Ops Tech group explained : There are cases where the person who has the knowledge is sitting right next to you and it goes unnoticed and you plow a lot of ground that you didn’t necessarily have to . There’s still a lot duplication of effort . There just isn’t any way that I know of to make all knowledge that has ever been done on something available to the person at the time in which they need it . It’s all a matter of getting the right knowledge into the right hands at the right time . So , while the evidence suggests that collective cogni - tive processes link the past knowledge of organizational members to current problems faced by others , it also suggests this process occurs only in those moments when that past knowledge is made available across the organization . Collective creativity can also have costs as well as beneﬁts . The emphasis on a collective process , for in - stance , may come at the cost of accomplishing other types of work . For instance , encouraging consultants to spend time contacting one another rather than using available solutions in the corporate database can result in not completing work on time , or in reinventing the wheel ( Hargadon and Bechky 2005 ) . Additionally , focusing on collectively creative interactions is not always prudent : For particular problems , sometimes a better solution is not necessary ( Nemeth and Staw 1989 , Staw 1995 ) . Future Research This study sought to identify and develop an initial model of collective creativity and the actions that precip - itate such moments in organizational settings . As such , qualitative methods and inductive theory building were a useful approach to identifying and describing the phe - nomenon . However , these methods are not as well suited to testing propositions and hypotheses derived from the theory . The relative effects ( and metrics ) of help seeking , help giving , reﬂective reframing , and reinforcement on collective cognition and similar group processes may be better studied using more quantitative methods in labo - ratory techniques or ﬁeld surveys . Future research might continue studying processes of collective cognition through laboratory or ﬁeld studies based on tests and exercises developed to study individ - ual cognition ( see , for example , Gentner and Gentner 1983 ; Gentner and Markman 1997 ; Reeves and Weisberg 1993 , 1994 ) . What experimental conditions that shape help seeking and help giving , for example , might be used to induce or suppress subsequent reﬂective reframing among pairs and groups of individuals working jointly to solve such creativity tasks ? In ﬁeld studies , how might past group performance shape subsequent help seeking among collaborators ? Future ﬁeld research could also focus on exploring the nature of reinforcing activities , as this study did not ﬁnd differences in the types of reinforcing behav - iors across ﬁrms . However , one might expect that rein - forcing actions might work more or less effectively in encouraging collective creativity . As Orlikowski ( 1993 ) found while studying technological adoption , reinforcing behavior can be tricky—when such actions run counter to the shared expectations of the organization members , their effectiveness is minimal . Thus , while the inter - actions of collective creativity may be momentary , the support structure that ﬁrms create for such moments can - not be ephemeral , and future research is needed to fully investigate the differences in effectiveness of reinforcing activities . Analyzing the creativity that emerges through col - lective , momentary processes has implications for managerial action as well . For instance , while the social - psychological ﬁndings about creativity suggest appli - cations to small , close groups that act , at times , like individuals ( Amabile 1988 , p . 141 ) , the emphasis in such research has been on creating “high - performance” teams as a persistent phenomenon ( e . g . , Katzenbach and Smith 1993 , Lipman - Blumen and Leavitt 1999 ) and not on enabling the ﬂeeting moments that possibly under - lie such high performance . The data from this ﬁeld study suggest that , rather than attempting to build last - ing groups , organizations might support the activities— help seeking , help giving , reﬂecting reframing , and reinforcing—that facilitate the spontaneous formation of ad hoc groups formed around particular problems . This implies that managers , in addition to managing creative individuals in the creative process , should also focus their attention on reinforcing the interactions that turn individuals into creative collectives . Further , while much of the creativity literature is focused on individual creative ability and its expression in the organizational context , managers might ﬁnd col - lective creativity more dependent on individuals’ abil - ities to interact with others . This perspective suggests organizations seeking creative outcomes , such as new Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 498 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS product development groups , should select and reward individuals who pursue collective achievements over individualones . Additionally , managers might encourage , or even require , routine interactions between project teams in order to foster the social interactions that pre - cede and ultimately precipitate collective moments that cross traditional organizational boundaries . For exam - ple , both IDEO’s brainstorms and McKinsey’s transi - tory team structures routinely bring together people from across projects in ways that foster friendships and infor - mal help seeking and help giving . Conclusion The phenomenon of creativity exists relatively indepen - dently of the interpretive frameworks we use to study it . Approaches that focus on the individual and inven - tive aspects of creativity will ﬁnd within any creative solution key roles played by particular individuals and particular ideas that break from established expectations . At the same time , however , approaches that focus on the social and continuous aspects of a creative solution will ﬁnd key roles played by particular interactions and preexisting ideas . In this way , collective perspectives on creativity neither deny the existence of the individuals involved nor deny the novelty of their ideas . Rather , a collective perspective makes salient other aspects of a persistently complex phenomenon . Popular and sci - entiﬁc interest in individual creative accomplishments shapes not only how we as social scientists choose to describe and measure creativity , but also how people in organizations approach their work and how they later explain it . In some cases it provides a model for individ - uals engaged in creative efforts to work alone and ignore potentially valuable past ideas—to reinvent the wheel . In other cases , it provides a language that masks ( to partic - ipants and observers alike ) what is a collective process . The data from this research offers one glimpse into how organizational creativity takes place as a collective pro - cess . Returning to the recognition by one of his longtime assistants that Edison was in reality a “collective noun , ” this research suggests that the study of creativity in orga - nizations might beneﬁt from the incorporation of more such collective nouns into our vocabulary . Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Robert I . Sutton , Steve Barley , Kathleen M . Eisenhardt , Kim Elsbach , Gerardo Okhuysen , and Jane Douglas for their comments on earlier drafts of this paper . Additionally , they appreciate the assistance of Jim Walsh and their three anonymous reviewers . They would also like to thank the many participants in this research project for sharing their time and insights . This research was funded in part by a grant from the Center for Innovation Management Studies of Lehigh University . Appendix . Research Methods—Sources of Data Interviews with key informants . Individual interviews offered detailed narratives of the problem - solving process . Such recollections are prone to individual experiences , biases , and retrospective rationalizations , yet often give voice to highly informed understandings of those who are closely involved in the process . In total , over 110 interviews were conducted ( with the in - depth study of IDEO Product Devel - opment accounting for approximately 60 of these ) . The ﬁrst author interviewed between 6 ( all of Hewlett - Packard’s onsite members of the SPaM Group ) and 12 informants within each of the other organizations , ranging from executives to project managers to engineers and other “front - line” employees who are actively engaged in the problem - solving work of the orga - nization . Interviews pursued three goals : to deﬁne the overall structure , work practices , and culture of the organization ; to identify and describe the patterns of interaction within and from outside the organization ; and to identify potential projects that exempliﬁed creative solutions . Project postmortems . Project postmortems are traditionally formal opportunities for project teams to reﬂect on the merits and mistakes of a recently completed project and record the experiences of the project team for others . In this research , they served as team interviews intended to discuss the history of particular projects . These postmortem interviews provided a useful picture of past events because participants offered mul - tiple perspectives on common events and often ﬁlled gaps in what , from any one informant , may have been an incomplete recollection . Observations of work . Observations of ongoing problem - solving activities varied by the type of work performed within each organization . While small and focused problem - solving sessions , like brainstorming meetings ( Osborn 1957 ) , offered a glimpse into the social interactions that constitute the creative process , ideas and solutions were also generated in ad hoc , informal hallway interactions . Observing these meetings and social moments provided insight into how social interactions shaped individual participants’ perspectives on the problem , and subsequent responses . Within each site , the ﬁrst author observed several problem - solving meetings and informal inter - actions in which groups faced problems and actively generated alternative solutions . Tracking of particular projects . Interviews and project post - mortems helped identify past projects that reﬂected , in their outcomes , new combinations of existing ideas . For these projects , the ﬁrst author interviewed relevant individuals to determine the source of inspirations for the innovative features of the project and tried to determine the path of informa - tion ﬂows that brought these innovative ideas together . Such follow - up interviews acted as “task - related tours” ( Spradley 1979 ) in which informants provided concrete details of past events and , by doing so , recollected speciﬁc interactions that shaped the outcomes of these projects . Documents and technological artifacts of the organiza - tion . Written material also served as a data source describing the work , structure , and culture of the organizations . These sources included the popular media , existing organizational research , and original and compiled historical data . For this research , technological artifacts included products , prototypes , sketches , and—in some cases—presentations that made up the work product of the organization . Studying the artifacts of an organization enabled the identiﬁcation of instances in which old solutions were used to solve new problems . This analysis motivated subsequent data gathering to understand the organi - zational processes that led to these solutions . Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS 499 Endnotes 1 While a number of professional service ﬁrms offer a single or limited set of preexisting services , such as tax preparation , legal advice , or the implementation of enterprise software , this study was interested in those organizations that engaged in open - ended projects , where the solutions were not known in advance . 2 The data for the IDEO case study was gathered during the ﬁrst author’s 18 - month ethnography of this organization . The original ﬁeld notes , interview transcripts , archived information , artifacts , and videotaped meetings were revisited to generate new insights into the creative process within this organization . 3 We present these four activities as distinct behaviors because they ﬁt the data reasonably well and provide a simple and analytically useful way of summarizing these data . Nonethe - less , the behaviors and motivations that informants described and we observed could not always be cleanly distinguished : Aspects of more than one activity were often present in any interaction . One person’s help seeking , for example , was also a way of reinforcing the help a designer had previously given . References Amabile , T . M . 1983 . The Social Psychology of Creativity . Springer - Verlag , New York . Amabile , T . M . 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organi - zations . B . M . Staw , L . L . Cummings , eds . Research in Organi - zational Behavior , Vol . 10 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 123 – 167 . Amabile , T . M . 1995 . Creativity in Context . Westview Press , Boulder , CO . Amabile , T . M . , R . Conti , H . Coon , J . Lazenby , M . Herron . 1996 . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Acad . Manage - ment J . 39 ( 5 ) 1154 – 1185 . Ashford , S . J . , R . Blatt , D . VandeWalle . 2003 . Reﬂections on the look - ing glass : A review of research on feedback - seeking behavior in organizations . J . Management 29 ( 6 ) 773 – 799 . Bateman , T . S . , D . W . Organ . 1983 . Job satisfaction and the good soldier : The relationship between affect and employee “citizen - ship . ” Acad . Management J . 26 ( 4 ) 587 – 595 . Brown , S . L . , K . M . Eisenhardt . 1998 . Competing on the Edge : Strategy as Structured Chaos . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Carsten , K . W . , M . A . West . 2001 . Minority dissent and team inno - vation : The importance of participation in decision making . J . Appl . Psych . 86 ( 6 ) 1191 – 1201 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . 1988 . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . R . J . Sternberg , ed . The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives . Cambridge Univer - sity Press , New York . Diehl , M . , W . Stroebe . 1987 . Productivity loss in idea - generating groups : Toward a solution of the riddle . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 53 ( 3 ) 497 – 509 . Diehl , M . , W . Stroebe . 1991 . Productivity loss in idea generating groups : Tracking down the blocking effect . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 61 ( 3 ) 392 – 403 . Dougherty , D . , C . Hardy . 1996 . Sustained product innovation in large , mature organizations : Overcoming innovation - to - organization problems . Acad . Management J . 39 ( 5 ) 1120 – 1153 . Drazin , R . , M . A . Glynn , R . K . Kazanjian . 1999 . Multilevel theorizing about creativity in organizations : A sensemaking perspective . Acad . Management Rev . 24 ( 2 ) 286 – 307 . Edmondson , A . 1996 . Learning from mistakes is easier said than done : Group and organizational inﬂuences on the detection and correction of human error . J . Appl . Behav . Sci . 32 ( 1 ) 5 – 28 . Edmondson , A . 1999 . Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams . Admin . Sci . Quart . 44 ( 4 ) 350 – 383 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1989 . Building theories from case study research . Acad . Management Rev . 14 ( 4 ) 532 – 550 . Eisenhardt , K . M . 1990 . Speed and strategic choice : How managers accelerate decision making . California Management Rev . 32 ( 3 ) 39 – 54 . Fiske , S . T . , S . E . Taylor . 1991 . Social Cognition . McGraw - Hill , New York . Gentner , D . , D . R . Gentner . 1983 . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . D . Gentner , A . Stevens , eds . Men - tal Models . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Gentner , D . , A . B . Markman . 1997 . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . Amer . Psychologist 52 ( 1 ) 45 – 56 . Getzels , J . W . 1975 . Problem - ﬁnding and inventiveness of solutions . J . Creative Behav . 9 12 – 18 . Glaser , B . G . , A . L . Strauss . 1967 . The Discovery of Grounded Theory ; Strategies for Qualitative Research . Aldine Pub . Co . , Chicago , IL . Hargadon , A . B . 1998 . Firms as knowledge brokers : Lessons in pur - suing continuous innovation . California Management Rev . 40 ( 3 ) 209 – 227 . Hargadon , A . B . 2002 . Brokering knowledge : Linking learning and innovation . B . M . Staw , L . L . Cummings , eds . Research in Orga - nizational Behavior , Vol . 24 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 41 – 85 . Hargadon , A . B . , B . A . Bechky . 2005 . The politics of knowledge work in a software development group . K . D . Elsbach , ed . Qual - itative Organizational Research . Information Age Publishing , Greenwich , CT , 15 – 35 . Hargadon , A . , R . I . Sutton . 1997 . Technology brokering and innova - tion in a product development ﬁrm . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 ( 4 ) 716 – 749 . Hutchins , E . 1991 . Organizing work by adaptation . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 14 – 39 . Katzenbach , J . R . , D . K . Smith . 1993 . The Wisdom of Teams : Creating the High - Performance Organization . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Koestler , A . 1964 . The Act of Creation . Dell , New York . Kurtzberg , T . R . , T . M . Amabile . 2001 . From Guilford to creative syn - ergy : Opening the black box of team level creativity . Creativity Res . J . 13 285 – 294 . Lave , J . 1988 . Cognition in Practice : Mind , Mathematics , and Culture in Everyday Life . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Lee , F . 1997 . When the going gets tough , do the tough ask for help ? Help - seeking and power motivations in organizations . Organ . Behav . Human Decision Processes 72 ( 3 ) 336 – 363 . Lee , F . 2002 . The social costs of seeking help . J . Appl . Behav . Sci . 38 ( 1 ) 17 – 35 . Lipman - Blumen , J . , H . J . Leavitt . 1999 . Hot Groups : Seeding Them , Feeding Them , and Using Them to Ignite Your Organization . Oxford University Press , New York . McKenna , C . 1995 . The origins of modern management consulting . Bus . Econom . Hist . 24 ( 1 ) 51 – 58 . McKenna , C . 1996 . Agents of adhocracy : Management consultants and the reorganization of the executive branch , 1947 – 1949 . Bus . Econom . Hist . 25 ( 1 ) 101 – 111 . Meindl , J . R . , C . Stubbart , J . F . A . Porac . 1996 . Cognition Within and Between Organizations . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Hargadon and Bechky : When Collections of Creatives Become Creative Collectives 500 Organization Science 17 ( 4 ) , pp . 484 – 500 , ©2006 INFORMS Miles , M . B . , A . M . Huberman . 1994 . Qualitative Data Analysis . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Millard , A . J . 1990 . Edison and the Business of Innovation . Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore , MD . Motowidlo , S . J . 2000 . Some basic issues related to contextual performance and organizational citizenship behavior in human resource management . Human Resource Management Rev . 10 ( 1 ) 115 – 126 . Mueller , J . S . , T . M . Amabile , W . B . Simpson , L . Fleming , C . N . Hadley . 2000 . The inﬂuence of time pressure on creative think - ing in organizations . Working Paper 01 - 023 , Harvard Business School , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA . Mullen , B . , C . Johnson , E . Salas . 1991 . Productivity loss in brain - storming groups : A meta - analytic integration . Basic Appl . Psych . 12 ( 1 ) 2 – 23 . Nemeth , C . J . , B . M . Staw . 1989 . The tradeoffs of social control and innovation in groups and organizations . Adv . Experiment . Psych . 22 175 – 210 . Nonaka , I . , H . Takeuchi . 1995 . The Knowledge - Creating Company : How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation . Oxford University Press , New York . Oldham , G . R . , A . Cummings . 1996 . Employee creativity : Personal and contextual factors at work . Acad . Management J . 39 ( 3 ) 607 – 634 . Orlikowski , W . 1993 . Learning from notes : Organizational issues in groupware implementation . Inform . Soc . 9 237 – 250 . Orr , J . 1996 . Talking about Machines : An Ethnography of a Modern Job . ILR Press , Ithaca , NY . Osborn , A . F . 1957 . Applied Imagination . Scribner , New York . Paulus , P . B . , M . T . Dzindolet . 1993 . Social inﬂuence processes in group brainstorming . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 64 ( 4 ) 575 – 586 . Paulus , P . B . , V . Brown , A . H . Ortega . 1996 . Group creativity . R . E . Pursuer , A . Montuori , eds . Social Creativity in Organizations . Hampton Press , Cresskill , NJ . Porac , J . F . A . , J . R . Meindl , C . Stubbart . 1996 . Introduction . J . R . Meindl , C . Stubbart , J . F . A . Porac , eds . Cognition Within and Between Organizations . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Reeves , L . M . , R . W . Weisberg . 1993 . On the concrete nature of human thinking : Content and context in analogical transfer . Ed . Psych . 13 245 – 258 . Reeves , L . M . , R . W . Weisberg . 1994 . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psych . Bull . 115 ( 3 ) 381 – 400 . Salancik , G . R . , J . Pfeffer . 1978 . A social information processing approach to job attitudes and task design . Admin . Sci . Quart . 23 ( 2 ) 224 – 253 . Schank , R . , R . P . Abelson . 1977 . Scripts , Plans , Goals , and Un - derstanding : An Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Spradley , J . P . 1979 . The Ethnographic Interview . Holt , Rinehart and Winston , New York . Stasser , G . , W . Titus . 1987 . Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dissemination of unshared infor - mation during group discussion . J . Personality Soc . Psych . 53 ( 1 ) 81 – 93 . Staw , B . M . 1995 . Why no one really wants creativity . C . M . Ford , D . A . Gioia , eds . Creative Action in Organizations . Sage Publi - cations , Thousand Oaks , CA , 161 – 166 . Sternberg , R . J . 1999 . Handbook of Creativity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Thompson , L . L . , J . M . Levine , D . M . Messick . 1999 . Shared Cognition in Organizations : The Management of Knowledge . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ . Van de Ven , A . H . 1986 . Central problems in the management of innovation . Management Sci . 32 ( 5 ) 590 – 607 . Walsh , J . P . , G . R . Ungson . 1991 . Organizational memory . Acad . Man - agement Rev . 16 ( 1 ) 57 – 91 . Weick , K . E . 1979 . The Social Psychology of Organizing . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Weick , K . E . 1995 . Sensemaking in Organizations . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Weick , K . E . , K . H . Roberts . 1993 . Collective mind in organizations : Heedful interrelating on ﬂight decks . Admin . Sci . Quart . 38 ( 3 ) 357 – 381 . Weick , K . E . , K . M . Sutcliffe , D . Obstfeld . 1999 . Organizing for high reliability : Processes of collective mindfulness . Res . Organ . Behav . 21 81 – 123 . Woodman , R . W . , J . E . Sawyer , R . W . Grifﬁn . 1993 . Toward a the - ory of organizational creativity . Acad . Management Rev . 18 ( 2 ) 293 – 321 . Yin , R . K . 1994 . Case Study Research . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA .