E ducation and c ulturE 31 ( 1 ) ( 2015 ) : 101 - 104 101 B ook r EviEw T he P ublic and i Ts P roblems Ava Becker John Dewey . Edited and annotated by Melvin L . Rogers , The Public and Its Problems : An Essay in Political Inquiry . University Park , PA : The Pennsylvania State University Press , 2012 . 190 + xiv pp . ISBN 978 - 0 - 271 - 05570 - 1 . $ 20 . 95 ( pbk ) . I came to this review not as an emerging scholar in political science or philosophy , but rather in language education . As such , the questions that I brought to the text were informed by my disciplinary formation and professional aspirations . I won - dered : What benefits might language educators in the twenty - first century derive from reading The Public and its Problems ? How might Deweyan reflections on the public , the state , community , and democracy inform or refresh ongoing debates in my field ? As I read , it struck me that Dewey’s writings do not feature more promi - nently in my field despite a great deal of overlap between his beliefs and those of many contemporary language educators and researchers . While the terminology we use may differ , like Dewey , applied linguists affirm the centrality of communi - cation in socialization ( chapter 5 ) , and many welcome dialogue aimed at destabiliz - ing monolithic , top - down understandings of identity , community , and citizenship ( e . g . , chapters 1 – 2 ) . Melvin L . Rogers’s painstaking editorial work on this classic text is an important step toward making one of Dewey’s “richest meditations on the future of democracy” ( 1 ) accessible to multidisciplinary audiences . Bookended by a handful of choice auxiliary resources ( a chronology of Dew - ey’s life , Rogers’s introduction , notes , and a finely curated bibliographical note ) , Dewey’s original writing remains virtually untouched save a few instances “where the absence of guidance makes Dewey’s meaning completely uncertain” ( xiv ) . Con - sequently , Deweyan scholars and novices alike will find value in this edited reprint of The Public and Its Problems . This edition will be of particular use in upper - level undergraduate and graduate courses from disciplines across the humanities and so - cial sciences . However , it is worth noting that it is first and foremost a political trea - tise , a philosophical text , so while the themes running throughout might resonate with many language educators and researchers ( for instance ) , the book is clearly not aimed at that audience , nor are Rogers’s annotations . Educators looking for a bullet list of practice - oriented recommendations will not find them here , and researchers seeking theory grounded in empirical research would also do well to look elsewhere . Rogers is not to be faulted for these potential lacunae , however . His objec - tive in revisiting Dewey’s work was to offer “a richer and more useful volume than E & C E duCation and C ulturE 102 a va B EckEr currently exists” ( xiv ) —an objective he unquestionably accomplished . Still , as a language education researcher I wondered if in his attempt not to “overburden the reader” with excessive informational notes ( xiv ) , he did not miss opportunities to venture a few relevant connections to the present historical moment . Such connec - tions would have been welcome , especially in his introduction , and might indeed have taken some of the burden off his diverse readership when attempting to link the text to current realities . Notably , in his own introduction to the book ( published in 1946 , some twenty years after the lectures were first delivered ) Dewey is very much aware of the “intervening events” ( 35 ) ( particularly surrounding the Second World War ) , and he frequently refers to the intensifying role of technology in war as he revisits his reflections on democracy initially presented in 1927 . In this way , his introduction serves to remind contemporary readers that our thinking and actions are inevitably and profoundly shaped by the victories and calamities of our times ; Rogers might have reflected a bit on these changed conditions , thereby bringing the volume more explicitly into current debates about democracy , the public , and the state . Rogers might also have considered including possible discussion questions at each chapter’s end , which would have enhanced this edition’s already obvious appeal as a teaching text . Nevertheless , what Rogers’s contribution may lack in terms of present - or future - oriented commentary it makes up for in its engagement with the past—an essential component in any twenty - first - century appreciation of Dewey’s work . In his introduction , Rogers writes with the intimacy of an intellectual biographer , au - thoritatively locating not only Dewey’s thinking but also the man himself in the his - torical , political , and intellectual climate of the early 1900s . The chapter constitutes a well - fleshed - out and unpresumptuous framework to which the novice , especially , might return to settle doubts and make connections throughout the book . Another strength can be found in Rogers’s judicious selection of key historical disputes to unpack . For instance , subheadings such as The Ethics of Democracy demarcate ac - cessible recapitulations of foundational debates Dewey had with Walter Lippmann and Sir Henry Maine . Rogers also astutely points out apparent contradictions across Dewey’s oeuvre , and he expertly advises the reader on how to “read” him—as in , for example , “It is a mistake to read him as the spokesperson for his time” ( 2 ) and “Readers of Dewey should be careful at precisely this juncture” ( 9 ) —which foments the reader’s confidence in his authoritative interpretations . Toward the end of his introduction , Rogers brings our attention to Dewey’s central contention that the public’s identity is wholly dependent on a return to “lo - cal communal life . ” He concludes the section with a question , the answer to which he proposes is indefinitely out of reach : “What would communal life look like , given the national , and increasingly , international stage on which political prob - lems play themselves out ? This is the primary question , whose answer seems ter - ribly and perhaps tragically elusive” ( 29 ) . I must admit that I was surprised at the B ook r EviEw 103 V olume 31 ( 1 ) 2015 moderately pessimistic tone of Rogers’s speculation . This is a question with which applied linguists have to contend constantly in practice and research ( see , e . g . , Blommaert and Rampton 2011 ; Garrett and Baquedano - López 2002 ) , and perhaps because of our incessant engagement with questions of community in highly plu - ral and transnational contexts , I have not seen them framed quite so dramatically in the language education literature . In response to Rogers’s apparent unease in answering his own question , I offer an insight from sociolinguist Jan Blommaert’s ( 2013 ) recent discussion of community and citizenship in “superdiverse” times : “The problem , ” he writes , “is one of imagination : how do we imagine these new forms of complexity ? ” ( 194 ) . Blommaert’s implicit call to engage with “new forms of complexity” resists Rogers’s resignation to an answer that “seems terribly and perhaps tragically elusive , ” and it seems to me to be more consonant with Dewey’s intellectual proclivities . Blommaert’s observation invites us to seek out the spaces for reimagining how we might go about redefining the public and the state in an era of increasing social and migratory complexity . Following Rogers’s twenty - nine - page Introduction is John Dewey’s The Pub - lic and Its Problems : An Essay in Political Inquiry . It comprises six chapters and is prefaced by a short Foreword ( 1927 ) and slightly longer Introduction ( 1946 ) . In it , John Dewey outlines his vision of democracy : its purpose , processes , and players . His discussion revolves , importantly , around definitional and philosophical tensions surrounding how we conceptualize “the public” and “the state” separately and in relation to one another . While it is quite accessibly and elegantly written overall , this reviewer found his penned lectures to be somewhat drawn out and even repetitive at times , but fortunately Rogers’s notes and introduction offered some respite where archaisms and other matters of style interfered with comprehension . Rogers’s me - ticulous annotations serve multiple functions , from signaling misquotations ( e . g . , chapter 4 , note 1 , 171 ) , to modest speculations on what “Dewey may have in mind” in a particular passage ( e . g . , introduction , note 3 , 165 ) , to tracking down obscure but relevant references . Throughout , Rogers offers substantial scholarly “connec - tive tissue” ( xiii ) to enhance and extend the reader’s engagement with the text . His annotations also include historical notes that are particularly useful to the reader who is unfamiliar with U . S . policies and political history ( e . g . , introduction , note 3 , 165 ; chapter 1 , note 7 , 177 ) . In addition to the ample references provided in the notes , Rogers has assembled an extensive bibliographical note composed of what he feels are “some of the most important texts on Dewey” ( 177 ) , namely for the Dew - eyan newcomer . These are grouped into four subheadings : “Works by Dewey” ( a single reference to a thirty - seven - volume edition published by the Southern Illinois University Press ) , “Dewey’s Biography and Intellectual Context , ” “Introductions to Dewey’s Ideas , ” and “Dewey’s Ethical and Political Ideas . ” Now approaching the centennial anniversary of the first publication of The Public and Its Problems , Rogers’s ( 2012 ) edition offers a deeply thoughtful and E & C E duCation and C ulturE 104 a va B EckEr expertly thorough editorial return to Dewey’s seminal treatise on democracy , which accords Dewey’s original thinking its rightful , central place in the volume . Despite the few areas I felt Rogers might have developed further , he seems to have struck a respectful balance between refreshing the text ( e . g . , clarifying archaisms ) and revitalizing it ( e . g . , posing questions that bring the text into the present day ) . As such , this edition is well positioned to attract attention across disciplinary lines . B iBliography Blommaert , Jan . “Citizenship , Language , and Superdiversity : Towards Complexity . ” Journal of Language , Identity , and Education 12 , no . 3 ( July 2013 ) : 193 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15348458 . 2013 . 797276 . Blommaert , Jan , and Ben Rampton . “Language and Superdiversity . ” Diversities 13 , no . 2 ( 2011 ) : 1 – 22 , http : / / www . unesco . org / shs / diversities / vol13 / issue2 / art1 . Garrett , Paul B . , and Patricia Baquedano - López . “Language Socialization : Reproduction and Continuity , Transformation and Change . ” Annual Review of Anthropology 31 , no . 1 ( June 2002 ) : 339 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . anthro . 31 . 040402 . 085352 . Ava Becker is a graduate student in the Department of Language and Literacy Edu - cation at The University of British Columbia . E - mail : ava . becker @ alumni . ubc . ca .