Evolving complexity : how tinkering shapes cells , software and ecological networks Ricard Sol´e ∗ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and Sergi Valverde 5 , 4 1 ICREA - Complex Systems Lab , Universitat Pompeu Fabra , Dr . Aiguader 88 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain 2 Institut de Biologia Evolutiva ( UPF - CSIC ) , Pg . Maritim 37 , 08003 Barcelona , 3 Santa Fe Institute , 1399 Hyde Park Road , Santa Fe NM 87501 , USA , 4 European Centre for Living Technology , S . Marco 2940 , 30124 , Venice , Italy 5 Evolution of Technology Lab , Institut de Biologia Evolutiva ( UPF - CSIC ) , Pg . Maritim 37 , 08003 Barcelona , A common trait of complex systems is that they can be represented by means of a network of interacting parts . It is , in fact , the network organisation ( more than the parts ) what largely conditions most higher - level properties , which are not reducible to the properties of the individual parts . Can the topological organisation of these webs provide some insight into their evolutionary origins ? Both biological and artiﬁcial networks share some common architectural traits . They are often heterogeneous and sparse , and most exhibit the small - world property or the presence of modular or hierarchical patterns . These properties have often been attributed to the selection of functionally meaningful traits . However , the proper formulation of generative network models suggests a rather diﬀerent picture . Against the standard selection - optimisation argument , some networks reveal the inevitable generation of complex patterns resulting from reuse and can be modelled using duplication - rewiring rules . These give rise to the heterogeneous , scale - free and modular architectures observed in the real case studies . Tinkering is a universal mechanism that drives not only biological evolution but also the large - scale dynamics of some technological designs . Here we examine the evidence for tinkering in cellular , technological and ecological webs and its impact in shaping their architecture and deeply aﬀecting their functional properties . Our analysis suggests to seriously reconsider the role played by selection forces or design principles as main drivers of network evolution . Keywords : Complexity , network science , emergence , tinkering , selection , evolution , spandrels , I . INTRODUCTION ”Knowing how something originated often is the best clue for how it works” Terrence Deacon The fabric of complexity is made of networks . The presence of collective - level , system properties necessarily requires a description grounded in a map of connections between individual parts . Such view has been around much longer than is usually acknowledged within the ﬁeld of Network Science . Long before small worlds and scale - free structures were identiﬁed , the importance of interactions and their embodiment within graphs was al - ready in place in ecology and neuroscience . Classic stud - ies on trophic webs and their stability had an enormous impact on our understanding of communities ( Margalef 1968 , May , 1973 , Pimm 1984 , Sol´e and Bascompte 2006 ) . Similarly , since Ramon y Cajal ( DeFelipe 2006 ) the re - alization that cognition was associated to complex webs has been percolating through the entire ﬁeld ( Sporns et al 2004 , Bassett and Sporns 2017 ) . Why to care about interactions among the units ? Why is the network level relevant in seeking explanations for the origins of complexity ? A main avenue that largely ∗ corresponding author . E - mail : ricard . sole @ upf . edu precluded the rise of network science early provided the answers . It was the ﬁeld of phase transitions ( Stanley , 1971 , Goldenfeld 2018 , Sol´e 2011 , Stein and Newman 2013 ) . Phase transitions are a common phenomenon that we know well : water freezes or boils and completely diﬀerent , homogeneous macroscopic properties can be seen on each phase ( liquid , solid and gas ) separated by characteristic transition temperatures . But how these phase transitions happen ? How can we use a microscopic theory that incorporates the properties and interactions among components and explain the completely diﬀer - ent qualitative properties displayed by each phase ? In searching for theories , physicists found that very simple models , incorporating a toy description of the interac - tions ( and paying very little attention to the structure of the components ) can fully explain them . The nature of the interactions , and not the components , is what mat - ters . The little role played by the details of the units is deeply tied to the presence of emergent patterns aris - ing on the larger scale ( Anderson , 1972 , Kauﬀman 1993 , Gell - Mann 1994 ) and the failure of the reductionist pro - gram ( Goodwin 1994 ; Sol´e and Goodwin , 2001 ) . Emer - gence became a central concept and the cornerstone of a view of systems where system - level properties could not be reduced to the properties of its component units . One particularly interesting problem that received con - siderable attention ( and that will be relevant here ) was the phenomenon of percolation ( Stauﬀer and Aharony 2003 ) : the sudden shift from a disconnected to a con - a r X i v : 1907 . 05528v1 [ q - b i o . P E ] 12 J u l 2019 2 FIG . 1 Complex systems and their network architecture . Three diﬀerent case studies ( left column ) include ( a ) molecular interactions within cells ( ﬁgure adapted from McGuﬀee and Elcock 2010 ) which can be described for example in terms of protein - protein interaction networks ( b ) where links indicate physical interactions , Predator - prey ( c ) and other interactions within ecological food webs , deﬁne a major class of links within complex ecological networks ( picture by Dariusz Kowalczyk ) . An example is shown in ( d ) where we display part of the Silwood Park web , where nodes and species and the edges stand for trophic interactions . Finally , artiﬁcial systems can also be described as networks . A specially relevant example is provided by software graphs , created by programmers ( e ) who build complex interacting subsystems such as the one displayed in ( f ) . This network is corresponds to the Aztec include network ( see text ) where diﬀerent parts of the software project and links indicate dependencies between ﬁles . Although each example result from very diﬀerent underlying processes and involve very diverse scales , they all share a common class of fundamental generative rules associated to reuse . nected system that is experienced by a set of N ele - ments that are connected with pairwise threads with a gi¡ven probability p . If (cid:104) k (cid:105) indicates the average number of connections displayed by a randomly chosen element of this system , for a random connection rule we have (cid:104) k (cid:105) = pN and it can be shown that the critical condition (cid:104) k (cid:105) c = 1 deﬁnes an abrupt ( topological ) phase transition ( see Albert and Barab´asi 2002 ) . It provides a powerful illustration of emergence and had a tremendous impact in very diverse domains , from molecular biology to so - cial dynamics . ( Albert and Barabasi 2002 ; Dorogovtsev and Mendes , 2002 ; Newman 2003 ; Bocaletti et al 2006 ; Estrada 2012 ; Barabasi , 2016 ) . With the turn of this century , the combination of avail - able data sets associated to social , technological and bio - logical systems and new generation of theoretical models 3 triggered a revolution that spread across all disciplines . Network Science became the basis for both new concepts and statistical methods . Classical graph theory ( Gross and Yellen 2005 ) had been mainly associated to the study of homogeneous webs , including in particular all kinds of lattices , trees and random graphs . Because the lack of knowledge about the architecture of real networks , most models of genetic , neural and ecological systems used ho - mogeneous graphs . Everything changed once the map - ping of Internet , social webs or - omic data provided the ﬁrst solid picture of real networks . They conﬁrmed an old sociological study ( Milgram 1967 ) indicating that the number of degrees of separation between two randomly chosen individuals , providing a very elegant mathemat - ical framework to explain the phenomenon ( Watts and Strogatz 1998 ) . Secondly , an unexpectedly general ﬁnd - ing was the realisation that real networks are heteroge - neous . Instead of previously assumed regular , Gaussian or exponential distributions of connections , long - tailed ones were found to be the rule : most elements are con - nected with a few others whereas a small number of them includes units connected to many others ( the hubs ) . It has been suggested ( Sol´e et al . , 2003 ) that inspecting the organisation of complex networks can reveal the evo - lutionary design or evolutionary principles that shaped them . In a nutshell , identifying the generative rules re - sponsible for their topology could be used to ﬁnd their origins and the contributions of randomness , architec - tural constraints or self - organisation . In other words , the paths followed by each system ( either through evolution - ary dynamics , developmental processes or technological design protocols ) can be deeply limited by fundamen - tal principles of mathematical nature . Very often , this reveals the failure of some standard assumptions and ex - planations involving selection or optimisation . In this paper , we will review the existing evidence for this idea and its deep implications for our understanding of network complexity . This includes : ( 1 ) the presence of mechanisms of network growth that are dominated by extensive reuse of extant components . Such ”tinkering” process ( Jacob , 1977 ) was early suggested by the French biologist Francois Jacob and has enormous importance in evolution . Evidence from multiple examples support this conjecture , but network structure provides a systems - level conﬁrmation of its impact ( including engineered , man - made systems ) . ( 2 ) Structural constraints limit the repertoire of potential forms of network complexity that can be found . ( 3 ) Some particular structures ( at diﬀerent scales ) display robust statistical patterns that could be attributed to optimal or eﬃcient design principles : they are byproducts of the heterogeneities created by genera - tive rules . As will be shown below , deep connections exist be - tween the structuralist view of biology , the tinkered na - ture of complexity and the ways networks ﬁll the space of the possible . II . EVOLUTIONARY TINKERING IN CELLULAR NETWORKS ”Living organisms are historical structures ( . . . ) They represent not a perfect product of engineering , but a patchwork of odd sets pieced together when and where opportunities arose . ” Fran¸cois Jacob Our ﬁrst approach to the evolution of complex net - works will consider the impact of a widespread feature of evolutionary dynamics : tinkering . As discussed in ( Ja - cob , 1977 ) there’s a major diﬀerence between the ways an engineer and evolutionary processes work . The ﬁrst has a goal and thus foresees what needs to be designed . To do so , the engineer can completely replace previous components and ignore previous protocols to build an artifact . In this way , novelties can emerge as a result , for example , of adopting a new material ( such as liquid crystal ) . In stark contrast , evolution does not foresee what solution is required for a given problem . Moreover , there’s no way evolutionary processes ignore those com - ponents and structures that are already in place : reuse of previous parts is crucial . Surprisingly , reuse leads to network heterogeneities that strongly constrain the local and global properties of the resulting graphs . An example of the implications of tinkering rules can be found in models of protein interaction networks . As with other non - directed graphs , we deﬁne a network Ω as a pair ( V , E ) . Here V stands now for the set of nodes and E the matrix of interactions between pairs of nodes . If we take a given protein v j ∈ V it will have a given number of links with other proteins in our graph . These networks are characterised by the presence of degree distributions following a truncated power law shape , i . e . P ( k ) ∼ ( k + k 0 ) − γ e k / k c ( 1 ) where P ( k ) is the probability distribution of having a protein interacting with k other proteins . Consider the following model ( Sol´e et al 2003 , Pastor - Satorras et al 2003 ) . The protein network is now reduced to a graph deﬁned by a collection of vertices V = { v k } and a matrix of connections provided by the adjacency matrix A = ( a ij ) where a ij = 1 if the two proteins inter - act and zero otherwise . Let us indicate by | V | the size of the network at a given step . We start form a set m 0 of connected nodes , and at each time step we perform the following operations ( ﬁgure 1a ) : ( i ) One node of the graph is selected at random and duplicated ; ( ii ) The links emanating from the newly generated node are removed with probability δ and ( iii ) New links ( not previously present after the duplication step ) are created between the new node and all any other node with probability α . Although available data indicate that new interactions are likely to be formed preferentially towards proteins with high degree here we do not consider this constraint . Step ( i ) implements gene duplication ( the tinkering component ) in which both the original and the replicated 4 FIG . 2 Modeling tinkered evolution in complex cellular networks . Simple rules of reuse ( a ) generate heterogeneous networks closely similar to those found in cells , such as the Human transcription factor network shown in ( b ) , described in ( Rodriguez - Caso et al . 2005 ) . Here hubs include key TFs ( such as the tumor supressor P53 ) associated to proliferation diseases . Most measurable network properties found in proteomes can be replicated , such as the distribution of network motifs . In ﬁgure ( c ) we display the observed frequencies ( ordered from or three diﬀerent protein networks , namely the human interactome ( HI , ﬁlled triangles ) , yeast proteome ( YP , ﬁlled circles ) and the subset of human transcription factors ( HTF , open squares ) . For comparison we display the predicted subgraph census from the duplication - rewiring model ( d , see Sol´e and Valverde 2008 ) . By tuning the removal rate of links associated to divergence , it can be shown that a transition from connected to disconnected occurs close to a critical value δ c = 1 / 2 , as shown for example from the estimation of the average network size against δ ( e ) . Here two diﬀerent models ( Sol´e et al 2003 , Vazquez et al 2003 ) have been used , here indicated as A and B , respectively . proteins retain the same set of interactions . The rewiring steps ( ii ) and ( iii ) implement mutations which translate into the deletion or addition of interactions with diﬀerent proteins . The process is repeated until N proteins have been obtained . An example of the networks obtained from this process give networks is shown in ( ﬁgure 2b ) closely resembling the protein maps found in cells ( ﬁg . 1b ) . This network ﬁts very well the heterogeneous de - gree distributions , but also other distributions associated to small - scale patterns , such as the abundance of three - and four - component ( ﬁg 2 c ) network motifs ( Milo et al . , 2002 ) which naturally result from our tinkering process ( see the subgraphs shown in ﬁgure 2a ) . The model cor - rectly reproduces the observed data ( ﬁg . 2d ) . In general , this model and the work by Vespignani and co - workers ( Vazquez et al , 2003 ; Colizza et al 2005 , Vazquez 2003 ) as well as duplication models involving gene regulation ( Teichmann and Babu 2004 ) successfully explain the ar - chitecture of protein maps ( van Noort et al 2004 ; Ara - bidopsis Interactome Mapping Consortium , 2011 ) . The network shown in ﬁg . 2b is sparse , but the model described above can give highly connected or even totally disconnected graphs . Deletion rate in particular needs to be tuned . What can the model say about this ? It is not diﬃcult to show ( Sol´e et al 2001 ) that the rate of link re - moval deﬁnes two phases separated by a critical value δ c . This is obtained from an average ( mean ﬁeld ) description that gives a dynamical equation for the average degree : dK ( n ) dn = 2 α n + 1 − 2 δα n K ( n ) ( 2 ) where n is the proteome size ( acting as a time scale ) . By solving this equation , a steady state K ∗ is obtained , namely : K ∗ = lim n →∞ K ( n ) = 2 α 2 δ − 1 ( 3 ) 5 One phase , associated to deletion rates δ > δ c , involves a disconnected proteome ( fragmented into diﬀerent parts ) and there is another phase where it becomes rapidly hy - perconnected . At the critical point separating these two phases ( ﬁgure 2e ) we see the emergence of a sparse , but connected graph associated to a percolation transition . In other words , there is a point where the protein inter - action network becomes a true system ( with paths con - necting all elements ) at a low cost . This is the region where the model ﬁts very well the data in the two main models of duplication and divergence . Perhaps more surprising , the networks resulting from tinkering also display modularity : they appear organized in subsets whose elements are more connected among them than with the rest of the web ( Sol´e and Valverde , 2008 ) . This was unexpected , since modularity is consid - ered one of the most important patterns associated to adaptive , functional traits of biological complexity ( Raﬀ 1996 ; Hartwell et al . 1999 ; Wagner et al . 2007 ) . Multi - ple cellular functions are carried by subsets of proteins , including developmental modules . In general , biological modularity provides the right trade - oﬀ between special - ization and integration ( Wagner 1995 ; Calabretta et al . 2000 ; Lipson et al . 2002 ) . Against that intuition , it was shown that modularity can emerge for free . As it oc - curs with other network patterns to be discussed below , it might be the inevitable outcome of reuse . Similarly , a common statistical pattern is also found at the level of so called network motifs ( Milo et al 2002 ) which were . already known from early work on social and ecological webs ( Stone et al 2019 ) . The topological structure of protein nets , as discussed above , might be largely the by - product of the network construction process . Tinkering is an inevitable con - straint in the process of increasing complexity through genome expansion . This is of course one part of the whole range of possible changes aﬀecting evolving genomes . Other processes such as de novo gene formation or whole genome duplications would inﬂuence the outcome ( Roth et al 2007 ) . But the main driver shaping the interaction network remains the same ( Middendorf et al . 2004 ) . There is an important consequence of these results within the context of evolutionary theory . The observed patterns , as mentioned above , describe a set of correla - tions that require an explanation . The network orga - nization found in these graphs include structural traits that could be interpreted as resulting from selective pressures . But sometimes structural patterns have no adaptive meaning . They are actually examples of what Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin called span - drels ( Gould and Lewontin 1979 ) . The term spandrel , borrowed from the vocabulary of architecture by these authors , deﬁnes the space between two arches or between an arch and a rectangular enclosure . In evolutionary biol - ogy , a spandrel is a phenotypic characteristic that evolved as a side eﬀect of a true adaptation ( Sol´e and valverde 2006 ) . The features of evolutionary spandrels can be summarised as follows : ( a ) They are the by - product of building rules . They have intrinsic , well - deﬁned , non - random features . ( b ) Their structure reveals some of the underlying rules of the system’s construction . The ﬁndings described above strongly support the idea that the proteome map contains a considerable amount of statistical correlations that are a byproduct of the duplication - rewiring set of rules . The presence of mod - ularity or non - random distributions of motifs cannot be taken ( alone ) as a signature of selection . This ﬁnding , as shown below , is far from accidental . III . SOFTWARE NETWORKS : HUMAN TINKERING ”A complex piece of software is , indeed , best regarded as a web that has been delicately pieced together from simple materials” Donald Knuth Technology , as we mentioned above , is diﬀerent from biology in a fundamental way . Jacob’s conjecture about this seems very well established . There is no intentional design in evolution , but it turns out that the limitations imposed by technological complexity imposes an eﬀective design barrier to engineers . To illustrate this idea , we will use the ﬁeld of software engineering . The reason of this choice is twofold . One one hand , software projects allow to extract a network of interactions among diﬀerent parts in a meaningful way , Secondly , software has become in - creasingly relevant since its inception in the 1950s and has become , even more than the Internet and the Power grid , the most important ( but largely invisible ) technol - ogy ( Valverde et al . 2002 , Valverde and Sol´e 2003 , 2005a , 2005b ; Valverde and Sol´e , 2015 ; Valverde , 2016 ) . Like many technologies , a software system consists of a large number of elements interacting with each other . Software is similar to a collection of linked pages in a website , but instead of being readable by humans , they are written in a programming language meant for com - puter processors ( Friedman et al . , 2008 ) . Consider the so - called dependency graph G = ( V , E ) where a vertex v i ∈ V is a program ﬁle ( e . g . , written in a programming language like Java , C or C + + ) . The links between ﬁles are described by a ( directed ) edge e ij ∈ E indicating a code dependency between source ﬁles v i and v j which is encoded with the reserved keyword include ( Lakos , 1996 ) . No other information is considered by the net - work reconstruction algorithm , which means that we are not including any further information , such as function - ality . We keep ourselves in the purely topological level . Using this network reconstruction , it was shown that dif - ferent large - scale software graphs shared a surprisingly universal set of traits . One in particular is the marked diﬀerence and sta - tistical nature of the in - and out - degree distributions ( Valverde and Sol´e 2005 ) . These distributions , to be indi - cated as P i ( k ) and P o ( k ) , respectively , indicate the prob - ability of having k links coming to or leaving the node , 6 FIG . 3 Modelling software dependency graphs . ( a ) A simple growth model simulates tinkering in software development processes . A programmer creates a new ﬁle by inheriting source code ( and their dependencies ) from other , existing m source code ﬁles or targets ( each target ﬁle is referred with probability p ) . Afterwards , code editing removes some dependencies from the new node with probability q . Our model generates networks which look like real dependency graphs . For example , ( b ) the software architecture of XFree86 ( a very popular Unix package developed since 1992 , displays scale - free behaviour . In ( c ) , the cumulative distributions associated to P i ( k ) and P o > ( k ) are shown . The power - law ﬁt of the cumulative in - degree distribution follows a power law with γ ic ≈ 1 while the out - degree distribution is exponential . ( d ) From left to right , we show the temporal evolution of a software network generated with tinkering rules . In spite of not assuming any kind of function , duplication and rewiring rules predict the heterogeneity of real dependency graphs , the emergence of clusters of source code ﬁles , and even the temporal evolution of the average connectivity . respectively . They are very diﬀerent : the ﬁrst follows a power law , i . e . P i > ( k ) ∼ k − γ i i whereas the second fol - lows an exponential decay , as displayed in ﬁgure 3b with the cumulative distributions . In order to compute them , we just need to integrate the degree distribution P ( k ) , i . e . P > ( k ) = (cid:90) K m k P ( k (cid:48) ) dk (cid:48) ( 4 ) where K m is the largest degree value . If the original dis - tribution is already a power law , i . e . P ( k ) = k − γ it is easy to show that , for large K m , P > ( k ) ∼ k γ − 1 / ( γ − 1 ) The ﬁt to the exponent is particularly good for these fat - tailed distributions using the accumulated form . For the software graphs discussed here , the in - degree distri - bution has a characteristic value very close to γ ≈ 2 in all the analysed systems ( Valverde and Sol´e , 2005b ) . This is consistent with the pervasiveness of scaling laws in software graphs , which seems largely independent of the choice of programming languages and / or speciﬁc func - tional traits ( Valverde et al . 2002 ; Potanin et al . , 2005 ; Concas et al . , 2007 ; Louridas et al . , 2008 ) . What is the origin of these patterns ? Why are they so close , despite the obvious dissimilarities to be expected from diﬀerent engineering projects ? The response seems to be , again , tinkering . Software projects , as much as they are planned and serve to a given objective , are de - veloped by engineers that create a system that grows over time . Diverse parts of the system are created by programmers with a good picture of the global organ - isation and the parts to be assembled . This assembly is assumed to follow rational design principles ( Press - man , 2009 ) . But , as the network grows , that knowledge is eroded and interactions among components are more unpredictable leading to conﬂicts between subparts . A common strategy is to reuse extant parts of the network and use them as the starting point for a new component . Code duplication in software projects is much more common than one would expect . Reuse is a natural pro - cess during development of complex software , where new code shares common traits with previously created ele - ments . Duplicate code is reused at diﬀerent scales , in - cluding large blocks containing millions of lines of code . 7 Useful blocks deal with speciﬁc tasks and they are of - ten encapsulated in well - deﬁned software modules . In - ternally , these modules comprise sets of densely intercon - nected software elements ( Subelj and Bajec , 2011 ; Con - cas et al . , 2017 ) . Since they are sophisticated structures , once a block has been created , a large part of its struc - ture is more likely to being reused in the future . As the system becomes more complex , programmers rely more frequently on duplication ( also known as cloning ) , since they know from experience that these structures are quite stable and behave well . Empirical analysis of software evolution conﬁrms that duplicate codes are more stable than non - duplicated codes ( Krinke , 2008 ) . A simple model , known as the Growing Network with Copying ( Krapivsky and Redner , 2005 ) explains the asymmetric nature of the two degree distributions and the robust scaling exponents . The rules are summarised in ﬁg , 3a and include directed links . The network grows by introducing a single node at a time . This new node links to m randomly selected target node ( s ) with prob - ability p as well as to all ancestor nodes of each target , with probability q . Speciﬁcally , if we label each node with a number indicating its age ( number one is the old - est ) . A new node ( number 6 ) attaches to target node 4 with probability p . This new node inherits every link from the target node ( dashed links ) , with probability q . The corresponding mathematical model for the average number of links L ( n ) is now dL ( n ) dn = mp + mq L n ( 5 ) Once solved , it gives us the average degree (cid:104) K n (cid:105) = L ( n ) / n . Interestingly , the solution to this equation gives three main regimes : ( a ) a constant average degree (cid:104) K n (cid:105) ∼ mp 1 − mq when mq < 1 , ( b ) a rapidly growing phase with acceler - ated increase (cid:104) K n (cid:105) ∼ N mq − 1 ( ending up in a fully connected web ) when mq > 1 and ( c ) a marginal state given by mq = 1 that displays a logarithmic growth , i . e . (cid:104) K n (cid:105) ∼ LnN Interestingly , software graphs seem to grow right at this critical point ( Valverde and Sol´e , 2005 ) separating no increase in the number of dependencies from a super - connected system . As shown by Kaprivski and Redner , the model predicts the previously described distributions at the marginal point i . e . P i ( k ) ∼ k − 2 and an exponen - tial decay for P o ( k ) . The universal class of structural patterns obtained by duplication rules is consistent with the hierarchical ar - chitecture of software networks . Although human minds take part in the manufacturing of software technology ( instead of the blind watchmaker ) and software systems cannot repair themselves ( Nehaniv et al . , 2006 ) , tinkering appears to be the main driver for the large - scale software structure . In addition , software design principles include fault - tolerance and extensibility , and the latter is closely related to the capability of software to evolve . The fact that a simple growth model is able to explain most of the statistical properties of software graphs ( Valverde and Sol´e 2005a , b ) is an unexpected turn to Jacob’s views : even the engineer , who consciously plans for the future , cannot avoid tinkering when preserving software stabil - ity . We can ﬁnd common signatures of tinkering in the statistics of software subgraphs . As it happened with network motifs for cellular networks , here too , the dis - tribution of motifs in dependency graphs is essentially a byproduct of tinkering . Given a ( sparse ) subgraph motif Ω , the average number of occurrences (cid:104) G (cid:105) of this motif in an uncorrelated scale - free network scales with the sub - graph size and the exponent of the in - degree distribution ( Itzkovitz et al . , 2003 ) : (cid:104) G (cid:105) ∼ N n − g + s − γ i + 1 ( 6 ) where s is the maximum in - degree in the motif and n and g are the number of nodes and links in the motif , respec - tively . This scaling is actually valid for 2 < γ i < s + 1 . Interestingly , this prediction is in very good agreement with the number of appearances of motifs in software networks ( Valverde and Sol´e , 2005b ) . It has been proposed that network features ( e . g . , motif abundances ) reveal functions ( Milo et al . , 2002 ) . How - ever , software and proteome networks display very simi - lar structural features , including scaling exponents , mo - tif distribution and modularity , which can be readily ex - plained using duplication - rewiring mechanisms . The re - markable convergence between natural and artiﬁcial net - works suggests the origin of motif abundances is neu - tral to selection . Assigning speciﬁc functions to mo - tifs does not take into account the plasticity of complex systems . Indeed , the same network motif can perform many diﬀerent functions depending on global require - ments ( Valverde and Sol´e , 2013 ; Widder et al 2012 ) . In this context , the origin of universal network patterns might be largely independent of speciﬁc selection pres - sures , but this does not mean they are not advantageous . Many other relevant ﬁndings emerged from the ﬁrst study of software maps ( Valverde and Sol´e , 2007 ) . One of them was the concept of breakdown of modularity ( Valverde , 2017 ) : because of a tendency of software projects to become more disordered ( in terms of the pat - tern of dependencies ) modules can become more inter - connected . Because of this , changes propagate ( Valverde , 2007 ) . Within the context of software engineering , short - cuts among modules would allow changes made in one module to other , apparently distant parts . These kind of phenomena were afterwards described within the context of brain networks , where nowadays the concept of discon - 8 nection disease ( Friston 1995 ) has become a central one . Breakdown of modularity would be key to understand faulty intermodule communication in e . g . Alzheimer’s disease or schizophrenia ( David , 1994 , Alexander - Bloch et al . , 2010 , Meunier et al . , 2010 , Bashan et al . , 2012 ; Godwin et al . , 2015 ) . IV . EVOLUTION OF ECOLOGICAL TINKERED NETWORKS ”It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank ( . . . ) and to reﬂect that these elaborately constructed forms , so diﬀerent from each other , and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner , have all been produced by laws acting around us . ” Charles Darwin On a much larger scale , consider the large - scale or - ganization of ecological systems , as described in terms of complex networks . There is a long tradition within ecology where networks of some kind have been studied . The reason is obvious when we realize that ecology has always been a systems science , with ecological interac - tions placed at the center of any meaningful description of communities and their environments ( ref ) . However , the rise of network science provided a novel view of the fabric of nature . The early papers on ecological networks ( Sol´e and Montoya 2001 ; Montoya and Sol´e 2001 ; Mon - toya et al . , 2006 , Dunne et al . , 2002 ) soon indicated that they shared the complexity - fragility trade - oﬀs with other complex systems . A very important implication of that was the existence of network co - extinctions and cascades promoted by the propagation of species losses through the trophic structure ( Sol´e and Montoya 2001 ) . Some simple , elegant models revealed , here too , that simple rules could help understanding the origins of food web graphs ( Williams and Martinez , 2000 ; Camacho et al 2002a , 2002b ) . Along with predator - prey interactions , which in - clude carnivorous interactions that beneﬁt one organism ( predator ) to the detriment of another ( prey ) , another important class of exchanges deals with cooperative in - teractions . This is the case of mutualistic webs , which are associated to pairwise relations where the two species help each other ( Bascompte and Jordano , 2007 ; Bastolla et al . , 2009 ) . This can occur through a diverse number of ways , including pollination ( transfer of pollen from a male plant to a female plant by another agent , including animals , insects and birds ) or through frugivory ( disper - sal of seeds along the fruits consumed by an agent ) . In both cases , it is assumed that a long - term coevolutionary dynamics has been shaping these interactions ( review ) . Some examples that are often mentioned illustrate this coevolutionary path with specialized pairs . But a more appropriate picture tells us that there is a range of possi - ble patterns of interaction where generalists also abound . The architecture of mutualistic webs has been shown to display well - deﬁned , common structural regularities already discussed above . In contrast with previous ex - amples , a bipartite organisation is present : there are two distinct classes of organisms ( such as plants and their pollinators ) . They are small worlds ( Ollesen et al . , 2006 ; Montoya and Sol´e , 2002 ; Watts and Strogatz , 1998 ) and the distribution of connections is known to follow a trun - cated power law shape : P ( k ) ∼ k − γ exp ( − k / k c ) ( 7 ) where the exponent γ for this distribution has a value close to one . Moreover , several additional structural pat - terns have also been found . These include a highly asym - metric matrix of interactions ( Bascompte et al . , 2006 ) and , more importantly , the presence of nestedness ( Bas - compte et al . , 2003 ) . In a nested network , both generalist and specialist are more likely to interact with generalists while interactions among specialists are rare . Nestedness has been shown to positively correlate with biodiversity ( Bastolla et al . , 2009 ; Saavedra et al . , 2016 ) . We ask whether speciation and divergence rules alone can explain structural regularities of mutualistic net - works . This approach makes strong assumptions . First , we assume that species are present or absent and their abundances ( and other species - speciﬁc traits ) do not play any role . Secondly , weighted links represent quantitative interactions among species . The strength of interactions evolves in time following a simple structural approach . The large - scale network structure is the combination of two processes taking place at evolutionary time scales : ( a ) new species are engendered from old ones through speciation and ( b ) environmental or stochastic factors vary the presence and the strength of species - species in - teractions . Unlike our two previous examples , involving unimodal networks , our model addresses bipartite graphs G = ( A , P , E ) including now two subsets A ( t ) and P ( t ) that correspond to two diﬀerent sets of species . Here , t needs to be understood as an evolutionary time step . Bipar - tite networks only have links between species of diﬀer - ent kind , that is , when there is a mutualistic relation - ship . The quantitative impact of animals on plants is weighted through the matrix ω ij = ω ( A i → P j ) , which gives the strength of interaction between animal species A i and plant species P j . The quantitive approach leads to the use of spectral radius ρ ( ω ) , which is a more rigor - ous assessment of nestedness than previous studies ( Stan - iczenko et al . , 2013 , Fischer and Lindenmayer , 2002 ) . From this weighted network , we can also limit ourselves to the topological network , where ω ij = ω ji = 1 when a positive interaction exists and zero otherwise . A schematic in Fig 4a illustrates the simple set of neu - tral rules used to evolve mutualistic networks ( Valverde et al . , 2018 ) . During speciation events ( denoted by S ) , a new animal species A k inherits all the mutualistic in - teractions from its parent species , ω kj = ω ij for all j = 1 , . . . , | P | ( see left branch in Fig 4a ) . A similar speci - ation event takes place for plant species ( see right branch 9 FIG . 4 Modelling tinkering in ecological networks . On a large scale , involving whole ecosystems , rules of tinkering can be understood in terms of species - level evolutionary events . ( a ) In particular , the large - scale organisation of mutualistic webs can be obtained from a simple model where speciation ( S ) of extant species is the equivalent to duplication events , whereas species divergence ( D ) is here related to link weight redistribution over evolutionary time . Using this model , the resulting webs ( b ) display truncated power laws ( c ) fully consistent ( in average and diversity ) with observable ones . ( d ) The spectral radius ρ ( ω ) ( a quantitative measure of nestedness ) is plotted against the network size ( S ) for a large sample of random networks evolved by duplication and divergence ( node colour represents the statistical signiﬁcance of the measured nestedness , higher values are more signiﬁcant ) . Open circles correspond to real networks , including the one displayed in the panel ( b ) , while the black line deﬁnes the analytical prediction for the random model . in Fig 4a ) . This splitting process derives two new species from their common ancestor . In the long term , the lin - eages diverge due to the random redistribution of link weights between parent and daughter species . Link mu - tations ( denoted by D ) satisfy two additional require - ments . First , there is a maximum value for the sum of weights attached to any species , i . e . (cid:80) j ω ji ≤ 1 . And second , links whose weight falls below a minimal thresh - old are always removed , which can lead to the eventual extinction of whole species , i . e . if (cid:80) j ω ji = 0 . This com - bination of rules represents natural resource constraints , e . g . , too many animals feeding on the same plant would rapidly deplete it . Speciation - divergence reproduces the observed pat - terns of network architecture , and without assuming any kind of adaptive mechanism . To validate our predictions , a data base ( IWDB ) of n = 25 weighted mutualistic webs ( Fig 4b is an example of real network ) is compared against a large set of simulated bipartite networks ran - domly sampled from the full parameter space . The pre - dicted degree distribution follows the truncated power - law found in empirical data ( see Fig 4c ) and analyti - cal models . Not only degree heterogeneity emerges from the neutral model , but all other measurable network at - tributes , including among them nestedness ( see Fig . 4d ) . But nestedness has been shown to be a byproduct of the heterogeneity ( Jonhson et al . , 2013 ) . Given the lack of a ﬁtness function driving selection , the agreement between theory and data supports the non - adaptive nature of the observed architecture ( Valverde et al . , 2018 ) . Macroevo - lutionary patterns shape the global architecture of mutu - alistic networks , while adaptation and selection work on top of universal features derived from general principles of network growth . Recent work further support the im - portance of ecological spandrels in community assembly ( Maynard et al . 2018 ) . 10 V . DISCUSSION : TINKERING AND BEYOND ”No paradox , no progress”NilesBohr What forces shape complexity ? Since networks are the fabric of complex systems , a reasonable way of rephras - ing the previous question is : what forces shape network complexity ? Too often , the observation of some partic - ular pattern is interpreted in terms of optimal design or some kind of adaptive trait . This is a traditional ten - dency among biologists while looking for explanations under the absence of solid arguments ( same can be said about many physicists with a limited understanding of biology and evolution ) . As pointed out by a number of authors ( Alberch 1998 , Gould 2002 ) the fundamental constraints imposed by extensive reuse pervades the pres - ence of most network - level structures , and non - adaptive processes might dominate many evolutionary processes ( Lynch 2007 ) . Tinkering and reuse are examples of those non - adaptive mechanisms . In this paper we have reviewed three relevant examples illustrating this conceptual framework that show how du - plication and rewiring inevitably occur either as evolu - tionary tinkering or as a consequence of a complexity design horizon . The later provides an unexpected twist to Jacob’s proposal : the engineer can sometimes act as a tinkerer . This is somewhat a paradoxical situation : as a software project keeps growing , complexity also grows in a nonlinear fashion , and individual understanding of the system decreases . In parallel , robust patterns also emerge . Because of the inevitable tendency towards het - erogeneous distributions of links resulting from the am - pliﬁcation process , several desirable properties emerge for free : the eﬃcient connectivity associated to the presence of hubs , along with the sparse ( and thus low - cost in terms of connections ) guarantees eﬃcient propagation of infor - mation among subparts . The modular or nested organ - isation facilitate the development of specialized ( but in - tegrated ) subparts . Here too division of labour can be selected on top of the incipient modular structure . The tinkering scenario thus enhances the chances for natural selection to exploit an advantageous network topology . The architecture of these complex networks and our knowledge of the microscopic rules provide the basis for identifying the origins of web complexity . What about other systems , where tinkering might be less relevant ? Optimality can certainly work in some cases , particularly in relation with tree - like structures , global optima can be reached through evolutionary search ( West et al . 1997 ) or energy minimization principles ( Rodriguez - Iturbe and Rinaldo , 2001 ) . Most evolutionary paths towards op - timality in networks , particularly spatial ones , require considering a conﬂict between eﬃcient communication and wiring costs ( Ferrer - i - Cancho and Sol´e 2003 ; Col - izza et al 2004 , see Seoane and Sol´e 2015 and references cited ) or conﬂicts between diﬀerent subparts ( Rasskin - Gutman and Esteve - Altava 2014 ; Esteve - Altava et al . 2015 ; Bruner et al . 2019 ) . In most cases , percolation and geometry constraints ( along with graph heterogene - ity ) can play a crucial role in limiting the space of possible networks that can exist ( Corominas - Murtra et al , 2013 ; Avena - Koenigsberger et al 2015 ) . Optimization and emergence seem to belong to totally diﬀerent domains , but they are not when dealing with evolved biological nets and their technological counter - parts ( Sol´e et al 20013 ) . This is particularly important when a conﬂict between two ( or more ) traits need to be simultaneously optimised . This can led to phase transi - tions where the conﬂict is resolved along with the emer - gence of some inevitable network organisation features ( Sol´e and Seoane , 2015 ) . An example is provided by an information theory model of emergence of language ( Ferrer - i - Cancho and Sol´e 2003 , Seoane and Sol´e 2018 ) . Language has been a great challenge to scholars from very diﬀerent disciplines and remains one of the most diﬃcult to explain as a major evolutionary transition ( szathm´ary and Smith 1995 ) . In this context , as pointed by Tecum - seh Fitch , language ’can be seen as a ”bag of tricks” pieced together via a process of evolutionary tinkering’ ( Fitch 2010 ) . As it also occurs with some features of the neural cortex , cognitive complexity can emerge out of reuse . Does this process create common patterns here too ? What kind of universals might be there ? Inter - estingly , here too a set of components ( words ) interacts in complex ways and some striking statistical patterns seem to be universal . This is the case of so called Zipf’s law . Imagine we count all words that appear within a text and rank them from the most frequent to the least one . Zipf’s law Is a scaling law , common to all known languages and says that the frequency of a word within a given ( long ) text decays with the inverse of its rank . How is this connected with the way words interact ? One of the most successful examples of application of network science is the study of language as a web of con - nected words . Speciﬁcally , using diverse ways of relat - ing words by their appearance within sentences ( Ferrer - i - Cancho et al . , 2004 ) , semantic relations ( Steyvers and Tenenbaum 2005 ; Motter et al 2002 ; Sigman and Cec - chi , 2002 ) or syntax ( Ferrer - i - Cancho and Sol´e 2004 ; Sol´e 2005 ) it was early shown that the resulting graphs shed light on the the functional and evolutionary aspects of their global organisation ( Sol´e et al 2010 ) . A very sim - ple illustration is provided by co - occurrence graphs ob - tained from written texts ( ﬁg 5a ) from which two words are considered to be linked if they appear one after the other within ( at least ) one sentence ( ﬁg 5b ) . By using this deﬁnition , a scale - free network is obtained ( ﬁgure 5c ) . Speciﬁcally , the frequency distribution of words hav - ing k co - occurrences with others was shown to scale as P ( k ) ∼ k − γ . Several interesting properties can be de - tected , among others very short path lengths , high clus - tering and the lack of links between prepositions and other words acting as hubs . It can be shown that some of these properties emerge for free from a simple model based on a conﬂict between 11 FIG . 5 Language networks exhibit scale - free structure and several kinds of correlations . A simple way of generating a web of words is the use of co - occurrence links . Here two words from a given text ( a ) are connected if they appear one after the other ( at least once ) within a given sentence ( b ) . In ( c ) we display a zoom to the co - occurrence ( purely topo - logical ) network obtained from the ﬁrst paragraphs of Augie Wren’s Xmas Tale by Paul Auster . The resulting web has some marked features , such as the lack of connections be - tween hubs ( disassortativity ) and very short path lengths . cognitive eﬀorts ( Ferrer - i - Cancho and Sol´e 2003 ) . In a nutshell , language complexity would be the result of si - multaneously reduce the cost of both speaker and hearer ( Zipf 1949 ) by minimising the error on both sides of the communication channel . Using two well - deﬁned quan - tities from information theory as measures of eﬀorts , it was shown that a phase transition takes place when both eﬀorts are equal . At that point , Zipf’s law emerges along with the underlying network of word - word interac - tions ( Ferrer - i - Cancho et al 2005 , Sol´e 2005 ; Corominas - Murtra et al , 2009 , 2011 ; Salge et al . 2015 ) . Tinkering processes are one major driving force in the historical and evolutionary dynamics of complex net - works . If duplication - divergence rules are responsible for network growth , they deeply constrain the structural out - come , creating graph correlations that are measurable and largely universal . As a consequence , order comes for free : observable regularities are the expected result of ampliﬁcation processes . Two important lessons are of relevance to evolutionary dynamics . The ﬁrst , that con - vergent patterns found at the network level can be largely explained by the mathematics of network growth under reuse of parts . Secondly , a considerable amount of topo - logical precursors required to develop adaptive traits and robustness are in place with no active selection . These ideas can be extended to technological systems , where network organisation has been shown to be irreducible to the individual - level decisions based on rational engineer - ing practices ( Sol´e et al . 2013 ; McNerney et al 2011 ) . This irreducible complexity is at the core of the struc - turalist view of evolution ( Alberch 1998 ; Gould 2002 ) that has been particularly relevant within the context of development . Structuralism holds the view that self - organisation and constraints play a leading role in deﬁn - ing the space of the possible , sometimes as a consequence of physical constraints ( Forgacs and Newman 2005 ; Oll´e et al 2016 ) . Our view is that topological constraints play a similar role in the context of network complexity . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the members of the Complex Systems Lab for very stimulating and useful discussions . RS thanks Stuart Kauﬀman and the late Brian Good - win for many conversations on evolution , complexity and networks . SV thanks Javier Salvador - Calvo , Francisco Jos´e Garc´ıa - Ojalvo and Jose Paredes for many discus - sions around the implications of software networks . Both authors acknowledge the inspiration of John Lokitis . This work has been supported by the Bot´ın Foundation by Banco Santander through its Santander Universities Global Division , a MINECO FIS2015 - 67616 fellowship and the Santa Fe Institute ( RS ) and by the Spanish Min - istry of Economy and Competitiveness , grant FIS2016 - 77447 - R MINECO / AEI / FEDER and European Union ( to S . V . ) . This work has also counted with the sup - port of Secretaria d’Universitats i Recerca del Depar - tament d’Economia i Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya and by the ”Mar´ıa de Maeztu” Programme for Units of Excellence in R & D ( MDM - 2014 - 0445 ) , and from the CERCA Programme of the Generalitat de Catalunya ( RS and SV ) . References 1 . Alberch , P . , 1989 . The logic of monsters : evidence for internal constraint in development and evolu - tion . Geobios , 22 , 21 - 57 . 2 . Albert , R . and Barab´asi , A . L . , 2002 . Statistical mechanics of complex networks . Reviews of mod - ern physics , 74 , 47 . 3 . Alexander - Bloch , A . F . , Gogtay , N . , Meunier , D . , Birn , R . , Clasen , L . , Lalonde , F . , et al . 2010 . Dis - rupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood - onset schizophre - nia . Front . Syst . Neurosci . 4 - 147 . 4 . Amaral , L . A . N . , Scala , A . , Barthelemy , M . and Stanley , H . E . 2000 . Classes of behavior of small - 12 world networks . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA , 97 , 11149 - 11152 . 5 . Anderson , P . W . , 1972 . More is diﬀerent . Science , 177 , 393 - 396 . 6 . Arabidopsis Interactome Mapping Consortium , 2011 . Evidence for network evolution in an Ara - bidopsis interactome map . Science , 333 , 601 - 607 . 7 . Avena - Koenigsberger , A . , Go˜ni , J . , Sol´e , R . and Sporns , O . , 2015 . Network morphospace . Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 12 ( 103 ) , 20140881 . 8 . Banzhaf , W . and Kuo , P . D . 2004 . Network motifs in natural and artiﬁcial transcriptional regulatory networks . J . Biol . Phys . Chem . 4 , 85 - 92 . 9 . Barab´asi , A . L . , 2016 . Network science . Cambridge university press . 10 . Barrat , A . , Barth´elemy , M . , Pastor - Satorras , R . , and Vespignani , A . 2004 . The architecture of com - plex weighted networks . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA101 ( 11 ) , 3747 - 3752 . 11 . Bascompte , J . , Jordano , P . , Meli´an , C . J . and Ole - sen , J . M . 2003 . The nested assembly of plant - animal mutualistic networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 100 , 9383 - 9387 . 12 . Bascompte , J . et al . 2006 . Asymmetric coevo - lutionary networks facilitate biodiversity mainte - nance . Science 312 : 431 - 433 . 13 . Bascompte , J . , and Jordano , P . 2007 . Plant - Animal Mutualistic Networks : The Architecture of Biodiversity . Annu . Rev . Ecol . Evol . Syst . 38 , 567 - 593 . 14 . Bashan , A . , Bartsch , R . P . , Kantelhardt , J . W . , Havlin , S . , and Ivanov , P . Ch . 2012 . Network phys - iology reveals relations between network topology and physiological function . Nat . Commun . 3 - 702 . 15 . Bassett , D . S . and Sporns , O . , 2017 . Network neu - roscience . Nature Neuroscience , 20 ( 3 ) , 353 . 16 . Bastolla , U . , Fortuna , M . A . , Pascual - Garc´ıa , A . , Ferrera , A . , Luque , B . , and Bascompte , J . 2009 . The architecture of mutualistic networks minimizes competition and increases biodiversity . Nature , 458 , 1018 - 1020 . 17 . Boccaletti , S . , Latora , V . , Moreno , Y . , Chavez , M . and Hwang , D . U . , 2006 . Complex networks : Struc - ture and dynamics . Physics reports , 424 , 175 - 308 . 18 . Bruner , E . , Esteve - Altava , B . and Rasskin - Gutman , D . , 2019 . A network approach to brain form , cortical topology and human evolution . Brain Structure and Function , pp . 1 - 15 . 19 . Calabretta R , Nolﬁ S , Parisi D , Wagner GP . Dupli - cation of modules facilitates the evolution of func - tional specialization . Artif Life . 2000 ; 6 : 69 ? 84 . 20 . Camacho , J . , Guimer ` a , R . and Amaral , L . A . N . , 2002a . Robust patterns in food web structure . Physical Review Letters , 88 ( 22 ) , 228102 . 21 . Camacho , J . , Guimera , R . and Amaral , L . A . N . , 2002b . Analytical solution of a model for complex food webs . Physical Review E , 65 ( 3 ) , 030901 . 22 . David , A . S . 1994 . Dysmodularity : a neurocogni - tive model for schizophrenia . Schizophr . Bull . 20 , 249 - 255 . 23 . Caldarelli , G . , Higgs , P . G . and McKane , A . J . 1998 . Modelling Coevolution in Multispecies Com - munities . J . Theor . Biol . 193 , 345 - 358 . 24 . Christensen , K . , Di Collobiano , S . A . , Hall , M . , and Jensen , H . J . 2002 . Tangled nature : a model of evolutionary ecology . J . Theor . Biol . 216 , 73 - 84 . 25 . Clune , J . , Mouret , J . B . and Lipson , H . 2013 . The evolutionary origins of modularity . Proc . R . Soc . B 280 , 20122863 . 26 . Colizza , V . , Banavar , J . R . , Maritan , A . and Ri - naldo , A . , 2004 . Network structures from selec - tion principles . Physical review letters , 92 ( 19 ) , p . 198701 . 27 . Colizza , V . , Flammini , A . , Maritan , A . and Vespig - nani , A . , 2005 . Characterization and modeling of protein - protein interaction networks . Physica A 352 , 1 - 27 . 28 . Concas , G . , Marchesi , M . , Pinna , S . , Serra , N . 2007 . Power - Laws in a Large Object - Oriented Soft - ware System . IEEE Trans . Soft . Eng . 33 ( 10 ) , 687 - 708 . 29 . Concas , G . , Marchesi , M . , Monni , C . , Orr ` u , M . and Tonelli , R . 2017 . Software Quality and Commu - nity Structure in Java Software Networks . Interna - tional Journal of Software Engineering and Knowl - edge Engineering 27 ( 7 ) , 1063 - 1096 . 30 . Corominas - Murtra , B . , Valverde , S . and Sol´e , R . , 2009 . The ontogeny of scale - free syntax networks : phase transitions in early language acquisition . Ad - vances in Complex Systems , 12 ( 03 ) , 371 - 392 . 31 . Corominas - Murtra , B . , Fortuny , J . and Sol´e , R . V . , 2011 . Emergence of Zipf’s law in the evolution of communication . Physical Review E , 83 ( 3 ) , 036115 . 32 . Corominas - Murtra , B . , Go˜ni , J . , Sol´e , R . and Rodriguez - Caso , C . , 2013 . On the origins of hi - erarchy in complex networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110 , 13316 - 13321 . 13 33 . DeFelipe , J . , 2006 . Brain plasticity and mental pro - cesses : Cajal again . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 7 , 811 . 34 . Dennett , D . C . 1995 . Darwin’s dangerous idea . Si - mon and Schuster , New York . 35 . Dorogovtsev , S . N . and Mendes , J . F . F . 2002 . Evo - lution of Random Networks . Adv . Phys . 51 , 1079 - 1187 . 36 . Dunne , J . A . , Williams , R . J . , and Mart´ınez , N . D . 2002 . Food - web structure and network theory : The role of connectance and size . PNAS 99 ( 20 ) , 12917 - 12922 . 37 . Esteve - Altava , B . , Diogo , R . , Smith , C . , Boughner , J . C . and Rasskin - Gutman , D . , 2015 . Anatomical networks reveal the musculoskeletal modularity of the human head . Sci . rep . 5 , 8298 . 38 . Estrada , E . , 2012 . The structure of complex net - works : theory and applications . Oxford University Press . 39 . Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . and Sol´e , R . , 2001 . The small world of human language . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . B , 268 ( 1482 ) , 2261 - 2265 . 40 . Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . and Sol´e , R . . , 2003 . Optimiza - tion in complex networks . In Statistical mechan - ics of complex networks ( pp . 114 - 126 ) . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg . 41 . Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . , Sol´e , R . V . and K¨ohler , R . , 2004 . Patterns in syntactic dependency networks . Physical Review E , 69 , 051915 . 42 . Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . , Riordan , O . and Bollob´as , B . , 2005 . The consequences of Zipf’s law for syntax and symbolic reference . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 272 ( 1562 ) , 561 . 43 . Fischer , J . and Lindenmayer , D . B . 2002 . Treating the nestedness temperature calculator as a ? black box ? can lead to false conclusions . Oikos 99 ( 1 ) , 193 - 199 . 44 . Fitch , W . T . , 2010 . The evolution of language . Cambridge University Press . 45 . Forgacs , G . and Newman , S . A . , 2005 . Biological physics of the developing embryo . Cambridge Uni - versity Press . 46 . Friedman , D . P . , Wand , M . , and Haynes , C . T . 2008 . Essentials of Programming Languages 3rd ed . MIT Press . 47 . Gell - Mann , M . , 1995 . The Quark and the Jaguar : Adventures in the Simple and the Com - plex . Macmillan . 48 . Godwin , D . , Barry , R . L . , and Marois , R . 2015 . Breakdown of the brain ? s functional network mod - ularity with awareness . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 , 3799 - 3804 . 49 . Goldenfeld , N . , 2018 . Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group . CRC Press . 50 . Goodwin , B . , 1994 . How the leopard changed its spots : The evolution of complexity . Princeton Uni - versity Press . 51 . Gould , S . J . ( 2002 ) The Structure of Evolutionary Theory , Harvard University Press . 52 . Gould , S . J . and Lewontin , R . C . ( 1979 ) The Span - drels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm : a critique of the Adaptationist Programme . Proc . R . Soc . B 205 , 581 - 598 . 53 . Gross , J . L . and Yellen , J . , 2005 . Graph theory and its applications . CRC press . 54 . Itzkovitz , S . , Milo , R . , Kashtan , N . , Ziv , G . , Alon , U . 2003 . Subgraphs in random networks . Phys Rev E 68 : 026127 . 55 . Jacob , F . 1977 . Evolution and Tinkering . Science 196 , 1161 - 166 . 56 . James , A . , Pitchford , J . W . and Plank , M . J . 2012 . Disentangling nestedness from models of ecological complexity . Nature 487 , 227 - 230 . 57 . Jonhson , S . , Dominguez - Garcia , V . and Mu˜noz , M . A . 2013 . Factors determining nestedness in com - plex networks . PloS one , 8 ( 9 ) , e74025 . 58 . Jordano , P . et al . 2003 . Invariant properties in co - evolutionary networks of plant - animal interactions . Ecol . Lett . 6 : 69 - 81 . 59 . Kauﬀman , S . A . , 1993 . The origins of order : Self - organization and selection in evolution . Oxford U . Press . 60 . Kauﬀman , S . A . and Levin , S . 1987 . Towards a gen - eral theory of adaptive walks on rugged landscapes . J Theor Biol 128 , 11 - 45 . 61 . Kauﬀman , S . A . and Johnsen , J . 1991 . Coevolution to the edge of chaos : coupled ﬁtness landscapes , poised states and coevolutionary avalanches . J . Theor . Biol . 149 , 467 - 505 . 62 . Krapivsky , P . L . and Redner , S . , 2005 . Network growth by copying . Physical Review E , 71 ( 3 ) , 036118 . 63 . Krinke J . 2008 . Is cloned code more stable than non - cloned code ? Eighth IEEE international work - ing conference on source code analysis and manip - ulation , 57 - 66 . 14 64 . Lakos , J . , 1996 . Large Scale C + + Software Design Addison - Wesley , New York . 65 . Lipson H , Pollack JB , Suh NP . On the origin of modular varia - tion . Evolution . 2002 ; 56 : 1549 ? 56 . 66 . Loreau , M . 2010 . Linking biodiversity and ecosys - tems : towards a unifying ecological theory . Phil . Trans . R Soc . B 365 , 49 - 60 . 67 . Louridas , P . , Spinellis , D . , and Vlachos , V . 2008 . Power Laws in Software . ACM Trans . Soft . Eng . Meth . 18 ( 1 ) , 1 - 26 . 68 . Lynch , M . 2007 . The evolution of genetic networks by non - adaptive processes . Nature Rev . Genet . 8 , 803 - 813 . 69 . Margalef , R . , 1968 . Perspectives in ecological the - ory . University of Chicago Press . 70 . May , R . M . , 1973 . Stability and complexity in model ecosystems . Princeton university press . 71 . Maynard , D . S . , Serv´an , C . A . and Allesina , S . , 2018 . Network spandrels reﬂect ecological assem - bly . Ecology letters , 21 ( 3 ) , 324 - 334 . 72 . Mazurie , A . et al . 2005 . An evolutionary and functional assessment of regulatory network motifs . Genome Biol . 6 , R35 . 73 . Meunier , D . , Lambiotte , R . , and Bullmore , E . T . 2010 . Modular and hierarchically modular organi - zation of brain networks . Front . Neurosci . 4 - 200 . 74 . McComb , W . D . 2008 . Renormalization Methods : A Guide For Beginners . Oxford U . Press . 75 . McGuﬀee , S . R . and Elcock , A . H . , 2010 . Diﬀusion , crowding and protein stability in a dynamic molec - ular model of the bacterial cytoplasm . PLoS com - putational biology , 6 ( 3 ) , p . e1000694 . 76 . McNerney , J . , Farmer , J . D . , Redner , S . and Tran - cik , J . E . , 2011 . Role of design complexity in tech - nology improvement . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 , 9008 - 9013 . 77 . Memmott , J . et al . 2004 . Tolerance of pollination networks to species extinctions . Proc . R . Soc . B 271 , 2605 - 2611 . 78 . Middendorf , M . , Ziv , E . and Wiggins , C . H . , 2005 . Inferring network mechanisms : the Drosophila melanogaster protein interaction network . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 102 ( 9 ) , pp . 3192 - 3197 . 79 . Milgram , S . , 1967 . The small world problem . Psy - chology today , 2 ( 1 ) , 60 - 67 . 80 . Milo , R . , Shen - Orr , S . , Itzkovitz , S . , Kashtan , N . , Chklovskii , D . , Alon , U . 2002 . Network motifs : simple building blocks of complex networks . Sci - ence 298 , 824 - 827 . 81 . Montoya , J . M . and Sol´e , R . V . 2002 Small world patterns in food webs . J . Theor . Biol . 214 , 405 - 412 . 82 . Montoya , J . M . , Pimm , S . and Sol´e , R . V . 2006 . Ecological networks and their fragility . Nature 442 ( 7100 ) , 259 - 264 . 83 . Motter , A . E . , De Moura , A . P . , Lai , Y . C . and Dasgupta , P . , 2002 . Topology of the concep - tual network of language . Physical Review E , 65 ( 6 ) , 065102 . 84 . Nehaniv , C . L . , Hewitt , J . , Christianson , B . , Wer - nick , P . 2006 . What software evolution and biologi - cal evolution don ? t have in common . Second inter - national IEEE workshop on software evolvability . Philadelphia : IEEE Computer Society , 58 - 65 . 85 . Newman , M . E . J . and Palmer , R . 2003 . Modelling extinction . Oxford U . Press . New York . 86 . Newman , M . E . , 2003 . The structure and function of complex networks . SIAM review , 45 ( 2 ) , 167 - 256 . 87 . Olesen , J . et al . 2006 . The smallest of all worlds : pollination networks . Ecological networks and their fragility . J . Theor . Biol . 240 , 270 - 276 . 88 . Olle - Vila , A . , Duran - Nebreda , S . , Conde - Pueyo , N . , Montanez , R . and Sole , R . , 2016 . A mor - phospace for synthetic organs and organoids : the possible and the actual . Integrative Biology , 8 ( 4 ) , 485 - 503 . 89 . Potanin , A . , Noble , J . , Frean , M . , and Biddle , R . 2005 . Scale - free geometry in OO programs . Com - mun . ACM , 48 ( 5 ) , 99 - 103 . 90 . Pressman , R . S . 2009 . Software engineering : a practitioner’s approach , 7th ed . Boston , MA : McGraw - Hill . 91 . Raﬀ RA . The shape of life . Chicago : Chicago U . Press ; 1996 . 92 . Rasskin - Gutman , D . and Esteve - Altava , B . , 2014 . Connecting the dots : anatomical network analysis in morphological EvoDevo . Biological Theory , 9 ( 2 ) , 178 - 193 . 93 . Rodriguez - Caso C . , Medina M . A . , Sol´e , R . V . 2005 . Topology , tinkering and evolution of the human transcription factor network . FEBS J . 272 ( 24 ) , 6423 - 6434 . 94 . Rodriguez - Iturbe , I . and Rinaldo , A . , 2001 . Fractal river basins : chance and self - organization . Cam - bridge University Press . 15 95 . Roth , C . , Rastogi , S . , Arvestad , L . , Dittmar , K . , Light , S . , Ekman , D . and Liberles , D . A . , 2007 . Evolution after gene duplication : models , mecha - nisms , sequences , systems , and organisms . Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B : Molecular and De - velopmental Evolution , 308 ( 1 ) , pp . 58 - 73 . 96 . Saavedra , S . , Rohr , R . P . , Olesen , J . M . , and Bas - compte , J . 2016 . Nested species interactions pro - mote feasibility over stability during the assembly of a pollinator community . Ecology and evolution . 6 , 997 - 1007 . 97 . Seoane , L . F . and Sol´e , R . , 2015 . Phase transitions in Pareto optimal complex networks . Physical Re - view E , 92 , 032807 . 98 . Sigman , M . and Cecchi , G . A . , 2002 . Global organi - zation of the Wordnet lexicon . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 99 ( 3 ) , 1742 - 1747 . 99 . Sol´e , R . , 2005 . Language : Syntax for free ? . Nature , 434 , . 289 - 290 . 100 . Sol´e , R . and Goodwin , B . C . , 2001 . Signs of life : how complexity pervades biology . Basic Books . 101 . Sol´e , R . V . , Corominas - Murtra , B . , Valverde , S . and Steels , L . , 2010 . Language networks : Their struc - ture , function , and evolution . Complexity , 15 ( 6 ) , 20 - 26 . 102 . Sol´e , R . V . and Manrubia , S . C . 1995 . Extinctions and self - organised criticality in a model of large - scale evolution . Phys . Rev E 54 , R42 - R46 . 103 . Sol´e , R . V . , and Montoya , J . M . 2001 . Complexity and fragility in ecological networks . Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . Ser B 268 , 2039 - 2045 . 104 . Sol´e , R . V . , Pastor - Satorras , R . , Smith , E . , Kepler , T . 2002 . A model of large - scale proteome evolution . Adv . Complex Syst . 5 , 43 - 54 . 105 . Sol´e , R . V . , Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . , Montoya , J . and Valverde , S . 2003 . Selection , Tinkering , and Emer - gence in Complex Networks . Complexity 8 ( 1 ) , 20 - 33 . 106 . Sol´e R . V . , and Valverde , S . 2006 . Are network motifs the spandrels of cellular complexity ? Trends Ecol . Evol . 21 ( 8 ) , 419 - 422 . 107 . Sol´e , R . V . , and Bascompte , J . 2006 . Self - organization in complex ecosystems . Princeton U . Press . 108 . Sol´e , R . V . , Valverde , S . , Casals , M . R . , Kauﬀman , S . A . , Farmer , D . and Eldredge , N . , 2013 . The evolutionary ecology of technological innovations . Complexity , 18 ( 4 ) , 15 - 27 . 109 . Sol´e , R . V . and Seoane , L . F . , 2015 . Ambiguity in language networks . The Linguistic Review , 32 , 5 - 35 . 110 . Sol´e , R . V . , and Valverde , S . 2008 . Spontaneous emergence of modularity in cellular networks . Jour - nal of the Royal Society Interface 5 ( 18 ) , 129 - 133 . 111 . Sporns , O . , Chialvo , D . R . , Kaiser , M . and Hilgetag , C . C . , 2004 . Organization , development and func - tion of complex brain networks . Trends in cognitive sciences , 8 ( 9 ) , 418 - 425 . 112 . Staniczenko , P . P . A . , Kopp , J . C . , and Allesina , S . 2013 . The ghost of nestedness in ecological net - works . Nature Comm . 4 , 1391 . 113 . Stanley , H . E . , 1971 . Phase transitions and critical phenomena . Clarendon Press , Oxford . Vancouver 114 . Stauﬀer , D . and Aharony , A . , 2014 . Introduction to percolation theory . Taylor and Francis . 115 . Stein , D . L . and Newman , C . M . , 2013 . Spin glasses and complexity . Princeton University Press . Van - couver 116 . Steyvers , M . and Tenenbaum , J . B . , 2005 . The large - scale structure of semantic networks : Statisti - cal analyses and a model of semantic growth . Cog - nitive science , 29 ( 1 ) , 41 - 78 . 117 . Stone , L . , Simberloﬀ , D . and Artzy - Randrup , Y . , 2019 . Network motifs and their origins . PLoS com - putational biology , 15 , e1006749 . 118 . Subelj , L . and Bajec , M . 2011 . Community struc - ture of complex software systems : Analysis and ap - plications . Phys . A : Stat . Mech . Appl . 390 ( 16 ) , 2968 - 2975 . 119 . Szathm´ary , E . and Smith , J . M . , 1995 . The major evolutionary transitions . Nature , 374 , 227 . 120 . Teichmann , S . A . and Babu , M . M . , 2004 . Gene reg - ulatory network growth by duplication . Nature ge - netics , 36 , 492 . 121 . V´azquez , A . , Flammini , A . , Maritan , A . and Vespignani , A . , 2003 . Modeling of protein inter - action networks . Complexus , 1 , 38 - 44 . 122 . Valverde , S . , Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2002 . Scale - free Networks from Optimal Design . Europhys . Lett . 60 , 512 - 517 . 123 . Valverde , S . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2007 . Hierarchi - cal small worlds in software architecture . Dynam . Cont . Discr . Impul . Syst . Ser . B 14 , 1 - 11 . 124 . Valverde , S . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2005 . Network motifs in computational graphs : A case study in software architecture . Phys . Rev . E 72 , 026107 . 16 125 . Valverde , S . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2005 . Logarithmic growth dynamics in software networks . Europhys . Lett . 72 , 858 - 864 . 126 . Valverde , S . , 2007 . Crossover from endogenous to exogenous activity in open - source software devel - opment . Europhys . Lett . 77 , 20002 . 127 . Valverde , S . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2009 . Motifs in graphs . Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science ( Robert A . Meyers , ed . ) , Springer Sci - ence + Business Media , New York , 5692 - 5702 . 128 . Valverde , S . , and Sol´e , R . V . 2015 . Punctuated equilibrium in the large - scale evolution of program - ming languages . J . R . Soc . Interface 12 , 20150249 . 129 . Valverde , S . 2016 . Major transitions in information technology . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B 371 , 20150450 . 130 . Valverde , S . 2017 . Breakdown of Modularity in Complex Networks . Front . Physiol . 8 , 497 . 131 . Valverde , S . , Pi˜nero , J . , Corominas - Murtra , B . , Montoya , J . , Joppa , L . and Sol´e , R . V . 2018 . The architecture of mutualistic networks as an evolu - tionary spandrel . Nat . Ecol . Evol . 2 , 94 - 99 . 132 . Vazquez , A . 2003 . Growing network with local rules : Preferential attachment , clustering hierar - chy , and degree correlations . Phys . Rev E67 , 056104 . 133 . V´azquez , A . , Flammini , A . , Maritan , A . and Vespignani , A . , 2003 . Modeling of protein inter - action networks . Complexus , 1 , 38 - 44 . 134 . Wagner GP , Pavlicev M , Cheverud JM . The road to modularity . Nature Rev Genet . 2007 ; 8 : 921 ? 31 . 135 . Watts , D . J . and Strogatz , S . H . 1998 . Collective dynamics of ”small - world” networks . Nature 393 : 440 - 442 . 136 . Widder , S . , Sol´e , R . and Mac´ıa , J . , 2012 . Evolv - ability of feed - forward loop architecture biases its abundance in transcription networks . BMC sys - tems biology , 6 ( 1 ) , 7 . 137 . Williams , R . J . , and Martinez , N . D . 2000 . Simple rules yield complex food webs . Nature 404 , 180 - 183 . 138 . Yu , I . , Mori , T . , Ando , T . , Harada , R . , Jung , J . , Sugita , Y . and Feig , M . , 2016 . . Biomolecular in - teractions modulate macromolecular structure and dynamics in atomistic model of a bacterial cyto - plasm . Elife 5 , e19274 . 139 . Zipf , G . K . , 1949 . Human behavior and the princi - ple of least eﬀort . Addison - Wesley .