news and views NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 FEBRUARY 2002 http : / / cellbio . nature . com E31 Ignition of a cellular machine Mara Kreishman - Deltrick and Michael K . Rosen The Arp2 / 3 complex has emerged as a key regulator of signal - dependent changes in the actin cytoskeleton . Recent biochemical and structural studies provide a wealth of information about how the assembly is regulat - ed by WASP family members and actin filaments , and raise important new questions about this cellular machine . R earranging the actin cytoskeleton in response to signals is critical in many biological processes , including cell motility , maintenance of cell morphology , bacterial and viral pathogenesis , and tumour metastasis . These rearrangements are subject to tight spatial and temporal control . Signal - dependent polymerization of new actin fila - ments happens very quickly and at specific locations in stimulated cells . For example , an activated neutrophil can change direction in seconds in response to a changing chemotac - tic gradient . Biochemically , however , sponta - neous actin polymerization is a very slow , nucleation - dependent process ( Fig . 1 ) . The first two binding reactions in the formation of a new filament — formation of an actin dimer and trimer — are thermodynamically unfavourable and result in a significant ini - tial lag . But once the trimer is formed , it becomes more favourable to add another monomer than to return to a dimer , and rapid polymerization follows — in other words , a trimer is the minimally required actin ‘nucleus’ 1 – 3 . To explain the extremely rapid polymerization kinetics seen in cells , a cellular nucleation factor ( s ) is necessary . Discovery of the actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex in 1994 by Pollard and cowork - ers 4 reconciled these issues by providing just such a nucleation factor 5 , and thus a single cellular pathway through which many actin - modulating signals act 5 . Over the past several years , a signalling pathway has been elucidated in which exter - nal signals act through molecules such as the Rho family GTPases Cdc42 and Rac , and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) to activate members of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family 6 – 10 . Activated WASP family members function cooperatively with existing actin fil - aments to stimulate the low intrinsic nucle - ation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 1 ) . Activated Arp2 / 3 then serves as a cellular actin nucleation factor , resulting in rapid , signal - dependent polymerization of new fil - aments , which leads to a branched network . Immunoelectron microscopy of lamellipo - dial actin networks has localized the Arp2 / 3 complex to filament branch points , which has led to the dendritic nucleation model for actin polymerization 5 , 11 . In this model , fila - ments elongating from 70 ° branch points provide the force needed to drive membrane deformation and other changes . The Arp2 / 3 complex consists of seven subunits : Arp2 and Arp3 along with five novel proteins ( p16 , p20 , p21 , p34 and p40 ) , all of which are conserved from protozoans to mammals 4 . The molecular mechanisms of Arp2 / 3 com - plex activity and regulation remain a mys - tery , and until now it was not clear why the isolated complex is inactive , or how interac - tions among its subunits and / or with WASP family members and filamentous actin ( F - actin ) stimulate its nucleating activity . Three recent papers 12 – 14 provide exciting new bio - chemical and structural data that greatly advance our understanding of these issues . The overall organization of the seven Arp2 / 3 subunits has been revealed both bio - chemically and structurally by Gournier et al . 13 , who reconstituted the assembly from individual subunits , and structurally , by Robinson et al . 14 , who solved the structure of the inactive Arp2 / 3 complex by X - ray crys - tallography . The complex is a flat ellipsoid , with all of the subunits in roughly the same plane . The p20 / p34 subunits form the struc - tural core of the assembly by creating a sta - ble dimer that forms a C - shaped clamp , which cradles the two Arp proteins . The p16 and p40 subunits are bound to the outside of the clamp , close to Arp2 . The p21 subunit decorates the edge of the structure through contacts to Arp3 . All of the subunits except p21 contact at least three other subunits , indicating an extensive network of pro - tein – protein interactions that stabilize the assembly . Interestingly , however , significant elements of the complex , including subdo - mains 1 and 2 of Arp2 , are disordered in the crystal , suggesting that the Arp2 / 3 complex , although extremely stable , is a very dynamic structure . The structures and relative positions of Arp2 and Arp3 in the crystal provide provocative explanations for the inactivity of the unstimulated Arp2 / 3 complex . The two Arp proteins adopt bilobed , actin - like folds , as predicted by sequence analyses 15 . But the ATP - binding pockets are spread open with respect to actin and no nucleotide is present in either protein . This is consistent with recent work that shows that the inactive Arp2 / 3 complex has only one ATP bound Actin + Arp2 / 3 + WASP + F - actin Actin + Arp2 / 3 + WASP Actin + Arp2 / 3 Actin Time N e w f il a m en t s Equilibrium Lag G r o w t h Figure 1 Hypothetical actin polymerization curves illustrating the effects of an activated nucleation factor . Spontaneous actin polymerization ( gray ) is very slow , and inactive Arp2 / 3 complex ( green ) has no effect . After stimulation by WASP proteins ( red ) , Arp2 / 3 becomes a competent nucleation factor , reducing the lag phase of polymerization and allowing rapid growth to proceed . The activity of Arp2 / 3 complex can be further stimu - lated by F - actin ( blue ) , resulting in even more rapid polymerization . Inset , the three kinetic phases of actin polymerization . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group news and views NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 FEBRUARY 2002 http : / / cellbio . nature . com E32 with reasonably high affinity at Arp3 — in contrast to WASP - activated Arp2 / 3 complex , which has ATP bound to both Arp2 and Arp3 ( refs 16 , 17 ) . These observations lead to a model in which part of the activation mech - anism is modulation of the ATP - binding affinities of the Arp proteins by stabilization of their nucleotide - binding pockets ( Fig . 2a ) . Another striking feature of the Arps in the crystal structure is that they are not orientat - ed properly to form a functional actin nucle - us ; they are rotated about 20 ° from positions that would allow them to mimic an actin dimer , and are separated by a large cleft . Another key step in activation , then , seems to be reorientation of the Arps relative to one another such that they form an actin - like dimer ( Fig . 2a ) . The crystal structure also suggests how WASPs might interact with the Arp2 / 3 com - plex to bring about activation . In the Robinson et al . 14 model , reorientation of the Arps would create a more compact structure of the assembly . Such a conformational change could be brought about by WASP peptides . The mouth of the cleft separating the Arps is flanked on either side by basic surface patches on the p21 and p40 subunits . An attractive model is one in which the car - boxyl termini of WASP proteins , all of which contain stretches of acidic amino acids , interact with one or both of these basic patches . This would be consistent with chemical crosslinking data which shows that WASP peptides interact with both p21 and p40 ( ref . 18 ) . Such electrostatic contacts could act in concert with interactions with other sequences in the WASP C termini ( such as the conserved stretch of basic and hydrophobic residues close to the acidic sequence 19 ) to stabilize the compact , active conformation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Two issues not addressed by the above model are the structure of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex at a filament branch point ( where it is presumably fully activated ) , and how F - actin functions in the activation process . The EM reconstructions presented by Volkmann et al . 12 begin to shed light on these issues . The authors present a three - dimensional recon - struction of yeast Arp2 / 3 complex bound to an activating WASP peptide , as well as two - dimensional models of the Acanthamoeba Arp2 / 3 complex bound to the side of an actin filament and at a branch point ( Fig . 2b – d , respectively ) . The most striking feature of the branch reconstruction is that for the EM model to accommodate a mass the size of the Arp2 / 3 complex , the Arps must be the first two subunits of the daugh - ter filament . This provides further evidence that the Arp dimer is a key component of a cellular actin nucleus ; this evidence also sup - ports models in which new filament growth occurs from the sides of existing fila - ments 20 , 21 . Biochemical data indicate that fil - aments themselves can activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . The complex interacts with F - actin through the p20 / p34 dimer ( and perhaps other subunits ) as proposed by Gournier et al . 13 , and work by several groups has indicat - ed that the lag phase of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated polymerization , although short - ened after activation of the assembly by WASP proteins , is completely eliminated after costimulation by F - actin 22 . A key issue also addressed by the EM work is clarifying precisely how WASP family members and F - actin function in the process . The WASP - bound complex is a reasonably planar , ellip - soid structure ( Fig . 2b ) , consistent with the activated structure proposed by Robinson et al . 14 . But this structure is significantly differ - ent from that seen in the filament - associated forms , which show strong deviations from planarity ( Fig . 2c , d ) . Thus , the WASP - bound state , although different from the free com - plex , might still not correctly position / reor - ganize Arp2 and Arp3 , or rearrange other subunits that contribute to filament nucle - ation . What , then , is the nature of the WASP - bound state ? Early rotary shadowing EM analyses of purified Arp2 / 3 complex reveal a U - shaped structure with a central cleft that is open to varying degrees 5 . This suggests that the isolated complex adopts a range of con - formations . Perhaps , then , WASP binding simply stabilizes the planar , ellipsoid , partial - ly activated conformation . Full activation of the complex and incorporation of Arp2 / 3 into a branch , however , seem to require an additional , significant conformational change , and this rearrangement is brought about by binding to the mother filament . This raises the interesting possibility that the largest quaternary change required for Arp2 / 3 activation is induced by filaments , rather than by WASP binding . A simpler model is that both WASP and filaments act on the same equilibrium between an open , planar conformation and a closed , non - pla - nar conformation , but only together do they bias that equilibrium sufficiently to give maximal activation . The three papers discussed here raise a number of significant , unanswered ques - tions about how the assembly is activated . First , how is the conformation in the crystal structure transformed into the shape seen at branch points ? As discussed above , several changes in Arp2 and Arp3 structure and ori - entation are necessary to produce an actin dimer , but it is not clear from the present data which of the various ligands to the com - plex induces each of these changes . An issue not explored in any of the structural work is how the ‘nucleotide state’ of each Arp pro - tein functions in governing the organization of the assembly . A related issue is how , at a thermodynamic level , WASP , nucleotide and F - actin drive the conformational transitions . The interplay of WASP and filaments is crit - ical to the spatial regulation of Arp2 / 3 — localized WASP activation results in Arp2 / 3 activation only near the membrane , and branched filament networks form only at specific sites . Answers to these questions will require high - resolution structural studies , as well as biochemical characterization , of each state in the activation pathway , of the ligand contacts that define each state , and of the dynamic transitions between them . Understanding how WASP drives Arp2 / 3 activation will also provide insight into reg - ulatory interactions of WASP and its rela - tives the Scar / WAVE proteins , and the nature of changes they must undergo to stimulate the Arp2 / 3 complex efficiently . Finally , all known activators require actin monomer - binding domains for activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex , raising the possibility that the fully activated Arp2 / 3 complex is in fact a b c d p34 * p21 p20 * p16 p40 * Arp3 Arp2 Figure 2 Structural states along the Arp2 / 3 complex activation pathway . a , Schematic rep - resentation of the inactive Arp2 / 3 complex derived from the crystal structure . Curved arrows indicate the ATP - binding pockets of Arp2 and Arp3 and the cleft separating the Arp proteins , all of which are predicted to close after activation . The arrow pointing down and to the right indicates the predicted direction of new barbed - end filament growth . Subunits thought to be involved in filament side - binding are indicated by asterisks . b , Representation of the planar , ellipsoid structure of the WASP - bound Arp2 / 3 complex . c , A representation of the non - planar conformation induced by interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with F - actin . d , A representation of the fully activated ( non - planar ) Arp2 / 3 complex at a filament branch point . Three - dimensional schematics are derived from the EM reconstructions . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group news and views NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 FEBRUARY 2002 http : / / cellbio . nature . com E33 an actin - like trimer 6 – 10 . But we do not know how a WASP - bound actin monomer would be positioned to form this trimeric nucleus . Understanding the rearrangements of the complex needed for activation , as well as the precise site of WASP binding , will reveal the location and position relative to the Arp pro - teins of the final actin monomer required for rapid and efficient actin polymerization . These three papers create a picture of the Arp2 / 3 complex as a molecular machine with multiple parts that can exist in several conformations , and it is the relative orien - tations of the parts that determine the effi - ciency of the assembly . It is now clear that ‘ignition’ of this machine will require con - certed actions of multiple activators to maximize the interplay of the parts , and to allow rapid , tightly regulated actin rearrangements within the cell . Mara Kreishman - Deltrick and Michael K . Rosen are in the Department of Biochemistry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas 75390 , USA . e - mail : rosen @ mrnmr1 . mskcc . org 1 . Cooper , J . A . , Buhle , E . L . , Jr . , Walker , S . B . , Tsong , T . Y . & Pollard , T . D . Biochemistry 22 , 2193 – 2202 ( 1983 ) . 2 . Tobacman , L . S . & Korn , E . D . J . Biol . Chem . 258 , 3207 – 3214 ( 1983 ) . 3 . Frieden , C . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 6513 – 6517 ( 1983 ) . 4 . Machesky , L . M . , Atkinson , S . J . , Ampe , C . , Vandekerckhove , J . & Pollard , T . D . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 107 – 115 ( 1994 ) . 5 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . & Pollard , T . D . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) . 6 . Higgs , H . N . & Pollard , T . D . Ann . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Takenawa , T . & Miki , H . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1801 – 1809 ( 2001 ) . 8 . Mullins , R . D . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 12 , 91 – 96 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Welch , M . D . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 423 – 427 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Carlier , M . F . , Ducruix , A . & Pantaloni , D . Chem . Biol . 6 , R235 - R240 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Volkmann , N . et al . Science 293 , 2456 – 2459 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Gournier , H . , Goley , E . D . , Niederstrasser , H . , Trinh , T . & Welch , M . D . Mol . Cell 8 , 1041 – 1052 ( 2001 ) . 14 . Robinson , R . C . et al . Science 294 , 1679 – 1684 ( 2001 ) . 15 . Kelleher , J . F . , Atkinson , S . J . & Pollard , T . D . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 385 – 397 ( 1995 ) . 16 . Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Carlier , M . F . & Pantaloni , D . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 46689 – 46692 ( 2001 ) . 17 . Dayel , M . J . , Holleran , E . A . & Mullins , R . D . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 14871 – 14876 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . & Mullins , R . D . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 3468 – 3475 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . & Higgs , H . N . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 76 – 82 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Amann , K . J . & Pollard , T . D . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Bailly , M . et al . Curr . Biol . 11 , 620 – 625 ( 2001 ) . 22 . Machesky , L . M . et al . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 ( 1999 ) . A ll eukaryotic cells internalize cell - sur - face proteins and material from their environment by endocytosis . The pathway is used , amongst others , for the uptake of nutrients , regulation of cell surface receptors and for the recycling of proteins used in the secretory pathway . Typically , receptors and bound ligand are targeted to early endosomes called sorting endosomes . Most ligands then dissociate from their receptors at the mildly acidic internal pH of the early endosome and are delivered to degradative late endocytic compartments . Uncoupling receptor – ligand complexes allows receptors to be recycled to the cell sur - face via either a direct ‘fast’ track or a paral - lel ‘slow’ route through recycling endosomes and possibly the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Unlike the initial steps of clathrin - and AP - 2 - dependent endocytosis and trans - port to early endosomes , little is known about the recycling pathway from early endosomes back to the cell surface and the proteins that regulate it . In this issue of Nature Cell Biology , de Renzis and col - leagues 1 uncover a connection between fusion of early endosomes and receptor recy - cling to the cell surface . They document that the FYVE - finger protein rabenosyn - 5 is a bifunctional effector of rab5 and rab4 that serves to link the activities of these sequen - tially acting GTPases on membrane traffic through early endosomes . Recycling endosomes can be distin - guished morphologically by their propensity to retain recycling transferrin receptors in a characteristic location close to the micro - tubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) and human choriocarcinoma - derived BeWo cells . But this property is not shared by all cells , and the dynamic pleiomorphic membrane organization of early endocytic organelles has so far precluded an ultrastructural char - acterization and definition of boundaries between early endosomes and recycling endosomes . Colocalization of proteins such as rab11 and RME - 1 ( ref . 2 ) with endocy - tosed transferrin at a late stage of its intracel - lular itinery nevertheless implies some form of biochemical heterogeneity in early endo - cytic organelles . In this respect it is immate - rial whether this heterogeneity reflects the existence of separate compartments with their surrounding membranes or dynamic assemblies of tubulovesicular membranes with distinct physicochemical properties . Food for the latter thought derives from several pieces of evidence . Early endosomes contain phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PI ( 3 ) P ) which specifically interacts with FYVE - and PX - domain containing periph - eral membrane proteins 3 , 4 . PI ( 3 ) P is present on internal vesicles and the limiting mem - brane of early endocytic organelles 5 , and is involved in multivesicular body ( MVB ) biogenesis 6 . On the other hand , recycling endosomes have a relatively high content of the raft - organizing lipids cholesterol and glycosphingolipids 7 . Important conceptual progress has also been provided by recent observations from Marino Zerial’s labora - tory . They found that rab5 , which controls fusion of endocytic vesicles with early endosomes 8 , and rab4 and rab11 , which regulate recycling from early endosomes 9 , 10 , sequentially organize the endocytic / recy - cling pathway of transferrin in domains within a continuous membrane structure . The distinct nature of these domains is reflected by their differential sensitivity to pharmacological tools such as brefeldin A and the phosphatidylinositol kinase inhibitor wortmannin . Interestingly , these domains are distinct for rab5 - controlled entry into the early endosomal system , and rab4 / rab11 - dependent departure to the cell surface 11 . The two gateways are connected by an intermediate domain defined by rab5 / rab4 , from which fast transferrin recy - cling occurs . These domains are probably generated through the recruitment of specif - ic effectors by the activated membrane - bound GTPases . In this sense , rab proteins might serve as nucleation sites for the assem - bly of oligomeric complexes . For example , rab5 has been shown to functionally recruit the phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase hVPS34 , and at least two PI ( 3 ) P - binding proteins , ‘Rab’ing up endosomal membrane transport Magda Deneka and Peter van der Sluijs Early endosomes are the first sorting station from which endocytosed materials are targeted to various intra - cellular destinations . Recent work has identified the FYVE - domain protein rabenosyn - 5 as a bifunctional effector of the GTPases rab5 and rab4 , physically connecting entry and recycling sites on early endosomes . © 2002 Nature Publishing Group errata NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOL 4 APRIL 2002 http : / / cellbio . nature . com 328 In Wahl & Carr ( Nature Cell Biol . 3 , E277 – E286 ( 2001 ) ) , the empty box next to histone acetyltransferase should contain the words ‘p300 / CBP’ in Fig . 2 . In Deitrick & Rosen ( Nature Cell Biol . 3 , E31 ( 2002 ) ) , the surname of Mara Kreishman - Deitrick was spelt incorrectly . In Bourguignon et al . ( Nature Cell Biol . 4 , E22 – E23 ( 2002 ) ) , the legends for Figs 1 and 2 were inadvertently reversed . In Jang et al . ( Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 51 – 58 ( 2002 ) ) , Fig . 3b should be as below . Fig . 4b and c should also be exchanged , and the x axis in Fig . 6e should be Hep3B , K42A - 1 , K42A - 2 and K42A - 3 . R e l a t i v e l u c i f e r a s e a c t i v i t y 5 4 3 2 1 0 TGF - β Smad2DNSmad3DNSmad7DNSmad7 – + + + + + + + – – – + – – + – – – + – – + – – – – + + + – – – – – – – – – – + b © 2002 Nature Publishing Group