CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 The Nature of Embryonic Stem Cells Graziano Martello 1 , 3 and Austin Smith 1 , 2 1 Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute and 2 Department of Biochemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , CB2 1QR United Kingdom ; email : austin . smith @ cscr . cam . ac . uk 3 Department of Molecular Medicine , University of Padua , Padova , 35122 Italy Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 2014 . 30 : 647 – 75 The Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology is online at cellbio . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100913 - 013116 Copyright c (cid:2) 2014 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved Keywords pluripotency , self - renewal , commitment , mammalian development , transcription factors , gene regulatory network Abstract Mouse embryonic stem ( ES ) cells perpetuate in vitro the broad developmen - tal potential of na¨ıve founder cells in the preimplantation embryo . ES cells self - renew relentlessly in culture but can reenter embryonic development seamlessly , differentiating on schedule to form all elements of the fetus . Here we review the properties of these remarkable cells . Arising from the stabil - ity , homogeneity , and equipotency of ES cells , we consider the concept of a pluripotent ground state . We evaluate the authenticity of ES cells in relation to cells in the embryo and examine their utility for dissecting mechanisms that confer pluripotency and that execute fate choice . We summarize cur - rent knowledge of the transcription factor circuitry that governs the ES cell state and discuss the opportunity to expose molecular logic further through iterative computational modeling and experimentation . Finally , we present a perspective on unresolved questions , including the challenge of deriving ground state pluripotent stem cells from non - rodent species . 647 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Contents A BRIEF HISTORY : FROM MONSTERS TO MARVELS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 648 EMBRYONIC STEM CELL SELF - RENEWAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650 THE EMBRYONIC STEM CELL STATE : CAPTURE OR CREATION . . . . . . . . . 654 THE EMBRYONIC STEM CELL TOOLKIT FOR DISSECTING PLURIPOTENCY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 655 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR GOVERNANCE OF THE GROUND STATE . . . . 657 INDUCTION OF THE GROUND STATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 659 EXIT FROM THE GROUND STATE AND PROGRESSION TO LINEAGE DETERMINATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 660 BIOLOGICAL COMPUTATION OF EMBRYONIC STEM CELL SELF - RENEWAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 664 A BRIEF HISTORY : FROM MONSTERS TO MARVELS Embryonic stem ( ES ) cell biology springs from an exotic source . Teratocarcinomas are bizarre tumors containing multiple tissue types , including fully differentiated structures , such as teeth and hair . Their monstrous appearance has been noted since antiquity as a gross caricature of normal development . Systematic study of these tumors became possible in the 1950s , when Leroy Stevens noted that males of the 129 strain of inbred mice sporadically developed testicular ter - atocarcinomas and showed that these could be maintained continuously by serial transplantation ( Stevens & Little 1954 ) . Malignant growth and transplantability of teratocarcinomas are associated with the presence of proliferative undifferentiated cells , called embryonal carcinoma ( EC ) cells . In a pioneering study , researchers injected individual EC cells into adult mouse brain and found that they could regener - ate multilineage teratocarcinomas ( Kleinsmith & Pierce 1964 ) . This experiment established that single EC cells can generate all constituent cell types of the tumor . Furthermore , the tumors were transplantable , indicating that EC cells are self - renewing and tumor propagating . In contrast , the differentiated cellular compartment in teratocarcinomas does not reform tumors ( Martin 1980 ) . EC cells are thus archetypal cancer stem cells that fuel malignant growth and differentiation ( Dick 2008 , Kleinsmith & Pierce 1964 ) . Teratocarcinomasinhumanarepredominantlytesticular , asin129mice . Stevensdemonstrated that the mouse tumors arose from developing germ cells and went on to show that they could be induced at high efﬁciency by grafting fetal germ cells to adult tissues ( reviewed in Stevens 1983 ) . However , EC cells do not resemble germ cells , and germ cells do not normally differentiate into other lineages . EC cells exhibit a simple morphology similar to cells present in the early embryo prior to gastrulation . Such embryonic founder cells have the ﬂexibility to produce all somatic cell lineages , a property termed pluripotency . Mouse embryos at these early stages were therefore grafted to extrauterine sites . They also gave rise to teratocarcinomas , but only if the grafted frag - mentcontainedpluripotentcells ( Diwan & Stevens1976 , Solteretal . 1970 , Stevens1968 ) . Surpris - ingly , therefore , pluripotency in the mouse embryo is associated with latent tumorigenic potential . EC cells outgrow from explants of teratocarcinomas and can readily be expanded into cell lines . In the 1970s , EC cell cultures were established from both testicular and embryo - derived terato - carcinomas . Typically , this was achieved by coculture with feeder layers of mitotically inactivated ﬁbroblasts , a standard technique used at the time to improve viability and proliferation of primary 648 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 cells ( Kahan & Ephrussi 1970 ) . The EC cell lines displayed rather diverse differentiation proper - ties , which fueled debate as to whether they might comprise a hierarchy of embryonic progenitors with different lineage speciﬁcations . While others pursued this seductive notion , Martin Evans and Gail Martin focused their attention on the retention of pluripotency . They found that subclones of pluripotent EC cells expanded on feeders reliably retained pluripotency . They also noted that when these clonal pluripotent EC cells were transferred onto on gelatin - coated dishes without feeders , they expanded as a mixed population in which nests of undifferentiated EC cells were interspersed among ﬁbroblastic cells ( Martin & Evans 1975 ) . They reasoned that EC cells can produce their own feeder cell equivalents through differentiation and inferred that feeders make a speciﬁc and necessary contribution to maintaining pluripotency ( Martin 1975 , 1980 ) . Martin and Evans also appreciated that batches of serum differed profoundly in their ability to support EC cell expansion and differentiation competence . These observations resulted in an empirical but reliable culture methodology for derivation and clonal propagation of EC cells with retention of pluripotency ( reviewed in Martin 1980 ) . Evans and Martin also demonstrated that when allowed to form aggregates clonal EC cells formed structures termed embryoid bodies that exhibit differentiation features found in early em - bryos ( Martin & Evans 1975 ) . EC cells also exhibited several markers consistent with an embryonic identity ( Martin 1980 ) . This relationship was probed using the recently developed technique for producing mouse blastocyst chimeras ( reviewed in Gardner 1998 ) . EC cells were injected into blastocysts to test if they could behave as embryo cells and become incorporated into a developing embryo . Mixed outcomes were obtained from these experiments . Some EC cell lines failed to incorporate , whereas others caused developmental abnormalities or produced tumors . Strikingly , however , some of the pluripotent EC cell lines could colonize the host embryo and produce live - born chimeras with EC cell progeny detectable in multiple tissues ( reviewed in Papaioannou & Rossant 1992 ) . Therefore , a subset of EC cells could respond to a host embryo environment and display functional attributes of normal embryo cells . Even in the best cases , however , EC cell injections did not produce the high levels of chimerism routinelyobtained withcellstransferreddirectlybetween embryos ( Papaioannou & Rossant1992 ) . A likely explanation was that although EC cells are chromosomally relatively stable and can display karyotypes that are close to diploid , they invariably carry one or more chromosomal anomalies ( Martin 1980 ) . As long as EC cells could be derived only via formation of tumors and were genetically abnormal , their similarity to embryo cells remained in question . The critical challenge was to establish pluripotent stem cell cultures directly from embryos . This breakthrough was made in 1981 . Using the conditions they had optimized for clonal ex - pansion of pluripotent EC cells on feeder layers , Evans and Martin independently succeeded in deriving undifferentiated cell lines from mouse blastocysts ( Evans & Kaufman 1981 , Martin 1981 ) . These cells seemed very similar to EC cells . Furthermore , they gave rise to teratocarcinomas when grafted to adult mice . Therefore , the possibility remained that the embryo cells had transformed in vitro . The Evans group ﬁnally eliminated this concern by establishing euploid cell lines that gave high - contribution chimeras and moreover transmitted the cultured cell genome through the germ line to generate healthy offspring ( Bradley et al . 1984 ) . Remarkably , then , pluripotent cells can be obtained from the early embryo , expanded through multiple generations in culture without genetic transformation , and resume development faultlessly when restored to the embryo . These cells are today called embryonic stem cells . Some10yearslateritwasfoundthatinspeciﬁccultureconditionsprimordialgermcells ( PGCs ) from mouse embryos could convert into proliferative stem cells ( Matsui et al . 1992 , Resnick et al . 1992 ) . These so - called embryonal germ ( EG ) cells are pluripotent and are indistinguishable from ES cells apart from their origin and in some cases loss of genomic imprints ( Leitch & Smith www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 649 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 2013 ) . Thus , the germ cell origin of teratocarcinoma is likely explained by induced conversion into pluripotent stem cells in vivo ( Leitch et al . 2013b , Stevens 1983 ) . Competence for germline transmission means that ES cells can be used as a vehicle for intro - ducing gene modiﬁcations into mice ( Robertson et al . 1986 ) . They are permissive to all standard genetic manipulation approaches , and their facility for clonal expansion enables isolation of rela - tively rare events , notably homologous recombination . In 1989 , the ﬁrst mice were generated with a knockout mutation created by gene targeting in ES cells ( Thompson et al . 1989 ) . ES cell – based genome engineering rapidly became a ubiquitous technique in mouse genetics ( Capecchi 2005 ) and was the predominant focus of ES cell research and usage throughout the 1980s and 1990s . The biological nature of ES cells and the molecular underpinning of pluripotency came into full focus only in the late 1990s . EMBRYONIC STEM CELL SELF - RENEWAL Stem cells are deﬁned by the capacity for repeated generation of two classes of progeny : daughter cells with equivalent proliferative and developmental potential and daughters speciﬁed for dif - ferentiation . ES cells have an indeﬁnite proliferative life span , and long - lived subclones obtained by single - cell expansion retain pluripotency . Thus , ES cells undoubtedly meet the criteria for self - renewing stem cells . What are the cues that allow or instruct their self - renewal ? Coculture with mid - gestation ﬁbroblasts in the presence of calf serum is complex and is far from the physiological environment of cells in preimplantation embryos . Moreover , the effective - ness of this culture system is heavily dependent on the inbred genetic background ; mouse strains are described as permissive or nonpermissive according to whether or not they give rise to ES cells in these unreﬁned culture conditions ( Gardner & Brook 1997 ) . In practice , almost all stably pluripotent ES cell lines derived using serum and feeders are from a single strain , 129 , or hybrids thereof . Interestingly , this is the parental strain that Stevens used for his teratocarcinoma studies , although it remains unclear whether there is a common genetic foundation . Furthermore , XX cell lines are underrepresented in conventional ES cell derivations , and those that are obtained tend to lose one of the X chromosomes ( Rastan & Robertson 1985 ) . Finally , the serum and feeder layer system has not yielded authentic chimera - forming ES cells from other mammals , or even other rodents . One interpretation of these observations would be that ES cells are selected or reprogrammed in culture through an inherently inefﬁcient or stochastic process ( Buehr & Smith 2003 , Smith 2001b ) . However , the empirical culture formulation could obscure and compromise the molecular pathways that determine ES cell self - renewal . Deconvolution of the cocktail of serum factors and feeder layer interactions was required . In the absence of feeders , pluripotent EC cells attached to gelatin - coated dishes and proliferated , but they also differentiated . Medium conditioned by preincubation with feeder cells could not prevent differentiation but did delay its onset ( Koopman & Cotton 1984 , Smith & Hooper 1983 ) . Through screening other cell types , it was found that medium harvested from Buffalo rat liver cells could suppress differentiation much more effectively , enabling clonal expansion and long - term propagation of EC and ES cells without feeders ( Smith & Hooper 1987 ) . These experiments also showed that the differentiation - inhibiting activity resided in a secreted protein . Puriﬁcation of this protein led to its identiﬁcation as the cytokine leukemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) ( Smith et al . 1988 , Williams et al . 1988 ) . LIF can replace feeders in both derivation and long - term culture of germline - competent ES cells . It is produced by feeder cells primarily in a form that is localized to the cell surface , which can explain why feeder cell – conditioned medium has limited effectiveness ( Rathjen et al . 1990 ) . However , ES cells in LIF and serum are morphologically rather heterogeneous , and cultures contain some overtly differentiated cells that are rarely apparent on feeders . It is thus likely that 650 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 feeders contribute more than LIF to maximize ES cell self - renewal ( see below ) . Nonetheless , LIF is the principal factor , and feeder cells lacking the Lif gene barely support ES cells ( Stewart et al . 1992 ) . LIF signals through a bipartite receptor to activate Janus - associated kinases ( JAKs ) . Downstream of activated JAK lie the extracellular signal - related kinase ( Erk ) and phosphatidyl inositol - 3 kinase ( PI3K ) pathways . LIF - stimulation of these pathways is not important for self - renewal , however . On the contrary , activation of Erk is antagonistic to self - renewal , and mutated receptors that do not couple to this pathway exhibit enhanced self - renewal signaling ( Burdon et al . 1999 ) . The effector of the self - renewal response is signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( Stat3 ) ( Boeuf et al . 1997 , Martello et al . 2013 , Matsuda et al . 1999 , Niwa et al . 1998 ) . In response to LIF binding and JAK activation , Stat3 is recruited to the LIF receptor complex and itself activated through phosphorylation by JAK . LIF / Stat3 is not sufﬁcient , however . If serum is withdrawn from ES cells , they continue to proliferate but lose ES cell features and differentiate over ﬁve to six days , mostly into neural precursors and neurons ( Ying et al . 2003b ) . Differentiation is delayed at high density or in the presence of LIF but still proceeds such that cultures cannot be propagated beyond two to three passages . The implication is that serum provides an additional signal ( s ) to LIF that is required to fully suppress differentiation , in particular to the neural lineage . Bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMPs ) are potent antagonists of neural speciﬁcation in vertebrate embryos . Transposed to ES cell culture , BMP can replace serum and sustain self - renewal in combination with LIF ( Ying et al . 2003a ) . This effect of BMP had been elusive because BMP alone promotes nonneural differentiation ( Malaguti et al . 2013 , Wiles & Johansson 1999 ) , and the self - renewal action is apparent only in the presence of LIF . BMP suppresses ES cell differentiation primarily through induction of Id genes , classical antagonists of basic helix - loop - helix transcription factors ( Davies et al . 2013 , Ying et al . 2003a , Zhang et al . 2010 ) . Both LIF and BMP act to block ES cell differentiation . What then are the triggersfor differenti - ation ? In a deﬁned culture system without added inducers , this should either be a cell - autonomous program , sometimes termed default , or be mediated through juxtacrine or paracrine intercellular signaling . The ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF ) pathway is operative in ES cell cultures . ES cells produce appreciable amounts of FGF4 , and they express a cognate receptor , FGFR2 . Although initially considered as a potential autocrine self - renewal stimulus , characterization of ES cells deleted for Fgf4 highlighted a role in differentiation ( Wilder et al . 1997 ) . FGF4 is the major acti - vator of Erk mitogen - activated protein kinases in ES cells . Consistent with previous ﬁndings of the antagonistic role of Erk activation in LIF signaling ( Burdon et al . 1999 ) , Erk2 mutant ES cells are resistant to differentiation and can be maintained with LIF alone ( Kunath et al . 2007 ) . Availability of potent and highly selective inhibitors of the Erk activating enzymes Mek1 / 2 enabled a chemical approach to ES cell culture . Such inhibitors , and also more promiscuous inhibitors of the Fgf receptor , could sustain robust ES cell self - renewal in the presence of LIF only ( Ying et al . 2008 ) . Another kinase , glycogen synthase kinase - 3 ( GSK3 ) , was also implicated by both chemical and genetic approaches as an antagonist of ES cell self - renewal ( Doble et al . 2007 , Sato et al . 2004 ) . Inhibition / deletion of GSK3 combined with LIF allowed efﬁcient ES cell self - renewal similar to Mek / Erk inhibition / ablation in the presence of LIF . Most striking , however , is the propagation of ES cells without LIF or serum factors , by combining selective inhibitors of both Mek / Erk and GSK3 pathways , PD0325901 and CH99021 , respectively ( Ying et al . 2008 ) . Application of these two small - molecule inhibitors ( 2i ) is sufﬁcient for clonal expansion of undifferentiated ES cells and for de novo derivation of ES cells from mouse blastocysts . The Erk pathway is a basic signaling module that is essential in many cell types . Independence from this pathway is thus a deﬁning feature of mouse ES cells . GSK3 is a negative regulator of many basic cellular processes and also restrains several intra - cellular signaling pathways ( Doble & Woodgett 2003 ) , most notably canonical Wnt / β - catenin www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 651 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 ( Clevers 2006 ) . The effect on ES cell self - renewal could therefore be multifactorial . Indeed , GSK3 inhibition ( GSK3i ) appears both to enhance ES cell growth and viability and to suppress differ - entiation . However , the most critical effects of GSK3i are mediated through β - catenin . ES cells lacking β - catenin can be sustained in the presence of LIF and MEK inhibition ( MEKi ) but ex - hibit severely blunted self - renewal in 2i ( Lyashenko et al . 2011 , Wray et al . 2011 ) . Intracellular β - catenin is targeted for proteasome destruction by phosphorylation by GSK3 and is thus sta - bilized by GSK3i . This mimics Wnt stimulation , which causes disassembly of the complex that colocalizes GSK3 and β - catenin . Nuclear accumulation of β - catenin leads to activation of tar - get genes via complex formation with DNA - bound Tcf / Lef transcription factors ( Clevers 2006 ) . Thus , β - catenin is thought to participate directly in transcriptional activation . In ES cells , how - ever , the situation is subtly but signiﬁcantly different . The predominant Tcf family member is Tcf3 ( gene name Tcf7l1 ) , which functions mainly , if not exclusively , as a repressor ( Houston et al . 2002 ; Merrill et al . 2001 , 2004 ) . Interaction between β - catenin and Tcf3 leads to abrogation of this repression apparently by dissociating Tcf3 from its DNA - binding sites ( Shy et al . 2013 , Wu et al . 2012 ) . Consistent with this model , β - catenin null ES cells regain responsiveness to GSK3i upon expression of full - length or truncated β - catenin lacking the transactivation domain ( Wray et al . 2011 ) . Importantly , Tcf3 deletion in ES cells phenocopies GSKi treatment by increasing resistance to differentiation ( Guo et al . 2011 , Pereira et al . 2006 , Wray et al . 2011 ) . This effect is achieved because Tcf3 directly represses key pluripotency factor genes ( Martello et al . 2012 ) . Consequently , expression of these factors is upregulated by GSKi . Although the β - catenin / Tcf3 interaction is clearly the principal axis through which GSK3i promotes ES cell self - renewal , it should be noted that Tcf3 expression is also reduced in the presence of GSKi , an effect that is un - likely to be dependent on β - catenin . Wnt ligands can support ES cell self - renewal in combination with LIF ( Berge et al . 2011 , Ogawa et al . 2006 ) , but in our hands Wnt does not fully substitute for GSKi in 2i culture . Furthermore , it is evident that GSK3i has independent effects because β - catenin null cells consistently exhibit higher colony forming efﬁciency in 2i with LIF than in MEKi with LIF ( Wray et al . 2011 ) . The ability to culture ES cells in a deﬁned milieu without serum factors has clariﬁed three confounding issues in the ﬁeld . First was the elusive nature of a putative ES cell self - renewal factor that could replace LIF . Such a factor was postulated to account for the normal development of pluripotent cells in the embryo in the absence of LIF signaling ( Smith 2001a ) . Furthermore , certain conditioned media that lacked LIF had been found to support limited ES cell self - renewal ( Dani et al . 1998 ) . However , the activity was associated with a high - weight molecular fraction and proved refractory to puriﬁcation . In retrospect , a probable explanation is that extracellular matrix components released into the media could adsorb FGF4 and / or provide Wnt . These considera - tions may also explain the added beneﬁt of feeders compared to ES cells cultured on gelatin with LIF and serum . Second , use of inhibitors overcame the nonpermissive strain barrier and allowed robust ES cell derivation from all strains of mice ( Kiyonari et al . 2010 , Nichols et al . 2009a ) and furthermore even from a different rodent species , the rat ( Buehr et al . 2008 , Li et al . 2008 ) . Third , ES cells cultured without feeders in LIF and serum or LIF and BMP are mosaic , with overt differ - entiation readily observed at low cell densities and covert cellular heterogeneity revealed by in situ inspection of a range of markers ( Wray et al . 2010 ) . In contrast , culture in 2i yields substantially homogeneous , undifferentiated ES cells even at clonal density ( Figure 1 a ) . These features led to the proposition that ES cells cultured in 2i are insulated from perturbation by differentiation inducers and may be anchored in a ground state ( Silva & Smith 2008 ) . The concept of ground state pluripotency implies robust self - renewal of a biologically homogeneous population of cells , each with unbiased potential to form all somatic cell lineages and germ cells . 652 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 50 µm a b Serum + LIF 2i + LIF E s rr b D A P I Single - cell blastocyst injection chimeras P B - G F P B r i g h t fi e l d Figure 1 Single embryonic stem ( ES ) cells self - renew and are pluripotent . ( a ) Colonies formed from single ES cells plated on gelatin - coated dishes in serum + LIF or 2i + LIF and immunostained for Esrrb . Esrrb is expressed by only a fraction of cells in serum but by all cells in 2i . ( b ) Chimeras generated by injection of single GFP - labeled ES cells into blastocyst - stage embryos . Embryos imaged at mid - gestation ( E12 . 5 ) show widespread GFP signal , showing that the injected cell was pluripotent . The left - hand embryo has little or no ES cell contribution and serves as a control for autoﬂuorescence . www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 653 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 THE EMBRYONIC STEM CELL STATE : CAPTURE OR CREATION The classical function of stem cells is to sustain homeostatic tissue turnover and enable repair throughout life ( Simons & Clevers 2011 ) . In contrast , embryonic development is a dynamic pro - gression . Self - renewal is not readily apparent in the early mammalian embryo . This raises the question : What exactly are ES cells , and how do they arise ? The ability of ES cells to reenter embryogenesis faultlessly argues that any changes incurred in culture must be reversible and that ES cells are functionally equivalent to early embryo cells . However , the derivation process in serum culture is protracted and inefﬁcient . ES cell colonies do not emerge , if at all , until after dissociation and replating of primary outgrowths . In this black box period it has been suggested that embryo cells may undergo transcriptional and / or epigenetic reprogramming to acquire self - renewal ( Tang et al . 2010 ) . With the advent of 2i , however , deriva - tion has become efﬁcient and reliable ( Nichols et al . 2009a ) , supporting the counterproposition of a simple and direct transition between intraembryonic and in vitro cell states . The textbook version is that ES cells originate from the mid - blastocyst - stage inner cell mass ( ICM ) at embryonic day 3 . 5 ( E3 . 5 ) . Mouse blastocysts are easiest to collect at this time , and consequently , this is the most widely used starting point . Whole E3 . 5 ICMs can give rise to ES cells in serum and LIF and very readily in 2i + LIF ( Nichols et al . 2009a , b ) . However , individual ICM cells at this stage are incapable of generating ES cell colonies in 2i + LIF unless they are supported by feeders , serum , or extracellular matrix ( Boroviak et al . 2014 ) . In marked contrast , single cells from the mature blastocyst stage ( E4 . 5 ) can be visualized forming ES cell colonies within three to four days in 2i + LIF and moreover with an efﬁciency greater than 50 % , which is comparable to the clonogenicity of established lines . Furthermore , inspection of transcription factor and signaling markers suggests that ES cells do not deviate substantially from a starting intraembryonic cell identity ( Boroviak et al . 2014 ) . Notably , this identity is clearly distinct from that of early ICM cells at E3 . 5 and of cells after implantation . Instead , ES cells most closely resemble the na¨ıve epiblast ( also called the primitive ectoderm ) , the founder population of the embryo that emerges within the ICM only at the mature blastocyst stage ( Gardner & Brook 1997 ; Nichols & Smith 2011 , 2012 ) . ES cell – forming ability declines abruptly upon implantation . These ﬁndings indicate that ES cells originate from a narrow window of mouse embryo development corresponding to the period between emergence of the na¨ıve epiblast and its organization into an epithelium shortly after implantation ( Nichols & Smith 2012 ) . ES cells have also been derived from embryos put into culture with feeders and serum at preblastocyst stages ( Tesar 2005 ) . A rational explanation is that cells can continue on a developmental trajectory in culture until they reach the na¨ıve epiblast stage , at which point they may be corralled into self - renewal ( Nichols & Smith 2011 ) . In this regard , it is signiﬁcant that no functional or developmental distinctions have been reported for ES cells relating to the initial stage of embryo culture . Pluripotent cell lines can also be established by culture of later stage egg cylinder epiblasts ( Brons et al . 2007 , Tesar et al . 2007 ) . These postimplantation epiblast stem cells ( EpiSCs ) are cul - tured without LIF or 2i and instead require FGF and activin in addition to feeders . They can differ - entiateinvitroandformteratocarcinomasbuthavelittleornocapacitytoformblastocystchimeras . EpiSCs have been found by transcriptome proﬁling to be a heterogeneous and partially culture - adapted phenotype that somewhat resembles anterior epiblast at the primitive streak stage ( Kojima et al . 2014 , Tsakiridis et al . 2014 ) . They are described as representing a primed state of pluripo - tency , reﬂecting expression of lineage speciﬁcation factors and predisposition for differentiation . As noted above , independence from Erk signaling is a distinctive property of ES cells , and is not shared by EpiSCs . The preimplantation epiblast also exhibits Erk independence . Indeed , inhibition of FGF receptor or Mek in the intact early embryo promotes formation of epiblast . 654 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 This occurs at the expense of hypoblast ( also known as primitive endoderm ) , the founder tissue of the extraembryonic yolk sacs that segregates in parallel with epiblast in the ICM of the mature blastocyst ( Chazaud et al . 2006 , Nichols et al . 2009b , Yamanaka et al . 2010 ) . Although FGF4 is expressed in the early embryo , nascent epiblast cells may be blind to this signal because they have little or no expression of FGF receptors ( Guo et al . 2010 ) . ES cells in contrast express functional FGFR2 , hence the need to inhibit this signaling axis . It is currently unclear whether the presence of FGFR2 in ES cells is ectopic or reﬂects an upregulation in vivo at a speciﬁc stage or circumstance not included in current proﬁles . The na¨ıve epiblast has a unique epigenetic signature , comprising genome - wide DNA hy - pomethylation with only imprinted regions and repeats spared ( Smith et al . 2012 ) . ES cells propa - gated in serum have much higher levels of DNA methylation ( > 70 % mC ) , which is comparable to somatic cells . This disparity was resolved upon examination of ES cells cultured in 2i . These show substantial demethylation , to a level ( 30 % mC ) similar to the preimplantation epiblast ( Ficz et al . 2013 , Habibi et al . 2013 , Leitch et al . 2013a ) . Very low expression of de novo DNA methyltrans - ferases DNMT3a and DNMT3b appears to underlie the loss of methylation . A second epigenetic distinction shared between rodent early epiblast and ES cells is reactivation of the silent X chro - mosome in females . These epigenetic erasure events contribute to an open chromatin landscape that may facilitate smooth access to diverse lineage - speciﬁcation programs during subsequent differentiation ( Meshorer et al . 2006 , Niwa 2007 ) . The weight of evidence points to the conclusion that ES cells are direct counterparts of a speciﬁc population of cells in the embryo , namely the na¨ıve epiblast in the mature blastocyst . In other words , ES cells are captured more than created . The authenticity of ES cells underscores their utility for studying the biology of pluripotency and early mammalian development . However , the paradox remains that na¨ıve epiblast is a transitory state in the embryo , whereas ES cells self - renew indeﬁnitely . In vitro propagation is not the subject of natural selection , so what feature of epiblast development could give rise to this capacity ? One possibility for the selective force is diapause . Diapause is a condition of temporary developmental arrest . Mice and rats have evolved the facility for diapause at the late - blastocyst stage . Embryonic development is paused in the face of nutritional demands from a previous litter that is still suckling . Suppression of estrogen secretion holds the uterus nonreceptive for implantation , and blastocysts are unable to develop further . Delayed - implantation blastocysts are viable for days or even weeks , and during this period there is some cell turnover in the na¨ıve epiblast , in other words , self - renewal . This facultative adaptation may be the foundation for ES cell propagation . The hypothesis is difﬁcult to test deﬁnitively , but some correlative evidence is that LIF signaling , which is dispensable for embryo development in laboratory conditions of controlled breeding , becomes essential in diapause , and speciﬁcally for persistence of the epiblast cells ( Nichols et al . 2001 ) . THE EMBRYONIC STEM CELL TOOLKIT FOR DISSECTING PLURIPOTENCY A pluripotency factor may be deﬁned as a gene product that directly and speciﬁcally supports the maintenance of ES cell identity . From this hierarchical perspective , gene products that serve general functions in basal processes , such as metabolism , cell cycle or transcription , do not qualify as pluripotency factors even though they may be necessary for ES cell propagation . Pluripotency factors are considered as a select group that in combination deﬁnes and governs the ES cell state , whereas gene products that mediate housekeeping functions provide the means through which the state is propagated . Candidate pluripotency factors have typically been identiﬁed by relatively speciﬁc expression in ES cells and early embryos ( Mitsui et al . 2003 , Okamoto et al . 1990 , Sch¨oler et al . 1990 ) www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 655 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 or through genetic screens ( Chambers et al . 2003 , Ivanova et al . 2006 ) . A versatile toolbox is available to validate and characterize such candidates . Forced expression of a transgene can be used to test sufﬁciency to maintain self - renewal and pluripotency . Ideally , transgene expression level should be constrained to near endogenous levels , to rule out neomorphic effects of overexpression ( Martello et al . 2012 , Niwa et al . 2009 ; see also Nakatake et al . 2013 for technical details ) . The transgene should be either ﬂanked by recombination sites to enable excision or regulated by an inducible promoter so that retention of differentiation potential can be tested . A recent technical innovation is the use of transposons such as piggyBac as vectors for the facile introduction and stable expression of transgenes of interest ( Guo et al . 2009 ) . Retroviral vectors , in contrast , are not used for expression studies because they are rapidly silenced in ES cells . The gain - of - function approach should be complemented by loss - of - function to test whether a gene of interest is required for maintenance of the ES cell state . Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) transfection is commonly used as a ﬁrst assay of candidates and can also be applied in genome - scale screens ( Ding et al . 2009 , Hu et al . 2009 , Martello et al . 2012 , Yang et al . 2012 ) . Stable knockdown by short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) is employed to test the long - term effects on self - renewal of loss of candidate pluripotency regulators ( Ivanova et al . 2006 ) . In general knockdown studies should be rigorously conﬁrmed by genetic disruption via either homologous recombination or genome editing . Tools such as TALENs and the CRISPR / Cas9 system are readily applied in ES cells ( Wang et al . 2013 ) . The impact of a gene of interest on ES cell self - renewal and pluripotency can be assessed in several ways . ES cells have the capacity to self - renew at clonal density , allowing a quantitative measurement of the self - renewal capacity of individual cells . In a colony forming assay , single cells are seeded at a very low cell density ( typically 50 cells per cm 2 ) and allowed to proliferate for ﬁve to six days . The colonies obtained are then scored for a marker of undifferentiated ES cells , such as alkaline phosphatase or a transgene reporter . The relative numbers of undifferentiated , mixed , or fully differentiated colonies reﬂect the self - renewal efﬁciency of ES cells in a given environment or following a genetic perturbation . For formal conﬁrmation of self - renewal , individual colonies should be picked and tested for continuous expansion and retention of differentiation potential . Forced expression of key pluripotency factors confers the capability to generate undifferentiated expandable colonies with reduced dependency of LIF and one or both of the 2i inhibitors . Speciﬁc factors may increase colony formation even in the presence of these inputs ( Martello et al . 2013 ) . Colony formation is used as a proxy for self - renewal efﬁciency in given conditions . The assay can be varied to test stability of the undifferentiated state . In a commitment assay , cells are plated at low density then cultured for a period without self - renewal input . Loss or persistence of self - renewal capacity is indicated by the number of undifferentiated colonies formed upon readdition of 2i + LIF . This assay has been used successfully to screen for and characterize genes that mediate exit from the ground state and entry into differentiation ( Betschinger et al . 2013 , Guo et al . 2011 , Leeb et al . 2014 ) . Several transcription factors have been functionally characterized as pluripotency factors , and their expression levels , measured by qRT - PCR , immunostaining , or Western blot , are commonly used as surrogate markers of the ground state . ES cell reporter lines have been generated in which the expression of a ﬂuorescent protein such as GFP is under control of the endogenous promoter of a pluripotency factor , typically Oct4 or Nanog ( see below ) ( Chambers et al . 2007 , Toyooka et al . 2008 , Wray et al . 2010 ) . Such reporter lines are widely employed to monitor and quantify ES cell self - renewal and differentiation by image analysis and ﬂow cytometry and also to detect emergence of pluripotent cells during molecular reprogramming ( Okita et al . 2007 , Wernig et al . 2007 ) . Another useful reporter is Rex1 : GFPd2 , in which the coding sequence for a destabilized form of GFP is inserted at the ATG of the Rex1 ( Zfp42 ) gene ( Wray et al . 2011 ) . Rex1 is not strictly 656 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 a pluripotency factor because it has neither gain - nor loss - of - function phenotypes . However , its expression is exquisitely speciﬁc for ground state ES cells and na¨ıve epiblast , and the destabilized GFP thus provides a neutral real - time reporter of transition in and out of these states ( Kalkan & Smith 2014 , Yang et al . 2012 ) . The assays described above provide stringent tests of the self - renewal capacity of ES cells . Differentiation propensity and potential can be measured using a variety of in vitro differentiation protocols . However , to test the full lineage repertoire and functionality of differentiation , in vivo assays are preferable . ES cells injected under the kidney capsule will form teratomas in four to six weeks . In this context , the cells differentiate into disordered but recognizable tissue types . Histological analysis of the teratoma can conﬁrm the presence of different germ layer derivatives and detect any omission or bias ( Osorno et al . 2012 ) . EpiSCs and PGCs can also give rise to teratomas , however . Therefore , a more rigorous test of both ES cell identity and pluripotency is chimera formation by blastocyst microinjection or morula aggregation ( Tam & Rossant 2003 ) . Uncompromised ES cells will yield extensive colonization of all tissues , including the germ line . A stringent variant of this assay is to use tetraploid blastocysts in which host embryo ICM cells are at a competitive growth disadvantage . Consequently , by mid - gestation surviving embryos are almost entirely ES cell derived ( Eakin et al . 2005 , Nagy et al . 1991 ) . The tetraploid complementation assay is an extreme test of the developmental integrity of ES cells but suffers from a high failure rate , even for ES cells that reliably generate high contribution germline chimeras by blastocyst injection ( Nagy et al . 1993 ) . Another stringent way to test developmental competence is to inject individual ES cells into the blastocyst . Chimeras with widespread contribution from single injected ES cells can be obtained with an efﬁciency of 30 – 40 % ( Figure 1 b ) . This clonal assay provides formal proof that pluripotency resides at the level of single cells rather than being a distributed population property . TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR GOVERNANCE OF THE GROUND STATE The POU - domain transcription factor Oct4 ( Pou5f1 ) is the preeminent pluripotency factor . Also known as Oct3 , it was the ﬁrst transcription factor identiﬁed and characterized as a regulator of pluripotency ( Okamoto et al . 1990 , Sch¨oler et al . 1990 ) . Oct4 is expressed in oocytes and early embryos through to early somite stages and is thereafter maintained exclusively in the germ cell lineage . In vitro Oct4 is found only in EC , ES , and EG cells . Upon deletion of Oct4 , pluripotency fails to become established in the embryo : ICM cells are allocated normally but lose identity and differentiate into trophectoderm ( Nichols et al . 1998 ) . In established ES cells , induced deletion of Oct4 leads to loss of self - renewal and differentiation . Unusually , this differentiation is mainly into the trophoblast lineage , which is not a common fate for ES cells ( Niwa et al . 2000 ) . Oct4 is thus considered the paramount pluripotency factor . Notably , however , forced expression of Oct4 does not consolidate or enhance ES cell self - renewal . On the contrary , even modest overexpression precipitates differentiation ( Niwa et al . 2000 ) . This ﬁnding suggested that Oct4 plays a dual role in self - renewal and differentiation and that its level should be tightly regulated to maintain pluripo - tency . Conversely , reduced levels of Oct4 have been found to impair ES cell differentiation without affectingself - renewal ( Karwacki - Neisiusetal . 2013 , Radzisheuskayaetal . 2013 ) . Apossiblerolefor Oct4 in the execution of lineage commitment in vivo is consistent with its persistent expression in the postimplantation epiblast during ingression through the primitive streak ( DeVeale et al . 2013 , Osorno et al . 2012 , Thomson et al . 2011 ) . Oct4 does play an earlier role in hypoblast differentia - tion , but temporally induced deletion and rescue experiments have revealed that this is a non - cell - autonomous function mediated via activation of Fgf4 expression in the ICM ( Le Bin et al . 2014 ) . Dissecting the precise functions of Oct4 in later fate decisions is likely to be even more challenging . www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 657 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 The SRY - box transcription factor Sox2 is also essential for ES cell self - renewal . Sox2 inactiva - tion in ES cells results in trophoblast formation , phenocopying Oct4 deletion ( Masui et al . 2007 ) . Sox2 is an Oct4 partner ( Ambrosetti et al . 1997 ) : It physically interacts with Oct4 protein ( Pardo et al . 2010 , van den Berg et al . 2010 ) , binds DNA together with Oct4 at Oct / Sox elements ( Chen et al . 2008 ) , and positively regulates Oct4 transcription ( Masui et al . 2007 ) . Sox2 is much more broadly expressed than Oct4 , however . In addition to the pre - and postimplantation epiblast , it is expressed in trophectoderm ( Keramari et al . 2010 ) and later on by all neuroectodermal cells and in diverse endodermal and epithelial tissues . Overexpression of Sox2 predisposes ES cells to differentiation ( Kopp et al . 2008 , Zhao et al . 2004 ) , suggesting that , like Oct4 , Sox2 expression levels should be constrained for efﬁcient self - renewal . Fgf4 was the ﬁrst gene demonstrated to be regulated by Oct4 / Sox2 ( Ambrosetti et al . 1997 ) and exempliﬁes the role of these pluripotency factors in promoting developmental progression . A coregulated target identiﬁed later is the gene encoding Nanog , a classic pluripotency - maintaining factor . Nanog is a homeodomain - containing transcription factor . Nanog expression in vivo is more restricted to the naive pluripotency compartment compared to Oct4 and Sox2 ( Silva et al . 2009 ) , although it is reexpressed exclusively in the egg cylinder just prior to and during gastrulation and is present in PGCs . Forced expression of Nanog in ES cells confers the ability to self - renew at clonal density in the absence of LIF ( Chambers et al . 2003 ) . Retained differentiation potential was shown by chimera formation following transgene excision , although interestingly germline transmission has not been documented . Loss of Nanog destabilizes pluripotent cells both in vitro and in vivo , as measured by impaired colony forming capacity ( Chambers et al . 2007 ) of Nanog null ES cells and the failure of Nanog null embryos to generate the epiblast ( Mitsui et al . 2003 , Silva et al . 2009 ) . Nonetheless , Nanog null ES cells can self - renew and retain pluripotency in optimal culture environments ( 2i + LIF ) . Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog have been shown to cross - regulate each other and consequently are proposed to form a core triad that maintains the pluripotent state through self - sustaining pos - itive feedback ( Young 2011 ) . This concept is widely accepted . However , it is not sufﬁcient to explain the observed properties of ES cells . Notably , dependency on the environment is not con - sidered . Moreover , forced expression of any member of the triad might be expected to stabilize the pluripotent state in such a feed - forward system , yet as noted above , Oct4 or Sox2 overexpression leads to differentiation . Furthermore , one of the triumvirate , Nanog , is dispensable for ES cell self - renewal and pluripotency . Finally , Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog are all expressed in EpiSCs , which have a distinct biology from ES cells . This evidence suggests that Oct4 / Sox2 and Nanog have complementary and only partially overlapping gene regulatory activities and that additional factors are integral to ES cell identity . Indeed , independent genome - wide occupancy studies show that only a portion of Nanog - bound regions are co - occupied by Oct4 / Sox2 ( Loh et al . 2006 , Marson et al . 2008 ) . Moreover , gene expression proﬁling after knockdown of either Oct4 or Nanog shows distinct transcriptional responses ( Loh et al . 2006 , Nishiyama et al . 2013 ) . A suite of transcription factors have been identiﬁed that are speciﬁc to na¨ıve epiblast and ground state ES cells and are downregulated in postimplantation epiblast and at the onset of ES cell differentiation . Among these factors , Esrrb , Klf4 , Klf2 , and Tbx3 have been functionally implicated in ES cell self - renewal through forced expression studies ( reviewed in Nichols & Smith 2012 ) . These ground state transcription factors are interconnected with one another and with Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog ( Chen et al . 2008 , Marson et al . 2008 ) . Like Nanog , their deletion can be tolerated by ES cells , although self - renewal is heavily compromised in the case of Esrrb knockdown orknockout . Nanog , Klf2 , and Esrrb arealldirectlyrepressedbyTcf3andconsequentlyupregulated by GSK3i . Among these , Esrrb appears pivotal , probably because Nanog also acts in part through 658 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 direct upregulation of Esrrb ( Festuccia et al . 2012 ) . Forced expression of Esrrb is sufﬁcient to render ES cells independent of GSK3i , with greater apparent potency than either Nanog or Klf2 , which must be overexpressed to enhance self - renewal . Furthermore , constitutive Esrrb can replace requirements for LIF . However , LIF does not directly regulate Esrrb , and Esrrb is dispensable when LIF is present . Thus , GSK3i and LIF stabilize ground state pluripotency through parallel mechanisms ( Martello et al . 2012 , Nichols & Smith 2012 ) . LIF stimulation leads to phosphorylation of the transcription factor Stat3 ( Akira et al . 1994 , Boeuf et al . 1997 ) . Phosphorylated Stat3 dimerizes , enters the nucleus , and activates the expression of target genes ( Bourillot et al . 2009 , Zhong et al . 1994 ) . Artiﬁcial activation of Stat3 is sufﬁcient to sustain ES cell self - renewal in the absence of LIF ( Matsuda et al . 1999 ) , whereas antagonism of Stat3 leads to differentiation ( Bourillot et al . 2009 , Niwa et al . 1998 ) . More recently , use of 2i has allowed the derivation of Stat3 null ES cells ( Ying et al . 2008 ) . These mutants show no functional response when exposed to LIF ( Martello et al . 2013 ) , conﬁrming that Stat3 is the critical mediator of LIF action in ES cells . Several studies had identiﬁed direct Stat3 targets , such as Klf4 , Gbx2 , and Pim1 ( Bourillot et al . 2009 , Hall et al . 2009 , Niwa et al . 2009 , Tai & Ying 2013 ) . However , over - expression of those targets only partially reproduces the pronounced effect of LIF when measured by the stringent assay of clonal expansion , and their knockdown or deletion does not abrogate LIF responsiveness . The search for effectors downstream of Stat3 was widened by taking advantage of deep sequencing technology to obtain a comprehensive LIF / Stat3 responsive transcriptome that could be integrated with ChIP - seq data . A focus on transcriptional regulators identiﬁed in addition to Klf4 , Gbx2 , and Pim1 an abundant but largely overlooked transcription factor Tfcp2l1 ( transcription factor CP2 - like 1 , previously known as CRTR2 ) ( Martello et al . 2013 ) . In common with other ground state pluripotency factors , Tfcp2l1 is expressed in the preimplantation epiblast and downregulated around implantation ( Pelton et al . 2002 ) . Tfcp2l1 is also rapidly downregu - lated during ES cell differentiation ( Ivanova et al . 2006 , Leeb et al . 2014 ) . Forced expression of Tfcp2l1 at endogenous levels fully recapitulates LIF effects on mouse ES cell self - renewal . Con - versely , Tfcp2l1 downregulation impairs the ES cell self - renewal response to LIF , indicating that Tfcp2l1 activity cannot be compensated by other Stat3 targets ( Martello et al . 2013 , Ye et al . 2013 ) . Thus , the LIF / Stat3 axis bolsters the ground state through induction of a handful of transcrip - tion factors , with Tfcp2l1 appearing to play the central role . Importantly , however , Tfcp2l1 is also a target of repression by Tcf3 and is induced by GSK3i ( Martello et al . 2013 , Ye et al . 2013 ) . Tfcp2l1 is therefore a point of convergence in the extrinsic direction of self - renewal . Notably , neither 2i nor LIF directly regulates Oct4 , Sox2 , or a third general pluripotency factor , Sall4 . INDUCTION OF THE GROUND STATE Molecular reprogramming of somatic cells ( Takahashi & Yamanaka 2006 ) provides a compelling demonstration that pluripotency is a transcription factor – determined state . Resulting induced pluripotent stem ( iPS ) cells can be transcriptionally , epigenetically , and functionally equivalent to ES cells ( Okita et al . 2007 , Takahashi & Yamanaka 2006 , Wernig et al . 2007 ) . Reprogramming provides an alternative system to gauge the relative contribution of inputs and factors controlling the na¨ıve pluripotent state . LIF , MEKi , and GSK3i have all been shown to enhance reprogram - ming efﬁciency ( Silva et al . 2008 , Sridharan et al . 2009 , Tang et al . 2012 , Theunissen et al . 2011 , Yang et al . 2010 ) . Moreover , for conversion of PGCs into EG cells , these inputs are actually sufﬁcient ( Leitch et al . 2010 , 2013b ) . Transcription factors associated with the ES cell state have been extensively implicated in reprogramming . EpiSCs , which already express Oct4 and Sox2 , can be efﬁciently converted to www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 659 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 na¨ıveiPScellsbyforcedexpressionofNanog , Klf4 , Klf2 , Esrrb , Tfcp2l1 , Tbx3 , orGbx2 ( Festuccia et al . 2012 , Guo et al . 2009 , Hall et al . 2009 , Martello et al . 2013 , Silva et al . 2009 , Ye et al . 2013 ) or by hyperactivation of Stat3 ( Onishi et al . 2014 , Yang et al . 2010 ) . In other words , activation of almost any node in the network is sufﬁcient in combination with 2i + LIF to reset from primed to ground state pluripotency . Furthermore , Nanog , Esrrb , Tbx3 , and Sall4 have been reported to enhance the formation of pluripotent hybrids in cell - fusion experiments ( Festuccia et al . 2012 , Han et al . 2010 , Silva et al . 2006 , Wong et al . 2008 ) . The classic Yamanaka reprogramming cocktail is composed of three pluripotency factors , Oct4 , Sox2 , and Klf4 , plus cMyc . Klf4 can be substituted by Klf2 or Esrrb ( Feng et al . 2009 , Nakagawa et al . 2007 ) , whereas the addition of other factors , such as Nanog , Tfcp2l1 , and Sall4 , is reported to increase reprogramming efﬁciency ( Tsubooka et al . 2009 , Wong et al . 2008 ) . Activation of endogenous Nanog or Essrb is rate limiting ( Buganim et al . 2012 , Silva et al . 2009 ) . These results demonstrate that the factors that are key to propagation of the pluripotent ground state can also contribute to regenerating this state in vitro . Interestingly , expression of all of these factors appears to be activated prior to formation of epiblast in the embryo ( Boroviak et al . 2014 , Guo et al . 2010 ) , suggesting that their function in development may encompass reprogramming the zygotic genome to a na¨ıve pluripotent state . EXIT FROM THE GROUND STATE AND PROGRESSION TO LINEAGE DETERMINATION EScellsself - renewrobustlyin2i + LIFandexpressallthecomponentsthatcanimposepluripotency on somatic cells ; therefore , how do ES cells escape the ground state to initiate differentiation ? Dissolution of the na¨ıve pluripotency program proceeds in less than 24 h in the peri - implantation mouse embryo , setting the stage for egg cylinder formation and subsequent spec - iﬁcation of germ cells and gastrulation . The speed and efﬁciency of this transition suggest a deterministic molecular program . However , ES cells have been proposed to embark on differen - tiation stochastically , associated with ﬂuctuations in expression of Nanog and other transcription factors ( Kalmar et al . 2009 , MacArthur & Lemischka 2013 ) . This idea was initially derived from the observation that in serum + LIF with neither feeders nor 2i , ES cells exhibit mosaic expres - sion of Nanog and other ground state transcription factors ( Chambers et al . 2007 , Niwa et al . 2009 , Wray et al . 2010 ) ( Figure 1 a ) . Tracking of ﬂuorescent reporters reveals that a fraction of cells that have downregulated a given factor can spontaneously regain expression ( Chambers et al . 2007 , Toyooka et al . 2008 ) . This engendered notions of metastability ( Silva & Smith 2008 ) or dynamic equilibrium ( Hayashi et al . 2008 ) . Single - cell proﬁling has substantiated variegated expression , also considered as high entropy expression ( MacArthur & Lemischka 2013 ) , of both pluripotency factors and lineage markers in ES cells in LIF and serum . Varying gene expression patterns are proposed to allow ES cells to sample different cell fate options and thus to be essential for pluripotency . However , in 2i almost all cells express detectable transcript and protein for each of the ground state factors and markers ( Dunn et al . 2014 , Faddah et al . 2013 , Filipczyk et al . 2013 , Wray et al . 2010 ) ( see also Figure 1 a ) . Furthermore , they show reduced or even undetectable expression of most lineage markers ( Marks et al . 2012 ) . Nonetheless , ES cells in 2i are manifestly pluripotent and moreover exhibit no appreciable delay in differentiation in vitro or in vivo . This suggests that the dynamic heterogeneity observed in serum is not intrinsic to ES cell identity or potency . The possibility arises that ES cell heterogeneity may be an epiphenomenon : a mixture of transitory cell states generated in response to incoherent environmental inputs ( Kalkan & Smith 2014 , Smith 2013 ) . Upon 2i withdrawal in deﬁned medium , ES cells appear to undergo unidirectional develop - mental progression , consistent with the behavior of peri - implantation epiblast in the embryo . 660 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Tfcp2l1 Esrrb Nanog Sox2 Naïve pluripotency Reversibilityphase Transitionalstate Primed pluripotency Lineage segregation Oct4 Nanog Tfcp2l1 Esrrb Sox2 Oct4 Sox2 Oct4 Sox2 Oct4 Sox2 Brn2 Oct4 Sox17 SSox177 Brn2 T Figure 2 Developmental progression from ground state embryonic stem ( ES ) cell to lineage commitment . On release from ground state maintenance culture , ES cells embark on continuous progression to lineage commitment . The initial phase is reversible until the ground state factors are entirely dissipated ( shown by representative factors in light blue ) . Cells then reach a transitional point characterized by the absence of either na¨ıve factors or lineage markers and the continued presence of Oct4 and Sox2 . Cells in this transitional phase are competent for lineage speciﬁcation : They upregulate lineage markers in response to external signals ( FGF , Nodal , Wnt ) and become primed for lineage commitment . Primed pluripotent cells ﬁnally leave the pluripotent state and enter deﬁnitive lineages . Neuroectodermal ( Sox2 and Brn2 positive ) and mesendodermal ( Oct4 and Sox17 positive ) progenitors are depicted . ES cells transition into lineage commitment without the requirement for an exogenous inducer , although it should be noted they express FGF4 and upregulate Nodal . Loss of ES cell character is not an instantaneous event , however . For ∼ 24 h , all cells remain able to self - renew as efﬁciently as at time zero in a colony forming assay if restored to 2i + LIF , even though there is substantial downregulation of ground state factors during this time . Extending the withdrawal period over the 24 – 72 - h period progressively reduces ability to regain self - renewal ( Betschinger et al . 2013 ) . Thus , the initial phase of exit from the ground state is reversible until cells reach a transition point at which ES cell identity is permanently extinguished ( Kalkan & Smith 2014 ) ( Figure 2 ) . Cells reach the transition point at different times after 2i withdrawal , however . This asynchrony can be a confounding factor for time course analyses at the population level . It is not eliminated by cell cycle synchronization of starting populations and therefore calls for fractionation based on markers of developmental state , such as Rex1 : GFPd2 ( Kalkan & Smith 2014 ) , time - lapse studies , and / or single - cell proﬁling . Fluctuating pluripotency factor expression has not been documented after 2i withdrawal in serum - free culture . Comprehensive time - lapse imaging of ﬂuorescent reporters has yet to be described , and therefore a period of metastability is not formally excluded . However , delineation of a reversible phase at the initiation of differentiation provides another possible explanation for dynamic heterogeneity observed in LIF and serum . In serum , cells may enter and persist in the reversible phase then sporadically revert owing to the presence of LIF . LIF signaling plays a key role in reversibility ; cells late in the reversible phase respond poorly to 2i alone , whereas 2i + LIF has the capacity to fully restore ground state self - renewal . This may parallel the role of LIF signaling in reprogramming , where it is required not simply to promote self - renewal of emergent iPS cells but also for induction of the na¨ıve pluripotent state ( Yang et al . 2010 ) . The LIF / Stat3 targets Tfcp2l1 and Klf4 are plausible mediators in this context because both have potent reversion activities ( Guo et al . 2009 , Martello et al . 2013 , Ye et al . 2013 ) . Acute susceptibility to the environment suggests that the naive pluripotency network may be poised to collapse . Does the network dissolve passively , or is it actively dismantled ? www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 661 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 As discussed above , there is abundant evidence that FGF4 stimulation of Erk is a key trigger for the differentiation process ( Kunath et al . 2007 , Stavridis et al . 2007 ) . FGF4 is directly regulated by Oct4 / Sox2 both in ES cells and in the embryo ( Ambrosetti et al . 1997 , Nichols et al . 1998 ) . The FGF4 / Erk axis downregulates transcription of Nanog and potentially other pluripotency factors , but the precise molecular mechanism ( s ) is still elusive ( Lanner et al . 2010 , Silva et al . 2009 ) . Tcf3 is also a direct target of Oct4 , and the presence of Tcf3 in ES cells constitutes an endogenous limiter , controlling expression of Esrrb , Tfcp2l1 , Nanog , and Klf2 ( Yi et al . 2008 ) . Genome - wide loss - of - function screens have been carried out to identify new genes required for timely progression out of the ground state and entry into differentiation ( Betschinger et al . 2013 , Leeb et al . 2014 , Yang et al . 2012 ) . These screens invariably recover Tcf3 and also components of the Gsk3 / β - catenin complex and the FGF / Erk pathway , consistent with their roles as primary drivers of developmental progression . A surprisingly large number of other candidate effectors have also been identiﬁed ( reviewed in Kalkan & Smith 2014 ) . Several have been validated , including the tumor suppressor folliculin and its interaction partners Fnip1 and 2 , which enforce cytoplasmic localization of the transcription factor Tfe3 and thereby reduce expression of Esrrb ( Betschinger et al . 2013 ) . Atypical protein kinase C iota was recovered in transposon mutagenesis screens in haploid ES cells ( Leeb et al . 2014 ) , providing genetic validation for the observation that a broad speciﬁcity inhibitor of PKC , G¨o6983 , enhances ES cell self - renewal ( Dutta et al . 2011 ) . The mechanism of this effect is still elusive . The RNA - binding protein Pum1 which binds 3 (cid:3) untranslated regions of mRNAs for key pluripotency factors Esrrb , Klf2 , Tbx3 , and Tfcp2l1 was also identiﬁed in the haploid ES cell screens . In the absence of Pum1 , these factors are upregulated under self - renewal conditions and show sustained expression after 2i withdrawal , suggesting that Pum1 acts like Tcf3 as a constitutive limiter of the pluripotency network ( Leeb et al . 2014 ) . Zinc ﬁnger proteins Zfp281 and Zfp706 also emerged as destabilizers of the ground state network . Interestingly most of the factors identiﬁed are already present in undifferentiated ES cells ( Kalkan & Smith 2014 ) . This means that pluripotency circuitry is actively constrained by multiple mechanisms during self - renewal . The concerted multifocal action of these destabilizers ensures timely extinction of the network upon withdrawal of self - renewal inputs ( Figure 3 ) . Notably , Esrrb and Tfcp2l1 are targeted by multiple effectors , suggesting that elimination of these two factors may be pivotal for dismembering the ground state . Indeed , simultaneous knockdown of Esrrb and Tfcp2l1 results in accelerated loss of other ground state factors upon 2i withdrawal . Extinction of both Esrrb and Tfcp2l1 could mark the transition point at which cells lose the potential to regain the ground state . Repressive chromatin modiﬁcations may be required for stable silencing . It is notable that several epigenetic modiﬁers have been recovered in the screens and also that Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are upregulated early during transition , providing the capacity for de novo DNA methylation . In contrast to loss of the entire suite of ground state factors , expression of Oct4 and Sox2 is maintained during the early stages of ES cell differentiation ( Thomson et al . 2011 , Trott & Martinez Arias 2013 ) . This is also consistent with the progression from na¨ıve to postimplantation epiblast in the embryo . Indeed , these two factors very likely contribute to changing cell identity through interaction with new partners that leads to rewiring the transcriptional program ( Adachi et al . 2013 ) ( Figure 2 ) . For instance , Otx2 is a partner of Oct4 that is induced early during transition in vitro and in the embryo and appears to play a role in remodeling the enhancer landscape ( Buecker et al . 2014 , Yang et al . 2014 ) . Some pluripotency factors , such as Klf5 and Sox2 , are also expressed in speciﬁc lineages . This has led to the idea that pluripotency is a precarious balance in which rival lineage speciﬁers constantly compete ( Loh & Lim 2011 ) . The tug - of - war is proposed to remain in balance during 662 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Y Pluripotency factor Destabilizer X Tcf3 Gbx2 Tfcp2l1 Esrrb Klf2 Sox2 Sall4 Oct4 Tbx3 MEKERK Tcf3 Tcf3 Tcf3 Flcn Pum1 Pum1 Pum1 Pum1 MEKERK Stat3 Klf4 Nanog Figure 3 Multiple mechanisms poise embryonic stem ( ES ) cells for exit from the ground state . Nodes of the ground state pluripotency circuitry ( blue ) are targeted by destabilizers ( negative regulators of pluripotency factors , orange ) . In the absence of LIF / Stat3 signaling ( light blue and light gray ) , the circuitry is substantially weakened . Note that general pluripotency factors Oct4 , Sox2 , and Sall4 are not directly regulated by either extrinsic inputs or destabilizers . Dashed lines indicate potential interactions between nodes inferred from correlated expression . self - renewal and to resolve during differentiation , when one family of factors becomes dominant over the others . However , ES cells do not enter into lineage commitment directly as they exit self - renewalbutﬁrstloseexpressionofallgroundstatefactorsprecedinganylineagespeciﬁcation . Cells in the transitionstage have upregulated expression of certain transcriptionfactors such as Otx2 that are increased immediately after implantation in vivo , but they do not yet express lineage - specifying factorssuchasTorFoxA2 . Thistransitionalstateappearssimilartoearlypostimplantationepiblast and is distinct from EpiSCs ( Hayashi et al . 2011 ) . Transitional cells appear sensitive to inducers such as Wnt or activin and may thereby be competent for lineage speciﬁcation . Two recent studies showed that during in vitro differentiation single cells express lineage markers in a mutually exclusive manner ( Thomson et al . 2011 , Trott & Martinez Arias 2013 ) . This www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 663 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 was detected after three to ﬁve days of differentiation . Therefore , cells had already transitioned through the sequence of states described above ( illustrated in Figure 2 ) . Among pluripotency factors , only Oct4 is known to be expressed continuously throughout the pre - and postimplantation epiblast . Oct4 , like other POU factors , interacts with many other transcription factors , and through these different partners it may serve as a scaffold for multiple gene expression programs that initiate alternative lineage commitment . Elucidating the molecular details of the changing role of Oct4 and in general how gene regulatory networks are rewired during ES cell differentiation is a fascinating challenge that can now be addressed by exploiting genome - scale technologies , particularly at the single cell level . BIOLOGICAL COMPUTATION OF EMBRYONIC STEM CELL SELF - RENEWAL Protein interaction and ChIP - seq studies show that pluripotency factors such as Oct4 and Nanog have the potential to interact with hundreds of proteins and thousands of genomic loci in ES cells ( Chambers & Tomlinson 2009 , Loh et al . 2006 , Marson et al . 2008 , Pardo et al . 2010 , van den Berg et al . 2010 ) . These studies do not inform as to whether widespread interaction is important for propagation of the ES cell state . Nonetheless , they have fostered the notion that self - renewal may be best explained by a vast interactome ( Lu et al . 2009 , Som et al . 2010 ) . The associated network maps can be useful resources , but they lack discrimination and therefore cannot explain or predict ES cell behavior . An alternative approach , as discussed above , is a minimal heirarchy scheme based on Oct4 , Sox2 , and Nanog activating mutual expression via interconnected positive feedback loops ( Young 2011 ) . ThiscanbereﬁnedtoincorporatenegativeautoregulationofNanog ( MacArthuretal . 2012 , Navarro et al . 2012 ) , and extended to include Klf4 and Esrrb , considering super - enhancers as key regulatory elements ( Hnisz et al . 2013 ) . These recursive network diagrams highlight the degree of interconnectivity between pluripotency factors . However , they consider ES cell pluripotency as an intrinsically self - propagating state , which does not readily account for dependency on external input and readiness for shutdown and transition into differentiation . Recent mathematical models have incorporated extrinsic regulation and differentiation permissiveness ( Herberg et al . 2014 , Luo et al . 2012 ) . Mathematical modeling becomes a challenge as the number of factors increases , however , and these analyses have been restricted to the Oct4 / Sox2 / Nanog triad . Comprehendingthearchitectureandoperationofthesystemasawholerequirescomputational approaches to generate models with both broad explanatory power and ideally also predictive potential . The scenario is relatively complex , with a set of interchangeable extrinsic inputs feeding into a circuitry of functionally relevant transcription factors that act cooperatively and , with the notable exceptions of Oct4 and Sox2 , are to a large extent interchangeable ( Figure 4 a ) . −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Figure 4 Biological computation of embryonic stem ( ES ) cell self - renewal . ( a ) Extrinsic modulators ( LIF , GSK3i , and MEKi ) and their downstream mediators ( Stat3 , Tcf3 , and Mek / Erk ) directly control the expression of ground state pluripotency factors ( listed as direct targets ) . General pluripotency factors Oct4 and Sox2 , which are required for pluripotency in both na¨ıve and primed epiblast , are not directly regulated by the ES cell self - renewal inputs , implying connectivity with the ground state factors ( gray arrows with question marks ) . Experimentally validated positive regulation is indicated by a black arrow ; negative regulation is indicated by a red circle - headed line . ( b ) The simplest among a set of models derived via Boolean approximation interconnecting extrinsic inputs , their targets , and the general pluripotency factors . This model is composed of only 12 components and 22 interactions and not only can explain ES cell self - renewal in four environments ( 2i + LIF , 2i , CH + LIF , PD + LIF ) and known phenotypes but also can predict the outcome of combined genetic perturbations . Positive regulation is indicated by a black arrow , and negative regulation is indicated by a red circle - headed line . Dashed lines in gray show optional interactions that could take place in equally valid but more complex models . 664 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 LIF GSK3i MEKi Stat3 MEKERK Klf4 Gbx2 Tfcp2l1 Esrrb Nanog Klf2 Sox2 Oct4 Extrinsicinputs Directtargets General pluripotencyfactors Tcf3 ? ? ? LIF Tcf3 Gbx2 Klf2 GSK3i MEKi MEKERK a b Nanog Klf4 Stat3 Tfcp2l1 Oct4 Sox2 Sall4 Esrrb www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 665 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 An abstract Boolean network is one approach to modeling the ground state transcrip - tion factor circuitry . These networks are generated by calculating pairwise correlation coef - ﬁcients between key transcription factors that are then discretized as high or low ( on / off ) ( Dunn et al . 2014 ) . The correlations are based on population expression levels in different self - renewal contexts ( 2i + LIF , 2i , CH + LIF , PD + LIF ) in each of which cell - to - cell variability is assumed to be minimal . The enormous initial set of models ( meta - model ) can be challenged with known ES cell behavior through a computational reasoning process applying bespoke software ( http : / / rein . cloudapp . net / ) . This formal veriﬁcation tool identiﬁes only those models that satisfy all the speciﬁcations ( experimental observations ) . Among the reduced set of models the simplest version consists of 3 inputs , 12 components , and 22 interactions ( Figure 4 b ) . The model set can explain known phenotypes , predict certain non - intuitive outcomes of combined genetic pertur - bations , and inform on the relative stability of ES cells under different culture conditions ( Dunn et al . 2014 ) . Notable features that emerge from this approach include the requirement for a third general pluripotency factor , Sall4 , and for speciﬁc repressive interactions between pivotal factors , notably negative regulation of Oct4 by Esrrb . Appreciation that both known and new ES cell behavior may be simulated by a circuitry formed of only a dozen components argues that a massively complex interactome is not required to de - scribe control of the ES cell state . Undoubtedly , the present models will be further reﬁned but the indications are that information processing to decide between self - renewal and entry into dif - ferentiation may be performed by a relatively simple biomolecular program . Whether such linear and deterministic reasoning is sufﬁcient to accurately model lineage choice or reprogramming remains to be seen . However , delineation of a minimal but sufﬁcient circuitry governing the ES cell state may guide and validate attempts to establish ground state pluripotent stem cells from large animals , nonhuman primates , and humans . Interestingly , ground state pluripotency factors such as Tfcp2l1 and Klf4 that are low or absent in current EpiSC - like human pluripotent cell lines are expressed in the human ICM ( O’Leary et al . 2012 , Yan et al . 2013 ) , consistent with potential functional conservation . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Rodent ES cells retain in toto the identity of na¨ıve preimplantation epiblast cells , with minimal adaptation to the in vitro environment . 2 . Na¨ıve epiblast cells and ES cells are predisposed to developmental progression ; the au - tocrine FGF4 / Erk signal actively promotes differentiation , whereas Tcf3 acts as a potent built - in negative regulator , or a limiter of na¨ıve pluripotency . 3 . The combination of inhibiting repression ( 2i ) and stimulating expression ( LIF ) of a speciﬁc group of pluripotency transcription factors holds ES cells in a self - renewing ground state . 4 . ES cells exhibit features indicative of a derestricted epigenome , including global DNA hypomethylation , reduced levels of histone modiﬁcations linked with gene silencing , and open chromatin . 5 . General pluripotency transcription factors , Oct4 , Sox2 , and Sall4 , although essential , are not conﬁned to na¨ıve epiblast or ES cells and are not directly responsive to extrinsic inputs that determine self - renewal . 666 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 6 . Ground state pluripotency transcription factors that deﬁne and determine the ES cell ground state also demarcate preimplantation from immediate postimplantation epiblast ; they comprise principally Nanog , Esrrb , and Tfcp2l1 , as well as Klf4 , Klf2 , Tbx3 , and Gbx2 . Except for Nanog , these factors are absent or expressed at low levels in EpiSCs and current human pluripotent cell lines . 7 . Entry of ES cells into differentiation is a continuous transition in which dismem - berment of the ground state transcription factor circuitry precedes expression of lineage - speciﬁcation markers and ultimately downregulation of general pluripotency factors . 8 . Interactions between pluripotency factors can be formalized and captured in data - constrained computational models to reveal the molecular program that executes the self - renewal versus differentiation decision . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . HowistheconstitutiveproliferationofEScellswithoutconventionalcellcycleregulation or growth factor input sustained ( Stead et al . 2002 ) , and is this directly controlled by pluripotency transcription factors ? 2 . Do ES cells have particular machinery to safeguard genome integrity during continuous proliferation ( Zalzman et al . 2010 ) , and does this relate to their developmental position in vivo as custodians of the germ line ? 3 . Does the capacity of ES cells for both anaerobic glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration ( Zhou et al . 2012 ) fulﬁll more than bioenergetic requirements , for example , by providing speciﬁc cofactors for control of gene expression ? 4 . Is the genome - wide epigenome erasure evident in na¨ıve epiblast and ground state ES cells a precondition for unbiased multilineage differentiation potential ? If so , do ES cells cultured in serum require periodic epigenome resetting to retain pluripotency ? 5 . Do speciﬁc adaptations of transcriptional machinery in ES cells ( Liu et al . 2011 ) facilitate precision control of gene expression in an open chromatin landscape ? 6 . Can sequential molecular transitions be delineated to construct the roadmap from the na¨ıve ground state to germ - layer speciﬁcation and commitment ? 7 . How does na¨ıve pluripotency become established in the embryo , and to what extent does somatic cell reprogramming recapitulate this process ? 8 . Can ground state ES cells be established from other mammals and their status au - thenticated by demonstrating executive function of ground state transcription factor circuitry ? DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 667 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all past and present members of the Smith laboratory for their insights and discoveries . G . M . was recipient of an EMBO Long - Term Fellowship and a HFSP Long - Term Fellowship . A . S . is a Medical Research Council Professor and is also funded by the Wellcome Trust , the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council , and European Commission projects SyBOSS , EuraTrans , and PluriMes . LITERATURE CITED Adachi K , Nikaido I , Ohta H , Ohtsuka S , Ura H , et al . 2013 . Context - dependent wiring of Sox2 regulatory networks for self - renewal of embryonic and trophoblast stem cells . Mol . Cell 52 : 380 – 92 Akira S , Nishio Y , Inoue M , Wang XJ , Wei S , et al . 1994 . Molecular cloning of APRF , a novel IFN - stimulated gene factor 3 p91 - related transcription factor involved in the gp130 - mediated signaling pathway . Cell 77 ( 1 ) : 63 – 71 Ambrosetti DC , Basilico C , Dailey L . 1997 . Synergistic activation of the ﬁbroblast growth factor 4 enhancer by Sox2 and Oct - 3 depends on protein - protein interactions facilitated by a speciﬁc spatial arrangement of factor binding sites . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 ( 11 ) : 6321 – 29 Berge DT , Kurek D , Blauwkamp T , Koole W , Maas A , et al . 2011 . Embryonic stem cells require Wnt proteins to prevent differentiation to epiblast stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 ( 9 ) : 1070 – 75 Betschinger J , Nichols J , Dietmann S , Corrin PD , Paddison PJ , Smith A . 2013 . Exit from pluripotency is gated by intracellular redistribution of the bHLH transcription factor Tfe3 . Cell 153 ( 2 ) : 335 – 47 Boeuf H , Hauss C , Graeve FD , Baran N , Kedinger C . 1997 . Leukemia inhibitory factor - dependent transcrip - tional activation in embryonic stem cells . J . Cell Biol . 138 ( 6 ) : 1207 – 17 Boroviak T , Loos R , Bertone P , Smith A , Nichols J . 2014 . The ability of inner cell mass cells to self - renew as embryonic stem cells is acquired upon epiblast speciﬁcation . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 6 ) : 516 – 28 Bourillot P - Y , Aksoy I , Schreiber V , Wianny F , Schulz H , et al . 2009 . Novel STAT3 target genes exert distinct roles in the inhibition of mesoderm and endoderm differentiation in cooperation with Nanog . Stem Cells 27 ( 8 ) : 1760 – 71 Bradley A , Evans M , Kaufman MH , Robertson E . 1984 . Formation of germ - line chimaeras from embryo - derived teratocarcinoma cell lines . Nature 309 ( 5965 ) : 255 – 56 Brons IG , Smithers LE , Trotter MW , Rugg - Gunn P , Sun B , et al . 2007 . Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mammalian embryos . Nature 448 : 191 – 95 Buecker C , Srinivasan R , Wu Z , Calo E , Acampora D , et al . 2014 . Reorganization of enhancer patterns in transition from naive to primed pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 14 : 838 – 53 Buehr M , Meek S , Blair K , Yang J , Ure J , et al . 2008 . Capture of authentic embryonic stem cells from rat blastocysts . Cell 135 ( 7 ) : 1287 – 98 Buehr M , Smith A . 2003 . Genesis of embryonic stem cells . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 358 ( 1436 ) : 1397 – 402 , discussion 1402 Buganim Y , Faddah DA , Cheng AW , Itskovich E , Markoulaki S , et al . 2012 . Single - cell expression analyses during cellular reprogramming reveal an early stochastic and a late hierarchic phase . Cell 150 ( 6 ) : 1209 – 22 Burdon T , Stracey C , Chambers I , Nichols J , Smith AG . 1999 . Suppression of SHP - 2 and ERK signalling promotes self - renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells . Dev . Biol . 210 ( 1 ) : 30 – 43 CapecchiMR . 2005 . Genetargetinginmice : functionalanalysisofthemammaliangenomeforthetwenty - ﬁrst century . Nat . Rev . Genet . 6 ( 6 ) : 507 – 12 Chambers I , Colby D , Robertson M , Nichols J , Lee S , et al . 2003 . Functional expression cloning of Nanog , a pluripotency sustaining factor in embryonic stem cells . Cell 113 ( 5 ) : 643 – 55 Chambers I , Silva J , Colby D , Nichols J , Nijmeijer B , et al . 2007 . Nanog safeguards pluripotency and mediates germline development . Nature 450 ( 7173 ) : 1230 – 34 Chambers I , Tomlinson SR . 2009 . The transcriptional foundation of pluripotency . Development 136 : 2311 – 22 Chazaud C , Yamanaka Y , Pawson T , Rossant J . 2006 . Early lineage segregation between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse blastocysts through the Grb2 - MAPK pathway . Dev . Cell 10 : 615 – 24 668 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Chen X , Xu H , Yuan P , Fang F , Huss M , et al . 2008 . Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells . Cell 133 ( 6 ) : 1106 – 17 Clevers H . 2006 . Wnt / β - catenin signaling in development and disease . Cell 127 ( 3 ) : 469 – 80 Dani C , Chambers I , Johnstone S , Robertson M , Ebrahimi B , et al . 1998 . Paracrine induction of stem cell renewal by LIF - deﬁcient cells : a new ES cell regulatory pathway . Dev . Biol . 203 ( 1 ) : 149 – 62 Davies OR , Lin C - Y , Radzisheuskaya A , Zhou X , Taube J , et al . 2013 . Tcf15 primes pluripotent cells for differentiation . Cell Rep . 3 ( 2 ) : 472 – 84 DeVeale B , Brokhman I , Mohseni P , Babak T , Yoon C , et al . 2013 . Oct4 is required ∼ E7 . 5 for proliferation in the primitive streak . PLOS Genet . 9 ( 11 ) : e1003957 Dick JE . 2008 . Stem cell concepts renew cancer research . Blood 112 ( 13 ) : 4793 – 807 Ding L , Paszkowski - Rogacz M , Nitzsche A , Slabicki MM , Heninger AK , et al . 2009 . A genome - scale RNAi screen for Oct4 modulators deﬁnes a role of the Paf1 complex for embryonic stem cell identity . Cell Stem Cell 4 : 403 – 15 Diwan SB , Stevens LC . 1976 . Development of teratomas from the ectoderm of mouse egg cylinders . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 57 ( 4 ) : 937 – 42 Doble BW , Patel S , Wood GA , Kockeritz LK , Woodgett JR . 2007 . Functional redundancy of GSK - 3 α and GSK - 3 β in Wnt / β - catenin signaling shown by using an allelic series of embryonic stem cell lines . Dev . Cell 12 ( 6 ) : 957 – 71 Doble BW , Woodgett JR . 2003 . GSK - 3 : tricks of the trade for a multi - tasking kinase . J . Cell Sci . 116 ( Pt . 7 ) : 1175 – 86 Dunn S - J , Martello G , Yordanov B , Emmott S , Smith AG . 2014 . Deﬁning an essential transcription factor program for na¨ıve pluripotency . Science 344 ( 6188 ) : 1156 – 60 Dutta D , Ray S , Home P , Larson M , Wolfe MW , Paul S . 2011 . Self - renewal versus lineage commitment of embryonic stem cells : protein kinase C signaling shifts the balance . Stem Cells 29 : 618 – 28 Eakin GS , Hadjantonakis A - K , Papaioannou VE , Behringer RR . 2005 . Developmental potential and behavior of tetraploid cells in the mouse embryo . Dev . Biol . 288 ( 1 ) : 150 – 59 Evans MJ , Kaufman MH . 1981 . Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse embryos . Nature 292 ( 5819 ) : 154 – 56 Faddah DA , Wang H , Cheng AW , Katz Y , Buganim Y , Jaenisch R . 2013 . Single - cell analysis reveals that expression of Nanog is biallelic and equally variable as that of other pluripotency factors in mouse ESCs . Cell Stem Cell 13 ( 1 ) : 23 – 29 Feng B , Jiang J , Kraus P , Ng J - H , Heng J - CD , et al . 2009 . Reprogramming of ﬁbroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells with orphan nuclear receptor Esrrb . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 ( 2 ) : 197 – 203 Festuccia N , Osorno R , Halbritter F , Karwacki - Neisius V , Navarro P , et al . 2012 . Esrrb is a direct Nanog target gene that can substitute for Nanog function in pluripotent cells . Cell Stem Cell 11 ( 4 ) : 477 – 90 Ficz G , Hore TA , Santos F , Lee HJ , Dean W , et al . 2013 . FGF signaling inhibition in ESCs drives rapid genome - wide demethylation to the epigenetic ground state of pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 13 ( 3 ) : 351 – 59 Filipczyk A , Gkatzis K , Fu J , Hoppe PS , Lickert H , et al . 2013 . Biallelic expression of Nanog protein in mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 13 : 12 – 13 Gardner RL . 1998 . Contributions of blastocyst micromanipulation to the study of mammalian development . BioEssays 20 : 168 – 80 Gardner RL , Brook FA . 1997 . Reﬂections on the biology of embryonic stem ( ES ) cells . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 41 ( 2 ) : 235 – 43 Guo G , Huang Y , Humphreys P , Wang X , Smith A . 2011 . A PiggyBac - based recessive screening method to identify pluripotency regulators . PLOS ONE 6 ( 4 ) : e18189 Guo G , Huss M , Tong GQ , Wang C , Sun LL , et al . 2010 . Resolution of cell fate decisions revealed by single - cell gene expression analysis from zygote to blastocyst . Dev . Cell 18 ( 4 ) : 675 – 85 Guo G , Yang J , Nichols J , Hall JS , Eyres I , et al . 2009 . Klf4 reverts developmentally programmed restriction of ground state pluripotency . Development 136 ( 7 ) : 1063 – 69 Habibi E , Brinkman AB , Arand J , Kroeze LI , Kerstens HHD , et al . 2013 . Whole - genome bisulﬁte sequenc - ing of two distinct interconvertible DNA methylomes of mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 13 ( 3 ) : 360 – 69 www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 669 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Hall J , Guo G , Wray J , Eyres I , Nichols J , et al . 2009 . Oct4 and LIF / Stat3 additively induce Kr¨uppel factors to sustain embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Cell Stem Cell 5 ( 6 ) : 597 – 609 Han J , Yuan P , Yang H , Zhang J , Soh BS , et al . 2010 . Tbx3 improves the germ - line competency of induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 463 : 1096 – 100 Hayashi K , Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM , Tang F , Surani MA . 2008 . Dynamic equilibrium and heterogeneity of mouse pluripotent stem cells with distinct functional and epigenetic states . Cell Stem Cell 3 : 391 – 401 Hayashi K , Ohta H , Kurimoto K , Aramaki S , Saitou M . 2011 . Reconstitution of the mouse germ cell speciﬁ - cation pathway in culture by pluripotent stem cells . Cell 146 : 519 – 32 Herberg M , Kalkan T , Glauche I , Smith A , Roeder I . 2014 . A model - based analysis of culture - dependent phenotypes of mESCs . PLOS ONE 9 : e92496 Hnisz D , Abraham BJ , Lee TI , Lau A , Saint - Andr´e V , et al . 2013 . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell 155 ( 4 ) : 934 – 47 Houston DW , Kofron M , Resnik E , Langland R , Destree O , et al . 2002 . Repression of organizer genes in dorsal and ventral Xenopus cells mediated by maternal XTcf3 . Development 129 ( 17 ) : 4015 – 25 Hu G , Kim J , Xu Q , Leng Y , Orkin SH , Elledge SJ . 2009 . A genome - wide RNAi screen identiﬁes a new transcriptional module required for self - renewal . Genes Dev . 23 : 837 – 48 Ivanova N , Dobrin R , Lu R , Kotenko I , Levorse J , et al . 2006 . Dissecting self - renewal in stem cells with RNA interference . Nat . Cell Biol . 442 ( 7102 ) : 533 – 38 Kahan BW , Ephrussi B . 1970 . Developmental potentialities of clonal in vitro cultures of mouse testicular teratoma . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . 44 ( 5 ) : 1015 – 36 Kalkan T , Smith A . 2014 . Mapping the route from naive pluripotency to lineage speciﬁcation . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . In press Kalmar T , Lim C , Hayward P , Mu˜noz - Descalzo S , Nichols J , et al . 2009 . Regulated ﬂuctuations in Nanog expression mediate cell fate decisions in embryonic stem cells . PLOS Biol . 7 : e1000149 Karwacki - Neisius V , G¨oke J , Osorno R , Halbritter F , Ng J - H , et al . 2013 . Reduced Oct4 expression directs a robust pluripotent state with distinct signaling activity and increased enhancer occupancy by Oct4 and Nanog . Cell Stem Cell 12 ( 5 ) : 531 – 45 Keramari M , Razavi J , Ingman KA , Patsch C , Edenhofer F , et al . 2010 . Sox2 is essential for formation of trophectoderm in the preimplantation embryo . PLOS ONE 5 ( 11 ) : e13952 Kiyonari H , Kaneko M , Abe S - I , Aizawa S . 2010 . Three inhibitors of FGF receptor , ERK , and GSK3 es - tablishes germline - competent embryonic stem cells of C57BL / 6N mouse strain with high efﬁciency and stability . Genesis 48 ( 5 ) : 317 – 27 KleinsmithLJ , PierceGB . 1964 . Multipotentialityofsingleembryonalcarcinomacells . CancerRes . 24 : 1544 – 51 Kojima Y , Kaufman - Francis K , Studdert JB , Steiner KA , Power MD , et al . 2014 . The transcriptional and functional properties of mouse epiblast stem cells resemble the anterior primitive streak . Cell Stem Cell 14 ( 1 ) : 107 – 20 Koopman P , Cotton RG . 1984 . A factor produced by feeder cells which inhibits embryonal carcinoma cell differentiation . Characterization and partial puriﬁcation . Exp . Cell Res . 154 ( 1 ) : 233 – 42 Kopp JL , Ormsbee BD , Desler M , Rizzino A . 2008 . Small increases in the level of Sox2 trigger the differen - tiation of mouse embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 26 ( 4 ) : 903 – 11 Kunath T , Saba - El - Leil MK , Almousailleakh M , Wray J , Meloche S , Smith AG . 2007 . FGF stimulation of the Erk1 / 2 signalling cascade triggers transition of pluripotent embryonic stem cells from self - renewal to lineage commitment . Development 134 ( 16 ) : 2895 – 902 Lanner F , Lee KL , Sohl M , Holmborn K , Yang H , et al . 2010 . Heparan sulfation - dependent ﬁbroblast growth factor signaling maintains embryonic stem cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state . Stem Cells 28 ( 2 ) : 191 – 200 LeBinGC , Mu˜noz - DescalzoS , KurowskiA , LeitchH , LouX , etal . 2014 . Oct4isrequiredforlineagepriming in the developing inner cell mass of the mouse blastocyst . Development 141 ( 5 ) : 1001 – 10 Leeb M , Dietmann S , Paramor M , Niwa H , Smith A . 2014 . Genetic exploration of the exit from self - renewal using haploid embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 14 ( 3 ) : 385 – 93 Leitch HG , Blair K , Mansﬁeld W , Ayetey H , Humphreys P , et al . 2010 . Embryonic germ cells from mice and rats exhibit properties consistent with a generic pluripotent ground state . Development 137 ( 14 ) : 2279 – 87 670 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Leitch HG , McEwen KR , Turp A , Encheva V , Carroll T , et al . 2013a . Naive pluripotency is associated with global DNA hypomethylation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 ( 3 ) : 311 – 16 Leitch HG , Nichols J , Humphreys P , Mulas C , Martello G , et al . 2013b . Rebuilding pluripotency from primordial germ cells . Stem Cell Rep . 1 ( 1 ) : 66 – 78 Leitch HG , Smith A . 2013 . The mammalian germline as a pluripotency cycle . Development 140 ( 12 ) : 2495 – 501 Li P , Tong C , Mehrian - Shai R , Jia L , Wu N , et al . 2008 . Germline competent embryonic stem cells derived from rat blastocysts . Cell 135 ( 7 ) : 1299 – 310 Liu Z , Scannell DR , Eisen MB , Tjian R . 2011 . Control of embryonic stem cell lineage commitment by core promoter factor , TAF3 . Cell 146 : 720 – 31 Loh KM , Lim B . 2011 . A precarious balance : pluripotency factors as lineage speciﬁers . Cell Stem Cell 8 ( 4 ) : 363 – 69 Loh Y - H , Wu Q , Chew J - L , Vega VB , Zhang W , et al . 2006 . The Oct4 and Nanog transcription network regulates pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nat . Genet . 38 ( 4 ) : 431 – 40 Luo Y , Lim CL , Nichols J , Martinez - Arias A , Wernisch L . 2012 . Cell signalling regulates dynamics of Nanog distribution in embryonic stem cell populations . J . R . Soc . Interface 10 : 20120525 Lu R , Markowetz F , Unwin RD , Leek JT , Airoldi EM , et al . 2009 . Systems - level dynamic analyses of fate change in murine embryonic stem cells . Nature 462 ( 7271 ) : 358 – 62 Lyashenko N , Winter M , Migliorini D , Biechele T , Moon RT , Hartmann C . 2011 . Differential requirement for the dual functions of β - catenin in embryonic stem cell self - renewal and germ layer formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 ( 7 ) : 753 – 61 MacArthur BD , Lemischka IR . 2013 . Statistical mechanics of pluripotency . Cell 154 ( 3 ) : 484 – 89 MacArthur BD , Sevilla A , Lenz M , M¨uller FJ , Schuldt BM , et al . 2012 . Nanog - dependent feedback loops regulate murine embryonic stem cell heterogeneity . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 : 1139 – 47 Malaguti M , Nistor PA , Blin G , Pegg A , Zhou X , Lowell S . 2013 . Bone morphogenic protein signalling suppresses differentiation of pluripotent cells by maintaining expression of E - Cadherin . eLife 2 : e01197 Marks H , Kalkan T , Menafra R , Denissov S , Jones K , et al . 2012 . The transcriptional and epigenomic foun - dations of ground state pluripotency . Cell 149 ( 3 ) : 590 – 604 Marson A , Levine SS , Cole MF , Frampton GM , Brambrink T , et al . 2008 . Connecting microRNA genes to the core transcriptional regulatory circuitry of embryonic stem cells . Cell 134 ( 3 ) : 521 – 33 Martello G , Bertone P , Smith A . 2013 . Identiﬁcation of the missing pluripotency mediator downstream of leukaemia inhibitory factor . EMBO J . 32 : 2531 – 56 MartelloG , SugimotoT , DiamantiE , JoshiA , HannahR , etal . 2012 . EsrrbisapivotaltargetoftheGsk3 / Tcf3 axis regulating embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Cell Stem Cell 11 ( 4 ) : 491 – 504 Martin GR . 1975 . Teratocarcinomas as a model system for the study of embryogenesis and neoplasia . Cell 5 ( 3 ) : 229 – 43 Martin GR . 1980 . Teratocarcinomas and mammalian embryogenesis . Science 209 ( 4458 ) : 768 – 76 MartinGR . 1981 . Isolationofapluripotentcelllinefromearlymouseembryosculturedinmediumconditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 78 ( 12 ) : 7634 – 38 Martin GR , Evans MJ . 1975 . Differentiation of clonal lines of teratocarcinoma cells : formation of embryoid bodies in vitro . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 72 ( 4 ) : 1441 – 45 Masui S , Nakatake Y , Toyooka Y , Shimosato D , Yagi R , et al . 2007 . Pluripotency governed by Sox2 via regulation of Oct3 / 4 expression in mouse embryonic stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 6 ) : 625 – 35 Matsuda T , Nakamura T , Nakao K , Arai T , Katsuki M , et al . 1999 . STAT3 activation is sufﬁcient to maintain an undifferentiated state of mouse embryonic stem cells . EMBO J . 18 ( 15 ) : 4261 – 69 MatsuiY , ZseboK , HoganBL . 1992 . Derivationofpluripotentialembryonicstemcellsfrommurineprimordial germ cells in culture . Cell 70 ( 5 ) : 841 – 47 Merrill BJ , Gat U , Dasgupta R , Fuchs E . 2001 . Tcf3 and Lef1 regulate lineage differentiation of multipotent stem cells in skin . Genes Dev . 15 ( 13 ) : 1688 – 705 Merrill BJ , Pasolli HA , Polak L , Rendl M , Garc´ıa - Garc´ıa MJ , et al . 2004 . Tcf3 : a transcriptional regulator of axis induction in the early embryo . Development 131 ( 2 ) : 263 – 74 Meshorer E , Yellajoshula D , George E , Scambler PJ , Brown DT , Misteli T . 2006 . Hyperdynamic plasticity of chromatin proteins in pluripotent embryonic stem cells . Dev . Cell 10 : 105 – 16 www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 671 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Mitsui K , Tokuzawa Y , Itoh H , Segawa K , Murakami M , et al . 2003 . The homeoprotein Nanog is required for maintenance of pluripotency in mouse epiblast and ES cells . Cell 113 ( 5 ) : 631 – 42 Nagy A , G´ocza E , Merentes Diaz E , Prideaux VR , Iv´anyi E , et al . 1991 . Embryonic stem cells alone are able to support fetal development in the mouse . Development 110 : 815 – 21 Nagy A , Rossant J , Nagy R , Abramow - Newerly W , Roder JC . 1993 . Derivation of completely cell culture - derived mice from early - passage embryonic stem cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 90 : 8424 – 28 NakagawaM , KoyanagiM , TanabeK , TakahashiK , IchisakaT , etal . 2007 . Generationofinducedpluripotent stem cells without Myc from mouse and human ﬁbroblasts . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 ( 1 ) : 101 – 6 Nakatake Y , Fujii S , Masui S , Sugimoto T , Torikai - Nishikawa S , et al . 2013 . Kinetics of drug selection systems in mouse embryonic stem cells . BMC Biotechnol . 13 : 64 Navarro P , Festuccia N , Colby D , Gagliardi A , Mullin NP , et al . 2012 . OCT4 / SOX2 - independent Nanog autorepressionmodulatesheterogeneousNanoggeneexpressioninmouseEScells . EMBO J . 31 : 4547 – 62 Nichols J , Chambers I , Taga T , Smith A . 2001 . Physiological rationale for responsiveness of mouse embryonic stem cells to gp130 cytokines . Development 128 ( 12 ) : 2333 – 39 NicholsJ , JonesK , PhillipsJM , NewlandSA , RoodeM , etal . 2009a . Validatedgermline - competentembryonic stem cell lines from nonobese diabetic mice . Nat . Med . 15 ( 7 ) : 814 – 18 NicholsJ , SilvaJ , RoodeM , SmithA . 2009b . SuppressionofErksignallingpromotesgroundstatepluripotency in the mouse embryo . Development 136 ( 19 ) : 3215 – 22 Nichols J , Smith A . 2011 . The origin and identity of embryonic stem cells . Development 138 ( 1 ) : 3 – 8 Nichols J , Smith A . 2012 . Pluripotency in the embryo and in culture . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 ( 8 ) : a008128 Nichols J , Zevnik B , Anastassiadis K , Niwa H , Klewe - Nebenius D , et al . 1998 . Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo depends on the POU transcription factor Oct4 . Cell 95 ( 3 ) : 379 – 91 Nishiyama A , Sharov AA , Piao Y , Amano M , Amano T , et al . 2013 . Systematic repression of transcription factors reveals limited patterns of gene expression changes in ES cells . Sci . Rep . 3 : 1390 Niwa H . 2007 . Open conformation chromatin and pluripotency . Genes Dev . 21 ( 21 ) : 2671 – 76 NiwaH , BurdonT , ChambersI , SmithAG . 1998 . Self - renewalofpluripotentembryonicstemcellsismediated via activation of STAT3 . Genes Dev . 12 ( 13 ) : 2048 – 60 Niwa H , Miyazaki J , Smith AG . 2000 . Quantitative expression of Oct - 3 / 4 deﬁnes differentiation , dedifferen - tiation or self - renewal of ES cells . Nat . Genet . 24 ( 4 ) : 372 – 76 Niwa H , Ogawa K , Shimosato D , Adachi K . 2009 . A parallel circuit of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells . Nature 460 ( 7251 ) : 118 – 22 O’Leary T , Heindryckx B , Lierman S , van Bruggen D , Goeman JJ , et al . 2012 . Tracking the progression of the human inner cell mass during embryonic stem cell derivation . Nat . Biotechnol . 30 ( 3 ) : 278 – 82 Ogawa K , Nishinakamura R , Iwamatsu Y , Shimosato D , Niwa H . 2006 . Synergistic action of Wnt and LIF in maintaining pluripotency of mouse ES cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 343 ( 1 ) : 159 – 66 Okamoto K , Okazawa H , Okuda A , Sakai M , Muramatsu M , Hamada H . 1990 . A novel octamer binding transcription factor is differentially expressed in mouse embryonic cells . Cell 60 ( 3 ) : 461 – 72 Okita K , Ichisaka T , Yamanaka S . 2007 . Generation of germline - competent induced pluripotent stem cells . Nature 448 ( 7151 ) : 313 – 17 Onishi K , Tonge PD , Nagy A , Zandstra PW . 2014 . Local BMP - SMAD1 signaling increases LIF receptor - dependent STAT3 responsiveness and primed - to - naive mouse pluripotent stem cell conversion fre - quency . Stem Cell Rep . 3 : 156 – 68 Osorno R , Tsakiridis A , Wong F , Cambray N , Economou C , et al . 2012 . The developmental dismantling of pluripotency is reversed by ectopic Oct4 expression . Development 139 : 2288 – 98 PardoM , LangB , YuL , ProsserH , BradleyA , etal . 2010 . AnexpandedOct4interactionnetwork : implications for stem cell biology , development , and disease . Cell Stem Cell 6 ( 4 ) : 382 – 95 Papaioannou VE , Rossant J . 1992 . Effects of the embryonic environment on proliferation and differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cells . Cancer Surv . 2 : 165 – 83 Pelton TA , Sharma S , Schulz TC , Rathjen J , Rathjen PD . 2002 . Transient pluripotent cell populations during primitive ectoderm formation : correlation of in vivo and in vitro pluripotent cell development . J . Cell Sci . 115 ( Pt . 2 ) : 329 – 39 672 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Pereira L , Yi F , Merrill BJ . 2006 . Repression of Nanog gene transcription by Tcf3 limits embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 ( 20 ) : 7479 – 91 Radzisheuskaya A , Le Bin Chia G , dos Santos RL , Theunissen TW , Castro LFC , et al . 2013 . A deﬁned Oct4 level governs cell state transitions of pluripotency entry and differentiation into all embryonic lineages . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 ( 6 ) : 579 – 90 Rastan S , Robertson EJ . 1985 . X - chromosome deletions in embryo - derived ( EK ) cell lines associated with lack of X - chromosome inactivation . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 90 : 379 – 88 Rathjen PD , Nichols J , Toth S , Edwards DR , Heath JK , Smith AG . 1990 . Developmentally programmed induction of differentiation inhibiting activity and the control of stem cell populations . Genes Dev . 4 ( 12B ) : 2308 – 18 Resnick JL , Bixler LS , Cheng L , Donovan PJ . 1992 . Long - term proliferation of mouse primordial germ cells in culture . Nature 359 ( 6395 ) : 550 – 51 Robertson E , Bradley A , Kuehn M , Evans M . 1986 . Germ - line transmission of genes introduced into cultured pluripotential cells by retroviral vector . Nature 323 : 445 – 48 SatoN , MeijerL , SkaltsounisL , GreengardP , BrivanlouAH . 2004 . Maintenanceofpluripotencyinhumanand mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK - 3 - speciﬁc inhibitor . Nat . Med . 10 ( 1 ) : 55 – 63 Sch¨oler HR , Dressler GR , Balling R , Rohdewohld H , Gruss P . 1990 . Oct - 4 : a germline - speciﬁc transcription factor mapping to the mouse t - complex . EMBO J . 9 ( 7 ) : 2185 – 95 Shy BR , Wu C - I , Khramtsova GF , Zhang JY , Olopade OI , et al . 2013 . Regulation of Tcf7l1 DNA binding and protein stability as principal mechanisms of Wnt / β - catenin signaling . Cell Rep . 4 ( 1 ) : 1 – 9 SilvaJ , BarrandonO , NicholsJ , KawaguchiJ , TheunissenTW , SmithAG . 2008 . Promotionofreprogramming to ground state pluripotency by signal inhibition . PLOS Biol . 6 ( 10 ) : e253 Silva J , Chambers I , Pollard S , Smith AG . 2006 . Nanog promotes transfer of pluripotency after cell fusion . Nature 441 ( 7096 ) : 997 – 1001 SilvaJ , NicholsJ , TheunissenTW , GuoG , vanOostenAL , etal . 2009 . Nanogisthegatewaytothepluripotent ground state . Cell 138 ( 4 ) : 722 – 37 Silva J , Smith AG . 2008 . Capturing pluripotency . Cell 132 ( 4 ) : 532 – 36 SimonsBD , CleversH . 2011 . Strategiesforhomeostaticstemcellself - renewalinadulttissues . Cell 145 : 851 – 62 Smith A . 2013 . Nanog heterogeneity : Tilting at windmills ? Cell Stem Cell 13 : 6 – 7 Smith A . 2001a . Embryonic stem cells . In Stem Cell Biology , ed . DR Marshak , RL Gardner , D Gottlieb , pp . 205 – 30 . New York : Cold Spring Harb . Lab . Press Smith AG . 2001b . Embryo - derived stem cells : of mice and men . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 : 435 – 62 SmithAG , HeathJK , DonaldsonDD , WongGG , MoreauJ , etal . 1988 . Inhibitionofpluripotentialembryonic stem cell differentiation by puriﬁed polypeptides . Nature 336 ( 6200 ) : 688 – 90 Smith TA , Hooper ML . 1983 . Medium conditioned by feeder cells inhibits the differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cultures . Exp . Cell Res . 145 ( 2 ) : 458 – 62 Smith AG , Hooper ML . 1987 . Buffalo rat liver cells produce a diffusible activity which inhibits the differen - tiation of murine embryonal carcinoma and embryonic stem cells . Dev . Biol . 121 : 1 – 9 Smith ZD , Chan MM , Mikkelsen TS , Gu H , Gnirke A , et al . 2012 . A unique regulatory phase of DNA methylation in the early mammalian embryo . Nature 484 ( 7394 ) : 339 – 44 Solter D , Skreb N , Damjanov I . 1970 . Extrauterine growth of mouse egg - cylinders results in malignant teratoma . Nature 227 ( 5257 ) : 503 – 4 Som A , Harder C , Greber B , Siatkowski M , Paudel Y , et al . 2010 . The PluriNetWork : an electronic represen - tation of the network underlying pluripotency in mouse , and its applications . PLOS ONE 5 ( 12 ) : e15165 Sridharan R , Tchieu J , Mason MJ , Yachechko R , Kuoy E , et al . 2009 . Role of the murine reprogramming factors in the induction of pluripotency . Cell 136 : 364 – 77 Stavridis MP , Lunn JS , Collins BJ , Storey KG . 2007 . A discrete period of FGF - induced Erk1 / 2 signalling is required for vertebrate neural speciﬁcation . Development 134 ( 16 ) : 2889 – 94 Stead E , White J , Faast R , Conn S , Goldstone S , et al . 2002 . Pluripotent cell division cycles are driven by ectopic Cdk2 , cyclin A / E and E2F activities . Oncogene 21 : 8320 – 33 Stevens LC . 1968 . The development of teratomas from intratesticular grafts of tubal mouse eggs . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 20 ( 3 ) : 329 – 41 www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 673 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Stevens LC . 1983 . The origin and development of testicular , ovarian and embryo - derived teratomas . In Teratocarcinoma Stem Cells ( Cold Spring Harbor Conferences on Cell Proliferation ) , Vol . 10 , ed . LM Silver , GM Martin , S Strickland , pp . 666 – 70 . New York : Cold Spring Harb . Lab . Press Stevens LC , Little CC . 1954 . Spontaneous testicular teratomas in an inbred strain of mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 40 ( 11 ) : 1080 – 87 Stewart CL , Kaspar P , Brunet LJ , Bhatt H , Gadi I , et al . 1992 . Blastocyst implantation depends on maternal expression of leukaemia inhibitory factor . Nature 359 : 76 – 79 Tai C - I , Ying Q - L . 2013 . Gbx2 , a LIF / Stat3 target , promotes reprogramming to and retention of the pluripo - tent ground state . J . Cell Sci . 126 : 1093 – 98 TakahashiK , YamanakaS . 2006 . Inductionofpluripotentstemcellsfrommouseembryonicandadultﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors . Cell 126 ( 4 ) : 663 – 76 Tam PPL , Rossant J . 2003 . Mouse embryonic chimeras : tools for studying mammalian development . Development 130 ( 25 ) : 6155 – 63 Tang F , Barbacioru C , Bao S , Lee C , Nordman E , et al . 2010 . Tracing the derivation of embryonic stem cells from the inner cell mass by single - cell RNA - Seq analysis . Cell Stem Cell 6 ( 5 ) : 468 – 78 Tang Y , Luo Y , Jiang Z , Ma Y , Lin C - J , et al . 2012 . Jak / Stat3 signaling promotes somatic cell reprogramming by epigenetic regulation . Stem Cells 30 ( 12 ) : 2645 – 56 Tesar PJ . 2005 . Derivation of germ - line - competent embryonic stem cell lines from preblastocyst mouse embryos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 8239 – 44 Tesar PJ , Chenoweth JG , Brook FA , Davies TJ , Evans EP , et al . 2007 . New cell lines from mouse epiblast share deﬁning features with human embryonic stem cells . Nature 448 : 196 – 99 Theunissen TW , van Oosten AL , Castelo - Branco G , Hall J , Smith A , Silva JCR . 2011 . Nanog overcomes reprogramming barriers and induces pluripotency in minimal conditions . Curr . Biol . 21 ( 1 ) : 65 – 71 Thompson S , Clarke AR , Pow AM , Hooper ML , Melton DW . 1989 . Germ line transmission and expression of a corrected HPRT gene produced by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells . Cell 56 ( 2 ) : 313 – 21 Thomson M , Liu SJ , Zou L - N , Smith Z , Meissner A , Ramanathan S . 2011 . Pluripotency factors in embryonic stem cells regulate differentiation into germ layers . Cell 145 ( 6 ) : 875 – 89 Toyooka Y , Shimosato D , Murakami K , Takahashi K , Niwa H . 2008 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of subpopulations in undifferentiated ES cell culture . Development 135 ( 5 ) : 909 – 18 Trott J , Martinez Arias A . 2013 . Single cell lineage analysis of mouse embryonic stem cells at the exit from pluripotency . Biol . Open 2 ( 10 ) : 1049 – 56 Tsakiridis A , Huang Y , Blin G , Skylaki S , Wymeersch F , et al . 2014 . Distinct Wnt - driven primitive streak - like populations reﬂect in vivo lineage precursors . Development 141 : 1209 – 21 Tsubooka N , Ichisaka T , Okita K , Takahashi K , Nakagawa M , Yamanaka S . 2009 . Roles of Sall4 in the generation of pluripotent stem cells from blastocysts and ﬁbroblasts . Genes Cells 14 ( 6 ) : 683 – 94 van den Berg DLC , Snoek T , Mullin NP , Yates A , Bezstarosti K , et al . 2010 . An Oct4 - centered protein interaction network in embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 6 ( 4 ) : 369 – 81 Wang H , Yang H , Shivalila CS , Dawlaty MM , Cheng AW , et al . 2013 . One - step generation of mice carrying mutations in multiple genes by CRISPR / Cas - mediated genome engineering . Cell 153 ( 4 ) : 910 – 18 Wernig M , Meissner A , Foreman R , Brambrink T , Ku M , et al . 2007 . In vitro reprogramming of ﬁbroblasts into a pluripotent ES - cell - like state . Nature 448 ( 7151 ) : 318 – 24 Wilder PJ , Kelly D , Brigman K , Peterson CL , Nowling T , et al . 1997 . Inactivation of the FGF - 4 gene in embryonic stem cells alters the growth and / or the survival of their early differentiated progeny . Dev . Biol . 192 ( 2 ) : 614 – 29 Wiles MV , Johansson BM . 1999 . Embryonic stem cell development in a chemically deﬁned medium . Exp . Cell Res . 247 ( 1 ) : 241 – 48 Williams RL , Hilton DJ , Pease S , Willson TA , Stewart CL , et al . 1988 . Myeloid leukaemia inhibitory factor maintains the developmental potential of embryonic stem cells . Nature 336 ( 6200 ) : 684 – 87 Wong CC , Gaspar - Maia A , Ramalho - Santos M , Reijo Pera RA . 2008 . High - efﬁciency stem cell fusion - mediated assay reveals Sall4 as an enhancer of reprogramming . PLOS ONE 3 ( 4 ) : e1955 Wray J , Kalkan T , Gomez - Lopez S , Eckardt D , Cook A , et al . 2011 . Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase - 3 alleviates Tcf3 repression of the pluripotency network and increases embryonic stem cell resistance to differentiation . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 838 – 45 674 Martello · Smith A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30CH25 - Smith ARI 11 September 2014 8 : 43 Wray J , Kalkan T , Smith AG . 2010 . The ground state of pluripotency . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 38 ( 4 ) : 1027 – 32 Wu C - I , Hoffman JA , Shy BR , Ford EM , Fuchs E , et al . 2012 . Function of Wnt / β - catenin in counteracting Tcf3 repression through the Tcf3 - β - catenin interaction . Development 139 ( 12 ) : 2118 – 29 YamanakaY , LannerF , RossantJ . 2010 . FGFsignal - dependentsegregationofprimitiveendodermandepiblast in the mouse blastocyst . Development 137 ( 5 ) : 715 – 24 Yan L , Yang M , Guo H , Yang L , Wu J , et al . 2013 . Single - cell RNA - Seq proﬁling of human preimplantation embryos and embryonic stem cells . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 : 1131 – 39 Yang J , van Oosten AL , Theunissen TW , Guo G , Silva JCR , Smith A . 2010 . Stat3 activation is limiting for reprogramming to ground state pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 7 ( 3 ) : 319 – 28 Yang S - H , Kalkan T , Morrisroe C , Smith A , Sharrocks AD . 2012 . A genome - wide RNAi screen reveals MAP kinase phosphatases as key ERK pathway regulators during embryonic stem cell differentiation . PLOS Genet . 8 ( 12 ) : e1003112 Yang S - H , Kalkan T , Morissroe C , Marks H , Stunnenberg H , et al . 2014 . Otx2 and Oct4 drive early enhancer activation during embryonic stem cell transition from naive pluripotency . Cell Rep . 7 : 1 – 14 Ye S , Li P , Tong C , Ying QL . 2013 . Embryonic stem cell self - renewal pathways converge on the transcription factor Tfcp2l1 . EMBO J . 32 ( 19 ) : 2548 – 60 Yi F , Pereira L , Merrill BJ . 2008 . Tcf3 functions as a steady - state limiter of transcriptional programs of mouse embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Stem Cells 26 ( 8 ) : 1951 – 60 Ying QL , Nichols J , Chambers I , Smith A . 2003a . BMP induction of Id proteins suppresses differentiation and sustains embryonic stem cell self - renewal in collaboration with STAT3 . Cell 115 ( 3 ) : 281 – 92 Ying QL , Stavridis M , Grifﬁths D , Li M , Smith AG . 2003b . Conversion of embryonic stem cells into neu - roectodermal precursors in adherent monoculture . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 : 181 – 86 Ying QL , Wray J , Nichols J , Batlle - Morera L , Doble B , et al . 2008 . The ground state of embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature 453 ( 7194 ) : 519 – 23 Young RA . 2011 . Control of the embryonic stem cell state . Cell 144 ( 6 ) : 940 – 54 ZalzmanM , FalcoG , SharovaLV , NishiyamaA , ThomasM , etal . 2010 . Zscan4regulatestelomereelongation and genomic stability in ES cells . Nature 464 : 858 – 63 Zhang K , Li L , Huang C , Shen C , Tan F , et al . 2010 . Distinct functions of BMP4 during different stages of mouse ES cell neural commitment . Development 137 ( 13 ) : 2095 – 105 Zhao S , Nichols J , Smith AG , Li M . 2004 . SoxB transcription factors specify neuroectodermal lineage choice in ES cells . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 27 ( 3 ) : 332 – 42 Zhong Z , Wen Z , Darnell JE . 1994 . Stat3 : a STAT family member activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in response to epidermal growth factor and interleukin - 6 . Science 264 ( 5155 ) : 95 – 98 Zhou W , Choi M , Margineantu D , Margaretha L , Hesson J , et al . 2012 . HIF1 α induced switch from bivalent to exclusively glycolytic metabolism during ESC - to - EpiSC / hESC transition . EMBO J . 31 : 2103 – 16 RELATED RESOURCES ESCODE : a compendium of processed and curated ChIP - seq studies in embryonic stem cells— http : / / codex . stemcells . cam . ac . uk / www . annualreviews . org • Embryonic Stem Cells 675 A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30 - FrontMatter ARI 2 September 2014 12 : 28 Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology Volume 30 , 2014 Contents Twists and Turns : A Scientiﬁc Journey Shirley M . Tilghman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Basic Statistics in Cell Biology David L . Vaux (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 23 Liquid - Liquid Phase Separation in Biology Anthony A . Hyman , Christoph A . Weber , and Frank J¨ulicher (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 39 Physical Models of Plant Development Olivier Ali , Vincent Mirabet , Christophe Godin , and Jan Traas (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 59 Bacterial Pathogen Manipulation of Host Membrane Trafﬁcking Seblewongel Asrat , Dennise A . de Jes´us , Andrew D . Hempstead , Vinay Ramabhadran , and Ralph R . Isberg (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 79 Virus and Cell Fusion Mechanisms Benjamin Podbilewicz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 111 Spatiotemporal Basis of Innate and Adaptive Immunity in Secondary Lymphoid Tissue Hai Qi , Wolfgang Kastenm¨uller , and Ronald N . Germain (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 141 Protein Sorting at the trans - Golgi Network Yusong Guo , Daniel W . Sirkis , and Randy Schekman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 169 Intercellular Protein Movement : Deciphering the Language of Development Kimberly L . Gallagher , Rosangela Sozzani , and Chin - Mei Lee (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 207 The Rhomboid - Like Superfamily : Molecular Mechanisms and Biological Roles Matthew Freeman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 235 Biogenesis , Secretion , and Intercellular Interactions of Exosomes and Other Extracellular Vesicles Marina Colombo , Gra¸ca Raposo , and Clotilde Th´ery (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 255 vii A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30 - FrontMatter ARI 2 September 2014 12 : 28 Cadherin Adhesion and Mechanotransduction D . E . Leckband and J . de Rooij (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 291 Electrochemical Control of Cell and Tissue Polarity Fred Chang and Nicolas Minc (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 317 Regulated Cell Death : Signaling and Mechanisms Avi Ashkenazi and Guy Salvesen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 337 Determinants and Functions of Mitochondrial Behavior Katherine Labb´e , Andrew Murley , and Jodi Nunnari (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 357 Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation Element Binding Proteins in Development , Health , and Disease Maria Ivshina , Paul Lasko , and Joel D . Richter (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 393 Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Synaptic Speciﬁcity Shaul Yogev and Kang Shen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 417 Astrocyte Regulation of Synaptic Behavior Nicola J . Allen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 439 The Cell Biology of Neurogenesis : Toward an Understanding of the Development and Evolution of the Neocortex Elena Taverna , Magdalena G¨otz , and Wieland B . Huttner (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 465 Myelination of the Nervous System : Mechanisms and Functions Klaus - Armin Nave and Hauke B . Werner (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 503 Insights into Morphology and Disease from the Dog Genome Project Jeffrey J . Schoenebeck and Elaine A . Ostrander (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 535 Noncoding RNAs and Epigenetic Mechanisms During X - Chromosome Inactivation Anne - Valerie Gendrel and Edith Heard (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 561 Zygotic Genome Activation During the Maternal - to - Zygotic Transition Miler T . Lee , Ashley R . Bonneau , and Antonio J . Giraldez (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 581 Histone H3 Variants and Their Chaperones During Development and Disease : Contributing to Epigenetic Control Dan Filipescu , Sebastian M¨uller , and Genevi ` eve Almouzni (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 615 The Nature of Embryonic Stem Cells Graziano Martello and Austin Smith (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 647 “Mesenchymal” Stem Cells Paolo Bianco (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 677 viii Contents A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . CB30 - FrontMatter ARI 2 September 2014 12 : 28 Haploid Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells : Rapid Genetic Screening and Germline Transmission Anton Wutz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 705 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 26 – 30 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 723 Cumulative Index of Article Titles , Volumes 26 – 30 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 726 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology articles may be found at http : / / www . annualreviews . org / errata / cellbio Contents ix A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AnnuAl Reviews it’s about time . Your time . it’s time well spent . AnnuAl Reviews | Connect with Our experts Tel : 800 . 523 . 8635 ( us / can ) | Tel : 650 . 493 . 4400 | Fax : 650 . 424 . 0910 | Email : service @ annualreviews . org New From Annual Reviews : Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application Volume 1 • Online January 2014 • http : / / statistics . annualreviews . org Editor : Stephen E . Fienberg , Carnegie Mellon University Associate Editors : Nancy Reid , University of Toronto Stephen M . Stigler , University of Chicago The Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application aims to inform statisticians and quantitative methodologists , as well as all scientists and users of statistics about major methodological advances and the computational tools that allow for their implementation . It will include developments in the field of statistics , including theoretical statistical underpinnings of new methodology , as well as developments in specific application domains such as biostatistics and bioinformatics , economics , machine learning , psychology , sociology , and aspects of the physical sciences . Complimentary online access to the first volume will be available until January 2015 . table of contents : • What Is Statistics ? Stephen E . Fienberg • A Systematic Statistical Approach to Evaluating Evidence from Observational Studies , David Madigan , Paul E . Stang , Jesse A . Berlin , Martijn Schuemie , J . Marc Overhage , Marc A . Suchard , Bill Dumouchel , Abraham G . Hartzema , Patrick B . Ryan • The Role of Statistics in the Discovery of a Higgs Boson , David A . van Dyk • Brain Imaging Analysis , F . DuBois Bowman • Statistics and Climate , Peter Guttorp • Climate Simulators and Climate Projections , Jonathan Rougier , Michael Goldstein • Probabilistic Forecasting , Tilmann Gneiting , Matthias Katzfuss • Bayesian Computational Tools , Christian P . Robert • Bayesian Computation Via Markov Chain Monte Carlo , Radu V . Craiu , Jeffrey S . Rosenthal • Build , Compute , Critique , Repeat : Data Analysis with Latent Variable Models , David M . Blei • Structured Regularizers for High - Dimensional Problems : Statistical and Computational Issues , Martin J . Wainwright • High - Dimensional Statistics with a View Toward Applications in Biology , Peter Bühlmann , Markus Kalisch , Lukas Meier • Next - Generation Statistical Genetics : Modeling , Penalization , and Optimization in High - Dimensional Data , Kenneth Lange , Jeanette C . Papp , Janet S . Sinsheimer , Eric M . Sobel • Breaking Bad : Two Decades of Life - Course Data Analysis in Criminology , Developmental Psychology , and Beyond , Elena A . Erosheva , Ross L . Matsueda , Donatello Telesca • Event History Analysis , Niels Keiding • Statistical Evaluation of Forensic DNA Profile Evidence , Christopher D . Steele , David J . Balding • Using League Table Rankings in Public Policy Formation : Statistical Issues , Harvey Goldstein • Statistical Ecology , Ruth King • Estimating the Number of Species in Microbial Diversity Studies , John Bunge , Amy Willis , Fiona Walsh • Dynamic Treatment Regimes , Bibhas Chakraborty , Susan A . Murphy • Statistics and Related Topics in Single - Molecule Biophysics , Hong Qian , S . C . Kou • Statistics and Quantitative Risk Management for Banking and Insurance , Paul Embrechts , Marius Hofert Access this and all other Annual Reviews journals via your institution at www . annualreviews . org . A nnu . R e v . C e ll D e v . B i o l . 2014 . 30 : 647 - 675 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by H o w a r d U n i v e r s it y on 10 / 13 / 14 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .