Source URL : https : / / www . cirm . ca . gov / about - cirm / publications / histone - modifications - human - enhancers - reflect - global - cell - type - specific - gene California Institute for Regenerative Medicine Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect global cell - type - specific gene expression . Journal : Nature Publication Year : 2009 Authors : Nathaniel D Heintzman , Gary C Hon , R David Hawkins , Pouya Kheradpour , Alexander Stark , Lindsey F Harp , Zhen Ye , Leonard K Lee , Rhona K Stuart , Christina W Ching , Keith A Ching , Jessica E Antosiewicz - Bourget , Hui Liu , Xinmin Zhang , Roland D Green , Victor V Lobanenkov , Ron Stewart , James A Thomson , Gregory E Crawford , Manolis Kellis , Bing Ren PubMed link : 19295514 Funding Grants : Mapping the transcriptional regulatory elements in the genome of hESC Public Summary : The human body is composed of diverse cell types with distinct functions . Although it is known that lineage specification depends on cell - specific gene expression , which in turn is driven by promoters , enhancers , insulators and other cis - regulatory DNA sequences for each gene , the relative roles of these regulatory elements in this process are not clear . We have previously developed a chromatin - immunoprecipitation - based microarray method ( ChIP - chip ) to locate promoters , enhancers and insulators in the human genome . Here we use the same approach to identify these elements in multiple cell types and investigate their roles in cell - type - specific gene expression . We observed that the chromatin state at promoters and CTCF - binding at insulators is largely invariant across diverse cell types . In contrast , enhancers are marked with highly cell - type - specific histone modification patterns , strongly correlate to cell - type - specific gene expression programs on a global scale , and are functionally active in a cell - type - specific manner . Our results define over 55 , 000 potential transcriptional enhancers in the human genome , significantly expanding the current catalogue of human enhancers and highlighting the role of these elements in cell - type - specific gene expression . Scientific Abstract : The human body is composed of diverse cell types with distinct functions . Although it is known that lineage specification depends on cell - specific gene expression , which in turn is driven by promoters , enhancers , insulators and other cis - regulatory DNA sequences for each gene , the relative roles of these regulatory elements in this process are not clear . We have previously developed a chromatin - immunoprecipitation - based microarray method ( ChIP - chip ) to locate promoters , enhancers and insulators in the human genome . Here we use the same approach to identify these elements in multiple cell types and investigate their roles in cell - type - specific gene expression . We observed that the chromatin state at promoters and CTCF - binding at insulators is largely invariant across diverse cell types . In contrast , enhancers are marked with highly cell - type - specific histone modification patterns , strongly correlate to cell - type - specific gene expression programs on a global scale , and are functionally active in a cell - type - specific manner . Our results define over 55 , 000 potential transcriptional enhancers in the human genome , significantly expanding the current catalogue of human enhancers and highlighting the role of these elements in cell - type - specific gene expression . 1