J . Cell Sci . at ) , 197 - 212 ( 1978 ) Printed in Great Britain © Company of Biologists Limited 1978 CELL TO SUBSTRATUM CONTACTS OF CHICK F1BROBLASTS AND THEIR RELATION TO THE MICROFILAMENT SYSTEM . A CORRELATED INTERFERENCE - REFLEXION AND HIGH - VOLTAGE ELECTRON - MICROSCOPE STUDY J . P . HEATH AND G . A . DUNN Strangeviays Research Laboratory , Worts Causeway , Cambridge CBi 4RN , U . K . SUMMARY The interference reflexion microscope may be used to examine the pattern of cell - substratum separation of cultured cells . Earlier studies on chick fibroblasts using this technique identified 3 types of separation : ( 1 ) focal contacts , representing approx . 10 - 14 nm separation and which are sites of cell - substratum adhesion and form at the leading edge of a cell during locomotion ; ( 2 ) close contacts , representing approx . 30 nm separation ; and ( 3 ) regions of greater separation , generally 100 - 140 nm . Using light microscopy these studies described the association of the focal contacts with the distal ends of cytoplasmic fibres and noted their similarity to the adhesion plaques described in EM studies of thin vertical sections of fibroblasts . In this investigation we have directly confirmed these earlier observations by using a corre - lated interference - reflexion and high - voltage stereo electron - microscopic study of cultured chick heart fibroblasts . The results show that focal contacts are always associated with the distal ends of linear bundles of microfilaments which pass centripetally and often obliquely through the cytoplasm . At their proximal ends the bundles insert into a loose matrix of micro - filaments and organelles surrounding the nucleus . The close contacts are often associated with a meshwork of microfilaments . The evidence supports the hypothesis that the microfilament bundles of a fibroblast form synchronously with the focal adhesions to the substratum . Our results are discussed with reference to the current evidence for the role of contractile proteins in cell locomotion . INTRODUCTION Electron - microscopical studies of cultured non - muscle cells have demonstrated the presence of 5 - 8 - nm diameter cytoplasmic microfilaments which are often organ - ized into bundles . It has been suggested that microfilaments are involved in many aspects of the in vitro behaviour of cells including cell locomotion ( Abercrombie , Heaysman & Pegrum , 1971 ; Abercrombie , Dunn & Heath , 1976 ) , contact inhibition of locomotion ( Heaysman & Pegrum , 1973 ) and contact guidance ( Dunn & Heath , I976 ) . The interference - reflexion light microscope ( IRM ) ( Curtis , 1964 ) may be used to demonstrate the pattern of spatial separation of a cultured cell from its plane glass substratum . Izzard & Lochner ( 1976 ) have used this microscope to distinguish 3 types of cell - substratum approach in the image of a chick embryo fibroblast : focal contacts , 198 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn close contacts , and regions of greater separation . Focal contacts are small discrete areas , o - i - 2 / tm wide by 2 - 10 jim long , of very close approach to the substratum ( 10 - 15 nm ) and are sites of cell - substratum adhesion ( see also Abercrombie & Dunn , 1975 ; Rees , Lloyd & Thorn , 1977 ) . Close contacts are broader areas of approximately 30 - nm separation which may also play a role in adhesion . The remainder of the ventral cell surface is not adherent to the substratum and is normally separated from it by a distance of 100 - 140 nm . In a locomoting fibroblast the leading lamella region of the cell and a small area at the extreme posterior end are usually occupied by close con - tacts dotted with focal contacts . The focal contacts are stationary with respect to the substratum and new ones appear close to the leading edge as the cell moves forward while more posterior focal contacts fade and disappear ( Lochner & Izzard , 1973 ) . Focal contacts have been shown to coincide with the distal ends of cytoplasmic fibres which are visible using phase - contrast or interference - contrast ( Nomarski ) optics ( Abercrombie & Dunn , 1975 ; Izzard & Lochner , 1976 ; Dunn & Heath , 1976 ) . Similar phase - dense fibres in cultured cells have been shown to be composed of 7 " 5 - nm diameter microfilaments ( Buckley & Porter , 1967 ) . For these and other reasons it has been proposed that focal contacts correspond with the plaques seen by electron microscopy of vertical sections of fibroblasts which are associated with bundles of 5 - 8 - nm microfilaments passing posteriorly and often obliquely away from the sub - stratum ( Abercrombie et al . 1971 ) . Microfilament bundles of a variety of cell types have now been shown to be a fairly well organized array of most of the contractile proteins which occur in smooth muscle ( Weber & Groeschel - Stewart , 1974 ; Lazarides & Weber , 1974 ; Lazarides , 1975 ; Lazarides & Burridge , 1975 ) and microfilament bundles isolated from rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells by laser microbeam dissection are capable of contracting in the presence of ATP ( Isenberg , Rathke , Hiilsmann , Franke & Wohlfarth - Bottermann , 1976 ) . The plaque - associated oblique bundles described in fibroblasts by Abercrombie et al . ( 1971 ) are therefore appropriately placed to draw the main cell mass forwards towards its anterior adhesions as they contract . However , there is at least one other essential requirement for cell translocation which is the protrusion of the leading edge in front of existing adhesions , a process which also may involve contractile proteins . In this paper we have taken individual chick heart fibroblasts and examined them with both interference - reflexion and high - voltage electron microscopy in order to correlate their pattern of cell to substratum separation with their organization of cytoplasmic microfilaments . This method enables us to examine the 3 - dimensional ultrastructure of a whole cell and follow the course of microfilament bundles and the orientation of microfilament meshworks , thus avoiding the difficulties of preparing and interpreting serial sections . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells Primary cultures of chick embryo heart fibroblasts were prepared on glass coverslips either as outwanderings from explanted 7 - day ventricles or from dissociated 10 - day ventricles Cell - substratum contacts and micro filaments 199 as described by Abercrombie & Dunn ( 1975 ) . The cultures were maintained in medium 199 supplemented with 10 % foetal bovine serum and 100 U / ml each of penicillin and streptomycin ( all from Flow Labs . Ltd . ) at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5 % CO a in air for 24 - 76 h . Light microscopy The interference - reflexion microscope used has been described elsewhere ( Abercrombie & Dunn , 1975 ) . A Zeiss 40 x 105 n . a . phase - contrast planapochromat objective allowed us to examine a cell in phase contrast or interference reflexion . The maximum illuminating numerical aperture of the interference reflexion microscope was measured using the method of Izzard & Lochner ( 1976 ) and was 097 . Sixteen - millimetre movies of individual living fibroblasts filmed in real time on the IRM showed that there was no alteration in the IR image prior to and during perfusion with 25 % glutaraldehyde prewarmed to 37 °C . In most experiments therefore the cells were fixed prior to observation and then photographed in cacodylate buffer on 35 - mm film , using both phase - contrast and interference - reflexion microscopy . High - voltage electron microscopy The cells were fixed in 2 - 5 % glutaraldehyde buffered with o - i M sodium cacodylate con - taining 3 mM calcium chloride pH 74 at 37 °C for 30 min . After being photographed the cells were postfixed in 1 % osmium tetroxide in the same buffer for 30 min at room temperature , dehydrated in ethanol and embedded in situ in Araldite . After polymerization at 60 °C for 2 days the coverslip was dissolved away in 48 % hydrofluoric acid at o °C and areas containing the cells for electron microscopy were cut out of the block , trimmed and mounted in an LKB Ultratome III . The block face was oriented perpendicular and parallel to the knife edge by eye and then the microtome was set to automatic cutting and the knife moved towards the block in 2 - / mi steps until the first section was cut . The sections were picked up on uncoated 3 - mm 100 - mesh latching folding grids ( Agar Aids Ltd . ) and stained in 2 % phosphotungstic acid in 95 % ethanol at 60 °C for 2 h . Individual cells which had been randomly selected for interference reflexion microscopy were relocated in the sections by light microscopy . A total of 30 such cells were identified and examined in a GEC - AE1 EM 7 high - voltage electron microscope fitted with a tilting stage and 20 - or 25 - / ttn objective apertures at a range of accelerating voltages from 700 to 1000 kV . Optimum illumination and contrast of the cells were obtained with sections of 0 - 5 - 2 / tm thickness , the thicker sections generally enclosing a whole cell . By using the micro - scope with a 25 - / tm objective aperture , which gives a depth of field of 2 fim for 3 - nm resolution ( Glauert & Mayo , 1973 ) , we were able to obtain the whole thickness of the sections in focus . However , the definition of individual cytoplasmic structures , e . g . microfilaments , was reduced in the thick sections due to the superimposition of detail . Depth information was obtained from stereo pairs of micrographs taken at various tilt angles . From the stereo pairs the thickness of the sections , which was variable due to the sectioning technique , and other vertical distances were obtained from the formula of Hudson & Makin ( 1970 ) : h = where h = vertical separation between two points mid way through the tilt angle 6 ; Y = parallax difference between the 2 points ; and M = total magnification at which the prints are viewed at 25 cm distance . Abbreviations on figures la lamella n nucleus m mitochondrion p polysomes mfb microfilament bundle t microtubule 200 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn Fig . i . Interference - reflexion micrograph of a primary chick heart fibroblast . The black streaks in the leading lamella and at the rear of the cell are the focal contacts ( small arrows ) 2 of which extend posteriorly into white streaks or high intensity reflexions . In the lamella the focal contacts are surrounded by dark grey areas or low intensity reflexions which are regions of close contact . Lower left is the leading lamella ( arrow ) of a second fibroblast showing focal contacts surrounded by regions of close contact . See text for explanation and further details . The illuminating wavelength 546 nm ; illuminating numerical aperture 0 - 97 ( same for all IR micrographs ) , x 1450 , bar 20 fim . Figs . 2 , 3 . High - voltage electron micrographs of the fibroblast shown in Fig . 1 . See text for details of technique and explanation . Fig . 2 . The focal contacts seen in the IR image coincide with the distal ends of cytoplasmic microfilament bundles . Some of the bundles radiate from a star - shaped concentration of microfilaments ( arrow ) . The close contacts seen in Fig . 1 are coin - cident with a loose meshwork of microfUaments oriented parallel to the leading edge of the lamella ( asterisk ) . Notice that the smaller microfilament bundles are not associ - ated with focal contacts . Lower left is the lamella of the second fibroblast shown in Fig . 1 . Section thickness 0 - 53 / tm ; 1000 kV , x 2780 , bar 10 fim . Fig . 3 . Detail of the area of the leading lamella marked with an asterisk in Fig . 2 showing the distal end of a microfilament bundle at a focal contact . The bundle is lying in a meshwork of filaments , microtubules and polysomes which coincides with a region of close contact . 800 kV , x 46200 , bar 0 - 5 fim . Cell - substratum contacts and microfilaments la * m f y Jf 202 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn RESULTS Description of the IR and HVEM images Fig . i shows a typical interference - reflexion image of a chick embryo fibroblast which was at the edge of the outwandering from a heart explant . The focal contacts vary in length from 2 to 5 / tm and are mainly surrounded by dark grey areas of low intensity reflexion which are the close contacts . Most of the rest of the cell gives a reflexion of similar or greater intensity than the background , indicating a greater cell to substratum separation . Notice , however , that there are complications in the reflexion image in the region of the nucleus which are almost certainly due to light reflected from the cytoplasm / nucleus interface ( Izzard & Lochner , 1976 ) . Fig . 2 is a high - voltage 1000 - kV electron micrograph of a thick section through the same fibroblast cut parallel to the substratum . The section is 0 - 53 / tm thick and con - tains all of the ventral surface of the cell and most of the dorsal surface except for a small region at the rear of the cell where the dorsal part of the nucleus is missing . The posterior half of the cell contains mitochondria and many vesicles and granules of O - I - I / tm diameter which lie in an electron - dense matrix of filaments and polysomes which together surround the nucleus forming the perinuclear zone . The anterior half of the cell is completely present within the section and flattens anteriorly to a broad leading lamella approximately 25 / tm wide and less than 0 - 5 / tm thick . The lamella contains many small vesicles o - i / tm in diameter , polysomes , microtubules and fila - ments 5 - 12 nm in diameter and of varying lengths . Linear bundles of filaments 5 - 20 / tm in length and consisting mainly of microfilaments approx 5 nm in diameter lie within the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3 ) . Focal contacts Comparison of the IRM and HVEM micrographs showed that in every cell the focal contacts of the leading lamella and of the trailing extremities of the cell always coincided with either the distal ends or , in a few cases , the entire length of a bundle of microfilaments lying in the cytoplasm ( Figs . 1 - 14 ) . The width of each focal contact which varied from o - i to i - o / tm was closely similar to the width of its accompanying microfilament bundle at the contact position . The bundles usually passed from the focal contacts through the cytoplasm towards the nucleus for a distance of 5 - 30 / tm ( Figs . 2 , 4 , 13 ) . The bundles varied not only in length and width but also in electron Figs . 4 , 5 . High - voltage electron micrograph of a whole primary chick heart fibro - blast ( Fig . 4 ) ; and interference reflexion micrograph of the same cell ( Fig . 5 ) showing the focal contacts ( black streaks ) and the close contacts ( grey areas ) in the leading lamella . Note the association of the microfilament bundles in the 2 lamellae with the focal contacts ( example arrowed ) . At the rear of the cell a bundle passes anteriorly and ventrally to the nucleus . See text for further details . Fig . 4 section thickness 13 / tm ; 1000 kV , x 2700 , bar 10 fim . Fig . 5 x 1340 , bar 10 / tm . Fig . 6 . High - voltage electron micrograph of part of the lamella arrowed in Fig . 4 showing the spreading of a microfilament bundle at a focal contact . 800 kV , x 32000 , bar 0 - 5 / tm . Cell - substratum contacts and microfilaments 203 n V mfb 204 J - P - Heath and G . A . Dunn density . There was , however , no apparent relation between the size of a microfilament bundle and the darkness of its associated focal contact ( e . g . Figs . 4 , 5 ) . Rarely , a single focal contact was associated with two bundles of microfilaments not more than 0 - 5 fim apart ( Fig . 8 ) . It is unlikely that in such instances the IRM was unable to re - solve 2 focal contacts , since similarly closely positioned bundles were observed with a clear separation of their associated focal contacts . We also found bundles , associated with 2 adjacent focal contacts , which merged at widely variable positions along their lengths and passed posteriorly as a single bundle ( Fig . 2 ) . Stereo views of the thicker areas of the lamella of a fibroblast ( up to 1 fim ) showed that many of the bundles travel obliquely away from their focal contacts at the ventral surface and terminate close to the dorsal cell surface ( Figs . 8 , 9 ) . In the thinner , distal regions of the lamella ( less than 0 - 25 / im ) the bundles appear to lie parallel to the substratum ; however , a slight obliqueness , if present , of these bundles may not have been detected by our stereo - scopic techniques . Fig . 8 is a stereo pair of micrographs showing two microfilament bundles lying obliquely within the leading lamella of a fibroblast . The focal contacts associated with these bundles ( Fig . 7 ) extend into a streak of high intensity reflexion , a characteristic of some oblique bundles ( see also Figs . 1 , 11 ) . Not all the microfilament bundles in our fibroblasts were associated with focal contacts . Typically most of the bundles less than o - i fim in width and up to 5 / im in length were not coincident with a focal contact ( Figs . 2 , 9 ) . These bundles , however , were also often lying obliquely and oriented parallel to the direction of locomotion of the cell and they were possibly linked to very small focal contacts beyond the resolving power of the IRM . The majority of the microfilament bundles in a fibroblast are linear , but curved bundles were found in both the lamellae and more commonly at the concave edges of the cells ( Figs . 2 , 13 ) . At a focal contact the distal end of its associated microfilament bundle spreads out , enabling the individual microfilaments to be resolved more clearly in the HVEM ( Figs . 3 , 6 ) . The appearance of the microfilaments at the focal contacts did not noticeably differ from that of microfilaments in any other part of the bundle . The microfilaments are not always spread evenly at a focal contact and may be found associ - ated into finer strands which merge posteriorly to form the bundle ( Fig . 8 ) . The proximal ends of the bundles lying in the leading lamellae terminated in or close to the perinuclear zone where they spread out like their distal ends and appeared to merge with the loose meshwork of filaments and organelles in these regions ( Figs . Fig . 7 . Interference reflexion micrograph of the leading lamella of a primary chick heart fibroblast . Most of the lamella gives a low - intensity reflexion indicating a close contact . At the edge of the lamella are 3 focal contacts ( arrows ) 2 of which extend posteriorly into a high - intensity reflexion , x 1500 , bar 10 / im . Fig . 8 . Stereo pair of high - voltage electron micrographs of part of the lamella of the same fibroblast showing the association of microfilament bundles with the focal con - tacts arrowed in Fig . 7 . At the focal contacts the bundles are spread out into smaller elements . On the left one focal contact is associated with 2 fine bundles of micro - filaments . The bundles pass posteriorly and obliquely through the meshwork of filaments and polysomes contained in the lamella . 800 kV ; section thickness I - I fim ; tilt ± io° from horizontal ; x 8000 , bar 2 fim . Cell - substratum contacts and microfilaments 205 8 l ' ? t ' - • \ CEL 29 206 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn 2 , 4 , 12 ) . There was no evidence of any attachment of the bundle to either an organelle or other recognizable cytoplasmic structure . Focal contacts at the rear of a fibroblast are few in number and are mainly found at the rearmost extremities ( Fig . 14 ) . The bundles associated with posterior focal contacts pass anteriorly and terminate near the nucleus . Some bundles from the rear focal contacts pass either dorsally or ventrally to the nucleus to terminate in the anterior perinuclear zone ( Fig . 4 ) . In a few instances we have observed interesting variations to the general pattern of the association between the microfilament bundles and the focal contacts . Firstly , some bundles instead of extending from a focal contact towards the perinuclear zone are associated with focal contacts at both ends ( Fig . 13 ) . These were more common in cells with decreased motility , such as are often found in sparse secondary cell cultures . Secondly , some cells possessed a star - shaped organization of microfilament bundles where radially arranged bundles pass from a common centre and often terminated at focal adhesions ( Fig . 2 ) . Lazarides ( 1976 ) has shown large numbers of similar struc - tures in spreading rat embryo cells but the absence of this structure in the majority of our cells suggests that it is unlikely to play an essential role in the organization of microfilaments . A third variation in the pattern is a peculiar curved structure some - times observed in primary fibroblasts , which lies roughly parallel to the leading edge of the lamella ( Fig . 10 ) and consists mainly of microfilaments ( Fig . 12 ) . Phase - dense lines of similar size and position are sometimes seen in living fibroblasts and have been seen to move towards the nucleus as the cell locomotes ( A . K . Harris & G . A . Dunn unpublished ) . Fig . 9 is a stereo view of a cell containing one of these structures and shows the central portion to be lying close to the dorsal surface of the lamella , demarcating an anterior region of cytoplasm with an unusually high density of poly - somes ( Fig . 12 ) . In the IRM ( Fig . 11 ) these structures show a high - intensity reflexion along most of their length and a low - intensity reflexion , similar to a focal contact , at one or both ends . Figs . 9 - 12 . A primary chick heart fibroblast . Fig . 9 . Stereo pair of high - voltage electron micrographs showing the whole cell . Some of the microfilament bundles are lying obliquely within the broad leading lamella ( arrows ) . Note the curved band of microfilaments lying in the centre and on the dorsal side of the lamella . The black dots are due to contamination during staining and mark the upper surface of the section when viewed stereoscopically . See text for further details . Section thickness 0 - 75 fim ; 1000 kV ; tilt±i8° from horizontal ; x 2600 , bar 10 fim . Fig . 10 . Phase - contrast micrograph of the fixed cell before embedding , showing the curved structure in the lamella , x 1350 . Fig . 11 . Interference - reflexion micrograph . Most of the lamella gives a low - intensity reflexion indicating a close contact . Note the association of the focal contacts ( arrow ) with the microfilament bundles seen in the electron micrograph ( Fig . 9 ) . x 1350 . Fig . 12 . High - voltage electron micrograph of part of the lamella showing the curved band of microfilaments . The distal ends of 2 microfilament bundles ( arrow ) fuse and merge into the perinuclear zone . A loose meshwork of microfilaments ( asterisk ) is associated with a close contact seen in Fig . 11 . 1000 kV , x 11610 , bar 2 fim . Cell - substratum contacts and microfilaments 207 14 - 2 208 Jf . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn Cell - substratum contacts and micro filaments 209 Close contacts In the IRM close contacts are found as broad amorphous zones which often sur - round the focal contacts ( Figs , i , 7 , 11 ) . In primary cultures of fibroblasts from explants up to 75 % of the leading lamella area is in close contact with the substratum , but this proportion is reduced in dissociated secondary cultures ( compare the relative areas of close contact in Figs . 1 and 11 with that in Fig . 14 ) . Interestingly , the area of close contact under a cell appears to be inversely correlated with the number of focal contacts ( compare Figs . 11 and 14 ) . The cytoplasm in the region of a close contact often contains a loose meshwork of microfilaments with some organization into fine bundles which were either randomly oriented or in a few cells oriented parallel to the edge of the leading lamella ( Figs . 2 , 12 ) . DISCUSSION A theoretical interpretation of the interference - reflexion image of cells cultured on a plane glass substratum has been discussed by Curtis ( 1964 ) , Lochner & Izzard ( 1973 ) and Izzard & Lochner ( 1976 ) . Izzard & Lochner argued that if an illuminating numerical aperture ( INA ) of approximately i - o or greater is used then the contrast pattern of the image will be largely due to zero - order interference of the light re - flected from both interfaces of the thin film of culture medium which separates the cell from the substratum , and thus that local changes in the reflected intensity of this light can be directly related to the local thickness of this film of medium . They based this argument on three points . Firstly , that higher - order interference fringes will lose contrast with increasing INA due to the overlapping interference patterns caused by an increase in the angle of incidence of the light ( see also Curtis , 1964 ) , and therefore only films whose thickness varies between o and 100 nm will contribute to the con - trast pattern of the image . Secondly , that the thickness of the cell does not fall to 100 nm , therefore the position of the other ( dorsal ) cell surface will not contribute to the image . Thirdly , that the thin film of medium separating the cell from the sub - stratum is not much above 100 nm thick , and therefore most of the changes in thickness of this film will contribute to the image . We would agree with this explanation of the image ( which ignores the complications in the nuclear area of the cell mentioned earlier ) but we think that one point merits further investigation . A reflexion at the microfilament bundle interface with the cytoplasm may contribute to the interference - reflexion image and may partially Figs . 13 , 14 . High - voltage electron micrograph of a whole secondary chick heart fibroblast ( Fig . 13 ) ; and interference - reflexion micrograph of the same cell ( Fig . 14 ) showing the focal contacts ( black streaks ) in the lamella and at the trailing ends of the cell . Note the association of microfilament bundles with the focal contacts . There are few areas of close contact ; most of the cell gives a high - intensity reflexion indicating a 100 - 140 nm separation . In the lamella 2 focal contacts are linked by a microfilament bundle ( arrows ) . See text for further details . Fig . 13 , section thickness 14 fim . 800 kV , x 2900 , bar 10 fim . Fig . 14 , X1130 . 210 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn account for the white streaks often found behind focal contacts ; Lochner & Izzard ( 1973 ) consider these streaks to indicate that the cell surface is lifted from the sub - stratum as if it were adherent to the bundle . Despite such difficulties in interpreting the complex IRM image there can be little doubt that the discrete dark streaks of focal contacts represent cell - to - substratum adhesions ( Abercrombie & Dunn , 1975 ; Izzard & Lochner , 1976 ) and the main pur - pose of this paper is to examine their relation to the microfilament bundle system . Our observations are a direct confirmation of the considerable weight of circumstantial evidence that focal contacts are always associated with microfilament bundles and therefore focal contacts are very probably equivalent to the plaques described from vertical thin sections of fibroblasts . In order to understand more about the time course of the formation of focal con - tacts and their associated microfilament bundles we examined the focal contacts which lay within 15 / tm of the leading edge in the IR images of 20 fibroblasts and found that of a total of 239 focal contacts each corresponded with a bundle of microfilaments in the HVEM images of those cells . Since chick heart fibroblasts move at a speed of approximately 75 / im per h ( Abercrombie , 1975 ) a delay as small as a few seconds between the formation of focal contacts and the subsequent formation of their associated microfilament bundles would have been detected as the occurrence of at least one or two focal contacts without associated bundles . We have therefore found no evidence to reject the hypothesis that microfilament bundles form synchronously with their associated focal contacts . We can speculate that the formation of a focal contact will provide a fixed point with reference to the substratum , which immediately enables the development of a nearly isometric contraction in the cytoplasm between this adhesion and a relatively stable fibrillar system surrounding the nucleus . Such a contraction may cause a very rapid organization of a loose meshwork of cytoplasmic contractile elements into a straight bundle extending from the focal contact to the perinuclear area ( Abercrombie et al . 1976 ) as has been demonstrated in the case of isometric contraction in Physarum ( Fleischer & Wohlfarth - Bottermann , 1975 ) and in Difflugia ( Wohlmann & Allen , 1968 ) . However , we have as yet no direct evidence of a relatively stable fibrillar system surrounding the nucleus ; these areas in which the oblique microfilament bundles spread out and terminate have a fine structure which does not suggest any particular rigidity . But the indirect evidence is persuasive . Each bundle is usually straight as if under tension between the 2 points and the spreading of the bundles into smaller elements , seen at the focal contacts , is also seen at the perinuclear termination . Weber ( 1976 ) reported that the nucleus of a cell remained together with the microfilament system after treatment with non - ionic detergents and deduced the existence of a cytoskeleton of which the nucleus is an integral part . Indeed the nucleus is often distorted into a shape which would be expected if it were embedded in an elastic gel pulled on by the oblique microfilament bundles ( Fig . 4 ) . The micro - filament bundles thus became organized in a manner which enables them by con - tracting to move the main cell mass forwards towards the anterior focal contacts . The mechanism of the organization of microfilaments into bundles as a result of isometric contraction ( Fleischer & Wohlfarth - Bottermann , 1975 ) may of course Cell - substratum contacts and microfilaments 211 operate between any 2 fixed points , even though they both be attachments to the sub - stratum . As our results have shown , such bundles linking 2 focal contacts do sometimes occur and contraction of these bundles may serve a function in vivo where the sub - stratum may be flexible e . g . in wound contraction ( Abercrombie , Flint & James , 1956 ; Gabbiani , Ryan & Majno , 1971 ) . The IRM showed that close contacts { ca . 30 nm cell - substratum separation ) were less frequent in dissociated secondary fibro - blasts than in primary outwandering fibroblasts , and since the former cells are often far less mobile than the latter , close contacts may play an important role in cell loco - motion , a possibility also discussed by Abercrombie & Dunn ( 1975 ) and Izzard & Lochner ( 1976 ) who reported that close contacts disappear in confluent monolayers of fibroblasts . We have found that close contacts are often associated with a concen - tration of loosely organized microfilaments in the cytoplasm and it may be that the close contact is a form of adhesion to the substratum and associated with the mesh - work of microfilaments in a similar manner to the focal contact - bundle association and may serve a similar function . Immunofluorescence studies on the distribution of contractile proteins in non - muscle cells shows that in addition to their localization in the microfilament bundles there is a diffuse pattern of staining throughout the leading lamella and that the staining is stronger in more mobile cells ( Weber , 1976 ) . We thank Mr M . Abercrombie for advice and criticism and Mr A . R . Peachey for technical assistance . This work was supported by the Medical Research Council . REFERENCES ABERCROMBIE , M . ( 1975 ) . The contact behaviour of invading cells . In Cellular Membranes and Tumour CellBeliaviour , 28th A . Symp . on Fundamental Cancer Research . Baltimore , U . S . A . : Williams & Wilkins . ABERCROMBIE , M . & DUNN , G . A . ( 1975 ) . Adhesions of fibroblasts to substratum during con - tact inhibition observed by interference reflexion microscopy . Expl Cell Res . 92 , 57 - 62 . ABERCROMBIE , M . , DUNN , G . A . & HEATH , J . P . ( 1976 ) . Locomotion and contraction in non - muscle cells . In Contractile Systems in Non - Muscle Tissues ( ed . S . V . Perry , A . Margreth & R . S . Adelstein ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland Publishing Co . ABERCROMBIE , M . , FLINT , M . H . & JAMES , D . W . ( 1956 ) . Wound contraction in relation to collagen formation in scorbutic guinea - pigs . J . Embryol . exp . Morph . 4 , 167 - 175 . ABERCROMBIE , M . , HEAYSMAN , J . E . M . & PECRUM , S . M . ( 1971 ) . The locomotion of fibro - blasts in culture . IV . Electron microscopy of the leading lamella . Expl Cell Res . 67 , 359—367 . BUCKLEY , I . K . & PORTER , K . R . ( 1967 ) . Cytoplasmic fibrils in living cultured cells . A light and electron microscope study . Protoplasma 64 , 349 - 380 . CURTIS , A . S . G . ( 1964 ) . The mechanism of adhesion of cells to glass . A study by interference reflection microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 20 , 199—215 . DUNN , G . A . & HEATH , J . P . ( 1976 ) . A new hypothesis of contact guidance in tissue cells . Expl Cell Res . 101 , 1 - 14 . FLEISCHER , M . & WOHLFARTH - BOTTERMANN , K . E . ( 1975 ) . Correlation between tension force generation , fibrillogenesis and ultrastructure of cytoplasmic actomyosin during isometric and isotonic contractions of protoplasmic strands . Cytobiologie 10 , 339—365 . GABBIANI , G . , RYAN , G . B . & MAJNO , G . ( 1971 ) . Presence of modified fibroblasts in granu - lation tissue and their possible role in wound contraction . Experientia 27 , 549—550 . GLAUERT , A . M . & MAYO , C . R . ( 1973 ) . The study of three - dimensional structural relation - ships in connective tissues by high voltage electron microscopy . J . Microscopy 97 , 83 - 94 . HEAYSMAN , J . E . M . & PEGRUM , S . M . ( 1973 ) . Early contacts between fibroblasts - an ultra - structural study . Expl Cell Res . 78 , 71 - 78 . 212 J . P . Heath and G . A . Dunn HUDSON , B . & MAKIN , M . J . ( 1970 ) . The optimum tilt angle for electron stereo - microscopy . J . Physics E . Scientific Instruments 3 , 311 . ISKNBERG , G . , RATHKE , P . C , HOLSMANN , N . , FRANKE , N . W . & WOHLFARTH - BOTTERMANN , K . E . ( 1976 ) . Cytoplasmic actomyosin fibrils in tissue culture cells . Direct proof of con - tractility by visualisation of ATP - induced contraction in fibrils isolated by laser microbeam dissection . Cell Tiss . Res . 166 , 427 - 443 . IZZARD , C . S . & LOCHNER , L . ( 1976 ) . Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibroblasts : an inter - ference - reflexion study with an evaluation of the technique . J . Cell Set . 21 , 129 - 159 . LAZARIDES , E . ( 1975 ) . Tropomyosin antibody : the specific localisation of tropomyosin in non - muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 65 , 549 - 561 . LAZARIDES , E . ( 1976 ) . Actin , a - actinin , and tropomyosin interaction in the structural organi - sation of actin filaments in non - muscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 68 , 202 - 219 . LAZARIDES , E . & BURRIDGE , K . ( 1975 ) . a - Actinin : immunofluorescent localisation of a muscle structural protein in non - muscle cells . Cell 6 , 289 - 298 . LAZARIDES , E . & WEBER , K . ( 1974 ) . Actin antibody : the specific visualisation of actin filaments in non - muscle cells . Proc . natn . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 , 2268 - 2272 . LOCHNER , L . & IZZARD , C . S . ( 1973 ) . Dynamic aspects of cell - substrate contact in fibroblast motility . J . Cell Biol . 59 , 199a . REES , D . A . , LLOYD , C . W . & THOM , D . ( 1977 ) . Control of grip and stick in cell adhesion through lateral relationships of membrane glycoproteins . Mature , Lond . 267 , 124 - 128 . WEBER , K . ( 1976 ) . Biochemical anatomy of microfilaments in cells in tissue culture using immunofluorescence microscopy . In Contractile Systems in Non - Muscle Tissues ( ed . S . V . Perry , A . Margreth & R . S . Adelstein ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland Publishing Co . WEBER , K . & GROESCHEL - STEWART , U . ( 1974 ) . Antibody to myosin : the specific visualisation of myosin containing filaments in non - muscle cells . Proc . natit . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 , 4561 - 4564 - WOHLMANN , A . & ALLEN , R . D . ( 1968 ) . Structural organisation associated with pseudopod extension and contraction during cell locomotion in Difflugia . J . Cell Sci . 3 , 105 - 114 . ( Received 30 May 1977 )