Real Options , Intangible Resources and Performance of Franchise Networks Nina Gorovaia Frederick University Cyprus 7 , Y . Frederickou Str . , Pallouriotissa , 1036 , Nicosia , Cyprus bus . gn @ fit . ac . cy November 2011 Abstract This study presents a model of franchise network’s performance by deriving hypotheses from the resource - based and the real options perspectives . According to the resource - based view , difficult to imitate resources create sustainable competitive advantage and contribute to superior performance of the franchise system . We test the following hypotheses : Intangible resources of the franchisor ( system - specific know - how and strength of the brand name ) , have a positive impact on the performance of the franchise system . Second , intangible outlet - specific resources of the franchisee ( exploration and exploitation capabilities ) positively impact the performance of the franchise system . Due to their higher degree of intangibility , exploration capabilities have a stronger impact on performance than exploitation capabilities . Third , based on the real option perspective , we hypothesize that including a real option clause in the franchise contract ( as franchisor’s option to acquire franchised units ) increases the franchisor’s incentives for intangible relationship - specific investments and hence the performance of the franchise system . We test these hypotheses with cross - sectional data from franchising networks in Germany . The data provide some support for the hypotheses . Keywords : performance of the franchise networks , intangible resources , real options , resource - based view . 2 Introduction According to the resource - based view , intangible resources of the franchisor and franchisees are the most important factors that contribute to the competitive advantage of franchise networks . In spite of their importance , they received relatively little attention in previous research . Most of the previous studies concentrated on the “governance - strategy fit” explanations of performance ( Bradach , 1997 , Shane , 1998 , Sorenson and Sorensen , 2001 ; Yin and Zajac , 2004 , Mitsuhashi , et al , 2008 , Barthélemy , 2008 ) without directly addressing the question of the performance impact of intangible resources . While these studies contribute to our understanding of how governance choices affect performance , they underestimate the importance of other performance drivers , such as intangible resources that are necessary for the creation of sustainable competitive advantage . First , this study aims to fill this gap by providing a resource - based explanation of performance of franchise networks . The resource - based view posits that the sources of value creation are the resources and capabilities of the firms . In case of franchising intangible resources and capabilities of both the franchisor and franchisees are necessary to achieve superior performance . In addition , the existing literature on franchising also lacks a real option explanation of governance choice and performance . Franchising as an organizational form has long been viewed as an attractive growth strategy for retail chains . Previous research has shown that an important motive to engage in franchising is the franchisor’s easier and less costly access to the outlet - specific resources . For example , according to the resource scarcity theory , franchisors have constraints on information , managerial and financial resources concerning the local outlets and hence expanding through franchising is a way to get access to these resources without asset ownership ( Oxenfelt and Kelley , 1968 - 1969 ) . By expanding through franchising the company can rely upon local partners to manage risk and create and share 3 knowledge of the local market . On the other hand , the dilution of franchisor’s ownership rights due to franchisees’ residual income rights can be compensated by including a real option clause ( option - to acquire the franchised outlet ) in the franchise contract ( Windsperger 2002 ) . This clause provides the franchisor the possibilities to exercise residual control rights at the end of the franchise relationship . Thereby , it increases the franchisor’s incentive to undertake investments in intangible system - specific and brand name assets during the contract period and consequently the performance of the franchise system . Overall , applying a real option perspective to franchising is a promising research strategy . The real option view considers the franchise relationship as a “call option” for the franchisor who has the right , but not the obligation , to acquire the franchise outlet from the franchisee at the end of the franchise agreement . The real option clause is a source of value creation for the franchisor , because he / she can defer investment at the initial stages of the expansion and make a decision to invest later depending on positive developments in the environment ( e . g . , unexpected demand growth ) . Hence , the real option perspective can help the franchise systems to expand gradually into the new markets under conditions of uncertainty ( Chi and McGuire , 1996 ) and provide a valuable tool to manage uncertainty proactively ( Kogut , 1991 ) . This managerial flexibility may positively influence the overall performance of the system . The paper is organized as follows : First , in the next section we review the relevant literature on performance of franchise networks . Second , section three develops a theoretical model and formulates the hypotheses . Finally , we test the hypotheses by using the data of German franchise networks . 4 Relevant Literature Performance of the franchise networks Compared to governance issues , performance issues have received little attention in the franchising context . A few studies have investigated the performance of franchise chains in terms of survival ( Shane , 1996 , 1998 ; Shane and Foo , 1999 ) , sales growth ( Sorenson and Sorensen , 2001 ; Yin and Zajac , 2004 ) , financial performance ( Barthelemy , 2008 ) . The level of analysis of these studies is also different : while Yin and Zajac ( 2004 ) , Kosová et al . ( 2008 ) investigate the performance of the franchised and corporate stores within one chain , Sorenson and Sorenson ( 2001 ) focus on chain wide revenue growth . Most studies primarily concentrated on the impact of governance structures on performance of franchise networks . Sorenson and Sørensen ( 2001 ) argue that the existence of company - owned and franchised outlets in a network ( a plural form ) creates different incentives for company managers and the franchisees that encourage distinct patterns of organizational learning that in turn contributes to superior performance . Bradach ( 1997 ) identifies four processes in which franchisees and firm - owned outlets strengthen one another . Kosová et al . ( 2008 ) examine the impact of organizational form , specifically franchising vs . company ownership , on hotel performance outcomes and find no performance or price differences between hotels operated under the two modes of organization . In sum , the performance explanations are linked to the governance / strategy fit ( Yin and Zajac , 2004 , Mitsuhashi , et al , 2008 ) . 5 Intangible Resources and performance of the franchise networks According to the resource - based view of the firm , only unique and difficult to imitate resources lead to superior performance ( Barney , 1991 ; Wernerfelt , 1984 ) . To have a potential for sustained competitive advantage the resources have to have four attributes : ( a ) they must be valuable , exploit opportunities and / or neutralize threats in the firm’s environment , ( b ) they must be rare among current and potential competitors , ( c ) they must be imperfectly imitable , ( d ) they have no strategically equivalent substitutes ( Barney , 1991 ) . Given these insights , what are the unique and difficult to imitate resources in franchising that can lead to sustainable competitive advantage and superior performance ? In franchising like in other businesses in the service sector , intangible resources play a very important role . Much of the success of the franchise networks relates to the ability to effectively manage and maximize the value of the intangible resources ( Watson et al , 2005 ) . What are the intangible resources in franchising ? The franchisor’s intangible resources refer primarily to the system - specific know - how and brand name assets ( Klein and Leffler 1981 ; Norton 1988 ) . According to Fladmoe - Lindquis and Jacque ( 1995 ) , the brand name is the most important intangible resource to protect against potential hazard since service companies cannot depend upon patented proprietary technology or processes as a protection against close substitutes . The franchisor’s system specific know - how is also very important to the market success of the product or service . The franchisee’s intangible resources refer to the outlet - specific local market know - how that contributes to better performance of the franchise outlet and also to better performance of the whole franchise system . Consequently , both franchisor’s and franchisees’ intangible resources are crucial for the success of the franchise system requiring close cooperation to create strategically valuable resources that neither could build independently ( e . g . , Dyer , 1996 ) . 6 Real options perspective in franchising The real options perspective has been used recently to evaluate the strategic investment opportunities in uncertain environments ( Leiblein , 2003 ) . In the management literature , real options were applied in studies that examine the strategic value of joint ventures ( Chi and McGuire , 1996 ; Folta , 1998 ; Folta and Leiblein , 1994 ; Kogut , 1991 ; Reuer and Leiblein , 2000 ) , market entry ( Miller and Folta , 2002 ) , and organizational governance ( Leiblein and Miller , 2003 ) . To the best of our knowledge no studies tested empirically the real options perspective in the context of franchising . The real options perspective can be used to explain the choice of the governance form and contract design in franchising . It recognizes that opportunity costs are associated with irreversible investments under uncertainty ( Leiblein , 2003 ) . Franchisor’s strategy to expand the network through franchisee - owned outlets , and not through company - owned outlets , defers committing resources which is valuable under uncertainty ( McDonald and Siegel , 1986 ) . Specifically , a real option perspective focuses on investments that create valuable follow - on investment opportunities , or growth options ( Bowman and Hurry , 1993 ) . Beginning an expansion strategy by using franchising is an opportunity for the franchisor to learn new knowledge in “manageable installments” ( Bowman and Hurry , 1993 ) . Knowledge sharing between franchisor and franchisees creates a favorable situation for the franchisor to learn and develop capabilities about the new markets and new technologies . Later on the franchisor can gain competitive advantage by acquiring the most successful franchised outlets in order to deploy these capabilities . The franchisor’s acquisition of franchised outlets proceeds incrementally as a result of accumulated learning . Thus , the franchisor can capitalize on favorable opportunities and mitigate negative shocks in a flexible way , acting proactively towards uncertainly ( Kogut , 1991 ) . The franchisor holding an option may expand 7 into attractive markets though company - owned outlets , and defer investment , abandon operations or expand through franchise outlets if the market conditions are less attractive . Overall , we can conclude that although some studies investigate the performance of the franchising networks , no studies have tested how the intangible resources of the franchisor and franchisee contribute to franchise network’s performance . Starting from this deficit , first the objective of the paper is to develop a resource - based view on performance of the franchise networks , since the firm’s specific resources and capabilities are crucial in explaining the firm ' s performance . Second , we examine the performance impact of the franchisor’s option to acquire the outlet . While many franchise contracts use real option clauses to compensate the franchisor for the diluted residual income and ownership rights , the effect of this option clause on performance of the franchise networks has not been analyzed . Theory and Hypotheses Overview of the Empirical Model First , in this section we describe our model ( see figure 1 ) . First , according to the resource - based view , intangible system - specific and local market resources strengthen the competitive position of the franchise system and hence they have a positive impact on performance . In addition , we hypothesize that the more intangible exploration assets have a stronger impact on performance than the less intangible exploitation assets . Second , real option clause in franchise contracts ( such as the franchisor’s buy option ) increases the franchisor incentive to invest in relationship - specific resources and consequently they positively influence the performance of the franchise system . Insert Figure 1 8 Hypotheses Franchisors’ intangible resources They refer to system - specific know how ( Hall , 1993 ) and brand name assets . System - specific know - how includes knowledge of the business concept : site selection , store layout , product or service development , procurement , delivery of the service . Each element of the business concept must be optimized so that each franchisee should be able to reproduce the prototype . This is not only necessary for the success of the whole franchise system , but also it represents an important source of risk reduction for the franchisee . The transfer of system specific know how requires personal and face - to - face contact between the franchisor and franchisees . Based on previous studies ( Darr et al , 1995 ; Fladmoe - Lindquist and Jacque , 1995 ; Simonin , 1999 ) , we use annual training days as indicators of franchisors’ intangible system - specific resources . An increase in franchisors’ intangible system - specific resources requires higher number of face - to - face interactions ( annual training days and local visits ) . The higher is the degree of intangibility , the more tacit is the knowledge of the franchisor , and the more difficult it is to transfer it to the franchisees . According to the resource - based view only difficult to imitate resources lead to sustainable competitive advantage and superior performance . Hence , we expect that the franchisor’s intangible system - specific resources vary positively with the performance of the franchise system . H1 : The intangible system - specific resources of the franchisor positively vary with performance of the franchise system . Creating a strong brand name involves high transaction - specific investments by the franchisor to signal a high quality of the branded product to the consumers . From a strategic perspective a strong brand name is less vulnerable to the competition and cannot be easily imitated by potential competitors . Brand name strength results in high residual income and 9 increased competitive advantage for the franchise system , which in turn leads to superior performance . Hence , we formulate the following hypothesis : H2 : The brand name assets of the franchisor vary positively with the performance of the franchise system . Franchisee’s intangible local market resources They are the outlet - specific know how referring to innovation and operations capabilities . Innovation capabilities are more explorative in nature and operation capabilities are more exploitative ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ; March , 1991 ) . Innovation capabilities refer to innovation and local market know - how , and operation capabilities refer to quality control and administrative capabilities ( Windsperger and Dant , 2006 ) . Because innovation ( or exploration ) capabilities are characterized by a higher explorative component than operation ( or exploitation ) capabilities , innovation capabilities are expected to show a higher degree of tacitness than operation capabilities . By applying the resource - based perspective , we expect that both the exploration and exploitation capabilities of the franchisees have a positive impact on performance of the franchise system . Furthermore , the impact of more intangible exploration capabilities on performance is stronger . We summarize these expectations in the following hypotheses : H3 : Exploration capabilities of the franchisees vary positively with performance of the franchise system . H4 : Exploitation capabilities of the franchisees vary positively with performance of the franchise system . H5 : The impact of more intangible assets of the franchisee ( exploration assets ) on performance is stronger . 10 Real option clause According to the real options perspective , the presence of a real option clause as ownership surrogate in the franchise contract offers flexibility to the franchisor to acquire the best performing franchise outlets , once the environmental situation is favorable , and thereby contributes to superior performance of the franchise system ( Kogut , 1991 ) . According to Windsperger ( 2002 ) , ownership rights in the franchise system refer both to residual rights and complementary ownership surrogates . The franchisor’s incentive to invest in intangible resources ( system - specific know - how and brand name ) will be higher , the more the diluted residual income and ownership rights are compensated by ownership surrogates , such as the real option clause in the franchise contract . Therefore , the real option clause increases the franchisor’s investment incentives during the contract period by compensating for the dilution of residual income and ownership rights under franchise contracting . Hence , we formulate the following hypothesis : H6 : Real option clause ( franchisor’s option to acquire the outlet ) increases performance due to the franchisor’s higher incentive for intangible relationship - specific investments . 11 Empirical Analysis Data collection Empirical data to test the hypotheses were collected from the German franchise sector . The questionnaires were mailed to the senior managers as key informants of 491 franchise systems in Germany . We received 137 questionnaires . The possibility of non - response bias was assessed by comparing early respondents with late respondents ( Armstrong and Overton 1977 ) . T - test comparisons of early and late respondents on the key constructs did not reveal statistically significant differences . Therefore , non - response bias is not likely to be a concern in the interpretation of the findings from this study . Measurement The measurement of the relevant variables for this study is summarized in the Appendix . To test the hypotheses we use the following variables : performance of the franchise system as dependent variable , intangible resources of franchisor ( brand name assets and system - specific resources ) , intangible resources of franchisees ( exploration and exploitation capabilities ) and the real option clause as explanatory variable . Additionally we used environmental uncertainty and sector as control variables . Dependent Variable As far as performance measurement is concerned , there is no consensus in the literature about the most appropriate way to measure the performance of franchise systems . The measurement of the performance can be based on objective or subjective indicators . While objective measures have greater validity , most of the franchise systems in this survey are private companies that do not disclose financial data . The literature has demonstrated that there is a strong correlation between objective and subjective performance indicators . Furthermore , 12 performance is a multi - faceted construct that cannot be restricted to one indicator only ( Elango and Fried , 1997 ) . Apart from the financial data performance should also include such dimensions as innovation and growth of the system . In this study , performance of the franchise networks ( PERFORM ) was measured as an average of six items : system growth , reduction in costs , increase in yields , increase in innovation , saving in coordination and control costs and profit growth . Franchisors were asked to rate the performance of their franchise system on a seven - point scale starting from much worse than planned to much better than planned . Independent Variables Intangible resources of the franchisor . These are measured by two variables : system - specific know - how and brand name . Consistent with the measurement applied in previous studies ( e . g . , Fladmoe - Lindquist and Jaque 1995 ; Darr et al . 1995 , Windsperger and Dant , 2006 ) we use “annual training days” ( TDAYS ) as a proxy for intangible system - specific resources of the franchisor . The more intangible and tacit the know - how of the franchisor , the more training days are required to transfer it to the franchisees . As argued by Simonin ( 1999 ) , the higher the degree of intangibility , the more personal ( face - to - face ) knowledge transfer mechanisms are needed for the knowledge transfer . The strength of the brand name ( BRAND ) is measured by an index of four items on a seven - point Likert scale , consistent with Combs and Ketchen ( 2004 ) and Barthélemy ( 2008 ) . Franchisors were asked to rate their systems on brand strength compared to competitors , brand recognition compared to competitors , reputation for quality , and importance of brand name for achieving competitive advantage . Intangible resources of the franchisee . We distinguish between exploration and exploitation capabilities of the franchisee ( March , 1991 ) . Consistent with Windsperger and 13 Dant ( 2006 ) , we measure exploration capabilities ( EXPLORE ) as a formative indicator consisting of two items : innovation capabilities and the local market knowledge . Exploitation capabilities of the franchisee ( EXPLOIT ) are also measured as a formative indicator consisting of two items : quality control and administrative capabilities of the franchisee . Since formative indicators influence the construct , “internal consistency reliability is not an appropriate standard for evaluating the adequacy of the measures” ( Jarvis et al 2003 : 202 ) . Real Options Clause ( RO ) . It is a binary variable . Franchisors were asked to indicate whether the franchise contract contains a real option clause ( as option to acquire the outlet ) ( 0 = no real option clause , 1 = real option clause ) . Control Variables Environmental uncertainty ( ENV ) . According to the transaction cost perspective , environmental uncertainty increases the transaction costs as the costs of the exchange relationship ( Williamson , 1975 ) . Market exchange is hazardous and contracts are costly to specify in uncertain business environments . Uncertain environments may facilitate subsequent contractual renegotiation and adjustments that are especially costly in the presence of specific investments . Hence , high environmental uncertainty may negatively impact the performance of the franchise chain . To measure environmental uncertainty the franchisors were asked to provide their perceptions regarding fluctuations in the outlet level sales , unpredictability of the market , and volatility of the local economic situation . The fourth item regarding the accuracy of sales forecasts was dropped due to low item - total correlation and scale reliability concerns . Sector ( SEC ) : We include a sectoral variable to control for sectoral effects because the know - how intensity of franchise firms varies between product / distribution and service firms 14 ( Zeithaml et al . 1985 ) . Services franchising firms are characterized by more intangible resources compared to product franchising firms . 0 refers to product and distribution franchising and 1 to the service sector . Construct validity and reliability . We use multi - item scales for measuring performance of the franchise systems , brand name , and environmental uncertainty . To check convergent and discriminant validity of the constructs we estimated the average intraconstruct correlation as a ‘‘within measure’’ and the average correlation of each construct’s items with each other construct’s items as a ‘‘between measure’’ . The results are presented in the Table 1 . The ‘‘within’’ average correlations presented on a diagonal line are higher than the ‘‘between’’ average correlations , proving the discriminant validity of these constructs . Cronbach alpha has also been calculated to test the scale reliability ; all three factors have values well above the recommended cut - off value of 0 . 70 ( Cronbach , 1951 ) : PERFORM = 0 . 836 , BRAND = 0 . 815 , ENV = 0 . 748 < INSERT TABLE 1 HERE > 15 Regression analysis Descriptive statistics and correlations are reported in Table 2 . < INSERT TABLE 2 HERE > We use OLS regression analysis to test the proposed model ( see Figure 1 ) . The dependent variable is the performance of the franchise system ( PERFORM ) . System - specific resourcess of the franchisor ( TDAYS ) , brand name of the franchisor ( BRAND ) , exploration ( EXPLORE ) and exploitation ( EXPLOIT ) capabilities of the franchisees and the real option clause ( RO ) are used as explanatory variables . Sector ( SEC ) and environmental uncertainty ( ENV ) are included in the model as control variables . Hence , we estimate the following regression equation : PERFORM = α 0 + α 1 lgTDAYS + α 2 BRAND + α 3 EXPLORE + α 4 EXPLOIT + α 5 RO + α 6 ENV + α 7 SEC + ε According to the resource - based view , we hypothesize positive effects of system - specific resources ( TDAYS ) , brand name ( BRAND ) , exploration ( EXPLORE ) and exploitation ( EXPLOIT ) capabilities of the franchisee on performance of the franchise networks . In addition , we hypothesize that the more intangible exploration assets have a stronger impact on performance than the less intangible exploitation assets . Based on the real options perspective , we expect a positive effect of the real option clause ( RO ) on performance of the franchise systems . First , we conduct an OLS regression analysis with only control variables ( Model 1 ) . Both environmental uncertainly and sector vary negatively with performance . The coefficient of environmental uncertainty is highly significant supporting the negative performance effect of high transaction costs due to higher uncertainty . 16 Second , we add the resource - based variables to the ( Model 1 ) : system - specific resources and brand name of the franchisor , as well as exploration and exploitation capabilities of the franchisees ( Model 2 ) . The results of the regression analysis are presented in the Table 3 . < INSERT TABLE 3 HERE > The coefficients of system - specific resources and brand name are positive and highly significant . This result confirms hypotheses 1 and 2 . The coefficient of the exploration capabilities of the franchisee is also positive and significant , providing strong support for hypothesis 3 . The coefficient of the exploitation capabilities is negative and significant , not providing support for the hypothesis 4 . Hypothesis 5 states that the impact of the more intangible local market resources of the franchisee ( exploration capabilities ) on performance is stronger compared to the less intangible resources ( exploitation capabilities ) . Our data provide support for this hypothesis . Finally , we add the real option variable to the regression model , see Model 3 . The coefficients of system - specific resources and brand name assets of the franchisor as well as exploration assets of the franchisee are consistent with the results in Model 2 . The coefficient of the real options variable is positive and significant , supporting hypothesis 6 . DISCUSSION The aim of this study is to contribute to the literature on performance of franchising networks by applying a resource - based and real option perspective . Compared to previous studies that linked performance to governance / strategy fit ( Sorenson , and Sørensen , 2001 ; Yin and Zajac , 2004 , Barthélemy , 2008 ) , we present a resource - based and real option explanation of the performance of franchise networks . According to the resource - based theory only resources , which are difficult to imitate , lead to competitive advantage and superior performance . In the 17 case of franchise networks , resources with low a low degree immitability are the franchisor’s intangible systems - specific know - how and brand name assets and the franchisees’ intangible local market resources ( exploration and exploitation capabilities ) . Our study extends the knowledge - based view used in Barthelemy ( 2008 ) by investigating the impact of franchisee’s intangible resources ( exploration and exploitation capabilities ) , additionally to brand name and system - specific resources of the franchisor . Using a cross - sectional sample of the franchising companies from Germany , we find significant support that intangible assets of both franchisor and franchisee are necessary to achieve competitive advantage and superior performance . Furthermore , responding to the call for greater theoretical diversity in the study of franchising ( Combs et al , 2004 ) our study adopted a real option perspective to generate hypotheses about performance of the franchise networks . Our data show that the inclusion of the real option clause in the franchise contract strongly increases the franchise network performance due to the franchisor’s higher incentive for intangible relationship - specific investments . The study has important implications for the franchisors : First , the intangible resources in the network are the main performance drivers ! The franchisors have to invest in the development of the brand name and system - specific resources to create competitive advantage . In addition , it is important for the success of the system that they make use of franchisees’ innovation capabilities and their intangible local market knowledge . Second , the inclusion of the real option clause in the franchise contract increases the system performance , because it gives the franchisor more managerial flexibility to acquire the best performing franchise outlets and strengthens his / her incentives for relation - specific investments . 18 References Armstrong , J . S . and Overton , T . S ( 1977 ) Estimating Non - Response Bias in Mail Survey . avenues to greater theoretical diversity . Journal of Management . 30 , ( 6 ) , 907 - 931 . Barney J . ( 1991 ) . Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage . Journal of Management 17 : 99 – 120 . Barthélemy , J . ( 2008 ) . Opportunism , knowledge , and the performance of franchise chains . Strategic Management Journal , 29 ( 13 ) , 1451 - 1463 . Bowman , E . H . , & Hurry , D . ( 1993 ) . Strategy through real option lens : an integrated view of resource investments and the incremental - choice process . The Academy of Management Review , 18 ( 4 ) , 760 - 782 . Bradach , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Using the plural form in the management of restaurant chains . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 , 276 - 303 . Chi , T . , McGuire , D . J . ( 1996 ) . Collaborative ventures and value of learning : Integrating the transaction cost and strategic option perspectives on the choice of market entry modes . Journal of International Business Studies 27 ( 2 ) : 285 - 307 . Combs , J . G . , & Ketchen , D . J . ( 2004 ) . A strategic groups approach to the franchising - performance relationship . Journal of Business Venturing , 19 ( 6 ) , 877 - 897 . Combs , J . G . , Michael , S . C . , & Castrogiovanni , G . J . ( 2004 ) . Franchising : a review and avenues to greater diversity . Journal of Management 30 ( 6 ) , 907 - 931 . Cronbach , L . J . ( 1951 ) . Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests . Psychometrika , 16 ( 3 ) , 297 - 334 . Darr , E . D . , L . Argote , D . Epple . ( 1995 ) . The acquisition , transfer , and depreciation of knowledge in service organizations : Productivity in franchises . Management Science , 41 ( 11 ) 1750 – 1762 . 19 Diamantopoulos , A . , Winkelhofer , H . ( 2001 ) . Index construction with formative indicators : an alternative to scale development . Journal of Marketing Research 38 ( 2 ) : 269 - 277 . Dyer , Jeffrey H . ( 1996 ) . " Specialized Supplier Networks as a Source of Competitive Advantage : Evidence from the Auto Industry , " Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 17 , Issue 4 , 271 - 292 . Elango , B . , Fried , V . H . ( 1997 ) . Franchising Research : A Literature Review and Synthesis . Journal of Small Business Management , 35 ( 3 ) : 68 - 81 . Folta , T . B . and Leiblein , M . J . ( 1994 ) . Technology Acquisition and the Choice of Governance by Established Firms : Insights from Option Theory in a Multinomial Logit Model . Academy of Management Proceedings , Dallas , Texas . Hall , R . ( 1993 ) . A framework linking intangible resources and capabilities to sustainable competitive advantage . Strategic Management Journal , 14 ( 8 ) , 607 - 618 . Jarvis , C . B . , Mackenzie , S . B . , Podsakoff P . M . ( 2003 ) . A critical review of construct indicators and measurement model misspecification in marketing and consumer research . Journal of Consumer Research 30 : 199 - 218 . Klein , B . , & Leffler , K . B . ( 1981 ) . The role of market forces in assuring contractual performance . The Journal of Political Economy , 89 ( 4 ) , 615 - 641 . Leiblein , M . , Miller , D . ( 2003 ) . An empirical examination of transaction - and - firm level influences on the vertical boundaries of the firm . Strategic Management Journal , 24 ( 9 ) , 839 – 859 . Leiblein . , M . ( 2003 ) . The choice of organizational governance form and performance : Predictions from transaction cost , resource - based , and real options theories . Journal of Management , 29 ( 6 ) , 937 – 961 . Levinthal , D . A . , March J . G . ( 1993 ) . The Myopia of Learning , Strategic Management Journal , 14 , 95 - 112 . 20 March , J . ( 1991 ) . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organization Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 71 - 87 . McDonald R , Siegel D . ( 1986 ) . The value of waiting to invest . Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 ( 4 ) : 707 – 727 . Miller , K . D . , Folta , T . B . ( 2002 ) . “Option Value and Entry Timing . ” Strategic Management Journal , 23 : 655 - 665 . Mitsuhashi , H . , Shane , S . , Sine , W . D . ( 2008 ) Organization governance form in franchising : efficient contracting or organizational momentum ? Strategic Management Journal , 29 , 1127 – 1136 Norton , S . W . ( 1988 ) . “Franchising , Brand Name Capital , and the Entrepreneurial Capacity Problem . ” Strategic Management Journal . 9 , 103 – 114 . Oxenfeldt , A . R . , & Kelly , A . O . ( 1968 – 1969 ) . Will successful franchise systems ultimately become wholly - owned chains ? Journal of Retailing , 44 : 69 – 83 . Shane , S . ( 1998 ) . Making new franchise systems work . Strategic Management Journal 19 ( 7 ) : 697 – 707 . Shane , S . ( 1996 ) . Hybrid organizational arrangements and their implications for firm growth and survival : A study of new franchisors . Academy of Management Journal , 39 ( 1 ) , pp . 216 - 234 . Shane , S . , Foo , M . ( 1999 ) . New firm survival : An institutional explanation for franchisor mortality . Management Science , 25 ( 2 ) : 142 - 159 . Simonin , B . L . ( 1999 ) . Ambiguity and the process of knowledge transfer in strategic alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 20 ( 7 ) , 595 – 623 . Sorenson , O . , Sørensen , J . B . ( 2001 ) . Finding the right mix : franchising , organizational learning , and chain performance . Strategic Management Journal 22 : 713 - 724 . 21 Watson , A . , Stanworth , J . , Healeas , S . , Purdyb , D . and Stanworth , C . ( 2005 ) , “Retail franchising : an intellectual capital perspective” , Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services , 12 , 25 - 34 . Wernerfelt B . ( 1984 ) . A resource - based view of the firm . Strategic Management Journal 5 ( 2 ) : 171 – 180 . Williamson , Oliver E . ( 1975 ) . Markets and Hierarchies : Analysis and Antitrust Implications . New York : Free Press . Windsperger , J . ( 2002 ) . The Structure of Ownership Rights in Franchising : An Incomplete Contracting View . European Journal of Law and Economics , 13 : 129 - 142 . Windsperger , J . , R . Dant ( 2006 ) , Contractibility and Ownership Redirection in Franchising : A Property Rights View , Journal of Retailing , 82 ( 3 ) , 259 - 72 . Yin . , X ; Zajac E . J . ( 2004 ) . The Strategy / Governance Structure Fit Relationship : Theory and Evidence in Franchising Arrangements . ” Strategic Management Journal , 25 ( 4 ) : 365 - 383 . 22 Figure 1 : Theoretical Model + H3 + H2 Intangible system - specific know - how Brand name Exploration capabilities + H1 Exploitation capabilities + H4 Real option clause Control Variables Sector Trust Environmental uncertainty + H6 PERFORMANCE of the franchise system + H5 23 Table 1 : Average within / between correlations BRAND PERFORM ENV BRAND 0 . 62339 PERFORM 0 . 264735 0 . 402562 ENV - 0 . 06704 - 0 . 15245 0 . 539696 24 Table 2 : Descriptive Statistics * * . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 01 level ( 2 - tailed ) . * . Correlation is significant at the 0 . 05 level ( 2 - tailed ) . Mean S . D PERFORM TDAYS BRAND EXPLORE EXPLOIT RO ENV SEC PERFORM 4 . 323 1 . 034 1 TDAYS 1 . 408 . 768 0 . 321 * * 1 BRAND 5 . 633 1 . 098 0 . 406 * * 0 . 039 1 EXPLORE 3 . 021 1 . 319 0 . 090 - 0 . 130 0 . 006 1 EXPLOIT 4 . 000 1 . 485 - 0 . 166 * - 0 . 177 - 0 . 031 0 . 480 * * 1 RO . 63 . 485 0 . 285 * * 0 . 077 0 . 145 - 0 . 040 - 0 . 221 * * 1 ENV 3 . 664 1 . 386 - 0 . 254 * * - 0 . 301 * * - 0 . 077 0 . 080 0 . 159 * - 0 . 184 * 1 SEC . 593 . 493 - 0 . 110 - 0 . 047 - 0 . 067 0 . 113 0 . 244 * * - 0 . 011 0 . 012 1 25 Table 3 : OLS Regression Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Variable Constant 5 . 141 * * * 2 . 592 * * * 2 . 011 * * * ( 0 . 252 ) ( 0 . 621 ) ( 0 . 659 ) SEC - 0 . 220 - 0 . 138 - 0 . 147 ( 0 . 170 ) ( 0 . 168 ) ( 0 . 167 ) ENV - 0 . 188 * * * - 0 . 134 * * - 0 . 091 ( 0 . 059 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 061 ) TDAYS - - - 0 . 316 * * 0 . 322 * * ( 0 . 106 ) ( 0 . 105 ) BRAND - - - 0 . 354 * * * 0 . 355 * * * ( 0 . 077 ) ( 0 . 076 ) EXPLORE - - - 0 . 139 * * 0 . 135 * * ( 0 . 066 ) ( 0 . 066 ) EXPLOIT - - - - 0 . 123 * * - 0 . 087 ( 0 . 060 ) ( 0 . 064 ) RO - - - - - - 0 . 438 * * ( 0 . 174 ) Model Summary N 152 119 117 Model F 6 . 044 * * * 9 . 599 * * * 8 . 923 * * * R 2 0 . 075 0 . 338 0 . 362 Adjusted R 2 0 . 062 0 . 302 0 . 322 Dependent Variable = PERFORM * * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * p < 0 . 05 ; * p < 0 . 1 ; Values in parentheses represent Standard Errors 26 APPENDIX : MEASURES OF THE VARIABLES Performance of the franchise system ( PERFORM ) : Six items measured on a seven point scale , Cronbach alpha = 0 . 836 To which extent did the franchise system achieve the following goals last year ? 1 . System growth 2 . Reduction of costs 3 . Increase of revenues 4 . More innovation 5 . Savings on coordination and control costs 6 . Profit growth Franchisor’s intangible resources : Annual Training Days ( TDAYS ) : Number of franchisee’s training days per year Brand name ( BRAND ) : Four items measured on a seven point scale , Cronbach alpha = 0 . 815 1 . Our brand name is very strong compared to our competitors 2 . The quality of our franchise system has a very good reputation 3 . Our franchise system is well recognized compared to our competitors 4 . Our brand name is very important to achieve a competitive advantage Franchisees’ intangible resources : Exploration capabilities ( EXPLORE ) Two items measured on a seven point scale Franchisee’s know - how advantage compared to company owned outlets evaluated by the franchisor regarding : 1 . Innovation capabilities 2 . Local market knowledge Exploitation assets ( EXPLOIT ) Two items measured on a seven point scale Franchisee’s know - how advantage compared to company owned outlets evaluated by the franchisor regarding : 1 . Quality control 2 . Administrative capabilities 27 Real option clause ( RO ) : A dichotomous variable indicating the presence of the real option clause ( as option to acquire the outlet ) in the franchise contract ( 0 = no real option clause , 1 = real option clause ) Trust ( TRUST ) Four items measured on a seven point scale , Cronbach alpha = 0 . 876 The franchisor has to evaluate trust between him and franchisees : 1 . There is great trust between us and franchisees . 2 . There is an atmosphere of openness and sincerity . 3 . The mutual cooperation is on a partnership basis . 4 . Information exchange is more than agreed . Environmental uncertainty ( ENV ) Four items on a seven point scale , Cronbach alpha = 0 . 748 1 . Sales at the local markets are very unpredictable 2 . It is very difficult to forecast the market development in the local markets 3 . Economic environment is changing quickly in the local markets Sector ( SEC ) Sectoral variable : 0 = Product distribution , 1 = Services .