Requirements to support Collaborative Sensemaking Karthikeyan Umapathy University of North Florida 1 UNF Drive Jacksonville , Florida , USA + 1 - 904 - 620 - 1329 k . umapathy @ unf . edu ABSTRACT Collaborative sensemaking occurs when a group of people with diverse backgrounds engage in the process of making sense of information rich , complex and dynamic situations . Our understanding of collaborative sensemaking and critical functionalities to support such sensemaking is limited . In this paper , based on review of relevant literature , we outline a set of broad requirements critical for supporting collaborative sensemaking . Requirements identified are : support for creating explicit representations , support co - existence of different representations , support for developing shared representation , support for creating representations using templates , providing workspace for developing shared representations , support for building consensus and reaching agreement , support for facilitating and moderating interactions , support for exchanging documents , and support for retrieving and visualizing information . We argue that a collaborative systems designed to satisfy above requirements would provide better support for collaborative sensemaking activities . Categories and Subject Descriptors D . 2 . 1 [ Requirements / Specifications ] General Terms Design Keywords Collaborative sensemaking , requirements , collaborative systems . 1 . INTRODUCTION Sensemaking can be defined as a process through which a person develops an understanding of some information or a particular situation in a given context . With current technological advancement in storing large amounts of information , we are increasingly facing information rich , complex and dynamic situations . It is the nature of these situations that requires a diverse group of people to develop a shared understanding of the context , collaboratively make sense of the situations , and make a group decision about actions to be taken . For instance , these situations can occur in military coalition operations [ 1 ] , emergency rooms in hospital [ 2 ] , pre - design stage among architects [ 3 ] , and collaborative Web searches [ 4 ] . When a diverse group of people collaboratively engage to make sense and gain a shared understanding of a complex information or situation , it is known as collaborative sensemaking . There has been a considerable amount of research on sensemaking at the individual level ; however , research is limited with respect to how sensemaking occurs in groups [ 4 ] . There have been few research efforts to develop collaborative systems to support collaborative sensemaking . Some of these collaborative systems are focused on mechanisms to retrieve and visualize relevant information , and / or to support for collaborative activities . Due to our lack of understanding on practical needs to support collaborative sensemaking , it is not clear whether these collaborative systems can provide adequate support . In this paper , we surveyed literature in different research areas relevant to collaborative sensemaking and developed a broad set of requirements that are necessary to provide realistic support for collaborative sensemaking . 2 . COLLABORATIVE SENSEMAKING Sensemaking can be characterized as continuous effort to understand ambiguous and uncertain context that may involve people , object , places , and events [ 5 ] . Sensemaking usually occurs when individuals are faced with obstacles impeding their attempts to reach a goal [ 6 ] . Sensemaking is considered as a process of overcoming knowledge gaps preventing an individual moving forward towards the goal [ 7 ] . In order to overcome knowledge gaps , individuals then engage in a process leveraging their experience to make sense of obstacles , and to develop and anticipate future course of actions to overcome obstacles [ 1 ] . During sensemaking processes , individuals search for appropriate knowledge structures ( i . e . , representations ) and try to fit available data / information to the knowledge structures in order to make sense of those obstacles [ 8 ] . Sensemaking process involves finding or constructing representations to understand unfamiliar context based on available information , refining representations when new information becomes available , questioning representation when new data indicates existence of anomalies , and reframing representations when competing explanations exist or new knowledge is generated [ 9 ] . Thus , sensemaking process can be characterized as interplay of searching for information , creating explicit representations of problem , organizing and encoding information to overcome obstacles . Sensemaking can occur at the individual level as well as the group level . Example for individual - level sensemaking would be— reader of this paper making sense of arguments and evidences presented by authors . Example for group - level sensemaking would be—local communities , local leaders , state leaders , national agency ( such as Federal Emergency Management Agency ) officials get together to make sense of an emergency CSCW CIS Workshop’10 , February 7 , 2010 , Savannah , GA , USA . situation and reach consensus on possible course of actions . Sensemaking process that involves a group of people with different worldviews collectively engage in making sense of chaotic and ambiguous situation is known as collaborative sensemaking [ 1 ] . Collaborative sensemaking typically occurs in a context that is continuously shifting and would involve multiple people engaging in sensemaking efforts . Collaborative sensemaking is inherently a multidimensional problem , because each individual would engage in sense - making efforts within and outside their community based on the individual worldviews which may be at odds with others [ 10 ] . In this context , obstacles would appear for “different groups at different times , in different forms , at different levels of comprehension and articulation” [ 10 ] . These obstacles would negatively interfere with collaborative sensemaking process . To overcome these obstacles , collaborators must spend a considerable amount of effort collaborating and communicating with each other to achieve consensus on a shared representation structure for the context as well as on their understanding ( i . e . , meaning ) of that representation [ 11 ] . Collaborators would need robust collaborative systems support to help them with their collaborative sensemaking process . Collaborative systems must be able to support both individual and collaborative sensemaking process . Collaborative systems should aid sensemaking process by providing collaborators capability “to infer some idea of what they have , what they want , why they can’t get it , and why it may not be worth getting in the first place” [ 12 ] . However , there is lack of adequate tool support due to our limited understanding of collaborative sensemaking and particularly due to the lack of understanding on requirements to guide the systems development . In the next section , we develop a set of requirements that must be satisfied by collaborative systems to support collaborative sensemaking . 3 . A SET OF BROAD REQUIREMENTS FOR SUPPORTING COLLABORATIVE SENSEMAKING Fundamental activities that are crucial to collaborative sensemaking process include : constructing and sharing knowledge ; developing shared knowledge collaboratively ; developing shared situation awareness and shared understanding ; and communication , coordination and collaboration required to support above activities . Therefore , we draw upon findings from a set of literature relevant to sensemaking , collaborative knowledge construction and sharing , and computer supported cooperative work , and develop a set of requirements for supporting collaborative sensemaking . In this section , we provide a brief discussion on each of these requirements . 1 . Support for creating explicit representations As mentioned earlier , individuals develop representations to organize their knowledge to gain better understanding of the current context during the sensemaking process . In order to assist the individual sensemaking process , it is important to facilitate them to create explicit representations of their knowledge structures [ 11 ] . Therefore , a collaborative system should provide representational entities that are relevant to those individual domains in order to help them develop representations , and compare and analyze various representations . Through creating these representations , collaborators develop and exchange knowledge with others . 2 . Support co - existence of different representations The availability of different representations to the same context allows collaborators from different communities to develop , exchange , and interpret knowledge using representational entities relevant to their own domains [ 13 ] . Thus allowing co - existence of representations permits each individual to maintain their personal representations . Maintaining personal representations would be beneficial for individuals to internalize unfamiliar knowledge by contextualizing it in their own terms [ 13 ] . 3 . Support for developing shared representation Allowing collaborators to create explicit representations in their own domain is not adequate to develop a shared understanding among collaborators . In order to reach a shared understanding of the context among collaborators , it is necessary to develop a shared and mutually agreed representation of the context [ 11 ] . Identification of patterns among different representations and ability to aggregate multiple related representations into a single integrated representation ( even though it may not be complete or compatible ) can be of tremendous help for developing shared representation . 4 . Support for creating representations using templates Sensemaking process is considered to be interplay between search for relevant information and search for appropriate representation of the information to gain a better understanding [ 13 ] . Templates can guide the search process of identifying and contextualizing new information . Shared and cross - referenced templates can be helpful in maintaining consistency among different representations and generating an integrated representation as well . Templates can also provide starting points for discussions as each collaborator can see how and where they are supposed to contribute . Templates act as a shared mental model allowing collaborators to organize knowledge common for a particular task at hand [ 10 ] . Templates can provide clarity and coherence to the integrated representation as collaborators use some shared set of conceptualizations to develop their representations . 5 . Provide workspace for developing shared representations In order to develop shared representations , collaborators would require a shared workspace , through which they can share constructive ideas and arguments , and reframe their representations [ 1 ] . A shared workspace should provide a multi - user environment capable of supporting both synchronous and asynchronous coordinated activities [ 3 ] . A shared workspace should support co - manipulation and co - construction activities required for developing shared representations . A shared workspace should also provide support for recording and retrieving representations . Furthermore , in order to support collaborative sensemaking and construction of shared representations , a shared workspace should provide awareness support such as what information is shared , who contribute the idea , what each collaborator is capable of , etc . [ 14 ] . 6 . Support for consensus building and reaching agreement During construction of shared representations , collaborators would encounter conflicting representations and disagree on information represented . Adequate support would be required to mitigate conflicts and reach a shared understanding through the process of communication and negotiation . Multimodal interface and communication systems are necessary to provide realistic support for achieving collaborative sensemaking and resolving disagreements on shared representations [ 15 ] . 7 . Support for facilitating and moderating interactions Most collaborative sensemaking occurs in contexts where collaborators are from different communities . Presence of communication system would not automatically persuade collaborators to engage in socialization process required for intense interaction to reach consensus [ 13 ] . To ensure sufficient interaction among collaborators that is geared towards reaching consensus and achieving collaborative sensemaking , there should be adequate support for facilitating and moderating interactions [ 16 ] . Role of moderator can be assumed by key members of collaborators . Moderators would require support for promoting everyone to contribute , maintaining consistent focus on their purpose , and ensure interaction occurs within certain established norms . 8 . Support for exchanging documents As collaborators come from different communities , their different backgrounds and domain perspectives would inhibit them to internalize new knowledge merely through communication with others [ 13 ] . This inhibition to internalize new knowledge would eventually inhibit collaborators reaching a shared understanding . Collaborators would require support for exchanging information in form of documents and other artifacts to ensure new knowledge is internalized . Adequate support would be required for storing , retrieving , and sharing documents which makes it easier for collaborators to access and internalize new knowledge [ 17 ] . 9 . Support for retrieving and visualizing information During collaborative sensemaking , collaborators handle large amounts of information stored in diverse set of artifacts . To develop a contextual understanding , collaborators would have to retrieve relevant information ; and comprehend , evaluate , and reflect on retrieved information based on what they know [ 18 ] . Thus , to ensure sensemaking process is efficient , collaborators would require adequate support for retrieving and extracting relevant information from multiple sources [ 8 ] . Collaborators would also require adequate visualization support that organizes and displays information in meaningful ways , so that collaborators can maintain awareness and make sense of large amount of information [ 14 ] . Above set of requirements addresses needs of both individual and collaborative sensemaking . Table 1 provides indication on whether a requirement is supporting individual or collaborative sensemaking and dependencies among them . Requirements 1 , 2 , and 9 aids individual sensemaking as they address individual concerns of developing representations of their knowledge and presenting information to aid new knowledge gain . Requirements 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , and 8 aid collaborative sensemaking as they address concerns of sensemaking in groups such as developing shared representation , sharing information and knowledge , and resolving conflicts . Requirement 4 aids both individual and collaborative sensemaking as it supports development of both individual and shared representations . Requirements 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , and 9 can be characterized as ‘must - have’ requirements as they are geared towards supporting core activities of collaborative sensemaking such as knowledge construction , knowledge sharing , gaining new knowledge , communication and collaboration towards reaching consensus and solving the problem , and retrieving and presenting information . Regards to requirement 4 , instead of templates , researchers may choose to use other means appropriate to their context to aid search for information and representation development . Regards to requirement 8 , if collaborators already have a sense of belonging to same community then they may not need moderation to ensure that their interaction and collaborative work is geared towards achieving intended goals . There are some dependencies among requirements as well . Requirement 2 depends upon requirement 1 , because means for developing different representations must be available in order for different representations to co - exist . Requirement 3 depends upon requirements 1 , 5 , and 6 because means for developing representations , a shared space to conduct collaborative work , and means to communicate must exist for supporting development of shared representation . Table 1 . Requirements matrix Requirements 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Individual Sensemaking (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) Collaborative Sensemaking (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) Prerequisite dependencies between requirements 2 (cid:57) 3 (cid:57) (cid:57) (cid:57) 4 . DISCUSSION Supporting collaborative sensemaking activities has become increasingly important as we are facing more complex and information rich situations which require a group of people to collaboratively make sense of the problems and identify a common solution . Although there has been an increasing number of experimental collaboration tools developed specifically for collaborative sensemaking , most of these tools are focused on developing simple functionalities to support collaborative sensemaking activities . For example : compendium [ 10 ] , CoSense [ 4 ] , EWall [ 18 ] , and sketchbook [ 3 ] . These tools are focused on providing different information retrieval mechanisms , different visualizations for presenting information , and different ways to support collaborative activities . Due to our lack of understanding on requirements required to support collaborative sensemaking , it is difficult to assess whether these tools provide realistic collaborative sensemaking support . In this paper , based on a set of literature relevant to collaborative sensemaking , we develop a set of broad requirements that indicates critical functionalities in order to provide realistic support for collaborative sensemaking . These requirements include : ( 1 ) support for creating explicit representations , ( 2 ) support co - existence of different representations , ( 3 ) support for developing shared representation , ( 4 ) support for creating representations using templates , ( 5 ) provide workspace for developing shared representations , ( 6 ) support for consensus building and reaching agreement , ( 7 ) support for facilitating and moderating interactions , ( 8 ) support for exchanging documents , and ( 9 ) support for retrieving and visualizing information . Above requirements also provides indications on research questions that needs to be explored in order to develop collaborative systems that can adequately support collaborative sensemaking , which may include but are not limited to : 1 . How do people build their conceptual representations to make sense of a complex situation ? 2 . How to support co - existence of different representations and maintain consistency among them to allow transformation between representations ? 3 . How to extract related entities and relationships from multiple relevant representations to generate shared representation ? 4 . How to provide guidance for users in identifying right information to search for and in using appropriate representation for new information to make connections with existing information ? 5 . How to develop a workspace that supports co - construction and co - manipulation of shared representation and assists users in maintaining their awareness on construction process and develop shared understanding of the representation ? 6 . How to help users to identify conflicting representations , resolve their disagreements , reach consensus on shared representation , and develop shared understanding ? 7 . How to provide a conductive environment in where everyone is encouraged to participate and contribute in the collaborative sensemaking activities ? 8 . How to support exchange of , storing of , retrieval of , and displaying of different kinds of artifacts ? 9 . How to develop intuitive visualizations that organizes and presents large amount of information to assist sensemaking without causing information overload problems ? By no means above identified requirements are complete . Extensive research need to be conducted to ensure identified requirements is complete and consistent . Future work would focus on identifying and categorizing requirements , validating requirements , and identifying possible techniques to address requirements . As part of future work , we intend to assess existing collaborative tools and multi - user virtual environments such as Second Life for their ability to support collaborative sensemaking , using the requirements identified in this paper . We also plan to address some of the above questions and develop mechanisms to support constructing and sharing representations to aid collaborators with identifying and overcoming knowledge gaps . Retrieving relevant information and providing means for communicating and collaborating are only half the battle . Assisting users with identifying their knowledge gap , helping them overcome that gap by finding new information , making sense of what they found on their own terms , and reaching a shared understanding are the next frontier of collaborative systems design . We argue that addressing requirements identified in this paper would provide a better foundation for developing collaborative systems to support collaborative sensemaking . 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ntuen , C . A . , Munya , P . and Trevino , M . An Approach to Collaborative Sensemaking Process . In Proceedings of the International Command and Control Technology Symposium ( ICCRTS ) ( Cambridge , UK , 2006 ) . Command and Control Research Program ( CCRP ) . [ 2 ] Paul , S . A . , Reddy , M . C . and deFlitch , C . J . Information and communication tools as aids to collaborative sensemaking . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Florence , Italy , 2008 ) . ACM . [ 3 ] Sullivan , J . , Banasiak , M . , Messick , C . and Rimey , R . Social - Technical Tools for Collaborative Sensemaking and Sketching . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( San Diego , CA , USA , 2009 ) . Springer - Verlag . [ 4 ] Paul , S . A . and Morris , M . R . CoSense : enhancing sensemaking for collaborative web search . In Proceedings of the International conference on Human factors in computing systems ( Boston , MA , USA , 2009 ) . ACM . [ 5 ] Klein , G . , Moon , B . and Hoffman , R . R . Making Sense of Sensemaking 1 : Alternative Perspectives . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21 , 4 2006 ) , 70 - 73 . [ 6 ] Dervin , B . An overview of Sense - Making research : Concepts , methods , and results to date . In Proceedings of the International Communication Association annual meeting ( Dallas , TX , 1983 ) . International Communication Association . [ 7 ] Dervin , B . Sense - making theory and practice : an overview of user interests in knowledge seeking and use . Journal of Knowledge Management , 2 , 2 1998 ) , 36 - 46 . [ 8 ] Russell , D . M . , Stefik , M . J . , Pirolli , P . and Card , S . K . The cost structure of sensemaking . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) ( Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 1993 ) . ACM . [ 9 ] Klein , G . , Moon , B . and Hoffman , R . R . Making Sense of Sensemaking 2 : A Macrocognitive Model . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21 , 5 2006 ) , 88 - 92 . [ 10 ] Selvin , A . M . and Shum , S . J . B . Repurposing Requirements : Improving Collaborative Sense - Making over the Lifecycle . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Product - Focused Software Process Improvement ( Oulu , Finland , 1999 ) . Technical Research Center of Finland . [ 11 ] Qu , Y . and Hansen , D . L . Building Shared Understanding in Collaborative Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Sensemaking at the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) ( Florence , Italy , 2008 ) . ACM . [ 12 ] Weick , K . E . and Meader , D . Sensemaking and group support systems . Macmillan , City , 1993 . [ 13 ] Novak , J . Helping Knowledge Cross Boundaries : Using Knowledge Visualization to Support Cross - Community Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) ( Big Island , Hawaii , 2007 ) . IEEE Computer Society . [ 14 ] Convertino , G . , Hong , L . , Nelson , L . , Pirolli , P . and Chi , E . H . Activity Awareness and Social Sensemaking 2 . 0 : Design of a Task Force Workspace . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction - Foundations of Augmented Cognition . Neuroergonomics and Operational Neuroscience ( San Diego , CA , USA , 2009 ) . Springer . [ 15 ] Rauschert , I . , Agrawal , P . , Sharma , R . , Fuhrmann , S . , Brewer , I . and MacEachren , A . Designing a human - centered , multimodal GIS interface to support emergency management . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 10th ACM international symposium on Advances in geographic information systems ( McLean , Virginia , USA , 2002 ) . ACM . [ 16 ] Gurzick , D . and Lutters , W . G . Towards a design theory for online communities . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems and Technology ( DESRIST ) ( Philadelphia , USA , 2009 ) . ACM . [ 17 ] Nosek , J . T . Collaborative Sensemaking Support : Progressing from Portals and Tools to Collaboration Envelopes . International Journal of e - Collaboration , 1 , 2 2005 ) , 25 - 39 . [ 18 ] Keel , P . E . EWall : A visual analytics environment for collaborative sense - making . Information Visualization , 6 , 1 2007 ) , 48 .