Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community Yukta Kakera Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis ykarkera @ iu . edu Sowmya Chandra Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis sowchan @ iu . edu ABSTRACT Voice assistants ( VAs ) such as Siri or Amazon Alexa can beneft older adults by ofering accessible and convenient information op - tions and aiding living independently . Therefore , researchers have considered how VAs might support older adults . Yet , few studies have explored opportunities for VAs to support communities and the implications of this integration . This study investigates older adults’ perceptions of VAs and the potential to extend VA capa - bilities to support an independent living community . We invited independent living residents to virtual community forums and in - terviews to discuss their experiences with VAs , expectations , and concerns for VA integration to support information exchange , well - ness , and social connections in their community . We found that residents desired additional VA capabilities to address unique com - munity needs , including building on existing community capacities to support VA adoption and use . We discuss VA design implica - tions for independent living communities and recommendations to support VA sustainability in a community environment . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered Computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI ; • Social and professional topics → User characteristics ; Age ; Seniors . KEYWORDS older adults , voice assistants , independent living , capacity building , assets ACM Reference Format : Yukta Kakera , Barsa Tandukar , Sowmya Chandra , and Aqueasha Martin - Hammond . 2023 . Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community . In Proceed - ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581561 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581561 Barsa Tandukar Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis btanduka @ iu . edu Aqueasha Martin - Hammond Indiana University – Purdue University Indianapolis aqumarti @ iupui . edu 1 INTRODUCTION The growing ubiquity of voice assistants ( VAs ) such as Siri or Ama - zon Alexa has led to new opportunities to support older adults with completing tasks and obtaining information in their homes . Many studies [ 5 , 6 , 12 , 27 , 35 , 47 , 53 , 54 , 62 ] suggest that older adults generally see potential value in adopting VA devices in their homes for convenience , accessibility , or to support daily tasks . With this rise in VA popularity , senior organizations have also begun to explore how VAs might support older adult communities . Indepen - dent living ( IL ) communities such as senior apartments , retirement communities , or IL communities that are part of continuing care retirement communities ( CCRCs ) and life plan communities ( LPCs ) [ 36 ] often help older adults age - in - place while providing access to care and onsite support ( e . g . , amenities , maintenance , healthcare ) . In recent years , several senior independent living organizations have explored how VA integration in senior communities can help reduce social isolation among older adults by providing companion - ship , especially to those that live alone [ 31 , 61 , 63 ] . Other studies [ 9 , 21 , 27 , 62 , 67 ] have recruited from older adult communities ; how - ever , like other VA research , the focus has primarily been limited to exploring individual uses in individual homes . In contrast to explorations of individual VA use , complementary studies of VA use in families [ 9 ] , caregiving dyads [ 27 ] , and even among older adult residents [ 62 ] suggest that users’ needs and ex - pectations for VAs change in group contexts . For instance , Trajkova and Martin - Hammond [ 62 ] studied individual commercial VA use in an older adult community and found that many residents found existing VA features useful but “ trivial ” and desired future applica - tions that could support continued independent living . While the study focused on understanding individual use and non - use , one of the fndings suggested a need to further explore “ essentia l” use cases of VAs as tools to support connections within the community . Similarly , Corbett and colleagues found that dyads of older adults and caregivers saw commercial VAs as useful for tasks such as enter - tainment and reminders , but they felt that current applications were limited and desired features that could better support collaborative care tasks [ 27 ] . This prior work establishes older adults’ desires and needs for diferent VA features and interactions in group settings to support collaborative and community tasks . However , limited prior work focuses on uncovering potential VA uses in community settings to support participation and a sense of community among members , specifcally among older adults . Further , prior work has noted challenges with older adults’ adopting and accepting VA tech - nologies or their interest waning over time [ 21 , 53 , 62 ] . Therefore , CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . while older adult communities may provide a potentially rich envi - ronment for deploying VA applications , designing for a community environment also introduces complexities . Thus far , we have also not fully explored factors that might help lead to the successful integration and sustainability of VAs within communities of people . This study investigates older adults’ perceptions of VA capabili - ties and the potential to extend these capabilities to an older adult independent living community . We use Chaskin’s framework of community capacity building [ 19 , 20 ] , which centers understand - ing community assets as essential to developing , deploying , and sustaining community - based initiatives , to purposefully explore opportunities for VAs to extend existing community assets and uncover new needed capacities to support VA adoption and sus - tainability within an independent living community . We engaged 38 independent living residents in four virtual community forums and 24 participants in semi - structured interviews to discuss their experiences with VAs and their expectations and concerns for VA integration within their community . We found that residents’ indi - vidual use of VAs aligned with common use cases . However , at the community level , participants desired to leverage VA capabilities to address unique community needs to build on existing community capacities , such as enhancing access to information and resources within the community . Participants also expressed the need for coordinated eforts to build additional capacities that support adop - tion and use among the broader community of residents . Our study represents a frst step in addressing the gap in knowledge of how VAs might be used to support older adults’ participation in commu - nity by acting as an intermediary to connect them with community information , resources , and services and by helping them connect with other community members . Based on our fndings , we ofer three main contributions . • First , we contribute insights into the existing community ca - pacities shared by participants and their needs for additional support . We discuss how voice assistant technologies can support older adults’ communal needs beyond individual use cases and can be leveraged to further build community capacity . • Second , we contribute scenarios of use that may be bene - fcial for supporting older adults in an independent living community , providing new insights on potential VA uses in community environments and guidelines for communal VA application design . • Third , we identify and discuss potential barriers to VA in - tegration and sustainability in an independent senior liv - ing environment . Identifying strategies for increasing the sustainability of community - focused designs is an ongoing challenge in HCI research , and much of the existing VA research focuses on integration in individual homes . There - fore , there is currently little understanding of approaches that may support community - level integration eforts . Based on our fndings , we contribute considerations for capacity building that may support better community - level difusion and sustainability . 2 CAPACITY BUILDING AND TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION IN COMMUNITIES The concept of community - capacity building stems from literature outside of Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) that aims to build and defne principles that can guide the development of sustainable community - based initiatives aligned with the communities’ priori - ties [ 19 ] . Chaskin defnes community capacity as “ the interaction of human , organizational , and social capital existing within a given community that can be leveraged to solve collective problems and improve or maintain the well - being of a given community . It may operate through informal social processes and / or organized eforts by individuals , organizations , and the networks of association among them and between them and the broader systems of which the com - munity is a part” [ 20 ] . Community - based initiatives are often char - acterized by a broad set of principles opposed to a “ well - specifed intervention model ” ; however , emerging frameworks highlight the necessary components for successfully launching an initiative into the community . Chaskin [ 19 ] found that examining community capacity often includes exploring four fundamental characteristics : ( 1 ) a sense of community , ( 2 ) commitment from community mem - bers , ( 3 ) problem - solving abilities , and ( 4 ) access to resources . A sense of community refers to the degree of connectedness among members and a recognition of mutual circumstances [ 19 ] . Sense of community represents the level at which people in a community are connected to each other due to instrumental factors such as cir - cumstance ( living in a housing complex ) or shared use of resources ( neighborhood park ) . Community commitment is the responsibility taken by individuals , groups , and organizations in what happens in the community environment . Problem - solving abilities refer to the community members’ commitment to action and making decisions that impact others in the community . Access to resources refers to available resources within the community . Chaskin also found that a community’s social agency , intent to engage , development of strategies , and mediating circumstances impact an initiative’s outcome [ 19 ] . Thus , understanding these diferent factors can help those developing community initiatives to plan for more sustainable solutions . Within HCI , researchers and practitioners have made similar arguments for designing technologies that are integrated into com - munities . For example , some researchers have examined partici - patory design ( PD ) , a method that emphasizes democratizing the design process , as an approach to technology design in communi - ties [ 16 , 34 ] and within organizations [ 33 ] . Approaches to PD , such as the MUST method , were developed to address the unique needs and challenges that arise when engaging in PD with organizations [ 33 ] . Carroll posits that PD is well - suited for exploring technol - ogy integration in communities [ 16 ] . However , because community environments often have unique challenges and needs , the PD pro - cess must shift slightly from supporting inclusion to supporting the self - actualization of community members . Carroll contends that factors such as lack of resources or technology planning can impact technology integration eforts in a community environment . Yet , it is imperative that community members are involved in develop - ing technologies that afect their activities and experiences [ 16 ] . Similarly , one of the tenants of conducting Action Research ( AR ) in HCI counters the idea that research with communities should Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany be generalizable [ 30 ] . Hayes discusses that those that engage inti - mately with communities understand the need to contextualize and localize fndings [ 30 ] . As such , there should be transparency when developing solutions so that community members and other stake - holders can understand what aspects might be useful to replicate for their setting [ 30 ] . Another approach , assets - based design , has also been found to be useful for engaging in work with communities [ 25 , 49 , 65 , 66 ] . Compared to other approaches , the assets - based approach starts by centering the design process on a community’s strengths and focuses on building upon those strengths [ 25 ] . Be - cause of the focus on strengths , as opposed to defcits , Dickinson and colleagues note that when designing in community settings , the role of the designer shifts from problem - solvers to “ facilitators who work with residents to understand their capacities and lend their expertise to design tools that support the communities’ eforts in ad - dressing local issues ” [ 25 ] . Therefore , leveraging an assets - based approach within communities can help position existing capacities as a central component of the design process [ 25 , 49 , 65 , 66 ] . 2 . 1 Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults As consumer - based voice assistants such as Google Home and Siri have emerged , Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) researchers have investigated how diferent groups use VAs in diferent settings [ 41 , 55 , 57 ] . From this work , we have gained a better understanding of usage patterns [ 10 , 53 ] , needs , and challenges of VAs [ 23 , 26 , 44 ] , but also the possibilities of these devices to support individuals with disabilities [ 2 , 3 , 14 , 52 ] , children [ 9 ] , and those with varied mobility or abilities [ 2 , 3 , 12 , 17 , 56 ] . Older adults ( 55 - 60 years of age or older ) have also been a population of great interest . For example , some suggest that voice assistants are among the most readily implementable emerging technologies to support older adults in the next 10 - 15 years [ 1 ] . Researchers are also investigating how VAs might advance opportunities to support older adults’ independence by exploring their use of these devices and expectations for future applications [ 5 , 6 , 12 , 27 , 35 , 47 , 53 , 54 , 62 ] . Initial fndings suggest that older adults desire to use VAs to aid them at home [ 5 , 6 , 46 , 53 , 59 ] . For instance , older adults perceive voice assistants as helpful in managing daily activities , particularly when living alone [ 6 ] . Older adults with low technical skills perceive VAs as helpful for their daily information needs [ 53 ] , and those with lower incomes perceive VA technologies as potentially useful for making health information tasks more accessible [ 46 ] . Despite older adults’ overall positive impressions of VAs , many studies suggest that older adults still express concerns about adopting VAs . Many of these concerns overlap with concerns raised by other groups of users . For example , privacy is often a top concern among VA users , regardless of age , including beliefs that VAs might be perpetually listening [ 28 , 29 , 32 , 37 , 38 , 40 ] and broader concerns about data privacy [ 13 , 26 ] . Some users fnd that VAs are not as accessible as they might seem [ 2 , 39 , 52 ] and that current VAs might not be as useful for certain situations [ 11 , 41 , 62 ] . Further , while speech recognition advances have improved interactions with voice - based devices , there are still open challenges for creating useable voice - enabled interactions [ 22 , 40 , 42 , 51 ] . However , these interactions can be particularly challenging for older adults , sometimes making VAs more difcult to use than other devices [ 55 , 62 ] . Among older adults , another challenge known to limit adop - tion and use of VAs is the need for more awareness of what the devices can do and fnding appropriate use cases and capabilities that support their needs [ 5 , 27 , 62 ] . Some older adults view the existing capabilities of VAs as less essential to their daily needs and , therefore , desire more meaningful interactions that could support health , wellness , and connecting with others [ 62 ] . Older adults and caregivers also see the potential for current VAs to help them with daily care tasks [ 27 , 67 ] . Still , open design issues with commercial devices can make adoption challenging [ 5 , 6 , 46 , 53 , 62 ] . Some sug - gest that more research is needed to understand barriers to use , desired interactions , and tradeofs to advance VA adoption and use among older adults [ 55 ] . For example , Almujalli found that older adults appreciated VAs for tasks such as reminding them of medica - tions but felt that current VAs had limited features for supporting care [ 5 ] . This paper extends prior work by exploring potential uses in independent living communities , potential challenges that might arise , and older adults’ beliefs about what is needed to support VA integration and sustainability within a community environment . 2 . 2 Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Groups and Communities In the United States , independent senior communities , also known as independent living communities ( IL ) or retirement communities , ofer older adults a way to age independently with a community of peers [ 7 ] . Older adults residing in IL often beneft from shared community amenities and resources while continuing to pursue daily activities outside the community if desired . Therefore , while they live within an IL community , there are usually no restrictions placed on residents’ schedules or movements outside the IL com - munity . While the amenities an IL community provides can vary widely , some of the advantages of these types of communities are the opportunities for sustained social interactions , support through peers in a similar life stage , and reduced household responsibili - ties [ 7 ] . IL communities also provide opportunities for formal and informal support networks , which can assist some older adults in remaining independent longer [ 7 ] . In recent years , there has been increased interest in how VAs might support older adults living in these environments to aid social wellness by reducing social isolation . For example , while living in a senior community can lower risks of social isolation through organized social activities , feelings of loneliness and depression can exist even in these communities as seniors often still have complete autonomy over their daily schedule and coming and going [ 4 ] . In collaboration with the American Association for Retired Persons ( AARP ) , a nonproft serving older adults in the United States , a senior apartment complex deployed VA devices to its residents to reduce social isolation through companionship [ 61 ] . Other organizations have explored similar deployments focusing on social isolation [ 31 , 63 ] or opportunities for VAs to aid care tasks [ 21 ] in older adult communities . For example , Chung and colleagues found that older adults in afordable housing found Google Home useful for everyday tasks and saw it as a potential tool to better support managing emergencies within their residential communities [ 21 ] . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . Despite growing interest in using VAs to support communities of people such as IL communities , much of the literature on VAs has focused on understanding how individuals use these devices in their homes to support day - to - day tasks [ 10 , 53 ] . For instance , Bent - ley and colleagues provide insight into how commercial devices are being used in homes for tasks such as fnding quick information or setting alarms but also found that users tended to use the same commands over and over and explore new commands less often [ 10 ] . Pradhan and colleagues found that older adults who were infrequent technology users made similar commands during initial explorations of a commercial voice assistant ; however , over time the use of some commands lessened as participants tended to use the device as a means to fnd quick information [ 53 ] . Neverthe - less , apart from studies to understand usage , emerging literature investigates VA use among groups of people to understand how interaction needs and expectations for features change in group contexts and how group dynamics might alter needs and use . Prior work on family VA use has explored how interactions might change in a family dynamic [ 9 , 43 ] . Lovato and colleagues examined how families engage with VA devices in the home , emphasizing the understanding of children’s interactions with VAs [ 43 ] . From this work , they identifed a need to tailor answers to unique users and requirements for closer consideration and support for how children interact with VA devices . Beneteau and colleagues also focused on families but investigated how families learned to use their devices [ 9 ] . They suggest opportunities for VAs to improve repair when acting within dynamic family conversations . Similar explorations of VA group interactions have also focused on supporting older adult interactions . Several researchers have studied how VAs might support older adult – caregiver dyads [ 27 , 59 , 67 ] . For example , Cor - bett and colleagues found that older adults and caregivers saw VAs as useful for information , entertainment purposes , and reminders but desired more capabilities explicitly related to care [ 27 ] . There - fore , studies’ fndings have shown benefts for exploring VA use among groups of individuals . However , we still know little about integrating VAs in larger communities of people and how they might support community participation . Given the potentially unique needs and assets of older adults living in senior communities , our work builds on prior work by contributing older adults’ perspectives of how VAs might support them as members of an independent living community . Our work explicitly examines VAs as tools to aid individual participation in the community by leveraging and extending community assets . In addition , given the prior challenges of VA adoption among older adults , we take an assets - based approach to research and design [ 25 , 49 , 65 ] , examining desired uses and the role of community capacity building and leveraging community assets for integrating VAs in a community setting . By exploring desired use and needs for community capacity building , we highlight potential approaches for overcoming known barriers to adopting VA applications by older adults and within community settings . We additionally ex - amine existing community capacities to better understand aspects of the community environment that might afect integration and sustainability . 3 METHODS The qualitative study was conducted in two phases . We conducted four virtual community forums ( N = 38 ) in partnership with residents and technical staf , followed by semi - structured interviews ( N = 24 ) with residents of a multi - site life plan community ( LPC ) . The goal of the forums was to engage community members in semi - structured discussions of how voice assistant ( VAs ) technologies might be integrated to support their daily activities as independent living residents . Following the forums , we conducted semi - structured in - terviews with residents to explore common challenges community members raised in forums and potential opportunities for voice assistant technologies to support their community . Our research was guided by the following questions : • RQ1 : What benefts or concerns do residents have regarding VAs supporting an independent living community ? • RQ2 : What , if any , potential future uses of VAs do partic - ipants desire to support participation in the independent living community ? • RQ3 : What is needed to integrate VAs in an independent living community setting ? What , if any , organizational con - cerns need to be considered ? All participants were recruited by email . The research team crafted a recruitment email for the organization’s staf to share with residents , including those that had participated in a prior VA pilot program . For forums , the email included the dates and invited residents to an open discussion about adopting and using VA technologies within the community . Residents were encouraged to attend any date that ft their schedules . Residents were encouraged to reach out to researchers for interviews to coordinate a meeting time . 3 . 1 Research Ethics Our study , its documents , and procedures were reviewed and ap - proved by the Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) at our university . Participants were informed about the study goals , procedures , ben - efts , and risks during the recruitment process and our intention to record and publish fndings anonymously from the forum dis - cussions and interviews . A study information sheet was sent along with the recruitment emails so that participants could make an informed decision of whether they wished to participate . At the beginning of each forum and interview session , we again shared information about the study and obtained permission to record discussions . Participants were also notifed of the potential risks to privacy and confdentiality , eforts we put in place to reduce risks to privacy and confdentiality , and their right to leave the forum or interview at any time . 3 . 2 Study Environment and Context We partnered with three independent living community sites that were part of a multi - site Life Plan Community ( LPC ) for this study . In the United States , an LPC is a type of senior living commu - nity providing continuing care services ranging from independent living to assistive and nursing care in one location [ 36 ] . For this study , we partnered with an independent living community , which includes private homes with shared amenities and community re - sources ; however , residents remain independent in their movements . Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 1 : Number and VA Experience of Participants in Community Forums Forum Number of Participants Voice - Assistant Experience Forum # 1 9 Past participants of VA pilot Forum # 2 9 Past participants of VA pilot Forum # 3 5 Past participants of VA pilot Forum # 4 15 Residents interested in VA technologies The three diferent community sites we partnered with were lo - cated at diferent locations in the northeastern United States . The community’s staf and residents were actively exploring “smart technologies , ” including voice assistants and other voice - activated technologies to support residents throughout the diferent loca - tions with information access and accessibility . Our partnership with this community was strategic in that we were aware of the organization’s eforts to formally integrate “smart technologies , ” specifcally voice assistants , into the community . In addition , the community members ( residents ) were highly involved in exploring VA technologies which outwardly refected two of the four com - ponents ( sense of community and commitment from community members ) defned by Chaskin [ 19 ] as necessary to build community capacity for an initiative . We explore these components along with the others in this paper . Therefore , our partnership aligned with our research goal of understanding how voice assistant technologies might support older adults as residents of a shared community . 3 . 3 Community Forums Four virtual community forums were conducted , each including members from the research team , technical staf leadership who acted as an ally to the residents and the research team , and residents with interest or concerns about integrating VA technologies in the community . Our decision to host a forum was inspired by prior HCI work examining civic technologies’ use in communities [ 25 , 48 ] . We thus chose a community forum in the frst phase of research to build trust among the community members and build confdence that their feedback would also be heard by those who could make changes within the local community ( i . e . , the technical staf ) . Thirty - eight residents attended across the four forums . All residents were 65 years of age or older , as required for join - ing the community . Most participants ( N ∼ 23 ) in the forums were involved in an ongoing community pilot program that provided residents with voice - only Amazon Echo devices supported onsite by the technical staf for use in their homes ( Table 1 ) . At the time of the study , these residents had been a part of the program for at least two years . Some of the residents involved in the pilot were also actively involved in testing a new Alexa application developed for the community that allowed them to look up events happening in the organization . However , at the time of the study , the applica - tion was not available to the wider community of residents . The application was only available at two locations and was still in the testing and feedback phase . Therefore , the application had open issues that caused the organization to pause its development after one year . The fourth forum included a mix of residents , including other residents interested in VA technologies that were not a part of the pilot program . As part of the ongoing work with this community , all four fo - rums began with a 10 - minute presentation where the research team reported results from a prior study focused on how residents used their Alexa during the pilot . This presentation focused on reporting individual generic uses ( e . g . , playing music , jokes , reminders ) of Alexa by pilot participants in their homes . Following the 10 - minute presentation , we transitioned into open discussion , where we asked participants to share their experiences using VAs and thoughts about how one might successfully introduce VAs or other voice - activated devices to support the independent living environment . We used an open - forum format where participants could freely express concerns , make comments , engage with technical staf rep - resentatives , or raise new questions ; therefore , participants were encouraged to participate as they saw ft . However , we did take a semi - structured approach to guide discussions . We used a set of questions to prompt discussions as needed during the forum if a discussion did not arise naturally to ensure coverage of topics . The question topics focused on understanding current uses of VAs , de - sires for VA support within the community , and concerns / questions about VA integration in the community . All participants had an opportunity to respond to questions and make comments ( e . g . , ex - press agreement , disagreement , raise new questions ) in the forums verbally or through chat . However , as in any forum , some par - ticipants did not actively participate through either mechanism , and we cannot confrm or deny agreement with other participants’ responses . To provide more context about the number of participants ac - tively participating in discussions , we examined the number of verbal responses from diferent participants across focus groups . We found that we had high participation ( ∼ 93 % ) among those that engaged verbally in discussions , with 28 of the 38 participants pro - viding verbal responses or comments during sessions . However , aligned with other studies that have used forums as a method of data collection [ 25 , 48 ] , we report participation as those that at - tended and voluntarily chose to engage in the forum as community members , whether verbally or non - verbally . Staf also participated as needed during the forum , responding to resident questions , and providing comments related to the feasibility of requests at the organizational level and their needs as far as being able to advance the shared vision of integrating VAs in the community . Part of the goal of the forums was to encourage open dialog between technical staf ( who would be responsible for maintaining any new system ) and the residents who would be primary users . However , for our study , we did not interview staf directly as they were interested in learning about what residents may want from voice technologies so that they could address expectations about the maintenance and feasibility of a system . Each forum lasted about one hour . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . Table 2 : Semi - structured Interview Participants ID ( Gender ) Age Education Disabilities # Years Using Voice VA Speaker VA Mobile Voice Search Smart Home P1 ( F ) > 90 Postgraduate Blind 2 X X P2 ( F ) > 90 Some college 1 . 5 X X P3 ( F ) 85 - 89 Some college Mobility 2 - 5 X X P4 ( F ) 75 - 79 Postgraduate < 1 X X P5 ( F ) 85 - 89 Postgraduate Unsure X P6 ( M ) 75 - 79 Postgraduate 2 - 5 X X X X P7 ( F ) 80 - 84 Postgraduate Deaf 2 - 5 X X P8 ( F ) > 90 Postgraduate Deaf > 10 X X X P9 ( M ) 85 - 89 Postgraduate Legally Blind 1 . 5 X X X P10 ( F ) 70 - 74 Postgraduate 2 X X P11 ( M ) > 90 Postgraduate Blind , Mobility < 1 X X P12 ( F ) 80 - 84 Some college < 1 X P14 ( F ) 75 - 79 Postgraduate Mobility < 1 X X P16 ( M ) 80 - 84 Postgraduate 2 - 5 X X X X P17 ( F ) 80 - 84 Doctorate Unsure X P18 ( F ) 75 - 79 Prof . Degree Unsure X X P19 ( M ) 75 - 79 Doctorate 2 - 5 X X X P20 ( F ) 80 - 84 Prof . Degree 2 - 5 X X P21 ( F ) 75 - 79 4 - Yr . College 2 - 5 X X X P22 ( M ) 75 - 79 Doctorate 2 - 5 X X X P23 ( M ) 75 - 79 4 - Yr College > 10 X X X X X P13 ( F ) 85 - 89 Postgraduate Unsure 3 . 4 Semi - Structured Interviews Following forums , we conducted semi - structured interviews . In - terviews were conducted to complement forums to gain additional insight into potential uses , to understand the existing capacities available in the community , and to understand residents’ opin - ions on VA integration . Interview topics focused on understanding what residents saw as strengths ( available capacities ) related to three themes that emerged as potentials for VA integration in their community : fnding information , accessing services , and connect - ing with others in their community . Interviews were opened to the broader community of residents . All interview sessions lasted about one hour . We interviewed 24 residents across the three sites . Interview participants were primarily female ( 68 . 2 % ) and White / Caucasian ( 91 % ) . Participants had at least some college and were familiar with diferent types of voice technologies ( Table 2 ) . Twenty - four participants completed interviews , but two , P15 and P24 , did not provide demographics . Interview participants were provided with a $ 20 gift card for their time . 3 . 5 Data Collection and Analysis All forum and interview sessions were recorded and later tran - scribed . For analysis , we used thematic analysis [ 24 ] . The analysis was conducted in two phases . For forums and interviews , two re - search team members independently read each forum and interview transcript , adding memos , and assigning an initial set of inductive codes to transcripts . The team then met several times to discuss and iteratively reconcile codes to create a codebook . After coming to a consensus , one team member , guided by the codebook , coded each of the forum transcripts . The themes that emerged from forum data were used to inform the direction of the interviews . The analysis of the forum data resulted in 22 sub - codes , fve codes , and three themes ( Figure 1 ) . The themes emerging from interview data were similar to those from forums except for adding a new theme ( existing community capacities ) . Using Chaskin’s [ 20 ] framework for examining com - munity capacity , we explored the foundations already in place to support voice assistant technology integration related to the use cases that emerged from forums . Additional themes focused on 1 ) existing sense of community , ( 2 ) existing access to community resources , ( 3 ) commitment from community members in the forms of existing VA use and interest , and ( 4 ) existing attempts to problem solve . We deductively applied these codes to tran - scripts to draw out quotes related to existing community capacity . Interview codes regarding envisioned VA uses for independent liv - ing were similar to forums ; however , through interviews , we gained more insight into how participants thought these tools should func - tion within the community . 4 FINDINGS We frst report the existing capacities in the community that were available to community members tied to desired VA uses . We then discuss themes that emerged from our data related to residents’ initial beliefs about how VAs could support them as members of an independent living community . Finally , we report fndings related Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 1 : Examples of themes and codes used to characterize forum transcript data . to potential barriers that would need to be overcome to support more widespread VA adoption and sustainability . 4 . 1 Existing Community Capacities We found that the sense of community among residents was rela - tively high , and as a result , many of the social activities provided in the community were organized by residents or were resident - led . As such , participants shared many ways they were involved in the community , including serving on civic committees , regular participation in community activities , coordinating and managing social events , and serving on the resident council and other task forces . For example , P23 shared , “ Well , I try to get involved as much as possible , I’m probably more physically able to move around than [ my wife ] . I swim in the pool two to three times a week . I get involved in some of the activities . There’s a singing group I’ve re - signed up for I’ve signed up for this play reading group . We play cards once a week to play Bridge . . . And when [ the community ] ofers trips and events , we generally take them up on it . . . And I’m on the movie committee and other committees . ” Many of the residents we talked with shared a sense of pride in being involved in their community and being able to contribute actively . Residents also noted that the community already had access to a myriad of resources , including services provided by the community and many others that were resident - led eforts to share informa - tion and bring people together . For example , the community had established various communication and information mechanisms to keep residents informed . Resources included a weekly newslet - ter , internal website , community calendars , shelf - notice ( paper no - tices placed in mailboxes ) , a dedicated TV channel , digital message boards , and community boards and listservs . Participants felt the community did a fairly good job communicating information about things happening . P7 shared that a dedicated resident committee led a lot of the communication about events and activities , which was one of the reasons the communication was reasonably good . However , P7 also noted , “ They had a committee a couple of years ago , chaired by a friend of mine , a communications committee to increase communications . And I know as many times as we sometimes publicize things , people , you know , a lot of it goes over because we have so much communication . ” Residents also shared that the community had various opportu - nities for residents to connect with one another . The community hosted shared entertainment activities and other organized social events and included information about resident interests through bios and a directory on their internal website . Residents also led many organized social activities and were involved in civic work and virtual meetings to meet others in the community . However , one of the most mentioned ways of meeting people was through organized meals . Several residents discussed that they would meet and sit with new people at meals or coordinate meals with people they would like to get to know to meet their neighbors and make new friends . P22 shared , “ But well , let me add that the primary way in which people on a regular basis get together here is at mealtime ; we’re required to take one meal a day , and that’s dinner at the facility , and that’s the time when people traditionally have gotten together and made new friends and met people and so on . There also are a variety of social clubs , whether it’s playing cards or getting together to read plays , or to write poetry or to or book groups there , there are lots of those kinds of things , which during the pandemic couldn’t meet because we couldn’t meet face to face . ” Yet , despite the many positives in the community , residents shared some challenges with accessing information and connecting with others . For example , P9 , who self - identifed as blind , shared that it could also be challenging to access information at times . They explained , “It’s not always consistently provided [ information ] , you know , all the residents get a ledge notice because it’s dropped at their apartment . . . And that’s the one foolproof way of getting the infor - mation out . Of course , the other end of it is that my wife , fortunately , sees so she can read it to me . But for those of us that may be handicap , using vision as an example , they can’t read it themselves and some - times that becomes a problem unless they can’t fnd somebody to read it for them . . . I guess what I’m saying is the communication is not comprehensive enough on a consistent basis to cover all the diferent disciplines and modes of communication needed in our community which numbers over 500 people now . ” Therefore , many participants CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . shared that they wanted better ways to easily access information and coordinate connections with other residents , including more options to make information and connecting more inclusive . They saw VAs as a possible way to extend access to information , services , and resources already available in the community . 4 . 2 Extending Community Capacities Through Voice Assistant Integration Aligned with prior work [ 5 , 6 , 53 , 62 ] , we found that many of the older adults that participated in our studies were using VAs in their individual residences to support everyday tasks such as setting reminders , music , and checking time . While the community was actively looking at ways to leverage VA technologies to improve communications and inclusion , the community’s vision of VAs to support communications had yet to be fully realized at the time of the study . Nevertheless , we found that a common opinion among residents was that they felt that the options available in commercial VAs did not go far enough for community use . P2 , F1 , who self - identifed as blind , shared : " I think if this , Alexa , is not going to have a meaningful place in our day - to - day environment in communica - tion and keeping us up to speed as to what’s going on in [ the community ] and what we need to know , it is not going to be very useful . It’s just a generic thing . I could go out and hire some other company or whatever it is to provide that . So , I think if you really want to be useful in terms of adapting to the needs of an independent living support facility with seniors in it , you’re going to have to be broader and more in - depth and directly related to our environment here as to answering questions that relate to our day - to - day needs and fulfllment of our requirements to help us . " Other residents also expressed that if voice technologies were to be integrated at the community level , there should be more coor - dinated eforts to leverage VA technology to enhance the existing capacities in the community - supporting access to information and resources and extending existing capacities for community building . Participants shared three ways that they envisioned VA applications could support them further : ( 1 ) improving informa - tion delivery and access , ( 2 ) enhancing existing services , and ( 3 ) facilitating connections . ‘ Providing assistance’ was also mentioned , but the main driver behind participants’ suggestions were still to improve access to existing community capacities to promote more equitable access for those with disabilities or no computer access . 4 . 2 . 1 Improving Information Delivery and Access . Participants felt that utilizing VAs could make accessing information within the community more convenient and inclusive . In terms of improv - ing information access , participants were particularly interested in the capabilities of voice systems for reducing the amount of efort needed to gather and manage information , lessening some of the challenges they experienced coordinating among the diferent in - formation sources provided by the community . P4 , F4 shared , “ We had asked [ the organization ] and are still looking forward to a time when we can ask Alexa about our dining and events of the day and so forth . . . I think that that will be wonderful once we can get that . It’s occurring to me something in addition , right now , it would be great if we could ask Alexa what are the community rules about the COVID issue . To be able to say , ‘Alexa , am I allowed to have a visitor on campus ? ’ And it would answer , ‘Yes if you call so - and - so . ’ That kind of thing . ” Other participants shared that they envisioned that VAs could help them conveniently keep up with daily community activities . Participants discussed that an important component of the VA design that would increase usefulness would be to have the infor - mation be personalized to their specifc community , which could , in addition , provide another potentially more accessible way for residents to access information . An interview participant , P3 , com - mented , “ Well , you know , you can personalize it to [ the community ] . I mean , that’d be nice . Maybe you can improve on that technology , of being able to ask Alexa more things about what’s going on today [ in the community ] . Especially if you haven’t , or if you can’t read the [ newsletter ] , you don’t have a tele century machine . ” While some participants felt the community provided a good variety of com - munication mediums for its residents , some participants felt that VAs could help to improve access to information , promoting better inclusion for the diverse body of residents within the community by providing alternative options . One participant , FG1 , P2 shared , “ The more methodologies that we have for communicating , the better . There’s not just one system that’s going to do it all . And there’s some of us that have incapacities , disabilities , physical , mental challenges , and things of that nature , that we can’t use all of those things [ that are currently available ] . And , of course , with a senior community , redundancy helps because we tend to forget and things of that nature , so it’s a bitter reminder . . . So , I know there’s a lot out there , but the more , the merrier , I guess the point I’m making and looking at it from a broad accessibility standpoint . . . we need something that’s more accessible . ” 4 . 2 . 2 Enhancing Existing Services . Forum and interview partici - pants also expressed interest in using VAs to enhance existing services provided by the independent living community . Early stud - ies investigating older adults’ reasons for moving to independent living communities fnd that most do so to anticipate future needs as they age , reducing the amount of upkeep and maintenance they need to do and the desire to live independently without “burdening” others [ 36 ] . Many residents we talked to shared similar reasons for joining their community . However , they also discussed that some - times accessing the services could be challenging . Therefore , they believed that VAs could help them better connect with community services and amenities that would support remaining independent . Participants suggested that VAs could help them access services provided by the organization , such as signing up for trips to the grocery store , picking up mail , making maintenance requests , and tracking dining options . P3 , F2 shared , “ When we began this [ par - ticipating in the VA pilot ] there was kind of a feeling that it would be connected somehow to the [ communities’ ] information . And so , I would try to say things like , ‘Alexa , sign me up for the trip to Safeway , ’ and it could”t do it . And the other day , I didn’t want to walk down to just get the mail if it wasn’t fnished yet . So , I said , ‘Alexa , is the mail in at [ organization ] ? ’ And it said , ‘I don’t know that . ”’ We saw similar suggestions in interviews adding ideas to enhance access to safety services . For example , P15 explained , “ Well , one thing that’s Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany occurred to me would be nice if someone had an accident in their apartment or fell down , for example , someone with mobility issues who might have trouble reaching a telephone to be able to just issue a voice command but something like Alexa to either call a security service that would be good . ” Similar to ideas for improving infor - mation access , residents felt that using voice could make accessing community services more convenient and accessible to many living in the community . 4 . 2 . 3 Facilitating Connections . Participants also felt that VAs could help facilitate connecting with people and groups in the commu - nity . While independent living residents often come and go as they choose , one of the benefts of living in an independent living com - munity is being able to live independently together as a group [ 36 ] . Residents in independent living communities often enjoy the ben - efts of living independently , with opportunities to connect with other older adults for social purposes . Many residents suggested that their hope for the initial VAs integration eforts was to support their ability to better connect with other residents in the com - munity . While many residents enjoyed connecting directly with others , some were excited about VAs’ potential to facilitate some of those interactions , especially as the community grew larger over the years . For example , some forum participants mentioned ways VAs might support “ fnding information about other residents ” and fnding relevant “ social events using their voice ” , especially those that found it challenging to use other mediums . P22 shared the following vision : “In the same way that computers do , and I think that , you know , the , we will eventually probably have in every apartment , some kind of a system that en - ables both voice and visual communication between among ourselves [ residents ] and between ourselves and concierge is or other parts of the community . . . You just talk to the box and the box does what you’ve asked it to do . . . I could also imagine the time when that becomes standard equipment in the apart - ments that you have this thing that sits on the counter , in the , in the center of the facility , it probably would be like the kitchen counter , or in the bedroom . . . And that’s how you communicate . You don’t do it at a key - board . You don’t have to do it with a telephone call . You just talk to the voice , and the voice takes care of things . ” One of the challenges experienced by some residents was learn - ing about others in the community with common interests and experiences that they may like to meet . Overall , residents sug - gested a preference for being able to connect face - to - face but felt VAs could potentially help them fnd people to connect with and events related to their interests . P15 shared that integrating a VA could help facilitate people being able to connect with others eas - ily . He stated , “ For example , like , the , there is a , you know , resident directory here , you can look in , but I , it would be nice . . . to be able to say please read me the biography of [ a resident ] or please call Joe . I don’t want to have to log in , and you know . . . ” Therefore , participants discussed ideas for VAs to make it easier to coordinate or facilitate connecting with other people in the community . On the other hand , some participants discussed that some resi - dents were not connected to the community at all . They felt VAs could also potentially help those residents engage more socially . For instance , P19 shared that they knew of people that were not connected , “ You know , we’ve [ my friends and I ] established social systems that work and so part of our challenge is to be open to new people . . . but the people I worry about here are several categories , and one is people who have gotten older and who have more trouble connecting either because they’ve lost a spouse or when they came in here single they didn’t establish a close group of contacts , or those close group of contacts are no longer alive . So , I think there’s people here who were in their apartments , not coming out a lot . ” The residents suggested that VAs could be used in some ways to motivate others to become more socially engaged . 4 . 3 Addressing Barriers and Building Additional Capacities Through Collective Knowledge In part , the goals of the forums were to open the dialog between residents and technical staf so that technical staf could better understand residents’ concerns about integrating VA technologies in the community . S1 noted in the forums : “What we [ the staf ] are trying to do is trying to help with [ community ] specifc items that we have control over . There are some generic tools that may or may not work . And we don’t have much infuence in that . We invested in some devices in developing a skill but did not see usage as much as we expected . . . We are trying to now understand what else would you want any voice recognition [ to do ] , is Alexa the right tool to use that ? Do we have Google users with Google Home and these things ? ” Therefore , in forums and interviews , residents discussed what they felt might be barriers to the broader adoption of VA tech - nologies within the community . While participants felt that VAs could be valuable tools to integrate into an independent living en - vironment , additional themes emerged from our data regarding challenges and concerns from residents and staf for integrating VAs as a tool to support the community . We learned that one main barrier participants felt needed to be addressed was rethinking VA integration eforts in a community environment to build assets to support sustainable use . Sustainability ( e . g . , an initiative’s ability to be maintained ) has long been a concern when introducing technological interventions into communities leading to the study of several approaches that support long - term community sustainable design [ 16 , 30 , 33 , 49 , 66 ] . One approach that residents discussed for potentially addressing the immediate needs of the resident body centered on fnding ways to leverage residents’ collective knowledge to build additional ca - pacity for VA integration among community members . Residents believed that the community could beneft from leveraging the knowledge and skills that individuals had gained over their life - time and were eager to share as a way to help educate the broader population of residents about VAs and what they can do . They also discussed using this approach to explore VA limitations , and how VAs might address the needs of the collective . Participants suggested that residents and staf come together to develop a set of CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . community assets that all residents looking to adopt these types of technologies could access , including opportunities for training , ex - tended technical support and maintenance , and shared integration plans . These discussions stemmed from forums where participants noted that some residents might not be aware of what existing systems can do , which might , in - turn , limit VA integration and sustainability eforts in the community . P3 , F4 shared that provid - ing instructional opportunities for residents could help them fnd and learn about benefcial use cases . They stated , “ information that might be available only by some direct question to some authority within [ the organization ] , who could answer some of the kinds of ques - tions that [ Participant 2 ] was ofering as examples . And that entails not only the technical means to do that but also some instructional opportunity . . . There are probably people present at this meeting [ fo - rum ] who , if I could consult , would answer my question . But in some more systematic way , how could information about ‘how to use’ Echo be distributed . ” Another participant mentioned that the residents at one of the campuses attempted to start an interest group for Echo users and shared that it might be a way to meet residents where they were to help facilitate examples of use cases . P5 , F4 shared , “ We conducted a class . . . on an introduction to Alexa , where we teach a lot of these skills starting from how you get it set up and everything and then the basic things it can do for you . We probably are more limited in our ability to use Alexa to get information about our community than you guys because we don’t utilize some of the [ website ] attributes like the event scheduling and so on that the other two communities use . Hopefully , we’re going to be moving in that direction , and that’ll give us a little bit more . ” Interview participants agreed that providing educational and training opportunities would be essential to ensuring that integration eforts were sustainable in the community . P17 shared , “ I think it would be mandatory [ train - ing ] , you know when I say mandatory , but in a nice way . Everybody needs to know how to use it [ VAs ] . And they would have to fgure out how to make that training accessible to people who also have disabil - ities and don’t move as freely as some of the rest of us . ” Therefore , capitalizing on the collective knowledge of residents and staf to build a community of practice would allow knowledge sharing to help develop appropriate use cases for others . Another key consideration for integrating VA at the community level was creating sustainable organizational support that could help residents with technical challenges and aid planning for the long - term maintenance of any community - focused applications . This planning would include ensuring everyone has access to a device but also further exploring relevant use cases that might be benefcial to the broader community and the support needed to sustain those use cases in the long term . Some participants felt that for successful VA integration at the community level , care - ful consideration would need to be made about prior awareness and perceptions of VAs within the community , as well as eforts to present cases that residents might fnd valuable . P1 , F3 , “ Somehow , I think you have to whet people’s appetite to tell them about some - thing that in some sense flls their needs . So , it has to be announced and introduced in a way that makes people interested . My experience is I talked to people about Alexa , ‘Do you know Alexa ? ’ And they said , ‘No’ . ” Participants also mentioned that any plan for integra - tion would require not only dedicated technical and maintenance support from staf but also ways to help residents understand inte - gration plans . P4 noted that they felt sharing “ information on what they [ the organization ] plan to do , and how they plan to do it ” would be essential to helping residents understand plans moving forward . P2 , F3 shared that also , while integrating , “It is important that you [ the organization ] don’t overpromise . Because all of these things have a backside . To have things on Alexa that are community oriented , have to be accurate . And if you can’t keep it up to date because you don’t have the manpower to do that and to follow up , then it ought not to be there . So , part of the thing is not to sell something that’s beyond what it’s really going to do . ” Accordingly , participants discussed that apart from residents’ potential expectations for organizational and staf support , understanding the feasibility and any additional person - hours required should also be considered in community integration eforts . 5 DISCUSSION Our research examined older adults’ perceptions of voice assistant ( VA ) technologies for supporting and enhancing an independent living community environment . We engaged 38 older adults in com - munity forum discussions followed by 24 individual interviews to better understand their perceptions of integrating VA technologies within their independent living community . The study’s goal was to understand what older adult residents perceived as the potential benefts and barriers of VA technologies at a community level , iden - tify use cases they value , and uncover potential factors that might impact integration eforts within the community . While other stud - ies have examined older adults’ use of VA technologies in the home [ 5 , 6 , 53 , 62 ] , older adults often fnd existing technologies limited for providing desired features in specifc group contexts , such as in caregiving dyads [ 27 ] or support for continued independent living [ 62 ] . Trajkova and Martin - Hammond found a need to distinguish between essential and casual use cases when designing VA applica - tions for older adults [ 62 ] . Therefore , complementing prior work focused on individual use of VAs by older adults , our study and its fndings purposefully focus on uncovering opportunities and essen - tial use cases for VAs to support a community of older adults , and the potential barriers to community - level integration that might hinder adoption . Aligned with prior fndings [ 27 , 62 ] , we found that residents felt that existing VA applications needed to go further to address the needs and interests of those living in an independent commu - nity setting . They shared their beliefs that existing VA applications were limited in addressing community - level needs . Participants also felt that for the integration of voice - based technologies to be successful at the community level , the organization and commu - nity would need to establish additional community capacities to aid adoption and sustainability , and to support the inclusion of all residents in the community . Based on our fndings , we leverage Chaskin’s defnition and characterization [ 19 , 20 ] of community capacity building to discuss opportunities and potential barriers to integrating VA technologies in a community of older adults to support participation and foster a sense of community . Our study contributes to existing literature by exploring community - level VA integration and providing insights into the needs of older adults in an independent senior living community to inform the design Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany of voice technologies that further build community capacity . We additionally contribute scenarios of VA use residents identifed as potentially benefcial to supporting a senior independent living community . These fndings add to the existing literature by identi - fying essential use cases [ 62 ] that might aid adoption among older adults . We refect on these scenarios to provide guidelines for de - signing communal VA applications more broadly . Finally , we ofer new insights into barriers to VA integration and sustainability in an independent senior living environment . Based on these fndings , we contribute considerations for designers , community organizers , organizations , and other stakeholders when approaching VA inte - gration eforts to support community - level adoption , difusion , and sustainability among a community of people . 5 . 1 Designing Communal Voice Assistant Applications Requires Focus on Community Needs Much of the prior work on VA use among older adults has focused on individual uses in the home [ 5 , 6 , 10 , 35 , 53 , 62 ] . While some studies such as [ 9 , 21 , 27 , 62 , 67 ] have recruited older adults liv - ing in community settings ( e . g . , apartment communities , Life Plan Communities ) , still much of the focus of this work has centered on exploring the potential use or perception of existing applications to support tasks within individual homes [ 5 , 6 , 10 , 35 , 53 , 62 ] . Yet , sev - eral recent studies have highlighted a need for a deeper exploration of useful collaborative voice applications for older adults in group contexts [ 21 , 27 , 62 , 67 ] , often noting mismatches in expectations for VA applications coupled with a lack of knowledge of appropriate and non - trivial use cases can be a signifcant barrier to adoption for older adults [ 55 , 62 ] . Our study intentionally examined the context of supporting participation in senior living , an area that has yet to be explored deeply in prior work . Similar to fndings by [ 27 , 62 ] , our participants noted that existing VA applications were limited for supporting a group of older adults in independent living . They suggested that for VA technologies to be useful at the community level , they need to be designed to address the unique challenges in the specifc community . Therefore , ofering a diferent perspective than prior studies , our study revealed the need for communal VA applications that build community capacity [ 19 ] and address unmet needs related to participation in the community . Below , we elabo - rate on the use cases proposed by participants and discuss potential guidelines to support the forms of communal VA design discussed in the use cases . We acknowledge that communities are diverse and dynamic but share our insights with the goal that they might transfer [ 24 ] to other communities with similar characteristics . 5 . 1 . 1 Communal Uses Cases . Our study reveals three communal use cases for VAs to support older adults in an independent living community environment : ( 1 ) improving communal informa - tion access delivery , ( 2 ) enhancing community services , and ( 3 ) facilitating community connections . Participants wanted VAs to support them in more easily accessing community - based information , such as information about events or fnding residents and staf . They also discussed how VAs might enhance community services already available such as online maintenance requests and cafeteria dinner reservations . Finally , they discussed that they envisioned VAs could help bet - ter support connections between themselves and other residents by making the process of connecting easier . Informed by our fndings , we provide examples of potential communal voice agent interac - tions that align with the examples participants shared in the forums and interviews . The three cases tie directly to the concept of com - munity capacity building defned by Chaskin [ 19 , 20 ] and focus on opportunities for VAs to support communal activities to further build a sense of community . Therefore , most discussions revolved around creating customized VA applications that leveraged internal data or tied to existing systems ( e . g . , an internal website ) to provide information and assistance more conveniently and efciently . Table 3 provides examples of how designers might leverage ex - isting VA capabilities to build on existing community capacities to make it easier for community members to access available as - sets . For example , creating custom VA applications that can help a user fnd and register for community events , submit maintenance requests using voice , or fnd information about others in the com - munity . The vast majority of VA applications can already provide simple informational and transactional interactions [ 45 ] , such as returning predetermined information or setting up event reminders . Therefore , these applications could likely leverage existing VA tech - nologies ( e . g . , Alexa , Siri ) which could also aid in widening access among community members . Some participants also suggested enhanced interactions that go beyond the existing , command - based conversational model com - monly used in existing VAs . In the current model , the user typically initiates a question , and the system answers [ 45 ] . Table 4 provides examples of how enhanced VA capabilities and features might pro - vide even more support to build existing community capacities to make it easier for members to access community assets . For exam - ple , participants discussed applications they could “ talk to ” to “ help them identify ” relevant events that were going on in the community or to “ automatically notify ” and help them sign - up for communal trips to the grocery store . Therefore , instead of VA applications that support older adults as a passive actor , participants discussed that VA technologies might assume the role of a collaborator or “true” assistant and actively engage them to make the processes easier . 5 . 1 . 2 Implications for Voice Assistant Design . We provide several recommendations for designing VA applications that may serve communal needs based on the example use cases . While the focus of our study was on understanding opportunities for VA applications , these guidelines likely also apply to the design of any community - based intelligent technologies that leverage automation and are designed to support community needs . Our frst recommendation aligns directly with the goals of our study . Our fndings indicate merit in including communities as partners in the VA design process . By engaging community members directly , even in the exploratory phase , we uncovered use cases they value , which helped to identify several “ essential ” use cases that prior work notes can be a barrier to adoption among older adults [ 62 ] . One newer interaction approach mentioned by participants also suggests the need for leveraging proactive engagement . With this approach , instead of the user engaging the agent , the agent would engage the user [ 18 , 64 ] to initiate interactions . These types of interactions are currently being studied , and early fndings have CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . Table 3 : Examples of communal VA interactions informed by fndings that can be supported by existing VA applications . Community Asset Use Case Example Voice Agent Interactions Listing Events 1 , 2 , 3 U : Hey [ agent ] , what are today’s events ? A : Here are today’s events . At 9 : 30 a . m . there is Group Yoga in Room 119 . At 9 : 30 a . m . there is morning prayer in the Chapel . At 10 : 00 a . m . there is an art class in Room 230 . . . Providing Information 1 U : Hey [ agent ] , is the mail in ? A : The mail is not in . Maintenance Requests 2 U : Hey [ agent ] , I need to submit a maintenance request . A : Sure , what is the problem . U : My sink is leaking . A : What is your apartment / house number ? U : 12345 A : I submitted a maintenance request for [ sink is leaking ] for apartment / house number [ 12345 ] . Maintenance requests usually require a 7 day turn around . If you do not receive any follow up by [ date ] , please call the maintenance department at 123 - 4567 . Dinner Reservations 2 , 3 U : Hey [ agent ] , I would like to make a dinner reservation for today . A : Sure , what is your name . U : My name is Ruth Greenwood . A : Ruth , how many people will be attending ? U : Six A : I have made a dinner reservation in the cafeteria for today for six people . Check with the front when you arrive for table directions . Residents and Staf 1 , 3 U : Hey [ agent ] , what is Vert McFadden’s contact information ? Information A : Vert McFadden , lives in apartment 180 . Their number is 123 - 4567 . Their email is vbert @ gmail . com . Would you like to hear Vert’s profle information ? U : Yes A : Vert is from Mississippi . Vert likes gardening and travel . Vert is an Air Force veteran . suggested a need to further explore when and where such interac - tions might be appropriate [ 18 , 64 ] . Cha and colleagues’ study of proactive interactions with smart speakers found that opportune moments for context - aware smart speaker reminders often vary based on several contextual factors [ 18 ] . Our fndings suggest that such interactions may be useful in enhancing community - based information access by not only providing timely information but also notifying members of information such as events that might be of interest to them . Therefore , proactive interactions could make becoming involved in the community easier . This could be help - ful not only for those community members that may experience access barriers , such as the older adults with vision disabilities that participated in our study , but also others such as those that fnd using a computer challenging or that simply fnd the current process cumbersome . By making it easier to become involved in the community , VAs could support the goals of building a sense of community which could further build community assets [ 19 , 20 ] . However , given research suggesting that some older adults fnd unexpected proactive communications unsettling [ 13 ] , more work will be needed to understand how to design such interactions . Related to the suggestion from participants that the voice assis - tant " simply talk " and their expectations that fnding information , engaging with services , and connecting with others become easier , our fndings also suggest the need for including more reasoning abilities in VA application design . To better reason about the users of the system , our fndings suggest the need for VAs to be able to learn about participants’ interests and , using that in - formation , be able to provide personalized recommendations . One of the potential advantages of community - level VA integration is the possibility of leveraging existing systems and processes to make reasoning and personalization more feasible . For example , the community we partnered with already provides access to other residents’ information through internal services such as a website , resident directory , and profle . Because these systems and resources are already established , they could be leveraged to match people to community resources , opportunities , and others . Further , while pri - vacy and trust concerns were not discussed among our participants , they have been shown as a barrier to adoption among older adults [ 13 , 15 , 62 ] . Since these existing internal systems have already been vetted by the organization , leveraging them could potentially ease some user’s privacy concerns . Related to increasing inclusion in the community , some stud - ies , particularly those focused on accessibility and technology ac - cess , suggest VAs can potentially increase access to information for people with disabilities [ 2 , 52 ] and older adults that may fnd it challenging to use technology [ 53 ] . Participants in our study also saw the potential for VAs to improve access and accessibility for those with disabilities and low technical knowledge . However , our fndings additionally suggest that at the community - level VA , design requires an emphasis on building community capacity by improving access to community assets that are already available . Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 4 : Examples of communal VA interactions informed by fndings that can be supported by enhanced VA capabilities and features . Community Asset Enhanced Features Example Enhanced Voice Agent Interactions Listing Community Events ( User Sets a Daily Event - Proactive Engagement - Reasoning ( Learns Interests , Personalized A : Good morning , Ruth , there are some events happening today that might interest you . U : Great , what are they ? Reminder for 9 : 00 a . m . ) Recommendations , Refning Automated A : [ knows about Ruth’s interest in art ] At 10 : 00 a . m . there is an art class in Room 230 . There are two spots available . There is a trip to the art Transactions ) museum scheduled for Friday , August 3 at 1 : 00 p . m . It was just posted . Would you like for me to sign you up for any of these events ? U : Yes , sign me up for both . A : Okay . I have signed you up for the art class in Room 230 and the trip to the art museum . Connecting with - Reasoning ( Learns Interests , U : Hey [ agent ] , I would like to make a dinner reservation . Residents and Staf Personalized A : Sure , Ruth , what date ? ( Dinner reservations Recommendations , Refning U : Today includes an option to Automated Transactions ) A : How many people will be attending ? meet and pair new people ) U : One , just me . A : Would you like to meet someone new at dinner ? U : Sure . A : There are three people with reservations that are interested in meeting others for dinner and have overlapping interests . All have reservations at 5 : 30 p . m . Vert McFadden likes gardening and travel . John Toussaint is from your home state . Pat Neely attends the same art class that you do on Tuesdays . Would you like to meet with any of these residents for dinner ? U : Yes , I would like to have dinner with Pat . A : Sure . I have made a reservation at 5 : 30 p . m . for you and Pat . I will notify Pat and confrm . Doing so could aid in supporting inclusion by increasing equi - table access to community assets ( e . g . , independently accessing community information and services ) and facilitating a sense of community through improved connections . Several partici - pants , with and without disabilities , emphasized the importance of VA applications for communities to focus on what is needed by the community instead of “generic” information access and services . Therefore , while prior studies have suggested that VAs can make information access and computing task more convenient , our study suggests that at the community - level the type of information and resources that are being supported by voice technologies are just as important to promoting adoption as the availability of voice to support independence or convenience . 5 . 2 Supporting Voice Assistant Difusion and Sustainability within Communities Requires Leveraging Existing Community Assets Learning about voice assistants , what they can do , and suitable use cases is a signifcant barrier to VA adoption [ 8 , 27 , 62 ] . For example , while primarily focused on VA use among families using generic features , Corbett and colleagues found that their participants strug - gled with learning to use VAs and wanted more assistance to learn how to capitalize on the capabilities [ 27 ] . Among our participants , even those who used VAs daily for personal uses , some expressed a lack of awareness of what existing VAs can do , which they discussed would likely be a signifcant barrier to adoption at the community level . Staf raised similar concerns and stated it was one of the reasons they were interested in learning more about community interests , noting a lack of uptake of VA devices in a prior pilot program . Both staf and residents agreed that adding a new tool without identifying potential strategies to promote use and sustain - ability could likely cause more challenges for residents interested in capitalizing on VAs as a tool to access information and resources in the community . Therefore , our fndings suggest a need to iden - tify diferent technology difusion strategies [ 8 ] when considering sustainable community VA integration . Beneteau and colleagues introduced and explored the concept of VA difusion [ 8 ] in their study , highlighting the necessity of under - standing the dissemination and difusion of learning of VA technolo - gies among families . In their work , Beneteau and colleagues identify the strategy of a “near - peer” model that leverages the knowledge of others ( family and friends ) or “near - peers” to infuence learning about VA technologies in family homes [ 8 ] . They propose a frame - work that leverages the social environment within the home that surrounds the user with learning infuencers ( i . e . , the VA – Echo Dot and outside infuencers - family and friends ) and helps a family CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . Figure 2 : Current ( a ) and proposed ( b ) models for approaching the integration of voice assistant technologies in the community . * VA Assets = Information and Resources for learning and using VAs . member learn about the VA technology . Our participants similarly noted that one of the advantages of living in a community is the potential to leverage the existing capacities or assets within the community , including human assets such as collective knowledge of other residents and staf to support the difusion of learning eforts . Several participants shared eforts to create spaces such as interest and learning groups that could help more residents learn about VA technologies . Therefore , our work suggests that leverag - ing the expertise of others in near proximity could also beneft the adoption of VAs in community settings . Our fndings additionally suggest a need to fundamentally re - think community - level VA integration focusing eforts on leverag - ing existing community assets not only as part of the design process but also as a viable approach to supporting the difusion and sus - tainability of VA designs within the community environment . Many existing studies show that VA learnability is a signifcant barrier to adoption and sustained use [ 8 , 27 , 62 ] . Within HCI , building sustainable community - based design is an ongoing challenge that has led to a focus on identifying approaches to building sustain - able designs within the community and organizational contexts [ 25 , 33 , 60 ] , including assets - based design [ 49 , 66 ] . One of the tenants of the asset - based design is a design process that focuses on identifying existing capacities to support long - term sustainability and the impact of technologies within the commu - nity it supports [ 49 , 66 ] . For instance , Dickinson and colleagues found that in the design of civic technologies , community residents felt any integration eforts should leverage existing community assets and connections between those assets to make it successful [ 25 ] . In Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , our study of assets as a method for sustainable design within communities aligns di - rectly with Chaskin’s examination of community capacities [ 19 ] . We found that the community we partnered with already had assets built - in the environment that residents felt could be leveraged to advance integration eforts within the organization . However , from their perspective , one of the main challenges of integration was not necessarily related to the organization providing access to tech - nology as they already had done but instead building additional community awareness ( i . e . , building new assets ) that could sustain long - term adoption , maintenance , and training of VA technologies among residents . In their work , Beneteau and colleagues contribute a model for re - thinking VA difusion of learning within families . Based on our fndings , we similarly propose a model for rethinking or shift - ing community - centered VA integration eforts from a “device” integration - focused model to a model that leverages the human as - sets within the community and centers them in the design process ( Figure 2 ) . In the current model ( Figure 2a ) , some residents have VA assets ( e . g . , individual skills , resources , and other supports ) that could support the difusion of learning and use of VAs to others in the community . However , often because of the ad hoc nature of the “device integration” approach , some residents may not be able to take advantage of those assets that could allow them to capitalize on the device’s capabilities ( Figure 2a ) . For example , Resident 3 and Resident 4 may have individual assets ( e . g . , installation help , knowledge about useful skills ) that could be leveraged to help others learn about VA technologies they already own ( Resident 1 ) or may be looking to adopt ( Resident 2 ) . These individual assets could add to the overall availability of community assets . Yet , while there may be some overlap ( e . g . , Resident 3 ofers occasional help to those they know ) , others , such as Resident 4 , may be disconnected and want to help but have no avenue to do so . Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany To pivot to a community - focused approach ( Figure 2b ) , we pro - pose a model where community and individual VA assets are repo - sitioned at the center of design and integration activities . In this model , VA assets are purposefully explored and included as part of the community assets already available to members . As our fnd - ings suggest , participants felt one of the advantages of living in a community is the ability to leverage the community’s collective knowledge to address potential barriers to VA adoption , which ultimately would limit the device’s usefulness to the overall com - munity . With this new approach , the community and each resident would be able to pool assets in support of the larger community ( e . g . , creating workshops , small learning groups ) . Pivoting to a fo - cus on leveraging assets might better support both individual and community VA adoption eforts , help identify the potential benefts and limitations of introducing a device for community purposes , as well as help uncover appropriate design cases for the community . In the proposed model , individual members of the community could leverage the assets or capacities of other humans ( e . g . , neighbors , friends , committees , staf ) available to them as members of the com - munity . Doing so could promote more equitable access to broader community information and resources that could aid community adoption of not only VAs but any technology that supports the com - munity . This approach is aligned with other participatory methods that focus on partnership with communities and understanding the community as a frst step to sustainable design [ 16 , 30 , 49 , 66 ] . We acknowledge that the success of this approach will depend on several community characteristics . Yet , in a community such as the one studied with a high level of community capacity ; this community - centered approach to integration might lead to better adoption and sustainability eforts within the community over time . 5 . 3 Limitations and Future Work Most of our study participants were actively interested in using VA devices and self - selected to participate based on that interest . However , we acknowledge that certain voices , such as reticent users , may be excluded due to this self - selection . The uses and ideas about capacity building may vary for those with less knowledge about VAs , diferent experiences , or other opinions about VA in - tegration within a community environment . Similarly , while we provide context about the community of focus during the study , opinions of VAs may also vary depending on diferent community characteristics . Aligned with the goals of similar types of research , while we anticipate that our fndings may translate to other com - munities of older adults [ 24 ] , our fndings are contextualized to the particular communities involved [ 30 , 50 ] and , therefore , may not be generalizable . Our study leverages community forums to engage potential users , staf , and researchers in dialog about VA integration in the community . While other HCI researchers have used this method [ 25 , 48 ] and demonstrated its efectiveness for democratizing the design process and engaging communities in design , the approach has its limitations . We attempted to compensate for potential limi - tations by recruiting from a group interested in community - level VA integration , providing additional mechanisms for participation ( e . g . , chat , non - verbal agreement - disagreement in Zoom ) during virtual forums , and complementing early fndings from forums with interviews . However , hosting a community forum leads to larger groups than traditional focus group sessions . Yet , like focus groups [ 58 ] , some participants may not elect to participate verbally for various reasons ( e . g . , personality , silent agreement , comfort ) , and we may have encountered this in our study . Additionally , some potential use cases residents suggested also required organizational policy considerations . For example , includ - ing VAs at the community level in settings such as organized IL communities to support independence might violate the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPPA ) which has requirements for the confdential exchange of personal health in - formation . VAs for fall safety would need to align with in - house policies for fall support . There is also the question of who sus - tains the data needed to keep these systems up to date , which our participants felt would be essential to promote continued use . In addition to community - based capacities , systematic approaches to identifying organizational capacities , including potential limita - tions , are needed when considering the sustainability of VAs in a community setting . While staf were involved in our study , their main goal at the time was to learn about residents’ perspectives and concerns . Therefore , our study provides limited insights into broader organizational challenges that may arise due to privacy or maintenance . Future work should focus on understanding concerns beyond those of community members that may afect integration eforts to address potential sustainability challenges more broadly . In the future , we plan to continue working with the commu - nity , residents , and staf to explore broader sustainability issues , including those related to organizational privacy requirements and maintenance . We have also explored strategies for transferring and implementing some of the use cases feasible with existing VA tech - nologies to develop community - focused applications . Our broader research goal is to continue to explore the use cases identifed in this study , including enhanced conversational approaches that can support older adults living in community environments to better participate and take advantage of available assets . 6 CONCLUSIONS We investigated older adults’ perceptions of voice assistant tech - nologies to support and enhance interactions in an independent living ( IL ) community . Findings suggest that IL residents used de - vices for individual needs in their homes . However , IL residents desired diferent types of VA support at the community level , in - cluding tailored applications relevant to the needs and challenges in their local community and consideration of capacity building needed to support integration eforts and adoption throughout the community . We discuss considerations and recommendations for designing communal VAs and integrating VAs in independent liv - ing environments . Our work contributes to research examining VA use in groups suggesting that at the community level , there is also a need for further concentrated studies to uncover how community dynamics may change VA use and requirements , in - cluding approaches to integration . We also discuss the potential for leveraging community capacities and assets as a springboard for strengthening the difusion and sustainability of VAs within a community once integrated . Our work contributes to a better under - standing of older adults’ opinions about VA use at the community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yukta Karkera et al . level in independent living . We also contribute considerations for community - level VA integration . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our participants and our community part - ners for allowing us to learn about their experiences . This research is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . 2144503 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Abdi , S . et al . 2021 . Exploring the Potential of Emerging Technologies to Meet the Care and Support Needs of Older People : A Delphi Survey . Geriatrics . 6 , 1 ( Feb . 2021 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / geriatrics6010019 . [ 2 ] Abdolrahmani , A . et al . 2018 . “Siri Talks at You” : An Empirical Investigation of Voice - Activated Personal Assistant ( VAPA ) Usage by Individuals Who Are Blind . Proceedings of the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( New York , NY , USA , 2018 ) , 249 – 258 . [ 3 ] Abdolrahmani , A . et al . 2021 . Towards More Transactional Voice Assistants : Investigating the Potential for a Multimodal Voice - Activated Indoor Navigation Assistant for Blind and Sighted Travelers . Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , May 2021 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 4 ] Adams , K . B . et al . 2004 . Loneliness and depression in independent living retire - ment communities : risk and resilience factors . Aging & mental health . 8 , 6 ( Nov . 2004 ) , 475 – 485 . [ 5 ] Almujalli , W . 2021 . Smart home technology efect on behavior , cognition , and wellbeing of individuals aging in place . ( 2021 ) . [ 6 ] Angelini , L . et al . 2021 . Seniors’ Perception of Smart Speakers : Challenges and Opportunities Elicited in the Silver & Home Living Lab . Proceedings of the 21st Congress of the International Ergonomics Association ( IEA 2021 ) ( 2021 ) , 137 – 144 . [ 7 ] Bekhet , A . K . et al . 2009 . Reasons for relocation to retirement communities : a qualitative study . Western journal of nursing research . 31 , 4 ( Jun . 2009 ) , 462 – 479 . [ 8 ] Beneteau , E . et al . 2020 . Assumptions Checked : How Families Learn About and Use the Echo Dot . Proc . ACM Interact . Mob . Wearable Ubiquitous Technol . 4 , 1 ( Mar . 2020 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 9 ] Beneteau , E . et al . 2019 . Communication Breakdowns Between Families and Alexa . Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , 2019 ) , 243 : 1 – 243 : 13 . [ 10 ] Bentley , F . et al . 2018 . Understanding the Long - Term Use of Smart Speaker As - sistants . Proc . ACM Interact . Mob . Wearable Ubiquitous Technol . 2 , 3 ( Sep . 2018 ) , 91 : 1 – 91 : 24 . [ 11 ] Bickmore , T . W . et al . 09 04 , 2018 . Patient and Consumer Safety Risks When Using Conversational Assistants for Medical Information : An Observational Study of Siri , Alexa , and Google Assistant . Journal of medical Internet research . 20 , 9 ( 09 04 , 2018 ) , e11510 . [ 12 ] Blair , J . and Abdullah , S . 2019 . Understanding the Needs and Challenges of Using Conversational Agents for Deaf Older Adults . Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( New York , NY , USA , 2019 ) , 161 – 165 . [ 13 ] Bonilla , K . and Martin - Hammond , A . 2020 . Older Adults’ Perceptions of Intelligent Voice Assistant Privacy , Transparency , and Online Privacy Guidelines . Sixteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ( SOUPS 2020 ) ( 2020 ) . [ 14 ] Branham , S . M . and Mukkath Roy , A . R . 2019 . Reading Between the Guidelines : How Commercial Voice Assistant Guidelines Hinder Accessibility for Blind Users . The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( New York , NY , USA , Oct . 2019 ) , 446 – 458 . [ 15 ] Brewer , R . et al . 2022 . An empirical study of older adult’s voice assistant use for health information seeking . ACM Transactions on . ( 2022 ) . [ 16 ] Carroll , J . M . and Rosson , M . B . 2007 . Participatory design in community infor - matics . Design Studies . 28 , 3 ( May 2007 ) , 243 – 261 . [ 17 ] Catania , F . et al . 2021 . Toward the Introduction of Google Assistant in Therapy for Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders : An Exploratory Study . Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery . 1 – 7 . [ 18 ] Cha , N . et al . 2020 . Hello There ! Is Now a Good Time to Talk ? Opportune Mo - ments for Proactive Interactions with Smart Speakers . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies . 4 , 3 ( Sep . 2020 ) , 74 : 1 – 74 : 28 . [ 19 ] Chaskin , R . J . 2001 . Building Community Capacity : A Defnitional Framework and Case Studies from a Comprehensive Community Initiative . Urban afairs review . 36 , 3 ( Jan . 2001 ) , 291 – 323 . [ 20 ] Chaskin , R . J . 1999 . Defning community capacity : A framework and implications from a comprehensive community initiative . Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of Chicago Chicago , IL . [ 21 ] Chung , J . et al . 2021 . Attitudes and Perceptions Toward Voice - Operated Smart Speakers Among Low - Income Senior Housing Residents : Comparison of Pre - and Post - Installation Surveys . Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine . 7 , ( Jan . 2021 ) , 23337214211005868 . [ 22 ] Clark , L . et al . 2019 . What Makes a Good Conversation ? : Challenges in Designing Truly Conversational Agents . Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , May 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . [ 23 ] Cowan , B . R . et al . 2017 . “What Can I Help You with ? ” : Infrequent Users’ Expe - riences of Intelligent Personal Assistants . Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( New York , NY , USA , 2017 ) , 43 : 1 – 43 : 12 . [ 24 ] Creswell , J . W . and Poth , C . N . 2016 . Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design : Choosing Among Five Approaches . SAGE Publications . [ 25 ] Dickinson , J . et al . 2019 . “The cavalry ain’t coming in to save us” : Supporting Ca - pacities and Relationships through Civic Tech . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 26 ] Easwara Moorthy , A . and Vu , K . - P . L . 2015 . Privacy Concerns for Use of Voice Activated Personal Assistant in the Public Space . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction . 31 , 4 ( Apr . 2015 ) , 307 – 335 . [ 27 ] F Corbett , C . et al . 2021 . Virtual Home Assistant Use and Perceptions of Use - fulness by Older Adults and Support Person Dyads . International journal of environmental research and public health . 18 , 3 ( Jan . 2021 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph18031113 . [ 28 ] Ford , M . and Palmer , W . 2019 . Alexa , Are You Listening to Me ? An Analysis of Alexa Voice Service Network Trafc . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing . 23 , 1 ( Feb . 2019 ) , 67 – 79 . [ 29 ] Han , S . and Yang , H . 2018 . Understanding adoption of intelligent personal assis - tants . Industrial Management & Data Systems . ( Apr . 2018 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / IMDS - 05 - 2017 - 0214 . [ 30 ] Hayes , G . R . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer in - teraction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction . 18 , 3 ( Aug . 2011 ) , 15 : 1 – 15 : 20 . [ 31 ] Helping Seniors Stay Independent in Their Homes Longer : https : / / newsroom . statefarm . com / new - alexa - skill - boosts - senior - independence / . Accessed : 2020 - 06 - 11 . [ 32 ] Javed , Y . et al . 2019 . Alexa’s Voice Recording Behavior : A Survey of User Un - derstanding and Awareness . Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Availability , Reliability and Security ( New York , NY , USA , 2019 ) , 89 : 1 – 89 : 10 . [ 33 ] Kensing , F . et al . 1998 . MUST : A Method for Participatory Design . Human – Computer Interaction . 13 , 2 ( Jun . 1998 ) , 167 – 198 . [ 34 ] Kensing , F . and Blomberg , J . 1998 . Participatory Design : Issues and Concerns . Computer supported cooperative work : CSCW : an international journal . 7 , 3 ( Sep . 1998 ) , 167 – 185 . [ 35 ] Koon , L . M . et al . 2020 . Perceptions of Digital Assistants From Early Adopters Aged 55 + . Ergonomics in design : the magazine of human factors applications . 28 , 1 ( Jan . 2020 ) , 16 – 23 . [ 36 ] Krout , J . A . et al . 2002 . Reasons for Relocation to a Continuing Care Retirement Community . Journal of applied gerontology : the ofcial journal of the Southern Gerontological Society . 21 , 2 ( Jun . 2002 ) , 236 – 256 . [ 37 ] Lau , J . et al . 2018 . Alexa , Are You Listening ? : Privacy Perceptions , Concerns and Privacy - seeking Behaviors with Smart Speakers . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 102 : 1 – 102 : 31 . [ 38 ] Liao , Y . et al . 2019 . Understanding the Role of Privacy and Trust in Intelligent Personal Assistant Adoption . Information in Contemporary Society ( 2019 ) , 102 – 113 . [ 39 ] Lister , K . et al . 2020 . Accessible conversational user interfaces : considerations for design . Proceedings of the 17th International Web for All Conference ( New York , NY , USA , Apr . 2020 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 40 ] Lopatovska , I . et al . 2019 . User recommendations for intelligent personal assistants . Journal of Librarianship and Information Science . ( Apr . 2019 ) , 0961000619841107 . [ 41 ] Lopatovska , I . and Oropeza , H . 2018 . User interactions with “Alexa” in public aca - demic space . Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology . 55 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 309 – 318 . [ 42 ] Lopatovska , I . and Williams , H . 2018 . Personifcation of the Amazon Alexa . Pro - ceedings of the 2018 Conference on Human Information Interaction & Retrieval - CHIIR ’18 ( New York , New York , USA , 2018 ) . [ 43 ] Lovato , S . B . et al . 2019 . Hey Google , Do Unicorns Exist ? : Conversational Agents As a Path to Answers to Children’s Questions . Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( New York , NY , USA , 2019 ) , 301 – 313 . [ 44 ] Luger , E . and Sellen , A . 2016 . Like having a really bad PA . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , May 2016 ) . [ 45 ] Moore , R . J . and Arar , R . 2019 . Conversational UX Design : A Practitioner’s Guide to the Natural Conversation Framework . Morgan & Claypool . [ 46 ] Nallam , P . et al . 2020 . A Question of Access : Exploring the Perceived Benefts and Barriers of Intelligent Voice Assistants for Improving Access to Consumer Health Building Community Capacity : Exploring Voice Assistants to Support Older Adults in an Independent Living Community CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Resources Among Low - Income Older Adults . Gerontology & geriatric medicine . 6 , ( Jan . 2020 ) , 2333721420985975 . [ 47 ] da Paixão Pinto , N . et al . 2021 . Conversational Agents for Elderly Interaction . 2021 IEEE 24th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design ( CSCWD ) ( May 2021 ) , 1 – 6 . [ 48 ] Peacock , S . et al . 2018 . Streets for People : Engaging Children in Placemaking Through a Socio - technical Process . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery . 1 – 14 . [ 49 ] Pei , L . and Nardi , B . 2019 . We Did It Right , But It Was Still Wrong : Toward Assets - Based Design . Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , May 2019 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 50 ] Pilloton , E . 2010 . Depth over breadth : designing for impact locally , and for the long haul . Interactions . 17 , 3 ( May 2010 ) , 48 – 51 . [ 51 ] Porcheron , M . et al . 2018 . Voice Interfaces in Everyday Life . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , 2018 ) , 640 : 1 – 640 : 12 . [ 52 ] Pradhan , A . et al . 2018 . “Accessibility Came by Accident” : Use of Voice - Controlled Intelligent Personal Assistants by People with Disabilities . Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , 2018 ) , 459 : 1 – 459 : 13 . [ 53 ] Pradhan , A . et al . 2020 . Use of Intelligent Voice Assistants by Older Adults with Low Technology Use . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 27 , 4 ( Sep . 2020 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 54 ] Reis , A . et al . 2018 . Using intelligent personal assistants to assist the elderlies An evaluation of Amazon Alexa , Google Assistant , Microsoft Cortana , and Apple Siri . 2018 2nd International Conference on Technology and Innovation in Sports , Health and Wellbeing ( TISHW ) ( Jun . 2018 ) , 1 – 5 . [ 55 ] Sayago , S . et al . 2019 . Voice Assistants and Older People : Some Open Issues . Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces ( New York , NY , USA , 2019 ) , 7 : 1 – 7 : 3 . [ 56 ] Schlomann , A . et al . 2021 . Potential and pitfalls of digital voice assistants in older adults with and without intellectual disabilities : Relevance of participatory design elements and ecologically valid feld studies . Frontiers in psychology . 12 , ( Jul . 2021 ) , 684012 . [ 57 ] Sciuto , A . et al . 2018 . “Hey Alexa , What’s Up ? ” : A Mixed - Methods Studies of In - Home Conversational Agent Usage . Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( New York , NY , USA , 2018 ) , 857 – 868 . [ 58 ] Sim , J . and Waterfeld , J . 2019 . Focus group methodology : some ethical challenges . Quality & quantity . 53 , 6 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 3003 – 3022 . [ 59 ] Soubutts , E . et al . Challenges for Healthcare AI to Support Aging in Place Together in the UK . francisconunes . me . [ 60 ] Tandukar , B . et al . 2021 . Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve On - line Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community . Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( New York , NY , USA , Jun . 2021 ) , 1695 – 1709 . [ 61 ] Tech Like Alexa Might Help With Isolation , Loneliness : https : / / www . aarp . org / home - family / personal - technology / info - 2018 / isolation - loneliness - technology - help . html . Accessed : 2019 - 12 - 19 . [ 62 ] Trajkova , M . and Martin - Hammond , A . 2020 . “Alexa is a Toy” : Exploring Older Adults’ Reasons for Using , Limiting , and Abandoning Echo . Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA , Apr . 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 63 ] # VoiceForLoneliness | Case Study | Greenwood Campbell : https : / / www . greenwoodcampbell . com / what / voiceforloneliness . Accessed : 2020 - 06 - 11 . [ 64 ] Wei , J . et al . 2021 . Developing the Proactive Speaker Prototype Based on Google Home . Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . Association for Computing Machinery . 1 – 6 . [ 65 ] Wong - Villacres , M . et al . 2020 . Culture in Action : Unpacking Capacities to Inform Assets - Based Design . Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , Apr . 2020 ) , 1 – 14 . [ 66 ] Wong - Villacres , M . et al . 2020 . From Needs to Strengths : Operationalizing an Assets - Based Design of Technology . Conference Companion Publication of the 2020 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( New York , NY , USA , Oct . 2020 ) , 527 – 535 . [ 67 ] Zubatiy , T . et al . 2021 . Empowering Dyads of Older Adults With Mild Cognitive Impairment And Their Care Partners Using Conversational Agents . Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery . 1 – 15 .