Influence of Airway Diameter and Cell Confluence on Epithelial Cell Injury in an In - Vitro Model of Airway Reopening . 1 , 2 H . C . Yalcin , 2 S . F . Perry , 1 , 2 S . N . Ghadiali , 1 Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics , Lehigh University , Bethlehem , PA 18015 2 Bioengineering Program , Lehigh University , Bethlehem , PA 18015 Contact Information : Samir N . Ghadiali Frank Hook Assistant Professor of Bioengineering Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics Rm . 265 Packard Lab 19 Memorial Drive West Bethlehem , PA 18015 email : sag3 @ lehigh . edu Phone : ( 610 ) 758 - 5168 Fax : ( 610 ) 758 - 6224 Running Title : Epithelial Cell Injury during Airway Reopening Page 1 of 46 Articles in PresS . J Appl Physiol ( August 16 , 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1152 / japplphysiol . 00164 . 2007 Copyright © 2007 by the American Physiological Society . Abstract Recent advances in the ventilation of patients with the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome ( ARDS ) , including ventilation at low lung volumes , have resulted in a decreased mortality rate . However , even low lung volume ventilation may exacerbate lung injury due to the cyclic opening and closing of fluid - occluded airways . Specifically , the hydrodynamic stresses generated during airway reopening may result in epithelial cell ( EpC ) injury . We utilized an in - vitro cell - culture model of airway reopening to investigate the effect of reopening velocity , airway diameter , cell confluence and cyclic closure / reopening on cellular injury . Reopening dynamics were simulated by propagating a constant velocity air bubble in an adjustable - height , parallel - plate flow chamber . This chamber was occluded with different types of fluids and contained either a confluent or sub - confluent monolayer of EpC . Fluorescent microscopy was used to quantify morphological properties and the percentage of dead cells under different experimental conditions . Decreasing the channel height and reopening velocity resulted in a larger percentage of dead cells due to an increase in the spatial pressure gradient applied to the EpC . These results indicate that distal regions of the lung are more prone to injury and that rapid inflation may be cyto - protective . Repeated reopening events and sub - confluent conditions resulted in significant cellular detachment . In addition , we observed a larger percentage of dead cells under sub - confluent conditions . Analysis of this data suggests that in addition to the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses generated during reopening , the EpC’s morphological , biomechanical and micro - structural properties may also be important determinants of cell injury . Page 2 of 46 3 Key words : Ventilator - Induced Lung Injury , Pulmonary Edema , Microbubble Flows , Cellular Injury , Microfluidics , Cytoskeleton , Cell Mechanics , Surface Tension , Pressure Gradients , Shear Stress Page 3 of 46 4 Introduction The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome ( ARDS ) is characterized by the influx of protein - rich edema fluid into the lung due to an increased permeability of the alveolar - capillary barrier ( 25 ) . In addition to hindering gas exchange , the presence of this edema fluid can disrupt the function of surfactant molecules which normally stabilizes pulmonary alveoli ( 16 , 32 ) . As a result , patients suffering from ARDS are unable to adequately inflate their lungs and must be mechanically ventilated in order to survive . However , the mechanical stresses associated with the reopening of fluid - filled and / or collapsed airways may damage the delicate epithelium . As a result , ventilation treatments can potentially exacerbate the underlying lung injury ( 10 , 11 ) . Historically , ARDS patients were ventilated with large tidal volumes ( i . e V T = 10 - 12 mL / kg ) to ensure adequate blood oxygenation . However , several studies ( 6 , 7 , 29 - 31 ) have demonstrated that the stretching deformations imparted to lung epithelial cells ( EpC ) during large V T ventilation results in significant cellular injury and further disruption of the alveolar - capillary barrier . As a result , several investigators have used low V T ventilation strategies ( i . e . V T = 5 - 7 ml / kg ) to minimize cellular injury ( 1 , 3 , 11 ) . In particular , a recent clinical trial demonstrated a 22 % reduction in patient mortality when V T was reduced from 12 ml / kg to 6 ml / kg ( 1 ) . Despite this decrease in mortality , several studies indicate that significant lung damage may also occur at low lung volumes due to the reopening of collapsed / fluid - filled airways ( 8 , 9 , 12 , 24 ) . At low lung volumes , the mechanical stresses generated during the reopening of closed pulmonary airways and alveoli may exacerbate the existing lung injury . However , the mechanisms responsible for airway / alveolar closure , and therefore , the types of mechanical forces generated during reopening , have recently been debated ( 18 ) . Based on computer Page 4 of 46 5 tomographic ( CT ) images of injured lungs , Gattioni and colleagues ( 13 ) proposed a closure mechanism in which the increased weight of the edematous lung results in the compliant collapse of small airways and alveoli . However , Hubmayr and colleagues have recently challenged the collapse mechanism based on direct experimental measurements of lung volumes using a parenchymal marker technique ( 22 , 23 ) . These authors proposed an alternative mechanism of closure in which non - collapsed airways / alveoli become fluid - filled due to the disruption of the alveolar - capillary membrane . Although the collapse and fluid - filled mechanisms may both occur in - vivo , this study will focus on the effect of reopening in a non - collapsed , fluid - filled airway . Several investigators ( 4 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 19 ) have used computational fluid dynamic ( CFD ) techniques to investigate the mechanics of reopening a fluid - filled airway . In these models , a “finger of air” with surface tension (cid:1) is used to reopen the airway with velocity U as shown in Figure 1 . These models have provided quantitative information about the hydrodynamic stresses exerted on the EpC which line airway walls ( see arrows in Figure 1 ) . Specifically , cells downstream from the air bubble experience a nominal shear stress , cells near the bubble tip experience a combination of shear and normal stresses and cells in the thin liquid film experience a normal stress ( i . e . pressure ) . The cells near the bubble cap also experience significant spatial and temporal gradients in shear and normal stress . The maximum shear stress , normal stress gradient and shear stress gradient experienced by the EpC during bubble propagation have been quantified by Bilek et . al . ( 4 ) . Finally , a computational study by Jacob and Gaver ( 19 ) indicates that the morphology of EpC may amplify the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses under certain conditions . Several investigators have also used experimental techniques to investigate the influence of airway reopening on lung injury . Although several animal studies indicate that low volume Page 5 of 46 6 ventilation techniques may generate significant lung damage ( 8 , 9 , 24 ) , it is difficult to identify the consequences of a particular mechanical stimulus in whole lung models due to the spatial and temporal diversity of acute lung injury and the complex morphology of the lung . By contrast , in - vitro cell culture models allow for a greater degree of control over the mechanical environment and therefore a more efficient means of evaluating how EpC respond to a given mechanical stimulus . For example , in - vitro cell stretching devices have been successfully used to investigate the consequences of the large stretching deformations that occur during high V T ventilation ( 27 , 29 , 33 ) . To investigate the consequences of reopening a fluid - filled airway , Gaver and colleagues ( 4 , 20 ) propagated an air bubble in a constant height flow chamber . These studies report an increase in cellular necrosis at low reopening velocities and attribute this increase to the large normal stress gradients that develop at low bubble velocities . Previous experimental studies also indicate that pulmonary surfactants can significantly reduce the mechanical stresses generated during reopening ( 15 ) and the degree of cellular necrosis ( 4 ) . Although several parameters may influence the degree of EpC injury during the reopening of fluid - filled airways , this study focuses on the effects of bubble velocity , airway diameter , repeated reopening events and the degree of confluence in the EpC monolayer . The first motivation for this study is that the bifurcating structure of the lung results in a wide range of airway diameters . In addition , the total cross - sectional area of the lung increases as the airway generation number increases ( 21 ) . As a result , the bubble velocity responsible for reopening will be different in different lung regions . Although the effect of bubble velocity has been investigated ( 4 ) , the influence of airway diameter on cellular injury has not been quantified . Previous computational studies ( 15 ) indicate that the magnitude of the fluid mechanical stresses exerted on the EpC is inversely proportional to airway diameter . We therefore hypothesize that Page 6 of 46 7 changes in both airway diameter and bubble velocity will alter degree of cellular injury observed during reopening . The second motivation for this study is that during ARDS the detachment of EpC will result in sub - confluent monolayers and the disruption of cell - to - cell communications / attachments ( 32 ) . Normally , EpC are tightly bound together into sheets called epithelia and cell - cell contacts between adjacent EpC bear most of the mechanical stress ( 2 ) . As a result , the loss of cell - cell contacts may make the EpC more vulnerable to the hydrodynamic forces generated during reopening . Furthermore , EpC in sub - confluent monolayers may exhibit different morphological , structural and biomechanical properties than EpC in confluent monolayers ( 29 ) . Changes in these properties may alter the EpC’s susceptibility to the hydrodynamic forces generated during reopening . We therefore hypothesize that the level of cellular confluence will alter the degree of EpC injury observed during the reopening of fluid - filled airways . To test these hypotheses , we have designed and utilized an experimental cell - culture system which mimics the reopening of fluid - filled airways . In the first set of experiments , we exposed a 100 % confluent monolayer of EpC to different bubble velocities in an adjustable - height , rigid - walled flow channel . In this system , channel height represents the diameter of an airway . We also exposed the confluent monolayer of EpC to repeated bubble passages to investigate the effect of cyclic closure and reopening . In a second set of studies , we cultured EpC to both 100 % and ~ 25 % confluence and exposed both systems to equivalent reopening conditions . Cellular necrosis was monitored with standard live / dead staining protocols and quantified as the percentage of dead cells in each experiment . An analysis of the results indicates that in addition to the hydrodynamic stresses generated during reopening , the biomechanical and Page 7 of 46 8 biostructural properties of the EpC may also be important determinants of cellular injury during airway reopening . Materials and Methods Cell Culture The rat pulmonary epithelial cell line ( CCL - 149 , American Type Culture Collection , Manassas , VA ) was used in this study ( passage number 20 - 30 ) . Cells were maintained in a culture medium consisting of Ham’s F12K medium with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin and 1 % fungizone ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . The cell culture medium was changed every 2 - 3 days . For each experiment , cells were harvested with 0 . 125 % trypsin ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , Ca ) , counted with trypan blue exclusion ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , Ca ) and seeded onto 30mm diameter coverslips placed in 6 well plates by adding 2ml of a 3×10 4 cells / ml solution to each well . Cells were grown under standard culture conditions ( 37°C , 5 % CO 2 and 95 % air ) for 1 day to obtain a sub - confluent monolayer ( ~ 25 % ) or for 4 days to obtain a confluent monolayer ( 100 % ) . Parallel Plate Flow Chamber EpC were exposed to reopening conditions in the modified perfusion chamber shown in Figure 2 . Here , the POC mini chamber system ( Hemogenix , Colorado Springs , CO ) , which was specifically designed for high resolution live - cell microscopy , was modified to create an adjustable - height parallel - plate flow chamber ( Figure 2A ) . Specifically , a rigid silicone gasket of variable thickness was sandwiched between a 0 . 17 mm thick upper coverglass and 0 . 17 mm thick lower coverglass seeded with cells ( see above ) ( Figure 2B ) . Silicon gaskets ( McMaster - Carr , New Brunswick , NJ ) were cut to the desired flow geometry ( Fig 2C ) , with a water jet cutter , to form the flow channel . Although a variety of flow channel geometries can be created , Page 8 of 46 9 this study utilized gaskets which formed a flow channel 10mm in width and 25mm in length . To assemble the chamber , the lower coverglass , containing cells was washed with phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) to remove non - adherent cells and placed onto chamber base . The silicon gasket , aluminum perfusion adapter with inlet and outlet tubes , upper coverglass and flow chamber top adapter were then placed in sequential order to complete the assembly ( Figure 2A , 2B ) . The channel height was governed by the thickness of the silicone gasket and channel heights of 0 . 5 mm , 0 . 8 mm and 1 . 7 mm were used in this study . These channels heights were selected based on the diameters of terminal and respiratory bronchioles ( 34 ) . The complete experimental setup is shown in Figure 2D . The flow chamber was connected to a PHD 2000 , high accuracy syringe pump ( Harvard Apparatus , Holliston , MA ) and was mounted on an IX - 71 inverted microscope ( Olympus , Melville , NY ) with fluorescence capabilities . A cooled SPOT RT - KI 7 - 33 Shot Color CCD camera ( Diagnostic Instruments , Sterling Heights , MI ) was used to obtain fluorescence live / dead images from several centerline locations within the flow channel . Note that disassembly of the system is not required to obtain high resolution images . All experiments were performed at room temperature ( 25°C ) . Generation of airway reopening conditions Two occlusion fluids were used in the study . Cell culture media was used for experiments related to the effect of cellular confluence , while PBS with 0 . 1 mg / ml CaCl 2 and MgSO 4 was used for experiments related to the effect of airway diameter . PBS represents a surfactant - deficient , high surface tension airway - lining fluid and since surfactant deficiency is a characteristic of ARDS ( 32 ) , this fluid was used in most of our experiments . However , the use of PBS in the experiments with a sub - confluent monolayer of EpC resulted in significant cell detachment ( see Figure 6 ) . In contrast , cell culture media did not result in cell detachment for Page 9 of 46 10 confluent or sub - confluent monolayers ( see Figure 7 ) and was therefore used in the experiments related to the effect of cellular confluence . After assembly , the flow chamber did not contain any fluid ( i . e . it was air filled ) . A syringe pump was then used to fill the flow chamber with the occlusion fluid at a rate of 3 mm / s . Once the channel was filled , the same syringe pump was operated in reverse to create a constant velocity “forward” propagating air bubble which removed the occlusion fluid at a constant rate . Once the air bubble had displaced the occlusion fluid , the chamber was re - filled with a live / dead stain at 3 mm / s and incubated before visualization ( see below ) . On average , each experimental run ( i . e . chamber assembly , bubble propagation and obtaining fluorescence images ) , was performed in ~ 10 minutes for experiments utilizing PBS and in ~ 20 min for experiments utilizing cell culture media . ( Differences in duration were due to the different incubation times required by the live / dead stains in PBS or media ) . Note that the initial filling of the chamber as well as the re - filling of the chamber with the live / dead stain involves the “backward” propagation of an air - liquid interface . Control experiments were therefore conducted to determine if this “backward” air - liquid interface propagation and / or maintaining cells at room temperature for 10 or 20 minutes causes any cell necrosis . Specifically , control conditions were established by pumping in an occlusion fluid containing the live / dead stain at 3 mm / s and maintaining the system at room temperature for 10 or 20 min . Almost no dead cells were observed under control conditions , which demonstrates that neither the “backward” air - liquid interface propagation during chamber filling nor maintaining the cells at room temperature for 10 or 20 min results in cellular necrosis . Bubble velocities used in this study were selected based on the range one would expect to find in the terminal and respiratory bronchioles . For normal breathing conditions of V T = 500 ml Page 10 of 46 11 and 12 breaths / min , the range of total cross - sectional areas found in the terminal and respiratory bronchioles ( 34 ) ( 100 to 1000 cm 2 ) , results in an expected range of reopening velocities from 1 to 10 mm / s . A baseline reopening velocity of 3 mm / s was selected to correspond to this range . In addition , we also investigated how an order of magnitude change in reopening velocity ( i . e . reopening velocities of 30 and 0 . 3 mm / s ) influences cellular injury . The flow rates required to create these reopening velocities were calculated based on the cross - sectional areas of the flow channel , Q = UA ; here Q is the flow rate specified by the syringe pump , U is the velocity of the air bubble and A is the cross - sectional area of the flow channel . Note that this formula assumes that the thickness of the film deposited during reopening is negligible and we utilized a well - established fluid - dynamic model of airflow in a fluid - filled channel ( 5 ) to verify this assumption . Specifically , film thickness is a function of a dimensionless velocity known as the Capillary number , Ca = µ U / (cid:1) ; here µ is the viscosity of the medium and (cid:1) is the surface tension . Ca relates the relative importance of viscous forces to surface tension forces on bubble propagation . For the bubble velocities used in our experiments the capillary number range is Ca = 3 . 7×10 - 6 to 3 . 7×10 - 4 . For this range of Ca values , the maximum theoretical film thickness is 0 . 5 % of the channel height . Therefore neglecting the film thickness in the flow rate calculation is justified . Quantification of Cellular Injury Cell viability following bubble propagation , was determined by live / dead staining . The live / dead stain ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad CA ) consisted of 1 . 2 µ M ethidium homodimer 1 and 1 . 2 µ M calcein AM , in PBS , for the airway diameter study or 1 µ M ethidium homodimer 1 and 2 µ M calcein AM in serum free cell culture media for the confluence study . Note that the working fluid for the stain was selected based on the occlusion fluid used in the experiment . For experiments conducted with PBS , the cells were incubated in the dark , at room temperature , for 2 minutes . Page 11 of 46 12 This short incubation time was used in order to prevent any additional cellular injury which may occur during prolonged exposure to PBS . In contrast , cells were incubated in the dark for 10 minutes in the experiments that utilized cell culture media as the working fluid . Calcein AM ( 494 nm excitation – 517 nm emission ) and ethidium homodimer 1 ( 528 nm excitation – 617 nm emission ) have been used extensively to differentiate live and dead cells . Calcein AM freely diffuses into living cells where it is converted into a membrane insoluble product . As it accumulates inside the cell , the cytoplasm of the cell can be viewed in green color . On the other hand , ethidium homodimer 1 can not enter through membranes of living cells . If the plasma membrane is ruptured , this dye enters the cell and binds to nuclear DNA . As a result , the nucleus of these “dead” cells can be viewed in red color . For each control and experimental condition , 5 to 10 fluorescent images were obtained from the centerline of the channel . The reason for acquiring images only along the centerline was to eliminate any possible stress magnification effects near the side - walls of the channel . The number of live cells ( i . e . calcein positive ) and dead cells ( i . e . ethidium positive ) in each image were counted using the Metamorph image analysis software ( Molecular Devices Co . , Downington , PA ) . The percentage of dead cells was calculated as the number of dead cells divided by the total number of cells in each image . For each experimental condition , the percentage of dead cells was quantified and the mean and standard error of these values were calculated . An analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with p < 0 . 05 was used to document statistically significance differences . Cyclic Reopening Experiments We also conducted a set of experiments to investigate the effect of cyclic reopening on EpC injury . These experiments were conducted by exposing confluent monolayers of EpC to Page 12 of 46 13 repeated bubble propagations and used PBS as the occlusion fluid . For these experiments , we assembled the chamber in the normal fashion and filled it with the occlusion fluid . We then propagated a bubble in the “forward” direction at a velocity of 3 mm / s to remove the occlusion fluid . We then re - filled the chamber with the occlusion fluid at a rate of 3 mm / s and repeated the “forward” bubble propagation at the same velocity . This procedure was repeated several times in order to produce one , three or five “forward” bubble propagations over the EpC . Finally , a live / dead stain was pumped into the chamber and fluorescent images were obtained at 5 - 10 random centerline locations . In addition to quantifying the necrosis rate for adhered cells , we also quantified cell detachment by counting the number of attached cells in each fluorescent image and calculating the % of cells that remained adhered relative to the average number of cells counted under control conditions ( i . e . no “forward” bubble propagation ) . Note that all images were obtained with a 10X objective . Confocal microscopy In this study , confocal microscopy was used to assess the morphology of EpC in both low and high confluent monolayers . Cells were stained with calcein AM ( 494 nm excitation – 517 nm emission ) and were viewed with a LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope ( Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) . After growing cells to the desired degree of confluence , the flow chamber was assembled and serum free cell culture media with 2 µ M calcein AM was pumped into the chamber . Calcein diffuses into the entire cytoplasm which allows for the visualization of whole - cell morphology . Cells were incubated in the dark for 10 minutes before obtaining a confocal scan which consisted of 20 - 40 confocal slices depending on the thickness of the cells . Each confocal image / scan was 0 . 2 µ m in thickness and the total scanning time was ~ 2 minutes . Cytoskeleton Staining Page 13 of 46 14 To visualize actin filaments , cells were seeded on coverslips and grown to the desired degree of confluence . Cells were then washed with PBS and fixed in 10 % neutral buffered formalin ( 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS ) for 10 min at room temperature . After washing with PBS , cells were permeabilized with a solution of 0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 in PBS for 5 minutes at room temperature and then rinsed with PBS . After blocking nonspecific binding with 1 % Bovine Serum Albumin ( BSA ) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature , cells were incubated with 2 . 5 % Alexa - 488 labeled phalloidin ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) in PBS for 20 minutes at room temperature to localize actin filaments . Finally cells were washed with PBS and the coverslips were flooded with 0 . 002 mg / ml DAPI ( 4 ’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) ( Sigma Aldrich , St . Louis MO ) in aqueous solution to label nuclei . Coverslips were then mounted on glass slides using Gelmount mounting media ( Biomeda , Foster City , CA ) and visualized by epifluorescence using an IX - 71 inverted microscope ( Olympus , Melville , NY ) with fluorescence capabilities . To visualize microtubules , cell monolayers were washed with PBS and fixed in cold methanol for 10 min . After a wash with PBS , non specific binding was blocked with 10 % normal goat serum in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature and cells were subsequently rinsed with PBS . To localize tubulin , cells were first incubated with a mouse monoclonal anti - tubulin antibody ( DM1A , 1 : 40 , Sigma , St Louis , MO ) in PBS at 37°C for 20 minutes . Following incubation with the primary antibody , cells were incubated with a Rhodamine labeled goat anti mouse IgG ( 1 : 40 , Jackson Immunologicals , West Grove PA ) in PBS at 37°C for 20 minutes . Finally , cells were washed with PBS and the coverslips were flooded with 0 . 002 mg / ml DAPI in aqueous solution to label nuclei . As above , coverslips were mounted on glass slides using Gelmount mounting media and visualized by epiofluorescence by using an IX - 71 inverted microscope ( Olympus , Melville , NY ) with fluorescence capabilities . Page 14 of 46 15 Experimental Results Effect of Channel Height and Bubble Velocity on Cellular Injury Figure 3 shows representative fluorescent pictures obtained under control conditions and as a function of bubble velocity and channel height . Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead and calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive . If the cell contains both colors , it was accepted as dead . As can be seen , the number of dead cells increases as the velocity and the channel height decrease . Figure 4 shows the percentage of cell death ( mean + SE ) for the various conditions used in this study . For all channel heights , control experiments result almost no injury ( < 1 % ) . The highest injury level was observed at a channel height of 0 . 5 mm and a bubble velocity of 0 . 3 mm / s ( 40 . 4 % ± 3 . 6 % ) while the lowest injury was observed at a channel height of 1 . 7 mm and a bubble velocity of 30 mm / s bubble velocity ( 0 . 5 % ± 0 . 01 % ) . A two - way ANOVA indicates that increasing the bubble velocity resulted in a statistically significant decrease in cell death ( F = 46 . 0 , p < 0 . 01 ) . In addition , propagating an air bubble in channels with larger heights resulted in a statistically significant decrease in cell death ( F = 27 . 3 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Note that the decrease in cell injury with increasing bubble velocity is consistent with previous studies ( 4 ) . A post - hoc comparison using the Holm - Sidak method indicates that all mean values in Figure 4 , except for values under control conditions , are statistically different ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Effect of Repeated Bubble Passes on Cell Adhesion and Injury Figure 5A shows how changing the number of repeated bubble passages influences the % of cells that remained adhered relative to control conditions . ANOVA indicate that although one bubble pass does not result in cell detachment , three and five bubble passes result in a statistically significant reduction in the number of adhered cells ( F = 26 . 7 , p < 0 . 01 ) . In addition , five bubble passes results in more cell detachment than three bubble passes ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Figure 5B Page 15 of 46 16 shows how repeated bubble passages influence the necrosis rate of the adhered cells . ANOVA indicates that compared to one bubble passage , three bubble passages increases the cell necrosis rate ( F = 53 . 3 , p < 0 . 01 ) . However , there was no statistically significant difference in the necrosis rate between three and five bubble passages ( p = 0 . 8 ) . These results suggest that cyclic airway reopening may cause significant lung damage and a denuded epithelium . Effect of Cell Confluence on Cellular Injury During ARDS , the epithelium in the lung is disrupted due to the detachment of EpC from the basement membrane . As a result , the EpC monolayer becomes less confluent , cell - cell attachments are disrupted and the ratio of type I to type II cells may be altered ( 32 ) . To investigate these conditions , we cultured the CCL - 149 cell line for 1 and 4 days in order to obtain low and high confluent monolayers of EpC . High confluent monolayers represent uninjured airways whereas low confluent monolayers represent injured airways . Cells were then exposed to bubble velocities of 0 . 3 , 3 and 30 mm / s in a 0 . 5 mm high channel to investigate the effect of confluence on cellular viability . Initially , we propagated air bubbles in channels occluded with PBS which contained a low confluent monolayer of EpC . However , under these conditions , all bubble velocities resulted in the detachment of a large percentage of the cells ( see Figure 6A ) . Note that we did not observe this cell detachment behavior when PBS was used as the occlusion fluid for the high confluent monolayer system ( Figure 3 ) . In order to quantify the amount of cell detachment , we counted the number of attached cells in each fluorescent image ( ~ 5 - 10 images per experiment ) and calculated the % of cells that remained adhered relative to the average number of cells counted under control conditions . As shown in Figure 6B , all three velocities produced statistically significant detachment relative to control conditions ( ANOVA , F = 39 . 4 , p < 0 . 01 ) while differences in the amount of cell detachment at the three different Page 16 of 46 17 velocities were not statistically significant ( p > 0 . 22 ) . These results indicate that sub - confluent monolayers undergo ~ 80 - 95 % cell detachment when exposed to bubble propagation in PBS . Since cellular detachment could lead to significant errors in quantifying cellular injury , we used an alternative occlusion fluid , i . e . cell culture media , which did not result in significant cellular detachment in either the high or low confluent monolayers . Figure 7 shows representative fluorescent pictures of the live / dead staining obtained for both high and low confluent monolayers at various bubble velocities when cell culture media was used as the occlusion fluid . Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead and calcein stained cells ( green ) are living . Figure 8 shows the percentage of cell death ( mean + SE ) for the various conditions . For both high and low confluent monolayers , control experiments resulted in almost no death ( < 1 % ) . A two - way ANOVA indicated that there was significantly less death in the high confluent monolayers than in the low confluent monolayers at all three velocities ( F = 111 , p < 0 . 01 ) . In addition , the two - way ANOVA indicated that the degree of cellular injury observed at different velocities in the low confluent monolayers was not statistically different ( F = 0 . 91 ) . Effect of Cell Confluence on Cellular Morphology In this study , we quantified the morphological properties of EpC in high and low confluent monolayers using confocal microscopy . Examples of the 3D images obtained with this technique are shown in Figure 9 . Here , a cytoplasmic live stain , Calcein AM , is used to visualize the entire cell body . In these figures , the top section represents a side view of the cross sections obtained at the location marked with a horizontal line . Most cells are elongated in one direction and the length of the cell ( L ) was defined as the maximum distance between the cell boundaries in the elongated direction . The maximum perpendicular distance to the length was defined as the width ( W ) . For sub - confluent cells , we defined the maximum distance from apical to basal Page 17 of 46 18 surface of the cell as the cell height ( h c ) . For confluent cells , we measured h c as the distance from the apical surface of cell - cell contact regions to the maximum apical surface of the cell . Note that h c was measured using the side views . This measurement procedure was repeated for 28 cells in high confluent monolayers and 19 cells in the low confluent monolayers . As shown in Figure 10 , the average dimensions measured for EpC in the high confluent monolayer were L = 44 ± 1 . 6 µ m , W = 28 ± 1 . 0 µ m and h c = 3 . 1 ± 0 . 14 µ m , while the average dimensions in the low confluent monolayer were L = 78± 5 . 7 µ m , W = 48 ± 4 . 3 µ m and h c = 5 . 8 ± 0 . 32 µ m . ANOVA indicates that the differences in the average L , W and h c values were statistically significant ( p < 0 . 01 for all cases ) . Effect of Cellular Confluence on Microstructural Properties In this study , we also visualized the actin and tubulin cytoskeleton network for EpC in high and low confluent monolayers . As shown in Figure 11A , for high confluent monolayers , actin filaments display a normal structure in which filaments exhibit fiber - like structure , provide attachments between neighboring cells and allow the EpC to form a tight sheet ( i . e . an epithelium ) . In the low confluent monolayer , however , actin forms a less fiber - like network and displayed a circumferential organization of filaments at the cell periphery . Figure 11B shows the network of microtubules observed in both high and low confluent monolayers . Tubulin forms a relatively uniform network in the high confluent cells while in the low confluent cells , the density of tubulin appears to decrease at the cell periphery . Discussion It is well established that the ventilation of ARDS patients at large tidal volumes ( V T ) imparts injurious stretching deformation to lung epithelial cells ( 10 , 32 ) . However , the reopening of fluid - filled airways at low lung volumes may also impart injurious mechanical stresses ( 18 ) . Page 18 of 46 19 The goal of this study was to develop and utilize an in - vitro , cell - culture model of airway reopening to investigate how several parameters including reopening velocity , airway diameter , repeated reopening events and cellular confluence influence cellular injury . In this model , we propagated a long , continuous air bubble at different velocities in an adjustable - height , parallel - plate flow chamber . This flow chamber was occluded with two different types of fluids ( PBS and cell culture media ) and the lower wall was lined with alveolar epithelial cells ( EpC ) cultured to either confluent or sub - confluent states . Fluorescent live / dead stains were used to quantify the percentage of dead cells , confocal microscopy was used to quantify cellular morphology and cytoskeletal stains were used to visualize changes in the EpC’s microstructure . Although previous investigators ( 4 , 20 ) utilized parallel - plate flow chambers to investigate the influence of two - phase , air - liquid flows on alveolar EpC , the flow chamber used in this study offers some unique advantages . First , unlike previous systems , high resolution fluorescent microscopy with 63x oil - immersed objectives can be performed in - situ without any disassembly of the system . The ability to visualize cells in - situ allowed for the specification of well defined control conditions ( i . e . filling the chamber with fluid ) which did not result in significant cell death . Second , although a simple flow channel geometry was used in this study , arbitrary flow geometries , including bifurcating patterns , can easily be accomplished by changing the pattern cut into the silicone - rubber flow channel gasket . Finally , the bottom coverslip of this system can be replaced with a transparent flexible membrane to more accurately simulate the collapsibility of pulmonary airways . During the ventilation of fluid - filled lungs , different diameter airways will be exposed to different reopening velocities . In this study , we accounted for these differences by varying both the bubble velocity and the height of the parallel - plate flow chamber . As shown in Figs . 3 and 4 , Page 19 of 46 20 a reduction in both airway diameter and / or bubble velocity resulted in an increase in cellular necrosis for cells cultured to ~ 100 % confluence . These results indicate that airways in distal lung regions are most prone to injury and that ventilation strategies with rapid reopening dynamics may help prevent cellular and tissue damage . The magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses exerted on the EpC will vary due to the different bubble velocities and channel heights used in each experiment . To investigate the relationship between hydrodynamic stress magnitude and cell death , we utilize the relationships developed by Bilek et . al . ( 4 ) to calculate the maximum pressure gradient , ( dP / dx ) max , shear stress , ( (cid:1) s ) max , and shear stress gradient , ( d (cid:1) s / dx ) max , exerted on the EpCs during bubble passage . ( ) ( ) 29 . 0 2 max 34 . 0 (cid:4) = Ca H dx dP (cid:6) ( 1 ) ( ) ( ) 36 . 0 max 69 . 0 Ca H s (cid:6) (cid:1) = ( 2 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 75 . 0 2 max 2 . 1 22 . 0 * Ca H dx d s + = (cid:6) (cid:1) ( 3 ) Here , (cid:6) is the air - liquid surface tension , H is the channel half - height , Ca = µ U / (cid:6) is the capillary number , U is the bubble velocity and µ is the fluid viscosity . For each experimental condition , i . e . different U and H , in which PBS was used as the occlusion fluid , the percentage of dead cells was plotted as a function of the different hydrodynamics stress parameters in Fig . 12abc . Note that this figure specifically demarcates changes in velocity and channel height and that all data in Fig . 12 are for 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC . The linear - regression analysis of the PBS data only ( see dashed line in Fig . 12 ) demonstrates that there is a strong ( r 2 = 0 . 91 ) and statistically significant ( p < 0 . 01 ) correlation of cell death with ( dP / dx ) max . In addition , there was a weaker ( r 2 = 0 . 42 ) but statistically significant ( p < 0 . 05 ) correlation of cell death with ( d (cid:1) s / dx ) max . Finally , there was no statistically significant correlation of cell death with the applied shear stress ( r 2 = 0 . 03 , p = 0 . 664 ) . This analysis provides strong statistical evidence that the amount of cell Page 20 of 46 21 injury is not a function of the maximum shear stress applied to the cell . In addition , although there is a statistically significant correlation with shear stress gradients , the divergence of the data in Fig . 12C as well as the nearly vertical relationships for isopleths in height suggests that shear stress gradients play a minor role . Therefore , the results of this study strongly indicate that the development of large spatial gradients in pressure is required to rupture the plasma membrane . Although the exact mechanisms are unknown , we hypothesize that spatial gradients in pressure may cause inhomogenous cell deformation and / or the development of non - uniform plasma membrane strains ( i . e . strain concentrations ) which promote membrane rupture . Future computational models of this system that account for cell mechanics and deformability may be useful in testing this hypothesis . In addition to the effect of a single reopening event , this study investigated how multiple bubble passes , which mimics cyclic airway reopening , influences cell injury . These studies utilized a confluent monolayer of EpC , PBS as the occlusion fluid and a reopening velocity of 3 mm / s . As shown in Figure 5B , although additional bubble passes result in an increase in cell necrosis ( 1 vs . 3 bubble passes ) , after a critical number of bubble passages ( i . e . 3 ) , the bubble does not induce additional cell necrosis . The data in Figure 5A demonstrates that although EpC remain adhered to the surface after a single bubble pass , repeated bubble passes cause a significant amount of cell detachment . We therefore conclude that the major implication of repeated airway reopening events is a denuded epithelium . Cell detachment may be an important mechanism of lung injury since an intact epithelium is required for normal lung function and EpC detachment would lead to an increased permeability of the alveolar - capillary barrier and the flooding of lung airspaces . Future studies should therefore focus on the potential mechanisms of Page 21 of 46 22 cell adhesion in order to identify cell based properties that would prevent lung injury by promoting firm EpC adhesion . In addition to the effect of reopening dynamics , data from the current study can be used to investigate the effect of different occlusion fluids on EpC injury during reopening . Specifically , in the current study , 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC were exposed to equivalent reopening conditions ( i . e . bubble velocity and channel height of 0 . 5mm ) in two different occlusion fluids , PBS and cell culture media . As shown in Figure 13 , for a given bubble velocity , bubble propagation in cell culture media resulted in significantly less cell death when compared with bubble propagation in PBS ( ANOVA , F = 121 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Note that for both fluids , control experiments , which consisted of maintaining cells PBS or cell culture media for 10 or 20 min with no bubble propagation , resulted in almost no dead cells ( < 1 % ) . The highest injury level was observed at a bubble velocity of 0 . 3 mm / s in PBS ( 40 . 4 % ± 3 . 6 % ) and the lowest injury was observed at a bubble velocity of 30 mm / s in cell culture media ( 0 . 7 % ± 0 . 2 % ) . A two - way ANOVA also indicates that for cell culture media conditions , increasing the bubble velocity results in a statistically significant decrease in cell death ( F = 51 . 8 , p < 0 . 01 ) which is consistent with data obtained for PBS conditions and with previous studies ( 4 ) . Although PBS and cell culture media have equivalent viscosities of µ = 0 . 007 g / ( cm * s ) , measurements of the surface tension via the pendent drop technique indicate that the surface tension of cell culture media is lower than the surface tension of PBS ( i . e . (cid:6) media = 57 dyne / cm vs . (cid:6) PBS = 72 dyne / cm ) . To investigate if the lower (cid:6) media value was responsible for the decreased cell necrosis , the % of cell death measured in the cell culture media experiments was plotted as a function of the different stress components as shown by the inverted dotted triangles in Fig . 12abc . Note that for these data points , stress components were calculated using (cid:6) media = 57 dyne / cm in Eqns . ( 1 - 3 ) . All Page 22 of 46 23 culture media data points were significantly lower than the value predicted by a linear regression of the PBS data ( dash lines ) . In addition , a linear regression on all data points in Fig . 12 indicate that the inclusion of the cell culture media points significantly reduces the strength of the correlation ( i . e . r 2 = 0 . 66 for ( dP / dx ) max and r 2 = 0 . 21 for ( d (cid:1) s / dx ) max ) . This result indicates that the decrease in cell death for the cell culture media experiments can not be explained by a decrease in hydrodynamic stress magnitude alone . We therefore hypothesize that differences in other fluid properties , such as osmolarity , may induce a rapid change in cell properties which in turn alters the cell’s susceptibility to bubble induced injury . For example , Quadri et . al . ( 26 ) indicate that exposure to hyperosomolar solutions induces changes in the cytoskeleton of pulmonary endothelial cell . Although PBS and cell culture media exhibit different osmolarities ( 275 mOsm vs . ~ 330 mOsm ) , these fluids also exhibit differences in several other parameters , i . e . pH , which may also influence the EpC susceptibility to bubble - induced injury . Therefore , future studies which are specifically designed to investigate the effect of individual fluid properties ( i . e osmolarity or pH ) are required to ascertain the exact role of these parameters on cell injury during bubble propagation . In the current study , we demonstrated that for a constant bubble velocity and channel height , sub - confluent monolayers of EpC are more susceptible to bubble - induced injury than confluent monolayers ( see Fig . 8 ) . Note that this increased susceptibility of sub - confluent cells to mechanically - induced injury is consistent with a study by Tschumperlin and Margulies ( 29 ) who demonstrated that for a constant stretch magnitude , sub - confluent cells experience more necrosis than confluent cells . In this study , we also demonstrated significant differences in cell morphology between the sub - confluent and confluent monolayers . Recently , a computational study by Jacob and Gaver ( 19 ) demonstrated that that the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses Page 23 of 46 24 applied to the EpC may be a function of cell morphology . Specifically , for constant surface tension , channel height and flow rate , these authors predict that the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stress applied to the EpC is only a function of the ratio between cell height ( h c ) and cell width ( W ) , i . e . m W = h c / W . Note that these authors utilized a 2D model and therefore this ratio may also be defined based on the cell length , i . e . m L = h c / L . To investigate if the change in morphology shown in Fig . 10 would result in changes in the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses applied to the EpC , we calculated m W and m L for both confluent and sub - confluent cells and report the mean + SE in Table 1 . Although the sub - confluent cells are taller and wider than confluent cells ( Fig 10 ) , the mean m W and m L ratios are not statistically different ( ANOVA , F = 0 . 118 ) . For constant m W or m L values , Jacob and Gaver ( 19 ) predict that the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stress applied to the EpC is nearly equivalent . Therefore , the differences in cell death between confluent and sub - confluent cells ( see Fig . 8 ) , are not likely due to a change in the magnitude of the applied hydrodynamic stresses . This result suggests that factors other than the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses generated during reopening may be important for determining the degree of cellular injury . In this study , we investigated some of the potential determinates of cell injury by visualizing micro - structural difference between sub - confluent and confluent cells . As shown in Fig . 11 , these differences are significant and indicate that sub - confluent and confluent cells likely exhibit different mechanical properties . For example , the redistribution of actin in the sub - confluent cells , i . e . reduced actin density in the cell interior and increased concentration of actin in the periphery , would suggest heterogeneous mechanical properties while EpC in 100 % confluent monolayers exhibited relatively uniform actin distribution . In addition , the presence of cell - cell contacts in the confluent monolayer may provide the epithelium with the mechanical integrity required to withstand the bubble - induced Page 24 of 46 25 hydrodynamic forces . We note that numerous biophysical parameters are changing simultaneously in the confluent vs . sub - confluent experiments and it is therefore difficult to identify the specific mechanisms responsible for injury from these experiments . The determination of how various cell - based factors influence injury will therefore require more controlled studies that investigate the effect of individual cell - based factors . For example , future studies could investigate injury mechanisms by altering a specific biophysical property , such as cytoskeletal structure , and coupling observations of cell necrosis with quantitative measurements of cytoskeletal structure / mechanics . One potential physiological limitation of the current system is that cells were cultured on a rigid glass substrate . To better mimic collapsible pulmonary airways , future studies should incorporate a flexible substrate and should investigate how altering the elasticity of this substrate influences cell injury during reopening . In addition , the effect of more complex airway geometries , i . e . bifurcations , on cell injury should also be investigated . Tubular channel geometries may also be used in future to better reflect the airway structure . Another non - physiological parameter of the current system is performing the experiments at 25 °C . Future experiments should be performed at 37 °C . Finally , ARDS typically involves the up - regulation of a variety of inflammatory mediators and the presence of thrombin or histamine in the alveolar fluid due to disruption of the alveolar - capillary barrier . These chemical agents have been shown to alter the mechanical properties of epithelial cells ( 28 ) and future studies should therefore investigate if these biomechanical changes influence the amount of bubble - induced cell injury . Conclusions In this study , we utilized an in - vitro cell culture model to investigate how bubble velocity , airway diameter , repeated reopening events and degree of cell confluence influence cell Page 25 of 46 26 necrosis during the reopening of fluid - filled airways . Results indicate that slow reopening velocities and small airway diameters both result in a significant increase in cell necrosis . The implication of this result is that airways in the deep lung , which are smaller , would experience slower reopening velocities and are most susceptible to injury . These results also indicate that ventilation techniques that seek to rapidly reopen the lung may prevent cellular injury in fluid - filled airways . An analysis of the data obtained in 100 % confluent monolayers with PBS as the occlusion fluid , indicates that the large spatial gradients in pressure that develop near the bubble tip are responsible for rupturing the cell’s plasma membrane . The repeated reopening experiments indicate that the major implication of cyclic airway reopening is detachment of EpC and a disruption of the epithelium . A comparison of data obtain with PBS and cell culture media as the occlusion fluid , indicates that in addition to the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stress applied to the EpC , cellular responses to changes in the fluid environment may also alter the EpC’s susceptibility to bubble - induced injury . This study also demonstrated that EpC in sub - confluent monolayers are more susceptible to the hydrodynamic stresses generated during reopening . Although there are significant differences in the morphology of confluent and sub - confluent cells , analysis of this data suggests that these changes would not alter the magnitude of the hydrodynamic stresses applied to the EpC . Therefore , changes in other cell - based properties might be responsible for the different injury levels observed in confluent and sub - confluent EpC . For example , visualization of the EpC’s cytoskeletal structure indicates that sub - confluent cells may have more heterogenous biomechanical properties than confluent cells and that confluent EpC contain significant cell - cell attachments which might increase the EpC’s resistance to bubble - induced injury . These results therefore indicate that in addition to the magnitude of the applied hydrodynamic forces , the degree of cell injury during airway reopening may also depend Page 26 of 46 27 on cellular responses to environmental conditions and the biomechanical / biostructural properties of the EpC . Therefore , future studies should be designed to specifically investigate how changes in different environmental and / or cellular properties influence EpC injury during airway reopening . The results of these studies may be useful in the future development of ventilation strategies that seek to reduce the magnitude of the injurious stress components or pharmaceutical therapies that seek to reduce the EpC’s susceptibility to bubble - induced cell injury . Page 27 of 46 28 Acknowledgements We thank E . David Bell for his assistance with the cell adhesion and repeated reopening experiments . Grants This work was supported by a Beginning Grant - In - Aid from the Pennsylvania - Delaware affiliate of the American Heart Association . S . Ghadiali is a Parker B . Francis Fellow of Pulmonary Research . Page 28 of 46 29 References : 1 . Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . N Engl J Med 342 : 1301 - 1308 , 2000 . 2 . Alberts B . Molecular Biology of the Cell . New York : Garland Science , 2001 . 3 . Amato MB , Barbas CS , Medeiros DM , Magaldi RB , Schettino GP , Lorenzi - Filho G , Kairalla RA , Deheinzelin D , Munoz C , Oliveira R , Takagaki TY , and Carvalho CR . Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 338 : 347 - 354 , 1998 . 4 . Bilek AM , Dee KC , and Gaver DP , 3rd . Mechanisms of surface - tension - induced epithelial cell damage in a model of pulmonary airway reopening . J Appl Physiol 94 : 770 - 783 , 2003 . 5 . Bretherton FP . The motion of long bubbles in tubes . Journal of Fluid Mechanics 10 : 166 - 188 , 1961 . 6 . Cavanaugh KJ , Jr . and Margulies SS . Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro method . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 283 : C1801 - 1808 , 2002 . 7 . Cavanaugh KJ , Jr . , Oswari J , and Margulies SS . Role of stretch on tight junction structure in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 25 : 584 - 591 , 2001 . 8 . D ' Angelo E , Pecchiari M , Baraggia P , Saetta M , Balestro E , and Milic - Emili J . Low - volume ventilation causes peripheral airway injury and increased airway resistance in normal rabbits . J Appl Physiol 92 : 949 - 956 , 2002 . 9 . D ' Angelo E , Pecchiari M , Saetta M , Balestro E , and Milic - Emili J . Dependence of lung injury on inflation rate during low - volume ventilation in normal open - chest rabbits . J Appl Physiol 97 : 260 - 268 , 2004 . 10 . Dos Santos CC and Slutsky AS . Invited review : mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury : a perspective . J Appl Physiol 89 : 1645 - 1655 , 2000 . 11 . Dreyfuss D and Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157 : 294 - 323 , 1998 . 12 . Eichacker PQ , Gerstenberger EP , Banks SM , Cui X , and Natanson C . Meta - analysis of acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome trials testing low tidal volumes . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 166 : 1510 - 1514 , 2002 . 13 . Gattinoni L , Pesenti A , Avalli L , Rossi F , and Bombino M . Pressure - volume curve of total respiratory system in acute respiratory failure . Computed tomographic scan study . Am Rev Respir Dis 136 : 730 - 736 , 1987 . 14 . Ghadiali S , Halpern D , and Gaver DP . A dual - reciprocity boundary element method for evaluating bulk convective transport of surfactant in free - surface flows . Journal of Computational Physics 171 : 534 - 559 , 2001 . 15 . Ghadiali SN and Gaver D . The influence of non - equilibrium surfactant dynamics on the flow of a semi - infinite bubble in a rigid cylindrical capillary tube . Journal of Fluid Mechanics 478 : 165 - 196 , 2003 . 16 . Greene KE , Wright JR , Steinberg KP , Ruzinski JT , Caldwell E , Wong WB , Hull W , Whitsett JA , Akino T , Kuroki Y , Nagae H , Hudson LD , and Martin TR . Serial changes in surfactant - associated proteins in lung and serum before and after onset of ARDS . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 1843 - 1850 , 1999 . Page 29 of 46 30 17 . Halpern D and Gaver DP , III . Boundary element analysis of the time - dependent motion of a semi - infinite bubble in a channel . Journal of Computational Physics 115 : 366 - 375 , 1994 . 18 . Hubmayr RD . Perspective on lung injury and recruitment : a skeptical look at the opening and collapse story . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : 1647 - 1653 , 2002 . 19 . Jacob AM and Gaver DP . An investigation of the influence of cell topography on epithelial mechanical stresses during pulmonary airway reopening . Physics of Fluids 17 , 2005 . 20 . Kay SS , Bilek AM , Dee KC , and Gaver DP , 3rd . Pressure gradient , not exposure duration , determines the extent of epithelial cell damage in a model of pulmonary airway reopening . J Appl Physiol 97 : 269 - 276 , 2004 . 21 . Levitzky MG . Pulmonary Physiology . New York : McGraw - Hill , Inc . , 1991 . 22 . Martynowicz MA , Minor TA , Walters BJ , and Hubmayr RD . Regional expansion of oleic acid - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 250 - 258 , 1999 . 23 . Martynowicz MA , Walters BJ , and Hubmayr RD . Mechanisms of recruitment in oleic acid - injured lungs . J Appl Physiol 90 : 1744 - 1753 , 2001 . 24 . Muscedere JG , Mullen JBM , Gan K , and Slutsky AS . Tidal ventilation at low airway pressures can augment lung injury . American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 149 : 1327 - 1334 , 1994 . 25 . Pugin J , Verghese G , Widmer MC , and Matthay MA . The alveolar space is the site of intense inflammatory and profibrotic reactions in the early phase of acute respiratory distress syndrome . Crit Care Med 27 : 304 - 312 , 1999 . 26 . Quadri SK , Bhattacharjee M , Parthasarathi K , Tanita T , and Bhattacharya J . Endothelial barrier strengthening by activation of focal adhesion kinase . J Biol Chem 278 : 13342 - 13349 , 2003 . 27 . Stroetz RW , Vlahakis NE , Walters BJ , Schroeder MA , and Hubmayr RD . Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma membrane stress failure . J Appl Physiol 90 : 2361 - 2370 , 2001 . 28 . Trepat X , Grabulosa M , Buscemi L , Rico F , Farre R , and Navajas D . Thrombin and histamine induce stiffening of alveolar epithelial cells . J Appl Physiol 98 : 1567 - 1574 , 2005 . 29 . Tschumperlin DJ and Margulies SS . Equibiaxial deformation - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol 275 : L1173 - 1183 , 1998 . 30 . Tschumperlin DJ , Oswari J , and Margulies AS . Deformation - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells . Effect of frequency , duration , and amplitude . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162 : 357 - 362 , 2000 . 31 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , and Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafficking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 - 946 , 2001 . 32 . Ware LB and Matthay MA . The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1334 - 1349 , 2000 . 33 . Waters CM , Glucksberg MR , Lautenschlager EP , Lee CW , Van Matre RM , Warp RJ , Savla U , Healy KE , Moran B , Castner DG , and Bearinger JP . A system to impose prescribed homogenous strains on cultured cells . J Appl Physiol 91 : 1600 - 1610 , 2001 . 34 . Weibel ER . Morphometry of the Human Lung . New York : Academic Press , 1963 . Page 30 of 46 31 Figure Legends : Figure 1 : Schematic diagram of fluid stresses applied to EpC during airway reopening . µ is the occlusion fluid viscosity , (cid:1) is the surface tension and U is the bubble velocity . Cells experience a nominal shear stress downstream , a combination of shear and normal stresses near the bubble tip and a normal stress in the thin liquid film . Figure 2 : Experimental apparatus . A : Parallel - plate flow chamber with a propagating bubble . B : Schematic of sandwich - configuration used to create the flow chamber . C : Channel gasket geometry used in this study . D : Diagram of the experimental system which consists of a syringe pump and a computer controlled fluorescent microscope . Figure 3 . Representative fluorescent images of each condition tested in the airway diameter study . Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive while Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective using an IX - 71 inverted microscope . Figure 4 . Effect of channel height and bubble velocity on the percentage of dead ( i . e . Ethidium stained ) cells . Data are means ± SE and all mean values , except for the control values , were statistically different ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Note , all data are for 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC and PBS as the occlusion fluid . Figure 5 : A ) Effect of repeated bubble passes on cell adhesion . Mean values at one bubble pass and control conditions are not statistically different while three and five passes resulted in significant cell detachment ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) B ) Effect of repeated bubble passes on attached cell death . Three bubble passes resulted in a statistically significant increase in cell death ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) while five bubble passes did not cause any additional injury ( p = 0 . 8 ) . All data were obtained in a confluent monolayer and the channel height and bubble velocity were 0 . 5mm and 3 mm / s respectively . Figure 6 : A ) Representative fluorescent images of cell detachment when PBS was used as the occlusion fluid in low confluent monolayers . Channel height was 0 . 5mm , Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive and Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective . B ) Percentage of cells that remained adhered after bubble passage at different velocities . Mean values at different velocities were statistically lower than controls ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) but mean values at 0 . 3 , 3 and 30 mm / s were not statistically different . Figure 7 : Representative fluorescent images of each condition tested in the cell confluence study . The channel height was constant ( 0 . 5mm ) and cell culture media was used as the occlusion fluid in all cases . Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive while Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective . Figure 8 : Effect of monolayer confluence on the percentage of dead cells at different reopening velocities when cell culture media was used as the occlusion fluid . Data are means ± Page 31 of 46 32 SE and differences between high and low confluent conditions at all velocities are statistically significant ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Mean values at different velocities in low confluent monolayers are not statistically different ( F = 0 . 91 ) . Figure 9 : Representative confocal images of A ) high and B ) low confluent monolayers with length , width and height measurements in individual cells . Cytoplasm of cells were stained with calcein ( green ) . Images were obtained with a 63 X objective mounted on a LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope . Figure 10 : Average morphological dimensions measured from confocal scans of EC in high and low confluent monolayers . All means are statistically significant ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Figure 11 : Cytoskeletal staining of A ) actin filaments and B ) tubulin filaments for EpC in high and low confluent monolayers . Green proteins represent actin filaments , red proteins represent tubulin and blue regions are nuclei of individual cells . The images were obtained with a 60X objective using an IX - 71 inverted microscope . Figure 12 : Correlation of cell death with the maximum A ) pressure gradients , b ) shear stress and C ) shear stress gradients exerted on EpC during reopening . Symbols represent data collected channel heights of 0 . 5 , 0 . 8 and 1 . 7 mm ( circles , squares and upright triangles respectively ) . Shading represents data collected at bubble velocities of 0 . 3 , 3 . 0 and 30 mm / s ( black , white and grey respectively ) . Inverted dotted triangles represents data collected using cell culture media as the occlusion fluid ( all other data utilized PBS ) . Regressions shown are based on the data collected in PBS only and regressions using all data ( PBS + media ) are not shown for clarity . Figure 13 : Effect of occlusion fluid ( i . e . PBS vs . cell culture media ) on the percentage of dead cells obtained at various bubble velocities for 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC . Data are means ± SE and all means are statistically different ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 05 ) . Page 32 of 46 33 Table 1 : Comparison of average height to width and height to length ratios measured in sub - confluent and confluent cells . Data a mean + standard deviation and differences between sub - confluent and confluent cells are not statistically different ( ANOVA , F = 0 . 118 ) Height to width ratio ( m W = h c / W ) Height to Length ratio ( m L = h c / L ) Sub - confluent cells 0 . 14 + 0 . 042 0 . 090 + 0 . 028 Confluent cells 0 . 12 + 0 . 040 0 . 074 + 0 . 027 Page 33 of 46 Figure 1 : Schematic diagram of fluid stresses applied to EpC during airway reopening . µ is the occlusion fluid viscosity , (cid:31) is the surface tension and U is the bubble velocity . Cells experience a nominal shear stress downstream , a combination of shear and normal stresses near the bubble tip and a normal stress in the thin liquid film . Epithelial Cells ( not to scale ) Air bubble Fluid - Filled Airway Shear Stress Normal Stress Surface Tension , (cid:1) Bubble VelocityU Viscosity , µ Page 34 of 46 Figure 2 : Experimental apparatus . A : Parallel - plate flow chamber with a propagating bubble . B : Schematic of sandwich - configuration used to create the flow chamber . C : Channel gasket geometry used in this study . D : Diagram of the experimental system which consists of a syringe pump and a computer controlled fluorescent microscope . Outlet Port Inlet Port Flow Channel Syringe Pump Flow Chamber Fluorescence Microscope Computer A C B Width = 10 mm Length = 25 mm D Cell Seeded Lower Coverglass Channel Gasket Upper Coverglass PropagatingBubble Page 35 of 46 Figure 3 . Representative fluorescent images of each condition tested in the airway diameter study . Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive while Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective using an IX - 71 inverted microscope . L e ss D e a t h Less Death 0 . 3 mm / s 3 mm / s 30 mm / s Bubble Velocity C h a nn e l H e i g h t 0 . 8 mm 1 . 7 mm 0 . 5 mm control Page 36 of 46 Figure 4 . Effect of channel height and bubble velocity on the percentage of dead ( i . e . Ethidium stained ) cells . Data are means ± SE and all mean values , except for the control values , were statistically different ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Note , all data are for 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC and PBS as the occlusion fluid . Bubble Velocity ( mm / s ) control 0 . 3 3 30 D e a t h ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 . 5 0 . 8 1 . 7 Channel Height ( mm ) Page 37 of 46 Number of Bubble Passes control 1 3 5 % o f C e ll s A dh ere d R e l a t i v e t o C o n t r o l 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Number of Bubble Passes control 1 3 5 % D e a t h o f A tt a c h e d C e ll s 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 A ) B ) N . S . N . S . Figure 5 : A ) Effect of repeated bubble passes on cell adhesion . Mean values at one bubble pass and control conditions are not statistically different while three and five passes resulted in significant cell detachment ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) B ) Effect of repeated bubble passes on attached cell death . Three bubble passes resulted in a statistically significant increase in cell death ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) while five bubble passes did not cause any additional injury ( p = 0 . 8 ) . All data were obtained in a confluent monolayer and the channel height and bubble velocity were 0 . 5mm and 3 mm / s respectively . Page 38 of 46 Bubble Velocity ( mm / s ) control 0 . 3 3 30 % o f C e ll s A dh ere d R e l a t i v e t o C o n t r o l 0 20 40 80 100 120 0 . 3 mm / s 3 mm / s 30 mm / s Bubble Velocity control A ) B ) Figure 6 : A ) Representative fluorescent images of cell detachment when PBS was used as the occlusion fluid in low confluent monolayers . Channel height was 0 . 5mm , Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive and Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective . B ) Percentage of cells that remained adhered after bubble passage at different velocities . Mean values at different velocities were statistically lower than controls ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) but mean values at 0 . 3 , 3 and 30 mm / s were not statistically different . Page 39 of 46 l o w D e g ree o f C o n f l u e n ce h i g h 0 . 3 mm / s 3 mm / s 30 mm / s Bubble Velocity control Figure 7 : Representative fluorescent images of each condition tested in the cell confluence study . The channel height was constant ( 0 . 5mm ) and cell culture media was used as the occlusion fluid in all cases . Calcein stained cells ( green ) are alive while Ethidium stained cells ( red ) are dead . Images were obtained with a 10X objective . Page 40 of 46 Figure 8 : Effect of monolayer confluence on the percentage of dead cells at different reopening velocities when cell culture media was used as the occlusion fluid . Data are means ± SE and differences between high and low confluent conditions at all velocities are statistically significant ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Mean values at different velocities in low confluent monolayers are not statistically different ( F = 0 . 91 ) . Bubble Velocity ( mm / s ) control 0 . 3 3 30 D e a t h ( % ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Low High Degree of Confluence Page 41 of 46 Figure 9 : Representative confocal images of A ) high and B ) low confluent monolayers with length , width and height measurements in individual cells . Cytoplasm of cells were stained with calcein ( green ) . Images were obtained with a 63 X objective mounted on a LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope . length width height width height length Cross Section Line Cross Section Line A ) B ) 50 µ m 50 µ m Page 42 of 46 Length Width Height C e ll D i m e n s i o n ( µ m ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 Low High Degree of Confluence Figure 10 : Average morphological dimensions measured from confocal scans of EpC in high and low confluent monolayers . All means are statistically significant ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 01 ) . Page 43 of 46 H i g h D e g ree o f C o n f l u e n ce L o w A ) Actin Staining B ) Tubulin Staining Figure 11 : Cytoskeletal staining of A ) actin filaments and B ) tubulin filaments for EpC in high and low confluent monolayers . Green proteins represent actin filaments , red proteins represent tubulin and blue regions are nuclei of individual cells . The images were obtained with a 60X objective using an IX - 71 inverted microscope . Page 44 of 46 Shear Stress , ( (cid:1) s ) max ( dyne / cm2 ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 D ea t h ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 Pressure Gradient , ( dP / dx ) max , ( dyne / cm2 / µ m ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 D ea t h ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 Shear Stress Gradient , ( d (cid:1) s / dx ) max ( dyne / cm2 / µ m ) 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 D ea t h ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 H = 0 . 5 mm , U = 0 . 3 mm / s H = 0 . 5 mm , U = 3 . 0 mm / s H = 0 . 5 mm , U = 30 mm / s H = 0 . 8 mm , U = 0 . 3 mm / s H = 0 . 8 mm , U = 3 . 0 mm / s H = 0 . 8 mm , U = 30 mm / s H = 1 . 7 mm , U = 0 . 3 mm / s H = 1 . 7 mm , U = 3 . 0 mm / s H = 1 . 7 mm , U = 30 mm / s Cell culture media data , H = 0 . 5 mm A ) B ) C ) Regression on PBS data ( r 2 = 0 . 91 , p < 0 . 01 ) Regression on PBS data ( r 2 = 0 . 42 , p < 0 . 05 ) Regression on PBS data ( r 2 = 0 . 03 , N . S . ) Figure 12 : Correlation of cell death with the maximum A ) pressure gradients , b ) shear stress and C ) shear stress gradients exerted on EpC during reopening . Symbols represent data collected channel heights of 0 . 5 , 0 . 8 and 1 . 7 mm ( circles , squares and upright triangles respectively ) . Shading represents data collected at bubble velocities of 0 . 3 , 3 . 0 and 30 mm / s ( black , white and grey respectively ) . Inverted dotted triangles represents data collected using cell culture media as the occlusion fluid ( all other data utilized PBS ) . Regressions shown are based on the data collected in PBS only and regressions using all data ( PBS + media ) are not shown for clarity . Page 45 of 46 Figure 13 : Effect of occlusion fluid ( i . e . PBS vs . cell culture media ) on the percentage of dead cells obtained at various bubble velocities for 100 % confluent monolayers of EpC . Data are means ± SE and all means are statistically different ( ANOVA , p < 0 . 05 ) . Bubble Velocity ( mm / s ) control 0 . 3 3 30 D e a t h ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 PBS Media Occlusion Fluid Page 46 of 46