DOCUMENT RESUME ED 438 185 SE 063 214 AUTHOR Redish , Edward F . ; Saul , Jeffery M . ; Steinberg , Richard N . TITLE Student Expectations in Introductory Physics . PUB DATE 2000 - 00 - 00 NOTE 19p . ; Originally published in the American Journal of Physics , v66 p212 - 24 , 1998 . PUB TYPE Reports Research ( 143 ) Tests / Questionnaires ( 160 ) EDRS PRICE MF01 / PC01 Plus Postage . DESCRIPTORS * Classroom Environment ; Higher Education ; * Physics ; Science Education ; Scientific Principles ; * Student Attitudes ; Student Interests ; * Student Reaction ; Student Surveys ; * Teacher Expectations of Students ; Teacher Student Relationship ABSTRACT Students ' understanding of what science is about and how it is done and their expectations as to what goes on in a science course play a powerful role in what they can get out of introductory college physics . This is particularly true when there is a large gap between what the students expect to do and what the instructor expects them to do . This paper describes the Maryland Physics Expectations ( MPEX ) Survey , a 34 - item Likert - scale survey that probes student attitudes , beliefs , and assumptions about physics . The results of pre - and post - instruction delivery of this survey to 1500 students in introductory calculus - based physics at 6 colleges and universities are presented . Findings indicate a large gap between the expectations of experts and novices and a tendency for student expectations to deteriorate rather than improve as a result of a semester of introductory physics . ( Contains 36 references . ) ( Author / WRM ) Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made from the original document . Student Expectations in Introductory Physics Edward F . Redish , Jeffery M . Saul , and Richard N . Steinberg Department of Physics , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 Students ' understanding of what science is about and how it is done and their expectations as to what goes on in a science course play a powerful role in what they can get out of introductory college physics . This is particularly true when there is a large gap between what the students expect to do and what the instructor expects them to do . In this paper , we describe the Maryland Physics Expectations ( MPEX ) Survey ; a 34 - item Liken - scale ( agree - disagree ) survey that probes student attitudes , beliefs , and assumptions about phys - ics . We report on the results of pre - and post - instruction delivery of this survey to 1500 students in introduc - tory calculus - based physics at six colleges and universities . We note a large gap between the expectations of experts and novices and observe a tendency for student expectations to deteriorate rather than improve as a result of a semester of introductory physics . I . INTRODUCTION What students expect will happen in their introductory calculus - based ( university ) physics course plays a criti - cal role in what they learn during the course . It affects what they listen to and what they ignore in the firehose of information provided during a typical course by in - structor , teaching assistant , laboratory , and text . It af - fects which activities students select in constructing their own knowledge base and in building their own un - derstanding of the course material . This paper explores student attitudes and beliefs about university physics and how those attitudes and beliefs change as a result of physics instruction . In this paper , we present the Maryland Physics Expectations ( MPEX ) Survey , a Likert - style ( agree - disagree ) questionnaire we have developed to probe some aspects of student expec - tations . We have used this survey to measure the distri - bution of student attitudes at the beginning and end of the first semester of calculus - based physics at six col - leges and universities . Our survey is included as an ap - pendix . Because so little is known about the distribution , role , and evolution of student expectations in the university physics course , many questions can be asked . To limit the scope of this paper , we restrict ourselves to three questions . Q1 . How does the initial state of students in univer - sity physics differ from the views of experts ? 1 Q2 . To what extent does the initial state of a class vary from institution to institution ? Q3 . How are the expectations of a class changed as the result of one semester of instruction in vari - ous learning environments ? PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTER ( ERIC ) Other questions , such as what happens over the longer term and how items of various clusters correlate with each other , are left for future publications . We begin by reviewing previous work on the subject in section II . The structure and validation of the survey is described in section III . Section IV contains the results of the survey for five calibration groups , ranging from novice to expert . The results of our survey with students are presented in section V , and section VI discusses the implications of our work . II . BACKGROUND AND REVIEW OF PREVIOUS WORK A . Recent Progress in Physics Education : Teaching Concepts In the past fifteen years , there has been a momentous change in what we know about teaching and learning in the introductory calculus - based physics course . In about 1980 , research began to show that the traditional class leaves most students confused about the basic concepts of mechanics . I Subsequent work extended those obser - vations to other areas including optics , heat and thermo - dynamics , and electricity and magnetism . 2 In studying student understanding of the basic concepts of physics , much has been revealed about what students know and how they learn . The crucial element is that students are not " blank slates . " Their experience of the world ( and of school ) leads them to develop many concepts of their own about how the world functions . These concepts are often not easily matched with those that are being taught in physics courses , and students ' previous conceptions may make it difficult for them to build the conclusions the teacher desires . However , it has been demonstrated that if this situation is taken into account , it is often pos - sible to provide activities that induce most of the stu - dents to develop a good functional understanding of many of the basic concepts . 3 1 BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 2 U . S . DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION Office of Educational Research and Improvement EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTER ( ERIC ) midis document has been reproduced as received from the person or organization originating it . Minor changes have been made to improve reproduction quality . Points of view or opinions stated in this document do not necessarily represent official OERI position or policy . Success in finding ways to teach concepts is an excellent start ( even though the successful methods are not yet widespread ) , but it does not solve all of our teaching problems with physics . We want our students to develop a robust knowledge structure , a complex of mutually supporting skills and attitudes , not just a patchwork of ideas ( even if correct ) . We want them to develop a strong understanding of what science is and how to do it . We want them to develop the skills and confidence needed to do science themselves . B . Student Expectations It is not only physics concepts that a student brings into the physics classroom . Each student , based on his or her own experiences , brings to the physics class a set of atti - tudes , beliefs , and assumptions about what sorts of things they will learn , what skills will be required , and what they will be expected to do . In addition , their view of the nature of scientific information affects how they interpret what they hear . In this paper , we will use the phrase expectations to cover this rich set of understand - ings . We focus on what we might call students ' cogni - tive expectations expectations about their under - standing of the process of learning physics and the structure of physics knowledge rather than about the content of physics itself . Our model of learning4 is a growth model rather than a knowledge - transfer model . It concentrates on what happens in the student , rather than what the teacher is doing . We therefore have chosen to focus our study on cognitive attitudes that have an effect on what it is stu - dents choose to do , such as whether they expect physics to be coherent or a loose collection of facts . The specific issues our survey covers are discussed in detail in the next section . Other issues , such as students ' motivation , preferences , feelings about science and / or scientists , etc . are important but have been probed extensively else - where . 5 Although we don ' t often articulate them , most physics instructors have expectation - related goals for their stu - dents . In our university physics course for engineers and other scientists , we try to get students to make con - nections , understand the limitations and conditions on the applicability of equations , build their physical intui - tion , bring their personal experience to bear on their problem solving , and see connections between classroom physics and the real world . We refer to this kind of learning goal a goal not listed in the course ' s syllabus or the textbook ' s table of contents as part of the course ' s " hidden curriculum . " We are frustrated by the tendency many students have to seek " efficiency " to achieve a satisfactory grade with the least possible effort often with a severe unnoticed penalty on how much they learn . They may spend a large amount of time memorizing long lists of uninterpreted facts or perform - ing algorithmic solutions to large numbers of problems without giving them any thought or trying to make sense of them . Although some students consider this efficient , it is only efficient in the short term . The knowledge thus gained is superficial , situation dependent , and quickly forgotten . Our survey is one attempt to cast light on the hidden curriculum and on how student ex - pectations are affected by instruction . C . Previous Research on Cognitive Expectations There are a number of studies of student expectations in science in the pre - college classroom that show that stu - dent attitudes towards their classroom activities and their beliefs about the nature of science and knowledge affect their learning . Studies by Carey6 , Linn , and oth - ers have demonstrated that many pre - college students have misconceptions both about science and about what they should be doing in a science class . Other studies at the pre - college level indicate some of the critical items that make up the relevant elemerits of a student ' s system of expectations and beliefs . For example , Songer and Linn studied students in middle schools and found that they could already categorize students as having beliefs about science that were either dynamic ( science is un - derstandable , interpretive , and integrated ) or static ( sci - ence knowledge is memorization - intensive , fixed , and not relevant to their everyday lives ) . " Alan Schoenfeld has described some very nice studies of the assumptions high schools students make about learning mathemat - ics . 9 He concludes that " Student ' s beliefs shape their behavior in ways that have extraordinarily powerful ( and often negative ) consequences . " Two important large scale studies that concern the gen - eral cognitive expectations of adult learners are those of Perry " ) and Belenky et al . ( BGCT ) " Perry tracked the attitudes of Harvard and Radcliffe students throughout their college career . Belenky et al . tracked the views of women in a variety of social and economic circum - stances . Both studies found evolution in the expectations of their subjects , especially in their attitudes about knowledge . I2 Both studies frequently found their young adult subjects starting in a " binary " or " received knowl - edge " stage in which they expected everything to be true or false , good or evil , etc . , and in which they expected to learn " the truth " from authorities . Both studies ob - served their subjects moving through a " relativist " or " subjective " stage ( nothing is true or good , every view has equal value ) to a " consciously constructivist " stage . In this last , most sophisticated stage , the subjects ac - cepted that nothing can be perfectly known , and ac - cepted their own personal role in deciding what views were most likely to be productive and useful for them . Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 2 Student Expectations 3 Although these studies both focused on areas other than science , " most professional scientists who teach at both the undergraduate and graduate levels will recognize a binary stage , in which students just want to be told the " right " answers , and a constructivist stage in which stu - dents take charge of building their own understanding . Consciously constructivist students carry out their own evaluation of an approach , equation , or result , and un - derstand both the conditions of validity and the relation to fundamental physical principles . Students who want to become creative scientists will have to move from the binary to the constructivist stage . This is the transition that we want to explore . An excellent introduction to the cognitive issues in - volved is given by Reif and Larkin " who compare the spontaneous cognitive activities that occur naturally in everyday life with those required for learning science . They pinpoint differences and show how application of everyday cognitive expectations in a science class causes difficulties . Another excellent introduction to the cogni - tive literature on the difference between everyday and in - school cognitive expectations is the paper by Brown , Collins , and Duguid , who stress the artificiality of much typical school activity and discuss the value of cognitive apprenticeships . " All the above - cited works stress the importance of ex - pectations in how teens and young adults make sense of their world and their learning . If inappropriate expecta - tions play a role in the difficulties our students com - monly have with introductory calculus - based physics , we need to find a way to track and document them . III . Constructing the Survey A . Why a Survey ? Our interactions with students in the classroom and in informal settings have provided us with preliminary in - sights into student expectations . As is usual in physics education research , repeated , detailed , taped and tran - scribed interviews with individual students are clearly the best way of confirming or correcting informal obser - vations and finding out what a student really thinks . The education literature contains particularly valuable transcripts of student interviews , especially in the work of David Hammer . In his Ph . D . thesis at Berkeley , Hammer followed six students throughout the first se - mester of their university physics course , tracking their progress through detailed problem - solving interviews . 16 Each student was interviewed for approximately 10 hours . The interviews were taped and transcribed , and students were classified according to their statements and how they approached the problems . I7 However , conducting interviews with large numbers of students would be prohibitively expensive , and they are unlikely to be repeated at many institutions . Interviews therefore cannot yield information about the distribution of stu - dent expectations in a large population . In order to study larger populations , a reliable survey is needed which can be completed by a student in less than half an hour and analyzed by a computer . We developed the Maryland Physics Expectations ( MPEX ) survey to meet this need . B . The Development of the MPEX Survey We began to develop the MPEX survey in the Autumn of 1992 at the University of Washington . Students in the introductory calculus - based physics class were given a variety of statements about the nature of physics , the study of physics , and their relation to it . They rated these statements on a five point scale from strongly dis - agree ( 1 ) to strongly agree ( 5 ) . Items for the survey were chosen as a result of a detailed literature review , discussions with physics faculty , and our combined 35 years of teaching experience . The items were then vali - dated in a number of ways : by discussion with other fac - ulty and physics education experts , through student in - terviews , by giving the survey to a variety of " experts " , and through repeated delivery of the survey to the same group of students . The MPEX survey has been iteratively refined and im - plemented through testing in more than 15 universities and colleges during the last four years . The final ver - sion of the survey presented here has 34 items and typi - cally takes twenty to thirty minutes to complete . We re - port here on the results of the MPEX survey given at six colleges and universities to more than 1500 students . A list of the institutions that have participated is shown in Table 1 . All students were asked to complete the survey during the first week of the term ' " ( semester or quarter ) and at the end of the term . In the rest of this section , we describe how we chose the items of the survey and how we validated it . Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 3 Student Expectations 4 Choosing the Items of the MPEX Survey The cognitive structures that we have referred to as " student expectations " clearly are complex and contain many facets . We decided to focus on six issues or di - mensions along which we might categorize student atti - tudes towards the appropriate way to do physics . Three of these are taken from Hammer ' s study and we have added three of our own . Building on the work of Perry and Songer and Linn cited earlier , Hammer proposed three dimensions along which to classify student beliefs about the nature of learning physics : I9 1 . Independence beliefs about learning physics whether it means receiving information or involves an active process of reconstructing one ' s own un - derstanding ; 2 . Coherence beliefs about the structure of physics knowledge as a collection of isolated pieces or as a single coherent system ; 3 . Concepts beliefs about the content of physics knowledge as formulas or as concepts that underlie the formulas . In the MPEX survey , we seek to probe three additional dimensions : 4 . Reality Link beliefs about the connection be - tween physics and reality whether physics is un - related to experiences outside the classroom or Institution Instructional Characteristics N University of Maryland , College Park ( UMCP ) traditional lectures , some classes with group - learning tutorial instead of recitation , no lab 445 University of Minnesota , Minneapolis ( UMN ) traditional lectures , with group - learning research de - signed problem - solving and labs 467 Ohio State University , Columbus ( OSU ) traditional lectures , group - learning research designed problem - solving and labs 445 Dickinson College ( DC ) Workshop Physics 115 a small public liberal arts university ( PLA ) Workshop Physics 12 a medium sized public two - year college ( TYC ) traditional 44 Table I : Institutions from which first semester or quarter pre - and post - instruction survey data was collected . All data is matched , i . e . , all students included in the reported data completed both the pre - and post - instruction surveys . Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 4 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 5 whether it is useful to think about them together ; 5 . Math Link beliefs about the role of mathematics in learning physics whether the mathematical formalism is used as a way of representing informa - tion about physical phenomena or mathematics is just used to calculate numbers ; 6 . Effort beliefs about the kind of activities and work necessary to make sense out of physics whether they expect to think carefully and evaluate what they are doing based on available materials and feedback or not . The extreme views associated with each of these vari - ables are given in Table 2 . We refer to the extreme view that agrees with that of most mature scientists as the ex - pert or favorable view , and the view that agrees with that of most beginning students as the novice or unfa - vorable view . The survey items that have been selected to probe the six attitudes are given in the right hand col - umn of the table . We refer to the collection of survey items designed to probe a particular dimension as a clus - ter . Note that there is some overlap , as these dimen - sions are not independent variables . 20 Although we believe the attitudes that we have defined as expert correspond to those attitudes needed by most creative , intuitive , and successful scientists , we note that they are not always predictors of success in introductory physics classes . In an earlier study , Hammer studied two students in the algebra - based physics course at Berkeley 2t One student possessed many novice charac - teristics but was doing well in the course . The other stu - dent possessed many of the characteristics preferred by experts but was having trouble . The second student ' s desire to make sense of the physics for herself was not supported and she did not begin to succeed until she switched her approach to memorization and pattern matching . In this case the course supported an attitude and an approach to learning that most physics instruc - tors would not endorse and one which certainly would cause her trouble if she were to try to take more ad - vanced science courses . 22 One can imagine exploring a wide variety of character - istics ranging from whether the students like physics to whether they are intimidated by physics to whether they think they should take notes in lecture . In creating the MPEX survey , we have chosen to focus on issues that have an effect on how students interpret and process the physics in the class . We have not considered the stu - dent ' s feelings about physics , its value or its importance . Student Expectations Validating the Survey : Interviews We conducted more than 100 hours of videotaped stu - dent interviews in order to validate that our interpreta - tion of the survey items matched the way they were read and interpreted by students . We asked students ( either individually or in groups of two or three ) to describe their interpretations of the statements and to indicate why they responded in the way that they did . In addi - tion , students were asked to give specific examples from class to justify their responses . From these interviews , we have found that students are not always consistent with their responses and ap - proaches to what appear to us to be similar questions and situations . We feel that this does not represent a failure of the survey , but properly matches these stu - dents ' ill - defined understanding of the nature of physics . One reason for this was described by Hammer . He ob - served that some students in his study believed that pro - fessional physicists used the favorable conditions , but that it sufficed for them to behave in the unfavorable fashion for the purposes of the course . He referred to this by adding the marker " apparent " to the characteris - tic . This is only one aspect of the complex nature of human cognition . We must also be careful not to as - sume that a student exists in one extreme state or an - other . A student ' s attitude may be modified by an addi - tional attitude , as in Hammer ' s observations , or even ex - ist simultaneously in both extremes , depending on the situation that triggers the response . 23 One must there - fore use considerable care in applying the results of a limited probe such as our survey to a single student . We are also aware that students ' self - reported percep - tions may not match the way they actually behave . 24 However , the interviews suggest that if a student ' s self - perception of the learning characteristics described in Table 2 differs from the way that student actually func - tions , the self - perception has a strong tendency to be closer to the side chosen by experts . We therefore feel that while survey results for an individual student may be misleading , survey results of an entire classroom might understate unfavorable student characteristics . IV . EXPERT EXPECTATIONS : THE CALIBRATION GROUPS In order to test whether the survey correctly represents elements of the hidden curriculum , we gave it to a vari - ety of students and physics instructors . We defined as " expert " the response that was given by a majority of experienced physics instructors who have a high con - cern for educational issues and a high sensitivity to stu - dents . We conjectured that experts , when asked what answers they would want their students to give , would respond consistently . A . The Calibration Groups We tested the response of a wide rangeof respondents by comparing five groups : 1 . Group 1 : engineering students entering the calcu - lus - based physics sequence at the U . of Maryland , 2 . Group 2 : members of the US International Physics Olympics Team 3 . Group 3 : high school teachers attending the two - week Dickinson College Summer Seminar on new approaches in physics education Favorable Unfavorable MPEX Items independence takes responsibility for constructing takes what is given by authorities 1 , 8 , 13 , own understanding ( teacher , text ) without evaluation 14 , 17 , 27 coherence believes physics needs to be consid - believes physics can be treated as 12 , 15 , 16 , ered as a connected , consistent framework unrelated facts or " pieces " 21 , 29 concepts stresses understanding of the under - focuses on memorizing and using 4 , 19 , 26 , lying ideas and concepts formulas 27 , 32 reality link believes ideas learned in physics believes ideas learned in physics 10 , 18 , are relevant and useful in a wide variety of real contexts has little relation to experiences outside the classroom 22 , 25 math link considers mathematics as a conven - views the physics and the math as 2 , 6 , 8 , ient way of representing physical phenomena independent with little relationship between them 16 , 20 effort makes the effort to use information does not attempt to use available in - 3 , 6 , 7 , available and tries to make sense of it formation effectively 24 , 31 Redish , Steinberg , and Saul Table 2 : Dimensions c f student expectations 5 6 Student Expectations D 10 D 19 D 28 D 2 D 11 A 20 D 29 D 3 A 12 D 21 D 30 4 D i 13 D 22 D 31 A 5 A 14 D 23 D 32 A 6 A 15 D 24 1 D 33 D 7 ( A ) = 16 D 25 A 34 ( A ) 8 D 17 D 26 A 9 ( D ) 1 18 I A 27 Table 3 : Prevalent responses of our expert group . Where the respondents did not agree at the > 80 % level , the item is shown in parentheses and the majority response is shown . The response " A " indicates agree or strongly agree . The re - sponse " D " indicates disagree or strongly disagree . 4 . Group 4 : university and college teachers attending the two - week Dickinson College Summer Seminar on new approaches in physics education 5 . Group 5 : college faculty who are part of a multi - university FIPSE - sponsored project to implement Workshop Physics at their home institutions . The University of Maryland students are a fairly typical diverse group of engineering students at a large research university . The entering class average on the FCI is around 50 % , comparable to the average for introductory university physics classes . 2 The number of students in the sample is N = 445 . The US International Physics Olympics Team ( USIPOT ) is a group of high school students selected from appli - cants throughout the USA . After a two week training session , five are chosen to represent the US in the Inter - national Physics Olympics . In 1995 and 1996 , this group trained at the University of Maryland in College Park and we took the opportunity to have them complete survey forms . The total number of respondents in this group is N = 56 . Although they are not teachers , they have been selected by experts as some of the best high school physics students in the nation . Our hypothesis was that they would prove to be more expert than the average university physics student , but not as expert as our groups of experienced instructors . The physics instructors who served as our test groups were all visiting Dickinson College . Attendees came from a wide variety of institutions . Many have had con - siderable experience in teaching , and all of them were sufficiently interested in educational development to at - tend a workshop . We separated them into three groups : group 3 high school teachers attending a two - week summer seminar ( N = 26 ) , group 4 college and univer - sity teachers attending the two - week summer seminar ( N = 56 ) , and group 5 college and university teachers implementing Workshop Physics in their classroom ( N = 19 ) . The teachers in group 5 were committed to im - plementing an interactive engagement model of teach - ing in their classroom . We asked the three groups of in - structors to respond with the answer they would prefer their students to give . We expected these five groups to show an increasing level of agreement with answers we preferred . B . The Responses of the Calibration Groups The group we expected to be the most sophisticated , the group 5 instructors , agreed strongly as to what were the responses they would like to hear from their students . On all but three items , 80 % or more of this group agreed with a particular position . Three items , num - bers 7 , 9 , and 34 , had a strong plurality of agreement , but between X and X of the respondents chose neu - tral . We define the preferred response of group 5 as the expert response . We define a response in agreement with the expert response as favorable and a response in disagreement with the expert response as unfavorable . For the analysis in this paper , the agree and strongly agree responses ( 4 and 5 ) are combined , and the dis - agree and strongly disagree responses ( 1 and 2 ) are combined . A list of the favorable responses to the sur - vey items is presented in Table 3 . To display our results in a concise and easily interpret - able manner , we introduce an agree - disagree ( A - D ) plot . In this plot , the percentage of respondents in each group answering favorably are plotted against the per - centage of respondents in each group answering unfa - vorably . Since the fraction of students agreeing and dis - agreeing must add up to less than or equal to 100 % , all points must lie in the triangle bounded by the corners ( 0 , 0 ) , ( 0 , 100 ) , ( 100 , 0 ) . The distance from the diagonal line is a measure of the number of respondents who an - swered neutral or chose not to answer . The closer a point is to the upper left corner of the allowed region , the better the group ' s agreement with the expert re - sponse . 26 The results on the overall survey are shown in Fig . 1 . In this plot , the percentages are averaged over all of the items of the survey , using the preferred responses of calibration group 5 as favorable . The groups ' responses are distributed from less to more favorable in the pre - dicted fashion . 27 Although the overall results support our contention that our survey correlates well with an overall sophistication of attitudes towards doing physics , the cluster results show some interesting deviations from the monotonic ordering . These deviations are quite sensible and sup - Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 6 Student Expectations 7 port our use of clusters as well as overall results . In or - der to save space and simplify the interpretation of re - sults , we present the data in Table 4 . Displayed in this table are the percentages of each group ' s favorable and unfavorable responses ( in the form favorable / unfavor - able ) . The percentage of neutrals and not answering can be obtained by subtracting the sum of the favorable and unfavorable responses from 100 . From the table we see that most of the fraction of re - spondents agreeing with the favorable response tends to decrease monotonically from group 1 - 5 with a few inter - esting exceptions . The high school teachers ( group 3 ) are farther than their average from the favorable corner in the coherence and math clusters , while the Physics Olympics team is closer to the favorable corner in those categories than their average . These results are plausi - ble if we assume that high school teachers are less con - cerned with their students forming a coherent and a mathematically sophisticated view of physics than are university teachers . The results also agree with our per - sonal observations that the members of the USIPOT are unusually coherent in their views of physics and excep - tionally strong in their mathematical skills . Note also that the Olympics team results are very far from the favorable corner in the effort cluster . The main discrepancies are in items 3 and 7 . We suggest that the reader peruse the survey items of that cluster ( 3 , 6 , 7 , 24 , 31 ) . These items represent highly traditional meas - ures of effort ( reading the textbook , going over one ' s lec - ture notes ) which we conjecture are not yet part of the normal repertoire of the best and brightest high school physics students before they enter college . We also con - jecture that most of them will have to learn to make these kinds of efforts as they progress to increasingly so - phisticated materials and the level of challenge rises . This analysis of both the overall responses of the cali - bration groups and the variations in the ordering con - firms that the MPEX survey provides a quantitative measure of characteristics which experts hope and ex - 100 % 00 % 80 % 70 % 60 % 50 % 40 % 30 % 20 % 10 % - 0 % + X + Experts College 789050 , 6 HS Taw hers + US1POT X UsACP pre 1 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 80 % 90 % 100 % Fig . I : A - D plot for Calibration Groups . Average of all items Redish , Steinberg , and Saul pect their students to have . V . STUDENT EXPECTATIONS : DISTRIBUTION AND EVOLUTION In this section , we discuss the results obtained from giv - ing the MPEX survey at the beginning and end of the first term of introductory calculus - based physics at six different institutions . In each case , the subject covered was Newtonian mechanics . The schools involved in - clude the flagship research institutions of three large state universities : the University of Maryland ( UMCP ) , Ohio State ( OSU ) , and Minnesota ( UMN ) ; plus three smaller schools : Dickinson College ( DC ) , a small public liberal arts college ( PLA ) , and a public two year college ( TYC ) . At the named colleges , we have data from mul - tiple instructors . In the case of the last two institutions , data was only collected from a small number of instruc - tors and students . These are included in order to dem - onstrate how the MPEX survey can be used as a diag - nostic tool , but are kept anonymous to protect the iden - tity of the instructors and institutions involved . At Maryland , Ohio State , and Minnesota , classes were presented in the traditional lecture - lab - recitation frame - work with some modifications . At Maryland , there is no laboratory in the first semester and some of the recita - tion sections were done with University of Washington style tutorials . 28 At Minnesota , the laboratory and reci - tations involve carefully designed group work . 29 At Ohio State , lectures are traditional but are enhanced by use of various interactive elements , while recitation and laboratory are done in a group problem - solving format similar to that developed at Minnesota . At Dickinson College and at the public liberal arts institution , the classes surveyed were done in the Workshop Physics en - vironment which replaces lectures with a combined lab and class discussion . 3d The two - year college used a purely traditional lecture - recitation framework . Like Maryland , they have no lab in the first semester . The schools involved , the structure of their courses , and the number of students in our sample are summarized in Table 1 . In order to eliminate the confounding factor of differen - tial drop - out rates , we only include students who com - pleted the survey both at the beginning and at the end of the term . We say that the data is matched . Our results show some differences among different classes at the same institution , but the variation is statistically consis - tent with the sample size . Therefore , we have combined results for similar classes at a given institution . The overall survey results for the six schools are pre - sented in an A - D plot in Fig . 2 . In order to simplify the reading of the graphs , we have displayed the results from the three large research universities in one part of 7 Student Expectations 8 Overall I depen - ( gAtuage . Reality an MIR lkita3 Dm Gra Experts 87 / 6 93 / 3 85 / 12 89 / 6 93 / 3 92 / 4 85 / 4 College Teachers 80 / 10 80 / 8 80 / 12 80 / 8 94 / 4 84 / 9 82 / 6 HS Teachers 73 / 15 75 / 16 62 / 26 71 / 18 95 / 2 67 / 21 68 / 13 USPOT 68 / 18 81 / 12 I 79 / 8 73 / 13 64 / 20 85 / 8 50 / 34 UMCP pre 54 / 23 54 / 25 1 53 / 24 42 / 35 61 / 14 67 / 17 67 / 13 UMCP post 49 / 25 48 / 27 49 / 27 44 / 32 58 / 18 59 / 20 48 / 27 UMn pre 59 / 18 59 / 19 i 57 / 20 45 / 27 72 / 9 72 / 11 72 / 11 UMn post 57 / 20 58 / 20 61 / 17 46 / 28 69 / 10 72 / 12 63 / 16 OSU pre 53 / 23 51 / 24 52 / 21 , - 37 / 36 65 / 10 65 / 13 66 / 16 OSU post 45 / 28 46 / 28 j 46 / 26 35 / 35 54 / 17 55 / 20 44 / 30 DC pre 61 / 15 62 / 14 58 / 17 47 / 23 76 / 4 70 / 10 75 / 7 DC post 60 / 19 67 / 14 66 / 18 58 / 23 72 / 9 71 / 12 57 / 26 PLA pre 57 / 23 PLA post - - - - - 4 / 31 57 / 27 57 / 26 38 / 46 45 / 34 71 / 13 52 / 25 74 / 11 54 / 19 72 / 8 48 / 30 - - - - - 2722 ! 47 / 33 TYC pre 55 / 22 41 / 29 50 / 21 TY - - - - C - - P - o - si - - - - - 49 / 26 - - - - - ii / 3i - T - 48 / 29 30 / 42 35 / 41 69 / 16 58 / 17 58 / 17 58 / 18 80 / 8 65 / 21 Table 4 : Perm rages of students giving favorable / unfavorable responses on overall and clusters of the MPEX survey at the beginning ( pre ) and end ( post ) of the first unit of university physics . the figure ( Fig . 2a ) and those from the smaller schools in another ( Fig . 2b ) . The pre - course results are shown by filled markers and the post - course results by open markers . The results of the expert group are shown by a cross . We make two observations . 1 . The initial state of the students at all the schools tested differs substantially from the ex - pert results . The expert group was consistent , agreeing on which survey responses were desir - able 87 % of the time . Beginning students only agreed with the favorable ( expert ) responses about 40 - 60 % of the time , a substantial dis - crepancy . What is perhaps more distressing is that students explicitly supported unfavorable positions about 20 - 30 % of the time . 2 . In all cases , the result of instruction on the overall survey was an increase in unfavorable responses and a decrease in favorable re - sponses . Thus , instruction produced an aver - age deterioration rather than an improvement of student expectations . The overall survey includes items that represent a vari - ety of characteristics , as displayed in Table 2 . In order to better understand what is happening in the classes ob - served , let us consider the initial state and the change of student expectations in the various clusters . The results are presented in Table 4 . A . The Independence Cluster One characteristic of the binary thinker , as reported by Perry and BGCT , is the view that answers come from an authoritative source , such as an instructor or a text , and it is the responsibility of that authority to convey this knowledge to the student . The more mature students understand that developing knowledge is a participatory process . Hammer classifies these two extreme views as " by authority " and " independent . " Survey items 1 , 8 , 13 , 14 , 17 , and 27 probe students ' views along this di - mension . On this cluster , students ' initial views were Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 8 Student Expectations 9 favorable in a range from 41 % ( TYC ) to 62 % ( DC ) . All groups showed essentially no significant change as a re - sult of one term of instruction . For comparison , the USIPOT showed favorable views on these items 81 % of the time . Survey items 1 and 14 are particularly illuminating and show the largest gaps between experts and novices . # 1 : All I need to do to understand most of the basic ideas in this course is just read the text , work most of the problems , and / or pay close attention in class . # 14 Learning physics is a matter of acquiring new knowledge that is specifically located in the laws , principles , and equations given in the textbook and in class . The expert group was in 100 % agreement that students should disagree with item 1 and in 84 % agreement that they should disagree with item 14 . Disagreeing with these items represents a rather sophisticated view of learning ; but favorable shifts on these items are exactly the sort of changes that indicate the start of a transition between - a binary and a more constructivist thinker . The interviews strongly support this view . Students who disagreed with these items were consistently the most vigorous and active learners . This cluster of items , and items 1 and 14 in particular , appear to confirm that most students in university phys - ics enter with at least some characteristics of binary learners , agreeing that learning physics is simply a mat - ter of receiving knowledge in contrast to constructing one ' s own understanding . We would hope that if a uni - versity education is to help students develop more so - phisticated views of their own learning , that the intro - ductory semester of university physics would begin to move students in the direction of more independence . Unfortunately , this does not appear to have been the case . In the touchstone items of 1 and 14 , the only sig - nificant improvement was DC on item 14 ( 26 % to 53 % ) , and overall , only DC showed improvement . B . The Coherence Cluster Most physics faculty feel strongly that students should see physics as a coherent , consistent structure . A major strength of the scientific worldview is its ability to de - scribe many complex phenomena with a few simple laws and principles . Students who emphasize science as a collection of facts fail to see the integrity of the struc - ture , an integrity that is both epistemologically convinc - ing and useful . The lack of a coherent view can cause students many problems , including a failure to notice er - rors in their reasoning and an inability to evaluate a re - called item through cross - checks . Survey items 12 , 15 , 16 , 21 , and 29 have been included in order to probe stu - dent views along this dimension . Our expert group was in agreement as to what responses were desirable on the elements of this cluster 85 % of the time . The initial views of students at our six schools were only favorable between 50 % and 58 % of the time . Most classes showed a small deterioration on this clus - ter , except for UMN ( slight improvement from 57 % to 61 % favorable responses ) and DC ( improvement of 58 % to 66 % favorable responses ) . Two specific items in this cluster are worthy of an ex - plicit discussion . # 21 : If I came up with two different approaches to a problem and they gave different answers , I would not worry about it ; I would just choose the answer that seemed most reasonable . ( Assume the answer is not in the back of the book . ) # 29 : A significant problem in this course is being able to memorize all the information I need to know . Item 21 is a touchstone . Coming up with two different answers using two different methods indicates some - thing is seriously wrong with at least one of your solu - tions and perhaps with your understanding of the phys - ics and how to apply it to problems . Our expert group 100 % 90 80 % 70 60 % 50 % 40 % 30 % 20 % - 10 % - + Evens . osu Pre X UMCP pre UMN pre , , OSU peel MUMCP post UMN post 0 % 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 60 % 90 % 100 % 100 % 90 80 % - 70 % 60 % 50 - 40 % 30 % - 20 % - 10 % 0 ir % + Evens 41 TYC po DC we W PLA pro ( ) roc post 0 CC post VPLA post 0 % 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 80 % 90 % 100 % Fig . 2a : ( top ) A - D plot for large schools . Average of all items . Fig . 2b : ( bottom ) A - D plot for small schools . Average of all items Redish , Steinberg , and Said 9 Student Expectations and USIPOT students feel strongly that students should disagree with item # 21 at the 85 % level . Initially , only 42 - 53 % of students produced a favorable response for this item , and only DC showed any significant im - provement on this item ( 52 % to 59 % ) . One school ( PLA ) showed a substantial deterioration ( 42 % to 17 % ) . The interpretation of item # 29 may depend significantly on the details of the examination structure of the course being probed . A sophisticated student will realize that the large number of different equations and results dis - cussed in a physics text can be structured and organized so that only a small amount of information needs to be memorized and the rest can be easily rebuilt as needed . Item # 29 is part of a probe into whether or not students see this structure or are relying on memorizing instead of rebuilding . However , if students are permitted to use a formula sheet or if exams are open book , they may not perceive memorization as a problem . This does not mean that they see the coherence of the material . " If extensive information is made available to students dur - ing exams , item # 29 needs to be interpreted carefully . A variety of examination aids were used for the classes of this study , ranging from open - book exams ( DC ) to no aids ( UMCP ) . Omission of item # 29 does not change the distributions in this cluster significantly . C . The Concepts Cluster The group of items selected for the concepts cluster ( items 4 , 19 , 26 , 27 , and 32 ) , are intended to probe whether students are viewing physics problems as sim - ply a mathematical calculation , or whether they are aware of the more fundamental role played by physics concepts in complex problem solving . For students who had high - school physics classes dominated by simple " problem solving " ( find the right equation , perhaps ma - nipulate it , then calculate a number ) , we might expect largely unfavorable responses on our items . We would hope , however , for substantial improvement , even as the result of a single college physics course . Our experts agree on their responses to the items of this cluster 89 % of the time . The initial views of the stu - dents at the six schools were favorable between 30 % ( TYC ) and 47 % ( DC ) of the time . All schools showed some improvement on this cluster except OSU which showed a small deterioration ( 37 % to 35 % favorable re - sponses ) . The two Workshop Physics schools showed the largest gains in favorable responses ( DC 47 % to 58 % , PLA 38 % to 45 % ) . Within this cluster , the results on items 4 and 19 are particularly interesting . # 4 : " Problem solving " in physics basically means matching problems with facts or equations and then substituting values to get a number . # 19 : The most crucial thing in solving a physics prob - lem is finding the right equation to use . While these items are similar , they are not identical . Agreeing with item 4 indicates a naive view of physics problems or a lack of experience with complex prob - lems . A more experienced student could reject 4 but still agree with 19 because of the phrase " most crucial " . One would , however , hope that increased experience with complex physics problems would lead a student to disagree with this item as well . For example , 54 % of the USIPOT students gave a favorable response on this item as compared to only 22 % of beginning students at UMCP . Our personal observations of these students in - dicate that as expected , the USIPOT students have con - siderably more experience with complex problem solv - ing than the typical beginning engineering student . Most of the schools begin with favorable responses on item # 4 of 50 - 55 % . Our TYC is an anomaly , with only 16 % of the students responding favorably on this item . This suggests that the group of students in our TYC may be considerably less sophisticated , at least along this di - mension , than the average beginning university student . The shifts on this item tend to be favorable and signifi - cant ( e . g . , UMCP 47 % > 59 % favorable , DC 52 % > 64 % favorable ) with the exception of our PLA institu - tion which showed a shift towards neutral . All groups showed a low initial favorable response on item 19 ( 13 % ( TYC ) to 31 % ( UMN ) ) but all showed a shift towards the favorable by the end of the semester . D . The Reality Link Cluster Although physicists believe that they are learning about the real world when they study physics , the context de - pendence of cognitive responses ( see ref . 4 ) opens a pos - sible gap between faculty and students . Students may believe that physics is related to the real world in princi - ple , but they may also believe that it has little or no rele - vance to their personal experience . This can cause prob - lems that are both serious and surprising to faculty . The student who does a calculation of the speed with which a high jumper leaves the ground and comes up with 8000 m / s ( as a result of recalling numbers with incorrect units and forgetting to take a square root ) may not bother to evaluate that answer and see it as nonsense on the basis of personal experience . When an instructor produces a demonstration that has been " cleaned " of distracting elements such as friction and air resistance , the instruc - Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 10 Student Expectations tor may see it as displaying a general physical law that is present in the everyday world but that lies " hidden " beneath distracting factors . The student , on the other hand , may believe that the complex apparatus is re - quired to produce the phenomenon , and that it does not occur naturally in the everyday world , or is irrelevant to it . A failure to make a link to experience can lead to problems not just because physics instructors want stu - dents to make strong connections between their real - life experiences and what they learn in the classroom , but because learning tends to be more effective and robust when linked to real and personal experiences . The four items we have included as the reality link clus - ter ( items 10 , 18 , 22 , and 25 ) do not just probe whether the students believe the laws of physics govern the real world . Rather , our items probe whether the students feel that their personal real world experience is relevant for their physics course and vice versa . In our interviews , we observed that many students show what we would call , following Hammer , an " apparent reality link . " That is , they believe that the laws of physics govern the behavior of the real world in principle , but that they do not need to consider that fact in their physics class . Our three groups of instructors were in almost unani - mous agreement ( 93 - 95 % ) with the favorable response on our reality cluster . An interesting anomaly was the response of the USIPOT students who only gave favor - able responses at the 64 % level . Examining their writ - ten comments as well as their responses gives one possi - ble explanation : A significant number of USIPOT stu - dents saw physics as being associated primarily with in - teresting and exotic phenomena , such as cosmology , relativity , and particle physics . Some of these students did not see a link between this physics and their per - sonal experiences . The student groups at our six schools started out with fairly strong favorable responses , ranging from 61 % ( UMCP ) to 76 % ( DC ) . Unfortunately , every group showed a deterioration on this measure as a result of in - struction , and some of the shifts were substantial ( OSU from 65 % to 54 % ; PLA from 71 % to 52 % , and TYC from 69 % to 58 % favorable responses ) . E . The Math Link Cluster An important component of the calculus - based physics course is the development of the students ' ability to use abstract and mathematical reasoning in describing and making predictions about the behavior of real physical systems . Expert scientists use mathematical equations as concise summaries of complex relationships among concepts and / or measurements . They can often use equations as a framework on which to construct qualita - tive arguments . Many introductory students , however , fail to see the deeper physical relationships present in an equation and instead use the math in a purely arithmetic sense as a way to calculate numbers . When students have this expectation about equations , there can be a se - rious gap between what the instructor intends and what the students infer . For example , an instructor may go through extensive mathematical derivations in class , ex - pecting the students to use the elements of the derivation to see the structure and sources of the relationships in the equation . The students , on the other hand , may not grasp what the instructor is trying to do and reject it as irrelevant " theory . " Students who fail to understand the derivation and structure of an equation may be forced to rely on memorization an especially fallible procedure if they are weak in coherence and have no way to check what they recall . The survey items probing students ' apparent expecta - tions31 of the role of mathematics are 2 , 6 , 8 , 16 , and 20 . Our expert group is in strong agreement on the favor - able answers for this cluster , agreeing at the 92 % level . Since high school physics courses tend to be decidedly less mathematical than university ' physics courses , we were not surprised that the high school instructors have much lower expectations for their students on this clus - ter , agreeing with its elements only 67 % of the time . This is comparable to the initial percentages of most of the students in our test classes , which range from 58 % to 74 % . Although these lower expectations may be appropriate for high school students and therefore for beginning university students , one might hope that these attitudes would change towards more favorable ones as a result of a university physics class . Unfortunately , none of the classes probed show improvement and three ( UMCP , OSU , PLA ) show a significant and substantial deteriora - tion . Among the items of the cluster , the results on item 2 is particularly interesting . # 2 : All I learn from a derivation of a formula is that the formula obtained is valid and that it is OK to use it in problems . From our interviews and informal discussions , we note that many students today have had little or no experi - ence with formal mathematical proof . A few did not understand the meaning of the word " derivation , " mis - taking it for " derivative . " 32 This lack of experience can produce a severe gap between the expectations of in - structors and students and cause serious confusions for both groups . On item 2 , the students at no institution showed favorable responses ( disagree ) at higher than the 44 % level ( UMN ) . At our TYC , only 20 % gave a favor - able response with item 2 initially , and 48 % of the stu - Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 11 Student Expectations 12 100 % 90 % 80 % . 70 % 60 % 50 % - 40 % - 30 % - 20 % 10 % 0 % 0 % + . - 9 . . - < > 0 X ' . rnt + Experts alr . OSU pre X UMCP pre TYC pre CC Pre Me PLA pre UMN pre , , OSU post { UMCP post < > TIC post 0 DC Peet 7PLA post UMN post 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 80 % 90 % 100 % Fig . 3 : Pre and post results for all institutions , effort cluster dents gave the unfavorable response . ( We write this re - sponse as 20 / 48 . ) They improved somewhat after the class ( to 33 / 41 ) , but our PLA deteriorated significantly ( from 36 / 18 to 25 / 33 ) . This deterioration did not appear to be associated with the Workshop Physics structure which tends to emphasize hands - on and laboratory ac - tivities over purely abstract and mathematical reasoning . The DC students changed on item # 2 from 39 / 25 to 45 / 31 . This maintains approximately the same ratio , but fewer students are undecided . F . The Effort Cluster Many physics lecturers do not expect most of their stu - dents to follow what they are doing in lecture during the lecture itself . They expect students will take good notes and figure them out carefully later . Unfortunately , many students do not take good notes and even those who do may rarely look at them . When physics begins to get difficult for students , most instructors expect them to try to figure things out using a variety of techniques working through the examples in the book , trying addi - tional problems , talking to friends and colleagues , and in general trying to use whatever resources they have available to make sense of the material . Some students , on the other hand , when things get difficult , may be at a loss for what to do . Some students do not have the idea that if they do not see something right away , there are steps they can take that will eventually help them make sense of the topic . 33 An important component of the tools that help build understanding is the appreciation that one ' s current understanding might be wrong , and that the mistakes one makes can give guidance in help - ing to correct one ' s errors . This dimension is probed by items 3 . , 6 , 7 , 24 , and 31 on the survey . For this cluster , the results are striking enough that we display them in an A - D plot in Fig . 3 . Our experts are in strong agreement on the answers to the items of this cluster , at an 85 % level . The initial views of the students at the various institutions begins quite high , ranging from 66 % favorable ( at OSU ) to 80 % favorable ( at our TYC ) . By the end of the semester , the shift is dramati - cally downward , with three institutions dropping in the favorable percentages by 20 % or more ( UMCP , OSU , and PLA ) , and three dropping by 10 - 15 % ( UMN , DC , and TYC ) . In one sense , this may be interpreted that the students expected to make more of an effort in the course then they actually did , as the shifts were largest on items 3 and 6 , but the downward shifts on items 24 and 31 were also substantial . G . Statistical Significance Every finite set of data contains fluctuations which have no real significance but arise from the details of a par - ticular sample . In this paper , our research questions in - volve comparisons of groups experts and novices , nov - ice students at different institutions , and students at the beginning and end of their first semester of physics . In order to compare these groups , we are comparing their averaged responses ( agree vs . neutral vs . disagree ) . In order for us to understand whether two responses are significantly different , we have to have some model of the random variable in our sample . Our interviews , our intuitions , and many discussions in the cognitive literature suggest that a human attitude can be complex . As we noted above , some students gave clear evidence in interviews of being in two contradic - tory states at the same time . What this implies is that the random variable we should be averaging is itself a probability , rather than a set of well - defined values . Un - fortunately , the average of probabilities may depend sig - nificantly on the structure of the constraints and pa - rametrization of the probabilities , as is well known from quantum statistics . Since detailed models of student at - titudes do not yet exist , we will estimate our signifi - cances by using a cruder model . Let us assume that a class is drawn from a very large homogeneous34 group of students and that in the large population , a percentage po of responses to an item or cluster will be favorable and a percentage qo will be un - favorable with po + qo = 1 . ( For now , we will ignore the possibility of neutral responses . ) In a finite sample of n students , we want to know what is the probability of finding ni favorable and n2 unfavorable responses with n1 + n2 = 1 . Using the Gaussian approximation to the binomial distribution , we get that the probability of find - ing fractions p = Thin and q = n2In is ( PPo ) ' P ( p ) = Ae 2a2 where A is a normalization constant and Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 12 Student Expectations 13 a 1Poqo n For this distribution , the probability that a sample will have a mean that falls within la of the true mean , po , is 0 . 684 and the probability that a sample will fall within 2a of the true mean is 0 . 954 . Since the fraction of neutral responses tends to be small , and since the binomial model is crude for this set of data , we treat our trinomial data as if it were approxi - mately binomial by renormalizing the observed p and q into an P and y . We consider a differ - P q ence or shift in means to be significant if it is at less than the 5 % probability level , that is , if the difference or II i ' ' ' shift is greater than twice a = . For example , at n values of p = 60 % , q = 20 % for N = 450 , we get a - 2 % . This doesn ' t change much over the typical values of p and q seen in Table 3 . We therefore consider a 5 % shift to be significant for our large schools . For N = 115 , those values of p and q give a - 4 % . We therefore con - sider a 10 % shift to be significant for Dickinson . VI . CONCLUSIONS : A . Summary In this paper we have discussed the creation and testing of the MPEX survey of student cognitive attitudes in physics . The survey was constructed to probe student expectations with a focus on six structures : independ - ence , coherence , concepts , their link between physics and their real world , their understanding of the role of math in physics , and the kind of effort they expect to make . The survey was calibrated using five groups . The group expected to be most sophisticated was in strong agreement ( better than - 80 % on almost all the items ) as to the desired responses on the items of the survey and their preferred response was defined as favorable . The other calibration groups showed increasing agreement with the expert group in the predicted manner . We tested the survey in classes at six schools that had varying entrance selectivity and that used a variety of approaches . We find answers to the research questions we posed in the introduction . Q1 . How does the initial state of students in univer - sity physics differ from the views of experts ? At the six schools tested , the initial state of students de - viated significantly from that of the expert calibration group with overall responses ranging from 50 - 60 % fa - vorable . The results on the concept cluster were particu - larly low ( 30 - 45 % ) and on the reality cluster were par - ticularly high ( 60 - 75 % ) . Q2 . To what extent does the initial state of a class vary from institution to institution ? At our three large state flagship institutions ( UMCP , OSU , UMN ) student attitudes as measured by the survey were very similar . The attitudes of beginning students at our selective liberal arts institution ( DC ) were consis - tently more favorable and those at our two year college ( TYC ) were consistently less favorable than those at our state flagship institutions . Q3 . How are the expectations of a class changed as the result of one semester of instruction in various learning environments ? At every school we studied , the overall results deterio - rated as the result of one semester of instruction . A sig - nificant part of this deterioration was the effort cluster : at every school tested , in their judgments at the end of a semester , students felt that they did not put in as much effort as they had expected to put in at the beginning of the semester . This part of the result is well - known and neither surprising nor particularly disturbing . What is more troublesome is the result that many of the schools showed deteriorations on the cognitive dimensions as well : half deteriorated on the independence dimension , two thirds on the coherence dimension , half on the math link ( with the others showing no gain ) , and all on the reality link . B . Implications The workplace and the role of physics in the educational milieu is changing . Modern industry now requires a much larger fraction of its workers to have some techni - cal expertise than was the case thirty years ago , and this trend is likely to continue . Our mandate now is to pro - vide a much larger fraction of our students with success - ful training in technological thinking skills than ever be - fore . The small fraction of students who enter our classes with expectations that match the instructors may be identified as " good " students and achieve success with a high probability . Some of these may go on to become physicists . The students who have inappropriate expec - tations may work extremely hard but still find them - selves unable to succeed . Our courses may then serve as filters to eliminate those students rather than helping to transform them . Worse yet , some courses may actually reward students with inappropriate attitudes , such as those who prefer memorizing to understanding , while driving away students who might excel in science given a more supportive structure . 35 If we degrade the re - quirements in our courses so that students can succeed Redish , Steinberg , and Saul / 3 Student Expectations 14 without developing an understanding of the nature of science , the scientific process , or how to learn science and do it , those students who come to college with a ma - ture set of attitudes may survive this approach without damage . But for those who will need to learn and do science at a more advanced level , and who need help with their understanding of what science is and how to think about it , this approach is a recipe for guaranteed failure . 36 A second inappropriate response to the new mandate is to " blame the victim " or claim that " some students just can ' t do physics . " This is particularly destructive when " some " turns out to be " most . " Many students have had previous training in science and math classes that dis - courages understanding , questioning , and creative thinking . Some students have had great success in courses in this mode over many years in elementary , middle , and high school ( and even in college ) . As has been demonstrated in many areas of cognitive psychol - ogy and education research , changing a long - held view is a non - trivial exercise . It may take specifically de - signed activities and many attempts . Anecdotal evidence suggests an " existence theorem . " Some students who come to college with serious mis - conceptions about how to do physics make the transition to become excellent students and successful scientists or engineers . Much of what we do in introductory classes does not ad - dress the hidden curriculum of improved expectations . Indeed , some of what we do may be counterproductive . If we are to learn the extent to which it is possible to help introductory students transform their approach to - wards physics , we must observe our students carefully and try to explicate the elements of an appropriate set of expectations . The failure to begin to move students from a binary view of learning to a more constructivist set of attitudes in the first term of university physics is most unfortunate . The start of college is a striking change for most students . This change of context gives instructors the valuable opportunity to redefine the social contract between stu - dents and teachers . This redefinition offers an opportu - nity to change expectations . If students are told at the beginning of their first college science course : " In high school you may have gotten away with memorizing equations without understanding them , but here that won ' t be enough " and if that mandate is followed through in both assignments and grading , students are more likely to be willing to put in the effort to change and grow . If students experience a series of science courses that do not require deeper understanding and a growth of sophistication , they will be much more reluc - tant to put in the time and effort to change in a later course . The survey presented here is a first step towards explor - ing these issues and expanding our understanding of what is really going on in our classrooms . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the members of the University of Maryland Physics Education Research Group , Lei Bao , Michael Wittmann , John Layman , John Le llo , and Mel Sabel la , who contributed substantially to the collection and analysis of the data presented in this paper . Visitors to the group , including John Christopher , Alvin Sapirstein , and Pratibha Jolly , contributed valuable com - ments and insights . We are particularly grateful to Lil - lian McDermott and the members of the University of Washington Physics Education Research Group where this work was begun for their hospitality and valuable discussions when two of us ( EFR & RNS ) were there . We would also like to thank the very many fa . culty members at the institutions involved who cooperated with us and gave us class time for their students to fill out our survey . We are very grateful to Priscilla Laws and her colleagues at the Dickinson College Summer Workshops for agreeing to let us give our survey to workshop participants and to Ed Neuenschwander , Larry Kirkpatrick and their colleagues for permitting us to survey the USIPOT students . 2 3 L . Viennot , " Spontaneous reasoning in elementary dynam - ics , " Eur . J . Sci . Educ . 1 , 205 - 221 ( 1979 ) ; D . E . Trowbridge , L . C . McDermott , " Investigation of student understanding of the concept of velocity in one dimen - sion , " Am . J . Phys . 48 , 1020 - 1028 ( 1980 ) ; D . E . Trow - bridge , L . C . McDermott , " Investigation of student understanding of the concept of acceleration in one dimen - sion , " Am . J . Phys . 49 , 242 - 253 ( 1981 ) ; A . Caramaza , M . McCloskey , B . Green , " Naive beliefs in ' sophisticated ' subjects : Misconceptions about trajectories of objects , " Cognition 9 , 117 - 123 ( 1981 ) . For a review and references , see L . C . McDermott , " What we teach and what is learned - Closing the gap , " Am . J . Phys . 59 , 301 - 315 ( 1991 ) ; Arnold B . Arons , Teaching In - troductory Physics , ( John Wiley & Sons Inc . , New York NY , 1997 ) . For example , see ( a ) R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff , " Learning motion concepts using real - time microcom - puter - based laboratory tools , " Am . J . Phys . 58 , 858 - 867 ( 1990 ) ; ( b ) P . S . Shaffer , and L . C . McDermott , " Research as a guide for curriculum development : An example from introductory electricity . Part II : Design of an instructional strategy , " Am . J . Phys . 60 , 1003 - 1013 ( 1992 ) ; ( c ) L . C . McDermott , P . S . Shaffer , and M . D . Somers , " Research as a guide for teaching introductory mechanics : An illus - Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 14 Student Expectations 15 problems and structuring groups " , Am . J . Phys . 60 ( 7 ) , 637 - 644 ( 1992 ) . 30 Indeed , some student comments lead us to suspect that formula sheets may have the tendency of confirming stu - dent expectations that formulas dominate physics . Their interpretation is that although memorizing lots of formulas is important for professionals , they do not need to do so for the current course . Thus , many faculty may be encourag - ing precisely that attitude they hope to discourage when they permit the use of formula sheets on exams . We are not aware of any research that shows the effect of formula sheets on student perceptions of the coherence of the mate - rial . 31 Note that this is an area where students ' beliefs about their abilities may surpass their actual abilities . More detailed investigations will require direct observation of student behavior on solving physics problems . 32 This led us to include the phrase " or proof ' in item 2 . 33 In another place , one of us has referred to this failure as a lack of parsing skills . These students , when faced with a complex sentence that they do not understand , will try reading it over and over again until it becomes familiar - - but they still may not understand it . They seem to lack the ability to decompose a complex sentence into its constitu - ent parts in order to make sense of it . E . F . Redish , " Is the computer appropriate for teaching physics ? " , Computers in Physics 7 ( December 1993 ) . 34 " Homogeneous " in this case does not of course mean that we assume the students are identical . Rather , it means that the students are " equivalent " that they are character - istic of the students who are to be found in " that type of class in that type of school " . 35 Sheila Tobias , They ' re Not Dumb , They ' re Different : Stalk - ing the Second Tier ( Research Corp . , Tucson AZ , 1990 ) . 36 This response is particularly dangerous because it is both easier for the faculty and less challenging for the student . This is analogous to the story told about the economic sys - tem in the former Soviet Union : " The workers pretended to work , and the government pretended to pay them , and everyone was satisfied . " Appendix : The MPEX Survey Note that individual items from this survey should not be used to evaluate individual students . On any single item , students may have atypical interpretations or special circumstances which make the " non - expert " answer the best answer for that student . Furthermore , students often think that they function in one fashion and actually behave differently . A more detailed observation is required to diagnose the difficulties of individual students . This survey is primarily intended to evaluate the impact of one or more semesters of instruction on an overall class . It can be used to illuminate some of the student reactions to instruction of a class that are not observable using traditional evaluations . In this context , it , together with evaluations of student learning of content , can be used as a guide for improving instruction . 1 All I need to do to understand most of the basic ideas in this course is just read the text , work most of the problems , and / or pay close attention in class . 1 2 3 4 5 2 All I learn from a derivation or proof of a formula is that the formula obtained is valid and that it is OK to use it in problems . 1 2 3 4 5 3 I go over my class notes carefully to prepare for tests in this course . 1 2 3 4 5 4 Problem solving in physics basically means matching problems with facts or equa - tions and then substituting values to get a number . 1 2 3 4 5 5 Learning physics made me change some of my ideas about how the physical world works . 1 2 3 4 5 6 I spend a lot of time figuring out and understanding at least some of the derivations or proofs given either in class or in the text . 1 2 3 4 5 7 I read the text in detail and work through many of the examples given there . 1 2 3 4 5 8 In this course , I do not expect to understand equations in an intuitive sense ; they just have to be taken as givens . 1 2 3 4 5 9 The best way for me to learn physics is by solving many problems rather than by carefully analyzing a few in detail . 1 2 3 4 5 Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 16 Student Expectations 17 BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 10 Physical laws have little relation to what I experience in the real world . 1 2 3 4 5 11 A good understanding of physics is necessary for me to achieve my career goals . A good grade in this course is not enough . 1 2 3 4 5 12 Knowledge in physics consists of many pieces of information each of which applies primarily to a specific situation . 1 2 3 4 5 13 My grade in this course is primarily determined by how familiar I am with the material . Insight or creativity has little to do with it . 1 2 3 4 5 14 Learning physics is a matter of acquiring knowledge that is specifically located in the laws , principles , and equations given in class and / or in the textbook . 1 2 3 4 5 15 In doing a physics problem , if my calculation gives a result that differs significantly from what I expect , I ' d have to trust the calculation . 1 2 3 4 5 16 The derivations or proofs of equations in class or in the text has little to do with solv - ing problems or with the skills I need to succeed in this course . 1 2 3 4 5 17 Only very few specially qualified people are capable of really understanding physics . 1 2 3 4 5 18 To understand physics , I sometimes think about my personal experiences and relate them to the topic being analyzed . 1 2 3 4 5 19 The most crucial thing in solving a physics problem is finding the right equation to use . 1 2 3 4 5 20 If I don ' t remember a particular equation needed for a problem in an exam there ' s nothing much I can do ( legally ! ) to come up with it . 1 2 3 4 5 21 If I came up with two different approaches to a problem and they gave different an - swers , I would not worry about it ; I would just choose the answer that seemed most reasonable . ( Assume the answer is not in the back of the book . ) 1 2 3 4 5 22 Physics is related to the real world and it sometimes helps to think about the connec - tion , but it is rarely essential for what I have to do in this course . 1 2 3 4 5 23 The main skill I get out of this course is learning how to solve physics problems . 1 2 3 4 5 24 The results of an exam don ' t give me any useful guidance to improve my understand - ing of the course material . All the learning associated with an exam is in the studying I do before it takes place . 1 2 3 4 5 25 Learning physics helps me understand situations in my everyday life . 1 2 3 4 5 26 When I solve most exam or homework problems , I explicitly think about the concepts that underlie the problem . 1 2 3 4 5 27 Understanding physics basically means being able to recall something you ' ve read or been shown . 1 2 3 4 5 28 Spending a lot of time ( half an hour or more ) working on a problem is a waste of time . If I don ' t make progress quickly , I ' d be better off asking someone who knows more than I do . 1 2 3 4 5 29 A significant problem in this course is being able to memorize all the information I need to know . 1 2 3 4 5 Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 17 1 8 Student Expectations 30 The main skill I get out of this course is to learn how to reason logically about the physical world . 1 2 3 4 5 31 I use the mistakes I make on homework and on exam problems as clues to what I need to do to understand the material better . 1 2 3 4 5 32 To be able to use an equation in a problem ( particularly in a problem that I haven ' t seen before ) , I need to know more than what each term in the equation represents . 1 2 3 4 5 33 It is possible to pass this course ( get a " C " or better ) without understanding physics very well . 1 2 3 4 5 34 Learning physics requires that I substantially rethink , restructure , and reorganize the 1 2 3 4 5 information that I am given in class and / or in the text . . Redish , Steinberg , and Saul 18 Student Expectations 19 03 / 01 / 2000 14 : 51 510 - 527 - 7087 REDISH & ASSOCIATES PAGE 01 02 / 23 / 2000 12 : 38 6142920263 ERIC CSMEE PAGE 83 U . S . Deportment of Education Office of Educational Research and Improvement ( GERI ) National Library of Education ( NLE ) Educational Resource . Information Center ( ERIC ) REPRODUCTION RELEASE I . DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION : titer : ( Specific Document ) t - SFo RIG ; Author ( ' ) : Corporate Source : Publication Debs : II . REPRODUCTION RELEASE : In sfter m DiSSOMIIRes ale widely as possible tknely and significant materials of interest to the educational commis * , dot : merits announced : 1 the monfhlY abstract Journal & thy ERIC system , Resources in Education ( ME ) , ate usually made available to users in microfiche , reproduced moor copy . and electronic media , and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service ( EDRS ) . Credit is given to the source of each decunielt and . V reproduction rewrote is granted , one of the following notices Is affixed to the document . If pemission is grafted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document , please CHECK ONE of the folleNsing thfee Options and sign at the bottom Of the page , Th . Nook Neter loam way tos be Mom b Level I dwarfing I PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTER ( ERIC ) Level 1 E Chock Ilmo for L . M11 nowt pewee * mored4coon end dieeernnetien M necresse or other ERIC mew maw 0 - 4 . dee : eves : 1 Wow ! coq . Sign hews , please Toe owe * * Mr shoran Deem MS be The mop * moo shown wea s . ad used tote Laval EA documents Moo le al une1219 doeureente PERA1115510N TO REPRODUCE AND DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN MICROFICHE . AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY . HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 0 THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES ! NFORMATION CENTER ( ERIC ) 2A Level 2A O gee * hew 6N Levet 2A mimeo , penmen reprottunket and dientleMbon ei maniere ! end M etedronk mode for EJEC Meal telseSen eubscrberb ONtr PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND CISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES ' NFORMATION CENTER ( ERIC ) 213 Level 2B E Ceeee IMO Me Leine 28 eeleese . Weal ; reptecluake Ire deoorelnallun ti micastio one Doeranents we no memos Ns mewed provided reproddelion ettellY Psinsta . If permission to Noroduee ie omitted . but no kw to atoodiod , document ' we ea wound in level I . I hereby grant to the Educational Resources thromtalion Oenter ( ERIC ) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this doorman as indicated above - Reproclustidn from the ERIC microfiche or electrOnic media by persons other than ERIC * moms end * system corkrPOWS requires prim : sem bun the copyrkyd Miller . Exception Is made kir non - przsit reproduction by WORM end Other IBMCIO to satisfy infonkstion ~ la of educators in response tO discrete * Maids , we \ ti . 44 ( . 1J \ OW )