Biol . Chem . 2017 ; 398 ( 4 ) : 411 – 423 Review Leszek Szablewski * and Anna Sulima The structural and functional changes of blood cells and molecular components in diabetes mellitus DOI 10 . 1515 / hsz - 2016 - 0196 Received May 3 , 2016 ; accepted October 14 , 2016 ; previously published online October 21 , 2016 Abstract : It is known fact that diabetes mellitus ( DM ) affects blood cells . Changes in the erythrocyte membrane , disorder in hemoglobin oxygen - binding and modification in mechanical characteristics , are effects of hyperglyce - mia on red blood cells . Altered susceptibility infection of patients with diabetes has been ascribed to a depression in the function of polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Neu - trophil function in patients with diabetes with good glu - cose control is slightly different than in healthy ones . DM causes significant changes in lymphocytes metabolism and their functions . Patients with diabetes , presenting with acute coronary syndrome , are at higher risk of cardi - ovascular complications and recurrent ischemic events in comparison to non - diabetic counterparts . Various mecha - nisms , including endothelial dysfunction , platelet hyper - activity , and abnormalities in coagulation and fibrynolysis have been implicated for this increased atherothrombotic risk . There are many other alterations of blood cells due to DM . In the present review we focused on modifica - tions of blood cells due to DM . Then , as a second point , we explored how the changes affect functions of red blood cells , white blood cells and platelets . Keywords : diabetes mellitus ; platelets ; red blood cells ; white blood cells . Introduction It has been well established that patients with diabetes are at increased risk of both surgical and nosocomial infections . Infection rates have been reported to be two to five times more prevalent in case of patients with diabe - tes than in the non - diabetic population . The relative risk of diabetic infectious disease - related hospitalization is 2 . 17 . Further , death attributed to infection is significantly higher in the case of these patients . Numerous epidemio - logical studies have indicated that the frequency of devel - oping certain types of cancer is higher in patients with type 2 diabetes ( Szymczak et al . , 2014 ) . In many cases the disease is associated with compromised immunity and it is commonly believed that diabetes increases patients’ susceptibility to infections , especially with yeast , fungi , and bacteria . Tuberculosis was a major cause of death in patients with diabetes before the advent of insulin therapy . It is the number one bacterial killer worldwide with 1 . 4 million deaths annually ( Restrepo et al . , 2014 ) . This altered susceptibility to infection has been ascribed to a depression in the function of polymorphonuclear leu - kocytes . Neutrophil function in well - controlled patients with diabetes differs little from that in healthy subjects , suggesting that function is partly related to poor meta - bolic control induced by high glucose concentrations . It is well documented that diabetes causes marked changes in lymphocytes metabolism and functions . Toxic effects of high blood glucose on red blood cells are manifested in the destruction of the erythrocyte mem - branes , disorders in hemoglobin oxygen - binding , and modification in mechanical characteristics of the mem - brane and cell in general . Oxidative stress caused by per - oxinitrite treatment of erythrocytes leads to modification of their membrane cytoskeleton structure . Changes in the cytoskeleton structure and lipid bilayer composition lead to damage of red blood cells . In this manuscript we will review how disturbances in glucose homeostasis change the metabolism and func - tions , including mechanisms , of particular blood cells . * Corresponding author : Leszek Szablewski , Medical University of Warsaw , Chair and Department of General Biology and Parasitology , Centre for Biostructure Research , 5 Chalubinskiego Str . , 02 - 004 Warsaw , Poland , e - mail : leszek . szablewski @ wum . edu . pl Anna Sulima : Medical University of Warsaw , Chair and Department of General Biology and Parasitology , Centre for Biostructure Research , 5 Chalubinskiego Str . , 02 - 004 Warsaw , Poland 412 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells It is notable that it is not proper to describe all changes observed in blood cells due to diabetes as ‘damage’ . Changes of red blood cells It is generally known that red blood cells change into a parachute shape in precapillary arterioles , retain their shapes through the capillaries , and change back in post - capillary venules . Erythrocyte deformability improves blood flow in the microvessels and in large arteries at high shear rate . A number of studies have suggested that erythrocytes deformability decreases in DM ( Aydin et al . , 2015 ; Kim et al . , 2015 ; Kuskonmaz et al . , 2015 ) . Reduced red blood cells deformability could greatly disturb oxygen transport to tissues . It is arguable that the reduction of red blood cells deformability and hypoxia of tissue in some diseases are related . Based on measurements of red blood cells deformability by different methods several investiga - tors have found that the deformability decreases with the increase of severity of the disease . Deformability of eryth - rocytes of patients with juvenile diabetes under ‘poor’ metabolic control was markedly decreased while the deformability of these cells of patients under ‘good’ control was normal . Several mechanisms have been proposed for the reduced red blood cells deformability observed in diabetes . Some previous studies found impaired deform - ability to be related to glycemic control ( increased HbA 1c ) , a high level of intracellular sorbitol , and the stiffness of red blood cell membranes , which referees to reduce spec - trin phosphorylation or cross - linkage ( Rice - Evans and Chapman , 1981 ) or an imbalance of the cholesterol / phos - pholipids ratio ( Bryszewska et al . , 1986 ) . It was found that patients with diabetes have higher mean cell hemoglobin in association with a lower mean cell volume ( MacRury et al . , 1990 ) and that the intracellular viscosity of red blood cells of these patients was elevated ( Watala et al . , 1996 ) . The increase of hemoglobin concentration raises intracellular viscosity . Tillmann et al . ( 1981 ) suggested that diminished flexibility of red blood cells of patients with diabetes can be explained partly by an increased concentrations of free fatty acids and ketone bodies in plasma , altered pH , and increased concentrations of lactate . Moreover , the above mentioned authors found a decreased fluidity of the intracellular hemoglobin caused possibly by a decreased concentration of 2 , 3 - diphospho - glycerate in the cells . Results obtained by other authors suggest that deformability caused by the detoriation was the result of alterations in the red blood cells membrane rather than by a change in intracellular viscosity ( Tsukada et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , diabetes induces an increase in red blood cells microviscosity , aggregation , and adhe - siveness , which cause changes in lipid composition , dys - function of membrane structure and composition ( Babu , 2009 ; Desouky , 2009 ; Buys et al . , 2013 ; Prakash , 2013 ; Al - Zamelya and Al - Shreefyb , 2014 ; Koehrer et al . , 2014 ; Kröger et al . , 2015 ; Shazi et al . , 2015 ) . As mentioned above , the oxidative stress in cells and tissues plays an important role in the pathogenesis of DM . Oxidative stress and increased insulin production contrib - ute to endoplasmic reticulum stress , protein misfolding and induction of the unfolded protein response , leading to pathological protein with accumulation ( Hayden et al . , 2005 ) . It manifests by increased levels of free radicals and lipid peroxidation ; it suppresses glycolysis , protein and nucleic acid production , enzyme activities and pro - motes oxidation - phosphorylation uncoupling . Lipid peroxidation alters the cellular structure of membrane bound enzymes by changing phospholipids and fatty acid composition ( Rodrigo et al . , 2007 ) . Erythrocytes of patients with diabetes have increased malonyldialdehide ( an indicator of lipid peroxidation ) ( Jain et al . , 1983 ) , and decreased glutathione and membrane – SH group com - pared with red blood cells of healthy subjects ( Rizvi et al . , 2005 ) . The oxidative stress may further induce red blood cells shape changes . Toxic effects of high blood glucose on red blood cells manifest in destruction of the erythrocyte membranes , disorders in hemoglobin oxygen - binding activity , modi - fication of mechanical characteristics of the membrane and cell in general . Red blood cells incubated with an elevated level of glucose showed a modified electro - phoretic profile of membrane proteins , a significantly increased protein glycation and induced ATPases activ - ity ( Na + , K + - ATPase , Mg 2 + - ATPase and Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + - ATPase ) ( Kumar et al . , 2011 ) . Erythrocytes of patients with type 2 diabetes exhibit impairment in the ability to release ATP in response to reduced O 2 tension ( Richards et al . , 2014 ) and the increased dephosphorylation of adenine and guanine nucleotides indicates serious energy metabo - lism in diabetes ( Dudzinska , 2014 ) . The proteolytic activ - ity in erythrocytes lysates against oxidatively damaged hemoglobin was significantly increased in patients with diabetes in comparison with healthy subjects ( Varashree and Bhat , 2010 ) . Increased red blood cells protein glyco - sylation in these patients is clearly evident ( Mahindrakar et al . , 2007 ) . It is controversial effect of modifying protein , by glucose adducts , on the electrical parameters of erythrocytes . But results obtained by Desouky ( 2009 ) showed that there is a relationship between increased concentration of glucose and the increase in the electri - cal properties . L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 413 A significant decrease in membrane fluidity was observed in patients with DM ( Emam et al . , 2008 ) . Red blood cells in normal human blood tend to form aggre - gates under low shear - flowing conditions , which form face - to - face morphology similar to a stack of coins called ‘rouleaux’ . Increased red blood cells aggregation has been observed in diabetes , with alterations in aggregation para - meters of red blood cells due to hyper cholesterol in Type 2 diabetes ( Babu , 2009 ) . Red blood cells from patients with diabetes are defec - tive in glucose transport ( Szablewski et al . , 2007a ) , expres - sion of glucose transporters ( Szablewski et al . , 2007b ) , have increased viscosity ( Veni et al . , 2014 ) , and change carbonic anhydrase activity ( Dutta et al . , 2015 ) . Changes of white blood cells Changes of monocytes A variety of polymorphonuclear leukocyte defects has been described in diabetes , but to date not many inves - tigations on monocyte function have been reported in patients with diabetes . Patients with diabetes are at high risk of developing micro - and macrovascular diseases . Risk factors for vascular diseases including this enhanced atherosclerosis - induced chronic hyperglycemia , insulin resistance , dyslipidemia , and hemostatic abnormalities . Monocytes play a principal role in the pathogenesis of ath - eromatosis , a common disease in patients with DM . After their attachment to the vascular endothelium , mono - cytes migrate through the endothelial cells to the sub - endothelial space , triggered by specific surface factors which are present in the endothelial cells after a local dysfunction . In the sub - endothelial space monocytes attach to basement membrane proteins , such as laminin ( Kostidou et al . , 2009 ) . Monocytes derived from patients with diabetes showed an increased ability to attach to laminin . The presence of ATP increased the attachment of control monocytes to laminin , whereas the presence of ATP did not affect the attachment of monocytes derived from patients with diabetes ( Kostidou et al . , 2009 ) . These results indicate a modified interaction between mono - cytes and laminin - 1 in DM . It is possible that different mechanisms of monocyte attachment to laminin in rela - tion to physiological circumstances are activated in diabe - tes ( Kostidou et al . , 2009 ) . Many data support a major role for inflammation in atherogenesis ( Horvath et al . , 2013 ) and that the endothe - lium is intimately involved at all stages of atheroma formation . Although a great deal has been published on vessels wall stiffness , very little attention has been paid to the state of the peripheral blood monocyte in diseases associated with atherosclerosis . In diabetes there is a sub - stantially increased risk of vascular disease . Many of the inflammatory markers associated with atherosclerosis are found in patients with diabetes at higher levels than in the non - diabetic subjects . For example , there are raised levels of C - reactive protein ( CRP ) and interleukin - 6 in Type 1 ( Mohamed - Ali et al . , 2001 ) and Type 2 ( Pradhan et al . , 2001 ) . CD36 is a type B scavenger receptor , expressed in different blood cells and platelets , which is normally thought to responsible for ~ 50 % of oxidized LDL ( oxLDL ) uptake ( Nicholson , 2004 ) . These receptors can recog - nize oxidized lipids or oxidized apoproteins ( Nicholson , 2004 ) . It was found that CD36 gene expression , showed a significant progressive increase in dependence on stage of diabetes ; from non - diabetic subjects through patients with diabetes with well - maintained glucose control com - pared to patients with poor glucose control ( Cipolletta et al . , 2005 ) . This gave ~ 50 % increase in well - controlled patients with diabetes and 130 % increase in poorly con - trolled patients above the healthy control group ( Cipolletta et al . , 2005 ) . There was no difference between patients with Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes . Only 4 % of the circulat - ing monocytes from the healthy subjects were positive for CD36 compared with 37 % for the circulating monocytes from the well - controlled patients with diabetes and with 64 % of poorly controlled patients ( Cipolletta et al . , 2005 ) . On the basis of obtained results , Cipolletta et al . ( 2005 ) suggest that peripheral blood monocytes are activated in poorly controlled diabetes . Another results were obtained when CD68 was investigated . Macrosialin / CD68 , another scavenger receptor , is a heavily glycosylated transmem - brane protein that is a highly expressed by tissue mac - rophages . Expression of CD68 gene was also significantly increased in monocytes from poorly controlled patients with diabetes ( Cipolletta et al . , 2005 ) . According to sug - gestion by Cipolletta et al . ( 2005 ) ‘peripheral blood CD14 + monocytes in subjects with poorly controlled diabetes are functionally activated and show some of the differ - entiation markers associated with macrophages’ . The above mentioned authors showed that monocytes of patients with diabetes demonstrate the increased ability for endothelial cell attachment , one of the stages of ath - eroma formation . Activation of monocytes is an important additional facet of the inflammatory profile of diabetic vascular disease to be added to endothelial dysfunc - tion . The changes observed in monocytes of patients are usually associated with maturation toward fully differen - tiated macrophages ( Cipolletta et al . , 2005 ) . High glucose 414 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells concentrations have been reported to enhance the levels of CD36 receptor involved in LDL internalization and the role of this receptor in the development of atherosclerosis is well established ( Griffin et al . , 2001 ) . Diabetic retinopathy is associated with microvascular damage and capillary occlusions which are common fea - tures of the microangiopathy in the eyes of patients . Among the white blood cells , monocytes and granulocytes are particularly likely to cause microvascular injury , because their activation can be accompanied by the release of pro - teases and oxygen - derived free radicals . An increase in the monocyte - derived microparticles ( MDMPs ) levels was observed , and the increase was correlated with the stage of diabetic retinopathy . The significant higher levels of MDMPs were found in diabetic retinopathy with capillary occlusion ( Ogata et al . , 2008 ) . The authors hypothesized that the microangiopathic changes in the diabetic retina are related to the increased level of MDMPs . Insulin deficiency is generally recognized as the primary pathogenic factor in the development of juvenile - onset diabetes . In contrast , in maturity - onset diabetes there is evidence of insulin deficiency as well as insulin resistance . DeFronzo et al . ( 1979 ) observed that 125 I - insulin binding to monocytes in patients with diabetes was 30 % below that in controls . Insulin binding to monocytes and insulin action were highly correlated in both control and patients . Type 1 diabetes mellitus ( DM ) is characterized by T cell - mediated β cell destruction and Th 1 - biased immune regulation . Monocytes and macrophage - derived cytokines and other immune mediators also have been implicated in the pathogenesis of diabetic complications . Results obtained by Giulietti et al . ( 2004 ) demonstrate high levels for IL - 1 , IL - 6 , IL - 12 p40 , and TNF - α in peripheral mono - cytes of patients with Type 1 diabetes when challenged with IFN γ , a typical Th1 cytokine . Another finding in this study was the very high expression of inflammatory cytokines in IFN γ - stimulated macrophages from patients with Type 2 diabetes . These patients tend to have higher serum TNF - α , cytokine that has even been implicated in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance in Type 2 diabe - tes . The higher production of TNF - α has been attributed mainly to the adipose tissue . Giulietti et al . ( 2004 ) suggest the macrophage as a possible major source of this and other inflammatory cytokine in patients with Type 2 dia - betes . Authors conclude that circulating monocytes from patients of Type 1 as well as Type 2 diabetes have an aber - rant cytokine profile when stimulated by an immune stim - ulus such as IFN γ . Monocytes derived from peripheral blood mononu - clear cells from patients with Type 1 diabetes of different age groups , and at risk children , are found to have a reduced potential to become differentiated into myeloid dendritic cells in granulocyte - macrophage colony - stim - ulating factor and interleukin - 4 conditioned cultures , as compared to those obtained from healthy subjects ( Sia and Hänninen , 2010 ) . Myeloid dendritic cells generated from patients are functionally impaired as judged by their reduced capability to activate autologous T cells , and stim - ulate allogenic lymphocytes ( Skarsvik et al . , 2004 ) . There is evidence that monocytes of patients with Type 1 diabe - tes are functionally aberrant , showing raised production of IL - 1 β , and IL - 6 , superoxide anion , and prostaglandin - endoperoxidase synthase 2 ( Bradshaw et al . , 2009 ) . It is notable that patients with Type 1 diabetes show abnormal monocyte gene expression ( Padmos et al . , 2008 ) . Tissue macrophages exist in two major states : clas - sically activated inflammatory M1 and alternatively acti - vated anti - inflammatory M2 . Patients with Type 2 diabetes have a marked reduction of the anti - inflammatory phe - notype , while M1 cells were unchanged as compared to healthy subjects ; as a result , M1 / M2 polarization ration is increased in diabetes ( Fadini et al . , 2013 ) . Because monocyte - macrophage are involved in inflammation and vascular disease , the M1 / M2 imbalance in diabetes can exert a negative impact of the development of diabetic complications ( Fadini et al . , 2013 ; Dai et al . , 2015 ; Lu et al . , 2015 ) . Disturbances in ratios between particular types of monocytes were observed in pregnant women with Type 1 diabetes as compared to healthy pregnant women ( Groen et al . , 2015 ) . Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) play an important role in innate immune responses and the occurrence of inflam - matory disease . These receptors are expressed on several cell types involved in the innate immune system . Acti - vation of these cells through TLRs induces an immune response by increasing the expression of molecules MHC - I , MHC - II and stimulatory molecules on the surface - presenting cells and subsequent activation of T cells . Acti - vated T cells produce inflammatory cytokines . Expression of TLRs on monocytes increase in women with gestational DM ( Xie et al . , 2014 ) and in patients with Type 2 diabetes ( Selehi et al . , 2015 ) . Changes of lymphocytes Impaired cell - mediated immunity in patients with dia - betes is being reported with increasing frequency . An enhanced susceptibility to infection is known to occur in a poorly controlled diabetic state . The incidence of recog - nized group of rare infections is definitely high in diabetes L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 415 or confined almost entirely to patients . Immune modula - tion accompanying metabolic dysfunction can adversely affect outcome of a non - infectious disease such as Type 2 DM . Results obtained by Muller et al . ( 1989 ) showed that T cell blastic transformation stimulated by phytohaemagglu - tinin and plasma levels of immunoglobulins are markedly reduced in patients with Type 1 diabetes . Lymphocytes of patients with Type 2 diabetes show reduced thymidine uptake , a reduced percentage of interleukin - 2 receptor - positive cells and increased plasma levels of TNF - α in com - parison with healthy subjects ( Pickup et al . , 2000 ) . It was observed that production of IL - 2 , IL - 6 and IL - 10 was dose - dependently suppressed by elevation in glucose concentrations . High glucose levels also inhibit proliferation of peripheral lymphocytes ( Reinhold et al . , 1996 ) . Olefsky and Reaven ( 1974 ) observed that lympho - cytes from adult patients with fasting hyperglycemia demonstrate a decreased ability to bind insulin . Authors suggest that this decreased insulin binding to lymphocytes can be accounted for primarily by an absolute decrease in number of available receptor sites per cell . Lymphocytes incubated in incubation medium with high glucose concentration ( equivalent of hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes ) showed disturbances in deoxy - D - glucose transport into cell and expression of glucose transporters ( Oleszczak et al . , 2012 ) . It was also observed that cellular deoxy - D - glucose transport and expression of glucose transporters in lymphocytes of these patients were damaged when compared to controls ( Oleszczak et al . , 2012 ) . Otton et al . ( 2002 ) observed that diabetes causes marked changes in lymphocyte metabolism and authors suggest that changes in lymphocyte metabolism may be an important mechanism leading to impairment of lymphocyte function . Lymphocyte apoptosis plays an important role in proper immune function . It removes developing lympho - cytes that fail to express an antigen receptor and regulates the size and duration of immune responses . If apoptosis is turned on at the wrong time , crucial cells may die off . When apoptosis malfunctions , the results may be dire and stroke damage in the organism can occur . Otton et al . ( 2004 ) observed a high proportion of apoptotic lympho - cytes in a diabetic state . The high occurrence of apoptosis in lymphocytes was accompanied by a reduced number of blood - circulating lymphocytes in patients with diabe - tes . On the other hand , defects in apoptosis may lead to autoimmune disorders and contribute to the pathogenesis of Type 1 diabetes . Lymphocytes of non - obese diabetic ( NOD ) mice , an animal model of autoimmune diabetes , have been found resistant to various apoptosis signals ( Colucci et al . , 1997 ) . The presence of diabetes plays an important role in the development of pulmonary tuberculosis . Increased incidence of tuberculosis in these patients can be ascribed to the cellular immunodeficiency . These include decreased number of T cells and NK cells , decreased blast cell trans - formation , mitogen - induced proliferation , and reduced interleukin - 2 receptors on lymphocytes and deficiency of T lymphocytes with CD 3 and CD 56 surface markers . A sig - nificant difference in total number of T lymphocytes and sub - units of helper T cells was observed in patients with diabetes ( Mansoori et al . , 2002 ) . Diabetic ketoacidosis is an extremely serious metabolic consequence of diabetes due to state of relative or absolute insulin deficiency and a rela - tive of absolute increase in counter regulatory hormones . Musa et al . ( 2010 ) investigated peripheral T lymphocytes subsets in patients with Type 2 diabetes in diabetic ketoac - idosis and patients with controlled Type 2 DM . Authors have found a significant decrease in CD4 + T cells along - side a non - significant increase in CD8 + T cells in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis compared to controlled patients with Type 2 DM and healthy subjects . Ratio of CD4 / CD8 + T cells was also lowest in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis . Authors suggest that these T cell changes in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis reflect an abnormal immunoregula - tory mechanism in parallel with an impaired metabolic process . It is suggestion that the change in levels of cyto - toxic T lymphocytes ( CD8 ) and helper T lymphocytes ( CD4 ) might be responsible for depressed immune response in patients with Type 2 diabetes ( Abdelrazaq et al . , 2013 ) , and defective activation plays an important role in the autoimmune process in patients with Type 1 DM ( Perri et al . , 2015 ) . The presented examples show different dis - turbances ( and different mechanisms ) due to diabetes that impaired immunological functions of lymphocytes . Changes of basophils Basophils role in inflammation associated with systemic abnormalities such as metabolic disorders remain largely unknown . Numerous studies indicate that metabolic dis - orders , such as obesity and Type 2 diabetes , may increase the prevalence and severity of allergic diseases , particu - larly food allergies and asthma . Increased incidences of glucose metabolism disturbance and insulin resistance are seen among obese asthmatic children compared to non - asthmatic children . To date , the underlying mecha - nisms connecting allergic and metabolic diseases have not been fully elucidated ( Han et al . , 2011 ) . Advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) are poten - tially important substances produced in high - glucose 416 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells disease conditions . AGEs are known to arise from the complex reaction between reducing sugars and proteins , and they can interact with a specific receptor ( RAGE ) that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily . Although a high serum glucose concentration leads to various changes in cellular functions , the AGE - RAGE interaction also mediates inflammatory responses . The potential effects of AGEs on human basophil function in vitro ( Han et al . , 2011 ) were investigated and it was found that a high concentration of glycated albumin promoted basophil apoptosis in a time - dependent manner . Glycated albumin failed to trigger degranulation and production of IL - 4 and IL - 13 in basophils , and dose - dependently induced secre - tion of IL - 6 and IL - 8 . A study presented by Han et al . ( 2011 ) revealed that a high concentration of glycated albumin exerts multiple effects on basophils , i . e . upregulation of surface RAGE expression , secretion of inflammatory cytokines , and induction of apoptosis . High levels of AGEs have been observed in patients with diabetes . Increased apoptosis of lymphocytes and macrophages in these patients may explain the impaired immune function seen in poorly controlled diabetes . Although it is unclear , whether basophils are involved in the pathogenesis of these abnormalities associated with diabetes , production of inflammatory cytokines by AGE - stimulated basophils might partially account for the exaggerated local inflam - mation observed in DM and associated infections . More - over , the action of AGEs on basophils might be important when diabetes coexists with bronchial asthma accompa - nied by an increase in airway basophil density ( Han et al . , 2011 ) . Changes of eosinophils There are few reports on disturbances in eosinophils due to DM . Nagai et al . ( 2001 ) described a patient with Type 2 diabetes who showed an immediate - type allergy against human insulin . The most interesting finding was the association with marked eosinophilia . The renal dys - function seemed to have progressed in parallel with the development of the patient’s eosinophilia . This patient had no other disorders that could have induced eosino - philia , such as parasitic infection , adrenal insufficiency , or hematological malignancy . The patient achieved satis - factory glycemic control by nateglinide without prolonged hypoglycemia . Nateglinide is a fast - acting short - duration insulinotrophic agent with a short half - life . It is known that marked eosinophilic infiltration as seen in hypere - osinophilic syndrome induces dysfunction of variety organs . Considering that the patient’s renal function was ameliorated after cessation of insulin therapy , the deto - riation of his renal dysfunction is likely to have been the result of eosinophilic infiltration into kidney ( Nagai et al . , 2001 ) . Myeloid alpha - defensisn ( m - α - defensins ) , an evolu - tionary ancient group of antimicrobial peptides , represent an essential part of the humoral branch of innate immu - nity . They are synthesized mainly by neutrophils during their promyelocytic stage of maturation in the bone marrow . These substances are involved in the destruc - tion of microbes following phagocytosis , degranulation or the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps . Neuwirth et al . ( 2012 ) observed that 30 % of patients with Type 1 diabetes exhibit increased levels of α - defensin mRNAs in their capillary blood . Eosinophils displayed augmentation of α - defensin expression in all patients with Type 1 diabe - tes tested . According to suggestions proposed by authors , the presence of transcriptionally active eosinophils in these patients suggests that eosinophils could be a part of an intricate innate immune cellular network involved in the development of DM . Zhu et al . ( 2013 ) observed that eosinophil percentage in patients with Type 2 diabetes is significantly lower than those with normal glucose tol - eration and impaired fasting glucose . Therefore authors suggest that higher peripheral eosinophil percentage is independently associated with decreased risk of Type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance ( Zhu et al . , 2013 ) . Changes of neutrophils Abnormalities of neutrophil phagocytosis and killing have been reported in patients with diabetes . Wilson and Reeves ( 1986 ) investigated neutrophil phagocyto - sis and killing of Candida albicans in patients with Type 1 diabetes and healthy subjects under various in vitro metabolic conditions . Phagocytosis occurred at similar levels in these patients and controls at all the glucose and β - hydroxybutyrate ( equivalent of ketoacidosis in DM ) con - centrations used . The ability of neutrophils from patients to kill candida was inhibited by increased concentrations of glucose and β - hydroxybutyrate . These data indicate that although phagocytosis occurs at similar levels in patients with diabetes and in healthy subjects , killing of candida by the diabetic neutrophil is impaired under conditions of hyperglycemia and ketosis . β - hydroxybutyrate exerts an independent effect on oxidative killing . Metabolism of this ketone body may be by its entry into the glycolytic pathway below the insulin sensitive phosphofructokinase stop ( Wilson and Reeves , 1986 ) . Neutrophils from patients with diabetes controlled with insulin showed impaired L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 417 phagocytosis of yeast , Candida guilliermondii ( Davidson et al . , 1984 ) . The obtained results suggest that defective phagocytosis is partly due to a reaction between glucose and the plasma proteins concerned with opsonisation . Authors conclude that defective phagocytosis may be important not only in coping with infections but also in other diabetic complications as plasma proteins are con - cerned with the removal of damaged or effete cells as well as foreign antigens . Repine et al . ( 1980 ) showed that killing of Staphylococcus aureus by neutrophils from patients with acute bacterial infection was increased in comparison to neutrophils from uninfected subject’s controls or the same patients after treatment with antibiotics . Conversely , neu - trophils from patients failed to increase their bactericidal activity in response to infection to the same degree as neutrophils from healthy subjects . The latter abnormality was pronounced in poorly controlled , but was also present in well - controlled patients . Neutrophils from poorly con - trolled , uninfected patients with diabetes did not kill Staphylococcus aureus to the same degree as neutrophils from healthy subjects or well - controlled patients ( Repine et al . , 1980 ) . Melioidosis is a serious infection disease caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei . Therapeutic treat - ment is difficult and the mortality rate associated with severe melioidosis remains high ( up to 50 % ) . Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of melioidosis . Patients with diabetes have a high incidence of melioidosis ; up to 60 % of patients with melioidosis have pre - existing or newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetes . The results obtained by Chanchamroen et al . ( 2005 ) showed that the afore men - tioned bacillus displayed reduced uptake by neutrophils compared to Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli . Additionally , intracellular survival of Burkholderia pseu - domallei was detected throughout a 24 - h period , indicat - ing the intrinsic resistance of B . pseudomallei to killing by neutrophils . Moreover , neutrophils from patients dis - played impaired phagocytosis of B . pseudomallei , reduced migration in response to interleukin - 8 , and an inability to delay apoptosis . Impaired phagocytosis of Klebsiella pneu - moniae by neutrophils obtained from patients with Type 2 diabetes with poor glycemic control was observed by Chiu et al . ( 2011 ) . Decreased of phagocytic activity in neutro - phils of patients with diabetes was described also by other authors ( Top et al . , 2007 ) . On the other hand , diabetes has no influence on the release of NET - related markers ( neu - trophil extracellular traps ) ; NETs are effector mechanisms of neutrophils that consist of extracellular DNA and his - tone - based structures decorated by antimicrobials . de Jong et al . ( 2014 ) found no differences in the release of the NET - related markers in melioidosis when comparing patients with diabetes or healthy subjects . Neutrophils isolated from patients with Type 2 dia - betes without microvascular complications and from patients with microvascular complications exhib - ited higher level of respiratory burst and produced an increased amount of superoxide anion as compared to the healthy subjects , served as control group . The increase was more pronounced in diabetes with complications as compared to these without ( Gupta et al . , 2007 ) . Hyper - glycemia enhances coagulation and reduces neutrophil degranulation and potentates coagulation . On the other hand , hyperinsulinemia inhibits fibrinolysis during endo - toxemia . These data suggest that patients with Type 2 diabetes may be especially vulnerable to prothrombotic events during inflammatory states ( Stegenga et al . , 2008 ) . Prolonged hyperglycemia can accelerate to formation of advanced end products ( AGE ) . Their receptors acti - vate signal transduction pathways that increase reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production and accelerated athero - genesis in diabetes . Neutrophils are one of the major sources of ROS . According to suggestion presented by Umsa - ard et al . ( 2015 ) , the presence of excess ROS is a sub - stantial mediator in the development of diabetes - related vasculopathy . Umsa - ard et al . ( 2015 ) showed that neutro - phils from poorly controlled patients with Type 2 diabetes produce significant higher myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) , a per - oxide enzyme seen in atherosclerotic lesions and produce increased ROS . The enhanced production of ROS causes oxidative stress . This process is thought to lead to diabetic vascular complications . Authors found that hyperglyce - mia increases adhesive capacity of neutrophils , enhanced migration toward IL - 8 and adherence to endothelial cells . As mentioned above , these disturbances may lead to the development and progression of the atherosclerosis in diabetes ( Umsa - ard et al . , 2015 ) . Neutrophils from people with poorly controlled diabetes and in vitro incubation of these blood cells with high glucose and the receptor for AGEs ligand S100B greatly enhanced superoxide genera - tion compared with healthy subjects ( Ayilavarapu et al . , 2010 ) . Elevated glucose concentrations promote receptor - independent activation of adherent human neutrophils ( Kummer et al . , 2007 ) . High concentrations of glucose ( ≥ 12 mm ) activate maternal neutrophils for enhanced oxidant production , which contrasts sharply with the finding that neutrophil activators such as N - formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine ( FMLP ) and lipopoly - saccharide ( LPS ) do not activate maternal neutrophils ( Kindzelskii et al . , 2002 ) . Petty et al . ( 2005 ) suggest that diabetic activation of oxidant production by pregnancy neutrophils may contribute to cellular damage . Patients with diabetes with chronic periodontitis have depressed chemotaxis in comparison with non - diabetic patients 418 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells with chronic periodontitis . Neutrophils from periodontitis patients generate abnormally high levels of oxygen radi - cals in response to stimuli ( Shetty et al . , 2008 ) . Neutrophils of patients with diabetes show distur - bances in almost all functions such as a release of proin - flammatory cytokines ( Hatanaka et al . , 2006 ) , increase count of active neutrophils and impaired deformability of passive neutrophils ( Linderkamp et al . , 1999 ) . Granu - locytes of these patients are defective in glucose transport ( Szablewski et al . , 2007a ) and expression of glucose trans - porters ( Szablewski et al . , 2007b ) . The count of white blood cells is a basic indicator of the inflammatory status . Conversely , recent evidence suggests that the neutrophil - lymphocyte ration ( NLR ) is a better risk factor in the predictor of adverse outcomes in various medical conditions . Increases of NLR were observed in patients with Type 2 diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance as compared to healthy subjects ( Shiny et al . , 2014 ) , in early stage diabetic nephropathy ( Huang et al . , 2015 ) , in patients with insulin resistance in newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetes ( Lou et al . , 2015 ) , and in patients with DM with and without diabetic foot ulcer ( Kahraman et al . , 2014 ) . There is also a correlation of NLR with different grades of glucose intolerance and insulin resistance ( Shiny et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore many authors recommend that NLR can be used as a reliable predic - tive marker of different complications of diabetes , as for example micro - and macrovascular diseases : coronary artery disease , acute coronary syndromes , heart failure , diabetic nephropathy , diabetic foot ulcer , neuropathy , retinopathy etc . DM is associated with chronic inflammation that increases secretion of inflammatory factors such as CRP , IL - 6 , MCP1 etc . These factors elevate neutrophil count . Buyukkaya et al . ( 2014 ) suggest that increased levels of neutrophils could mediate insulin resistance may be through augmented inflammation . The persistent neutro - phil proteases within Type 2 diabetes and lymphocytes may be also be involved in this process . Insulin resistance may be related to the signal transduction mediated by T cells and insulin resistance results in a decrease in T cell count ( Lorenzo et al . , 2014 ) . Recent studies suggest that neutrophils play an important role in Type 1 DM ( Valle et al . , 2013 ; Battaglia 2014 ; Diana and Lehuen 2014 ) . Slightly reduced circulat - ing neutrophils levels are associated with Type 1 DM . Batt - aglia ( 2014 ) discusses three possible events : impairment in neutrophil output from the bone marrow and neutro - phil differentiation , increase in peripheral consumption / destruction , and tissue sequestration . Neutrophils might be reduced because they have been recruited into tissues or observed reduction in circulating neutrophils might simply reflect a chronic viral infection . Changes of platelets Patients with diabetes presenting with acute coronary syndrome have a higher risk of cardiovascular compli - cations and recurrent ischemic events when compared to non - diabetic counterparts . Different mechanisms including endothelial dysfunction , platelet hyperactiv - ity , and abnormalities in coagulation and fibrynolysis have been implicated for this increased atherothrombotic risk . Atherothrombosis , defined as atherosclerotic lesion disruption with superimposed thrombus formation , is a leading cause of death in patients with DM . Platelets play a pivotal role in atherothrombosis and platelets of patients with diabetes are hyperreactive . Growing evidence sug - gests that the platelets of these patients are larger and hyperreactive , showing increased adhesion and aggre - gation , and increased platelet - dependent thrombin gen - eration ( Sabor et al . , 2012 ) . Non - enzymatic glycation of proteins may be significant in diabetic atherothrombosis ( Fereiro et al . , 2010 ) . Recurrent episodes of hyperglycemia lead to the non - enzymatic interaction between the car - bonyl group of the reducing sugar and the primary amino group to a protein banding to a cascade , the final result is a heterogeneous group of compounds known as AGE . An enhanced glycation of platelet membrane proteins is observed in diabetes , and most of the glycated platelets can be incorporated into thrombi ( Chappey et al . , 1997 ) . Some of these AGEs cause externalization of platelet membrane phosphatidylserine that leads to surface clot - ting factor activation and so directly enhance the throm - bogenic state ( Wang et al . , 2007 ) . Similarly , the platelets of patients with diabetes have increased glycation levels of surface membrane proteins which cause decreased mem - brane fluidity and increased platelet sensitivity to agonists ( Watala et al . , 1998 ) . Platelets from patients show low intracellular levels of antioxidants , and this in turn has been linked to an increased production of thromboxane ( Thomas et al . , 1985 ; Davi et al . , 1990 ; Santilli et al . , 2015 ) . In patients with diabetes , increased large platelets are more thrombogenic and thus put the patient at a higher risk status . Mean platelet volume ( MPV ) is a determinant of platelet functionality and increased MPV is associated with increased risk for myocardial infraction , stroke and transient ischemic attacks ( Akinsegun et al . , 2014 ) . An increase in MPV has been documented in patients with metabolic syndrome , stroke , DM and in patients with L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 419 impaired fasting glucose . Patients with diabetes not only have a greater atheromatous plaque burden but also a thrombotic diathesis that is in part due to changes in the coagulation system with increased intravascular thrombin generation , and reduced fibrinolytic potential ( Ang et al . , 2008 ) . Platelet activation contributes to the pathology by not only triggering thrombus formation but also causing microcapillary embolization and release of constrictive , oxidative , and mitogenic substances that accelerate pro - gression of local vascular lesions . The pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in diabetes has several potential contribu - tors , which include increased intravascular thrombin generation and reduced fibrinolytic potential ( Almer and Nilsson 1975 ) . Fibrinogen levels may also be elevated to fibrin clot formation and platelet aggregation . Fibrino - lytic activity has been reported to be low in Type 2 diabe - tes ( Juhan - Vague et al . , 1989 ) . This is thought to be due to high levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor - 1 ( PAI - 1 ) ( Vinik et al . , 2001 ) . Oxidative stress can directly affect platelet reactiv - ity as superoxide anions enhance intraplatelet calcium release upon platelet activation , helping to amplify the platelet aggregation response ( Santilli et al . , 2015 ) . Normal endothelium produces nitric oxide ( NO ) and prostacyclin , which inhibit platelet activation under physiological conditions . Endothelial dysfunction leads to reduced production of NO and prostacyclin and so con - tributes to platelet hyperreactivity . NO can be oxidized by superoxide anions , leading to further reductions in its half - life and antiplatelet action . Platelet aggregation is raised in uncontrolled insulin - dependent patients with diabetes and returns to normal after 24 h treatment with a feedback - controlled insulin infusion ( Juhan et al . , 1982 ) . The hyperaggregability of Type 2 diabetes platelets might be caused by loss of sensitivity to insulin . Under experi - mental conditions , platelets of patients with Type 2 dia - betes show better adhesion to a prothrombotic surface make larger aggregates , have an increased procoagulant surface compared with platelets from healthy control subjects ( Ferreira et al . , 2006 ) . Insulin inhibits this reac - tion in platelets from healthy individuals but not from patients with Type 2 diabetes ( Trovati et al . , 1988 ) . A key step in the initiation of a hemostatic plug is tissue factor ( TF ) exposure . TF is an integral transmembrane protein located on the plasma membrane . TF binds activated FVII and the complex activates FVIII , FIX , and FX , generating thrombin and inducing clotting ( Gerrits et al . , 2010 ) . In healthy individuals , TF synthesis is inhibited by insulin , but in patients with Type 2 diabetes inhibition is impaired ( Gerrits et al . , 2010 ) . On the other hand , it was found that high - risk Type 2 diabetes patients , without prior ischemic events have normal blood platelet functionality profiles ( Shlomai et al . , 2015 ) . In summary , according to Watala et al . 2005 ) increased platelet aggregation and adhesion are due to the follow - ing : reduced platelet membrane fluidity due to changes in the lipid composition of membrane or glycation of mem - brane proteins , increased production of thromboxane A2 , increased expression of platelet adhesion molecules , increased expression of platelet surface receptors and gen - eration of platelet dependent thrombin . Platelets are less sensitive to the effects of prostacyclin and NO , show disor - dered calcium and magnesium hemostasis . Active plate - lets in patients with diabetes are also rich in cytokines and chemokines and hence contribute to inflammation and atherogenesis alongside a procoagulant milieu . The pediatric patients with Type 1 DM show morphological evidence of hyperactivity . Higher mean volume , distri - bution width and platelet large cell ratio were observed ( Malachowska et al . , 2015 ) . Therefore authors suggest that the received results support the theory that platelet function is altered even in young patients with diabetes , potentially contributing to increased cardiovascular risk later on ( Malachowska et al . , 2015 ) . Conclusion This review expands our current understanding of the role of DM in risk of development of blood cells damages . However , precise mechanism of DM action that stimulates these damages remains unclear . DM and structural and functional changes of blood cells are common conditions , and their co - diagnosis in the same individual is not infrequent . These two diseases are heterogeneous , multifactorial , severe , and chronic . DM is a complex , chronic disease , and an increasingly signifi - cant problem as the incidence increases worldwide . The World Health Organization predicts that in 2030 there will be 366 millions people with diabetes ( 5 % of the world’s population ) . References Abdelrazaq , A . A . , Yousif , W . H . , and Wohaieb , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Flow cytometric analysis of CD4 and CD8 T - cell subsets in some Iraqi patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 . Cur . Res . Microb . Biotechnol . 1 , 235 – 238 . Akinsegun , A . , Olusola , D . A . , Sarah , J - O . , Olajumoke , O . , Adewumi A . , Majeed , O . , Anthonia , O . , Ebele , U . , Olaitan , O . , Olanrewaju , A . et al . ( 2014 ) . Mean platelet volume and platelet 420 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells counts in type 2 diabetes : mellitus on treatment and non - diabetic controls in Lagos , Nigeria . Pan . Afr . Med . J . 18 , 42 . Almer , L . and Nilsson , I . M . ( 1975 ) . On fibrynolysis in diabetes mel - litus . Acta . Med . Scand . 198 , 101 – 106 . Al - Zamelya , O . M . Y . and Al - Shreefyb , H . H . ( 2014 ) . The relationship between erythrocytes membrane variables , conductivity of erythrocyte suspension and activity of purified erythrocyte glutathione - S - transferase enzyme GST in diabetic patients . Med . J . Babylon . 10 , 3 . Ang , L . , Palakodeti , A . , Khalid , A . , Tsimikas , S . , Idrees , Z . , Tran , P . , Clopton , P . , Zafar , N . , Bromberg - Marin , G . , Keramati , S . et al . ( 2008 ) . Elevated plasma fibrinogen and diabetes mellitus are associated with lower inhibition of platelet reactivity with clopi - dogrel . J . Am . College . Cardiol . 52 , 1052 – 1059 . Aydin , M . E . , Erbatur , M . E . , Çomu , F . M . , and Arslan , M . ( 2015 ) . Effect of sevoflurane and desflurane on erythrocyte deformability dur - ing ischemia - reperfusion injury on lower extremity in diabetic rats . Int . J . Anesthetic . Anesthesiol . 2 , 2 . Ayilavarapu , S . , Kantarci , A . , Fredman , G . , Turkoglu , O . , Omori , K . , Liu , H . , Iwata , T . , Yagi , M . , Hasturk , H . , and Van Dyke , T . E . ( 2010 ) . Diabetes - induced oxidative stress is mediated by Ca 2 + - independent phospholipase A2 in neutrophils . J . Immunol . 184 , 1507 – 1515 . Babu , N . ( 2009 ) . Alterations in aggregation parameters due to hyper cholesterol in type 2 diabetes mellitus . Open Circ . Vasc . J . 2 , 10 – 14 . Battaglia , M . ( 2014 ) . Neutrophils and type 1 autoimmune diabetes . Curr . Opin . Hematol . 21 , 8 – 15 . Bradshaw , E . M . , Raddassi , K . , Elyman , W . , Orban , T . , Gottlieb , P . A . , Kent , S . C . , and Hafler , D . A . ( 2009 ) . Monocytes from patients with type 1 diabetes spontaneously secrete proinflammatory cytokines inducing Th 17 cells . J . Immunol . 183 , 4432 – 4439 . Bryszewska , M . , Watala , C . , and Torzecka , W . ( 1986 ) . Changes of erythrocyte membranes and in composition of plasma lipids in type I diabetes . Br . J . Haematol . 62 , 111 – 116 . Buys , A . V . , Van Rooy , M - J . , Soma , P . , Van Papendorp , D . , Lipinski , B . , and Pretorius , E . ( 2013 ) . Changes in red blood cell membrane structure in type 2 diabetes . Cardiovasc . Diabetol . 12 , 25 . Buyukkaya , E . , Karakas , M . F . , Karakas , E . , Akçay , A . B . , Tanboga , I . H . , Kurt , M . , and Sen , N . ( 2014 ) . Correlation of neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio with the presence and severity of metabolic syndrome . Clin . Appl . Thromb . Hemost . 20 , 159 – 163 . Chanchamroen , S . , Kewcharoenwong , C . , Susaengrat , W . , Ato , M . , and Lertmemongkolchai , G . ( 2005 ) . Human polymorphonuclear neutrophil responses to Burkholderia pseudomallei in healthy and diabetic subjects . Infect Immun . 77 , 456 – 463 . Chappey , O . , Dosquet , C . , Wautier , M . P . , and Wautier , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Advanced glycation end products , oxidant stress and vascular lesions . Eur . J . Clin . Invest . 27 , 97 – 108 . Chiu , C - H . , Yeh , K - M . , Siu , L - K . , Fung , C - P . , Lin , J - C . , and Chang , F - Y . ( 2011 ) . Impact of age on neutrophil phagocytic reaction with different capsular serotypes of Klebsiella pneumoniae . J . Microbiol . Immunol . Infect . 44 , 333 – 337 . Cipolletta , C . , Ryan , K . E . , Hanna , E . V . , and Trimble , E . R . ( 2005 ) . Activation of peripheral blood CD14 + monocytes occurs in diabetes . Diabetes . 54 , 2779 – 2786 . Colucci , F . , Bergman , M - L . , Penha - Gonçalves , C . , Cilio , C . M . , and Holmberg , D . ( 1997 ) . Apoptosis resistance of nonobese diabetic peripheral lymphocytes linked to the Idd 5 diabetes suscepti - bility region . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 , 8670 – 8674 . Dai , X . , Zhan , J . , Demmy , T . A . , Poordad , F . B . , Fauceglia , P . L . , Zhang , H . , and Wu , L . ( 2015 ) . Monocytes play different roles in stimu - lating T cells in obese diabetic individuals . Int . J . Immuno - pathol . Pharmacol . 28 , 374 – 383 . Davi , G . , Catalano , I . , Averna , M . , Notarbartolo , A . , Strano , A . , Cia - batton , G . , and Patrono , C . ( 1990 ) . Thromboxane biosynthesis and platelet function in type II diabetes mellitus . N . Engl . J . Med . 322 , 1769 – 1774 . Davidson , N . J . , Sowden , J . M . , and Fletcher , J . ( 1984 ) . Defective phagocytosis in insulin controlled diabetics : evidence for a reaction between glucose and opsonising proteins . J . Clin . Pathol . 37 , 783 – 786 . DeFronzo , R . , Deibert , D . , Hendler , R . , Felig , P . , and Soman , V . ( 1979 ) . Insulin sensitivity and insulin binding to monocytes in maturity - onset diabetes . J . Clin . Invest . 63 , 939 – 946 . Desouky , O . S . ( 2009 ) . Rheological and electrical behavior of erythrocytes in patients with diabetes mellitus . Romanian J . Biophys . 19 , 239 – 250 . de Jong , H . K . , Koh , G . C . K . W . , Achouiti , A . , van der Meer , A . J . , Bulder , I . , Stephan , F . , Roelofs , J . J . , Day , N . P . , Peacock , S . J . , Zeerleder , S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Neutrophil extracellular traps in the host defense against sepsis induced by Burkholderia pseudomallei ( melioidosis ) . Intensive . Care . Med . Exp . 2 , 21 . Diana , J . and Lehuen , A . ( 2014 ) . Macrophages and β - cells are responsible for CXCR2 - mediated neutrophil infiltration of the pancreas during autoimmune diabetes . EMBO . Mol . Med . 6 , 1090 – 1104 . Dudzinska , W . ( 2014 ) . Purine nucleotides and their metabolites in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus . J . Biomed . Sci . Eng . 7 , 38 – 44 . Dutta , M . , Biswas , U . K . , Chakraborty , R . , Banerjee , P . , Kumar , A . , and Raychaudhuri , U . ( 2015 ) . Reduced erythrocyte carbonic anhydrase activity by Swietenia macrophylla seeds in diabetic rats . J . Diab . Metab . Disord . Contr . 2 , 00035 . Emam , S . J . , Nikzamir , A . R . , Nakhjavani , M . , and Esteghamati , A . R . ( 2008 ) . Erythrocyte membrane fluidity in ageing , type 2 diabe - tes and stroke patients . Int . J . Endocrinol . Metab . 1 , 20 – 27 . Fadini , G . P . , de Kreutzenberg , S . V . , Boscaro , E . , Albiero , M . , Cap - pellari , R . , Kränkel , N . , Landmesser , U . , Toniolo , A . , Bolego , C , Cignarella , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . An unbalanced monocyte polarisa - tion in peripheral blood and bone marrow of patients with type 2 diabetes has an impact on microangiopathy . Diabetologia . 56 , 1856 – 1866 . Ferreira , I . A . , Mocking , A . I . , Feijge , M . A . , Gorter , G . , van Haeften , T . W . , Heemskerk , J . W . and Akkerman , J . W . ( 2006 ) . Platelet inhibition by insulin in absent in type 2 diabetes mellitus . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 26 , 417 – 422 . Fereiro , J . L . , Gómez - Hospital , J . A . , and Angiolillo , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Plate - let abnormalities in diabetes mellitus . Diab . Vasc . Dis . Res . 7 , 251 – 9 . Gerrits , A . J . , Koekman , C . A . , van Haeften , T . W . and Akkerman , J . W . W . ( 2010 ) . Platelet tissue factor synthesis in type 2 diabetic patients is resistant to inhibition by insulin . Diabetes . 59 , 1487 – 1495 . Giulietti , A . , Stoffels , K . , Decallonne , B . , Overbergh , L . , and Mathieu , C . ( 2004 ) . Monocytic expression behavior of cytokines in dia - betic patients upon inflammatory stimulation . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 1037 , 74 – 78 . Griffin , E . , Re , A . , Hamel , N . , Fu , C . , Bush , H . , McCaffrey , T . , and Asch , A . S . ( 2001 ) . A link between diabetes and atherosclerosis : L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 421 glucose regulates expression of CD36 at the level of transla - tion . Nat . Med . 7 , 840 – 846 . Groen , B . , van der Wijk , A - E . , van der Berg , P . P . , Lefrandt , J . D . , van der Berg , G . , Sollie , K . M . , de Vos , P . , Links , T . P . , and Faas , M . M . ( 2015 ) . Immunological adaptations to pregnancy in women with type 1 diabetes . Sci . Rep . 5 , 13618 . Gupta , A . , Tripathi , A . K . , Tripathi , R . L . , Madhu , S . V . , and Banerjee , B . D . ( 2007 ) . Advanced glycosylated end products - mediated activation of polymorphonuclear neutrophils in diabetes mellitus and associated oxidative stress . Indian . J . Biochem . Biophys . 44 , 373 – 378 . Han , K , Suzukawa , M , Yamaguchi , M , Sugimoto , N , Nakase , Y , Toda , T , Nagase , H . , and Ohta , K . ( 2011 ) . The in vitro effects of advanced glycation end products on basophil functions . Int . Arch . Allergy . Immunol . 115 , 64 – 70 . Hatanaka , E . , Montegudo , P . T . , Marracos , M . S . M . , and Campa , A . ( 2006 ) . Neutrophils and monocytes as potentially important sources of proinflammatory cytokines in diabetes . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 146 , 443 – 447 . Hayden , M . R . , Tyagi , S . C . , Kerklo , M . M . , and Nicolls , M . R . ( 2005 ) . Type 2 diabetes mellitus as a conformational disease . J Pan - creas . 6 , 287 – 302 . Horvath , P . , Oliver , S . R . , Ganesan , G . , Zaldivar , F . P . Jr . , Radom - Aizik , S . , and Galassetti , P . R . ( 2013 ) . Fasting glucose levels modu - lates cell surface expression of CD11b and CD66b in granulo - cytes and monocytes of patients with type II diabetes . J . Invest . Med . 61 , 972 – 977 . Huang , W . , Huang , J . , Liu , Q . , Lin , F . , He , Z . , Zeng , Z . , and He , L . ( 2015 ) . Neutrophil - lymphocyte ratio is a reliable predictive marker for early - stage diabetic neuropathy . Clin . Endocrinol . 82 , 229 – 233 . Jain , S . K . , Mohandas , N . , Clark , M . R . , and Shohet , S . B . ( 1983 ) . The effect of malonyldialdehyde , a product of lipid peroxidation of the deformability , dehydration and 51 Cr - survival of erythrocyte . Br . J . Haematol . 53 , 247 – 255 . Juhan , I . , Buonocore , M . , Jouve , R . , Vague , P . H . , Moulin , J . P . , and Vialettes , B . ( 1982 ) . Abnormalities of erythrocyte deformability and platelet aggregation in insulin - dependent diabetics cor - rected by insulin in vivo and in vitro . The Lancet . 1 , 535 – 536 . Juhan - Vague , I . , Roul , C . , Alessi , M . C . , Ardissone , J . P . , Heim , M . , and Vague , P . ( 1989 ) . Increased plasminogen activator inhibitor activity in non - insulin - dependent diabetic patients : relation - ship with plasma insulin . Thromb . Haemost . 61 , 370 – 373 . Kahraman , C . , Yümün , G . , Kahraman , N . K . , Namdar , N . D . , and Cosgun , S . ( 2014 ) . Neutrophil - to - lymphocyte ratio in diabetes mellitus patients with and without diabetic foot ulcer . Eur . J . Med . Sci . 1 , 8 – 13 . Kim , H . J . , Lee , J . H . , Cho , J . H . , Moon , J . S . , Won , K . Ch . , and Lee , H - W . ( 2015 ) . Association between red blood cell deformability and diabetic complication in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus . Endocr Soc . 97 th Annual Meeting and Expo , 2015 , San Diego , Diabetes Immunol , Diab Compl , THR - 613 . Kindzelskii , A . L . , Huang , J . B . , Chaiworapongsa , T . , Kim , Y . M . , Romero , R . , and Petty , H . R . ( 2002 ) . Pregnancy alters glucose - 6 - phosphate dehydrogenase trafficking , cell metabolism , and oxidant release of maternal neutrophils . J . Clin . Invest . 110 , 1801 – 1811 . Koehrer , P . , Saab , S . , Berdeaux , O . , Isaïco , R . , Grégoire , S . , Cabaret , S . , Bron , A . M . , Creuzof - Garcher , CP , Bretillon , L . , and Acar , N . ( 2014 ) . Erythrocyte phospholipid and polyunsaturated fatty acid composition in diabetic retinopathy . PLoS One 9 , e106912 . Kostidou , E . , Trachana , V . , Topouridou , K . , Paletas , K . , Tsapas , A . , Kaloyianni , M . , and Koliakos , G . ( 2009 ) . Monocyte attachment to laminin in diabetes mellitus . The role of ATP . Cell Adh . Migr . 3 , 155 – 159 . Kröger , J . , Jacobs , S . , Jansen , E . H . J . M . , Fritsche , A . , Boeing , H . , and Schulze , M . B . ( 2015 ) . Erythrocyte membrane fatty acid fluidity and risk of type 2 diabetes in the EPIC - Potsdam study . Diabeto - logia 58 , 282 – 289 . Kumar , R . , Kumar , A . N . , and Ahmed S . ( 2011 ) . Changes in erythro - cyte membrane in type - 2 diabetes mellitus without dyslipi - demia . J . Diabetes . Metab . 2 , 1 – 2 . Kummer , U . , Zobeley , J . , Brasen , J . C . , Fahmy , R . , Kindzelskii , A . L . , Petty , A . R . , Clark , A . J . and Petty , H . R . ( 2007 ) . Elevated glucose concentrations promote receptor - independent activation of adherent human neutrophils : an experimental and computa - tional approach . Biophys . J . 92 , 2597 – 2607 . Kuskonmaz , S . M . , Cicek , E . , Comu , F . M . , Arslan , M . , and Kurtipek , O . ( 2015 ) . Effect of propofol and memantine on erythrocyte deformability in diabetic rat model . Med . Sci . Disc . 2 , 221 – 224 . Linderkamp , O . , Ruef , P . , Zilow , E . P . , and Hoffman , G . F . ( 1999 ) . Impaired deformability of erythrocytes and neutrophils in children with newly diagnosed insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus . Diabetologia . 42 , 865 – 869 . Lorenzo , C . , Hanley , A . J . , and Haffner , S . M . ( 2014 ) . Differential white cell count and incident type 2 diabetes : the insulin resistance atherosclerosis study . Diabetologia . 57 , 83 – 92 . Lou , M . , Luo , P . , Tang , R . , Peng , Y . , Yu , S . , Huang , W . , and He , L . ( 2015 ) . Relation between neutrophil - lymphocyte ratio and insulin resistance in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus patients . BMC . Endocrine . Dis . 15 , 9 . Lu , W . , Zhang , Z . , Fu , C . , and Genshan , M . A . ( 2015 ) . Intermediate monocytes lead to enhanced myocardial remodeling in STEMI patients with diabetes . Int . Heart . J . 56 , 22 – 28 . MacRury , S . M . , Small , M . , Anderson , J . , MacCuish , A . C . , and Lowe , G . D . ( 1990 ) . Evaluation of red cell deformability by a filtration method in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus with and without vascular complications . Diabetes Res . 13 , 61 – 65 . Mahindrakar , Y . S . , Suryakar , A . N . , Ankush , R . D . , Katkam , R . V . , and Kumbhar , K . M . ( 2007 ) . Comparison between erythrocyte hemo - globin and spectrin glycosylation and role of oxidative stress in type - 2 diabetes mellitus . Indian J . Clin . Biochem . 22 , 91 – 94 . Malachowska , B . , Tomasik , B . , Szadkowska , A . , Baranowska - Jazwiecka , A . , Wegner , O . , Młynarski , W . , and Fendler , W . ( 2015 ) . Altered platelets’ morphological parameters in children with type 1 diabetes – a case control study . BMC Endocrine . Disord . 15 , 17 . Mansoori , D . , Jamaati , H . R . , Arami , S . , Zadsar , M . , Abbasian , L . , Esteghamati , A . R . , and Velayati , A . A . ( 2002 ) . Comparison of lymphocyte number and their subsets in patients with diabetes mellitus type II , tuberculosis and concomitant TB and diabetes . Tanaffos 1 , 45 – 50 . Mohamed - Ali , V . , Armstrong , L . , Clarke , D . , Bolton , C . H . , and Pinkney , J . H . ( 2001 ) . Evidence for the regulation of levels of plasma adhesion molecules by proinflammatory cytokines and their soluble receptors in type 1 diabetes . J . Intern . Med . 250 , 415 – 421 . Muller , C . , Zielinski , C . C . , Kalinowski , W . , Wolf , H . , Mannhalter , J . W . , Aschauer - Treiber , G . , Klosch - Kasparek , S . , Eibl , M . M . , and Schrenthaner G . ( 1989 ) . Effects of cyclosporin A upon humoral and cellular immune parameters in insulin - dependent diabetes 422 L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells mellitus type I : a long term follow - up study . J . Endocrinol . 121 , 177 – 83 . Musa , B . O . P . , Onyemelukwe , G . C . , Hambolu , J . O . , Bakari , A . G . , and Anumah , F . E . ( 2010 ) . Cell - mediated immunity in Type 2 diabetes mellitus patients in diabetic ketoacidosis , patients with con - trolled Type 2 diabetes mellitus and healthy control subjects . J . Medicine Medical Sci . 1 , 290 – 295 . Nagai , Y . , Mori , T . , Abe , T . , and Nomura , G . ( 2001 ) . Immediate - type allergy against human insulin associated with marked eosino - philia in type 2 diabetic patient . Endocrine . J . 48 , 311 – 316 . Neuwirth , A . , Dobeš , J . , Oujezdská , J . , Ballek , O . , Benešová , M . , Šumnik , Z . , Včeláková , J . , Koloušková , S . , Obermannová , B . , Kolář , M . et al . ( 2012 ) . Eosinophil from patient with type 1 dia - betes mellitus express high level of myeloid alpha - defensins and myeloperoxidase . Cellular . Immunol . 273 , 158 – 163 . Nicholson , A . C . ( 2004 ) . Expression of CD36 in macrophages and atherosclerosis : the role of lipid regulation of PPARgamma signaling . Trends . Cardiovasc . Med . 14 , 8 – 12 . Ogata , N . , Nomura , S . , Shouzu , A . , Imaizumi , M . , Arichi , M . , and Matsumura , M . ( 2008 ) . Elevation of monocyte - derived micro - particles in patients with diabetic retinopathy . Diab . Res . Clin . Pract . 73 , 241 – 248 . Olefsky , J . M . and Reaven , G . M . ( 1974 ) . Decreased insulin binding to lymphocytes from diabetic subjects . J . Clin . Invest . 54 , 1323 – 1328 . Oleszczak , B . , Szablewski , L . , and Pliszka , M . ( 2012 ) . The effect of hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia on glucose transport and expression of glucose transporters in human lymphocytes B and T : an in vitro study . Diabetes Res . Clin . Pract . 96 , 170 – 178 . Otton , R . , Mendonca , J . R . , and Curi , R . ( 2002 ) . Diabetes causes marked changes in lymphocyte metabolism . J . Endocrinol . 174 , 55 – 61 . Otton . , R . , Soriano , F . G . , Verlengia , R . , and Curi , R . ( 2004 ) . Diabetes induces apoptosis in lymphocytes . J . Endocrinol . 182 , 145 – 156 . Padmos , R . C . , Schloot , N . C . , Beyan , H . , Ruwhof , C . , Staal , F . J . T . , de Ridder , D . , Aanstoot , H . J . , Lam - Tse , W . K . , de Wit , H . , de Herder , C . et al . ( 2008 ) . Distinct monocyte gene - expression profiles in autoimmune diabetes . Diabetes . 57 , 2768 – 73 . Perri , V . , Russo , B . , Crinò , A . , Schiaffini , R . , Giorda , E . , Cappa , M . , Rosado , M . M . , and Fierabracci , A . ( 2015 ) . Expression of PD - 1 molecule on regulatory T lymphocytes in patients with insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 16 , 22584 – 22605 . Petty , H . R . , Kindzelskii , A . L . , Chaiworapongsa , T . , Petty , A . R . , and Romero , R . ( 2005 ) . Oxidant release is dramatically increased by elevated glucose concentrations in neutrophils from pregnant women . J . Maternal - Fetal . Neonatal . Med . 18 , 397 – 407 . Pickup , J . C . , Chusney , G . D . , Thomas , S . M . , and Burt D . ( 2000 ) . Plasma interleukin - 6 , tumor necrosis factor alpha and blood cytokine production in type 2 diabetes . Life Sci . 67 , 291 – 295 . Pradhan , A . D . , Manson , J . E . , Rifai , N . , Buring , J . E . , and Ridker , P . M . ( 2001 ) . C - reactive protein , intereukin - 6 and risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus . J . Am . Med . Assoc . 286 , 327 – 334 . Prakash , A . ( 2013 ) . Erythrocyte fragility increases with the duration of diabetes in Indian population . Int . J . Bas . Appl . Med . Sci . 3 , 172 – 177 . Reinhold , D . , Ansorge , S . , and Schleicher , E . D . ( 1996 ) . Elevated glucose levels stimulate transforming growth factor - β 1 ( TGF - β 1 ) , suppress interleukin IL - 2 , IL - 6 and IL - 10 production and DNA synthesis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells . Horm . Metabol . Res . 28 , 267 – 70 . Restrepo , B . I . , Twahirwa , M . , Rahbar , M . H . , and Schlesinger , L . S . ( 2014 ) . Phagocytosis via complement or Fc - gamma receptors is compromised in monocytes from Type 2 diabetes patients with chronic hyperglycemia . PLOS ONE 9 , e92977 . Rice - Evans , C . , and Chapman D . ( 1981 ) . Red blood cell biomembrane structure and deformability . Scand . J . Clin . Invest . 44 , 99 – 110 . Richards , J . P . , Yosten , G . L . C . , Kolar , G . R . , Jones , C . W . , Stephenson , A . H . , Ellsworth , M . L . , and Spraque , R . S . ( 2014 ) . Low O 2 - induced ATP release from erythrocytes of humans with type 2 diabetes in restored by physiological ratios of C - peptide and insulin . Am . J . Physiol . Regul . Integr . Comp . Physiol . 307 , R862 – 868 . Repine , J . E . , Clawson , C . C . , and Goetz , F . C . ( 1980 ) . Leukocytes and host defense . Bactericidal function of neutrophils from patients with acute bacterial infections and from diabetics . J . Inf . Dis . 142 , 869 – 875 . Rizvi , S . I . , Zaid , M . A . , Amis , R . , and Mishra , N . ( 2005 ) . Protective role of tea catechins against oxidation - induced damage of type 2 diabetes erythrocytes . Clin . Experimental . Pharmacol . Physiol . 32 , 70 – 75 . Rodrigo , R . , Böchler , J . P . , Araya , J . , Prat , H . , and Passalacqua , W . ( 2007 ) . Relationship between ( Na + K ) - ATPase activity , lipid per - oxidation and fatty acid profile in erythrocytes of hypertensive and normotensive subjects . Mol . Cell Biochem . 303 , 73 – 81 . Sabor , M . , Moinuddin , and Ilyas , S . ( 2012 ) . Platelets structural , functional and metabolic alterations in diabetes mellitus . Pak . J . Physiol . 8 , 40 – 43 . Santilli , F . , Simeone , P . , Liani , R . , and Davi , G . ( 2015 ) . Platelets and diabetes mellitus . Prostagl . Lipid . Med . 120 , 28 – 39 . Selehi , E . , Hedayati , N . , Dolati , S . , Mirzaei , R . , Namdar , A . , and Vojgani , M . ( 2015 ) . The immunomodulatory effect of 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 D3 on TLR2 and TLR4 expression on monocytes in patients with type II diabetes mellitus . Arch . Med . Lab . Sci . 1 , 18 – 22 . Shazi , A . , Lingam , S . C . , and Ahmad , A . ( 2015 ) . A study on excess permittivity on diabetic human erythrocytes using computer aided dielectrodynamic technique . Int . J . Sci . Env . Technol . 4 , 864 – 869 . Shetty , N . , Thomas , B . , and Ramesh A . ( 2008 ) . Comparison of neutrophil functions in diabetic and healthy subjects with chronic generalized periodontitis . J . Indian . Soc . Periodontal . 12 , 41 – 44 . Shiny , A . , Bibin , Y . S . , Shanthirani , C . S . , Regin , B . S . , Anjana , R . M . , Balasubramanyam , M . , Jebarani , S . , and Mohan , V . ( 2014 ) . Association of neutrophil - lymphocyte ratio with glucose intol - erance : an indicator of systemic inflammation in patients with type 2 diabetes . Diab . Techn . Theraup . 16 , 524 – 530 . Shlomai , G . , Haran - Appel , T . , Sella , T . , Grossman , Y . , Hauschner , H . , Rosenberg , N . , and Grossman E . ( 2015 ) . High - risk type - 2 diabetes mellitus patients , without prior ischemic events have normal blood platelet functionality profiles : a cross - sectional study . Cardiovasc . Diabetol . 14 , 80 . Sia , C . and Hänninen , A . ( 2010 ) . Functional alterations of proinflam - matory monocytes by T regulatory cells : implications for the prevention and reversal of type 1 diabetes . Rev . Diabet . Stud . 7 , 6 – 14 . Skarsvik , S . , Tittanen , M . , Lindstrom , A . , Casas , R . , Ludvigsson , J . , and Vaarala , O . ( 2004 ) . Poor in vitro maturation and proin - flammatory cytokine response of dendritic cells in children at genetic risk of type 1 diabetes . Scan . J . Immunol . 60 , 647 – 652 . Stegenga , M . E . , van der Crabben , S . N . , Blümer , R . M . E . , Levi , M . , Joost , C . M . , Serlie , M . J . , and van der Poll , T . ( 2008 ) . L . Szablewski and A . Sulima : Diabetes mellitus and blood cells 423 Hyperglycemia enhances coagulation and reduces neutrophil degranulation , whereas hyperinsulinemia inhibits fibrynolysis during human endotoxemia . Blood . 112 , 82 – 89 . Szablewski , L . , Oleszczak , B . , Mrozikiewicz - Rakowska , B . , Karnafel , W . , and Grytner - Zięcina , B . ( 2007a ) . Deoxy - D - glucose transport into lymphocytes , granulocytes and erythrocytes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus . Exptl . Clin . Diabetol . 7 , 245 – 255 . Szablewski , L . , Sobczyk - Kopcioł , A . , Oleszczak , B . , Mrozikiewicz - Rakowska , B . , Karnafel W . , and Grytner - Zięcina , B . ( 2007b ) . Expression of glucose transporters in peripheral blood cells in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus depending on the mode of therapy . Exptl . Clin . Diabetol . 7 , 204 – 212 . Szymczak , I . , Śliwińska , A . , and Drzewoski , J . ( 2014 ) . DNA damage and efficacy of DNA repair in patients with type 2 diabetes and coexisting colorectal cancer . Polskie . Arch . Med . Wewn . 7 – 8 , 352 – 357 . Thomas , G . , Skrinska , V . , Lucas , F . V . , and Schumacher , O . P . ( 1985 ) . Platelet glutathione and thromboxane synthesis in diabetes . Diabetes . 34 , 951 – 954 . Tillmann , W . , Merten , A . , Lakomek , M . , Gahr , M . , Tiechtl , J . , and Schröter , W . ( 1981 ) . Flexibility of erythrocytes in juvenile diabe - tes mellitus . Blut . 43 , 125 – 128 . Top , C . , Yildiz , S . , Öncül , O . , Qydedi , T . , Çervikbaş , A . , Soyogul , U . G . , and Cavuşlu , S . ( 2007 ) . Phagocytic activity of neutrophils improves over the course of therapy of diabetic foot infections . J . Infect . 55 , 369 – 373 . Trovati , M . , Anfossi , G . , Cavalot , F . , Massucco , P . , Mularoni , E . , and Emanuelli , G . ( 1988 ) . Insulin directly reduces platelet sensitiv - ity to aggregating agents . Studies in vitro and in vivo . Diabetes . 37 , 780 – 786 . Tsukada , K . , Sekizuka , E . , Oshio , C . , and Minamitani , H . ( 2001 ) . Direct measurement of erythrocyte deformability in diabetes mellitus with a transparent microchannel capillary model and high - speed video camera system . Microvascular Res . 61 , 231 – 239 . Umsa - ard , W . , Thongboonkered , V . , and Soongsathitamon , J . ( 2015 ) . Activated status and altered functions of neutrophils in poorly controlled diabetes . JAFES . 30 , 9 – 17 . Wang , Y . , Beck , W . , Deppisch , R . , Marshall , N . A . , Hoenich , N . A . , and Thompson , M . G . ( 2007 ) . Advanced glycation end products elicit externalization of phosphatidylserine in a subpopulation of platelets via 5 - HT2A / 2C receptors . Am . J . Physiol . Cell . Physiol . 293 , C328 – C336 . Watala , C . , Boncler , M . , Golański , J . , Koziołkiewicz , W . , Trojanowski , Z . , and Walkowiak , B . ( 1998 ) . Platelet membrane lipid fluidity and intraplatelet calcium mobilization in type 2 diabetes mel - litus . Eur . J . Haematol . 61 , 319 – 326 . Watala , C . , Boncler , M . , and Gresner , P . ( 2005 ) . Blood platelet abnormalities and pharmacological modulation of platelet reactivity in patients with diabetes mellitus . Pharmacol . Rep . 57 , 42 – 58 . Watala , C . , Golanski , J . , Witas , H . , Gurbiel , R . , Gwozdzinski , K . , and Trojanowski , Z . ( 1996 ) . The effects of in vivo and in vitro non - enzymatic glycosylation and glycosylation on physico - chemical properties of haemoglobin in control and diabetic patients . Int . J . Biochem . Cell . Biol . 28 , 1393 – 1403 . Wilson , R . M . and Reeves , W . G . ( 1986 ) . Neutrophil phagocytosis and killing in insulin - dependent diabetes . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 63 , 478 – 484 . Valle , A . , Giamporcaro , G . M . , Scavini , M . , Stabilini , A . , Grogan , P . , Bianconi , E . , Sebastiani , G . , Masini , M . , Maugeri , N . , Porretti , L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Reduction of circulating neutrophils precedes and accompanies type 1 diabetes . Diabetes . 62 , 2072 – 2077 . Varashree , B . S . and Bhat , P . G . K . ( 2010 ) . A study of proteolytic enzyme activity in the erythrocytes of diabetic patients . Online J . Health Allied . Sci . 9 , 13 – 15 . Veni , S . N . , Vasishth , A . , and Krishna , T . R . ( 2014 ) . Studies on rheo - logical behavior of human erythrocytes of normal and diabetes mellitus . Int . J . Pharmacol . Pharmaceut . Sci . 2 , 18 – 21 . Vinik , P . I . , Erbas , T . , Park , T . S . , Nolan , R . , and Pittenger , G . L . ( 2001 ) . Platelet dysfunction in type 2 diabetes . Diabetes Care . 24 , 1476 – 1485 . Xie , B - G . , Jin , S . , and Zhu , W - J . ( 2014 ) . Expression of toll - like receptor 4 in maternal monocytes of patients with gestational diabetes mellitus . Exp . Ther . Med . 7 ; 236 - 240 . Zhu , L . , Su , T . , Xu , M . , Xu , Y . , Li , M . , Wang , T . , Sun , J . , Zhang , J . , Xu , B . , Lu , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Eosinophil inversely associates with Type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance in Chinese adults . PLoS One 8 , e67613 .