Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View of Knowledge Management Mark S . Ackerman 1 , Juri Dachtera 2 , Volkmar Pipek 2 & Volker Wulf 2 1 University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Ann Arbor , MI , USA ( E - mail : ackerm @ umich . edu ) ; 2 University of Siegen , Siegen , Germany ( E - mail : juri . dachtera @ uni - siegen . de ; E - mail : volkmar . pipek @ uni - siegen . de ; E - mail : volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de ) Abstract . Knowledge Management ( KM ) is a diffuse and controversial term , which has been used by a large number of research disciplines . CSCW , over the last 20 years , has taken a critical stance towards most of these approaches , and instead , CSCW shifted the focus towards a practice - based perspective . This paper surveys CSCW researchers ’ viewpoints on what has become called ‘ knowledge sharing ’ and ‘ expertise sharing ’ . These are based in an understanding of the social contexts of knowledge work and practices , as well as in an emphasis on communication among knowledgeable humans . The paper provides a summary and overview of the two strands of knowledge and expertise sharing in CSCW , which , from an analytical standpoint , roughly represent ‘ generations ’ of research : an ‘ object - centric ’ and a ‘ people - centric ’ view . We also survey the challenges and opportunities ahead . Key words : knowledge sharing , expertise sharing , CSCW , collective memory , organizational memory , expertise location , expert ﬁ nder , expertise ﬁ nding , knowledge management , sociotechnical , collective intelligence 1 . Introduction One of the major research streams within CSCW has been the role of information in organizational settings . A considerable number of papers have explored the situated role of information within various kinds of collectivities , and many of these are among the great intellectual accomplishments of the CSCW community . In this paper , we review the CSCW literature on a particular aspect of information — how organizations , or other collectivities , can harness and use the knowledge and expertise that their members have to solve problems or get work done . CSCW has a rich history with this problem . CSCW has focused on the social practices involved in knowledge sharing , as well as the systems that could support knowledge sharing . While this thematic area is also treated by other research communities , their research epistemologies are quite distinct . We will position them broadly . In Information Systems ( IS ) , typically a business school discipline , this research area is called Knowledge Management . In its mainstream it is largely normatively or prescriptively oriented , and it lacks a technology - design orientation as well as a micro - scale , empirical perspective on the Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2013 ) 22 : 531 – 573 © Springer Science + Business Media Dordrecht 2013 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 013 - 9192 - 8 practices of knowledge sharing . In Learning Science , Computer Supported Collaborative Learning ( CSCL ) investigates the role computers can play in facilitating learning and in improving didactic methodologies . While there has been a recent shift in emphasis and some overlapping work ( e . g . , Goggins et al . 2013 ) , in its mainstream the CSCL community is oriented towards educational institutions , mainly schools and universities . In Computer Science , knowledge - related topics are typically treated by researchers with an Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence or ( Large ) Database background . While these communities have been successful in developing interesting algorithms to create and manipulate complex data sets , they generally treated these problems in a strictly technical manner . Empirical explorations into the practice of knowledge - intense work have been typically lacking in this discourse . Design oriented work in the CSCW community is based on some of the algorithms created in Computer Science , but the merit of the CSCW community is to have explored the relationship between innovative computational artifacts and knowledge work — from a micro - perspective . To characterize the speci ﬁ c stance of our community , we will use the terms knowledge sharing and expertise sharing in this paper . Both terms connote CSCW ’ s spin on the problem — that knowledge is situated in people and in location , and that the social is an essential part of using any knowledge ( Ackerman et al . 2002b ) . Knowledge Management , in mainstream IS terms , often connotes ignoring the nuance and complexity of real organizational and social life , not focusing on the fact that work and knowledge are closely intertwined . As Normark and Randall ( 2005 ) also state , far more useful systems can be developed if they are grounded in an analysis of work practices and do not ignore the social aspects of knowledge sharing i . Within the CSCW discourse we distinguish here between knowledge and expertise sharing . The term knowledge sharing takes a perspective in which externalization of knowledge in the form of computational or information technology artifacts or repositories play an important role . We use the term expertise sharing when the capability to get the work done or to solve a problem is instead based on discussions among knowledgeable actors and less signi ﬁ cantly supported by a priori externalizations ( Pipek et al . 2012 ; Ackerman et al . 2002b ) . These perspectives also re ﬂ ect a certain temporal sequenciality echoing the ( technical ) developments in the ﬁ eld of Knowledge Management in general . Therefore , we speak of ‘ generations ’ ii in the following . The ﬁ rst generation we examine , repository models of information and knowledge , was rooted in documents or computer records . Within CSCW , this had the rubric of organizational memory , although there were many earlier efforts to examine document and information ﬂ ows . This body of work was concerned with information as an externalized artifact or object , although the information was understood to be within a social context . This work produced many insights into the social practices around knowledge sharing . The shortcomings of repository models were quickly recognized and empirically investigated both in CSCW and knowledge management practice , and a second generation began to examine tying communication among people into knowledge 532 Mark S . Ackerman et al . work . In CSCW , this body of work about expertise sharing bifurcated : There has been research on how to ﬁ nd others in an organization or organizations with the requisite expertise or skills and on online communities ( initially restricted in scope and size ) that allowed people to share their knowledge ( Ackerman and Halverson 2004b ) . Expertise ﬁ nders , recommenders , and collaborative help systems were some of the CSCW technical efforts in this direction . As well , there have been many studies of how people helped one another within organizations . As the span of networks and computational systems expanded , the scope of study expanded to Internet - scale systems and communities . Recent work has also expanded from knowledge and expertise sharing within organizations to include other forms of collectivities , including hobbyist groups ( e . g . , Torrey et al . 2007 ) , open - source communities ( e . g . , Singh and Twidale 2008 ; Dabbish et al . 2012 ) , and social movements ( e . g . , Saeed et al . 2010 ) . There have also been examinations of information and knowledge use within collectivities of increasing complexity , for example , hospitals ( e . g . , Zhou et al . 2011 ) , inter - organizational networks ( e . g . , Pipek and Wulf 2003 ) , and NGOs ( e . g . , Saeed et al . 2010 ) . We will cover each of these generations in turn . We will largely follow these generations , and mostly follow chronological order , while recognizing that our structure is , to some extent , merely an expository device . 2 . The ﬁ rst generation : the repository model Discussions of documents , information , and repositories were certainly not new . Libraries have been around for millennia , and early information retrieval systems included document retrieval systems and scienti ﬁ c dissemination of information ( SDI ) systems , which routed new scienti ﬁ c papers . However , with the advent of early networked and distributed systems in the late 1980s and early 1990s , interest rapidly grew in organizations to ‘ harness what they knew ’ . As one early popular press article gushed : Such collective knowledge is hard to identify and harder still to deploy effectively . But once you ﬁ nd it and exploit it , you win . ( Stewart 1991 , p . 44 ) CSCW researchers quickly moved in to examine the realities of knowledge management : knowledge sharing in organizations . CSCW , in particular , grew interested in understanding how to use , maintain , and reuse both formal and informal information , perhaps with an emphasis on the latter . Studies included both technical and social - analytic , and often both in sequence . We will start with the former . 2 . 1 . Technical research The ﬁ rst generation in knowledge management used a repository model ; organizations were to build vast repositories of what they knew . ( For an early 533 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View popular account , see Stewart 1991 ) . These repositories were to include digitized manuals , standard procedures , process maps , and so on , but they would also include all sorts of other information including best practices , narratives , e - mail , and other forms of informal information . We will discuss the repository model in the following paragraphs ; however , it should be noted that CSCW never really accepted that this model would work in practice ( e . g . , Bannon and Kuutti 1996 ) . Numerous CSCW studies examined how people actually used information , especially informal information , and even the earliest CSCW systems examined ways of including people in information seeking and use . Nonetheless , efforts in this generation of work did focus on information artifacts that were , to some extent , separable from their authors and users . CSCW produced a number of repository - model systems . Many of these systems considered technical issues that were worked out enough to produce commercially viable systems ; most of the research systems are now obsolete . These systems have to be understood within their historical context . Early CSCW efforts included attempts to create repositories of design and decision rationales , argumentation , and informal information . These investigations led to systems that primarily supported the sharing of information . Tapestry ’ s ( Goldberg et al . 1992 ) central focus was on sharing through tagging and ﬁ ltering . Its users could collaboratively tag documents and informal information , thus allowing a continuously ﬁ ltered stream of material going into a repository to be rerouted back to the users . OVAL ( Malone et al . 1995 ) focused instead on the mechanics of sharing . It provided four primitives for handling information and sharing : information objects , users ’ views ( or organizations ) of their information , links between objects , and semi - autonomous agents that structured information for the user . All of these could be shared . As well , commercial interest manifested itself in systems such as Lotus Notes during this period . Xerox deployed a number of systems , and Orr ’ s important study ( Orr 1986 , 1996 ) demonstrated that organizational members , in this case Xerox repair people , could learn from and help one another become more effective , including through technical systems . In the mid - 1990s , a number of CSCW papers gathered under the rubric of organizational memory , which was to examine how an organization could retain knowledge from its past ( Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . Organizational memory later expanded to include other forms of collective memory ( e . g . , community memories and group memories ) . Answer Garden was an early system in this area . Answer Garden ( Ackerman 1998 ; Ackerman and Malone 1990 ) argued for a repository of informal information , speci ﬁ cally answers to technical questions . However , if users could not ﬁ nd the answer to their question , they could ask their question through the system . Answer Garden would route the question to an appropriate expert , including people as ﬁ rst class information sources . The system also had properties that would be found repeatedly useful . It had matched motivations , with experts getting rid of repeated 534 Mark S . Ackerman et al . questions and with users getting answers to their questions . An information repository in the Answer Garden system also ‘ grew ’ where people needed information . Yet , some of the standard issues with repository systems were apparent in its ﬁ eld study ( Ackerman 1993 , 1994a ) , particularly dif ﬁ culty with motivating users to author and organize the material and to maintain the information and its navigation . Answer Garden 2 ( Ackerman and McDonald 1996 ) ( AG2 ) , with a more nuanced view of expertise , tackled the problem of context . It tried to keep answer - providing local as much as possible , so context could be preserved . It assumed expertise was variable , and everyone could provide some help . AG2 also assumed that people nearby an asker would know more about local context and might be better at explaining than might experts . However , if no one nearby could provide an answer , AG2 incrementally escalated questions to larger and larger groups of people ( or to paid consultants ) through a range of computer - mediated communication mechanisms . Pipek and Wulf ( 2003 ) summarized many of the issues in Answer Garden and behind the intuitions that led to AG2 , they also pointed out the dif ﬁ culties of reuse and the organization of the information in repositories over time , especially when context changed . Organizational memory , as a concept , was re - examined in Ackerman and Halverson ( 1998 , 2004a ) : The study showed that no organizational memory per se existed ; the perfect repository was a myth . Instead , people in organizations used a number of memory artifacts , they used the artifacts together as resources , and each memory artifact had different properties . Terveen et al . ( 1995 ) investigated many of the same issues for a design rationale repository for large - scale software engineering . Design Assistant was designed to create ‘ a living design memory ’ . The system provided advice in much the same manner as an expert system , using many kinds of information , including informal histories , email , knowledge - bases , and automatic software messages . The study found that such a memory could be constructed and used , but the researchers also found they needed to embed both the system and the information in both practice and in the organizational context . The study included , notably , 2 years of use . Other organizational and group memory system studies of the period included GIMMe ( Lindstaedt 1996 ) , Team Memory ( Morrison 1993 ) , and TeamInfo ( Berlin et al . 1993 ) . Other CSCW systems of the same period examined alternative sharing and reuse models for knowledge sharing . Grassroots ’ ( Kamiya et al . 1996 ) users , presumed to be in a small group with a resulting high level of trust , could select and push information into other people ’ s reading lists . Grassroots supported a hierarchical model of knowledge sharing , and also made sharing be an active process . Boland et al . ( 1992 ) used shared cognitive maps , linked to users ’ assumptions , to share perspectives about their underlying assumptions for decisions and actions . In this case , users at the same organizational level ( managers ) could enact a common sense - making of their situations . CSCW technical research on repositories and information artifacts has since diminished . In general , work on repository systems became commercialized , and as 535 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View well , CSCW researchers began focusing on communications as a more viable and central concern . This shifting of emphasis can be seen in the progression of Answer Garden , with its central concern of building an information repository , to Answer Garden 2 , with its augmentation of the information repository with many forms of communication , to later studies of expertise sharing and hybrid systems , to be discussed below . There have been notable exceptions , however . The Placeless project ( Dourish 2003 ) , along with its various facets ( Dourish et al . 1999 , 2000 ) , examined the potential roles of properties , or name - value pairs , that could be attached to documents or other information artifacts . The studies found that properties permitted better retrieval and organization than did hierarchical repositories . This provided for both mutual intelligibility , or being able to quickly comprehend how others viewed the information , as well as appropriation and customization . Computationally - based properties , called active properties in Placeless , blurred the line between application and infrastructure , since the infrastructure could serve as components of applications ; documents could be maintained and organized over time . These studies repeated the ﬁ ndings of the earlier OVAL work ( Malone et al . 1995 ) , but with substantially greater detail and nuance . The problem of ( re - ) organizing the information was also tackled by Shipman and Marshall ( 1999 ) , Shipman and McCall ( 1999 , 1994 ) , and Shipman et al . ( 2001 ) , all of which investigated how to incrementally add formalization . In their systems , information could start as informal and unstructured , and slowly be formalized over time . This not only provided more structure to informal information , it also allowed greater computational tractability in retrieval and reuse ; the ﬁ nding is a complement to the Placeless ﬁ ndings . Finally , distillation of informal information into more concise and well - organized forms was examined in Nam and Ackerman ( 2007 ) . Using Shipman and Marshall ’ s principle , Arkose allowed users to incrementally and collaboratively organize and summarize collections of informal information such as brainstorming sessions and e - community posts . Recently , technical work into information artifacts has picked up again . Researchers have resurfaced several old research streams , largely by using machine learning and crowdsourcing mechanisms . For example , by using Opinion Space ( Faridani et al . 2010 ) , Internet users can more easily ﬁ nd and peruse comments that were found insightful by other users . KnowDis ? ( Laqua et al . 2011 ) provided additional , appropriate documents when users read email . Next we examine the social - analytical studies that argued against and resulted from the repository model . While the technical studies detailed new design spaces , arguably , these studies could be regarded as a major contribution to knowledge sharing . Indeed , even many of the technical studies were socio - technical , exploring both the technical and social issues simultaneously . 2 . 2 . Social - analytic studies of the repository model Problems with the repository model became quickly apparent after systems were introduced and ﬁ eld - tested ( Bannon and Kuutti 1996 ; Ackerman 1994b ; Brown 536 Mark S . Ackerman et al . and Duiguid 1991 ) . Reducing the richness of collective memory to speci ﬁ c information artifacts was utopian . As Bannon and Kuutti ( 1996 ) , after raising a number of problems with the repository model , so eloquently argued : … information does not simply exist ‘ out there ’ , but is produced by speci ﬁ c people in speci ﬁ c contexts for speci ﬁ c purposes . While this does not imply that it is bound solely to that whole context , it does mean that one cannot in any straightforward way extract and abstract from this web of signi ﬁ cation items of ‘ information ’ which can be stored in some central resource for later use … . ( p . 163 ) . Uncovering and investigating the social issues in knowledge sharing ﬁ t well with standard CSCW concerns . CSCW in general has assumed that understanding situated use was critical to producing useful , and usable , systems ( Suchman 1987 ; Suchman and Wynn 1984 ) and that usability and usefulness are social and collaborative in nature . Exceptions in organizational activities , instead of being assumed to be deviations from correct procedures , were held to be ‘ normal ’ in organizational life ( Suchman 1983 ) and to be examined for what they said about organizational activity , including information handling ( Randall et al . 2007 ; Schmidt 1999 ) . In the following sections , we survey this literature in terms of what the studies say to the general social context of information use and then the speci ﬁ c concerns of boundary objects , common information spaces , and assemblies ( collections ) . These papers studied and analyzed the concerns about information - as - artifact and the repository model , but many of them also apply to expertise sharing where communication is at the core . Three points need to be made before walking through this literature . First , it must be noted that these concerns were not begun by CSCW nor were they exclusively examined by CSCW researchers ; however , CSCW as a ﬁ eld expanded and deepened the earlier studies . Nor are the concerns limited to the ﬁ rst generation systems . Many generalize to any knowledge sharing . Second , some results come from socio - technical studies . In today ’ s terms , the technical work also served as exploratory probes into work and practice ( Wulf et al . 2011 ) . For example , an early socio - technical investigation was Dourish et al . ( 1993 ) . This study deployed two calendar systems and showed different use resulting from the differing sources of authoring and authority . There was a sharp relationship between who entered the data and the politics of its use : The secretaries entered of ﬁ cial , authoritative event information into one , and everyone could enter unauthoritative , but timely , event information into the other . That is , the paper not only included system implementation , it also worked through a social - analytic discussion of system use and social implications . Other socio - technical studies include Ackerman 1994a ; Dourish 2003 , and Hinrichs et al . 2005 . Finally , most of these studies are ethnographically - based and / or interpretivist studies . These ethnographically - based ﬁ ndings should not be viewed in empiricist terms . Viewing them as resulting in sensitizing concepts ( Blumer 1986 ; Strauss 537 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View 1993 ) is more useful , especially in speci ﬁ c situations . Sensitizing concepts do not have closure ; that is , they are often present and should be considered in any research study or requirements analysis , but they are not always present . Social context . A number of ethnographically - based studies have tackled the thorny issues involved in the social creation , use , and reuse of information . There are many of these studies , and it is a rare CSCW ethnographically - based study that does not touch at all on issues of information and knowledge sharing . We cannot hope to cover all of the relevant studies ; we include a necessarily brief subset of them . The studies presented here have investigated issues of motivation , context in reuse , assessments of reliability and authoritativeness , organizational politics , maintenance , and rei ﬁ cation . Each issue will be discussed in turn . First , obtaining information for repository systems was found , in research studies and in practice , to be a dif ﬁ cult challenge . Motivating people to add knowledge to a repository was found to be key by Orlikowski ( 1992 ) , and in her site , largely required dealing with the dif ﬁ cult organizational issues of reward structures and changing mental models of use . The organization Orlikowski studied , a consulting company , had trouble motivating the authoring of material . Although partners wanted to garner the ﬁ rm ’ s knowledge , the lower - level consultants who were supposed to contribute were not rewarded for their time or effort . The consulting ﬁ rm later moved to rewarding its authors , but her ﬁ ndings hold up well . In general , the dif ﬁ culties in aligning reward and incentive structures with desired contribution , especially among differing groups , was a constant problem with repository projects . The initial vision in these projects was capturing an organization ’ s knowledge rather than sharing it . That vision was often utopian , and it ignored misaligned people and groups that had differing career anchors ( Schein 1978 ) , reward and incentive structures , and mental models of how to get their work done . The issue of motivation remains very salient . For example , Hinds and Pfeffer ( 2003 ) identi ﬁ ed motivational barriers mainly located in the competitive structure within companies . In their study they found that , if knowledge sharing is not rewarded , employees have no incentive to engage in it . Other scholars share this view ( Alvesson and Kärreman 2001 ; Schmidt 2012 ) . Second , a substantial number of studies have examined the social context of information reuse . The processes of decontextualization and recontextualization loomed over the repository model , and have been heavily examined ( Ackerman and Halverson 2004a ; Schmidt and Bannon 1992 ) . ( This issue was also called embeddedness / disembeddeness in Brown and Duguid 2000 . ) In short , informa - tion as it occurs in a social setting has to be decontextualized by an author or editor to remove extraneous details . The information has to be recontextualized by the re - user in order to understand whether and how to reuse the information object . For example , one might not need to include the speci ﬁ c location of a printer in an of ﬁ ce , but details about the current network con ﬁ guration might be 538 Mark S . Ackerman et al . important for reuse . This is dif ﬁ cult to achieve , and even harder to achieve for complex problems . Third , several key papers point to how this recontextualization is achieved as a situated , social action . Part of what is required for recontextualization is to understand the expertise of the author ( Schmidt 1999 ) . Information is also assessed by potential re - users in many ways to assess its quality : Studies have examined trustworthiness ( Van House et al . 1998 ) ; reliability , authoritativeness , and quality ( Brown and Duguid 2000 ; Van House et al . 1998 ) ; understandability ( Lutters and Ackerman 2002 , 2007 ) ; the provisional or ﬁ nal nature of the information ( Hardstone et al . 2004 ) ; and , the obsolescence and completeness of the material ( Pipek and Wulf 2003 ) . Potential re - users in organizations also situate the information in its original institutional context . People notice whether the material was of ﬁ cially sanctioned or vetted ( Harper 1998 ; Harper et al . 2001 ; Van House et al . 1998 ) . Furthermore , Heath and Luff ( 1996 ) pointed out that information is shared within mutual practices . In their study , entries in a patient record can connote relative expertise and understanding of a patient ’ s condition , thereby requiring a shared understanding of how medical entries are used for proper recontextualization . Fourth , as authoring and re - use may be situated in organizational contexts , that information necessarily carries with it organizational politics . A long line of work has discussed how knowledge sharing has politics ( Harper 1998 ; Harper and Sellen 1995 ; Kling 1991 ; Mambrey and Robinson 1997 ; Markus 1983 ) . This can be seen in several of the studies already discussed . Dourish et al . ( 1993 ) , as mentioned , noted that organizational members understood to which calendar entries to pay attention by interpreting the organizational role of the person entering the event . As well , who can author , maintain , or reuse information may be mandated or controlled within an organization ( Ackerman and Halverson 1998 ; 2004a ) . In Ackerman and Halverson ’ s hotline study , there were many information sources , and for each , only members of speci ﬁ c groups were allowed to change the data . However , Wulf ( 1997 ) showed that the division of labor with regard to categorizing documents can shift when introducing an IT - based repository into a hierarchical organization . Halverson et al . ’ s ( 2004 ) study of a help desk for technical consultants added organizational policies , sometimes embedded in infrastructures , to the set of concerns . Information ’ s meta - data also has politics . As Suchman and others ( Suchman 1994 and commentaries in the same issue ) have pointed out , categories in general are linked to political considerations ; this is also true in the practices around categorizing documents at the time of their storage . However , Wulf ’ s ( 1997 ) study indicates that certain actors are not always aware of their interests when deciding on categorization schemes . This seems to be speci ﬁ cally the case when they are still unfamiliar with the long - term use of shared repositories . Fifth , information objects , as well as classi ﬁ cation schemes , in a repository need to be ongoingly maintained to keep them both up - to - date and complete . Hinrichs et al . ( 2005 ) , Stevens and Wulf ( 2002 ) , and Pipek and Wulf ( 2003 ) 539 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View conducted long term studies into large repositories of technical drawings in engineering domains . Their investigations included a steel mill ’ s central drawing archive , which included some that were 100 years old , and a sewage company that just had been privatized . It turned out that the proper functioning of these archives was severely challenged over time by changing storage media and classi ﬁ cation schemes , as well as organizational and economic changes . Hinrichs et al . ( 2005 ) also argued that appropriate tool support can help in maintaining classi ﬁ cation schemes within archives by assigning meta - data ef ﬁ ciently . Their toolkit was integrated into the sewage company ’ s document management system and allowed assigning a speci ﬁ c attribute value to a prede ﬁ ned set of existing documents as well as a set of prede ﬁ ned attribute values to newly created documents . Other studies have raised many of the same issues for long - term reuse . Lutters and Ackerman ( 2002 , 2007 ) examined repair records in an aircraft technical archive and also found that older records tended not to be considered useful . The older records could be dif ﬁ cult to recontextualize , and prospective users could then not evaluate the repair record ’ s authoritativeness and reliability : For example , the authors might no longer be known ( i . e . , they have retired or moved on ) , procedures might have changed , and some information required for understanding the record later might not have been written down for social reasons ( e . g . , how competent the author was ) . Even retrieval has been found to be dif ﬁ cult over time . While meta - data and proper classi ﬁ cation would help this , people ﬁ nd adding meta - data to be laborsome ( Hinrichs et al . 2005 ) or tend to use the category with the lowest cognitive effort , what Anderson et al . ( 2007 ) called ‘ residual categories ’ . This makes the reconstruction of classi ﬁ cation schemes a knowledge - intense practice ( Pipek and Wulf 2003 ; Pipek et al . 2003 ) and complicates later retrieval . Finally , repository systems promote an objecti ﬁ ed view of knowledge . Ackerman and Halverson ( 1998 ) found it more useful to analyze information as a duality of process and object : An information object demarks only a snapshot of various organizational or collective processes : An information object is a ‘ punctuated crystallization ’ of a knowledge process , using Shapiro ’ s ( 1994 ) terminology . Despite the many uncovered issues , these studies did point to important abstractions in designing , implementing , and adopting knowledge sharing systems . Three of these are discussed in detail below , both for their importance and because they remain ongoing research themes in CSCW . We include some research outside of CSCW here , when it is important for continuity . Boundary objects and other knowledge sharing objects . Star and Griesemer ’ s ( 1989 ) seminal paper de ﬁ nes boundary objects as : … objects which both inhabit several intersecting social worlds and satisfy the informational requirements of each of them . Boundary objects are 540 Mark S . Ackerman et al . objects which are plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites . ( p . 393 ) The paper pointed out boundary objects in science , including databases , standardizations , and maps . The concept was expanded in Bowker and Star ( 1999 ) , which considered the development of classi ﬁ cation systems . Boundary objects , therefore , are critical to knowledge sharing . Because of their plasticity of meaning boundary objects serve as translation mechanisms for ideas , viewpoints , and values across otherwise dif ﬁ cult to traverse social boundaries . Boundary objects are bridges between different communities of practice ( Wenger 1998 ) or social worlds ( Strauss 1993 ) . Boundary objects , for CSCW ’ s purposes , are information objects that have meaning on both sides of an intra - organizational or inter - organizational boundary . However , in most cases , some meaning is lost — and necessarily so — as the information crosses the boundary . As an example , in an organizational setting ( Ackerman and Halverson 2004a ) , management reviews of an employee may be very critical to the human resources department or the line department , but are not necessary to the payroll department . This is actually quite functional — we would drown in information if all context and detail were provided always . Organizational routines across the boundary can assume summaries of the context and detail . A number of CSCW researchers have examined how boundary objects are used in work practices . Berg and Bowker ( 1997 ) detailed how patient records in hospitals act as boundary objects . A patient record , in their view , ‘ produces ’ the patient for physicians , technicians , and nursing staff by serving as surrogate representations of the patient in the medical record . The information artifact used is inherently not a complete representation of the patient . Mambrey and Robinson ( 1997 ) examined information work ﬂ ows in a German ministry for the POLITeam project . The study found that additional data , inscriptions in their case , could be used to understand the relative meanings of information artifacts being circulated among different groups . The study also noted that boundary objects could be compound : Folders included papers and documents . Other use studies include how ‘ diary ’ entries mediate between shift changes at a paper mill ( Auramäki et al . 1996 ; Kovalainen et al . 1998 ) , asynchronously providing summaries of important events . As mentioned , Ackerman and Halverson ( 2004a ) reported on a personnel hotline , detailing the information ﬂ ows within telephone calls and the construction of the answers . In all of these , the recontextualization of the boundary object was nuanced and dif ﬁ cult , but often achieved , allowing for the reuse of information in organizations . Other studies have focused on how boundary objects play in the micro - negotiations within developing shared understanding . For example , Yamauchi et al . ( 2000 ) addressed information mechanisms used by dispersed volunteer open - 541 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View source programmers , and Bergman et al . ( 2004 ) examined the evolution of proto - architectures and project plans at NASA . The emergence of a new artifact serving as a boundary object was observed in Halverson and Ackerman ( 2003 ) , which described how a ‘ cheat sheet , ’ used by both airlines and air traf ﬁ c control to guide their daily activities , came to be . The study also described how differing representations evolved . Perhaps due to the tool development focus in HCI and CSCW , certain characteristics of boundary objects have been promoted to the foreground in the literature . Star ’ s original de ﬁ nition includes such diverse notions of boundary objects as coincident boundaries ( e . g . , the shared understanding of the geopolitical boundary of the state of California ) and ideal types . CSCW has focused on the more tractable information processing objects such as standard - ized forms and information in repositories . These are easier to implement and of more commercial interest . In so focusing , there has often been an over - emphasis on boundary objects as material artifacts , which can limit the analytical power that boundary objects bring to understanding negotiation and mediation in routine work . Nonetheless , some important studies have considered how to support both process and information objects . Bandini et al . ( 2003 ) described a ‘ T - Matrix ’ artifact , technically supported , that covered all relevant aspects of producing a tire ; it supported capturing past experiences as well as innovation through the emergence of knowledge items concerning tire performance , blend features , and recipe interventions . In later studies ( Cabitza et al . 2008 , 2009 ) , additional artifacts at the intersection of coordinating work practices and fostering knowledge sharing were constructed and analyzed . Their ‘ clinical pathways ’ helped coordinate a patient ’ s treatment plan and also encoded best practices of treating patients with speci ﬁ c health problems . Cabitza and Simone ( 2012 ) argue for a perspective where artifacts carry two levels of information : awareness promoting information ( API , information on the current state of a collaborative activity ) and knowledge - evoking information ( KEI , information triggering previously acquired knowledge or triggering and supporting learning as well as innovation ) . They suggest ‘ affording mechanisms ’ ( extending previous de ﬁ nitions of ‘ coordination mechanisms ’ in Schmidt and Simone 1996 ) as a formal construct to describe and manage both kinds of information in an integrated way . As well , work in CSCW has begun to extend the concept of boundary object to include new types of information objects . Lutters and Ackerman ( 2007 ) and Lee ( 2007 ) suggested classes of more free - form boundary negotiating artifacts , less structured and standardized than boundary objects . Lutters and Ackerman , in their study of aircraft repair work , pointed out that the ‘ boundary object ’ concept was too limited , and their study extended the concept to include the existence of higher - level ‘ event streams ’ and ‘ meta - negotiations ’ . In their site , boundary objects ( repair orders ) were interpreted in light of past and future interactions between the parties ( airframe manufacturer and airline ) , based in previously 542 Mark S . Ackerman et al . established levels of trust and expectation , as well as being guided by current context . Lee , in a study of museum design , pointed to the existence of other information objects that did not have quite the same properties as boundary objects , especially their standardization . Lee termed these objects ‘ boundary negotiating ’ objects , as they often helped participants discuss , negotiate , and sometimes settle on boundaries . This work was continued in Bietz and Lee ( 2009 ) , which examined the use of metagenomic databases as ‘ sites for negotiation of community boundaries ( p . 11 ) ’ . This ﬁ nding echoed O ’ Day et al . ( 2001 ) and Boujut and Blanco ( 2003 ) , both of which also found information objects that served as a mechanism for discussions . Bietz and Lee also pointed at the prevalence of un ﬁ nished or incomplete information objects , especially those designed as boundary objects . Bossen ’ s ( 2002 ) work on medication documenta - tion examined the ‘ boundary spanning ’ role as mediation among the different social worlds of surgeons , physicians , technicians , nurses and administrators . Reddy et al . ( 2001 ) and Halverson and Ackerman ( 2003 , 2007 ) examined how the same data could be represented in different ways , essentially creating alternative boundary objects . Cabitza et al . ( 2013 ) also expanded the investigation of information objects , again bringing ‘ boundary objects ’ into a larger , more abstracted viewpoint . Summarizing and extending earlier studies , Cabitza et al . describe what they term a ‘ knowledge artifact ’ , which is : a physical , i . e . , material but not necessarily tangible , inscribed artifact that is collaboratively created , maintained and used to support knowledge - oriented social processes ( among which knowledge creation and exploita - tion , collaborative problem solving and decision making ) within or across communities of practice … . ( p . 35 ) Since knowledge artifacts emerge from practice and inform practice they are inherently local ; they provide a ‘ bounded openness ’ that allows participants to establish a shared meaning on the one hand , while remaining open for modi ﬁ cations on the other . The knowledge artifacts provide shared representations not in a sense that they contain knowledge , but in the sense that they stimulate socialization and internalization of knowledge . They are always underspeci ﬁ ed , but at an appropriate level of under - speci ﬁ cation that can be described in terms of granularity ( level of detail provided ) , approximation ( degree of interpretable closeness ) and rigidity ( degree to which it allows useful interpretations in a variety of contexts and situations ) . Thereby knowledge artifacts , although not as formalized as some boundary objects , can serve in the capacity of boundary objects , but are not limited to doing so . Important issues remain in considering boundary objects and other information objects within a repository view . Boundary objects clearly do not fully describe the complexity and variety of information objects in use . Although there have 543 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View been substantial strides , we have seen only the beginning of detailed ﬁ eldwork examining the complexity and variety of modern information objects . The types of information objects , as used in practice , remain to be fully inventoried . ( We remind the reader that , in the standard CSCW view , an information ‘ object ’ cannot be separated from its social context and the practices that produce and use that ‘ object ’ . Therefore , object and process must be considered together . ) Additionally , important details are still lacking in our understanding of how to handle exceptional cases and to support the nuances of trust , context , and authoritativeness . We are also at the beginning of considering how to design these information objects . The work of Cabitza , Simone , and colleagues , in their series of studies , shows how to consider the social issues in information use and then investigate those issues by designing and testing new information objects with similar properties . This work , and to a lesser extent that of Lutters and Ackerman , points to new types of information artifacts that add to boundary object capabilities . These objects might continuously change , incorporating traces of coordination protocols , process representations , or other forms of negotiated practice knowledge . Finally , the complexities of digital objects are starting to stretch the de ﬁ nition of ‘ an ’ object , especially in electronic health records ( EHRs ) ( Bossen et al . 2012 ; Zhou et al . 2011 ) , which are assemblies of many records for any given patient . Common information spaces . The second abstraction we wish to consider is that of ‘ common information spaces ’ ( CIS ) ( Bannon and Bødker 1997 ; Schmidt and Bannon 1992 ) . Schmidt and Bannon ( 1992 ) de ﬁ ned CIS as : … the focus is on how people in a distributed setting can work cooperatively in a common information space — i . e . by maintaining a central archive of organizational information with some level of ‘ shared ’ agreement as to the meaning of this information ( locally constructed ) , despite the marked differences concerning the origins and context of these information items . The space is constituted and maintained by different actors employing different conceptualizations and multiple decision making strategies , supported by technology . ( p . 22 ) Bannon and Bødker ( 1997 ) continued this analysis by noting that the extent of sharing and the ‘ the mechanisms used to support “ holding in common ” the information ’ ( p . 83 ) can vary . CISes are open and malleable by nature , but also require ‘ some form of closure , to allow for forms of translation and portability between communities ( p . 86 ) ’ . Furthermore , participants must be able to interpret the information so as to collaborate , and they must do this actively . Bannon and Bødker ( 1997 ) summarizes the differences between CISes and other views of knowledge management repositories : 544 Mark S . Ackerman et al . A common information space is not just a repository of information constituted once and for all , which raises interesting concerns for design … . ( p . 94 ) Bossen ( 2002 ) , based on work in Reddy et al . ( 2001 ) and Reddy and Dourish ( 2002 ) as well as his own ﬁ eldwork , attempted to address why CISes might differ so much ( as was pointed out in Bannon and Bødker ) . Bossen proposed 7 dimensions of analysis for CISes : the degree of distribution of work , the ‘ webs of signi ﬁ cance ’ and their number , the level of required articulation work , the means of communication , the web of artifacts , and the need for precision and promptness of interpretation . All of these dimensions could vary , and would account for the large differences in CISes . Fields et al . ( 2005 ) pointed out that these dimensions could be summarized as the degrees of distribution , the kinds of articulation work and artifacts required , the means of communication , and the differences in frames of reference among participants . Fields et al . ( 2005 ) also began an analysis , continued in Rolland et al . ( 2006 ) and Munkvold and Ellingsen ( 2007 ) , that pointed to a conceptual problem with CIS : Any given situation has ‘ zones of overlapping meaning ’ ( Fields et al . 2005 , p . 129 ) . In fact , there are overlapping zones of partially overlapping meaning ; boundaries are , if anything , dif ﬁ cult to draw . Munkvold and Ellingsen ( 2007 ) , in their analysis of nursing plans , extended the issue of ‘ zones ’ to include temporality . For Munkvold and Ellingsen , CISes exist often only temporarily , as separate groups come together to work in a coordinated fashion for a time and then go back into their parallel work . This problem in the concept of CIS can be found in many similar concepts that try to draw boundaries around situated activity . The Chicago School ’ s concept of ‘ social world ’ ( Strauss 1993 ) suffers from the same problem . Nonetheless , the concept of CIS has been found to be useful when considering information artifacts and their use . CIS draws attention to the ongoing work involved in using and reusing information in social settings . It also calls attention to the necessity of the dialectical tension between the regularization and routinization required by boundary objects ( or , often , similar information objects ) and the openness and implicit assumptions in organizational or social activities ( Cabitza et al . 2013 ) . This cannot be resolved for knowledge sharing , especially in its repository form . Since this tension cannot be resolved in the abstract , managing it is a necessary requirement for information environments . Assemblies . The ﬁ nal abstraction discussed by CSCW researchers , useful in the consideration of information artifacts and repositories , is that of assemblies . ( We use ‘ assembly ’ to denote an organized collection of information objects . ‘ Assemblages , ’ deeply rooted in the Science , Technology , and Society literature , would include the surrounding practices and culture around an object or collection . ) Implicit in the concept of CIS and in boundary objects is the question of assemblies . A line of work that deserves to be expanded further 545 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View concerns how assemblies of information objects work together . It is clear that information objects are used together , but how do they work together ? How are assemblies of information objects bound together in social processes ? No single information artifact or social practice works in isolation ; they are always in some socially situated context . Schmidt and Wagner ( 2003 , 2004 ) began this line of work , calling for an investigation into what they called ‘ ordering systems ’ . An ordering system is ‘ a complex of interrelated coordinative practices and artifacts ( Schmidt and Wagner 2003 , p . 274 ) ’ . Based on a study of an architect ’ s work , they were able to identify ‘ clusters of coordinative artifacts , each of which supports a coupled set of practices ( p . 280 ) ’ , including work ﬂ ows , classi ﬁ cation , validation , and other procedures . In Schmidt and Wagner ’ s work is a call to consider ordering systems , especially as they develop , collide , and adapt . The key for them is the acknowledgement of ‘ clusters ’ and their ‘ coupled set ’ of practices . This call was echoed in the later Schmidt et al . ( 2007 ) , which analyzed work practices in two cancer clinics in Vienna . They show that the work is essentially the same between both clinics , but it is done in very different ways using different information artifacts . This paper again calls for more studies analyzing ‘ the “ higher - order ” practices of endless combination and recombination of artifacts , formats , notations , etc . that are found across such sites ’ ( p . 1 ) . While assemblies were not the explicit target for Ackerman and Halverson or for Lee , the question is clearly present in both sets of work . As mentioned above , Ackerman and Halverson ( 2004a ) examined the use of many different information artifacts together in their distributed cognition analysis of organizational memory . In their ﬁ eld study of a hotline , they uncovered many small memories , wrapped in many social practices , used in combination . These memories , which were all information artifacts , and the practices were used as resources in ﬂ exible arrangements by the hotline ’ s members . That is , speci ﬁ c assemblies were situated as arrangements of many possible artifacts and practices ( as in Katzenberg et al . 1996 ; Pentland 1992 ) . And while Lee ’ s ( 2007 ) boundary negotiating objects had distinct roles in participants ’ practices ( perhaps the result of her process of theoretical categorization ) , the roles were complementary and had to work together in order to get the participants ’ museum exhibit built . Again , combinations were critical . The concept is also considered in other research , including Munkvold and Ellingsen ( 2007 ) and Reddy and Dourish ( 2002 ) . We now turn to the next generation , expertise sharing . As one can see , CSCW presaged this move in Knowledge Management , with its emphasis on the social situatedness of knowledge production and use , as well as its interest in tying in computer - mediated communication . 3 . The second generation : sharing expertise A second generation of CSCW studies emphasized interpersonal communications of knowledgeable actors over externalizations in ( IT ) artifacts . The shift away from the 546 Mark S . Ackerman et al . repository model ascribed a more crucial role to the practices of individuals engaging in knowledge - or expertise - sharing . Emphasis was on ﬁ nding an appropriate person . In this second generation , sharing tacit knowledge , including that contextual knowledge that might be required to understand information , became critical . The distinction between ‘ explicit ’ and ‘ tacit ’ knowledge originated from Polanyi ’ s work ( 1967 ) and became widespread with Nonaka and Takeuchi ( 1995 ) . It is worth noticing that Nonaka and Takeuchi ’ s interpretation of Polanyi ’ s terminology led to the idea that ‘ making tacit knowledge explicit ’ could be one of the design goals to associate with IT tools particularly of the ‘ ﬁ rst generation ’ . But Polanyi introduced the term ‘ tacit ways of knowing ’ to exactly describe the kinds of knowing that are dif ﬁ cult , if not impossible to verbalize . Tacit knowledge can be learned only through common experiences , and therefore , contact with others , in some form , is required for full use of the information . Two concepts were critical in stimulating the shift towards the second generation and have strongly in ﬂ uenced this line of work : Community of practice . The concept of ‘ Community of Practice ’ ( CoP ) ( Wenger 1998 ) became a useful analytical lens to identify relevant groups of people . A CoP can roughly be de ﬁ ned as a group that works together in a certain domain and whose members share a common practice . Most important about the concept is its account of knowledge sharing and socialization , which describes a certain way to learn and internalize a characterizing set of practices : Learning within a CoP takes place as ‘ legitimate peripheral participation ’ ( Lave and Wenger 1991 ) , a process of apprenticeship in which participants in the group move from the periphery to the center , i . e . become increasingly knowledgeable ( Fischer 2007 ; Lave and Wenger 1991 ) . To better differentiate occasions for learning , Brown and Duguid ( 2000 ) added the concept of networks of practice ( NoP ) . Members of a NoP do not necessarily work together but work on similar issues in a similar way , e . g . , the carpenters of a certain region . The similarities of their work practices provide a common ground to foster better knowledge and expertise sharing . Another concept , which built on the notion of CoP is the ‘ Community of Interest ’ ( CoI ) . Contrary to CoPs , members of a CoI are not de ﬁ ned by common practices but by a common interest . While the latter holds them together , the diversity of their backgrounds provides a rich source for creativity and innovation ( Fischer 2001 ) . A comprehensive review of different communities and their functioning can be found in Andriessen ( 2005 ) . Intrinsically based in their view of ‘ tacit knowledge , ’ the Knowledge Management community appropriated CoP in an interventionist manner . CoPs were to be cultivated or even created ( Wenger et al . 2002 ) , and they became fashionable as ‘ the killer application for knowledge management practitioners ’ ( Su and Wilensky 2011 , p . 10 ) with supposedly bene ﬁ cial effects on knowledge exchange within groups . However , this interventionist adoption in Knowledge Management was disputed among its intellectual fathers ( see for a discussion again see Su and Wilensky 2011 , p . 30 f . ) . 547 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View The CSCW community has generally not followed such an interventionist appropriation of the concept ( for an exception , see Stevens et al . 2005 ) . The concept of CoP was applied in a different way — to understand expertise sharing , serving as an analytical lens to get a hold on the situatedness of knowledge - related processes . While these practice - based conceptions of learning had a strong in ﬂ uence on the CSCW discourse , it is important to keep in mind that they describe just one dimension of the enabling conditions . Social capital . Another useful concept for expertise sharing has been ‘ social capital ’ ( Cohen and Prusak 2001 ; Huysman and Wulf 2004 ; Lesser et al . 2000 ) . It originated from Bourdieu ( 1977 ) and refers to collective abilities derived from social networks . The core intuition that makes social capital conceptually interesting is that the goodwill that people have toward others is a valuable resource for expertise sharing ( Adler and Kwon 2002 ) . While the concept of CoP enables us to understand learning opportunities to be inherently related to shared practices , social capital sees resources for expertise sharing rather in the relational and empathic dimension of social networks . In this sense it offers an additional intuition to understand conditions which foster expertise sharing . Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) argued that social capital consists of three dimensions : structural opportunity , cognitive ability , and relational motivation . Technical support for expertise sharing mainly addresses the structural opportunity dimension by providing an infrastructure for knowledge exchange . The other two dimensions are , however , not very much addressed by system designers ( Huysman and Wulf 2006 , p . 41 ) . When analyzing actors ’ cognitive abilities to share knowledge , a practice - based perspective may need to be taken into account . However , social capital is not necessarily grounded in common practices . CoPs have a high degree of social capital , if the degree of trust , mutuality , and recognition by peers is high . The three dimensions of social capital can be translated into the questions of ‘ who ’ shares knowledge and ‘ how ’ it is shared ( structural dimension ) , ‘ what ’ is shared ( cognitive dimension ) and ‘ why ’ and ‘ when ’ people engage in knowledge sharing ( relational dimension ) ( ibid , p . 44 ) . By informing technology design with empirical research along these questions , all three dimensions of social capital can be tackled ( Huysman and Wulf 2005 ) . What , then , needs to be supported in sharing expertise among people ? As mentioned , Ackerman and Halverson ’ s ( 1998 ) study of a call - center workplace arrived at the conclusion that a techno - centric approach , which concentrates solely on making more knowledge artifacts available , would be misleading . Rather , contextual knowledge is required to select the right source , strip off the information from its original context and then re - contextualize it according to the situation at hand . This knowledge is often found in conjunction with knowing or asking other people . Normark and Randall ’ s ( 2005 ) case study of an emergency call center also stressed the socially distributed nature of knowledge . They emphasized efforts of ‘ ﬁ nding - out ’ ( Fitzpatrick 2003 ) when analyzing knowledge - sharing practices . Rather than looking for different kinds of sources , however , they distinguished between knowledge ‘ in the small ’ and ‘ in the large ’ ( Ackerman and Mandel 1995 , 548 Mark S . Ackerman et al . 1999 ) . While the latter referred to what is termed ‘ explicit knowledge ’ , knowledge ‘ in the small ’ is described as ‘ local knowledge ’ . Fitzpatrick ( 2003 ) notes that it is especially characterized by its emergent nature . Which knowledge becomes important and who holds it only evolves in the concrete situation at hand ( Normark and Randall 2005 ) ; this would be particularly true for their time - and safety - critical emergency settings . Which knowledge is needed can hardly be planned in advance . While the two studies differed slightly in their analytic stances towards knowledge distribution in social settings , they both point out that there is ‘ ﬁ nding - out ’ work involved in gathering and making sense of the available information . While Ackerman and Halverson ( 1998 ) highlighted the situated effort of de - and re - contextualization , Normark and Randall ( 2005 ) highlighted the process - character and contingent nature of what they call ‘ expertise combining ’ . Bannon and Bødker ( 1997 ) used the expressions ‘ packaging ’ and ‘ unpacking ’ information with its sense - making context . All these studies concentrate on particular aspects of knowledge exchange in social settings , which Schmidt ( 2012 ) , who is critical towards the sources of the concept of ‘ tacit knowledge , ’ termed ‘ didactic practices required for a cooperative ensemble to be able to maintain and develop its own competencies ’ ( p . 208 ) . 3 . 1 . People ﬁ nding and expertise location If systems are to play a meaningful role in expertise sharing , they should support this ‘ ﬁ nding - out ’ work in seeking appropriate people . To address both the explicit and tacit dimensions of knowledge , and address the limitations of the repository model resulting from a focus on visible and storable representations rather than the interactions producing and modify - ing them , expertise sharing systems in the second generation sought to facilitate knowledge exchange at the level of individuals and collectives . These tools often tackled technical , organizational , and social issues simultaneously . People - ﬁ nding , as mentioned , really began with some of the ﬁ rst CSCW systems ; however , some even earlier attempts existed , using information retrieval techniques — Who Knows ( Streeter and Lochbaum 1988 ) from Bellcore was arguably the ﬁ rst such system , and Information Lens ( Malone et al . 1987 ) had a prototype ‘ anyone server , ’ which allowed users to send a query that the system would route to some appropriate organizational member . We have already mentioned several others : Answer Garden ( Ackerman 1994a ) assumed users could ask questions of experts , and if the answer were not present already , the questions would be routed in a primitive escalation cascade . Answer Garden 2 ( AG2 ) ( Ackerman and McDonald 1996 ) used a more ﬂ exible ( and rule - based ) escalation system to route the question to potentially larger 549 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View and larger groups . All of these systems assumed that sometimes knowledge could be found only in other people . More recent systems focusing on ‘ people ﬁ nding ’ in CSCWare based largely on a combination of approaches for determining social relationships through network analysis , topics of interest , and then expertise determination . Social relationships are usually based on some sort of Social Network Analysis ( SNA ) ( McDonald 2003 ; Terveen and McDonald 2005 ) , and relationships among people are quanti ﬁ ed in terms of tie strength , direction , and type of tie . Social networks can include networks for sharing communications , sociability , or expertise . In general , expertise sharing systems vary considerably in how people ’ s pro ﬁ les are created , including what data is used and how users are involved ; how relative expertise is determined ; how queries or people are matched to people ; and , how recommendations are made . Pro ﬁ le construction can be contentious . Below , we will discuss privacy issues , but expertise location systems must depend on their searchable pro ﬁ les , which store information about individuals . Ehrlich ( 2003 ) , based on focus group results , established three key factors that should be covered by pro ﬁ les : the person ’ s credentials , likeliness of responding , and accessibility . Relative expertise is also a requirement in pro ﬁ les . Early efforts found that it was dif ﬁ cult to have people rate themselves or one another ( Ackerman et al . 2002a ) , and therefore later efforts tried to automate the evaluation of expertise levels ( e . g . , Zhang et al . 2007 ) . By searching a pro ﬁ le database , people extend their awareness of other people ’ s qualities and may consider contacting them . According to Ehrlich ( 2003 ) , an expertise locator system aims to bring people together who do not know each other , and therefore relies on weak social ties . Pro ﬁ le maintenance can also be an issue , as it was for repositories . Ehrlich et al . ( 2007 ) conducted a series of interviews with consultants and found personal networks to be extremely important to these consultants . At the same time , these networks needed continuous care in order to support time - critical tasks . Following , we describe the various approaches to expertise sharing in CSCW . These lines of research used a combination of interpretivist analyses of organizational needs , design and construction of technical prototypes , and social studies of system use . They are , then , really socio - technical lines of examination , as one often ﬁ nds in current CSCW . McDonald and Ackerman ( 1998 ) examined expertise sharing in a small - to - medium sized software company , which they called MSC . They found that MSC participants used a variety of strategies for ﬁ nding the right expertise in the company . McDonald and Ackerman divided the expertise ﬁ nding seen in MSC into three stages : identi ﬁ cation , selection , and escalation . The identi ﬁ cation stage concerns ﬁ nding an appropriate group of people ( candidates ) , selection concerns picking which candidates to approach , and escalation is identi ﬁ cation and selection from an ever - expanding list of people if no satisfactory candidate or answer is found . Selection might include whether a candidate was busy , etc . It should be noted that these stages were merely analytically separable ; in practice , 550 Mark S . Ackerman et al . they are often mixed and combined , since they are situated activities . However , the authors found the analytic distinctions useful in subsequent technical work . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) , in another study of a software company ( in Norway rather than the US ) , saw expertise ﬁ nding as much more situated , and availability was key . Their conclusion was that an appropriate system would have to be one promoting awareness of expertise and availability based in ‘ seeing ’ others ’ activities . These two approaches are largely incompatible . McDonald and Ackerman ’ s approach is more scalable , but at the cost of reifying social activities that are , in fact , often situated and combined ; Groth and Bowers ’ approach can be more faithful to the contingencies of organizational life , but does not scale well . Based on the McDonald and Ackerman study , McDonald built a system , Expertise Recommender ( ER ) ( McDonald 2000 ; McDonald and Ackerman 2000 ) which architecturally combined a number of different , replaceable identi ﬁ cation and selection components . For the evaluation prototype , ER used primarily an identi ﬁ cation mechanism based in a local software engineering practice within MSC , a practice of documenting who had handled the software component in question . For this organization , this speci ﬁ c practice served as a convenient and more accurate mechanism for identifying appropriate people with the necessary expertise , and local arrangements could be more meaningful since the expertise ﬁ nding and escalation itself occurred locally . Mockus and Herbsleb ( 2002 ) similarly analyzed who had touched the code . ER also used a variety of other matching mechanisms , including keyword vectors , based on local documents , and so on . ER ’ s ﬂ exible architecture allowed both general matching mechanisms ( e . g . , position in the organizational chart ) and local matching mechanisms ( e . g . , who had maintained the code last ) . For ER , selection was key ; identi ﬁ cation provided recommendations , and selection consisted of ﬁ lters for determining whom to approach . The prototype ER included selection ﬁ lters based on graphs for organizational structure , sociability , and knowledge domain . That is , McDonald constructed a graph based on two SNAs , one for ‘ who hangs out with whom ’ and who knows what topic in the organization ( McDonald and Ackerman 2000 ) ; these were constructed using pile - sort techniques for SNA . In his lab - based evaluation studies ( McDonald 2001 , 2003 ) , McDonald found that ER was capable of providing excellent expertise identi ﬁ cation , but his selection ﬁ lters required additional capabilities . Users wanted ﬁ ltering based on ego - focused networks rather than aggregated views of the organizational social network . In another series of studies , Reichling and Veith ( 2005 ) also preceded their system development with an ethnographic study ; they studied a knowledge - intensive network - ( and lobbying - ) organization , NIA . They found many barriers to expertise sharing originating from NIA ’ s complex organizational structure . Within the organization , multiple sub - units existed fairly independent from one another . Employees reported a low degree of transparency and weak knowledge about the tasks and competences of colleagues from other units . Between the 551 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View departments , there was a subtle competition . All these factors resulted in social networks being critically important for accessing expertise ; outsiders needed to maintain personal contacts with insiders in order to access services ( which was the actual task of the organization ) . On the one hand , some opportunities to improve the situation by means of information technology were identi ﬁ ed : Employees suggested implementing a Yellow - Pages system which could be accessed by means of a search engine for personal attributes ( ‘ like Google ’ ) . Another idea was a ‘ virtual notice board ’ , where external service requests and other work could be posted . On the other hand it became clear that changes on the organizational level would be necessary to create the structural preconditions for successful expertise sharing . For this reason , they used the integrated OTD approach ( Wulf and Rohde 1995 ) that takes into account both organizational and technical factors . Based on this study , the design for the ‘ Expert Finder ’ implementation for NIA was component - based ( Reichling et al . 2007 ) . It combined ‘ push ’ and ‘ pull ’ mechanisms . Expertise pro ﬁ les consisted of three components : The ﬁ rst was the Yellow Pages component , where users could enter general information about themselves and their position in the organization , and the second was a keyword vector , automatically generated from a user ’ s textual documents ( users could also manually select textual documents and choose the data sources for pro ﬁ le generation ) . The third part was a feedback component . Expert recommendations could be judged on a ﬁ ve - point scale , where no negative scores were permitted and giving feedback was not mandatory . Technically , the system used the ‘ ExpertFinding Framework ’ : After language recognition , the textual documents were ﬁ ltered through a language - speci ﬁ c catalogue of stop words , resulting in a list of keywords . This list was then further processed to reduce the number of terms ( Reichling et al . 2005 ) . Matching took place via speci ﬁ cally con ﬁ gured algorithms . Privacy concerns played a major role in the selection of design criteria for the Expert Finder . Due to the legal situation in Germany , the software needed to be built in a way that respected the co - determination rights of the workers . For this reason , it was decided not to include email sources in the construction of the pro ﬁ les . Moreover , text documents were selected by the user via their folders and analyzed automatically . However , the documents never left the user ’ s computer . The resulting list of key words was uploaded to the server only with the explicit permission of users and could be edited beforehand ( Reichling et al . 2007 ) . Reichling and Wulf ( 2009 ) evaluated the Expert Finder ’ s design by introducing it to NIA and observing its appropriation for several months . Users took the semi - automatically generated rankings very seriously and carefully evaluated their own positioning for topic areas in which they claimed to be experts . The authors also found that semi - automatically generated rankings could interfere with formal aspects of an organization . For instance , people expected that the expertise pro ﬁ les could be taken as job descriptions . 552 Mark S . Ackerman et al . IBM researchers have also studied a number of expertise sharing systems ; these systems were designed and used within IBM . Among them was ReachOut , a search tool that could be used to ﬁ nd potential candidates for advice or help ( Ribak et al . 2002 ) . Another system was ‘ SmallBlue ’ , a ‘ people mining ’ - system , which included ‘ SmallBlue Find ’ , a search engine , that ranked people according to speci ﬁ c search terms , which should represent knowledge or skills ( Lin et al . 2008 ) . Other parts of SmallBlue also allowed searching for other criteria , but we will focus here on the expertise search function . The system drew heavily on private data sources : outgoing email and chat messages were complemented by data from an enterprise directory . The authors were aware that using private data is a delicate issue , and for this reason , they applied limitations to data collection , usage , and distribution . Users needed to actively opt - in , only outgoing mail was used , and con ﬁ dential mails as well as external names were ignored . SmallBlue Find displayed the usual contact information ( room number , af ﬁ liation , etc . ) , and the system also provided two features that the authors called ‘ Social Distance ’ and ‘ Expertise in Context ’ . The ﬁ rst showed the shortest ( or an alternate ) social path from the seeker to the knowledgeable person . The second function provided additional information about the knowledgeable person ’ s sharing - related activities ( Ehrlich et al . 2007 ) . The rationale behind these functions was to support the searcher ’ s selection with additional information . Shortly after its ﬁ rst implementation in consultancy work , SmallBlue was evaluated with regard to its adoption and the users ’ opinions about privacy ( Ehrlich et al . 2007 ) . The evaluation was conducted using a combination of semi - structured interviews , log data , and an online survey . After making the system publicly available within IBM , people began opting in with their data sources , which led to the rapid indexing of other employees as well . After 6 months , 1600 people had opted in and over 150 , 000 people were indexed in the system . In the interviews , most people stated that searching for a person is not a daily activity for them , and the search results were judged to be fairly accurate . When asked about privacy matters , no concerns were expressed . The log data revealed that while most users probably used the tool just out of curiosity , there were also some who used it again and again . The ‘ social distance ’ tool was judged useful , because when contacting an unknown person , users found it helpful to mention the social path to him . Shami et al . ( 2008 ) also evaluated how a particular person was selected from a result list . Their study suggested that people prefer others with whom they share a social connection to complete strangers . However , those people whom the participants knew directly were not the ﬁ rst choice to be contacted : Participants did not expect them to hold considerably more expertise . More valuable in terms of selection were people who were 2 or 3° away . This is consistent with McDonald ( 2003 ) , where it was found that 553 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View users preferred seeing choices they did not know already . For Shami et al . , rank order strongly in ﬂ uenced selection ; higher ranked results were considered more frequently for further exploration . Yarosh et al . ( 2012 ) presented a later lab study of SmallBlue investigating the relationship between the presentation of additional information and frequently occurring types of expertise - search related tasks . That paper presented a list of ten entries that were considered most useful for accomplishing tasks . Above , we have mostly equated ‘ people ﬁ nding ’ with ‘ expertise location ’ . In fact , however , expertise in a certain ﬁ eld is only one criterion by which people can be searched . Guy et al . ( 2008b ) introduced SONAR ( Social Networks Architecture ) , an API , which collected data from Web 2 . 0 providers and made them available to SONAR clients . SONAR aimed to show who is related to whom and how . Clients could ask questions about these relationships , which might concern expertise ( e . g . , on a certain topic ) or other criteria . An interesting feature of SONAR is that it distinguished between public and private sources . Two modes of network analysis were available : a sociocentric view that used only public sources , and an egocentric view that also included private sources . The sociocentric view could be invoked by anyone to gain information about the connections between any individuals and groups . In the egocentric view , users could view only their own connections with others . The distinction between different kinds of sources is crucial for privacy reasons . Guy et al . ( 2008a ) examined how far public sources can approximate the quality of private sources . When implemented within IBM , over ten sources from the company ’ s intranet were used , such as blogs , social tagging systems and the organizational chart ( public ) , as well as email and chat transcripts ( private ) ( Guy et al . 2008b ) . This exemplary implementation calculated a buddy list based on the strength of ties . In order to account for a different signi ﬁ cance of sources and providers , users could also manually change the latter ’ s relative weighting . Faces ( Guy et al . 2012 ) implemented SONAR , and also drew on other company - speci ﬁ c sources : a social networking site and a corporate directory . Faces ’ web - based frontend displayed faces alongside organizational information ( such as department , related people and contact information ) . While the SONAR implementation reported above calculated the strength of ties generally on the basis of a user pro ﬁ le , detailed information about the user was not required for Faces . Search results could , however , be optimized by giving more details about the searcher . Guy et al . ( 2012 ) also provided details on the calculation used by the backend . Won and Pipek ( 2003 ) tried to tackle the problem of expertise location by borrowing from the CSCW concept of ‘ peripheral awareness ’ ( e . g . , Rodden 1996 ; Schmidt 2002 ) . They noticed that expert pro ﬁ les were often not up - to - date , and that various behavior patterns around self - representation of experts and ontological differences hinder ﬁ nding the ‘ right ’ expert in a pro ﬁ le - based approach . Instead , they suggested supporting ‘ peripheral expertise awareness ’ 554 Mark S . Ackerman et al . based on expertise - indicating activities in an organization . Indications of expertise can be found when a colleague hands in a reimbursement form for a seminar he attended ( i . e . , he may be an expert in the seminar topic now ) , or when a number of Wikipedia edits on a topic seem to qualify a colleague as competent in that topic . As single indications are insecure , users could logically combine them into complex expertise indicators that could be shared and rated by colleagues , to indicate the trustworthiness of expertise hypotheses . Users could then ask to be noti ﬁ ed whenever trusted indicators were triggered by activities in the organization . Dörner et al . ( 2007 ) also showed in a small evaluation that several privacy issues required a sensitive further development of the basic idea , although a rich infrastructure of software sensors , for which the approach would bene ﬁ t , was not available at the time . 3 . 2 . Open issues in expertise and people ﬁ nding The overview of the studies we presented here allows us to summarize a number of open issues for further research in expertise sharing : Development of personal pro ﬁ les . All expertise ﬁ nders are in ﬂ uenced by the particular environment for which they are developed . SONAR , Faces , and SmallBlue ( formerly known as IBM Atlas ) relied on data that was collected to reconstruct the social network of the actors . The environment within IBM allowed the systems to draw on many sources , for which content is publicly available ( at least inside the company ) . Examples of their sources included blogs , social tagging systems , and organizational charts . In addition , private sources such as email and chat protocols were available and could in principle also be used . On the other hand , the network organization where Expert Finder ( Reichling et al . 2007 ) was implemented had many constraints concerning data ; there was little information easily available or accessible . Although a reconstruc - tion of the actors ’ social networks would have been highly valuable , it could not be conducted , since the analysis of emails was considered too invasive to the employees ’ privacy . As a result , the idea to derive pro ﬁ les from self - selected documents of the experts was an interesting compromise for pro ﬁ le generation without users ’ losing control of their personal information . It is also worth noting , that the very same users who asked for very speci ﬁ c and targeted selection processes when looking for an expert , were still keen on presenting themselves as expert even at the periphery of their knowledge spectrum — thus blurring the results of an expert ﬁ nding process ( Dörner et al . 2007 ) . Privacy and control . Privacy protection is an important topic for all systems . While Reichling et al . ( 2007 ) allow users to select indicative folders and chose to completely abstain from emails , Ehrlich et al . ( 2007 ) took substantial measures to preserve privacy while still exploiting the email ’ s value . The SONAR API uses email only for private 555 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View analyses — which means that only the user ’ s own emails are used for her own analysis . Privacy was similarly important for McDonald ’ s participants , and aggregated social network views ( so as to avoid privacy violations that might occur in ego - networks ) were not always useful ( McDonald 2003 ) . We can observe here different attempts to make sure that the user ’ s private data is not disseminated throughout the organization without his control ( e . g . , Dörner et al . 2007 ) . Dörner et al . ( 2007 ) found that even if no continuous pro ﬁ le is visible , users want to be in control of the information ﬂ ows that in ﬂ uence their appearance in an organization . Therefore , Reichling et al . ( 2007 ) allowed users to observe and even change their pro ﬁ les . Accuracy . It is a methodological challenge to evaluate the quality of algorithms that recommend people . There is not any ‘ objective ’ truth and people ’ s judgment on other ’ s capability can vary considerably . Ackerman et al . ( 2002a ) calculated one ’ s expertise in organizational tasks , and then asked people to rate one another ’ s expertise levels . The study determined that about 20 organizational participants were able to do as well as 3 ‘ expertise concierges ’ , managers with high transactive memory about organizational projects . McDonald ( 2001 ) also examined the same data , and found that participants ’ assessments were correct approximately 79 % of the time ( although the expertise concierges were better with 85 % ) . He argued this accuracy in expertise determination was as high as might be expected for systems . Reichling et al . ( 2005 ) also compared automatically generated expertise pro ﬁ les with those generated by members of a network of researchers about themselves . The results indicated that the deviations between the different human assessments were within the same range of variation as those between human and automatically generated ones . A deeper problem for providing ‘ accurate ’ recommendations also lies in the issues around privacy and self - representation that lead to con ﬂ icting requirements for expertise ﬁ nding and to an approach where users can codify for themselves their notions of accuracy ( Dörner et al . 2007 ) . 3 . 3 . Finding others in a communication space Besides expertise ﬁ nding , another possibility for expertise sharing is to create a place where people with expertise can be found ( Ackerman and Halverson 2004b ) . The use of computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) for the purposes of obtaining help and information has been extensively studied in CSCW , and we cannot attempt to review of all those studies here . ( For general monographs and surveys see , e . g . , Preece 2000 and Wellman 1999 . ) There have been numerous studies of providing help on CMCs , including studies of email distribution lists ( e . g . , Constant et al . 1994 ; Finholt and Sproull 1990 ) , Usenet forums ( e . g . , Fiore et al . 2002 ; Fisher et al . 2006 ; Turner et al . 2005 ) , bulletin boards ( e . g . , Hiltz and Turoff 1993 ) , and synchronous chat ( e . g . , Ackerman and Palen 1996 ; Bradner et al . 1999 ) . Much of this literature is germane to expertise sharing . For example , 556 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Constant et al . ( 1994 ) studied the use of weak ties to obtain help in organizational settings , Fiore et al . ( 2002 ) examined how users made judgments about Usenet authors , and Ackerman and Palen ( 1996 ) investigated how the technical affordances of a chat - based help system were related to its emergent social characteristics . With the advent of the Web , Question - and - Answer ( Q & A ) communities sprung up . They were similar to Communities of Interest ( CoI ) and older bulletin board systems , but were Internet - based , public facing , and often quite large . There have been a number of studies of Q & A communities , and Gazan ( 2011 ) provides a review of this literature up to 2010 . ( Gazan uses “ social Q & A ” for these communities . “ Social Q & A ” has also been used more broadly , as in Mamykina et al . ( 2011 ) , to include Q & A through social network systems . We will use “ social Q & A ” in its broader sense below . The terms “ social Q & A ” , “ QnA ” , “ CQA ” , and “ QA ” communities have all been used as well for Q & A communities . ) As Gazan notes , researchers have extensively studied question classi ﬁ cation and answer quality as measures , as well as user satisfaction , motivation , and reputation in Q & A communities . For example , Welser et al . ( 2009 ) was the ﬁ rst among an extensive line of research into answerers , people essential to the health of any Q & A community . Gazan ’ s ( 2011 ) categories have continued to be research topics since 2010 . The most heavily studied have been motivation and incentives . Hsieh et al . ( 2010 ) examined the relationship between quality of answer and payment . They found that more money leads to more answers , but not necessarily to better answers . Jeon et al . ( 2010 ) , based on a re - examination of two studies ’ data , found similar results . Hsieh et al . ( 2011 ) examined the use of charitable contributions as incentives ; they found that such contributions spur credibility of answers , although in a nuanced way , for users . Tausczik and Pennebaker ( 2012 ) used both self - reports and inferred measures to determine user ’ s motivations on MathOver ﬂ ow , a site for professional mathematics . They found that altruism and reputation building to be the two important motivations . Dearman and Truong ( 2010 ) reversed the question of why people answer and investigated why people do not answer . Pal et al . ( 2012 ) continued the investigation into answerers . Using StackOver ﬂ ow data , they were able to build models of expert evolution and identify different categories of experts . This is a promising ﬁ rst step in looking at answerers over time and in trying to understand the dynamic characteristics of these sites . In other work , Yang et al . ( 2010 ) examined the answerers ’ activity , including its burstiness , on three platforms , Baidu , Naver , and Yahoo . They found substantial differences , perhaps due to cross - cultural factors among others . Work on the answers themselves has been more sparse . Pal et al . ( 2012 ) opened up a new line of research into how questions age and become obsolete . This is critical for retrieval at a later date . More recently , researchers have begun to investigate how people use social media to obtain answers , often called ‘ social Q & A ’ . Two lines of research exist , 557 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View echoing the classic division of social and technical analyses . First , there has been work on how people use existing social network systems , largely Facebook and Twitter , to ask questions and answer ( e . g . , Lampe et al . 2006 ; Morris et al . 2010a , b ) . Panovich et al . ( 2012 ) investigated the relation of tie strength ( i . e . , how intimate two people are ) to answer quality . Zhang et al . ( 2010 ) examined questions and answers in an organizational setting . Nichols and Kang ( 2012 ) reported reasonable response rates in merely asking strangers for help ; they found that help was more likely when the query requested quick , non - personal answers . It remains to be seen whether Nichols and Kang ’ s approach can scale . White et al . ( 2011 ) investigated the relationship between community size and contact rate in a social Q & A system . In their experiment they found a social Q & A system would perform better as community size increased , but users preferred not being bothered too often . Second , there has been work on innovative new systems . Aardvark , a commercial system , routed questions to appropriate others via email . Horowitz and Kamvar ( 2012 ) provided a detailed description of Aardvark ’ s system and its algorithms . 4 . Sharing knowledge and expertise : future directions 4 . 1 . Interconnected practices : expertise infrastructures It may seem a paradox that while practices are becoming interconnected ( as argued above ) , the ‘ expert ’ may become an anonymous or even intangible actor . But the new technological options also propel new types of knowledge - management interactions based on micro - activities : Community , crowdsourcing , and microtasking environments make it very easy and convenient to help others by sharing one ’ s expertise . As was mentioned above , one phenomenon is the growing importance of ‘ social search ’ , which makes it easier to help knowledge seekers navigate to someone with expertise . It is clear that social search has different characteristics , and different capabilities , from Q & A communities , but more work will be required to fully determine these . As well , social search combines elements of expertise sharing through online places with expertise ﬁ nding , providing additional possibilities for design . There is a wide array of new sources of collaboratively constructed information spaces becoming available . Numerous papers have examined how Wikipedia has been constructed ( e . g . , Nagar 2012 and Forte et al . 2012 to pick only two ) . Other wikis have also been examined . Hansen et al . ( 2007 ) looked at a wiki associated with a technical distribution list . Kittur and Kraut ( 2010 ) in an impressive study examined 6811 wikis for the quality and the processes of activities potentially contributing to knowledge construction . While the knowledge sharing of Wikipedia is obvious , many other forms of informal information now exist on 558 Mark S . Ackerman et al . the Web . It remains to be seen how valuable these will be over time , but they are often reused and interestingly , their systems often combine some level of repository and communication . For example , Ko and Chilana ( 2010 ) looked at Mozilla bug reports , and Gilbert and Karahalios ( 2010 ) looked at Amazon reviews . Dabbish et al . ( 2012 ) in their study of Github , a code repository , found that code projects were regularly used by participants to stay current and follow new technical knowledge . Even community - constructed mathematical proofs ( Cranshaw and Kittur 2011 ) have been examined . Among the social media used for informal communication , microblogging platforms like Twitter with its openness and visibility have spawned new ways of collecting knowledge , which can be exempli ﬁ ed using approaches to support crisis management . Starbird et al . ( 2010 ) described how people affected by a ﬂ ood used social media not only to communicate , but also to organize information ﬂ ows , and suggested an approach to make use of these dynamics systematically ( Vieweg et al . 2010 ) . Vieweg ( 2012 ) then presented a framework to identify tweets that carry information about an ongoing crisis situation . Forming a volatile repository of very situated pieces of information , tweets may be analyzed to generate a rich picture of ongoing events while still providing a link back to the authors as original experts about local situations , strategies , and activities . At the fringes of these developments in social media , other forms of involving human expertise in problem solving have emerged that make use of often partial expertise of often anonymous experts . Crowdsourcing ( e . g . , for sorting images , in von Ahn and Dabbish 2004 ) and microtask approaches ( e . g . , for language translation , in Ambati et al . 2012 ) offer new ways of generating knowledge that have proved helpful for a range of problem structures . Still , relying on knowledge aggregated from an anonymous crowd can be problematic ( Kittur et al . 2008 ) . There is ongoing work about supporting more complex task structures ( e . g . , Ambati et al . 2012 ; Dow et al . 2012 ; Kittur et al . 2012 ; Kulkarni et al . 2012 ) , which may alleviate the problem . ( See Kittur et al . 2013 for a review of ‘ human computation ’ or ‘ social computation ’ . ) , Other solutions are to not choose ‘ arbitrary ’ experts , but ‘ crowds ’ de ﬁ ned e . g . , by location ( Heimerl et al . 2012 ) , or to combine expert and crowd results ( Kandasamy et al . 2012 ) . CSCW research will need to investigate whether and how each ﬁ eld of practice we encounter is changed by these new opportunities . Reconsidering the medical domain for example , it might be interesting to look for changes in physician / nurse or clinician / patient cooperation through these emerging expertise resources . 5 . Conclusion CSCW has contributed many ﬁ ndings to a better understanding of knowledge and expertise sharing . In this paper , we separated the studies and their ﬁ ndings into two ‘ generations ’ , noting that the distinction between the two is often only 559 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View rhetorical , with recent studies ( and many older ones ) including elements of both . We used ‘ knowledge sharing ’ and ‘ expertise sharing ’ to separate out the two . In what we termed the ﬁ rst generation , the knowledge sharing studies were artifact - centered , based in a repository model . These studies contributed many ﬁ ndings about the social nature of information production , storage , retrieval , and reuse that have been useful . CSCW researchers , and those in adjacent research ﬁ elds , contributed to a general understanding that information use is heavily situated and socially contextualized . For practitioners , these studies served as critical reminders that one could not focus on the technical alone . Even technical studies were , necessarily , socio - technical . In these studies , CSCW used and extended the concepts of boundary objects , common information spaces , and assemblies in order to understand and account for the element of social use . The concept of ‘ boundary objects ’ allows researchers to focus on the information objects that traverse organizational and social boundaries . Boundary objects were revealed to have a secret life where their ambiguity proved to be an asset , not an obstacle for knowledge sharing . CSCW researchers examined how they are used , and extensions have been offered so as to understand the social and communicative processes in which they are embedded . Other types of information objects have also come under investigation . ‘ Common information space ’ has been used to highlight the contingent understanding of information within social units , and it continues to enable researchers to de ﬁ ne , analyze and design environments of knowledge exchange beyond organizational borders . Recently , concepts like ‘ assemblies ’ and ‘ ordering systems ’ have been used to investigate how information artifacts have been used in combination . It remains an important task for CSCW research to uncover commonalities and differences of ordering systems , especially with different stakeholder groups working with shared repositories . In what we called a second generation of studies , the communication - centered expertise sharing studies focused attention on how knowledge is shared among knowledgeable actors . CSCW researchers , and those in adjacent areas , examined ‘ Communities of Practice ’ and ‘ social capital ’ in order to understand how and why knowledge is provided by others . The Communities of Practice concept established a perspective that embedded knowledge exchange not only into a practice of doing , but also in to a practice of learning ( in and through practice ) . Social capital drew attention to relationship aspects in networks that guide the search for and exchange of knowledge . These concepts have been brought into expertise sharing systems , and researchers have produced a number of expertise - ﬁ nding and expertise - locating systems and studied them extensively . Expertise sharing , between coordinated and knowledgeable actors , has been found to be an often critical , if not required , part of knowledge sharing . 560 Mark S . Ackerman et al . As time goes on , knowledge and expertise sharing are becoming standardized and routinized in many organizations and other collectivities . At the same time , new technologies , data collection mechanisms , analysis techniques , and ﬁ elds of application have created many new research and design opportunities and challenges for the CSCW viewpoint to be extended anew . The last 20 years of research into knowledge and expertise sharing has illuminated the enormous issues in dealing with information , knowledge , and expertise . It has challenged the normative , prescriptive understandings in other literatures . As a ﬁ eld , CSCW has created and examined new applications and systems over and over again , but more importantly , constantly attempted to view those applications and systems in terms of their social possibilities , issues , and challenges . In short , we have confronted the opportunities of ‘ knowledge management ’ socio - technically and in practice . As one might hope , the elaborated understanding has evolved into an accumulated literature , intellectual viewpoint , and epistemological stance . We fully expect the next 20 years , with its new technologies , interesting designs , and collaborative opportunities , to be as fruitful . 6 . Addendum Subsequent corrections , modi ﬁ cations , and additions to this document will be found at http : / / www . socialworldsresearch . org / sharing - expertise - review . The cita - tion list , in bibtex format , will be available there as well . Acknowledgments To craft this paper , we acknowledge the support of the German Science Foundation ’ s Graduate School 1769 ‘ Locating Media ’ . The research on the Siegen side has been supported by various grants by the German Ministry of Education and Research , the German Ministry of Economics and Technol - ogy , and the State of North Rhine Westphalia over a period of more than 15 years . This work was also supported , in part , by the U . S . National Science Foundation under grants IIS 0905460 , IIS 0948639 , and ACI 1035162 . We are indebted to many , many people who have helped us and engaged with us around these issues over many years . They are far too numerous to list here , but we are deeply appreciative . We do , however , want to acknowledge Kjeld Schmidt for his continued patience and interest , as well as the three anonymous reviewers who greatly strengthened this paper . We also thank all of current and past students and research staff for the enormous help they have provided . 561 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Notes i In this paper , we will not differentiate between knowledge and information : We could easily spend several lifetimes teasing the two apart , and colloquial uses are suf ﬁ cient ( as argued in Normark and Randall 2005 ) . ii These generations are not completely distinct — some studies may have foreshadowed a generation , and later studies sometimes combined them . It is dif ﬁ cult to cover so much intellectual ground without being reduced to making seemingly arbitrary categorizations , and we beg the reader ’ s indulgence on this point . References Ackerman , Mark S . ( 1993 ) . Answer Garden : A Tool for Growing Organizational Memory of Work . Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Ph . D . Thesis . Ackerman , Mark S . ( 1994a ) . Augmenting the Organizational Memory : A Field Study of Answer Garden . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 94 ) , pp . 243 – 252 . Ackerman , Mark S . ( 1994b ) . De ﬁ nitional and Contextual Issues in Organizational and Group Memories . Proceedings of the Twenty - seventh IEEE Hawaii International Conference of System Sciences ( HICSS 94 ) , pp . 191 – 200 . Ackerman , Mark S . ( 1998 ) . Augmenting Organizational Memory : A Field Study of Answer Garden . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 203 – 224 . Ackerman , Mark S . , James S . Boster , Wayne G . Lutters , and David W . McDonald ( 2002a ) . Who ' s There ? The Knowledge Mapping Approximation Project . In Mark S . Ackerman , Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Sharing Expertise : Beyond Knowledge Management . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 159 – 178 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Christine Halverson ( 1998 ) . Considering an Organization ' s Memory . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 98 ) , pp . 39 – 48 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Christine Halverson ( 2004a ) . Organizational Memory : Processes , Boundary Objects , and Trajectories . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 155 – 189 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Christine Halverson ( 2004b ) . Sharing Expertise : The Next Step for Knowledge Management . In Volker Wulf and Marylene Huysman ( eds . ) , Social Capital and Information Technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Thomas W . Malone ( 1990 ) . Answer Garden : ATool for Growing Organizational Memory . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Of ﬁ ce Information Systems , pp . 31 – 39 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Eric Mandel ( 1995 ) . Memory in the Small : An Application to Provide Task - Based Organizational Memory for a Scienti ﬁ c Community . Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference of System Sciences ( HICSS 95 ) , pp . 323 – 332 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Eric Mandel ( 1999 ) . Memory in the Small : Combining Collective Memory and Task Support for a Scienti ﬁ c Community . Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce , vol . 9 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 105 – 127 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and David W . McDonald ( 1996 ) . Answer Garden 2 : Merging Organizational Memory with Collective Help . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 96 ) , pp . 97 – 105 . Ackerman , Mark S . , and Leysia Palen ( 1996 ) . The Zephyr Help Instance : Promoting Ongoing Activity in a CSCW System . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 96 ) , pp . 268 – 275 . 562 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Ackerman , Mark S . , Vokmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) ( 2002b ) . Sharing Expertise : Beyond Knowledge Management . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Adler , Paul S , and Seok - Woo Kwon ( 2002 ) . Social capital : prospects for a new concept . Academy of Management Review , vol . 27 , no . 1 , pp . 17 – 40 . Alvesson , M . , and D . Kärreman ( 2001 ) . Odd couple : making sense of the curious concept of knowledge management . Journal of Management Studies , vol . 38 , no . 7 , pp . 995 – 1018 . Ambati , Vamshi , Stephan Vogel , and Jaime Carbonell ( 2012 ) . Collaborative work ﬂ ow for crowdsourcing translation . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1191 – 1194 . Anderson , Stuart , Gillian Hardstone , Rob Procter , and Robin Williams ( 2007 ) . Down in the ( Data ) base ( ment ) : Supporting Con ﬁ guration in Organisational Information Systems . In Mark S . Ackerman , Christine A . Halverson , Thomas Erickson and Wendy A . Kellogg ( eds . ) , Resources , Co - Evolution , and Artifacts : Theory in CSCW . New York : Springer , pp . 221 – 254 . Andriessen , J . H . Erik ( 2005 ) . Archetypes of Knowledge Communities . Proceedings of the International Conference on Communities and Technologies 2005 , pp . 191 – 213 . Auramäki , Esa , Mike Robinson , Anne Aaltonen , Mikko Kovalainen , Arja Liinamaa , and Taina Tuuna - Väiskä ( 1996 ) . Paperwork At 78 kph . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 96 ) , pp . 370 – 379 . Bandini , Stefania , Ettore Colombo , Gianluca Colombo , Fabio Sartori , and Carla Simone ( 2003 ) . The role of knowledge artifacts in innovation management : the case of a chemical compound designer CoP . Proceedings of the International Conference on Communities and Technologies , pp . 327 – 345 . Bannon , Liam , and Susan Bødker ( 1997 ) . Constructing Common Information Spaces . Proceedings of the European Computer Supported Cooperative Work Conference ( E - CSCW ' 97 ) , pp . 81 – 96 . Bannon , Liam , and Kari Kuutti ( 1996 ) . Shifting Perspectives on Organizational Memory : From Storage to Active Remembering . Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS - 29 ) , pp . 156 – 167 . Berg , Marc , and Geoffrey C . Bowker ( 1997 ) . The Multiple Bodies of the Medical Record : Towards a Sociology of an Artifact . Sociological Quarterly , vol . 38 , no . 3 , pp . 513 – 537 . Bergman , Mark , Gloria Mark , and Kalle Lyytinen ( 2004 ) . Rede ﬁ ning Boundary Objects : An Examination of System Design . Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Organizational Discourse . Berlin , Lucy M . , Robin Jeffries , Vicki L . O ' Day , Andreas Paepke , and Cathleen Wharton ( 1993 ) . Where Did You Put It ? Issues in the Design and Use of a Group Memory . Proceedings of the ACM InterCHI ' 93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 23 – 30 . Bietz , Matthew J . , and Charlotte P . Lee ( 2009 ) . Collaboration in Metagenomics : Sequence Databases and the Organization of Scienti ﬁ c Work . Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( E - CSCW ' 09 ) , pp . 243 – 262 . Blumer , Herbert ( 1986 ) . Symbolic Interactionism : Perspective and Method . Berkeley : University of California Press . Boland , Jr . , Richard J . , Anil K . Maheshwari , Dov Te ' eni , David G . Schwartz , and Ramkrishnan V . Tenkasi ( 1992 ) . Sharing Perspectives in Distributed Decision Making . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 92 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 306 – 313 . Bossen , Claus ( 2002 ) . The parameters of common information spaces : the heterogeneity of cooperative work at a hospital ward . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 02 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 176 – 185 . Bossen , Claus , Lotte Groth Jensen , and Flemming Witt ( 2012 ) . Medical secretaries ' care of records : the cooperative work of a non - clinical group . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 921 – 930 . 563 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Boujut , Jean - François , and Eric Blanco ( 2003 ) . Intermediary Objects as a Means to Foster Co - operation in Engineering Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 12 , no . 2 , pp . 205 – 219 . Bourdieu , Pierre ( 1977 ) . Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Bowker , Geoffrey C . , and Susan L . Star ( 1999 ) . Sorting Things Out : Classi ﬁ cation and Its Consequences . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bradner , E . , W . Kellogg , and T . . Erickson ( 1999 ) . The Adoption and Use of " Babble " : A Field Study of Chat in the Workplace . Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW ' 99 ) , pp . 139 – 158 . Brown , John S . , and P . Duiguid ( 1991 ) . Organizational Learning and Communities of Practice : Toward a Uni ﬁ ed View of Working , Learning and Innovation . Organization Science , vol . 2 , pp . 40 – 57 . Brown , John Seeley , and Paul Duguid ( 2000 ) . The Social Life of Information . Cambridge : Harvard Business Review Press . Cabitza , Federico , Gianluca Colombo , and Carla Simone ( 2013 ) . Leveraging underspeci ﬁ cation in knowledge artifacts to foster collaborative activities in professional communities . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 71 , no . 1 , pp . 24 – 45 . Cabitza , Federico , and Carla Simone ( 2012 ) . Affording Mechanisms : An Integrated View of Coordination and Knowledge Management . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 21 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 227 – 260 . Cabitza , Federico , Carla Simone , and Marcello Sarini ( 2008 ) . Knowledge Artifacts as Bridges between Theory and Practice : The Clinical Pathway Case . In Mark Ackerman , Rose Dieng - Kuntz , Carla Simone and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Knowledge Management in Action . Boston : International Federation for Information Processing , pp . 37 – 50 . Cabitza , Federico , Carla Simone , and Marcello Sarini ( 2009 ) . Leveraging Coordinative Conventions to Promote Collaboration Awareness : The case of Clinical Records . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) Journal , vol . 18 , no . 4 , pp . 301 – 330 . Cohen , Don , and Laurence Prusak ( 2001 ) . In Good Company : How Social Capital Makes Organizations Work . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Constant , David , Sara Kiesler , and Lee Sproull ( 1994 ) . What ' s Mine Is Ours , or Is It ? A Study of Attitudes about Information Sharing . Information Systems Research , vol . 5 , no . 4 , pp . 400 – 421 . Cranshaw , Justin , and Aniket Kittur ( 2011 ) . The polymath project : lessons from a successful online collaboration in mathematics . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1865 – 1874 . Dabbish , Laura , Colleen Stuart , Jason Tsay , and Jim Herbsleb ( 2012 ) . Social coding in GitHub : transparency and collaboration in an open software repository . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1277 – 1286 . Dearman , David , and Khai N . Truong ( 2010 ) . Why users of yahoo ! : answers do not answer questions . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 329 – 332 . Dörner , Christian , Volkmar Pipek , and Markus Won ( 2007 ) . Supporting expertise awareness : ﬁ nding out what others know . Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer Human Interaction for the Management of Information Technology . Dourish , Paul ( 2003 ) . The Appropriation of Interactive Technologies : Some Lessons from Placeless Documents . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) Journal , vol . 12 , no . 4 , pp . 465 – 490 . Dourish , Paul , Victoria Bellotti , Wendy Mackay , and Chao - Ying Ma ( 1993 ) . Information and context : lessons from the study of two shared information systems . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Organizational Computing , pp . 42 – 51 . Dourish , Paul , W . Keith Edwards , Anthony LaMarca , John Lamping , Karin Petersen , Michael Salisbury , Douglas B . Terry , and James Thornton ( 2000 ) . Extending document management 564 Mark S . Ackerman et al . systems with user - speci ﬁ c active properties . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol . 18 , no . 2 , pp . 140 – 170 . Dourish , Paul , W . Keith Edwards , Anthony LaMarca , and Michael Salisbury ( 1999 ) . Presto : an experimental architecture for ﬂ uid interactive document spaces . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 6 , no . 2 , pp . 133 – 161 . Dow , Steven , Anand Kulkarni , Scott Klemmer , Bj Hartmann , ouml , and rn ( 2012 ) . Shepherding the crowd yields better work . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1013 – 1022 . Ehrlich , Kate ( 2003 ) . Locating Expertise : Design Issues for an Expertise Locator System . In Mark S . Ackerman , Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Beyond Knowledge Managament . Sharing Expertise . Cambridge , USA : MIT Press , pp . 137 – 158 . Ehrlich , Kate , C - Y . Lin , and V . Grif ﬁ ths - Fisher ( 2007 ) . Searching for Experts in the Enterprise : Combining Text and Social Network Analysis . Proceedings of the ACM GROUP 2007 Conference on Supporting Group Work , pp . 117 – 126 . Faridani , Siamak , Ephrat Bitton , Kimiko Ryokai , and Ken Goldberg ( 2010 ) . Opinion space : a scalable tool for browsing online comments . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1175 – 1184 . Fields , Bob , Paola Amaldi , and Antonello Tassi ( 2005 ) . Representing collaborative work : the airport as common information space . Cognition , Technology & Work , vol . 7 , no . 2 , pp . 119 – 133 . Finholt , Tom , and Lee S . Sproull ( 1990 ) . Electronic Groups at Work . Organization Science , vol . 1 , no . 1 , pp . 41 – 64 . Fiore , Andrew T . , Scott Lee Tiernan , and Marc A . Smith ( 2002 ) . Observed behavior and perceived value of authors in usenet newsgroups : bridging the gap . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2002 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 323 – 330 . Fischer , Gerhard ( 2001 ) . Communities of Interest : Learning through the Interaction of Multiple Knowledge Systems . Proceedings of the 24th Information Systems Research Seminar in Scandinavia , pp . 1 – 14 . Fischer , Gerhard ( 2007 ) . Designing socio - technical environments in support of meta - design and social creativity . Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computer Supported Sollaborative Learning ( CSCL ' 07 ) , pp . 2 – 11 . Fisher , D . , M . Smith , and H . T . Welser ( 2006 ) . You Are Who You Talk To : Detecting Roles in Usenet Newsgroups . Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( HICSS ' 06 ) . Fitzpatrick , Geraldine ( 2003 ) . Emergent Expertise Sharing in a New Community . In Mark S . Ackerman , Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Sharing Expertise : Beyond Knowledge Management . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 81 – 110 . Forte , Andrea , Niki Kittur , Vanessa Larco , Haiyi Zhu , Amy Bruckman , and Robert E . Kraut ( 2012 ) . Coordination and beyond : social functions of groups in open content production . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 417 – 426 . Gazan , Rich ( 2011 ) . Social Q & A . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 62 , no . 12 , pp . 2301 – 2312 . Gilbert , Eric , and Karrie Karahalios ( 2010 ) . Understanding deja reviewers . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 10 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 225 – 228 . Goggins , Sean , Isa Jahnke , and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) ( 2013 ) . Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning at the Workplace . London : Springer . Goldberg , Yaron , Marilyn Safran , and Ehud Shapiro ( 1992 ) . Active Mail – A Framework for Implementing Groupware . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 92 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 75 – 83 . 565 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Groth , K . , and J . Bowers ( 2001 ) . On ﬁ nding things out : Situating organisational knowledge in CSCW . Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 279 – 298 . Guy , I , M . Jacovi , N . Mushulam , I . Ronen , and E . Shahr ( 2008a ) . Public vs . private : comparing public social network information with email . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2008 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 393 – 402 . Guy , I , S . Ur , and I . Ronen ( 2012 ) . Best Faces Forward : A Large - scale Study of People Search in the Enterprise . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2012 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1775 – 1784 . Guy , I . , M . Jacovi , E . Shahar , N . Meshulam , V . Soroka , and S . Farrell ( 2008b ) . Harvesting with SONAR : the value of aggregating social network information . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2008 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1017 – 1026 . Halverson , Christine A . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2003 ) . Yeah , the Rush ain ' t here yet – Take a break : Creation and use of an artifact as organizational memory . Proceedings of the IEEE Hawaii International Conference of System Sciences ( HICSS ' 03 ) . Halverson , Christine A . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2007 ) . The Birth of an Organizational Resource : The Surprising Life of a Cheat Sheet . In Mark S . Ackerman , Christine A . Halverson , Thomas Erickson and Wendy A . Kellogg ( eds . ) , Resources , Co - Evolution , and Artifacts : Theory in CSCW . London : Springer , pp . 9 – 36 . Halverson , Christine A . , Thomas Erickson , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2004 ) . Organizational issues : Behind the help desk : evolution of a knowledge management system in a large organization . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 304 – 313 . Hansen , Derek L . , Mark S . Ackerman , Paul J . Resnick , and Sean Munson ( 2007 ) . Virtual Community Maintenance with a Collaborative Repository . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science and Technology ( ASIS & T ) , pp . 1 – 20 . Hardstone , Gillian , Mark Hartswood , Rob Procter , Roger Slack , Alex Voss , and Gwyneth Rees ( 2004 ) . Supporting informality : team working and integrated care records . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 04 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 142 – 151 . Harper , Richard ( 1998 ) . Inside the IMF . New York : Academic Press . Harper , Richard , Rob Procter , Dave Randall , and Mark Rounce ﬁ eld ( 2001 ) . ' Safety in numbers ' : calculation and document re - use in knowledge work . Proceedings of the International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ' 01 ) , pp . 242 – 251 . Harper , Richard , and Abigail Sellen ( 1995 ) . Collaborative Tools and the Practicalities of Professional Work at the International Monetary Fund . Proceedings of the ACM CHI ' 95 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 122 – 129 . Heath , Christian , and Paul Luff ( 1996 ) . Documents and Professional Practice : “ Bad ” Organizational Reasons for ” Good ” Clinical Records . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 96 ) , pp . 354 – 363 . Heimerl , Kurtis , Brian Gawalt , Kuang Chen , Tapan Parikh , and Bjorn Hartmann ( 2012 ) . CommunitySourcing : engaging local crowds to perform expert work via physical kiosks . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2012 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1539 – 1548 . Hiltz , Starr Roxanne , and Murray Turoff ( 1993 ) . The network nation : human communication via computer . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hinds , Pam , and Jeffrey Pfef ﬂ er ( 2003 ) . Why organizations don ’ t ‘ know what they know ’ : Cognitive and motivational factors affecting the transfer of expertise . In Mark Ackerman , Volkmar Pipek and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Sharing Expertise . Beyond Knowledge Management . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 3 – 26 . Hinrichs , Joachim , Volkmar Pipek , and Volker Wulf ( 2005 ) . Context grabbing : Assigning metadata in large document collections . Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 367 – 386 . 566 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Horowitz , Damon , and Sepandar D . Kamvar ( 2012 ) . Searching the village : models and methods for social search . Communications of the ACM , vol . 55 , no . 4 , pp . 111 – 118 . Hsieh , Gary , Scott E . Hudson , and Robert E . Kraut ( 2011 ) . Donate for credibility : how contribution incentives can improve credibility . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3435 – 3438 . Hsieh , Gary , Robert E . Kraut , and Scott E . Hudson ( 2010 ) . Why pay ? : exploring how ﬁ nancial incentives are used for question & answer . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 305 – 314 . Huysman , M . H . , and Volker Wulf ( 2006 ) . IT to support knowledge sharing in communities , towards a social capital analysis . Journal of Information Technology , vol . 21 , pp . 40 – 51 . Huysman , Marleen H . , and Volker Wulf ( 2005 ) . The role of information technology in building and sustaining the relational base of communities . The Information Society , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 81 – 89 . Huysman , Marleen , and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) ( 2004 ) . Social Capital & Information Technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jeon , Grace YoungJoo , Yong - Mi Kim , and Yan Chen ( 2010 ) . Re - examining price as a predictor of answer quality in an online q & a site . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 325 – 328 . Kamiya , Kenichi , Martin Roscheisen , and Terry Winograd ( 1996 ) . Grassroots : Providing a Uniform Framework for Communicating , Sharing Information , and Organizing People . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 96 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 239 – 240 . Kandasamy , Durga M . , Kristal Curtis , Armando Fox , and David Patterson ( 2012 ) . Diversity within the crowd . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Companion pp . 115 – 118 . Katzenberg , Barbara , Fred Pickard , and John McDermott ( 1996 ) . Computer Support for Clinical Practice : Embedding and Evolving Protocols of Care . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 96 ) , pp . 364 – 369 . Kittur , Aniket , Ed H . Chi , and Bongwon Suh ( 2008 ) . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . Proceedings of the ACM CHI ' 08 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 453 – 456 . Kittur , Aniket , Susheel Khamkar , Paul Andreacute , and Robert Kraut ( 2012 ) . CrowdWeaver : visually managing complex crowd work . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1033 – 1036 . Kittur , Aniket , and Robert E . Kraut ( 2010 ) . Beyond Wikipedia : coordination and con ﬂ ict in online production groups . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 10 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 215 – 224 . Kittur , Aniket , Jeffrey V . Nickerson , Michael Bernstein , Elizabeth Gerber , Aaron Shaw , John Zimmerman , Matt Lease , and John Horton ( 2013 ) . The future of crowd work . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1301 – 1318 . Kling , Rob ( 1991 ) . Value Con ﬂ icts in the Design and Organization of EFT Systems . In Charles Dunlop and Rob Kling ( eds . ) , Computerization and Controversy . ﬁ rst ed . Boston : Academic Press , pp . 421 – 435 . Ko , Andrew J . , and Parmit K . Chilana ( 2010 ) . How power users help and hinder open bug reporting . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1665 – 1674 . Kovalainen , Mikko , Mike Robinson , and Esa Auramaki ( 1998 ) . Diaries at Work . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 98 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 49 – 58 . Kulkarni , Anand , Matthew Can , and Bjorn Hartmann ( 2012 ) . Collaboratively crowdsourcing work ﬂ ows with Turkomatic . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1003 – 1012 . Lampe , Cliff , Nicole Ellison , and Charles Stein ﬁ eld ( 2006 ) . A face ( book ) in the crowd : social Searching vs . social browsing . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 06 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 167 – 170 . 567 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Laqua , Sven , M . Angela Sasse , Steven Greenspan , and Carrie Gates ( 2011 ) . Do you know dis ? : a user study of a knowledge discovery tool for organizations . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2887 – 2896 . Lave , Jean , and Etienne Wenger ( 1991 ) . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge , USA : Cambridge University Press . Lee , Charlotte P . ( 2007 ) . Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Routine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 307 – 339 . Lesser , Eric L . , Michael A . Fontaine , and Jason A . Slusher ( eds . ) ( 2000 ) . Knowledge and Communities . Boston : Butterworth - Heinemann . Lin , C - Y . , V . Grif ﬁ ths - Fisher , Kate Ehrlich , and C . Desforges ( 2008 ) . SmallBlue : People Mining for Expertise Search and Social Network Analysis . IEEE Multimedia Magazine , vol . 15 , pp . 78 – 84 . Lindstaedt , Stefanie N . ( 1996 ) . Towards organizational learning : growing group memories in the workplace . Proceedings of the Conference Companion for ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 96 ) , pp . 53 – 54 . Lutters , Wayne G . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2002 ) . Achieving Safety : A Field Study of Boundary Objects in Aircraft Technical Support . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 02 ) , pp . 266 – 275 . Lutters , Wayne G . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2007 ) . Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 341 – 372 . Malone , Thomas W . , Ken R . Grant , Franklyn A . Turbak , Stephen A . Brobst , and Michael D . Cohen ( 1987 ) . Intelligent Information Sharing Systems . Communications of the ACM , vol . 30 , no . 5 , pp . 390 – 402 . Malone , Thomas W . , Kum - Yew Lai , and Christopher Fry ( 1995 ) . Experiments with Oval : a radically tailorable tool for cooperative work . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 177 – 205 . Mambrey , P . , and M . Robinson ( 1997 ) . Understanding the Role of Documents in a Hierarchical Flow of Work . Proceedings of the ACM Group Conference ( GROUP ' 97 ) , pp . 119 – 127 . Mamykina , Lena , Bella Manoim , Manas Mittal , George Hripcsak , Bjorn Hartmann ( 2011 ) . Design lessons from the fastest q & a site in the west . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2857 – 2866 . Markus , M . Lynne ( 1983 ) . Power , Politics , and MIS Implementation . Communications of the ACM , vol . 26 , no . 6 , pp . 430 – 444 . McDonald , David W . ( 2000 ) . Supporting Nuance in Groupware Design : Moving from Naturalistic Expertise Location to Expertise Recommendation . McDonald , David W . ( 2001 ) . Evaluating Expertise Recommendations . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work ( Group ' 01 ) , pp . 214 – 223 . McDonald , David W . ( 2003 ) . Recommending collaboration with social networks : a comparative evaluation . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2003 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 593 – 600 . McDonald , David W . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 1998 ) . Just Talk to Me : A Field Study of Expertise Location . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 98 ) , pp . 315 – 324 . McDonald , David W . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2000 ) . Expertise Recommender : A Flexible Recommendation System Architecture . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 2000 ) , pp . 231 – 240 . Mockus , Audris , and James D . Herbsleb ( 2002 ) . Expertise Browser : A Quantitative Approach to Identifying Expertise . Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ' 02 ) , pp . 503 – 512 . 568 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Morris , Meredith Ringel , Jaime Teevan , and Katrina Panovich ( 2010a ) . A Comparison of Information Seeking Us ing Search Engines and Social Networks . Proceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media ( ICWSM ' 10 ) , pp . 291 – 294 . Morris , Meredith Ringel , Jaime Teevan , and Katrina Panovich ( 2010b ) . What do people ask their social networks , and why ? : a survey study of status message q & amp ; a behavior . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1739 – 1748 . Morrison , J ( 1993 ) . Team Memory : Information Management for Business Teams . Proceedings of the 26th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pp . 122 – 131 . Munkvold , Glenn , and Gunnar Ellingsen ( 2007 ) . Common Information Spaces along the illness trajectories of chronic patients . Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 291 – 310 . Nagar , Yiftach ( 2012 ) . What do you think ? : the structuring of an online community as a collective - sensemaking process . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 393 – 402 . Nahapiet , J . , and S . Ghoshal ( 1998 ) . Social Capital , Intellectual Capital and the Organizational Advantage . Academy of Management Review , vol . 23 , no . 2 , pp . 242 – 266 . Nam , Kevin K . , and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2007 ) . Arkose : Reusing Informal Information in Online Communities . ProceedingsoftheACMConference onSupportingGroupWork ( Group ' 07 ) , pp . 137 – 146 . Nichols , Jeffrey , and Jeon - Hyung Kang ( 2012 ) . Asking questions of targeted strangers on social networks . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 999 – 1002 . Nonaka , Ikujiro , and Hirotaka Takeuchi ( 1995 ) . The knowledge - creating company : How Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation . New York : Oxford University Press . Normark , Maria , and Dave Randall ( 2005 ) . Local expertise at an emergency call centre . Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 347 – 366 . O ' Day , V . , A . Adler , A . Kuchinsky , and A . Bouch ( 2001 ) . When worlds collide : Molecular biology as interdisciplinary collaboration . Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 399 – 418 . Orlikowski , Wanda J . ( 1992 ) . Learning from Notes : Organizational Issues in Groupware Implemen - tation . Proceedings of the Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 92 ) , pp . 362 – 369 . Orr , Julian ( 1986 ) . Narratives at Work : Storytelling as Cooperative Diagnostic Activity . Proceedings of the Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW 86 ) , pp . 62 – 72 . Orr , Julian ( 1996 ) . Talking About Machines : an Ethnography of a Modern Job . Ithaca : ILR / Cornell University Press . Pal , Aditya , James Margatan , and Joseph Konstan ( 2012 ) . Question temporality : identi ﬁ cation and uses . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 257 – 260 . Panovich , Katrina , Rob Miller , and David Karger ( 2012 ) . Tie strength in question & answer on social network sites . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1057 – 1066 . Pentland , Brian T ( 1992 ) . Organizing moves in software support hot lines . Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 37 , no . 4 , pp . 527 – 548 . Pipek , Volkmar , and Volker Wulf ( 2003 ) . Pruning the Answer Garden : Knowledge sharing in maintenance engineering . Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 1 – 20 . Pipek , Volkmar , Volker Wulf , and A . Johri ( 2012 ) . Bridging Artifacts and Actors : Expertise Sharing in Organizational Ecosystems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( JCSCW ) , vol . 21 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 261 – 282 . 569 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Pipek , Volkmar , Joachim Hinrichs , and Volker Wulf ( 2003 ) . Sharing expertise : challenges for technical support . In Mark Ackerman , V . Pipek and Volker Wulf ( eds . ) , Sharing Expertise - Beyond Knowledge Management , MIT Press , Cambridge . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 111 – 136 . Polanyi , Michael ( 1967 ) . The Tacit Dimension . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . Preece , Jenny ( 2000 ) . Online Communities . New York : Wiley . Randall , Dave , Richard Harper , and Mark Rounce ﬁ eld ( 2007 ) . Fieldwork for Design : Theory and Practice . London : Springer . Reddy , Madhu , and Paul Dourish ( 2002 ) . A Finger on the Pulse : Temporal Rhythms and Information Seeking in Medical Work . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 02 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 344 – 353 . Reddy , Madhu , Paul Dourish , and Wanda Pratt ( 2001 ) . Coordinating Heterogeneous Work : Information and Representation in Medical Care . Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW ' 01 ) , pp . 239 – 258 . Reichling , Tim , Kai Schubert , and Volker Wulf ( 2005 ) . Matching Human Actors based on their Texts : Design and Evaluation of an Instance of the ExpertFinding Framework . Proceedings of the International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( Group ' 05 ) , pp . 61 – 70 . Reichling , Tim , and Michael Veith ( 2005 ) . Expertise sharing in a heterogeneous organizational environment . Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( E - CSCW ' 05 ) , pp . 325 – 345 . Reichling , Tim , Michael Veith , and Volker Wulf ( 2007 ) . Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 16 , pp . 431 – 465 . Reichling , Tim , and Volker Wulf ( 2009 ) . Expert Recommender System in Practice : Evaluating Semiautomatic Pro ﬁ le Generation . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2009 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 59 – 68 . Ribak , Amnon , Michal Jacovi , and Vladimir Soroka ( 2002 ) . " Ask before you search " : peer support and community building with ReachOut . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 02 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 126 – 135 . Rodden , Tom ( 1996 ) . Populating the Application : A Model of Awareness for Cooperative Applications . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 96 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 87 – 96 . Rolland , Knut H . , Vidar Hepsp , and Eric Monteiro ( 2006 ) . Conceptualizing common information spaces across heterogeneous contexts : mutable mobiles and side - effects of integration . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 06 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 493 – 500 . Saeed , Saqib , Volkmar Pipek , Markus Rohde , and Volker Wulf ( 2010 ) . Managing nomadic knowledge : a case study of the European social forum . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 537 – 546 . Schein , Edgar H . ( 1978 ) . Career Dynamics . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Schmidt , Kjeld ( 1999 ) . Of maps and scripts : The status of formal constructs in cooperative work . Information and Software Technology , vol . 41 , pp . 319 – 329 . Schmidt , Kjeld ( 2002 ) . The problem with ‘ awareness ’ . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 11 , pp . 285 – 298 . Schmidt , Kjeld ( 2012 ) . The trouble with tacit knowledge . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 21 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 163 – 225 . Schmidt , Kjeld , and Liam Bannon ( 1992 ) . Taking CSCW Seriously : Supporting Articulation Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 1 , no . 1 – 2 , pp . 7 – 40 . Schmidt , Kjeld , and Carla Simone ( 1996 ) . Coordination Mechanisms : Towards a Conceptual Foundation of CSCW Systems Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 5 , no . 2 / 3 , pp . 155 – 200 . 570 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Schmidt , Kjeld , and Ina Wagner ( 2003 ) . Ordering systems : coordinative practices in architectural design and planning . Proceedings of the International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ' 03 ) , pp . 274 – 283 . Schmidt , Kjeld , and Ina Wagner ( 2004 ) . Ordering Systems : Coordinative Practices and Artifacts in Architectural Design and Planning . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 13 , no . 5 / 6 , pp . 349 – 408 . Schmidt , Kjeld , Ina Wagner , and Marianne Tolar ( 2007 ) . Permutations of cooperative work practices : a study of two oncology clinics . Proceedings of the International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ' 07 ) , pp . 1 – 10 . Shami , N . Sadat , Kate Ehrlich , and D . R . Millen ( 2008 ) . Pick me ! Link selection in expertise search . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2008 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1089 – 1092 . Shapiro , Dan ( 1994 ) . The Limits of Ethnography : Combining Social Sciences for CSCW . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 94 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 417 – 428 . Shipman , Frank , III , and Catherine C . Marshall ( 1999 ) . Formality Considered Harmful : Experiences , Emerging Themes , and Directions on the Use of Formal Representations in Interactive Systems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 8 , no . 4 , pp . 333 – 352 . Shipman , Frank , III , Robert Airhart , Haowei Hsieh , Preetam Maloor , J . Michael Moore , and Divya Shah ( 2001 ) . Visual and spatial communication and task organization using the visual knowledge builder . Proceedings of the International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ' 01 ) , pp . 260 – 269 . Shipman , Frank , III , and Ray McCall ( 1999 ) . Supporting Incremental Formalization with the Hyper - Object Substrate . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 199 – 227 . Shipman , Frank , III , and Raymond McCall ( 1994 ) . Supporting Knowledge - Base Evolution with Incremental Formalization . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 94 ) , pp . 285 – 291 . Singh , Vandana , and Michael B . Twidale ( 2008 ) . The confusion of crowds : non - dyadic help interactions . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 08 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooper - ative Work , pp . 699 – 702 . Star , Susan Leigh , and James R . Griesember ( 1989 ) . Institutional Ecology , " Translations " and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 – 39 . Social Studies of Science , vol . 19 , pp . 387 – 420 . Starbird , Kate , Leysia Palen , Amanda L . Hughes , and Sarah Vieweg ( 2010 ) . Chatter on the red : what hazards threat reveals about the social life of microblogged information . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 10 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 241 – 250 . Stevens , Gunnar , Michael Veith , and Volker Wulf ( 2005 ) . Bridging among Ethnic Communities by Cross - cultural Communities of Practice . Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & T 2005 ) , pp . 377 – 396 . Stevens , Gunnar , and Volker Wulf ( 2002 ) . A new dimension in access control : studying maintenance engineering across organizational boundaries . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 02 ) , pp . 196 – 205 . Stewart , Thomas A . ( 1991 ) . BrainPower . Fortune , June 3 , 1991 , 44 – 60 . Strauss , Anselm L . ( 1993 ) . Continual Permutations of Action . New York : Aldine de Gruyter . Streeter , Lynn A . , and Karen E . Lochbaum ( 1988 ) . Who Knows : A System Based on Automatic Representation of Semantic Structure . Proceedings of the RIAO 88 Conference , pp . 380 – 388 . Su , Norman Makoto , and H . N . Wilensky ( 2011 ) . Doing Business with Theory : Communities of Practice in Knowledge Management . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 21 , pp . 1 – 50 . 571 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View Suchman , Lucy A . ( 1983 ) . Of ﬁ ce Procedure as Practical Action : Models of Work and System Design . ACM Transactions on Of ﬁ ce Information Systems , vol . 1 , no . 4 , pp . 320 – 328 . Suchman , Lucy A . ( 1987 ) . Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Computer Communication . New York : Cambridge University Press . Suchman , Lucy A . ( 1994 ) . Do Categories Have Politics ? Computer Supported Cooperative Work , vol . 2 , pp . 177 – 190 . Suchman , Lucy A . , and Eleanor Wynn ( 1984 ) . Procedures and Problems in the Of ﬁ ce . Of ﬁ ce : Technology and People , vol . 2 , pp . 133 – 154 . Tausczik , Yla R . , and James W . Pennebaker ( 2012 ) . Participation in an online mathematics community : differentiating motivations to add . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 207 – 216 . Terveen , Loren , and David W . McDonald ( 2005 ) . Social matching : A framework and research agenda . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 401 – 434 . Terveen , Loren , Peter Selfridge , and M . David Long ( 1995 ) . Living Design Memory : Framework , Implementation , Lessons Learned . Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 38 . Torrey , Cristen , David W . McDonald , Bill N . Schilit , and Sara Bly ( 2007 ) . How - To Pages : Informal Systems of Expertise Sharing . Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 391 – 410 . Turner , Tammara Combs , Marc A . Smith , Danyel Fisher , and Howard T . Welser ( 2005 ) . Picturing Usenet : Mapping Computer - Mediated Collective Action . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 10 . Van House , Nancy A . , Mark H . Butler , and Lisa R . Schiff ( 1998 ) . Cooperative Knowledge Work and Practices of Trust : Sharing Environmental Planning Data Sets . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 98 ) , pp . 335 – 343 . Vieweg , Sarah ( 2012 ) . Twitter communications in mass emergency : contributions to situational awareness . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 12 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work Companion , pp . 227 – 230 . Vieweg , Sarah , Amanda L . Hughes , Kate Starbird , and Leysia Palen ( 2010 ) . Microblogging during two natural hazards events : what twitter may contribute to situational awareness . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1079 – 1088 . von Ahn , Luis , and Laura Dabbish ( 2004 ) . Labeling images with a computer game . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2004 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 319 – 326 . Walsh , James P . , and Gerardo Rivera Ungson ( 1991 ) . Organizational Memory . The Academy of Management Review , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 57 – 91 . Wellman , Barry ( 1999 ) . Networks In The Global Village : Life In Contemporary Communities . Boulder : Westview Press . Welser , H . T . , E . Gleave , V . Barash , M . Smith , and J . Meckes ( 2009 ) . Whither the Experts ? Social Affordances and the Cultivation of Experts in Community Q & A Systems . Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Science and Engineering ( CSE ' 09 ) , vol . 4 , pp . 450 – 455 . Wenger , E . , Richard McDermott , and William Synder ( 2002 ) . Cultivating Communities of Practice . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Wenger , Etienne ( 1998 ) . Communities of practice : learning , meaning , and identity . New York : Cambridge University Press . White , Ryen W . , Matthew Richardson , and Yandong Liu ( 2011 ) . Effects of community size and contact rate in synchronous social q & a . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2837 – 2846 . Won , Markus , and Volkmar Pipek ( 2003 ) . Sharing knowledge on knowledge - the exact peripheral expertise awareness system . International Journal on Universal Computer Science , vol . 9 , pp . 1388 – 1397 . 572 Mark S . Ackerman et al . Wulf , Volker ( 1997 ) . Storing and Retrieving Documents in a Shared Workspace : Experiences from the Political Administration . Proceedings of the Conference on Human Computer Interaction : INTERACT 97 , pp . 469 – 476 . Wulf , Volker , and Markus Rohde ( 1995 ) . Towards an integrated organization and technology development . Proceedings of the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS 1995 ) , pp . 55 – 64 . Wulf , Volker , Markus Rohde , Volkmar Pipek , and Gunnar Stevens ( 2011 ) . Engaging with practices : design case studies as a research framework in CSCW . Proceedings of the ACM CSCW ' 11 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 505 – 512 . Yamauchi , Yutaka , Makoto Yokozawa , Takeshi Shinohara , and Toru Ishida ( 2000 ) . Collaboration with Lean Media : How Open - Source Software Succeeds . Proceedings of the CSCW ' 00 Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 329 – 338 . Yang , J . , X . Wei , M . Ackerman , and L . Adamic ( 2010 ) . Activity lifespan : An analysis of user survival patterns in online knowledge sharing communities . Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media ( ICWSM ' 10 ) . Yarosh , S . , T . Matthews , and M . Zhou ( 2012 ) . Asking the right person : supporting expertise selection in the enterprise . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2012 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2247 – 2256 . Zhang , Jun , Mark S . Ackerman , and Lada Adamic ( 2007 ) . QuME : a mechanism to support expertise ﬁ nding in online help - seeking communities . Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST 2007 ) , pp . 111 – 114 . Zhang , Jun , Yan Qu , Jane Cody , and Yulingling Wu ( 2010 ) . A case study of micro - blogging in the enterprise : use , value , and related issues . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 123 – 132 . Zhou , Xiaomu , Mark Ackerman , and Kai Zheng ( 2011 ) . CPOE workarounds , boundary objects , and assemblages . Proceedings of the ACM CHI 2011 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3353 – 3362 . 573 Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View