Behavioral Programming of Autonomous Characters based on Probabilistic Automata and Personality Luca Chittaro , Milena Serra HCI Lab , Dept . of Math and Computer Science , University of Udine , Via delle Scienze 206 , 33100 Udine , Italy ph : + 39 ( 0432 ) 558 . 450 , fax : + 39 ( 0432 ) 558 . 450 e - mail : { chittaro , serra } @ dimi . uniud . it This paper presents a system for realistic behavioral programming of virtual characters , based on personality and probabilistic automata . We describe personality by using the Five - Factor Model and achieve autonomy through a goal - oriented approach . Each character perceives the surrounding world , decides how to behave and acts on the environment according to its personality and to its goals . The chief idea explored by the proposed approach is that personality has a probabilistic inﬂuence on behavior selection instead of a deterministic one . Different behavior sequences available to achieve a goal are modeled using probabilistic automata and making probability dependent on character personality . This leads to non - repetitive behaviors , whose evolution is not foreseeable . The paper ﬁrst motivates the approach in the context of cybertherapy . Then , it summarizes related work and illustrates in detail the proposed approach . Finally , it presents obtained results and discusses the main limitations of the implemented system . Keywords : virtual characters , personality , behavioral autonomy , probabilistic automata This is a preprint of an article published in the Journal of Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds , Volume 15 , Issue 3 - 4 ( July 2004 ) , p 319 - 326 , c (cid:1) 2004 John Wiley and Sons , Inc . http : / / www . interscience . wiley . com / cgi - bin / jhome / 106562739 1 Introduction A very important challenge for the virtual reality community is to create Virtual Environments ( VEs ) inhabited by realistic characters . Realism should ideally be achieved in all layers of the modeling pyramid , i . e . geometric , kinematic , physical , behavioral and cognitive [ 1 ] . While there is a signiﬁcant amount of work related to the ﬁrst three levels , behavioral and cognitive modeling have become subjects of study in more recent times . The behavioral layer concerns abilities such as self - animation as reaction to environmental stimuli , while the cognitive layer concerns aspects such as characters knowledge , knowledge acquisition and planning abilities . This paper is mainly concerned with realistic behavioral programming and the proposed approach has been developed in the context of a cybertherapy project . The word cybertherapy identiﬁes psychological therapies that use virtual reality to create the situations needed to elicit particular emotions or states in a patient . One of the most signiﬁcant successes in this ﬁeld has been reached in the treatment of phobias : patients are exposed to objects and situations that cause their phobia , but this exposure takes place in a VE instead of the real world ( Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy , VRET ) [ 2 , 3 ] . An important factor for the effectiveness of cybertherapy is the sense of presence felt by patients , that is highly correlated with VE realism [ 4 ] . As far as social phobias are concerned , VEs need to be populated by highly realistic characters , but realism is complex to achieve . Two of the main ideas that contribute to characters realism are behavioral characterization , i . e . differentiating characters behavior , and autonomy , i . e . the ability for a character to act on and react to the environment . Characters should ideally be able to reproduce all the different behavioral traits of human beings . For example , when we observe a group of people , we do not expect them to move and behave all alike , event if they are in the same social context . In human beings , behavioral differences depend on several psychological factors , such as personality , mood and habits . Endowing characters with a psychological characterization determines a differentiation of their behavior . The problem of characters autonomy in cybertherapy has been pointed out by Gaggioli et al . [ 5 ] , who discuss the use of virtual characters in clinical psychology . For example , if a character remains frozen , its behavior will not be consistent with that of real people . An autonomous character should instead behave according to what happens around it , as human beings do . This paper is devoted to describe our solutions to the two mentioned problems , i . e . discriminating characters behavior through a psychological characterization and endowing characters with behavioral autonomy . It proposes a goal - oriented approach , based on personality deﬁnition and on probabilistic automata , to obtain a probabilistic inﬂuence of personality on behavior selection . The paper is organized as follows : ﬁrst , we discuss related work in behavioral characterization and behavioral autonomy ; then , we describe our approach and the underlying architecture ; ﬁnally , the obtained results are evaluated and discussed . Related work Even if behavioral characterization and autonomy have become subjects of research relatively recently , there is a considerable amount of carried out studies . This section presents some representative examples of proposed approaches for the two problems . Behavioral characterization Different solutions have been proposed to the problem of improving believability of virtual characters and many of them concern psychological aspects , such as : • personality , i . e . the total sum of all the behavioral and mental characteristics by means of which an individual is recognized as being unique ; • emotional state , i . e . the combination of all emotions felt in an instant , where an emotion is a strong feeling accompanied by a physical alteration ( e . g . turning pale , blushing . . . ) ; • mood , i . e . a persistent emotional state . Representing these aspects and mapping them into visible effects that the user notices are the ﬁrst problems encountered in endowing a character with a psychological characterization . In particular , a way to describe personality is the Five - Factor Model ( FFM ) [ 6 ] , a well - known psychological model that summarizes personality traits in ﬁve continuous dimensions ( openness , conscientiousness , extraversion , agreeableness and neuroticism ) , whose values range from 0 to 100 . The Character Markup Language ( CML ) [ 7 ] is an example of a language for scripting the animation of virtual characters taking into account personality and emotions . In CML , a character can be deﬁned as belonging only to one of the two extremes of the FFM dimensions ( e . g . open - minded or close - minded , extravert or introvert . . . ) , while emotions are separately deﬁned . This way , the effects of emotions on character voice , facial expression and behavior are algorithmically generated . The FFM is used also in the EMOTE system [ 8 ] , where 2 personality inﬂuences both the character perception of the environment and the way actions are performed , but not the behavioral choices . Andr´e [ 9 ] proposes to use both personality and emotions to select a behavior and to convey the internal state of a character through posture , speech and facial expression . Personality is related to emotions in such a way that personality is a variable that determines the intensity of emotions . Personality is deﬁned using the FFM , while emotions are those provided by the OCC - Model [ 10 ] . B´echeiraz and Thalmann [ 11 ] created a system where an emotion is generated as a consequence of a perception . The emotion produces immediately a reaction , that can be a body response , a facial expression or a behavior selection . No personality deﬁnition is taken into account . A system comprising all the above mentioned psychological aspects ( i . e . personality , emotional state and mood ) has been proposed by Egges , Kshirsagar and Thalmann [ 12 ] , who used it to create a conversational agent whose responses and facial expressions depend on all the three aspects . In the Improv system [ 13 ] , information about the character can inﬂuence probability of choice of scripts , i . e . simple actions or sequences of actions / scripts . Character information is made of several variables that are freely created by the animator , thus the system lacks an homogeneous , explicit deﬁnition of personality and emotional state . Behavioral autonomy A character can be said to be autonomous when it is able to perceive objects and creatures in the VE and to behave accordingly to these perceptions [ 14 ] . Various approaches have been proposed to create autonomous characters . For example , in the mVITAL system [ 15 ] , every character is provided with a small KBS ( Knowledge - Based System ) that deﬁnes what it knows ( initial beliefs ) , what it can infer from its knowledge ( reasoning abilities ) and what it wants to do ( goals ) . Such method is very ﬂexible , but deﬁning the knowledge base is a complex and time - consuming task , requiring signiﬁcant expertise . A reasoning system is used also by Noser and Thalmann [ 16 ] , who propose a system where motion decisions are based on perception , visual memory and reasoning abilities . Figure 1 : High - level architecture In the Greta Project [ 17 ] , the decisional structure of the character is represented by a set of Dynamic Belief Networks ( DBN ) , each one modeling the probability for an emotion to arise . The emotional state then determines the next behavior to be chosen . B´echeiraz and Thalmann [ 11 ] use Finite - State Machines ( FSMs ) to describe and compose possible behaviors , whose selection is determined not only by the emotional state , but also by the perceptual state . FSMs are used also by Brooks [ 18 ] to create multiple layers for a robot architecture . Each layer is an isolated computational unit that implements the whole cognitive process , i . e . the Sense - Decide - Act ( SDA ) cycle : it is able to perceive what happens in the surrounding world , to respond to it by selecting a proper behavior and to act on the environment . A FSM is activated through sensor nodes and algorithmically produces an output through actuator nodes . Proposed approach In our approach , we deﬁne the personality of characters using the FFM [ 6 ] . A personality is deﬁned assigning values between 0 and 100 to each of the ﬁve dimensions considered by the model . The internal processes of characters follow the SDA cycle , i . e . characters are able to perceive what happens around them , to decide a proper reaction and to perform the related actions in the VE . We achieve behavioral 3 differentiation by having personality inﬂuence each of those three steps . Therefore , characters with different personality traits may perceive the world differently , may select different behaviors and may perform the same action in different ways . Our approach to behavioral autonomy is goal - oriented : every decision taken by a character aims to achieve one or more goals , that are provided by the animator when deﬁning the character . The behavior sequences that can be used to achieve a goal are modeled through probabilistic automata ( Probabilistic Finite - State Machines , PFSMs ) , where probabilities are inﬂuenced by character personality , as we will see in the following . While in the previously described approaches the psychological characterization had a deterministic inﬂuence on characters behavior , in our approach this inﬂuence is probabilistic . The Improv approach [ 13 ] is able to introduce probabilistic behaviors , but it does not use an homogeneous and explicit personality deﬁnition and is not based on PFSMs . Probabilistic personality inﬂuence implies that , as it happens with human beings , one cannot fully predict how a character will react to a stimulus : its personality might lead it to act most of the times in a certain way , but other reactions are possible . As a consequence , the same situation can evolve in different ways . System architecture Our system has been implemented in Java and relies on VRML for visualization purposes . The high - level architecture of the system is shown in Figure 1 : each character in the VRML world is managed by a software agent ; each of them is able to perceive the environment and the other characters through a ﬂow of Low - Level Events ( LLEs ) . LLEs describe sampled changes in position and orientation of each character , of the user and of objects in the VE . Moreover , they detect when a character is touched by the user . Characters can interact with the environment and other characters , resulting in the production of further events , and they perceive the user as they perceive any other character . A centralized module , the agentsController , plays the role of an interface between agents and the VRML World : it sends to the agents the LLEs received from the VE and executes in the VE the animations chosen by the agents . Moreover , it implements a time - sharing mechanism , allowing agents to progress in parallel . The internal organization of an agent into modules is illustrated in Figure 2 . In the following , we describe in detail each module , also discussing how personality inﬂuences characters behavior in each step of the SDA cycle . Figure 2 : Internal architecture of a single agent Sense As far as sensing is concerned , we want each character to perceive the environment according to its position and personality . The Sense Module ( see Figure 2 ) contains a set of ﬁlters ( one for the character ﬁeld of view , one for its ﬁeld of attention and one for the perception of being touched ) that analyze environmental information , by processing LLEs coming from the VRML world , and determine if something new has to be noticed by the character . If this is the case , the Sense Module generates an High - Level Event ( HLE ) , i . e . an abstract description of interesting LLEs from the character point of view . As an example , the FieldOfAttention ﬁlter produces information on what gets the character attention . If the agent notices , by processing the LLEs , that the user’s position has entered the agent ﬁeld of attention , an HLE will indicate that the user has to be noticed by the character . The size of the ﬁeld of attention depends on the character 4 personality ( openness factor ) : a very attentive character will have a wider ﬁeld of attention than an absent - minded one . The set of ﬁlters can be extended and every new ﬁlter can use none , one or more personality factors to perform its task . This way , we achieve personality inﬂuence on the character perception . Decide People act to achieve one or more goals that arise from some external or internal stimuli . In the developed system , characters autonomy is accomplished through a goal - oriented approach : every character has a set of active goals and acts to achieve them . Each goal is activated or deactivated by a sub - module of the Decide Module ( i . e . the EventHandler ) as a reaction to an HLE . For example , one can program an agent in such a way that when the FieldOfAttention ﬁlter communicates that the user has just got the character attention , a corresponding goal ( e . g . ”Interact with the user” ) is activated . A goal can be achieved in different ways , each one corresponding to a sequence of behaviors , where a behavior is an atomically executed action . In our approach , possible behavior sequences that achieve a goal are represented with a PFSM , where each transition ( i . e . each edge in the automata ) corresponds to a behavior . To each transition , we associate : i ) a ( possibly empty ) list of preconditions that must be true to allow selecting the transition ; ii ) a personality weights array ( PWA ) containing the weight that each personality factor has on the probability of choosing the transition . Weights in the array are set to 0 by default ; the animator has to assign a positive value only to those personality factors that have to affect the choice and she can refer to each personality factor both positively ( e . g . extraversion ) and negatively ( e . g . introversion ) . When an agent has to take a decision , it must ﬁrst choose on which goal , among the activated ones , to focus ; then , it has to choose a transition inside the related PFSM ( see Figure 2 ) . Both goal and transition are probabilistically chosen by the DecisionStep sub - module . A goal probability depends on : i ) its priority , which is speciﬁed when the goal is deﬁned ; ii ) its recency of activation , because a new goal should get the agent attention ; iii ) conscientiousness value in the character personality . Indeed , a very conscientious person will concentrate more on the goals she is trying to achieve , while a less conscientious one is more likely to be distracted by new goals . The probability of a transition depends on the associated PWA and on the character personality . For each transition , the probability of choice p is computed as follows : p = (cid:1) N i = 1 W [ i ] ∗ P [ i ] , where W [ i ] is the i th element of the N - dimensional PWA and P [ i ] is the corresponding element in the personality deﬁnition . Figure 3 : A simple PFSM related for the goal ”React to Approaching User” As an example , Figure 3 shows a very simple PFSM that can be related to a goal called ”React to Approaching User” . When this automata is ﬁrst activated , it goes in state 0 and there are two possible behaviors : greeting the user or going away . To choose the greeting behavior , a precondition must be true , i . e . the user must be able to see the character . If the precondition is false , the character can only go away , otherwise the choice of behavior will be probabilistically determined . Extraversion / introversion is the only personality factor to which the animator has assigned a value and thus it is the only one that affects probability in this example . Let us assume that the personality of the character employing the PFSM of Figure 3 has an extraversion value of 80 : this will be used as the normalized value 0 . 8 and the ”greetUser” transition will have a probability of choice equal to 1 × 0 . 8 ( 1 is the extraversion weight in the PWA ) , while the ”goAway” transition will have a probability of choice equal to 1 × 0 . 2 ( introversion is computed as 1 − extraversion in the personality deﬁnition , 1 is the introversion weight in the PWA ) . Probabilities are always normalized before the choice takes place . By applying the 5 PFSM of Figure 3 , an extraverted character is more likely to greet the user . However , there is a 20 % probability that the opposite might happen and this represents the unpredictable nature of human behavior . A character never remains frozen . Every time it completes a transition or every time a new event occurs , it takes a new decision and executes it ; when no events occur and no goals are activated , there is always a goal to be chosen : the Idle goal . The purpose of this goal , which has no related PFSM , is to provide the character with a set of common actions , such as looking around , wandering or scratching its own head , that can be carried out when there is nothing more signiﬁcant to do . The probability of choice of actions that are associated to the Idle goal depends on personality : each action has a PWA and the probability of choosing an action in the set is computed with the same formula described above . The Idle goal thus solves the problem of frozen characters described in the introduction . Act Personality of human beings inﬂuences the way they move and speak ; e . g . an extravert person tends to make broader gestures compared to an introvert one [ 9 ] . In our system , each behavior is physically implemented by an animation ( or a sequence of animations ) stored in the Animation Library ( see Figure 2 ) and we can associate alternative animations to the same behavior . The choice among alternatives is inﬂuenced by personality as follows : i ) ideal personality values can be speciﬁed for each animation ( the speciﬁcation may involve none , one or more personality factors ) ; ii ) the Act Module computes the Euclidean distance from the ideal personality values of animations to the corresponding elements in the character personality ; iii ) the minimum distance animation is chosen and executed in the VRML World . For example , there can be different types of animation for the walking behavior based on the extraversion value , but only the one with the extraversion value nearest to the character value will be chosen . Two of the ﬁve factors inﬂuence additional aspects of how behaviors are carried out : neuroticism inﬂuences speed of animations , while extraversion inﬂuences the distance the character keeps from other characters . Figure 4 : Two executions of the same scenario lead to different , but coherent results . UPPER SEQUENCE : the brown - haired character takes initiative , goes towards the other one and they have a conversation until the fair - haired character walks away . LOWER SEQUENCE : the fair - haired character takes initiative and goes towards the other one , but now interaction is limited to a brief greeting and the brown - haired character walks quickly away 6 Results The probabilistic inﬂuence of personality factors , achieved through PFSMs , is effective in generating realistic behaviors . The generation of different behaviors , that are coherent with the general requirements provided by the animator ( e . g . see the scenario described by Figure 4 ) , makes it possible to use the same scenario several times . Moreover , avoiding repetitiveness increases the characters believability . These two results are very important in cybertherapy . Consider , for example , a scenario for the treatment of social phobia , where the patient is in a square full of characters and has to walk through the square . A single visit to the square cannot be sufﬁcient and it can be necessary to repeat it several times . The therapist may decide to use the same scenario so that the patient get used to it . If the characters in the scenario do not vary their behavior , the scene will lose its believability and this can affect negatively the therapy . Another positive aspect of our system is that the therapist can vary the typical behavior of a character by changing only the values of its personality factors ( e . g . Figure 5 shows the effects of changing values of factors ) . With such a small effort , it is possible to obtain a set of characters that differ not only in what they do , but also in how they perceive events and in how they physically move . This way , characters behave more like real people , improving realism of the VE . Moreover the system is ﬂexible , supporting the deﬁnition of deterministic behavior sequences , personality - inﬂuenced behavior sequences and even pseudo - random ones . Informal evaluation To informally evaluate the implemented system , we created four scenarios ( some of which are suitable for the context of social phobia treatment ) , that contain some characters placed inside a reconstruction of a real city square . The informal evaluation we carried out aimed to test if ( and which ) differences among the characters behaviors are perceived by users . Moreover , we wanted to collect users’ opinions to assess characters believability and realism . Thirteen university students , whose age varied from 20 to 25 years , were involved in the evaluation ; 7 were males and 6 females ; 6 of them had computer expertise and 6 had previous experience in navigating VEs . Following a think - aloud protocol , users were asked to try the described scenarios , explain what was happening , report similarities and differences they noticed among characters , remark what they liked or disliked about them and what they found highly or scarcely realistic . The main results of this informal evaluation can be summarized as follows . First , 90 % of users reported behavioral differences among characters with different personalities , even when the characters had the same goals ( same PFSMs ) . It is interesting to note that users did comment on the differences by trying to give explanations in terms of emotions and / or moods ( that were consistent with the differences in behavior ) . Second , users were more attracted by autonomous characters than by deterministically - programmed ones , that were also present in the scenario . For example , when in front of two characters , one deterministically - programmed and one probabilistically - programmed , all users followed shortly the ﬁrst and then devoted all their attention to the other , whose behavior was not foreseeable . Conclusions and future work We proposed a goal - oriented approach to characters programming based on probabilistic automata . Characters are endowed with a personality that has a probabilistic inﬂuence on behavior selection . As a consequence , behavioral choices are not always predictable , consistently with real people . Moreover , personality inﬂuences also perception and actuation , generating characters that react in different ways to environmental changes and that perform the same type of action in different ways , similarly to what happens with human beings . The major limitation of the proposed system is that characters have currently no long - term memory . They do not remember what goals they have achieved in the past , thus they can try to achieve them again , if a proper event activates them . This is desirable in some cases , e . g . the goal of avoiding a car . However , in some other cases , repetition reduces realism , e . g . if a character greets the user every time they meet but only a few seconds have passed since the last meeting . Therefore , our current priority is to extend the system in such a way that it becomes able to discriminate between the two types of goals . Moreover , we intend to investigate how to help animators in assigning PWAs to transitions in PFSMs to obtain believable behavior sequences . Currently , this is a trial - and - error process , that can be very time - consuming . A further improvement of our system may also include a module responsible for the emotional state of characters , so as to further extend their psychological model . 7 Figure 5 : UPPER SEQUENCE : Interaction with an extravert and agreeable character : to call the character , the user clicks on it ; the character comes promptly to the user ; the character says something to the user . LOWER SEQUENCE : Interaction with a shy and disagreeable character : to call the character , the user clicks on it ; the character ignores the user and walks away ; the user goes near to the character and the latter shyly greets ; the character walks immediately away References [ 1 ] J . Funge , X . Tu , and D . Terzopoulos . Cognitive Modeling : Knowledge , Reasoning and Planning for Intelligent Characters . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages 29 – 38 . ACM Press : New York , August 1999 . [ 2 ] B . K . Wiederhold and M . D . Wiederhold . The Use of Virtual Reality Therapy for The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders and Phobias . Computer Graphics Journal of WSCG , 33 ( 2 ) : 25 – 27 , May 1999 . [ 3 ] S . Bouchard and P . Renaud . Applications of Virtual Reality in Clinical Psychology : Illustrations With the Treatment of Anxiety Dis - orders . In Proceedings of HAVE 2002 - IEEE International Workshop on Haptic Audio Visual Environments and Their Applications , pages 7 – 11 , November 2002 . [ 4 ] M . J . Schuemie . Human Computer Interaction and Presence in Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy . PhD thesis , Delft University of Technology , 2003 . http : / / graphics . tudelft . nl / ˜vrphobia / dissertation . pdf ( last accessed on May 2004 ) . [ 5 ] A . Gaggioli , F . Mantovani , et al . Avatars in Clinical Psychology : A Framework for the Clinical Use of Virtual Humans . CyberPsy - chology & Behavior , 6 ( 2 ) : 117 – 125 , 2003 . [ 6 ] P . J . Howard and J . M . Howard . The Big Five Quickstart : An introduction to the Five - Factor Model of Personality for Human Resource Professionals , 1995 . http : / / www . centacs . com / quickstart . htm ( last accessed on May 2004 ) . [ 7 ] Y . Arafa and A . Mamdani . Scripting Embodied Agents Behavior with CML : Character Markup Language . In International Confer - ence on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 313 – 316 . ACM Press : New York , January 2003 . [ 8 ] N . Badler , J . Allback , L . Zhao , and M . Byun . Representing and Parameterizing Agent Behaviors . In Proceedings of Computer Animation , pages 133 – 143 . ACM Press : New York , January 2002 . [ 9 ] E . Andr´e . State of Art in Emotion and Personality . Presentation at Virtual Humans Workshop , March 2002 . http : / / www . ict . usc . edu / ˜vhumans / presentations / Andre - Emotions . ppt ( last accessed on May 2004 ) . 8 [ 10 ] A . Ortony , G . Clore , and A . Collins . The Cognitive Structure of Emotion . Cambridge University Press : New York , 1998 . [ 11 ] P . B´echeiraz and D . Thalmann . A Behavioral Animation System for Autonomous Actors personiﬁed by Emotions . In Proceedings of First Workshop on Embodied Conversational Characters ( WECC ’98 ) , pages 57 – 65 , 1998 . [ 12 ] A . Egges , S . Kshirsagar , and N . Magnenat - Thalmann . A Model for Personality and Emotion Simulation . In Proceedings of Knowledge - Based Intelligent Information & Engineering Systems ( KES2003 ) , Lecture Notes in AI . Springer - Verlag : Berlin , 2003 . [ 13 ] K . Perlin and A . Goldberg . Improv : A system for scripting interactive actors in virtual worlds . In Proceedings of the 23 rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages 205 – 215 , August 1996 . [ 14 ] A . Pina , E . Cerezo , and F . J . Ser´on . Computer Animation : From Avatars to Unrestricted Autonomous Actors ( A Survey on Replication and Modelling Mechanisms ) . Computer & Graphics , 3 ( 24 ) : 297 – 311 , 2000 . [ 15 ] G . Anastassakis , T . Ritchings , and T . Panayiotopoulos . Virtual Agent Societies with the mVITAL Intelligent Agent System . In R . De Antonio , A . Aylett and D . Ballin , editors , Proceedings of Intelligent Virtual Agents , Lecture Notes in AI , pages 112 – 125 . Springer - Verlag : Berlin , 2001 . [ 16 ] H . Noser and D . Thalmann . Towards Autonomous Synthetic Actors . In Proceedings of French - Japan Workshop on Synthetic Worlds , Aizu ( Japan ) , 1993 . http : / / ligwww . epﬂ . ch / ˜thalmann / papers . dir / autonomous . pdf ( last accessed on May 2004 ) . [ 17 ] F . de Rosis , C . Pelachaud , I . Poggi , V . Caroﬁglio , and B . De Carolis . From Greta’s Mind to her Face : Modelling the Dynamics of Affective States in a Conversational Embodied Agent . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 59 : 81 – 118 , 2003 . [ 18 ] R . A . Brooks . Intelligence Without Representation . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 47 : 139 – 159 , 1991 . 9