Proceedings of the 27th Annual Fellowship Symposium of the Utah NASA Space Grant ConsortiumUNSGC2021 May 10 , 2021 , Logan , UT , USA A PRELIMINARY APPROACH TO SELECT AN ORIGAMI SOURCE PATTERN FOR DEPLOYABLE SPACE ARRAYS Diana S . Bolanos Compliant Mechanism Research Department of Mechanical Engineering Brigham Young University Provo , UT 84602 Email : dbolanos @ byu . edu Spencer P . Magleby Compliant Mechanism Research Department of Mechanical Engineering Brigham Young University Provo , UT 84602 Email : magleby @ byu . edu ABSTRACT This paper presents a systematic approach for selecting an origami pattern for deployable space array applications . A wide variety of origami patterns exist , thereby introducing a daunting task to decide on which pattern is most suitable for the applica - tion at hand . Similarly , different space missions present varying requirements . The focus of this paper is to provide aerospace en - gineers and designers with a framework for identifying optimal origami source models for space array applications . 1 INTRODUCTION Origami has inﬂuenced product development throughout the past several years . The principles of paper folding have provided novel approaches for engineers to create physical and functional products . From solar arrays [ 1 ] to medical devices [ 2 ] , origami - inspired systems have diversiﬁed the design process for designers around the globe . Designing origami - based space arrays can become a daunt - ing and confusing task . It requires a deep understanding of origami behavior and the ability to correlate such behaviors to the application at hand . A challenge posed by origami design is deciding which parameters and values will yield the required results . Whether it be to achieve high packing efﬁciency or re - conﬁgurability , designers are left with the task of deciding which origami parameters will be most suitable for their needs . One critical part of the selection process is ﬁnding the best origami source model . Without a systematic framework , one can easily become overwhelmed with the measure of design variables and parameters . The goal of this paper is to provide engineers and designers a guiding structure for selecting a base origami pattern to later be optimized and adapted for the application at hand . 2 BACKGROUND Deployable space arrays , whether they be used as solar pan - els [ 3 ] , reﬂectarrays [ 4 ] , sunshields [ 5 ] , or telescopes [ 6 ] , are de - signed to achieve a high ratio of deployed area to stowed volume . This is necessary to maintain spatial efﬁciency in the payload area of the spacecraft the array launches in . Maximizing this ra - tio is difﬁcult , as larger deployed sizes pose complications with stowing the array within the spacecraft prior to deployment . One solution to this challenge is the use of origami - based design [ 7 ] . Morgan et al . created a preliminary process for origami - adapted design ( Figure 1 ) . This process provides a strong foun - dation for designers seeking to create an origami - based system . Origami - based systems have been categorized into three separate classiﬁcations : applied , adapted , and inspired [ 8 ] . Systems that have a direct link to origami are classiﬁed as origami - adapted . This classiﬁcation suggests the ability to modify the pattern , accommodate for thickness , and use non - paper - like materials . As a result , most space systems fall under this category . Mor - gan’s aforementioned approach for designing origami - inspired aerospace mechanisms delves broadly at the design process used to go from origami pattern to origami product . However , while 1 Copyright © 2021 DeﬁneProblem OrigamiSolution Modify Fold Pattern Integrate - Deﬁne constraints and requirements - Evaluate starting criteria - General material selection - Find origami source model - Abstract base design - Mathematical model - Actuation - Thickness - Select hinge type - Store strain energy - Rigidly foldable - Integrate parts - Material selection - Prototype Preliminary Process for Origami - Adapted Design FIGURE 1 : A preliminary design process for origami - adapted de - sign proposed by Morgan et . al [ 8 ] . This edition focuses solely on the the steps highlighted in green . this process offers a holistic approach for designing origami - based systems , it must be further decomposed into detailed sub - approaches . As such , the focus of this work will lie within the ”Origami Solution” component - particularly on ”Find origami source model . ” 3 SELECTION PROCESS Morgan’s approach for designing aerospace mechanisms is seen in Fig . 1 . The focus of this paper will delve into ”Find origami source model . ” The goal of this work is to facilitate the selection process for selecting an origami pattern for a deploy - able space array application . This will be presented through a similar , but more in depth , approach as presented by Morgan . Figure 2 presents a design network of events ( activities and outcomes ) that must take place to select an origami source model for a deployable space array . Mattson and Sorensen developed this approach as a tool for teams to customize a network speciﬁc to the project needs . As mentioned in their book , nodes represent design outcomes and arrays represent design activities . Solid ar - rows indicate independent relationships that must be sequentially executed , while dashed arrows represent interdependent relation - ships where the outcome of one activity affects the other . This network provides a guide for engineers and designers to success - fully ﬁnd a suitable origami source model . The following sec - tions provide deeper synthesis for the proposed design network . 3 . 1 Pattern Requirements The ﬁrst step involves deﬁning requirements speciﬁc to the mechanics of the zero - thickness origami pattern . This excludes any requirements that relate to external subsystems such as de - ployment , environment , materials , and more . For example , the array may need to extend a certain distance away from the sen - sor once deployed , however this requirement is not relevant when deciding on the seed origami pattern . As such , it is necessary to deduce the original system requirements into ones that only per - tain to the mechanics of the space zero - thickness crease pattern . It is important to note that these requirements will be speciﬁc to the application . 3 . 2 Pattern Candidates Once requirements have been determined , the next step in the design network involves determining pattern candidates . While several origami creases exist , not all are transferable to space array applications . It is beneﬁcial to explore through litera - ture searches the history of space arrays used in the application at hand . This case - speciﬁc step is critical in gaining an intuition for how to proceed . Although an exactly similar application may not be found through literature searches , an understanding of similar missions or origami applications may be encountered . A brief repository of patterns used in engineering applica - tions can be found in Fig . 3 . This list can be used as a starting point for this step in the design process . 3 . 3 Analysis In parallel to creating a candidate solution set is the prac - tice of developing metrics and guiding equations based on the requirements set in ( 1 ) . These metrics should provide a starting point for analytical models to further be developed . Once a candi - date set of pattern metrics have been established , equations must be created to examine relationships between patterns and their parameters . The goal of this step is to create metrics that can be transfer - able across the candidate patterns in order to ensure a fair com - parison . As such , it is desireable that non - dimensional relation - ships are formed . Nonetheless , it may be the case that modiﬁca - tions must take place in order for the metric to be fairly analyzed for each pattern . While it is favorable to quantify each metric into an analyt - ical equation , some metrics may be subjected to binary ( yes / no ) or intuitive decision making . 3 . 4 Decision The last steps in the design network involves reducing and converging . Reducing comes once a candidate set of patterns and metrics have been evaluated . Using the equations developed from the metrics , each pattern should be analyzed and metric values 2 Copyright © 2021 D Find Origami Source Model A B C E F G H I J 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 ACTIVITIES A Deﬁne space array applica " on requirements B Explore origami pa # erns used in similar applica " ons C Conduct literature search on speciﬁc space array needs D Develop metrics based on requirements E Develop guiding equa " ons for each metric F Create candidate solu " on set of pa # erns G Reduce the candidate solu " on set H Rate the candidates according to needs using decision analysis tools I Combine and improve candidate pa # erns J Select the strongest origami pa # ern OUTCOMES 1 Applica " on - speciﬁc requirements 2 Origami pa # erns used in deployable space arrays 3 Sources of similar nature applica " ons 4 Per " nent background informa " on on pa # erns and applica " ons 5 Metrics dependent on speciﬁc applica " on requirements 6 Guiding equa " ons for each metric 7 Appropriate candidate solu " on set of pa # erns 8 Reduced candidate solu " on set of pa # erns 9 Ra " ngs for each candidate pa # ern 10 Op " mal candidate pa # ern 11 Selected origami source model REQUIREMENTS PATTERN CANDIDATES ANALYSIS DECISION FIGURE 2 : Design network created to facilitate the process of selecting an origami source model . Activities are denoted through solid arrows , and outcomes are denoted through circular end points . Process inspired by Mattson and Sorensen [ 9 ] . should be recorded in a systematic manner . This serves as a pre - liminary reduction method to simplify the ﬁnal selection process . This process involves utilizing a decision analysis tool to rate and score the pattern candidates , while also aiming to improve the candidates or equations to ensure a fair consideration between patterns is conducted . It is important to note that if a clear de - cision can be made through ratings , activity I can be omitted . Outcomes 9 and 10 are interdependent because they rely on each other to ensure the ﬁnal , and most promising , set of patterns are being contested based on decision analysis tools and pattern re - ﬁnement . Lastly , the last step is to select the strongest origami pattern based on the previous analysis . 4 EXAMPLE CASE The example case provided will demonstrate the process de - scribed through Fig . 2 and the aforementioned steps . The appli - cation will involve the one - time deployment of a LiDAR deploy - able telescope to be sent as a secondary payload . 4 . 1 Pattern Requirements A set of subsystem pattern requirements have been selected to help identify the most optimal pattern for a LiDAR telescope application . These requirements may have an effect on other parts of the design process , but they are also pertinent to this step because of their effect on pattern capabilities . 1 . The pattern must approximate circularity 2 . The pattern must deploy to a 1 meter diameter from a 0 . 5m x 0 . 5m x 0 . 3m volume 3 . The panels contained in the pattern must approximate circu - larity 4 . The pattern must utilize a minimum number of unique pan - els 3 Copyright © 2021 TACHI - MIURA FLASHER MAP FOLD WATERBOMB HEXAGON SERPENTINE DIAMOND MIURA - ORI SQUARE TWIST FIGURE 3 : A repository of common origami patterns used in engineering applications . 4 . 2 Pattern Candidates After conducting a brief literature search and exploring dif - ferent deployable telescope applications in space , a set of can - didate patterns have been established . These patterns include : Flasher , Hexagon , and Square Twist . The Flasher has been ex - amined in work performed by [ 1 ] to be used as a solar panel conﬁgured in space . A deployable regular hexagon has been ana - lyzed as a potential pattern used in deployable origami reﬂectar - rays [ 10 ] . Lastly , the Square Twist pattern has shown potential in providing reconﬁgurable states of origami antennas , as seen by Wang et . al [ 11 ] . 4 . 3 Analysis Using the established requirements , a set of deﬁning metrics and equations have been created and are described in the follow - ing sections . It is important to note that at this stage , these met - rics should be crease - pattern speciﬁc . Meaning , thickness should not be considered . This step should be iteratated on in the fu - ture to examine if still applicable once further design decisions such as seed pattern modiﬁcations and thickness acommodation techniques are implemented . 4 . 3 . 1 Circularity Circularity is a metric that will aim to compare the candidate patterns selected based on Requirement 1 . The equation used to analyze this metric can be described by : η = Area pattern Area circumcircle ( 1 ) This equation guides the analysis towards a nondimensional and simple approach for comparing the area of the pattern to the circumcircle area created by the outermost vertices of each pat - tern . 4 . 3 . 2 Deployment Factor The deployment factor fa - cilitates the measure of Requirement 2 . Equation 2 compares the areal deployment factor between the pattern’s deployed and stowed states . This metric focuses solely on the side of the pat - tern that faces parallel to the sensor once deployed , and ﬁts par - allel to the compartment opening while stowed . This allows for thickness requirements to be neglected at this stage in the pro - cess . A comparison of both states can be seen in Fig . 4 . γ = Area deployed Area stowed ( 2 ) 4 . 3 . 3 Panel Circularity LiDAR telescopes exhibit greater optical efﬁciencies using circular apertures . As a re - 4 Copyright © 2021 ( a ) ( b ) FIGURE 4 : ( a ) Stowed hexagon pattern within its allocated com - partment ( b ) Deployed hexagon pattern deployed at a distance from the compartment . Note the light yellow portion of each hexagon structure indicates an arbitrary thickness . sult , one important requirement for this case study is the use of circular - aperture panels . It is desireable to choose a pattern that optimizes individual panel circularity . For this application , this requirement also helps with manufacturing processes of the ma - terial that will be used for each aperture . To quantify this metric , Equation 3 established a nondimensional relationships between panel area and its circumcircle area , similar to Equation 1 . σ = Area panel Area circumcircle ( 3 ) 4 . 3 . 4 Number of Unique Panels The last metric used to compare patterns is the number of unique panels . For this application , it is desirable that panel uniqueness is minimized as to ensure ease of manufacturing . This directly affects the pattern selection process because some patterns exhibit a variety of dif - ferent panel geometries , sizes , and dimensions . No equation ex - ists for this metric as it is simply a count of distinct panels within a pattern . 4 . 4 Decision The last step in the design network is to decide on the source origami pattern . This step may involve several iterations depen - dant on ongoing changes in requirements . Nonetheless , this ex - ample case study uses the metrics and equations developed in the Analysis step to rank the three patterns . Once values were obtained for each pattern , scores between one and three were as - signed for each pattern’s ability to meet the requirement , with one being the lowest score and three being the highest score . In addition , each metric was subjected to a weight value indicating its importance . This simpliﬁed Pugh Decision Matrix is recorded in Table 1 . The pattern with the highest score was the Flasher . A zero - thickness crease model can be seen in Fig . 5 . Although it ranked lowest in two of the four metrics , the Flasher’s high level of cir - cularity and deployment factor caused it to outweigh its competi - tors . At this point in the process , the designer should analyze the results and observe the conﬁdence of the results . If at this point the results are not convincing , it may be necessary to go through the design network steps again and make modiﬁcations . For ex - ample , perhaps there are other subsystem requirements that have been overlooked and may now need to be placed in this analysis . Or , weight values may need to be adjusted depending on how important each metric truly is . 5 CONCLUSION Selecting an origami source model necessitates structure and intuitive understanding . By following the design network pro - TABLE 1 : Pugh Decision Matrix used to compare the results of each pattern’s competency against a set of design metrics . Three represents the highest score . One represents the lowest score . W e i gh t F l a s h er H e xago n Squ a re T w i s t Circularity 2 3 2 1 Deployment Factor 3 2 1 1 Panel Circularity 1 1 3 2 Number of Unique Panels 1 1 2 2 Total Score 14 12 9 5 Copyright © 2021 posed in this paper , it is expected that readers not only understand the design process , but also gain an understanding of origami ap - plications in space arrays . As observed in a variety of design process literature , require - ments are critical in setting a baseline approach for how to select a concept . This task is no different . However , this stage requires the system requirements to be decoupled into smaller subsys - tem requirements that pertain only to the origami crease pattern . Factors such as deployment methods , environment , and materi - als must not be considered yet . If possible , these requirements should not attribute thickness in the system either . Pattern candidates can be observed through literature searches , research exploration , or at a minimum by utilizing the repository provided in Figure 3 . Next , analysis can be divided into two categories : metrics and equations . Requirements lead to metrics , and metrics must be represented by equations . As noted , it may be difﬁcult to create general equations that can be used for every pattern . It is therefore suggested that careful considera - tion be taken in this step to ensure fair comparisons . If necessary , equations can be altered to ﬁt the context of the pattern . Lastly , the decision making process should be a result of the analysis performed in the previous step . This step should uti - lize as much unbiased , quantitative analysis as possible . The tool presented in this work to accomplish this task is the Pugh De - cision Matrix . As noted , this step should be iterative . Once the matrix provides a winning concept , intuitive analysis should then be used to judge the candidacy of the result . The design tools presented in this paper , including Morgan’s design process , a design network , and a Pugh Decision Matrix facilitate a systematic approach for selecting an origami source model . As a result of this work , engineers and designers may customize these tools to suit their design needs and application requirements . Further work involves testing this framework on a variety of different space array applications . 6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This paper is based on work supported by the Utah NASA Space Grant Consortium and the NASA Goddard Space Center . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Zirbel , S . A . , Trease , B . P . , Magleby , S . P . , and Howell , L . L . , 2014 . “Deployment methods for an origami - inspired rigid - foldable array” . [ 2 ] Johnson , M . , Chen , Y . , Hovet , S . , Xu , S . , Wood , B . , Ren , H . , Tokuda , J . , and Tse , Z . T . H . , 2017 . “Fabricating biomedi - cal origami : A state - of - the - art review” . International jour - nal of computer assisted radiology and surgery , 12 ( 11 ) , pp . 2023 – 2032 . [ 3 ] Zirbel , S . A . , Trease , B . P . , Thomson , M . W . , Lang , R . J . , Magleby , S . P . , and Howell , L . H . , 2015 . “Hanaﬂex : a large FIGURE 5 : Paper model prototype of a Flasher crease pattern showed in its deployed ( a ) and stowed ( b ) states . . solar array for space applications” . In Micro - and Nanotech - nology Sensors , Systems , and Applications VII , Vol . 9467 , International Society for Optics and Photonics , p . 94671C . [ 4 ] Kaddour , A . - S . , Zekios , C . L . , and Georgakapoulos , S . V . , 2020 . “A reconﬁgurable origami reﬂectarray” . In 2020 14th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation ( EuCAP ) , IEEE , pp . 1 – 4 . [ 5 ] Wilson , L . , Pellegrino , S . , and Danner , R . , 2013 . “Origami sunshield concepts for space telescopes” . In 54th AIAA / ASME / ASCE / AHS / ASC Structures , Structural Dy - namics , and Materials Conference , p . 1594 . [ 6 ] Lang , R . J . , 2008 . “From ﬂapping birds to space telescopes : 6 Copyright © 2021 the modern science of origami . ” . In NPAR , p . 7 . [ 7 ] Natori , M . , Katsumata , N . , Yamakawa , H . , Sakamoto , H . , and Kishimoto , N . , 2013 . “Conceptual model study us - ing origami for membrane space structures” . In Inter - national Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol . 55942 , American Society of Mechanical Engineers , p . V06BT07A047 . [ 8 ] Morgan , J . , Magleby , S . P . , and Howell , L . L . , 2016 . “An approach to designing origami - adapted aerospace mecha - nisms” . Journal of Mechanical Design , 138 ( 5 ) . [ 9 ] Mattson , C . A . , and Sorensen , C . D . , 2020 . “Product de - velopment tools and techniques” . In Product Development . Springer , pp . 167 – 307 . [ 10 ] Rubio , A . J . , Kaddour , A . - S . , Georgakopoulos , S . V . , Yn - chausti , C . , Magleby , S . , and Howell , L . L . , 2021 . “A de - ployable hexagonal reﬂectarray antenna for space applica - tions” . In 2021 United States National Committee of URSI National Radio Science Meeting ( USNC - URSI NRSM ) , IEEE , pp . 136 – 137 . [ 11 ] Wang , L . - C . , Song , W . - L . , Zhang , Y . - J . , Qu , M . - J . , Zhao , Z . , Chen , M . , Yang , Y . , Chen , H . , and Fang , D . , 2020 . “Active reconﬁgurable tristable square - twist origami” . Ad - vanced Functional Materials , 30 ( 13 ) , p . 1909087 . 7 Copyright © 2021