Co - 3Deator : A Team - First Collaborative 3D Design Ideation Tool Cecil Piya 1 , Vinayak 1 , Senthil Chandrasegaran 3 , Niklas Elmqvist 3 , Karthik Ramani 1 , 2 1 School of Mechanical Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA 2 School of Electrical & Computer Engineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA 3 College of Information Studies , University of Maryland , College Park , MD , USA (cid:8) cpiya , fvinayak , ramani (cid:9) @ purdue . edu (cid:8) senthilc , elm (cid:9) @ umd . edu User 1 User 2 User 3 a . Multi - user design iteration c . Concept Space b . Concept Component Hierarchy d . Collaborative Design Explorer e . Design alternatives collectively generated by the team Figure 1 . General overview of the creative workﬂow and design representation in Co - 3Deator : ( a ) 3D design content created by 3 users in a design team , ( b ) An example of how the design concept can be hierarchically represented as multi - level design data , ( c ) The design concept space comprising of individual concepts and their constituent parts , ( d ) Organizing the design concept space as a collaborative design explorer for navigating the space and sharing design data , ( e ) Design alternatives generated by collaboratively combining , redeﬁning , and reinterpreting designs from the explorer . ABSTRACT We present C O - 3D EATOR , a sketch - based collaborative 3D modeling system based on the notion of “team - ﬁrst” ideation tools , where the needs and processes of the entire design team come before that of an individual designer . Co - 3Deator in - cludes two speciﬁc team - ﬁrst features : a concept component hierarchy which provides a design representation suitable for multi - level sharing and reusing of design information , and a collaborative design explorer for storing , viewing , and ac - cessing hierarchical design data during collaborative design activities . We conduct two controlled user studies , one with individual designers to elicit the form and functionality of the collaborative design explorer , and the other with design teams to evaluate the utility of the concept component hierarchy and design explorer towards collaborative design ideation . Our results support our rationale for both of the proposed team - ﬁrst collaboration mechanisms and suggest further ways to streamline collaborative design . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 Information Interfaces and Presentation : Group & Orga - nization Interfaces— Computer - supported Cooperative Work Author Keywords Collaborative design ; creative ideation ; early - stage design ; 3D modeling INTRODUCTION Collaboration is now widely accepted to be a vital part of early - stage design ideation , and many tools such as TeamStorm [ 11 ] , 1 skWiki [ 36 ] , and GroupMind [ 26 ] have been proposed to scaf - fold this activity . The core tenet of collaborative ideation is—the more design alternatives one generates , the more high - quality / novel designs one ends up with [ 20 ] . However , to our knowledge , in all currently available collaborative design tools , sharing a design—such as a sketch , prototype , or 3D model—to brainstorm a wide variety of design alternatives with your team is an explicit and often heavy - weight opera - tion . The reason for this is that all current design tools are ﬁrst and foremost just that : design tools , where the focus is on content creation for individual designers rather than collabo - rative creation across the entire team . In other words , we can characterize all current tools as “designer ﬁrst” ideation tools . In this paper , we propose the notion of “team ﬁrst” ideation tools , and further introduce a speciﬁc team - ﬁrst ideation tool called C O - 3D EATOR for creating , sharing , and assembling 3D objects via pen - and - touch sketch - based 3D modeling . Similar to the “mobile ﬁrst” paradigm of responsive web design [ 33 ] , the goal of team - ﬁrst ideation tool design is to let the team’s design process—rather than that of the individual—guide the analysis and design of the tool . As a case in point , our Co - 3Deator is designed from the ground up based on the notions of a Concept Component Hierarchy and Collaborative Design Explorer . The concept component hierarchy serves as the data representation for any content creation—such as the sketch - based 3D modeling support in Co - 3Deator—and automatically detects , segments , and organizes each part of a design artifact as the user is creating it . These parts are automatically shared with all collaborators through the design explorer , such that each member of the team can browse , adopt , and assemble them with other parts into new designs . Thus , the concept component hierarchy and design explorer in Co - 3Deator make the adopting and remixing of parts a natural operation leading to an effortless creation of several different design alternatives by any team member . We motivate our novel team - ﬁrst design philosophy for ideation tools based on industry’s exploding need for fostering effective yet inexpensive creative processes during product innovation and development [ 9 ] . Scaffolding such creativity requires robust design teams where different designers con - tribute unique perspectives , re - interpret each others ideas , and collectively uncover a larger design solution space [ 30 ] . En - abling collaboration is thus a core principle for digital creativ - ity support tools [ 27 ] , and our team - ﬁrst philosophy takes this idea to its logical conclusion . Our inspiration for the speciﬁc techniques in this paper stem from the fact that early - stage design is generally characterized by iterative sequences of both convergence and divergence [ 36 ] , where new designs are created and then discarded or reﬁned , respectively . Thus , the rationale for the team - ﬁrst collaboration mechanisms in Co - Submitted to ACM CHI 2017 . Do not redistribute . 3Deator is that these iterations can be signiﬁcantly accelerated if the component parts of a design created by one designer can be automatically identiﬁed , segmented , and shared to other team members , during the collective creative process . To showcase the team - ﬁrst design approach , we conducted a user study with four teams of experienced designers . Results from the studies were very promising and clearly highlighted the beneﬁts of the concept component hierarchy and collabo - rative design explorer in team - based design processes . BACKGROUND “All design is redesign” is a common axiom among design - ers and design researchers [ 8 ] , referring to the analogous and iterative aspects of design . There is a parallel between this view of design and the notion of creativity as a novel combi - nation of existing ideas . Boden [ 2 ] identiﬁes three approaches to creativity , namely ( a ) combination : creating new ideas by combining existing ones , ( b ) exploration : systematic search within a deﬁned conceptual space , and ( c ) transformation : it - eratively modifying parts of a deﬁned solution . Our work is based on Boden’s interpretation of creativity , and motivated by three assumptions about design ideation : ( a ) creativity is often a novel combination or reinterpretation of existing ideas or artifacts , ( b ) such novel combinations and reinterpretations are better performed by teams , and ( c ) there is a need for 3D design tools and processes—that support quick realization and exchange of ideas—which can be leveraged to support novel combinations and reinterpretations . In this section , we explore existing research that support our assumptions and motivate our work . Creative Ideation in Conceptual Product Design Traditional creativity tests such as Guilford’s Alternative Uses Test , based on his Structure of Intellect [ 10 ] , and the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking [ 31 ] focus on the idea of creativity as “ﬂexible thinking” . Flexible or divergent thinking refers to the act of creating new ideas by reusing or reinterpreting existing ideas and artifacts , an example of Boden’s approach of combi - nation [ 2 ] . Brainstorming is perhaps one of the most widely used creative ideation processes , and it promotes creativity by focusing on the divergent aspect of ideation , with the prompt “generate as many ideas as you can” , while deferring judgment on the generated ideas [ 18 ] . Studies have shown that there is a positive correlation between the number of ideas generated and the greater incidence of creative ideas [ 20 ] . Research has also shown that in a design process , ideas that have a stronger connection to other ideas generated earlier , tend to be more creative [ 32 ] . That is to say , creative ideas are formed when the designer ﬁrst generates a large number of ideas , and then iterates over these ideas to change , modify , and reﬁne them . Widely used techniques to aid generation of more ideas and promote divergent thinking include SCAMPER [ 15 ] , Method 6 - 3 - 5 [ 21 ] , C - Sketch [ 24 ] , and the Gallery method [ 19 ] . All of the above methods use the notion of modifying , reinterpreting , and combining existing ideas to form new ones , which can be seen as examples of Boden’s combination and exploration approaches . A systematic technique to explore a large num - ber of solutions to address complex problems was introduced 2 by Fritz Zwicky [ 37 ] . His solution , now commonly used in product design as the Morphological Matrix involves identify - ing the main functions that need to be performed to address a design problem , generating a number of possible solutions for each function , and coming up with meaningful combi - nations of such solutions [ 17 ] . In essence , a Morphological Matrix provides a means for navigating through a ﬁnite space of design concepts at varying levels of functional or structural details . In Co - 3Deator , we explore how to visually represent such a design space in a 3D design ideation tool , such that a design team can efﬁciently explore new ideas by combining and reinterpreting existing designs . Collaborative Design Tools Today , most practical design work involves collaboration be - tween people with diverse , often complementary expertise [ 3 ] . In fact , with the exception of SCAMPER , all the divergent thinking techniques listed above require the involvement of a team . A study performed using the 6 - 3 - 5 method has shown that the group’s involvement increases the originality of the ﬁnal ideas even when the initial , individually generated ideas are not very original [ 1 ] . Digital tools for collaboration were traditionally designed to support the later stages of design . Recently , there has been considerable interest in computational support for collabora - tive ideation . These include tools for collocated collabora - tion , such as the i - LAND environment [ 29 ] , the immersive Hybrid Ideation Space [ 6 ] and an integration of paper and digital media in the form of IdeaVis [ 7 ] . Other tools such as TEAMSTORM [ 11 ] and GAMBIT [ 22 ] support sketch - based collaborative ideation on mobile devices . skWiki [ 36 ] , a more recent framework supporting sketch - based collaborative ideation , is designed with the creative process of modiﬁcation , reuse , and reinterpretation in mind . It thus supports branching , the creation of alternatives from a source sketch , and merging , the combination of existing sketches to form a new idea . Design Representations for Collaborative Work While our approach draws inspiration form the creative pro - cess presented in skWiki , we emphasize use of 3D models to represent design ideas . This is because , in addition to en - abling greater visual clarity of design ideas , 3D models can be inherently represented as a hierarchical structure that allows for systematic deconstruction of a design concept into sub - assemblies , parts , and shapes . Such modularity of 3D designs naturally lends itself to collaborative morphological opera - tions , where design components can be shared , combined , and reused at varying levels of details . We ﬁnd that sketch , text , and 2D image based representations are not as amenable to such operations , as they require explicit segmentation for ex - tracting hierarchical components . Thus , in Co - 3Deator we seek to support team - ﬁrst based collaborative design modeling by leveraging the inherent structural and functional hierarchy of 3D design data . Sketch - based 3D Design Modeling Given its focus on early - stage design ideation , the ability to quickly externalize ideas is an essential aspect of Co - 3Deator . We ﬁnd that most conventional modeling tools utilize a highly detail - oriented parametric workﬂow that can prevent capturing of ﬂeeting ideas and stiﬂe creativity during early - stage de - sign [ 28 ] . Thus , we seek a low - ﬁdelity 3D modeling workﬂow that allows users to quickly express ideas in 3D form , with min - imal effort and without the need for details ( e . g . dimensions or spatial constraints ) . Recent advances in sketch - based 3D modeling techniques uti - lize our natural ability to sketch with a pen for generating 3D designs [ 16 ] . Such techniques allow users to construct 3D shapes by simply sketching their 2D outlines , while the back - end system infers the intended 3D geometry [ 12 , 23 ] . Given their ease of use and efﬁciency , sketch - based 3D modeling tools are highly amenable towards creative design ideation pro - cesses . In Co - 3Deator , we present a 3D modeling tool—driven by a similar sketch - based approach—which not only supports design creation but also light - weight storage and transfer of design data . Further , this tool allows for seamless integra - tion of our team - ﬁrst features within the modeling workspace , and helps maintain consistency of interactions during both modeling and collaborative operations . Combinatorial 3D Design In computer graphics , several works have explored the notion of decomposing 3D designs into useful parts , and recombining them to create new designs . Such works mainly focus on au - tomating the 3D design synthesis process [ 13 , 35 ] or enabling creativity by exploring a pre - deﬁned and immutable design space [ 4 , 34 , 25 ] . In Co - 3Deator , we focus on a team - centric approach , where real time collaborations between team mem - bers foster both creation and exploration of a design concept space . Here , in addition to combinatorial creativity , we also emphasize construction of new design content , along with re - deﬁnition and re - interpretation of existing ideas . OVERVIEW : CONCEPT COMPONENT HIERARCHY The concept component hierarchy is a core aspect of our team - ﬁrst approach , and serves as a data representation for hierar - chically creating , organizing , storing , and accessing design concepts . Co - 3Deator enforces this hierarchy at all stages of the design workﬂow . Here , designs are inherently constructed in a hierarchical manner ( Figure 1 ( b ) ) , where 2D sketches form individual 3D shapes , shapes are grouped into functional parts , and parts collectively deﬁne a design concept . By as - sociating shapes to parts , this hierarchy not only captures the geometric structure , but also functional and semantic concepts of a design . Further , it also provides the primary basis for collaborative design via sharing and reuse of design data at varying levels of detail . As shown in Figure 1 ( c ) , a design concept space comprises multiple concept component hierarchies generated by a de - sign team . In Co - 3Deator , we utilize the collaborative design explorer ( Figure 1 ( d ) ) as a medium to visually represent , interactively navigate , and further explore this space . CO - 3DEATOR The Co - 3Deator interface enables both 3D content creation and collaborative work . For ﬂexibility and intuitiveness , it is best used on a digital tablet supporting pen - and - touch inputs , 3 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( h ) ( g ) ( f ) ( e ) ( i ) ( j ) ( k ) ( l ) Figure 2 . General 3D design workﬂow in Co - 3deator with a bicycle design example : ( a - b ) Using a tapered blobby shape to deﬁne the bike frame ( ﬁrst shape ) , ( c - d ) Adding a hole and modifying the shape ( with overdrawing ) on the bike frame , ( e ) Setting a plane at the tip of the frame and deﬁning the handlebar with a rounded blobby shape , ( f ) Setting sketch plane - manipulation widget allows users to adjust plane position , ( g - h ) Deﬁning a handlebar grip using tubular shapes , ( i ) Mirroring the handlebar grip about the frame , ( j ) Completing the design by adding seat and wheels - the read wheel shapes are copied , ( k ) The shapes are colored / textured and tagged to an appropriate part - each part can be selected and manipulated as a single entity , ( l ) Design Explorer viewed in 3D workspace . but is also compatible within ordinary PCs . It comprises of two components—a 3D Design Workspace , and a Collaborative Design Explorer —both catering to the team - ﬁrst approach . 3D Design Workspace The 3D design workspace enables both construction of new designs and collaborative design work . By allowing users to model a full design within this workspace , it prevents shift - ing of focus across different views , and also allows creation of shapes in context of a progressing design [ 14 ] . Figure 2 illustrates the general design workﬂow with different creative activities that can be performed in the 3D workspace . New Shape Creation Users can create 3D shapes by drawing their 2D outlines on a sketch plane . This plane can be deﬁned at a central workspace location ( Figure 2 ( a ) ) or over an existing design model ( Figure 2 ( e - g ) ) , and freely manipulated with a 3D widget . We utilize tubular ( or sweeps in CAD ) , and blobby shapes ( in - ﬂated meshes ) —demonstrated in several sketch - based design tools [ 12 , 23 ] —as the basis for constructing 3D designs . Such shapes have been shown to allow sufﬁcient complexity and diversity within designs , and can be constructed using simple 2D sketch inputs . Blobby Shapes are created by drawing a closed “proﬁle curve” on the sketch plane , and inﬂating its interior region outwards from the plane . Users can choose from four different inﬂation functions—rounded , ﬂat , tapered , and linear ( Figure 3 ) . Tubular Shapes are deﬁned using two “rail curves” , between which a sweep geometry with a circular cross section is ﬁtted . We can use freeform or polyline sketch inputs , to draw the Blobby Shapes Rounded Tapered Flat Linear Tubular Shapes Shape Thickness Drag Inflation Handle Figure 3 . ( top ) Generating four types of blobby shapes from a proﬁle curve ( bottom left ) ; Generating a tubular shape from two rail curves ; ( bottom right ) Increasing thickness of a blobby shape using the manipu - lation widget . proﬁle and rail curves . The raw sketch data is automatically smoothened using a single exponential function and uniformly resampled to avoid geometric artifacts . Editing and Modifying Shapes The edit mode ( Figure 2 ( c ) ) is invoked by selecting a shape with a double tap gesture . Here , the workspace switches to a purely 2D sketch mode with the shape’s underlying curves displayed in a front facing view . In this view , the curves are magniﬁed to enable operations requiring ﬁner control and precision . Users can perform two types of edit operations . Overdrawing : As shown in Figure 4 , sketching directly over a region on a curve allows us to make changes to a shape and also add details . For tubular shapes , overdrawing can also be used to extend or truncate the rail curves . Holes : Drawing closed curves within the proﬁle of a blobby shape indicates a hole through its 3D geometry . 4 Figure 4 . Overdrawing to modify proﬁle and rail curves : ( top row ) over - drawn curves are shown in red , ( bottom row ) result of integrating over - drawn curves with proﬁle and rail curves . Shape Selection & Manipulation When a shape is selected with a single tap gesture , a 3D manipulation widget gets anchored to it ( Figure 2 ( j ) ) . By dragging an axis or arc in the widget , users can translate or rotate the shape and explore different conﬁgurations . For blobby shapes , the widget also consists of a spherical handle at the tip of its normal axis ( Figure 3 ( bottom - right ) ) . Dragging this handle changes the shape’s inﬂation magnitude . Additional Operations We provide Delete , Copy and Mirror operations for removal , replication , and regular or symmetric arrangement of iden - tical shapes . Here , shapes can be copied to a user selected location or mirrored across the sketch plane of another shape . Additionally , the Undo - Redo commands allow users to retrace modeling operations upto the last 100 steps . Color and Texture Application Color and textures allow users to enhance the appearance of designs and also uniquely characterize shapes with speciﬁc material properties . Here , we use the default Windows color dialog box , and provide a texture library of commonly used materials ( e . g . metals , wood , plastics , leather , rubber etc . ) Tag Shapes to Speciﬁc Parts Before any design activity , our system requires the broad level functional parts of the design context to be identiﬁed and labeled with distinct names . This ensures the modular structure of the resulting design for use during collaborative work . Each shape within a design is thus tagged to a speciﬁc part after its creation . A given part can have multiple shapes , and are also amenable to the aforementioned operations ( e . g . copy , mirror , manipulate etc . ) within the workspace . Collaborative Design Explorer The design explorer is the central medium supporting all team - ﬁrst design activities . It visually represents the design con - cept space developed by the design team , and enables storing , browsing , sharing and accessing of design ideas . Elicitation of the Design Explorer Before implementing the design explorer , we ﬁrst sought to understand how designers perceive a design concept space with multiple concept component hierarchies , and how they’d like to represent it within a 3D ideation tool . For this , we con - ducted an elicitation study with 9 engineering and 3 industrial design graduate students with expertise in product design and 3D modeling . Our goal was to use the insights from this study to infer guidelines for the design explorer . Figure 5 . Two examples of sketches created by elicitation study partici - pants to express the design explorer’s appearance and functionality . Each study session was carried out with a single participant , and involved an interview style discussion . The participants were ﬁrst presented with the following scenario . Assume there is a 3D design ideation tool that allows users to construct design concepts in a hierarchical manner , i . e . parts and shapes of designs are naturally segmentable from the design . This tool is used by a design team to collectively generate multiple design concepts . These concepts along with their components form an abstract space called the design concept space . Based on this scenario , the ensuing interview questions fo - cused on three underlying topics . • How would the participants like to have the design concept space represented within the 3D design workspace ? • What kinds of interactive mechanisms would they like to see for navigating the design concept space to view , share , and access design information ? • What kinds of capabilities would they like their concept space representation to provide for supporting collaborative design ideation ? In addition to verbally expressing their ideas , participants were also encouraged to sketch how they thought the design explorer should look and function like . We provided them with a screenshot image of a minimal 3D workspace of Co - 3Deator , over which they could draw and comment . Figure 5 shows two examples of how participants sketched their ideas . From the information provided by the designers , we abstracted the following attributes that the design explorer should have to support efﬁcient navigation of the design concept space and ﬂuid sharing of design ideas across team members . G1 Concurrent visibility of explorer in 3D workspace . Be - ing able to observe and reﬂect on others’ ideas during a design activity not only inspires creativity but also helps identify new possibilities in one’s own design . G2 Hierarchical navigation of the concept space . This al - lows users to quickly browse through multiple design con - cepts in their entirety , and only take a detailed look at inter - esting or relevant designs . G3 Chronological arrangement of design ideas . The newest designs in the concept space typically represent the most recently developed ideas or those that have been polished through iterations . Displaying them ﬁrst provides a quick overview of the current state of the concept space and also prevents dwelling over defunct designs . G4 Classify designs by team members . To ensure that each member gets credit for his contributions and to track the 5 Hierarchical Browsing Filtered Browsing Exploded View Full Design Concepts Selected Parts Figure 6 . Dual Modes for Concept Space Navigation : ( left ) Hierarchical view with full design concepts and exploded view of selected concept , ( right ) Filtered view with a speciﬁc part ( handlebar ) displayed history of a design’s evolution , each concept should be identiﬁable to its author . G5 Filter design space by speciﬁc component . This allows users to ﬁlter the content of the explorer , relevant to a spe - ciﬁc design component or a modeling activity , and also efﬁciently search for ideas within that context . Design Explorer Features Based on the guidelines we implemented the design explorer as shown in Figure 6 . We place labels for each guideline ( e . g . G1 , G2 ) in the text to help readers understand how and where they are addressed . The design explorer comprises of the following features . List View of Design Concepts : The design explorer is es - sentially a single column menu with thumbnails of design concepts as menu items . It displays the most recent designs from a particular team member , and can be vertically scrolled to view his / her previous concepts ( G3 ) . It can also be lat - erally scrolled to view designs across other team members . We use this organization as it enables grouping of designs by their creator ( G4 ) , and allows team members to track where a shared design came from . Further , a single column view helps avoid clutter in the 3D workspace , while allowing designers to navigate the concept space during a modeling activity ( G1 ) . Dual Mode for Concept Space Navigation : We provide two modes for browsing through concepts in the design explorer . • Hierarchical Browsing : Here , the explorer by default shows thumbnails of the full design concepts . When a given con - cept thumbnail is selected , a secondary menu pops up with thumbnails showing a close up view of the concept’s indi - vidual parts , separate from the design ( G2 ) . • Filtered Browsing : This mode can be used when a design model is active within the 3D workspace . By selecting a speciﬁc part or shape on the model , users can ﬁlter the explorer such that only the corresponding parts from the concept space are displayed . Here , the selection in the modeling space serves as a query input for ﬁltering the explorer content ( G5 ) . Session 1 Session 2 Part 2 Temp Shape 1 User 1 Assembly 1 Iteration 1 Iteration 2 User 2 Assembly 2 Part 1 Shape 2 Figure 7 . Structure of cloud - based shared folder for storing 3D designs in design explorer . Sharing and Importing Designs During a design activity , users can choose to share their de - signs and ideas only when they feel ready . This helps avoid evaluation apprehension [ 5 ] , and provides team members with freedom for independent thinking . Each design created by users is initially stored locally within their individual tablets . The upload option can be invoked at any point to make their design ( s ) accessible in the explorer . Users can import designs uploaded to the explorer directly into their workspace . Here also , the hierarchical and ﬁltered browsing modes can be leveraged to import either the entire concept or just a speciﬁc component . Design data can be imported from the explorer in two ways . Insert : This operation makes a copy of a full design model or a single part and places it in the workspace at a location speciﬁed by the user . Replace : A given part in the workspace can be substituted with a corresponding part from another design in the explorer . This operation ﬁrst deletes the original part from the workspace , generates a copy of the new part , and places it at the same location in the design . Here , the system ﬁnds an optimal orientation and scale for the new part by matching its minimum bounding box with that of the previous part . Similarly , a full design model can also be replaced with another concept model . System Implementation Setup and Hardware : Co - 3deator was implemented using OpenGL and written in C + + . To run this application , we used Microsoft Surface Pro 3 tablets ( Windows 8 , Intel Core i5 , 4 GB RAM ) , which came equipped with a digital pen . Design Data Format : Each design model is stored in a folder with a distinct ID . Just as with the design , this folder is also hierarchically divided into subfolders , each containing shapes from a speciﬁc part ( Figure 7 ) . A temporary folder is used for retaining untagged shapes . To store a 3D shape , we de - ﬁned a light - weight ﬁle format containing 3D vertices of the underlying curves and other appearance data ( e . g . texture ﬁle location , scale , inﬂation magnitude etc . ) . Whenever a design is imported or loaded into the workspace , the ﬁle data is read by the system and corresponding shapes regenerated . Design Data Storage : In our setup , the unshared designs for each team member are stored locally in their tablets . The shared designs however are kept in a cloud based ( Dropbox ) repository , which is shared across all tablets . As shown in Figure 7 , the design data in the shared repository are organized within a four layer sub - folder structure , each layer denoting 6 a design’s session , iteration , user , and assembly ID . During execution , Co - 3Deator employs a listener function to scan this repository at regular intervals of 2 seconds , check for changes in the design data , and update the explorer accordingly . Screenshot images of the design concepts and its parts are also stored within the respective folders . These images are captured when a design is saved and used as the explorer’s thumbnails . USER STUDY To evaluate Co - 3Deator , we conducted a qualitative user study with four design teams , each in a co - located setting . This study mainly explored how design teams use the system towards early stage design ideation , the resulting creative outcomes , and demonstrated system usability . Method Participants We recruited 4 design teams , each comprising 3 randomly assigned members . All participants ( 9 male and 3 female ; aged 22 to 31 ) were graduate students in Mechanical Engi - neering and had experience in product design , 3D modeling , and design teamwork . Procedure Each session lasted 2 hours and was was conducted in a small conference room . The participants were seated at a table facing others , and had access to individual tablets with Co - 3Deator installed . The room was also equipped with a large monitor , for displaying the design concept space generated by the team . At the beginning of each session , the moderator gave a 25 - minute step - by - step demo of the system ( shown in the large display ) , which the participants followed on their tablets . To prevent creative ﬁxation , we only showed how to use Co - 3Deator , not what kinds of things can be achieved with it . After the training , participants proceeded to the study tasks . Upon completing a session , they then ﬁlled out a post - study questionnaires to document their experiences . Tasks Each session was treated as a single design activity , where teams developed and expanded a design concept space using Co - 3Deator . To contextualize the activity , we posed a speciﬁc design problem while allowing for sufﬁcient creative freedom . Your design team has to come up with new and interesting ideas for a stroller—ﬁt for kids between 6 - 24 months of age . This stroller will be primarily marketed in locations with prolonged winters and considerable snowfall . Before coming up with ideas , each team ﬁrst discussed the design problem to identify functional parts they would use within their designs . This mainly focused on what the parts would do ( e . g . something to push the stroller ) rather than how they would look . The design activity was divided into three tasks , inspired by Boden’s approach towards creativity [ 2 ] and ideation techniques discussed in the background section . 1 . Create : Each team member used the 3D modeling features of Co - 3Deator to generate as many design concepts as they could on their own within a 25 - minute time limit . Verbal communication was not allowed to encourage independent thinking during the early stages of the activity and to ensure original contributions from each member . 2 . Combine : The goal in this task was to expand the concept space through quick combination of parts—from designs created in the previous task—within a 20 - minute time limit . To emphasize combinatorial creativity , the only shape mod - iﬁcations we allowed was scaling ( to adjust proportionality ) and color / texture ( appearance ) changes on the parts . Here , participants were allowed to communicate with teammates or ask questions about their designs . 3 . Redeﬁne : This was a freeform activity , where participants could take an existing design and redeﬁne it into a new concept , however they found it ﬁt . To prevent continuing work on one’s own designs , participants could only redeﬁne their teammate’s designs . This task was also 20 minutes long , and allowed verbal communications . Data Collection We captured a log of system events from each tablet to help us observe user activities during the design tasks . We also video recorded each session for post - study analysis of group discus - sions . Finally , each participant also answered the post - study questionnaire comprising Likert - scale ratings and subjective written comments about their experience . Results To illustrate our observations and insights from the study , we will frequently refer to Figures 8 and 9 . Due to space con - straints , we only show concept spaces generated by Teams 3 and 4 in Figure 8 . These were the most and the least productive teams , respectively , in terms of number of concepts generated . In Figure 9 , we show how users allocated their time towards different modeling activities during the three tasks . Each bar in this chart represents the average time spent on an activity , expressed as a fraction of the total modeling time . Individual Creative Expressiveness As shown in the ﬁrst column of Figure 8 , each participant could independently express a variety of ideas within the design context . We observed creative diversity not just across design teams and team members , but also within ideas generated by an individual . On average , constructing a design model took about 12 minutes and 14 seconds ( std . dev . = 3 min ) . Here , 9 participants created 2 or more designs and the remaining 3 created only one . In addition to creating and editing individual shapes ( Figure 9 - Create ) we found the frequency of shape manipulations to also be signiﬁcant . This could be attributed to users moving shapes around to explore different design conﬁgurations . Combinatorial Creativity In the Combine task ( Figure 8 , second column ) , each team was able to at least double the size of their concept space , and produce designs different from their sources . The few designs that look redundant are because they share a common central shape ( e . g . blue race car like stroller in Team 4 combined designs ) . Figure 10 shows one example of how parts or shapes from completely different designs can be arranged to produce an entirely new concept . 7 T ea m 4 T ea m 3 Individual Designs Combined Designs Redefined Designs Figure 8 . Design concept spaces developed by Teams 3 ( most productive ) and 4 ( least productive ) . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Create Combine Redefine F r a c t i on o f M ode li ng T i m e Edit Shape Color / Texture Change Manipulate Shape Manipulate Part Browse Explorer Add New Shape Figure 9 . General trends in how users allocated their time towards dif - ferent activities during the three tasks . Each bar represents an average fraction of the total modeling time . User 1 User 3 User 2 User 1 User 3 Figure 10 . Example of a new design generated by combining parts from existing designs , constructed by different team members . Most users generated 2 - 3 new concepts in an average time of 5 min and 54 sec ( std . dev = 2 min and 20 sec ) . The user activity log ( Figure 9 - Combine ) showed that participants spent a considerable amount of time manipulating shapes around such that the parts would better conform to the new design . We observed users apply two main approaches in this task . The more pragmatic approach entailed importing a central part ( e . g . the seat or frame ) which showed potential , and adding other parts that ﬁt well with it . One participant stated “I selected the main part , in this case the frame , and then the rest of them were assembled on top , similar to how we assemble a product in real life . ” The other—more adventurous—approach involved browsing through the explorer and importing all parts that “stood out” or “looked cool” . Various conﬁgurations would then be tested , to prune out those that didn’t work , ultimately converging to a satisfactory solution . Design Redeﬁnition In the Redeﬁne task , users employed four approaches to create new concepts from existing ones ( examples in Figure 11 ) : • Completing : Given the time limits in the study , some de - signs could not be completed . In such cases , we found other team members naturally inclined to use this task as an opportunity to bring such designs to a closure . As one user indicated : “I looked for something that was not good looking or something that had scope of improvement . ” • Extending : It was common for users to seek out ways to augment a design either to improve its functionality or add another capability . The example in Figure 11 shows a case where wheel treads are added for better traction , side arm - rests for safety , and elevated handlebars for ergonomic push - ing : “ ( using the explorer ) it was easy to judge what was earlier missed in every design , and what could work better . ” 8 ( d ) Reinterpretation ( b ) Extending ( a ) Completing ( c ) Branching I n i t i a l D e s i gn s R ede f i ned D e s i gn s Figure 11 . Four distinct ways in which users redeﬁned existing designs in the explorer . • Branching : Users often created design variations by simply changing color , texture , and style of one or more parts . • Reinterpretation : To save time , some users borrowed one or more shapes from a speciﬁc part and reinterpreted them with an entirely new meaning or function . In an extreme case , shown in Figure 11 ( d ) , one user reinterpreted the wheels as jet boosters ( the red shapes represent propulsion ﬂames ) , to enable the stroller to hover in midair . On average users spent about 8 minutes ( std . dev . = 4 min , 40 sec ) on each design . 7 of them were able to come up with two or more designs and the remaining 5 only one . The high variation in both the completion times and productivity , could be attributed to the open - endedness of this task . For example , while branching a design generally takes less time , completing and extending designs are more involved . Final Concept Selection To close the activity , each team reﬂected on the overall con - cept space and collectively selected a ﬁnal concept ( Figure 12 ) . Interestingly , all of these ﬁnal concepts were produced during the Combine and / or Redeﬁne phases , and had undergone at least one iteration beyond their conception . This is consistent with the notion that creative ideas are generally connected to ideas from prior iterations [ 32 ] . We also found Teams 1 , 2 , and 3 to further reﬁne their ﬁnal concepts to better meet the functional needs of the design problem . Here , one member volunteered to serve as a “designated modeler” , incorporating changes to the ﬁnal design based on discussions and sugges - tions from other teammates . The teams also requested to project the shared workspace on the large display for everyone to view and comment upon . Team 1 Team 2 Team 3 Team 4 Figure 12 . Final concepts collectively selected and ﬁnalized by each de - sign team . Design Explorer Browsing Behavior During the study , we observed participants using both the hier - archical and ﬁltered modes for navigating the design concept space . The choice for when to use a speciﬁc mode was largely based on the level of design detail being sought and the stage of a design activity . For example , the hierarchical mode was mainly used to inspire new design ideas , particularly when starting out from a blank slate . As seen in the Combine task , this mode allowed users to observe multiple designs in par - allel in order to come up with novel combinations : “If I was combining different shapes , then I would prefer to look at all of my options together . ” The ability to view each part in their original context also helped users better understand how to employ them in a new design : “It gives me insight about the part before actually using it . ” The ﬁltered mode , on the other hand , was mainly used to search for speciﬁc parts or shapes for a design already under progress : “as you progress through the design when speciﬁc things are required the ﬁltered view is better . ” Here , it served as a means for substituting parts or shapes in the design , either to reﬁne its form or generate its variants . Users found this mode to be an efﬁcient way to quickly search and identify a relevant part ( or shape ) without going through multiple levels of menus : “I could see all the options available for the exact part that I needed . ” System Usability To help evaluate system usability , each participant ﬁlled out a post - study questionnaire , comprising 5 - point Likert scale questions . These question covered the primary features of the interface , and their concise version are shown in Figure 13 , next to corresponding results . We also encouraged participants to provide comments to support each rating . Disagree Strongly Disagree Easy to use and learn ? Easy to create shapes directly in 3D space ? Easy to create 3D shapes from pen - based sketching ? Were blobby / tubular shapes adequate for creativity ? Easy to manipulate 3D shapes ? Easy to modify and edit shapes ? Easy to explore different design forms & options ? Were you satisfied with your design ? Neutral Agree Strongly Agree Figure 13 . 5 - point Likert scale feedback on system usability . Bars ( brown ) to the right of the central line indicate positive responses , while those ( green ) on the left indicate negative responses . In Figure 13 , we can see that users responded favorably to - wards the overall system , the modeling workﬂow , and its speciﬁc features . We found that all users could learn and in - dependently use the system with only 25 minutes of training . Most users found direct creation of shapes in 3D to be “sim - pler and faster , instead of sketching in 2D and then extruding ( as in conventional modelers ) ” , and that “it is easy to see how everything ( shapes ) lines up and scales” . Despite their simplicity , blobby and tubular shapes enable users express a variety of design forms . However , some users indicated that shelling , extruded cuts , non - orthogonal holes , and revolves could enhance expressiveness . All users were able to easily modify shapes in the edit mode . Figure 9 shows that shape editing was frequently used during the initial creation and 9 redeﬁnition stages , and mainly utilized for adapting existing shapes into new contexts or borrowing them as seed geometry for new shapes . While the 3D widget provides greater controllability than multi - touch gestures , few users found its shape manipulations to be tedious , as it only allows 1 DOF control at a time . Several users thus indicated that enabling spatial constraints between shapes could “help me adjust the parts much faster” . DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS The results of our user study clearly show that the Combine and Redeﬁne operations allowed design teams to efﬁciently come up with divergent concepts from prior iterations . This is largely attributable to the concept component hierarchy , which provides users with the freedom to selectively choose what level of design information to work with from a given concept . For example , combinatorial operations are an obvious way to generate new concepts by integrating parts from separate designs . However , simply putting parts together does not lead to an aesthetic or structurally sound design . Instead , the ability to isolate , manipulate , and reconﬁgure individual shapes within a given part is what allows users to adapt it to a new design context . Similarly , during design redeﬁnition , the concept component hierarchy gives users the ﬂexibility to alter a design at multiple levels of detail . As a result , they were able to produce divergent concepts ranging from stylistic alterations to complete structural or functional reformulations . While Co - 3Deator serves as a team - ﬁrst ideation tool , by neces - sity it also consists of designer - ﬁrst elements . This is because to support any collaborative design process , there needs to be available a preliminary design concept space with seed ideas . Thus , in our team - ﬁrst workﬂow , individual design creation is mainly used for initializing the concept space . The main strength of this approach however lies in its support towards collaborative creativity . Here , the combinatorial and redeﬁni - tion operations across the concept component hierarchy allow design teams to rapidly expand upon an initial concept space . Such productivity cannot be achieved with a designer - ﬁrst approach alone . Several users in our study indicated that the ability to view different concepts in the design explorer—while working on their own designs—helped inspire new ideas not just for their current work , but also for those during future iterations . As two participants indicated : “Looking at the designs made me realize how I could improve my own ideas and keep adding ideas for new designs” ; “It helped me diversify my ideas and bring out some other factors I did not think of . ” This is con - sistent with the notion of “working with multiple design ideas in parallel to foster the creative process” [ 11 ] . However , our design explorer takes this a step further by allowing users to work with multiple designs not just at a global concept level , but also at individual part and shape levels . As a result , the ability to hierarchically navigate the concept space or ﬁlter de - sign information allows users to search for creative inspiration within focused contexts , while uncovering solutions or ideas at varying levels of details . While our user study mainly focused on validating the creative mechanisms resulting from the team - ﬁrst design approach , we ﬁnd a scope for an extended study that deeply explores each mechanism in greater detail , and the system’s usability within long term and multi - disciplinary design scenarios . Further , given the interesting results observed in our study , we ﬁnd value in pursuing a study dedicated to better understanding design concept re - interpretations within collaborative design scenarios . For example , it would be interesting to observe the creative outcomes if we allowed design teams to concur - rently work with multiple product contexts . Here , how would the designers share and reinterpret ideas across different con - texts ? Or , how would this inﬂuence the creative outcomes of a collaborative design activity . In Co - 3Deator , the 3D workspace mainly serves as a personal space for individual users to create and explore designs on their own . However , an interesting observation we made was that during a convergent process like ﬁnal concept selection , design team members were naturally inclined to improvise a shared workspace , where the modeling activity reﬂected the ongoing discussions and mutual decisions . Thus , we ﬁnd a scope for exploring collaborative 3D design tools , where multiple designers can concurrently create , modify , and exchange 3D content and ideas within a shared workspace . Given the 3 - dimensionality of the designs , such a system poses several interesting questions : ( a ) what will the system and its modeling interactions look like , ( b ) what types of design representations foster creative collaborations in such interfaces , and ( c ) how can we leverage proxemics to optimize social interactions and make the system non - intrusive ? CONCLUSION We have presented Co - 3Deator , a 3D design ideation tool for creating , sharing , combining , reusing , and redeﬁning early stage designs based on the notion of “team - ﬁrst” ideation . Team - ﬁrst represents a class of ideation tools , whose design and operation emphasizes collaborative design processes and mechanisms . In Co - 3Deator , such mechanisms were charac - terized by the concept component hierarchy and collaborative design explorer for representing , storing , browsing , and ac - cessing design data , while allowing design team members to collectively explore and navigate a design concept space . To this end , the concept component hierarchy and design explorer together support creative design ideation via combinatorial de - sign compositions and multi - level design redeﬁnitions . Finally , we have validated the utility of these contributions through a qualitative user study with four design teams . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback . This work was supported by the National Science Foundation ( CHS Award # 1422341 , CPS : Synergy Award # 1329979 , and Eager Award # 1153538 ) . Any opinions , ﬁndings , or recommenda - tions presented are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF . REFERENCES 1 . Bryan M Blair and Katja Hölttä - Otto . 2012 . Comparing the Contribution of the Group to the Initial Idea in 10 Progressive Idea Generation . In Proceedings of the ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers in Engineering Conference . 2 . Margaret A Boden . 1996 . Dimensions of Creativity . MIT Press . 3 . Louis L . Bucciarelli . 1996 . Designing Engineers . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 4 . Siddhartha Chaudhuri and Vladlen Koltun . 2010 . Data - driven suggestions for creativity support in 3D modeling . ACM Transactions on Graphics 29 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 183 . 5 . Michael Diehl and Wolfgang Stroebe . 1987 . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of personality and social psychology 53 , 3 ( 1987 ) , 497 . 6 . Tomás Dorta . 2007 . Implementing and assessing the hybrid ideation space : a cognitive artefact for conceptual design . International Journal of Design Sciences and Technology 14 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 119 – 133 . 7 . Florian Geyer , Jochen Budzinski , and Harald Reiterer . 2012 . IdeaVis : a hybrid workspace and interactive visualization for paper - based collaborative sketching sessions . In Proceedings of the Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . 331 – 340 . 8 . Ashok K Goel and Susan Craw . 2005 . Design , innovation and case - based reasoning . The Knowledge Engineering Review 20 , 03 ( 2005 ) , 271 – 276 . 9 . Christopher A Gosnell and Scarlett R Miller . 2016 . But Is It Creative ? Delineating the Impact of Expertise and Concept Ratings on Creative Concept Selection . Journal of Mechanical Design 138 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 021101 . 10 . Joy P . Guilford . 1956 . The Structure of Intellect . Psychological Bulletin 53 , 4 ( 1956 ) , 267 – 293 . 11 . Joshua Hailpern , Erik Hinterbichler , Caryn Leppert , Damon Cook , and Brian P . Bailey . 2007 . TEAM STORM : demonstrating an interaction model for working with multiple ideas during creative group work . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition . 193 – 202 . 12 . Takeo Igarashi , Satoshi Matsuoka , and Hidehiko Tanaka . 2007 . Teddy : a sketching interface for 3D freeform design . In Acm SIGGRAPH 2007 Courses . ACM , 21 . 13 . Evangelos Kalogerakis , Siddhartha Chaudhuri , Daphne Koller , and Vladlen Koltun . 2012 . A probabilistic model for component - based shape synthesis . ACM Transactions on Graphics 31 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 55 . 14 . James McCrae , Nobuyuki Umetani , and Karan Singh . 2014 . FlatFitFab : interactive modeling with planar sections . In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . ACM , 13 – 22 . 15 . Michael Michalko . 2006 . Thinkertoys : A Handbook of Creative - Thinking Techniques . Ten Speed Press . 16 . Luke Olsen , Faramaz Samavati , Mario Costa Sousa , and Joaquim Jorge . 2008 . A taxonomy of modeling techniques using sketch - based interfaces . Eurographics State of the Art Reports 1 , 1 . 4 ( 2008 ) , 1 . 17 . Johan Ölvander , Björn Lundén , and Hampus Gavel . 2009 . A computerized optimization framework for the morphological matrix applied to aircraft conceptual design . Computer - Aided Design 41 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 187 – 196 . 18 . Alex F Osborn . 1953 . Applied Imagination . Scribner . 19 . Gerhard Pahl and Wolfgang Beitz . 1999 . Engineering Design : A Systematic Approach ( second ed . ) . Springer . 20 . Paul B Paulus , Nicholas W Kohn , and Lauren E Arditti . 2011 . Effects of quantity and quality instructions on brainstorming . The Journal of Creative Behavior 45 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 38 – 46 . 21 . B . Rohrbach . 1969 . Creative nach Regeln : Methode 635 , eine neue Technik zum Lösen von Problemen . Absatzwirtschaft 12 , 19 ( 1969 ) , 73 – 75 . 22 . Ugo Braga Sangiorgi , François Beuvens , and Jean Vanderdonckt . 2012 . User interface design by collaborative sketching . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 378 – 387 . 23 . Ryan Schmidt , Brian Wyvill , Mario Costa Sousa , and Joaquim A Jorge . 2007 . Shapeshop : Sketch - based solid modeling with blobtrees . In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 courses . ACM , 43 . 24 . Jami J Shah , Noe Vargas - Hernandez , Joshua D Summers , and Santosh Kulkarni . 2001 . Collaborative Sketching ( C - Sketch ) – An Idea Generation Technique for Engineering Design . Creative Behavior 35 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 168 – 198 . 25 . Andrei Sharf , Marina Blumenkrants , Ariel Shamir , and Daniel Cohen - Or . 2006 . Snappaste : an interactive technique for easy mesh composition . The Visual Computer 22 , 9 - 11 ( 2006 ) , 835 – 844 . 26 . Patrick C Shih , David H Nguyen , Sen H Hirano , David F Redmiles , and Gillian R Hayes . 2009 . GroupMind : supporting idea generation through a collaborative mind - mapping tool . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work . ACM , 139 – 148 . 27 . Ben Shneiderman . 2007 . Creativity support tools : Accelerating discovery and innovation . Commun . ACM 50 , 12 ( 2007 ) , 20 – 32 . 28 . Pieter Jan Stappers and James M Hennessey . 1999 . Toward electronic napkins and beermats : Computer support for visual ideation skills . In Visual representations and interpretations . Springer , 220 – 225 . 29 . Norbert Streitz , Jorg Geissler , Torsten Holmer , Shin’ichi Konomi , Christian Müller - Tomfelde , Wolfgang Reischl , Petra Rexroth , Peter Seitz , and Ralf Steinmetz . 1999 . i - LAND : An Interactive Landscape for Creativity and Innovation . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 120 – 127 . 11 30 . Christine A Toh and Scarlett R Miller . 2015 . How engineering teams select design concepts : A view through the lens of creativity . Design Studies 38 ( 2015 ) , 111 – 138 . 31 . Ellis Paul Torrance . 1968 . Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . Personnel Press Incorporated . 32 . Remko van der Lugt . 2003 . Relating the quality of the idea generation process to the quality of the resulting design ideas . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design . 33 . Luke Wroblewski . 2009 . Mobile First . http : / / www . lukew . com / ff / entry . asp ? 933 . ( November 2009 ) . 34 . Xiaohua Xie , Kai Xu , Niloy J Mitra , Daniel Cohen - Or , Wenyong Gong , Qi Su , and Baoquan Chen . 2013 . Sketch - to - Design : Context - Based Part Assembly . In Computer Graphics Forum , Vol . 32 . Wiley Online Library , 233 – 245 . 35 . Kai Xu , Hao Zhang , Daniel Cohen - Or , and Baoquan Chen . 2012 . Fit and diverse : set evolution for inspiring 3D shape galleries . ACM Transactions on Graphics 31 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 57 . 36 . Zhenpeng Zhao , Sriram Karthik Badam , Senthil Chandrasegaran , Deok Gun Park , Niklas Elmqvist , Lorraine Kisselburgh , and Karthik Ramani . 2014 . skWiki : a Multimedia Sketching System for Collaborative Creativity . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1235 – 1244 . 37 . Fritz Zwicky . 1969 . Discovery , Invention , Research through the Morphological Approach . Macmillan . 12