Neuron , Vol . 47 , 907 – 918 , September 15 , 2005 , Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 07 . 023 Dissociable Controlled Retrieval and Generalized Selection Mechanisms in Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex David Badre , 1 , 2 , * Russell A . Poldrack , 3 E . Juliana Paré - Blagoev , 4 Rachel Z . Insler , 1 and Anthony D . Wagner 1 , 5 , * 1 Department of Psychology and Neurosciences Program Stanford University Stanford , California 94305 2 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 3 Department of Psychology and Brain Research Institute University of California , Los Angeles Los Angeles , California 90095 4 Graduate School of Education Harvard University Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 5 Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging Charlestown , Massachusetts 02129 Summary How does ventrolateral prefrontal cortex ( VLPFC ) control mnemonic processing ? Alternative models propose that VLPFC guides top - down ( controlled ) re - trieval of knowledge from long - term stores or selects goal - relevant products of retrieval from among com - petitors . A paucity of evidence supports a retrieval / selection distinction , raising the possibility that these models reduce to a common mechanism . Here , four manipulations varied semantic control demands dur - ing fMRI : judgment specificity , cue - target - associative strength , competitor dominance , and number of com - petitors . Factor analysis revealed evidence for a meta - factor that accounted for common behavioral variance across manipulations and for functional variance in left mid - VLPFC . These data support a generalized control process that selects relevant knowledge from among competitors . By contrast , left anterior VLPFC and middle temporal cortex were sensitive to cue - target - associative strength , but not competition , consistent with a control process that retrieves knowledge stored in lateral temporal cortex . Distinct PFC mecha - nisms mediate top - down retrieval and postretrieval selection . Introduction Over a lifetime , humans accumulate knowledge about the world , including general facts , concepts , and word meanings . Making gainful use of this knowledge to comprehend stimuli and inform action in a variable en - vironment requires a system for retrieving and selecting stored information as goals dictate ( Miller and Cohen , 2001 ; Shimamura , 1995 ) . Substantial evidence indi - * Correspondence : badred @ mit . edu ( D . B . ) ; wagner @ psych . stanford . edu ( A . D . W . ) cates that left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex ( VLPFC ) is critical for the performance of tasks that demand ac - cess to and evaluation of semantic knowledge ( Demb et al . , 1995 ; Devlin et al . , 2003 ; Kapur et al . , 1994 ; Köhler et al . , 2004 ; Metzler , 2001 ; Noppeney and Price , 2004 ; Petersen et al . , 1988 ; Poldrack et al . , 1999 ; Sohn et al . , 2003 ; Swick and Knight , 1996 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 1998 ; Wagner et al . , 2001 ; Zhang et al . , 2004 ) , though the functional character and topographic orga - nization of processing within left VLPFC remains highly controversial ( Badre and Wagner , 2002 ; Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ; Gold et al . , 2005 ; Moss et al . , 2005 ; Thompson - Schill , 2003 ) . At the heart of the debate is whether left VLPFC mediates ( 1 ) the selection of goal - relevant knowledge over irrelevant competitors ( Flet - cher et al . , 2000 ; Moss et al . , 2005 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 , 1999 ) , ( 2 ) the top - down activation ( controlled retrieval ) of semantic knowledge under situations in which bottom - up retrieval mechanisms fail to recover goal - relevant information ( Bunge et al . , 2005 ; Wagner et al . , 2001 ) , or ( 3 ) both selection and retrieval because these putatively distinct processes may reduce to a sin - gle , shared mechanism ( Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . Here , we report behavioral and fMRI evidence support - ing the existence of a generalized selection mechanism that accounts for behavioral variance under a variety of semantic processing contexts and that accounts for functional variance in left mid - VLPFC activation . We further report that this generalized selection mecha - nism is functionally and neuroanatomically distinct from a controlled retrieval process that depends on left ante - rior VLPFC and appears to activate stored semantic knowledge in left temporal cortex . As such , these data provide evidence for a mechanistic distinction between selection and retrieval with selection operating on active representations that emerge through bottom - up and top - down retrieval . According to the selection hypothesis , left VLPFC control mechanisms are critical when a subset of knowledge that is task - relevant must be selected over a competing subset of irrelevant knowledge ( Fletcher et al . , 2000 ; Moss et al . , 2005 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 , 1999 ) . Hence , selection demands can be manipu - lated by requiring subjects to direct attention to a sub - set of cue - related knowledge . For example , when the similarity between stimuli must be judged along a spe - cific semantic dimension ( e . g . , color or form ) , other se - mantic features of the stimuli are task - irrelevant and must be selected against in favor of the relevant fea - ture . Left VLPFC activation is greater during perfor - mance of such feature - based judgments relative to global similarity judgments , for which selection de - mands are argued to be minimal because all features are relevant ( Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 ) . Selection demands also can be manipulated by varying the de - gree to which access to irrelevant and competitive in - formation is facilitated . Thus , left VLPFC activation increases during picture naming when competing knowledge is primed – – and thus competition is en - hanced – – and this is the case even when task demands Neuron908 putatively require minimal controlled retrieval ( Moss et al . , 2005 ) . Likewise , activation increases in left VLPFC accompany other circumstances in which a primed fea - ture of a stimulus becomes irrelevant upon repetition , thus increasing selection demands during repeated stimulus processing ( Fletcher et al . , 2000 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 1999 ) . This pattern of PFC activation con - trasts with across - feature priming reductions in left temporal cortices – – structures thought to store long - term semantic knowledge and to mediate bottom - up retrieval ( Thompson - Schill et al . , 1999 ) . These observa - tions motivate the hypothesis that left VLPFC supports a postretrieval selection mechanism that operates on the products of bottom - up retrieval processes with se - lection demands increasing when multiple competing representations have been retrieved and when task - irrelevant representations are prepotent . Alternatively , left VLPFC mechanisms have been hy - pothesized to directly support the top - down ( controlled ) retrieval of knowledge when bottom - up ( automatic ) processes are insufficient to retrieve task - relevant knowledge ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) . Controlled retrieval demands can be varied by manipulating the extent to which a cue is effective in eliciting retrieval of task - rele - vant information . For instance , greater left VLPFC acti - vation is observed when the pre - experimental associa - tion between the retrieval cue and target knowledge is relatively weak compared to when a strong association exists ( Bunge et al . , 2005 ; Wagner et al . , 2001 ) . This is the case even within the context of a global - related - ness task in which selection demands may be minimal ( Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 ) . According to the re - trieval perspective , top - down inputs from VLPFC trig - ger the recovery of long - term knowledge and , thus , should have a correlated activation increase in left tem - poral regions that store semantic knowledge . It is im - portant to note , however , that a manipulation of asso - ciative strength may also result in increased selection demands because weak activation of relevant informa - tion may make this knowledge more susceptible to in - terference , a case similar to an underdetermined re - sponse ( Thompson - Schill et al . , 2005 ) . Given these competing models of VLPFC function , a critical challenge for theorists of cognitive control is to specify the relation between selection and controlled retrieval . One possibility is that a common process bi - ases retrieval under any circumstance in which relevant knowledge does not come to mind automatically , either because of poor cue support ( e . g . , weak cue - target as - sociative strength ) or to competition from automatically retrieved , irrelevant competitors ( Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . Alternatively , controlled retrieval and selection may be mechanistically and anatomically distinct pro - cesses mediated by left VLPFC ( Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ; Martin and Chao , 2001 ) with the former guiding retrieval of knowledge stored in temporal cortex and the latter operating on the products of retrieval to select relevant representations from among competitors . This latter possibility receives indirect support because studies putatively varying selection demands have typi - cally identified activation in left mid - VLPFC ( w Brod - mann areas [ BA ] 45 / 44 ) , whereas those putatively vary - ing controlled retrieval have localized activation in a more anterior and ventral region of left VLPFC ( w BA Figure 1 . Task Schematic Depicting Four Manipulations of Control at Retrieval In all trials , subjects selected a target ( below fixation ) based on its relation to the cue ( above fixation ) . ( A ) Judgment specificity was manipulated by either requiring selection of the target most glob - ally related to the cue ( left ) or most similar to the cue along a spe - cific semantic feature ( right ) , such as color in this example . ( B ) Within related blocks , associative strength manipulated whether the correct target was a strong ( left ) or weak ( right ) associate of the cue . ( C ) In experiment two , the number of targets during related blocks varied between two ( left ) or four ( right ) . ( D ) Within the feature task , a trial was congruent ( left ) if the correct target was also a pre - experimental associate of the cue and incongruent ( right ) if the correct target was not the pre - experimental associate . 47 ) . However , at present , direct evidence for a func - tional anatomic dissociation between selection and retrieval is lacking . Moreover , a clear mechanistic dis - tinction between these two processes has not been ar - ticulated nor empirically supported . These limits partly stem from the fact that , to date , no study has directly manipulated both selection and controlled retrieval de - mands and because of the exclusive reliance upon theoretical task analyses to support past inferences about the processes correlated with VLPFC activation . The present functional MRI ( fMRI ) study directly ex - amined the functional and neuroanatomic relation be - tween selection and controlled retrieval , combining four manipulations of control demands across two experi - ments ( Figure 1 ) . In both experiments , judgment speci - ficity ( Figure 1A ) varied whether subjects selected a tar - get based on its global relatedness to a cue ( related ; low selection ) or its similarity to a cue along a specific dimension ( feature ; high selection ) . Within the related task , associative strength ( Figure 1B ) varied whether the correct target was a strong ( low controlled retrieval ; potentially low selection ) or weak ( high controlled re - Retrieval and Selection in VLPFC 909 Figure 2 . Behavioral Results from Experiments One and Two Impact on RT and errors of ( A ) judgment specificity , ( B ) associative strength and number of targets ( four targets , solid line ; two targets , dashed line ) , and ( C ) congruency in experiment one ( solid circles ) and experiment two ( open circles ) . In all figures , error bars reflect within - subject standard error . trieval ; potentially high selection ) associate of the cue . During experiment two , number of targets varied whether the correct target was selected from amongst two or four alternatives , providing an additional manip - ulation of retrieval ( be it automatic or controlled ) and selection demands ( Figure 1C ) . Finally , during the fea - ture task , one of the targets was a normative associate of the cue ( e . g . , TAR / COAL ) , and congruency varied whether this associate was the target most similar to the cue along the relevant dimension ( congruent ) or was the competing distractor ( incongruent ) ( Figure 1D ) . Selection demands were greater during incongruent tri - als as information retrieved automatically because of the associative linkage between the cue and distractor was irrelevant , yielding greater competition . As suggested by the preceding task analyses , a com - mon processing component – – such as selection – – may be engaged across the experimental manipulations . To the extent that this is the case , one might expect such a factor to account for a common portion of behavioral variance across the experimental manipulations . Ac - cordingly , to quantify and assess the possible contribu - tion of such a common control process across these semantic processing contexts , an exploratory factor analysis of behavior was performed to extract a meta - variable that accounted for common behavioral vari - ance across the manipulations . This metavariable , which emerged from the data rather than from theoreti - cal task analyses , then served as a covariate during fMRI analysis to examine whether it accounted for functional variance within VLPFC . Results Simple Behavioral Effects Behavioral effects were considered reliable at an α of . 05 ( see Supplemental Data available with this article online for details ) . Analyses of reaction time ( RT ) and errors confirmed the efficacy of the four control manip - ulations . Judgment specificity reliably impacted RT : feature judgments took longer than relatedness judg - ments ( Figure 2A ) , indicating that RT slowed as putative selection demands increased . Weak cue - target asso - ciative strength resulted in longer RT and higher errors compared to strong associative strength , consistent with an increase in control demands ( Figure 2B ) . Num - ber of targets revealed that selecting from among four targets slowed RT and increased errors relative to se - lecting from two targets ( Figure 2B ) . Importantly , there was no behavioral difference between weak - two versus strong - four trials , motivating an analysis to rule out time - on - task accounts of the fMRI data . Finally , the congruency manipulation impacted selection demands , evidenced by longer RT and higher errors on incongru - ent relative to congruent trials ( Figure 2C ) . Factor Analysis of Behavior Factors extracted from a factor analysis can serve as metavariables that account for more total variance across behavioral measures than any of the measures contribute in isolation . In the current context , a compo - nent that accounts for variance across the experimental manipulations might reflect the influence of a common control process . Accordingly , factors were extracted from the standardized differences in errors and RT due to associative strength ( weak−strong ) , judgment specific - ity ( feature - related ) , and congruency ( incongruent - con - gruent ) for subjects in experiment one and experiment two ( total n = 33 ) . Number of targets was not included in this analysis as it only varied in experiment two . Factor analysis revealed two factors that accounted for over half ( 54 % ) the variance in the six behavioral measures ( Figure 3A ) . Loadings of the six individual measures on the first factor revealed a common com - ponent accounting for variance due to congruency , judgment specificity , and associative strength ( Figures 3B and 3C and Table 1 ) . Based on this metavariable’s pattern of loadings – – particularly noting the strong as - sociation with congruency – – we suggestively refer to it as the “selection component . ” Congruency loaded heavily and almost exclusively on the selection compo - nent ( Figures 3B and 3C ) with this factor accounting for 51 % and 71 % of the variance in the congruency RT and error effects , respectively . Critically , manipulations of associative strength and judgment specificity also produced behavioral effects that loaded on the selec - tion component ( Figures 3B and 3C and Table 1 ) . Neuron910 Figure 3 . Results from the Factor Analysis ( A ) The scree plot depicts the six initial unrotated factors ( “selection component , ” red ; “nonselection component , ” blue ) including rank ( x axis ) , eigenvalue ( left y axis ) , and proportion of overall variance accounted for by each factor ( right y axis ) . ( B ) Spatial representation of the factor loadings of the six behavioral measures ( points ) plotted in a space defined on the selection component ( x axis ) and nonselection component ( y axis ) . The further along a given axis a point is from the origin , the stronger its relationship with that component . Points in the red zone may be considered strongly related to the selection component and points in the blue zone are strongly related to the nonselection component . ( C ) Diagram depicting the mapping of the two components ( ovals ) onto the variances ( boxes ) associated with each measure . Numbers represent factor loadings , curved arrows connect correlated factors , and colored shading represents the proportion of explained variance accounted for by the selection component ( red ) and nonselection component ( blue ) . Together , ( B ) and ( C ) illustrate that the selection compo - nent is shared across all three manipulations of control . ( Note : F - R , feature - related ; I - C , incongruent - congruent ; W - S , weak - strong ; RT , reaction time ; Err , errors . ) By contrast , the second factor ( “nonselection com - ponent” ) accounted for variance in RT and error effects of associative strength and judgment specificity but ac - counted for practically no variance due to congruency ( Figures 3B and 3C and Table 1 ) . Hence , only the selec - tion component indexed behavioral variance common to all three control manipulations , whereas the nonse - lection component , though accounting for variance common to associative strength and judgment speci - ficity , was not associated with congruency and , thus , does not likely reflect a source of variance due to selec - tion demands . Correlates of Semantic Processing Relative to fixation , semantic processing ( collapsed across condition and restricted to accurate responses ) elicited activation throughout left VLPFC , as well as in Table 1 . Percentage of Variance in Each Behavioral Measure Accounted for by the Two Extracted Components Measure Selection Component Nonselection Component Total Congruency RT 51 . 3 0 . 3 51 . 5 Congruency errors 70 . 7 4 . 6 75 . 3 Judgment type RT 4 . 3 42 . 5 46 . 8 Judgment type errors 12 . 3 43 . 8 56 . 1 Associative strength RT 32 . 6 16 . 7 49 . 3 Associative strength errors 0 . 0 47 . 2 47 . 2 posterior cortices ( Figure 4A ) . Within left VLPFC , activa - tion extended from a posterior region ( w BA 44 / 6 ) to a more anterior mid - VLPFC region ( w BA 45 ) , corre - sponding to inferior frontal gyrus pars opercularis and pars triangularis ( Figure 4B ) , and also to an anterior and ventral VLPFC region ( w BA 47 ) , corresponding to infe - rior frontal gyrus pars orbitalis ( Figure 4B ) . It should be noted that the anterior and mid - VLPFC subregions defined here correspond to a division of what has been previously termed anterior left inferior prefrontal cortex ( aLIPC ) . As noted above , these subre - gions correspond to existing anatomical and approxi - mate cytoarchitechtonic subdivisions of the inferior frontal gyrus and may be largely distinguished in ante - rior slices based on their relationship to the horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure ( Figure 4B ) . In part , this finer fractionation has been adopted in light of recent obser - Retrieval and Selection in VLPFC 911 Figure 4 . Left VLPFC Responses to Control Demands ( A ) Surface rendered conjunction of all con - trol conditions > fixation for the first and sec - ond epochs of experiment two with critical regions labeled . ( B ) Coronal slices ( y = 16 and y = 30 ) demar - cating the anatomical boundaries by which activation foci were assigned to mid - VLPFC ( inferior frontal gyrus pars triangularis and pars opercularis ) or anterior VLPFC ( inferior frontal gyrus pars orbitalis ) . Labeled anatom - ical landmarks are ( 1 ) inferior frontal sulcus , ( 2 ) insular sulcus , ( 3 ) horizontal ramus of the lateral fissure , and ( 4 ) orbital gyrus . ( C ) Contrasts of congruency ( conjunction of experiment one and experiment two , p < 0 . 001 ) , associative strength ( experiment two , p < 0 . 001 ) , judgment specificity ( conjunction of experiment one and experiment two , p < 0 . 001 ) , and number of targets ( experiment two , p < 0 . 005 ) . The cross - experiment con - junction of associative strength was not cal - culated because differences in associative strength between experiments were not comparable ( see Experimental Procedures ) . ( D ) Contrasts of associative strength ( blue ) and judgment specificity ( red ) and their over - lap ( purple ) are rendered on an inflated MNI canonical surface . Substantial anatomical and functional separability is observed be - tween anterior VLPFC , which was selectively sensitive to associative strength , and mid - VLPFC , which was sensitive to associative strength and judgment specificity . Moreover , the effect of congruency ( not plotted for ease of viewing ) overlapped with those of associative strength and judgment specificity in mid - VLPFC ( see C ) . ( E ) Rendering of the weak - two > strong - four convergence map between experiment two from the present study and the corresponding contrast from a previous experiment ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) revealed an effect restricted to the ventral anterior extent of left VLPFC . vations ( Badre and Wagner , 2005 ; Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ) suggesting functional distinctions among these subregions . Posterior VLPFC corresponds to what has been previously referred to as posterior LIPC ( pLIPC ) . Beyond PFC , activation was evident in left middle temporal cortex ( w BA 21 / 22 ) , a region previously asso - ciated with semantic retrieval ( Bokde et al . , 2001 ; Dob - bins and Wagner , 2005 ; Martin et al . , 1994 ; Petersen et al . , 1988 ; Wagner et al . , 2001 ) and that functionally couples with left anterior VLPFC ( Bokde et al . , 2001 ; Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ) . Given the present focus on selection and controlled semantic retrieval , subsequent analyses focused on responses in left VLPFC and mid - dle temporal cortex . Neural Effects of Congruency The congruency manipulation loaded most specifically on the selection component metavariable . Hence , this control manipulation putatively provides a relatively pure starting point for indexing the neural substrates of a generalized selection process . In experiment one , an incongruent > congruent effect was observed in left fronto - operculum ( p < 0 . 05 , corrected ) with greater acti - vation on incongruent trials also present in left mid - VLPFC ( −54 15 18 ) at an uncorrected threshold ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Replicating this mid - VLPFC effect , comparison of incongruent > congruent feature trials in experiment two ( p < 0 . 05 , corrected ) revealed reliable activation in left mid - VLPFC ( −45 18 24 ) that extended posteriorly ( −45 9 27 ) . A formal test of the convergence of the con - gruency effects across experiments one and two re - vealed activation in left mid - VLPFC ( −48 18 18 ) , poste - rior ( −42 9 21 ) and dorsal , anterior ( −45 39 3 ) VLPFC subregions ( Figure 4C ) , and bilateral fronto - operculum ( Table S1 ) . Neural Effects of Judgment Specificity , Associative Strength , and Number of Targets The selection component also accounted for a portion of the behavioral variance due to judgment specificity and associative strength , suggesting a common source of variance between these control manipulations and the congruency manipulation . This factor analysis out - come predicts a convergence in the patterns of left VLPFC activation engaged by these control manipula - tions . Consistent with this perspective , contrasts of associative strength ( weak > strong ) and judgment specificity ( feature > related ) revealed activation in left mid - VLPFC ( p < 0 . 05 , corrected ) inclusive of the voxels showing a congruency effect ( Figure 4C ; Table S1 ) . Di - rect overlap of the judgment specificity and associative strength contrast maps revealed extensive conver - gence in their engagement of left mid - VLPFC ( w BA 45 ) extending into posterior VLPFC ( Figure 4D , purple re - Neuron912 Figure 5 . The Selection Component Ac - counted for Variance in Left Mid - VLPFC Functional Activation The factor analysis metavariable served as a covariate during fMRI analyses of congru - ency , associative strength , and judgment specificity . Conjunction of these covariate effects ( conjoint p < 0 . 000125 ) revealed that the selection component reliably accounted for function variance in left mid - VLPFC acti - vation ( −54 21 12 ) , here rendered on an in - flated canonical surface . Also , plotted are beta values extracted from left mid - VLPFC ( y axis ) against the selection component factor score ( x axis ) for congruency , associative strength , and judgment specificity manipula - tions . gion ) . Given this high overlap , it is notable that the most anterior and ventral extent of left VLPFC ( −51 27 −3 and −48 30 −12 ) , corresponding to the inferior frontal gyrus pars orbitalis ( w BA 47 ) , appeared selectively sensitive to associative strength ( Figure 4D , blue region ) , a find - ing to which we return below . The number of targets manipulation ( four > two ) in experiment two revealed no reliable activation in left VLPFC at the corrected threshold . At a moderately re - duced threshold ( p < 0 . 005 , uncorrected ) , activation was observed in left posterior ( −45 12 27 ) and mid - VLPFC ( −51 27 15 ) ( Figure 4C ) , replicating number of targets effects identified in a prior experiment ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) ( −39 6 24 and −45 27 9 ) . Importantly , local - ization of these effects converged with the mid - VLPFC activation common to the congruency , judgment speci - ficity , and associative strength contrasts ( Figure 4C ) . Mid - VLPFC and the Selection Component The three manipulations included behaviorally in the factor analysis resulted in functional effects within left VLPFC with overlapping activation in mid - to posterior VLPFC ( Figure 4 ) . This finding raises the possibility that this region supports a common control process that may be indexed by the selection component metavari - able . To test this hypothesis , we correlated the fMRI indices of each control manipulation with the factor scores derived from the two extracted components . Specifically , a conjunction analysis was conducted to test for the convergence of regions showing a correla - tion between the selection component and the associ - ated neural effects of congruency , associative strength , and judgment specificity . Significance was assessed at a conservative threshold ( conjoint α = 0 . 000125 ) , pro - viding confidence in rejection of the conjunction null ( Nichols et al . , 2005 ) . Strikingly , this analysis implicated left mid - VLPFC ( −54 21 12 ) as the only convergent site at which all control contrasts were correlated with the selection component ( Figure 5 ) . This novel analysis strongly implicates neural processes in left mid - VLPFC as coupled with the common variance in behavior in - dexed by the selection component . The nonselection component did not correlate with functional variance at standard thresholds ( but see Supplemental Data ) . Anterior VLPFC and Controlled Semantic Retrieval In contrast to left mid - VLPFC , which was engaged across all control manipulations and was associated with the selection component , an anterior and ventral focus in left VLPFC was specifically sensitive to asso - ciative strength ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . Moreover , the con - trast of weak - two > strong - four trials , which is behav - iorally matched for time on task , revealed differential activation restricted precisely to this anterior and ven - tral locus of left VLPFC ( −45 27 −15 ) with this pattern converging with that seen in a prior study of controlled semantic retrieval ( Figure 4E ) ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) . The selective nature of the response in the ventral anterior extent of left VLPFC was confirmed by ROI analyses ( Figure 6 ) . Specifically , the ventral anterior ex - tent of left VLPFC ( −45 27 −15 ) revealed a robust effect of associative strength ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 20 . 1 , p < 0 . 005 ) but did not show reliable effects of judgment specificity ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 2 . 5 , p = 0 . 14 ) , congruency ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 2 . 1 , p = 0 . 18 ) , nor number of targets ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 0 . 11 , p = 0 . 75 ) . This pattern qualitatively differed from that in left mid - VLPFC ( −51 15 33 ) , which showed effects of all four manipulations , as evident in a Manipulation ( associa - tive strength , number of targets , judgment specificity , congruency ) × region ( anterior VLPFC , mid - VLPFC ) in - teraction ( F [ 3 , 30 ] = 5 . 0 , p < 0 . 01 ) . This outcome strongly supports an anatomical and functional delineation be - tween controlled retrieval and selection . Middle Temporal Cortex and Semantic Retrieval Semantic processing elicited activation in a left middle temporal region ( Figure 4A ) previously implicated in studies of semantic retrieval . Given the distinct predic - tions made by the selection and controlled retrieval hypotheses regarding activation in regions thought to store long - term semantic knowledge , ROI analyses as - sessed the sensitivity of left middle temporal cortex ( −48 −48 3 ) to the four control manipulations ( Figure 6 ) . There were two important findings . First , left middle Retrieval and Selection in VLPFC 913 Figure 6 . Integrated Percent Signal Change Data from ROI Analyses Analysis of ROIs in ( 1 ) anterior VLPFC ( −54 27 −9 ) , ( 2 ) posterior / mid - VLPFC ( −51 15 33 ) , and ( 3 ) middle temporal cortex ( −48 −48 3 ) reveal the sensitivity of each region to asso - ciative strength ( top left ) , number of targets ( top right ) , judgment specificity ( bottom left ) , and congruency ( bottom right ) manipula - tions . Anterior VLPFC showed selective sensi - tivity to associative strength , middle tempo - ral cortex showed sensitivity to associative strength and number of targets , whereas mid - VLPFC that was sensitive to all control manipulations . Note : asterisk represents p < 0 . 05 ; tilde , p = 0 . 1 . temporal cortex was sensitive to the two manipulations that putatively varied the amount of semantic knowl - edge retrieved ( associative strength : F [ 1 , 10 ] = 13 . 3 , p < 0 . 005 ; number of targets : F [ 1 , 10 ] = 11 . 9 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Se - mantic retrieval demands putatively increase across weak versus strong cue - target associative strength tri - als because during weak trials , additional knowledge , above and beyond that emerging through automatic re - trieval processes , must be recovered in a top - down manner to guide the decision . Semantic retrieval is also greater when there are four versus two targets because semantic knowledge is recovered about more stimuli in the former case . In this instance , the differential seman - tic retrieval may emerge from bottom - up ( automatic ) processes , as argued by others ( Thompson - Schill et al . , 1997 ) , thus resulting in an effect of number of targets in middle temporal cortex but not in left anterior VLPFC . Consistent with this perspective , left anterior VLPFC and middle temporal ROIs functionally dissociated across the two retrieval manipulations , as evidenced by a manipulation ( associative strength , number of tar - gets ) × region interaction ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 10 . 7 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Second , whereas left middle temporal cortex was sensitive to semantic retrieval , it was insensitive to judgment specificity and congruency ( Fs < 1 ) , providing evidence that the selection processes subserved by left mid - VLPFC operate postretrieval . Importantly , the pat - tern of left middle temporal activation , which may mark semantic retrieval , dissociated from that in left mid - VLPFC , which putatively marks selection , as evidenced by a manipulation ( associative strength , number of tar - gets , judgment specificity , congruency ) × region in - teraction ( F [ 3 , 30 ] = 9 . 4 , p < 0 . 0005 ) and by a selection demands ( judgment specificity , congruency ) × region interaction ( F [ 1 , 10 ] = 7 . 8 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Discussion The present data indicate that controlled retrieval and selection processes make distinct contributions to the regulation of memory and are mediated by anatomically separable subregions of left VLPFC . As such , these data offer resolution to the debate over left VLPFC function and advance mechanistic understanding of the relation between top - down retrieval and selection . Two central findings warrant attention . First , our data provide evidence for a general selec - tion process that operates across multiple semantic control conditions and is mediated by left mid - VLPFC . Process commonality was initially established through detection of functional overlap in left mid - VLPFC ( w BA 45 ) across the four control manipulations , consistent with theoretical task analyses suggesting that each manipulation varied selection demands . Process com - monality was further established through identification of a metavariable that accounted for behavioral vari - ance common to three of the control manipulations . Strikingly , the variance in this metavariable correlated with variance in left mid - VLPFC activation . Second , left anterior VLPFC ( w BA 47 ) was exclu - sively engaged in response to increased demands on the top - down retrieval of semantic knowledge , rather than postretrieval selection . That is , left anterior VLPFC was selectively sensitive to cue - target associative strength , with this functional pattern dissociating from that in left mid - VLPFC , thus suggesting a role in acti - vating long - term knowledge rather than resolving com - petition . This interpretation garners further support when considering the pattern of activation in left middle temporal cortex , a region that stores semantic knowl - edge and , thus , was expected to be sensitive to amount of semantic retrieval , be it knowledge ac - cessed via controlled retrieval ( indexed by associative strength ) and via more automatic retrieval routes ( in - dexed by number of targets ) . Importantly , left middle temporal activation varied with associative strength and number of targets but showed little sensitivity to selection demands ( congruency and task specificity ) . Collectively , these findings motivate a two - process model of fronto - temporal control of semantic memory . Neuron914 Retrieval of semantic knowledge stored in lateral tem - poral cortex may emerge through bottom - up ( auto - matic ) and / or top - down ( controlled ) mechanisms , with the latter mediated by left anterior VLPFC . As knowl - edge is retrieved , selection of task - relevant representa - tions from among retrieved competitors is required , with selection being mediated by left mid - VLPFC . Al - though the present data support this two - process model , it is important to note that the control of seman - tic memory is likely dynamic , such that selection opera - tions may begin to be engaged even prior to comple - tion of the retrieval stage ( i . e . , processing is likely to be parallel , rather than strongly serial ) . Postretrieval Selection The demand to select task - relevant representations from retrieved alternatives may be common to many contexts . Because stimuli are capable of automatically cueing more than one associate , any retrieval act holds the possibility of some competition from irrelevant , re - trieved information ( Anderson and Spellman , 1995 ; Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . Indeed , even the manipula - tion of associative strength , which we previously ar - gued to impact controlled retrieval demands without consequences for selection ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) , can also result in variable competition because of the pres - ence of irrelevant competitors or an “underdetermined response” on weak trials ( Kan and Thompson - Schill , 2004 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 2005 ) . Consistent with this perspective , increased semantic retrieval because of top - down ( associative strength ) or more automatic ( number of targets ) processes served to upregulate de - mands on left mid - VLPFC . In contrast to left middle temporal cortex , however , upregulation of left mid - VLPFC activation did not sim - ply track the amount of information retrieved . Rather , increased activation also accompanied manipulations that directly varied the degree of competition between retrieved alternatives while putatively holding semantic retrieval constant ( judgment specificity and congru - ency ) . This pattern was further supported by the strik - ing observation that across - manipulation behavioral variance in the “selection component” accounted for functional variance in left mid - VLPFC . Hence , going be - yond a qualitative overlap in sites of activation across manipulations thought to vary selection demands , the factor analysis identified a metavariable corresponding to shared variance across the manipulations . That this quantitative index of a shared processing component accounted for functional variance in left mid - VLPFC , when considered in combination with the broader pat - tern of imaging data , provides particularly compelling evidence in favor of a selection interpretation of left mid - VLPFC function . Critically , the dissociation between left mid - VLPFC and lateral temporal cortex suggests that the represen - tations on which this general selection process oper - ates are not necessarily long - term semantic represen - tations of the sort thought to be stored in lateral temporal regions . In particular , it appears reasonable to designate this selection process as occurring postre - trieval , operating on active representations that per - haps are being maintained in working memory . As noted above , this proposal does not require that re - trieval itself is all or none . Indeed , active representa - tions entering working memory may be partial , tran - sient , and even weak . However , it does require a distinction between active representations ( putatively maintained in working memory ) and long - term memory representations . There is evidence for such a distinc - tion in the nonhuman primate ( Miller et al . , 1996 ) in which disruption of active neural representations in temporal cortices through interference does not disrupt representations actively maintained in PFC , which are capable of subsequently guiding action . Furthermore , a distinction between stored long - term representations and working memory representations that guide action does have theoretical precedence ( e . g . , O’Reilly et al . , 2002 ) . Although the present manipulations of selection de - mands were within the context of semantic processing , it is not necessarily the case that the operation of this mechanism must be restricted to task contexts of se - mantic control or even memory in general . Indeed , the common factor influencing whether tasks elicit activa - tion in left mid - VLPFC appears to be whether they in - volve selection or interference resolution en route to generating a response . For example , left mid - VLPFC has been associated with increased interference within working memory ( Badre and Wagner , 2005 ; Bunge et al . , 2001 ; Jonides et al . , 1998 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 2002 ) , during task switching ( Brass and von Cramon , 2004 ) , and in response selection ( Jiang and Kanwisher , 2003 ; Milham et al . , 2001 ) . Furthermore , during episodic remembering , left mid - VLPFC has been associated with selection of perceptual and conceptual episodic details ( Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ) , suggesting that this region resolves conflict across memory and content domains . At a mechanistic level , this domain - general se - lection process may bias active representations main - tained in working memory to overcome conflict , thereby permitting selection of relevant representations from “noise” because of other active competitors . Controlled Semantic Retrieval Though a generalized selection process may play a role in resolving interference , the present data provide evi - dence of a dissociation across left VLPFC subregions for which a single - process model does not provide an account . The anterior , ventral extent of left VLPFC dis - sociated from mid - VLPFC because left anterior VLPFC was exclusively sensitive to associative strength ( Fig - ure 4D ) . Importantly , this was the case even when pit - ting controlled retrieval demands ( associative strength ) against overall retrieval ( number of targets ) because left anterior VLPFC was the only region to show a weak - two > strong - four effect . This pattern suggests that left anterior VLPFC is uniquely sensitive to the need to con - trol retrieval when available cues are insufficient to acti - vate relevant knowledge through bottom - up processes . In operation , a controlled retrieval mechanism may accumulate and maintain cues or retrieval goals to me - diate retrieval of additional relevant information stored in left temporal cortices ( e . g . , Badre and Wagner , 2002 ) . Consistent with this interpretation , left anterior VLPFC activation because of associative strength was accom - Retrieval and Selection in VLPFC 915 panied by similar activation in left middle temporal cor - tex . Moreover , prior studies have demonstrated a func - tional coupling between left anterior VLPFC and left middle temporal cortex during semantic processing ( Bokde et al . , 2001 ) and episodic recollection of con - ceptual event details ( Dobbins and Wagner , 2005 ) . Col - lectively , these data suggest that left anterior VLPFC may operate on representations in middle temporal cortex , though a metric of causality or directionality of information flow awaits future research ( Friston et al . , 2003 ; Goebel et al . , 2003 ; Sun et al . , 2004 ) . In our account for the observed dissociation between anterior VLPFC and mid - VLPFC , the critical distinction between controlled retrieval and selection putatively derives from the nature of the representations on which each process operates . The controlled retrieval process subserved by left anterior VLPFC may directly influence long - term semantic representations stored in lateral temporal regions . By contrast , the generalized selec - tion process supported by left mid - VLPFC may be criti - cal in resolving interference among active representa - tions maintained in working memory . One implication of the close association of controlled retrieval with the activation of stored representations is that this process should be tied more directly to tasks that demand ac - cess to long - term memory , whereas the selection pro - cess may be required to resolve interference among representations in working memory that came to be ac - tivated through means other than semantic retrieval . The ability to flexibly and strategically access knowl - edge is a central feature of an adaptive control system ( Anderson et al . , 2004 ; Sohn et al . , 2003 ) . The present results argue that distinct control mechanisms in left VLPFC contribute to this process by guiding access to semantic knowledge not retrieved automatically and selecting from among retrieved representations . The network proposed here may be central to a number of task contexts in which representations must be re - trieved or selected en route to generating a response . Future research promises to further specify the nature of these control mechanisms so as to better under - stand when they are necessary for successful adap - tive behavior . Experimental Procedures Participants Twenty - two right - handed , native English speakers ( 13 female ; ages 18 – 25 years ) were enrolled in experiment one , and an independent sample of 11 right - handed , native English speakers ( four female ; ages 18 – 30 years ) were enrolled in experiment two . Data from two additional subjects recruited for experiment one were excluded be - cause of significant artifacts . All participants received $ 50 remuner - ation for participation . Informed consent was obtained in a manner approved by the Human Subjects Committee of the Massachusetts General Hospital and the Committee on the Use of Humans as Ex - perimental Subjects at MIT . Design and Logic Event - related trials were separated in time by jittered ( 0 – 8 s ) null fixation periods and were grouped into task blocks . Blocks began with a baseline fixation period ( 12 s and 16 s for experiments one and two , respectively ) followed by a 4 - s instruction cue indicating the task ( feature or related ) to be performed for that block . On each trial , a cue word and a set of target words were presented for 3 s ( Figure 1 ) . Subjects chose one of the targets based on its semantic relationship with the cue and indicated their response on a keypad positioned under their left hand . Subjects were given 4 s to respond ( inclusive of the 3 - s cue - target set presentation ) . When the instruc - tion cue was “RELATED , ” subjects were to select the target that was most globally related to the cue . Alternatively , if the instruction specified a semantic feature ( e . g . , “COLOR , ” “SHAPE , ” “SIZE , ” or “TEXTURE” ) , subjects were to select the target most similar to the cue along this dimension . This design permitted manipulation of judgment specificity ( feature vs . related ) , cue - target associative strength ( strong versus weak ) , number of targets ( two versus four ) , and congruency ( congruent versus incongruent ) during semantic processing ( Figure 1 ) . The order of experimental and fixation events within a block was determined by optimizing the efficiency of the design matrix so as to permit event - related analyses ( Dale , 1999 ) ; efficiency was equated across related and feature blocks . Experiment one was designed to factorially combine control de - mands , crossing the associative strength , judgment specificity , and congruency manipulations within subject . Across four fMRI scan runs , subjects encountered 240 trials divided equally among the four associative strength × judgment specificity condition cross - ings . Furthermore , of the 120 feature trials , half were congruent and half were incongruent ( Figure 1 ) . Each scan contained four experi - mental blocks , two related and two feature , counterbalanced in an ABBA / BAAB fashion . Experiment two was designed to maximize sensitivity and power of the control manipulations while still permitting within - subject analysis . This goal was achieved by isolating control manipulations into separate processing epochs within a single scan session . Dur - ing an initial epoch , subjects performed the related task alone , with associative strength and the number of targets being manipulated ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . In a second epoch , subjects alternated be - tween feature and relatedness judgments , as in experiment one . However , unlike in experiment one , only judgment specificity and congruency manipulations were included . Otherwise , trial events in this epoch unfolded as with experiment one . Each of the epochs consisted of two fMRI scan runs . During epoch one , subjects en - countered 288 related trials ( Figure 1A ) . In the second epoch , sub - jects performed 80 related and 80 feature trials grouped into 8 re - lated and 8 feature blocks counterbalanced in an ABBA / BAAB fashion . These blocks were divided equally and counterbalanced across the two scan runs . Furthermore , subjects encountered 40 congruent and 40 incongruent trials mixed across the feature blocks . Stimuli Stimuli for all experiments were chosen from single - response free - association norms ( Moss and Older , 1996 ; Postman and Keppel , 1970 ) and were equated for word length and for normative fre - quency of use ( Kucera and Francis , 1967 ) across experimental con - ditions . For each of 240 cues in experiment one , one strongly asso - ciated , one weakly associated , and one unassociated target were chosen . The mean normative probability that the item was gener - ated as the associate of the cue differed across strong ( 0 . 11 ) and weak ( 0 . 02 ) targets , yielding a pre - experimental associative strength ratio of approximately 5 : 1 for strong : weak trials . This ratio was markedly lower than the 22 : 1 ratio adopted in epoch one of experi - ment two ( see below ) because of the additional counterbalancing constraints of the experiment one factorial design . Unassociated targets were determined based on their absence from a cue’s nor - mative list of associates . Stimuli for epoch one of experiment two were taken directly from a prior study , and thus details of stimulus selection and counterbal - ancing have been described previously ( Wagner et al . , 2001 ) . The mean normative probability that an item was generated as the as - sociate of the cue differed substantially between strong ( 0 . 22 ) and weak ( 0 . 01 ) targets . For each of the 160 cues in epoch two of ex - periment two , one associated and one unassociated target were selected . The mean normative probability of item generation for the associated target ( 0 . 19 ) was comparable to strong trials of epoch one . Again , unassociated targets were determined based on their absence from a cue’s normative list of associates . fMRI Procedures Whole - brain imaging for both experiments was performed on a 3T Siemens MRI system ( experiment one , 3T Allegra MRI system ; ex - Neuron916 periment two , 3T Trio MRI system ) . Functional data were acquired with a gradient - echo echo - planar pulse sequence ( experiment one , TR = 2 s , TE = 40 ms , 21 axial slices , 3 . 125 × 3 . 125 × 5 mm , 1 mm inter - slice gap , 208 volume acquisitions per run ; experiment two , TR = 2 s , TE = 30 ms , 20 axial slices , 3 . 125 × 3 . 125 × 5 mm , 1 mm inter - slice gap , 408 / 284 volume acquisitions per epoch1 / epoch2 run ) . High - resolution T1 - weighted ( MP - RAGE ) anatomical images were collected for anatomical visualization . Head motion was re - stricted with firm padding that surrounded the head . Visual stimuli were projected onto a screen and were viewed through a mirror attached to the head coil . Exploratory Factor Analysis An exploratory factor analysis of the behavior was performed by standard procedures ( Harris , 1967 ) . To provide a sufficient number of observations , subjects from both experiments were included in the factor analysis . Absolute differences in RT and errors for asso - ciative strength , judgment specificity , and congruency were com - puted and standardized within experimental group for inclusion in the factor analysis . It should be noted that the inclusion of relative , rather than absolute , difference scores does not qualitatively change any of the obtained results . The six eigenvalues describing the variance - covariance matrix of these six scores were then ex - tracted . Factors with eigenvalues greater than 1 were selected for additional analysis . Selected factors underwent oblique rotation with the Varimax algorithm . Regression estimate factor scores for inclusion in fMRI analysis were derived for each subject based on the oblique factor solution ( Harris , 1967 ) . Factor analysis was per - formed in StatView 5 . 0 . 1 ( SAS Institute ) . fMRI Data Analysis Data were preprocessed with SPM99 ( Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology , London ) . Functional images were corrected for differences in slice acquisition timing by resampling all slices in time to match the first slice followed by motion correction across all runs ( by sinc interpolation ) . Structural and functional data were spatially normalized to an EPI template based on the MNI ste - reotactic space ( Cocosco et al . , 1997 ) with a 12 - parameter affine transformation along with a nonlinear transformation with cosine basis functions . Images were resampled into 3 - mm cubic voxels and then spatially smoothed with an 8 - mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian kernel . Statistical models were constructed with SPM99 under the as - sumptions of the general linear model . Experiment one and the second epoch of experiment two used a mixed fMRI design , such that judgment specificity was manipulated across blocks and asso - ciative strength and congruency were manipulated in an event - related manner within blocks ( Donaldson et al . , 2001 ) . Because event and block regressors were correlated in these instances , all conditions were solely modeled as events by constructing regres - sors for each cell of the design ( i . e . , any effect of task “state” was not separately assessed ) . Similarly , the first epoch of experiment two was modeled in a standard event - related manner . Correct and incorrect trials were modeled separately ; all statistical contrasts were restricted to correct trials . Effects were estimated with a subject - specific fixed - effects model with session - specific effects and low - frequency signal com - ponents treated as confounds . Linear contrasts were used to ob - tain subject - specific estimates for each effect . These estimates were entered into a second - level analysis treating subjects as a random effect with a one - sample t test against a contrast value of zero at each voxel . Correlations of individual effects of control with factor scores were estimated with a multiple regression that in - cluded the factor scores as independent measures and the sub - ject - specific estimate for each control contrast as the dependent measure at each voxel . Voxel - based group effects were considered reliable to the extent that they consisted of at least five contiguous voxels that exceeded an uncorrected threshold of p < 0 . 001 . Moreover , maxima reported in left VLPFC survived correction for multiple comparisons over the search volume by Gaussian random - field theory ( Friston et al . , 1995 ) ( corrected p < 0 . 05 ) ; where effects in left VLPFC did not pass the corrected threshold , uncorrected results are reported to the extent that they constitute replications of findings from an indepen - dent data set . The volume used for correction included gray matter within left VLPFC and was generated in an unbiased manner based on the intersection of the automated anatomical labeling ( AAL ) re - gions ( Tzourio - Mazoyer et al . , 2002 ) that comprise the entire infe - rior frontal gyrus ( AAL regions , 11—inferior frontal gyrus pars oper - cularis , 13—inferior frontal gyrus pars triangularis , and 15—inferior frontal gyrus pars orbitalis ) and the SPM a priori gray image ( 50 % prior probability of gray matter ) . Group statistical maps were ren - dered on a canonical brain with SPM99 . For the purpose of addi - tional anatomical precision , group contrasts were also rendered on an MNI canonical brain that underwent cortical “inflation” with FreeSurfer ( CorTechs Labs , Inc . ) ( Dale et al . , 1999 ; Fischl et al . , 1999 ) and the SPM surfrend toolbox ( written by I . Kahn ; http : / / spmsurfrend . sourceforge . net / ) . To reveal common effects at the voxel level across independent conditions and data sets , we performed conjunction analyses . Un - less otherwise noted , conjunction analyses were assessed as sig - nificant at a conjoint α level of p < 0 . 001 . That is , a significant conjunction does not indicate that both contrasts were individually significant at standard thresholds ( Nichols et al . , 2005 ) but rather means that both were significant at more lenient thresholds ( with a joint probability of a Type I being less than 0 . 001 ) . The group - level voxel - based contrasts were supplemented with region - of - interest ( ROI ) analyses . All significant voxels within a 6 - mm radius of a chosen maximum defined an ROI and unless otherwise noted , were defined from the conjunction of all control conditions > fixation for the first and second epochs of experiment two ( Figure 4A ) . Selective averaging with respect to peristimulus time allowed assessment of the signal change associated with each condition . Integrated percent signal change ( iPSC ) was then computed based on the peak plus and minus one TR . The peak was defined neutrally for each ROI based on the average time course across all conditions . The resultant data were subjected to repeated - measures analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) . Supplemental Data The Supplemental Data for this article can be found online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 47 / 6 / 907 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments Supported by the National Science Foundation ( 0133126 ) , Ellison Medical Foundation , McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience , American Society for Engineering Education , and the Alfred P . Sloan Foundation . We thank M . Hutson , I . Sturdivant , D . Pain , and S . Laszlo for assistance with data collection . We are also indebted to I . Kahn for the provision of the inflated MNI canonical surface and rendering tools . Received : April 4 , 2005 Revised : June 3 , 2005 Accepted : July 20 , 2005 Published : September 14 , 2005 References Anderson , M . C . , and Spellman , B . A . ( 1995 ) . On the status of inhibi - tory mechanisms in cognition : memory retrieval as a model case . Psychol . Rev . 102 , 68 – 100 . Anderson , J . R . , Bothell , D . , Byrne , M . D . , Douglass , S . , Lebiere , C . , and Qin , Y . ( 2004 ) . An integrated theory of the mind . Psychol . Rev . 111 , 1036 – 1060 . Badre , D . , and Wagner , A . D . ( 2002 ) . Semantic retrieval , mnemonic control , and prefrontal cortex . Behav . Cogn . Neurosci . Rev . 1 , 206 – 218 . Badre , D . , and Wagner , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Frontal lobe mechanisms that resolve proactive interference . Cereb . Cortex , in press . Bokde , A . L . W . , Tagamets , M . - A . , Friedman , R . B . , and Horwitz , B . ( 2001 ) . Functional interactions of the inferior frontal cortex during the processing of words and word - like stimuli . Neuron 30 , 609 – 617 . Brass , M . , and von Cramon , D . Y . ( 2004 ) . Selection for cognitive Retrieval and Selection in VLPFC 917 control : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study on the se - lection of task - relevant information . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8847 – 8852 . Bunge , S . A . , Ochsner , K . N . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . H . , and Gabri - eli , J . D . ( 2001 ) . Prefrontal regions involved in keeping information in and out of mind . Brain 124 , 2074 – 2086 . Bunge , S . A . , Wendelken , C . , Badre , D . , and Wagner , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex : evidence for separable retrieval and integration mechanisms . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 239 – 249 . Cocosco , C . A . , Kollokian , V . , Kwan , R . K . S . , and Evans , A . C . ( 1997 ) . Brainweb : online interface to a 3D MRI simulated brain database . Neuroimage 5 , 425 . Dale , A . M . ( 1999 ) . Optimal experimental design for event - related fMRI . Hum . Brain Mapp . 8 , 109 – 114 . Dale , A . M . , Fischl , B . , and Sereno , M . I . ( 1999 ) . Cortical surface - based analysis . I . Segmentation and surface reconstruction . Neu - roimage 9 , 179 – 194 . Demb , J . B . , Desmond , J . E . , Wagner , A . D . , Vaidya , C . J . , Glover , G . H . , and Gabrieli , J . D . ( 1995 ) . Semantic encoding and retrieval in the left inferior prefrontal cortex : a functional MRI study of task difficulty and process specificity . J . Neurosci . 15 , 5870 – 5878 . Devlin , J . T . , Matthews , P . M . , and Rushworth , M . F . ( 2003 ) . Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex : a combined func - tional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic stim - ulation study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 15 , 71 – 84 . Dobbins , I . G . , and Wagner , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Domain - general and do - main - sensitive prefrontal mechanisms for recollecting events and detecting novelty . Cereb . Cortex , in press . Donaldson , D . I . , Petersen , S . E . , Ollinger , J . M . , and Buckner , R . L . ( 2001 ) . Dissociating state and item components of recognition memory using fMRI . Neuroimage 13 , 129 – 142 . Fischl , B . , Sereno , M . I . , and Dale , A . M . ( 1999 ) . Cortical surface - based analysis . II . Inflation , flattening , and a surface - based coordi - nate system . Neuroimage 9 , 195 – 207 . Fletcher , P . C . , Shallice , T . , and Dolan , R . J . ( 2000 ) . “Sculpting the response space”—an account of left prefrontal activation at encod - ing . Neuroimage 12 , 404 – 417 . Friston , K . J . , Holmes , A . P . , Worsley , K . J . , Poline , J . - B . , Frith , C . D . , and Frackowiak , R . S . J . ( 1995 ) . Statistical parametric maps in func - tional imaging : a general linear approach . Hum . Brain Mapp . 2 , 189 – 210 . Friston , K . J . , Harrison , L . , and Penny , W . ( 2003 ) . Dynamic causal modelling . Neuroimage 19 , 1273 – 1302 . Goebel , R . , Roebroeck , A . , Kim , D . S . , and Formisano , E . ( 2003 ) . Investigating directed cortical interactions in time - resolved fMRI data using vector autoregressive modeling and Granger causality mapping . Magn . Reson . Imaging 21 , 1251 – 1261 . Gold , B . T . , Balota , D . A . , Kirchhoff , B . A . , and Buckner , R . L . ( 2005 ) . Common and dissociable activation patterns associated with con - trolled semantic and phonological processing : evidence from fMRI adaptation . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 1438 – 1450 . Harris , C . W . ( 1967 ) . On factors and factor scores . Psychometrika 32 , 363 – 379 . Jiang , Y . , and Kanwisher , N . ( 2003 ) . Common neural substrates for response selection across modalities and mapping paradigms . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 15 , 1080 – 1094 . Jonides , J . , Smith , E . E . , Marshuetz , C . , Koeppe , R . A . , and Reuter - Lorenz , P . A . ( 1998 ) . Inhibition in verbal working memory revealed by brain activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 8410 – 8413 . Kan , I . P . , and Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2004 ) . Effect of name agree - ment on prefrontal activity during overt and covert picture naming . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 4 , 43 – 57 . Kapur , S . , Rose , R . , Liddle , P . F . , Zipursky , R . B . , Brown , G . M . , Stuss , D . , Houle , S . , and Tulving , E . ( 1994 ) . The role of the left prefrontal cortex in verbal processing : semantic processing or willed action ? Neuroreport 5 , 2193 – 2196 . Köhler , S . , Paus , T . , Buckner , R . L . , and Milner , B . ( 2004 ) . Effects of left inferior prefrontal stimulation on episodic memory formation : a two - stage fMRI - rTMS study . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 16 , 178 – 188 . Kucera , H . , and Francis , W . N . ( 1967 ) . Computational Analysis of Present - Day English ( Providence , RI : Brown University Press ) . Martin , A . , and Chao , L . L . ( 2001 ) . Semantic memory and the brain : structure and processes . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 11 , 194 – 201 . Martin , A . , Wiggs , C . L . , Lalonde , F . , and Mack , C . ( 1994 ) . Word re - trieval to letter and semantic cues : a double dissociation in normal subjects using interference tasks . Neuropsychologia 32 , 1487 – 1494 . Metzler , C . ( 2001 ) . Effects of left frontal lesions on the selection of context - appropriate meanings . Neuropsychology 15 , 315 – 328 . Milham , M . P . , Banich , M . T . , Webb , A . , Barad , V . , Cohen , N . J . , Wsza - lek , T . , and Kramer , A . F . ( 2001 ) . The relative involvement of anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex in attentional control depends on the nature of conflict . Brian Res . Cogn . Brain Res . 12 , 467 – 473 . Miller , E . K . , and Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An integrative theory of prefron - tal cortex function . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 24 , 167 – 202 . Miller , E . K . , Erickson , C . A . , and Desimone , R . ( 1996 ) . Neural mecha - nisms of visual working memory in prefrontal cortex of the ma - caque . J . Neurosci . 16 , 5154 – 5167 . Moss , H . , and Older , L . ( 1996 ) . Birkbeck Word Association Norms ( Hove , UK : Psychology Press ) . Moss , H . E . , Abdallah , S . , Fletcher , P . C . , Bright , P . , Pilgrim , L . K . , Acres , K . , and Tyler , L . K . ( 2005 ) . Selecting among competing alter - natives : selection and retrieval in the left inferior frontal gyrus . Cereb . Cortex , in press . Nichols , T . , Brett , M . , Andersson , J . , Wager , T . , and Poline , J . - B . ( 2005 ) . Valid conjunction inference with the minimum statistic . Neu - roimage 25 , 653 – 660 . Noppeney , U . , and Price , C . J . ( 2004 ) . Retrieval of abstract seman - tics . Neuroimage 22 , 164 – 170 . O’Reilly , R . C . , Noelle , D . C . , Braver , T . S . , and Cohen , J . D . ( 2002 ) . Prefrontal cortex and dynamic categorization tasks : representa - tional organization and neuromodulatory control . Cereb . Cortex 12 , 246 – 257 . Petersen , S . E . , Fox , P . T . , Posner , M . I . , Mintun , M . , and Raichle , M . E . ( 1988 ) . Positron emission tomographic studies of the cortical anat - omy of single - word processing . Nature 331 , 585 – 589 . Poldrack , R . A . , Wagner , A . D . , Prull , M . W . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . H . , and Gabrieli , J . D . ( 1999 ) . Functional specialization for seman - tic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage 10 , 15 – 35 . Postman , L . , and Keppel , G . ( 1970 ) . Norms of Word Association ( New York : Academic Press ) . Shimamura , A . P . ( 1995 ) . Memory and frontal lobe function . In The Cognitive Neurosciences , M . S . Gazzaniga , ed . ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , pp . 803 – 813 . Sohn , M . H . , Goode , A . , Stenger , V . A . , Carter , C . S . , and Anderson , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Competition and representation during memory re - trieval : roles of the prefrontal cortex and the posterior parietal cor - tex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 7412 – 7417 . Sun , F . T . , Miller , L . M . , and D’Esposito , M . ( 2004 ) . Measuring interre - gional functional connectivity using coherence and partial coher - ence analyses of fMRI data . Neuroimage 21 , 647 – 658 . Swick , D . , and Knight , R . T . ( 1996 ) . Is prefrontal cortex involved in cued recall ? A neuropsychological test of PET findings . Neuro - psychologia 34 , 1019 – 1028 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Neuroimaging studies of semantic memory : inferring “how” from “where . ” Neuropsychologia 41 , 280 – 292 Thompson - Schill , S . L . , D’Esposito , M . , Aguirre , G . K . , and Farah , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of se - mantic knowledge : a reevaluation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 14792 – 14797 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Swick , D . , Farah , M . J . , D’Esposito , M . , Kan , I . P . , and Knight , R . T . ( 1998 ) . Verb generation in patients with focal frontal lesions : a neuropsychological test of neuroimaging findings . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 15855 – 15860 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , D’Esposito , M . , and Kan , I . P . ( 1999 ) . Effects Neuron918 of repetition and competition on activity in left prefrontal cortex during word generation . Neuron 23 , 513 – 522 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Jonides , J . , Marshuetz , C . , Smith , E . E . , D’Esposito , M . , Kan , I . P . , Knight , R . T . , and Swick , D . ( 2002 ) . Effects of frontal lobe damage on interference effects in working memory . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 2 , 109 – 120 . Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Bedny , M . , and Goldberg , R . F . ( 2005 ) . The frontal lobes and the regulation of mental activity . Curr . Opin . Neu - robiol . 15 , 219 – 224 . Tzourio - Mazoyer , N . , Landeau , B . , Papathanassiou , D . , Crivello , F . , Etard , O . , Delcroix , N . , Mazoyer , B . , and Joliot , M . ( 2002 ) . Auto - mated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macro - scopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single - subject brain . Neuroimage 15 , 273 – 289 . Wagner , A . D . , Paré - Blagoev , E . J . , Clark , J . , and Poldrack , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Recovering meaning : left prefrontal cortex guides controlled semantic retrieval . Neuron 31 , 329 – 338 . Zhang , J . X . , Zhuang , J . , Ma , L . , Yu , W . , Peng , D . , Ding , G . , Zhang , Z . , and Weng , X . ( 2004 ) . Semantic processing of Chinese in left inferior prefrontal cortex studied with reversible words . Neuro - image 23 , 975 – 982 .