Innovations in Interaction Design & Learning Workshop Organizers June Ahn University of Maryland , College Park College of Information Studies , College of Education juneahn @ umd . edu Tamara Clegg University of Maryland , College Park College of Education , College of Information Studies tclegg @ umd . edu Jason Yip University of Washington Information School jcyip @ uw . edu Elizabeth Bonsignore University of Maryland , College Park College of Information Studies ebonsign @ umd . edu Jochen Rick badDesigner jeffRick @ badDesigner . us Abstract Many new technologies for children focus on fostering learning . However , designers and researchers often come from disparate traditions that either stress innovative design methodologies ( e . g . participatory design ) or rigorous examination of learning ( e . g . , design - based research ) . This workshop brings together researchers who are actively engaged in , or interested in , weaving together these research fields to develop usable , engaging , and innovative technologies that are also deeply grounded in theories of learning . We invite participants to submit position papers describing their work in progress . The goals of the workshop will be to better articulate the unique issues that arise at the intersection of interaction design and learning design , and develop an agenda for a next wave of research that draws a clear link between methodologies in these fields . All topic areas related to design , learning , and children are welcome . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . IDC ' 15 , June 21 - 25 , 2015 , Medford , MA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3590 - 4 / 15 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771956 Author Keywords Interaction design ; learning sciences ; HCI ; children ; research ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . Workshops IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 462 Introduction Designing usable , engaging , and effective learning technologies for children is a complex endeavor . Researchers across the Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) , Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , and Learning Sciences ( LS ) communities have explored this broad field in separate ways that are now converging rapidly [ 4 , 7 ] . Studies from the IDC and HCI fields have produced innovative design methodologies that document the intricate ways that the design activity can work with children as partners [ 5 , 6 ] . Design studies in these fields often focus on describing the development and features of technologies , along with observations of how children engage and interact with these tools . The process of design and creating is highlighted in the HCI field . Conversely , a strength of learning sciences research has been a focus on understanding learning in a wide variety of settings and deriving design principals from emerging theories of learning [ 3 ] . Design is also a core element of the learning sciences , but often the design aspects of the research cycle serve primarily to configure conditions that allow researchers to observe and understand learning processes [ 1 , 2 ] . Our aim is to bring together designers and researchers who are interested in pushing forward a research agenda that gives equal weight to the design and learning research aspects of our work in child - computer interaction . We envision a wide range of designers and scholars as the audience for this workshop . We encourage individuals who are actively designing and developing novel technologies and tools for children’s learning to share their work . The aim for our workshop activities is to help these project teams develop ideas for studying how learning happens with their technologies , and design research projects ( and perhaps collaborative partnerships with other researchers ) to realize these studies . We also encourage individuals who are studying , and have deep insight , into any aspect of children’s learning and development to participate . Such individuals will be able to inform designs from their theoretical expertise , and gather perspectives to better incorporate design methodologies into the creation of new technologies or interventions that can further their research agendas . Researchers studying learning and children may also find partnerships with developers , designers , and HCI researchers in this workshop . Scope and Topics Given these general aims , we invite a wide range of position papers that deal with topics including ( but not limited to ) : 1 . Design methodologies with children , adolescents , and different youth populations 2 . The design and development of new children’s technologies , tools , and interaction designs 3 . Research that contributes key theories or findings about children , their development , and learning processes ( that does not have to involve technology , but has implications for the design of technology ) 4 . New contexts of children’s lives and learning that illuminate opportunities to design for , and study , children’s learning with technology Workshops IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 463 Workshop Structure We propose a full - day workshop and expect between 10 - 20 participants for this workshop . Phase 1 : Speed Geeking . Following a brief introduction , each participant or research team will have 5 minutes to do a quick presentation about their work , design or learning goals for their research , and the type of feedback and interaction they would like to seek through the workshop . The workshop organizers will record these projects , goals , and workshop needs on paper , and place them throughout the room to be re - visited in Phase 3 . Phase 2 : Participatory Design Example . Next , we will guide participants through a participatory design activity to demo Cooperative Inquiry , the co - design methodology we use for developing learning technologies [ 5 , 8 , 9 ] . We will use our prototype – ScienceKit – as an example and outline some of our past work [ 1 , 2 ] . As with other child - computer interaction workshops , we invite children to attend our session to lend their insights and design ideas in the co - design exercise . We will debrief this activity , and use this shared experience to generate ideas about how to integrate design methodologies and learning sciences research in the lifecycle of a project . Phase 3 : Sounding Boards . Next , participants will identify other projects they would like to explore more deeply . We will dynamically organize participants into discussion groups . These groups will participate in a “sounding board” activity , where participants will give more details about their projects , share demos , ask questions , and discuss issues each project team is working on . Sounding board groups will discuss and record notes on the following topics with respect to their projects : ( 1 ) Design insights and ways to push design work even further ( 2 ) Learning insights , and ideas for developing more rigorous studies of learning ( 3 ) Potential sources of tension or obstacles that might be presented by the ideas discussed . Phase 4 : Design + Learning . In the final stage of the workshop we will brainstorm and articulate , in a whole group discussion , a series of design & research guidelines that may shape research and development projects that incorporate both extensive design methodologies and rigorous learning sciences research methods . Our goal is to elicit ideas about methodological standards and design principles that could become shared , norms for researchers and developers in the future . Expected Outcomes We hope to have three outcomes that arise from this workshop : 1 . Participants will have a chance to receive feedback from those in other fields regarding the design and learning research components of their work 2 . Participants will have opportunities to form new partnerships and ongoing work after the workshop 3 . We will articulate a set of research and design guidelines that clearly articulates the issues researchers should attend to when combining design + learning research . This discussion could result in a joint publication from the workshop . Organizer Bios Dr . June Ahn is an Assistant Professor at the University of Maryland , College Park . He holds a joint appointment in the College of Information Studies and College of Workshops IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 464 Education , and is a faculty member at the Human - Computer Interaction Lab . Dr . Tamara Clegg is an Assistant Professor at the University of Maryland , College Park . She holds a joint appointment in the College of Education and College of Information Studies . She is also a faculty member in the Human - Computer Interaction Lab . Dr . Jason Yip is an Assistant Professor of Digital Youth at the University of Washington , Seattle . He is faculty in the Information School . Elizabeth Bonsignore is a PhD student at the University of Maryland , College Park in the College of Information Studies . She is also a member of the Human - Computer Interaction Lab . Dr . Jochen “Jeff” Rick is owner of badDesigner . us , which aims to bring research in educational technology to a broader audience . He received his PhD from Georgia Institute of Technology and has held research positions at the Open University and Saarland University . References 1 . Ahn , J . , Clegg , T . , Yip , J . , et al . Seeing the unseen learner : designing and using social media to recognize children’s science dispositions in action . Learning , Media and Technology 0 , 0 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 31 . 2 . Clegg , T . , Yip , J . , Ahn , J . , et al . When face - to - face fails : Opportunities for social media to foster collaborative learning . Tenth International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning , ( 2013 ) . 3 . Collins , A . , Joseph , D . , and Bielaczyc , K . Design Research : Theoretical and Methodological Issues . The Journal of the Learning Sciences 13 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 15 – 42 . 4 . DiSalvo , B . and DiSalvo , C . Designing for Democracy in Education : Participatory Design and the Learning Sciences . Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS 2014 ) , International Society of the Learning Sciences ( 2014 ) . 5 . Druin , A . Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for children with children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : the CHI is the limit , ( 1999 ) , 592 – 599 . 6 . Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , and Fails , J . A . Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 1 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 14 – 23 . 7 . Rick , J . , Horn , M . , and Martinez - Maldonado , R . Workshop on Human - Computer Interaction and the Learning Sciences . 10th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning , ( 2013 ) . 8 . Walsh , G . , Druin , A . , Guha , M . L . , et al . Layered Elaboration : A New Technique for Co - design with Children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1237 – 1240 . 9 . Yip , J . , Clegg , T . , Bonsignore , E . , Gelderblom , H . , Rhodes , E . , and Druin , A . Brownies or Bags - of - stuff ? : Domain Expertise in Cooperative Inquiry with Children . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , ACM ( 2013 ) , 201 – 210 . Workshops IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 465