In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . Harnessing People’s Creativity : Ideation and Expression through Visual Communication Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Colin T . William Abstract The people who buy and use the products we create are not typically invited to play in the fuzzy front - end of the development process because it is commonly believed that they are not creative . But participation early in the front - end is needed to drive truly human - centered product development . We have learned how to harness the creativity of potential end - users very early in the development process . The research methods in this chapter explore not only what people say and do , but also what people make . The say methods are rooted in verbal communication and are used in situations such as traditional focus groups . Methods such as applied ethnography focus on what people do through direct or indirect observation . The make methods are unique in their ability to elicit creative expression from everyday people . This chapter describes and shows examples of “make” toolkits we use to elicit creative thinking from people who will buy and use future products and services . It also outlines how all the methods ( say and do and make ) are used together in order to fully understand people’s past , present as well as anticipated experiences with products and services . The Current Situation There is a widely held belief shared today by those involved in new product and service development that consumers are not creative . This belief has many variations including : “consumers do not know and cannot express their needs and / or dreams . ” “consumers cannot imagine or envision how their future could be different from the present . ” “consumers cannot come up with ideas for new products or services to improve their lives . ” “consumers cannot even recognize good ideas that are put in front of them in the form of concepts or prototypes . ” This belief has come from many years of market research dominance in the product development arena . Traditional forms of market research rely on verbal communication between people , i . e . , on what people say . The “say methods” are useful for getting an idea of what consumers can tell you and want to tell you in words , but they are very limited in the context of all the other methods that can be used to understand people’s unmet needs and dreams . Even the language that market researchers use to describe the people we design for , such as consumers , users and customers , puts them into roles with limited and very clearly defined boundaries . Consumers are people who shop . Users are people who use products In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . and services . Customers are purchasers . By putting people in narrow categories , we limit their ability to contribute creatively . As a result , the people who will be buying and using the products and services we create have not been invited to play in the front - end of the development process . At best , they are invited to participate at the concept evaluation phase or in usability testing . Participation in the middle or end of the design development process is not enough to drive truly human - centered product and service development . To do so requires that we find ways to harness the creativity of ordinary people early in the design development process . The Emerging Point of View We have found that there are research methods and tools that everyday people can use to contribute in the front end of the process . We have seen , contrary to the prevailing point of view , that everyday people are creative when given appropriate “tools” . We can harness their creativity early in the development process . Examples of the innate creativity of everyday people are becoming more evident daily . Desktop publishing by people not trained in design was the first sign . Now personal web sites are proliferating , as are web sites where people can , for example , design their own shoes or decorate their own t - shirts . On the non - electronic side , we see the rapid growth of activities such as scrapbooking and a renewed interest in folk art . With the advent of new forms of electronic communication , people today have become more demanding “consumers” . They are in the position now to be participants , even innovators , in the new product and service design and development process . The Opportunity : Harnessing People’s Creativity Before talking about how we have learned to harness the creativity of everyday people , we need to define what we mean by creativity . We take a transdisciplinary view : “Creative thinking in all fields occurs preverbally , before logic or linguistics comes into play , manifesting itself through emotions , intuitions , images and bodily feelings . The resulting ideas can be translated into one or more formal systems of communication such as words , equations , pictures or music or dance only after they are sufficiently developed in their prelogical forms . ” ( Root - Bernstein , R . & M . , 1999 ) . We will use ideation to refer to the preverbal idea stage and expression to refer to the translation of those ideas into formal systems of communication . According to Koestler ( 1964 ) , every creative act involves bisociation , a process in which previously unrelated ideas are brought together and combined . He contrasts bisociation with association . Association refers to previously established connections among ideas . Bisociation involves making entirely new connections . According to Koestler , bisociation only occurs when the person has been thoroughly involved in the problem or situation for a long time . Koestler also emphasizes the importance of dreams , in that dreaming involves bisociation at an unconscious level . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . To harness people’s creativity we need to support both ideation and expression . Here is the four - step framework we use : 1 . Immersion 2 . Activation of feelings and memories 3 . Dreaming 4 . Bisociation and expression The immersion step lasts from one to several weeks and takes place in the natural context of the experience being studied , usually the participant’s home or place of work . We guide the participants in daily self - documentation of their thoughts , feelings , and ideas about the experience being investigated . We may also ask them to observe and document their current behavior as well . The next three steps take place in face - to - face meetings , either individually or in groups . First we engage the participants in one or more “exercises” with “toolkits” that have been designed to evoke and activate related memories and feelings . The research tools we use for the activation exercises are predominantly visual , and are discussed in greater depth later in this chapter . Then we invite them to participate in an exercise with a toolkit designed to encourage their dreaming about their future or an ideal experience . Again , the research tools are predominantly visual . In the final bisociation and expression step we invite them to bring expression to the ideas they are having . This is the most exciting part – we have seen people express completely new ideas for products or services within a few minutes . It is as though they are ready to explode with ideas . The exercises / toolkits that we use for this step are deliberately abstract and ambiguous . Different Approaches to Learning : What People Say , Do and Make The research methods in this chapter explore not only what people say , but also what people do and make . Typical approaches to learning about people focus on what they say and do . As mentioned above , the say methods are rooted in verbal communication , such as through traditional focus groups . This can generate a lot of information , but it is limited to what people are able to put into words . Methods such as ethnography focus on what people do , through direct observation or through logs and diaries . Such methods also provide much information about behaviors , but they often lack in accessing people’s underlying motivations or emotions . The make methods described in the next section look at what people make , with creativity - based research tools you give them . Make methods enable creative expression by giving people ambiguous visual stimuli to work with . Being ambiguous , these stimuli can be interpreted in different ways , and can activate different memories and feelings in different people . The visual nature liberates people’s creativity from the boundaries of what they can state in words . Together , the ambiguity and the visual nature of these tools allow people much room for creativity , both in expressing their current experiences and ideas and in generating new ideas . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . Examples of Creativity - Based Research Tools In this section we’ll give you , the reader , examples of research tools that allow participants to use their natural creativity to express their ideas . These include pre - meeting tools for use before a group session to facilitate immersion , tools for activating memories and expressing emotions , tools for mapping processes and routines , and tools for bisociation and expression of ideas and ideals . The array of possible tools is limitless , and you should not constrain yourself to those outlined in this chapter . Experiential research tools are not “one size fits all” , and you should develop tools for each project with that in mind . Pre - Meeting Immersion Tools Mailing participants some tools in advance of a group meeting can enhance the quality of the meeting that takes place . Participants can think about issues to be discussed and about their own experiences . Below we highlight three pre - meeting tools , which can be used individually or together in one booklet . • Workbooks A workbook can contain different types of questions , such as demographic information , opinions and information about things people own or use . This lets you learn details about the people without using up meeting time , and thus is suited to less discussion - based issues . Hands - on exercises also can be included ; these can be completed and brought to a meeting , or mailed back to you in advance ( the latter allows you to develop more relevant follow - up questions ) . Assigning exercises ahead of time in workbooks can save time at the meeting , but it is important that you give enough workspace and clear instructions . Also , make exercises as interesting as possible to increase the chance of people completing them . • Diaries / day - in - the - life exercises These methods give people space in a workbook to record and become immersed in experiences . This can attune them to details about activities they might normally take for granted . For instance , a diary of commuting experiences might have people record the amount of time spent in the car each day , amount of time spent stopped in traffic , and how they felt and occupied themselves during commuting downtime . In a day - in - the - life exercise , people outline their typical day , either specific aspects ( e . g . use of computers for work and leisure , workspaces , etc . ) or across the board . This exercise can be useful in identifying opportunities for new ideas , as people can explain their experiences and the emotions attached to them . • Send a camera home Both workbooks and diaries can be enhanced by giving people a camera to document their experiences . They take pictures to document specific aspects of their lives , and mount them on workbook / diary pages to show what they do . This adds a level of richness to text - based methods – as the saying goes , a picture really can be worth a thousand words . So , for instance , a picture of a workspace can give you deeper In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . insight into the ways people organize their lives and their stuff . Two options for this are the disposable camera and the Polaroid camera . The former is cheaper , with minimal loss if a participant is dropped from the study . One downside is that participants must leave time to get film developed . Polaroid cameras and film are much more expensive , but they allow people to take and evaluate pictures on the spot . Further , people can immediately annotate the picture . Tools for the Group Meeting Below are just a few examples of tools that can be used within group meetings . These tools can also be used individually . They are designed to allow participants to use their previous immersion to stimulate creative exploration . Again , these are only examples to which you shouldn’t feel constrained . • Collages Collaging allows people to articulate experiences through pictures and words . Collaging involves giving people a set of picture and word stickers and a space on which to arrange them according to your instructions ( see figure # ) . Figure # : A sample collage set , and people creating collages in a group . Collaging is ideal for activating feelings and memories , as well as for dreaming . The stimulus set should not be too precisely defined – some stimuli should be ambiguous enough in meaning to allow participants to impose their own interpretation to facilitate creative expression . A collage exercise for our commuting project might give people a workspace divided into two halves , with one for expression of emotions surrounding current commuting experiences , and the other for dreaming about the emotions of commuting in the future . There are four steps to developing an effective collage toolkit : brainstorming , pilot testing , refinement and production . Brainstorming In brainstorming ideas for a collage toolkit , the goal is to provide the participants with the means to communicate across a wide array of experiences . The challenge , then , is in selecting stimuli – words and pictures – which will not only cover experiences you might anticipate , but others you won’t . For this reason , the stimuli must be intentionally ambiguous , so as to allow the participants to impose their own In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . meanings . Moreover , you should involve as many people as you can in your brainstorming sessions , to expand the horizons beyond your own experiences . The brainstorming session will focus on selecting words and pictures for use in the toolkit . Words are the easier part – anyone can brainstorm words that reflect their experiences . Some sample words for our commuting project might include “traffic” , “thirsty” , “waiting” , “music” , or “boring” . In fact , you should ask at least three people to brainstorm words in order to get a good variety . Words by themselves , however , are fairly narrow in scope , and that is what leads to the importance of pictures . Brainstorming an image set will be crucial in enticing your participants to communicate . Images can come from anywhere , e . g . magazines or personal photographs . What is important is creating a set that will be evocative . A picture of a person in a car is relevant to our project , but it won’t necessarily evoke discussion or emotions . On the other hand , images such as a picture of a traffic light , a cup of coffee , or a jagged speech bubble filled with “ @ # $ % & * ! ” , will be more potent , more real . But at the same time , you should include images you may not imagine to be part of the experience . Including a picture of a serene scene might evoke someone to talk about their ideal , stress - free commute . So the idea is to cover as broad a range of emotions and experiences as one can , even if they may not fit the expected model of the experience . On the practical side , you should already be anticipating how you will present these images and words to people . If you plan on giving people sticker sheets of pictures and words , then plan out what size stickers you will use , so that you can anticipate how large or small your images need to be . One image may seem perfect but when reduced down to sticker size , it may not be intelligible . On the other hand , if you choose to use paper sheets of images , you can use larger or nonstandard shapes of images ( see “Production” for more on this ) . Here are a few rules of thumb for what to include in a collage set : ~ a balance of positive and negative images and words , ~ a balance of abstract and concrete images and words , ~ both natural as well as man - made things , and ~ people of all types : male and female , young and old , racial balance , etc . Once a large set of ideas has been brainstormed , the set will inevitably need to be narrowed down . Overwhelming participants with an immense toolkit is not recommended . Reduce the set to a manageable level , certainly no more than 100 words and 100 pictures , and preferably 150 of the two combined . Distilling your set to manageable proportions will be a challenge , but it will be helped if you can spot redundancies . In our example , a picture of a clogged highway and the words “traffic jam” , both address the same thing , so it may be better to discard one or the other . At this stage you may not need to narrow down your set all the way . If you get rid of the most obvious redundancies , then you can solicit help in the next stage to narrow the set further . Pilot Testing It is imperative to try out your instructions and picture / word set on a few pilot subjects to get their feedback . While your instructions may seem obvious to you on paper , they may seem vague or unclear when spoken aloud to a person unfamiliar In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . with the task . Remember , people aren’t asked to do this kind of task everyday , so it is important to make sure in advance that they understand it . During a pilot test you will run a few people through your task , preferably people who don’t know about your project . Within your pilot test , you should try to approximate your test conditions as much as possible . So if your target is to complete a task in 20 minutes , then you should try to do so in your pilot test also . Where a pilot test may deviate from your plan is in soliciting feedback . When the pilot test people are trying to build their collage , you can ask them about what they are thinking – are there any concepts they’d like to express , but for which they can’t find an image or word ? Any images or words they think are redundant ? This can be done as they look , when their thoughts are fresh , or after they are done . The latter will allow you to deviate less from your test plan . Pilot testing can be invaluable in finishing out your toolkit . Almost always it will lead you to make subtle changes to your instructions . Also , you will get a clearer idea of the completeness of your stimulus set . You should be prepared to do a few pilot tests , and to change instructions and toolkits on the fly as you conduct them , especially if you are just beginning to learn these new tools and methods . Refinement Once you have run your pilot tests , you should make refinements to your toolkit . Narrow down the image / word set again , if it isn’t already at a manageable level . If you make major changes , don’t be afraid to run another pilot session . They seldom take much time , and the enhancements to your toolkit can be major . Production Once your toolkit is finalized , you can proceed with production . You should have already given consideration to how you want to present your images to people , and there are costs and benefits either way . Sticker sheets allow participants to work more quickly , and are less cumbersome ; however , sticker sheets can be expensive , and they place strict limits on image sizes . Moreover , if you choose small stickers , people observing the groups through a one - way mirror may be unable to see the images as participants talk about what they have created . The other option is to print your images and words on sheets of paper , and have participants use scissors to cut them out and glue sticks to paste them down . This method is less expensive , and it allows more freedom with image sizes ; however , it also requires more time and effort for participants to create a collage this way . In producing your collage toolkit , you should make several extra copies to give to those observing the session . Be sure to have enough supplies ( e . g . , scissors , glue , tape , colored markers , etc . ) for everyone . • Cognitive mapping Cognitive mapping allows people to map out processes and events , or their understanding of categories or systems . Cognitive mapping toolkits usually contain a poster board and symbolic shapes , which can be used to map out connections , clusters or hierarchies of concepts ( see figure # ) . Words may also be included . These tasks let people express and develop bisociations in thought processes and In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . structures . The toolkit provides people a medium that channels and simplifies their ability to express complex concepts . Figure # : A sample cognitive mapping kit and a completed cognitive map . A complex structure like that on the right would be difficult to express in words . To continue with the example of a study of commuting experiences , a cognitive mapping task could be used to have people embody and map out their ideal commuting experience for the future . Sample shapes could symbolize the home , the “cockpit” of the car , homes of potential carpoolers , places to get coffee or breakfast , shapes for side roads , main streets , highways and work ; also included could be colored word stickers to symbolize emotions . People could be asked to map out their ideal experience and associate emotions and times with each step . The general process of developing a cognitive mapping toolkit is much the same as that for developing a collage toolkit . That is , you will still follow the same brainstorming > pilot testing > refinement > production procedure . The major differences lie in anticipating the workspace people will need and the kind of shapes that will help them express their ideas . The shapes in figure # above include a house , a cloud , sun shapes , circles , and hands . As mentioned above , the bright orange and yellow shapes might be used to reflect positive emotions , whereas a grey cloud may be very negative . The shapes may be used literally or they may be used metaphorically . It is advisable to include very simple shapes such that many different interpretations are possible for each shape . For the development of your mapping toolkit , it can be useful to go to an art supply or a hobby / craft store and buy a broad sampling of colored shapes available . You will probably also need to produce some shapes of our own . Your brainstorming with colleagues will help to put together the appropriate selection . You can use your pilot sessions to get feedback , and to see which shapes people use to express themselves . In selecting word stickers , the procedure will be essentially the same as for developing a collage toolkit ; however since cognitive mapping is better used for addressing experiences at a more specific level , you will want to make your selections more concrete ( i . e . , less ambiguous ) than for an emotion - centered collage . This will allow you to start pulling out specific areas of opportunity in looking at what people are doing , thinking and feeling today . As with the collage toolkit , be prepared with extra copies of your toolkit for your audience . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . • Velcro - modeling Velcro - modeling allows people to embody and express their ideas in low - fidelity , three - dimensional models . Ideal for use after other tasks have been used for immersion , activation and dreaming , Velcro - modeling allows people to actively embody their ideas in a hands - on manner . A Velcro - modeling kit will consist of shapes , buttons and other items ( see figure # ) that are ambiguous in purpose , maximizing the opportunity for people to imagine and impose their own thoughts in the expression of their ideas . In this case , however , the basic “building blocks” ( i . e . , the larger dark gray components in the upper right corner of the kit photograph ) are three - dimensional forms covered with material to which Velcro will stick . The smaller control elements ( i . e . , the white and the colored button - like shapes in the same photo ) are three - dimensional as well . Some are purchased and others are custom made . All the smaller control elements have Velcro on the back so they can stick to the gray forms . We also supply extra Velcro dots so that people can stick the gray forms to one another . Figure # : A sample Velcro - modeling kit , and a father and son collaboratively creating an ideal model using this kit . For our commuting example , we might create a model cockpit for a car with surfaces coated in Velcro . Participants could arrange specific controls or features according to their needs and to the needs of their passengers , to create and describe the ideal cockpit for the everyday commuter . It is not possible to cover the creation of a Velcro - modeling toolkit in this short chapter . Most pieces are custom - designed and the collection of a full set may take years . We started with a small set and still find the need to add on to it every time it is used . Contrary to the toolkit sizes prescribed for image collaging and cognitive mapping , it is best to have very large Velcro - modeling toolkits . For example , for a group of four or five people , we might use hundreds of gray forms of many shapes and sizes together with hundreds of smaller components . At the point at which Velcro - modeling is used , people usually have ideas in mind and they quickly scan through hundreds of components to find those that best fit their ideas . A Velcro - modeling toolkit for an individual would be smaller , but still offer plenty of choice in components so that the person could quickly give form to any ideas that come to mind . Velcro - modeling is a very powerful tool for allowing ordinary people to express their dreams . It is often the case that people start grabbing pieces and using them intuitively before we can even finish giving the instructions . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . Guidelines for Using Tools Selecting Tools With so many tools available , it is important to develop a plan for using them . Getting the most out of tools requires having defined goals about what you want to learn , and a procedure that builds towards those goals . In developing your methodology , you should think about your goal , then pick tools that will facilitate people’s thinking and talking about their experiences . In doing this , consider the following issues : • Which research tool or tools will access what you want to learn ? Consider the aspects of experience you wish to access . As discussed in the preceding section , different tools are better for accessing cognitive vs . emotional aspects of experience . Certain tools can access people’s ideal experiences and ways for them to realize those ideals . Your goals will help dictate the types of tools you will use . • What do you want out of the tools ? Different tools yield different results . Some are more useful for the discussion they generate . For instance , collages enable storytelling , as participants talk about their collages . On the other hand , with Velcro - models the artifacts have greater importance . These artifacts may be a primary goal , e . g . to serve as inspiration for designers . But even then , the discussion of the models can be extensive and can serve as an important source of inspiration . • In what order should the tools be presented ? This issue is very important to the results you will get . Often the results of a tool will be incomplete unless participants have thought about the experience situation being investigated in advance . You can handle this by sending a workbook and camera to each participant before the meeting . This allows them to pay more attention to everyday life experiences , priming them for participation in the group discussion . Similarly , having participants create a past - present - future collage will prime them for thinking about specific ideal experiences or products . A good approach to deciding on the order is to follow the four - step framework described previously . Work from the general to the specific – start with current experience , explore it in greater depth , then use this as a baseline for evaluating and / or creating new ideas . Below is an example of tool ordering for our hypothetical study of commuting experiences for exploring automobile cockpit design : 1 . Immerse people in their everyday experiences of commuting via a workbook and camera . 2 . Open the group meeting with discussion of things they noticed while filling out the workbook . 3 . Have them create collages about the emotional aspects of commuting today vs . in the future in order to activate their feelings and memories . 4 . Have them create a cognitive map of the ideal experience of commuting to encourage their dreaming . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . 5 . Have them work with a Velcro - model car cockpit to support bisociation and expression . For example , they could remove elements that inhibit their ideal experience and add elements that would enhance the experience . The Discussion Guide Having created a general order for using tools , you can now draft a discussion guide , the formal instructions for running the meeting . This should cover the order of events , specific instructions for each part of the meeting , amount of time for each exercise , goals for each tool and follow - up questions . This guide is useful for standardization , both from session to session and across different people who might be running sessions . In writing your discussion guide , consider your goals and the time available . It is no small challenge to learn about people’s experiences in two hours while giving all participants the opportunity to speak . Outline specific instructions for your tools and estimate the time needed for each . Be generous and realistic about this : estimate time for participants to introduce themselves , to discuss any homework you gave in advance , to carry out each exercise , and time for each person to talk about what they create in each exercise . Next you should run a pilot session using the discussion guide and prototype tools . Recruit volunteers and run them through . Keep track of the time for each exercise and discussion , and get feedback from your volunteers on timing issues ( too much time or too little for each exercise ? ) and instructions ( clear , unclear ? ) . Based on these sessions , make changes to the guide . When estimating time , remember that in a group you will have more people than in your pilot session . If you run too long , consider putting certain exercises into the workbook for participants to do in advance and bring with them to the meeting . If you still run too long , explore ways to meet your goals using fewer tools . You also can change instructions that were unclear or didn’t meet your goals . Good feedback from pilot subjects can lead to changes to both the instructions and the tools themselves , such as suggestions on stimuli that should be added to the exercises . Seeing the tools in action will provide you with insight for refining them for better discussion and results . Having modified your procedure , test the full discussion guide again for time , and test any modifications to instructions that you make . After a few rounds of testing and iteration you’ll be ready to go . Results of creativity - based research Just as the toolkits support the creativity of everyday people , the artifacts people make from the toolkits support the creativity of designers . We often find that the design team members keep the artifacts such as collages , cognitive maps and Velcro - models to surround themselves with during their own ideation and expression activities . There are methods for both qualitative and quantitative analysis of the data from the say , do and make approaches . The most basic methods will center on identifying the items that occur most frequently on collages or in transcripts . Such items can serve as a starting point from which to go back to transcripts ( i . e . , the written protocol of what people said in the group meetings ) to look for recurring themes . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . More powerful statistical methods include cluster analysis and the use of Pathfinder Associative Networks ( Schvaneveldt , 1990 ) ; these can be useful for identifying patterns in data . A discussion of the analysis of data could fill a chapter or even a textbook to itself , however , so it is beyond the scope of this chapter . Conclusions To drive truly human - centered product and service development requires that we harness the creativity of ordinary people early in the development process . Although this chapter had focused on the role of the “make” tools , it should be clear from the example that a carefully planned execution of all three categories of methods ( say and do and make ) is needed to develop a successful understanding of people’s unmet needs and dreams . It is in the convergent territory that lies at the intersection of what people say and do and make that the useful insights can be found . We have focused on the use of the make tools for a number of reasons . First , because they are new and because we have found that these tools are the most effective way we know to elicit the creativity of everyday people . Use of the make tools has the added benefit of resulting in artifacts such as collages , mappings and Velcro - models . Designers and other members of the development team can quickly become immersed in the minds and hearts of their potential end - users when they hear people talk about the artifacts they have created with the make tools . The methods and tools described in this chapter have been used to drive and inspire the design development of products and services in many different industries : consumer , computer , medical and industrial . The Zip Drive by Iomega that was introduced in the mid 1990’s is one of the better recognized results of this approach . References and related readings BUZAN , T . , & BUZAN , B . , 2000 , The Mind Map Book ( Millennium Edition ) ( BBC Worldwide Ltd . , London ) . CAPACCHIONE , L . , 2000 , Visioning : Ten Steps to Designing the Life of Your Dreams ( Penguin Putman , New York ) . GARDNER , H . , 1983 , Frames of Mind : The Theory of Multiple Intelligences ( Basic Books , New York ) . HORN R . E . , 1998 , Visual Language : Global Communication for the 21 st Century ( MacroVU , Incorporated , Bainbridge Island , Washington ) . KOESTLER , A . , 1964 , The Act of Creation ( Hutchinson & Co , London ) . McCLOUD , S . , 1994 , Understanding Comics : The Invisible Art ( HarperCollins , New York ) . McKIM , R . H . , 1980 , Experiences in Visual Thinking ( Brooks / Cole , Wadsworth , California ) . In Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development . Langford J and McDonagh - Philp D ( Eds . ) Taylor and Francis , 2001 . ROOT - BERNSTEIN , R . and ROOT - BERNSTEIN , M . , 1999 , Sparks of Genius : The 13 Thinking Tools of the World ' s Most Creative People ( Houghton - Mifflin , New York ) . SANDERS , E . B . - N . , 2000 , Generative Tools for CoDesigning . To appear in Scrivener , Ball and Woodcock ( Eds . ) Collaborative Design ( Springer - Verlag , London ) . SCHVANEVELDT , R . W . , 1990 , Pathfinder Associative Networks : Studies in Knowledge Organization ( Ablex Publishing , Norwood , New Jersey ) .