145 Dilemmas in Situating Participation in Rural Ways of Saying Nicola Bidwell James Cook University School of Business ( IT ) Cairns , QLD nicola . bidwell @ jcu . edu . au Dianna Hardy James Cook University School of Business ( IT ) Townsville , QLD dianna . hardy @ jcu . edu . au ABSTRACT We reflect upon participation in design processes by people who emphasise ‘primary orality’ , or direct , face - to - face , unmediated communication , due to their rural locations in places with low technology ambiance and cultural antecedents . We focus on issues and relationships between rural contexts and primary orality of relevance to our projects with Indigenous people in regional Australia and villagers in remote rural South Africa . We observe dilemmas as we apply methods , which are informed by ethnomethodology , ethnography and Participatory Design , in enabling local participation , such as intrusive recording practices , concerns about power structures and appropriate investment of time . Author Keywords Rural , Indigenous culture , technology probes ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces , presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Developing systems to suit those living beyond the ‘design capitals’ of the world , such as in rural places , requires localising the design processes that involve user participation ( Bidwell & Browning , 2009 ) . Generally , we acknowledge the role of group - based oral communication for participation by different stakeholders and user groups in design processes and decisions . For example , over two - thirds of the thirty participatory methods classified by Kensing and Munk - Madsen ( Kensing & Munk - Madsen 1993 ) involve oral communication and dialogue ; gesture and body movements are core to the range of artefacts and methods used to provoke and inform user - centred design . Often emphasis on oral communication and performance within a group is connected with bringing plurality ( Gaver 2007 ) or egalitarian efficacy ( Liberman 1985 ) to envisioning services and products , to integrate bodily phenomena ( Klemmer et al . 2006 ) or promote collective acceptance of a new system . Within such emphases we tend to consider orality and performance as integrated with recorded and / or technologically mediated communication . That is direct , communication entwines with secondary orality , a mode which exists because of the written word . Thus , when working with groups whose cultural antecedents lie in modes of ‘primary orality’ , not in a written language ( Ong , 1982 ) , we face a challenge : software design has emerged in cultural contexts with a heritage in secondary orality ( Ong , 1982 ) . Direct , or “primary” orality and performance is unequivocally essential in communication within the classical design contexts of cities and workplaces ; but , it dominates practices , relationships and intangible knowledge in rural places . Supporting participation in design by those whose communication , with each other , and with their environment and history , acutely emphasises face - to - face speech , gesture , song , music , drama , ritual , skills or crafts poses dilemmas in design processes which have a provenance of interactions that do not involve face - to - face communication . Here , we reflect upon participation in design processes by people who emphasise primary orality due to their cultural antecedents and locations in places with low technology ambiance . Our insights in rural contexts illuminate issues that might be otherwise obscured but are fundamental to facilitating user participation in a dialogic and situating design appropriately in general . We first summarise some of the ways that rural places contrast with the dominant locale of design to show relationships between rural places and primary orality . We emphasise issues relevant to our projects with Indigenous people in regional Australia and villagers in remote rural South Africa . Then we describe dilemmas in enabling local participation that we encounter as we apply Participatory Design , ethnomethodological or ethnographic methods . Inhabitants of rural places often encounter a disjuncture between technology and their lived experience that reflects incompatibilities between concepts about communication produced in urban places and rural life ( Bidwell & Browning b 2009 ) . For example , social networking technologies match less well with the qualities and functions of social interactions within closely - knit rural communities than they do with interactions between inhabitants of cities ( Gilbert et al . 2008 ) while farm - and office - based participants emphasise different aspects of expression in their technologically - mediated communication ( Hargreaves 2008 ) . These discrepancies mirror power differences between rural people and the cultural , social and economic milieu of urban places and the seats of legislative and economic authority in cities . Design feeds this difference in the most banal ways as technology is not routinely designed to suit the characteristics of rural populations such as their land - based employment , informal acquisition of practical skills or transport , OZCHI 2009 , November 23 - 27 , 2009 , Melbourne , Australia . Copyright the author ( s ) and CHISIG Additional copies are available at the ACM Digital Library ( http : / / portal . acm . org / dl . cfm ) or ordered from the CHISIG secretary ( secretary @ chisig . org ) OZCHI 2009 Proceedings ISBN : 978 - 1 - 60558 - 854 - 4 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . (cid:50)(cid:61)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:44) ' 09 , (cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:89) (cid:21)(cid:22) - (cid:21)(cid:26) , 2009 , (cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68) © ACM 2009 ISBN : 978 - 1 - 60558 - (cid:27)(cid:24)(cid:23) - 4 / 09 / 1 (cid:20) . . . $ 10 . 00 146 electricity and tele - communications infrastructure . Technology development and use marginalises rural people and dis - empowers their every - day manner of communication in the process of design . That is , the ordinary nuances of communication that convey and order information in rural domains and enable communities in rural places to function are silenced by design activities and analyses that emerge from urban ways of doing and saying . Disconnects between technology design processes and communication within everyday rural life is particularly acute for communities whose culture is based on oral traditions and in places where technology and secondary orality is less pervasive . Consider how text has existed in Indigenous Australian society for less than 200 of its 40 , 000 year history or that many rural Africans become literate in English but not in the language they use in community life . In such communities orality underlies everyday acts of social and information organisation . Orally transmitting knowledge , directly and without recording , involves constantly recreating , accumulating and dividing it across a group according to immediate factors , social systems and protocols and power relations . It mutually constructs particular ‘management’ structures , such as inherited and hierarchical authorities , and particular processes , such as consensus - based decision - making . This intangible stuff of oral custom can conflict with the structures of information representation and distribution that are facilitated by mediating tools , such as text or electronic records . Such issues go far further than content alone , just as the multiple roles of paper in offices exceed the text written upon it ( Benford et al . 1997 ) , and it is critical to differentiate the nature of conflicts from simple ideas of textual or computer illiteracy . For example , people living in places with low population densities , small isolated communities or with few modern amenities survive by co - operating , exchanging performed knowledge face - to - face and attending to interpersonal relations , regardless of their textual literacy . The nuances of everyday acts of information transfer and social participation differ from those where structures are more extensively shaped by text and indirect orality , such as in urban places ; including those of software design . Regardless of whether we bring participants into our user - centred processes or enter their world by participatory design , our text - based culture and secondary orality tends to frame the way designers conceive participation . We might be unaware of such framing , for example consider our use of telling stories in understanding participants’ world , experience or unarticulated feelings about technology ( Erickson 1996 ) . Interpreting their content may be difficult across cultural gulfs but , as is importantly , some of their message may be buried in intricate details of their form . As Finnegan ( 2007 ) indicates we apply particular definitions of form and structure , associated with our own traditions of communicating stories , and these constructs may differ from those that apply in cultures with oral literature . Definitions of story and literature seep into our construction of the ethnomethodological tools we use to gather data , remotely , about participants’ lives and interactions , such as diary studies , photo - logs or probes . Similarly , our view of the little acts of design by which people adapt technology are situated in a theory of domestification which itself originates from our history of media and secondary orality ( Silverstone & Haddon 1996 ) . For example , consider how swiftly we interpret the absence of other numbering systems when we observe mobile phone numbers painted above doors in Indian streets ( Light 2009 ) and are quick to surmise phone numbers may serve a similar identification role . That is domestication of technology , and the data gathered from diary studies or probes , exists within a power relationship between globalised secondary orality and local communication norms . Different groups with strong oral traditions have varying and often dichotomous views towards the inclusion of western tools into their society . For example , tangible recording to preserve Traditional Knowledge ( TK ) is long recognised as a “Faustian bargain” ( Ginsberg 1996 ) , that can both empower and corrupt the knowledge . Indigenous groups in the United States and Australia have opposing views on what is to be gained or lost by introducing technological recordings , such as GIS ( Palmer 2007 , Turk 2007 ) . Techniques using tangible objects , body movements or role - playing , to inspire and express ideas and technology requirements , may align better with the way that rural people participate in solving problems and innovation using primary orality and performance ( e . g . fixing a fence , constructing a kraal or resolving a village dispute ) . However , regardless of how long and how well we suspend judgment , or our reactions to participants’ actions and interactions , at some stage we must translate , conceptualise and abstract from design events , involving speech and gesture , into design requirements . These translations are framed by secondary orality and visual records . Techniques involving participants in the translation , such as asking them to sketch on paper as advocated in rapid prototyping ( Snyder 2003 ) , again impose a particular communication framework and toolset in connecting visual representation to design . Starting from scratch in creating a concept is difficult enough for participants in general and particularly so in impoverished regions where people have limited personal experience of using writing materials , especially for such an unfamiliar exercise . As designers embedded in secondary orality and text we are challenged to conceive and enact methods that can situate participation appropriately , equalise the power balance in the dialectic of design and engage users and participants . Maintaining engagement in , what may be long - term , design requires the process and the resulting technology to be compatible with participants’ routine communication methods and social practices . Thus , ethnography serves a critical step in uncovering the recurrent details of enacted local practice and using this to inform the structure of design activities . Our approach to the two of our projects in regional Australia and rural Africa described here differs in the emphases of ethnography , ethnomethodology and participatory design . Thus we proceed by summarising the people , places and communication contexts and the methods we applied . 147 PEOPLE & SITES In the projects described here we collaborate with members of the Khonjwayo clan at Lwandile , in the “Wild Coast” area of the Eastern Cape South Africa of South Africa , and members of the Gugu Badhun clan in rural and regional north Queensland , Australia . Remote South Africa Most residents in remote Lower Ndungunyeni can trace their ancestry to the area’s settlement at least eight generations ago by the Khonjwayo , one of six Chiefdoms descending from the monarchy of a distinct Xhosa tribal cluster . Chiefdoms are territorial not based on pure kinship , so Khonjwayo ancestry includes indigenous Khoikhoi and San , ship - wrecked Europeans and Apartheid exiles . Today , traditional habitation , land - use , communication and power structures persist ( Bidwell & Browning 2009 ) . Isolated by topology , neglected by successive regimes and with a local history of resistance to colonists , famine and invasion , everyday life , in the 50km 2 area , anchors to traditional social networks and customary power structures . Lower Ndungunyeni’s 20 , 000 population , is acutely impoverished and even with remittances , pensions and child benefit , 80 % of families survive on less than 10 % of the national , median income for a working white man . There is significant migration from Ndungunyeni to cities throughout South Africa , but relocation is usually a temporary strategy to improve conditions for origin communities ( Bidwell & Browning 2009 ) . So , people ‘sent’ to a city dwell in low - budget informal settlements and / or with a relative , to maximize the benefits to their origin household or save for a home in their village . Favoring rural needs over a migrant’s own urban ‘progress’ reflects continuities between migrants and their origins distinct from modern peripatetic life - style . Even those benefiting from migration or diversifying their rural income have limited local access to modern facilities . There is poor transport , no sanitation and most of Lower Ndungunyeni has no grid electricity , although clinics , some schools and a few households have solar power . Such conditions can promote cohesion in local social networks including many kin . Families live in umzi which are informally distributed clusters of thatched , mud - brick rondavels , fronted by a garden for subsistence crops and connected by paths to water across hilly common grazing land . Formal , legislative institutions are separate from daily custom and practice , for instance people learn to read and write in English but speak Xhosa and democratically elect politicians but are closer to Headmen who inherit leadership patrilineally . Traditional and modern powers do interplay , so tribal groups broadly align with political parties and Headmen receive a small government salary and can effect municipal works ( e . g . clearing a road to his umzi ) ; but , in Ndungunyeni , democratic and customary structures have weak ties . Regional Australia The now widely dispersed Gugu Badhun group are the traditional owners of land surrounding the Valley of Lagoons and present - day town of Greenvale in north Queensland . For many years after the impact of colonization , the Gugu Badhun remained on their country by working on cattle stations . After World War II the cattle stations became unwilling to continue to employ Indigenous people , due to changes in labour laws regarding equal pay , which led to the diaspora of the Gugu Badhun in small towns in remote and regional areas throughout Queensland and state capitals such as Darwin and Adelaide . Despite separation of family groups , the Gugu Badhun have maintained strong ties to their country and to traditional customs and spirituality ; however , it has become increasingly difficult for members to maintain traditions with members who reside thousands of kilometres from their country . In an attempt to resolve these issues Elders run an annual “youth cultural camp” , during spring holidays , near their country where TK regarding language , bush flora and fauna ; caring for country and environmental care are taught . Attendance at these events has dwindled over the years as members have moved further afield for work prospects ; the distance separating group members , has made staying in contact increasingly difficult . Thus , the Gugu Badhun are increasingly turning to ICT to preserve their heritage , to show their culture as constantly evolving and to stay in touch with each other . Text - based Literacy & Media for Secondary Orality Ordinary use of media differs in the contexts in South African and Australia . Ambient text and literacy in everyday information sharing is rare in Lwandile ( Bidwell & Browning 2009 ) . Up to half of 9 - year - olds cannot read , as many villagers speak only Xhosa but young children learn to read in English , and written materials are not easily available . Instead social practice , and preferences for media when present ( e . g . TV , radio ) , emphasizes orality , song and dance . The main media supporting secondary orality in Lwandile is the cell - phone and the radio . Many villagers over 15 years own or share a low - end cell - phone , which they prefer to use to speak than SMS but do so rarely as airtime is unaffordable and not easily purchased locally . There are three TVs in the village but , without grid electricity they are infrequently used . Until the project villagers had not had access to video and most had never used a digital camera or camera - phone before . In contrast to the Khonjwayo , the Gugu Badhun have access to electricity but less cell phone coverage at rural locations . All participants however have ready access to TV . Further over the past 30 years , Gugu Badhun members have become increasingly involved in digital projects to preserve their language , cultural history and empower their young people to participate fully in modern Australia by using technology . The Gugu Badhun have long collaborated with academic personnel to preserve language ; for example in 1972 they worked with Sutton on audio recordings of the last partially fluent member of their group speaking their traditional language on audio tape ( Sutton 1973 ) . In 1995 the group produced an award - winning language CD , in association with a local filmmaker and following on from that project , they worked with members of the local university ( including author 2 ) to record oral history videos of Elders in their group and to make them available via the Internet . 148 METHODS Despite the temporary migration of the Khonjwayo and the diaspora of Gugu Badhun our project methods focus on work at particular sites . That is , rather than take a ‘multi - sited’ approach ( Marcus 1995 ) we initiated our research by building relationships and focusing in depth at specific locations . Ethnography of the Khonjwayo In South Africa our work is informed by an ethnography of events as the first author interacted with the site over 18 months . We aimed to co - generate a design approach by forming relationships , interpreting priorities and opportunities for design in the ad - hoc details of daily life , and under - taking ‘socio - technical experiments’ . We describe these this as four phases . In Phase 1 , we [ author 1 ] established relationships to enable living in the area by exchanging emails with Ans , a Dutch volunteer in a local Non - governmental Organisation ( NGO ) and , then , with Thabo , the elder son of Ndungunyeni’s senior Headman . We first stayed at Canzibe hospital , hosted by Ans , and drove to Lwandile ( 1 hr ) to meet the Headman and to Mdumbi ( 30 mins ) to see the NGO . These observations suggested focusing on interfaces between traditional leaders , the community and local and remote agencies on development projects . Two weeks later we returned with equipment to put in a room the Sibulos had furnished in the Headsman’s umzi in Lwandile . In Phases 2 and 3 we lived , according to local norms , for two consecutive months to collect data on domestic and community life and participate in activities . The final phase began when we left Lwandile and returned only for two visits , separated by 9 months encompassing 18 days in situ . In situ we recorded data using handwritten notes , 650 photographs , of which villagers took 200 , and 12 hours of video . Ex - situ we transcribed video , compiled ‘thick’ descriptions , logged email , SMS , phone calls and Facebook interactions , and integrated all of these to derive themes hermeneutically . The situated nature of work in Ndugunyeni enabled collecting a vast range of data on local practices in Lwandile ; movements of people and information between villages and between villages and the city movements on local transport between villages and to and from Mthatha ; and , digital communication . To begin with we gathered data by impromptu contextual interview while interacting with the family and passively observed visitors to the umzi in connection with the Headman’s duties ( e . g . resolving disputes , interfacing with police , signing hunting permits ) . Daily interactions developed most swiftly with women ( by participating in domestic duties ) , and with the elder sons . With increased familiarity we conversed with local teenagers , villagers and others on business in the umzi , in the spaza , on walks in the village or at Sunday football matches . Over the next month we gained insights into the Headman’s senior son priorities for local development projects pursuing the Khonjwayo Chieftainship and accompanied him to community meetings , meetings that led to establishing a new independent non - profit organization , and trips to another NGO . We also attended a school’s official opening by provincial dignitaries ; met the Headman’s son - in - law , a Chief in another area , when he visited ; accompanied the Headman to Mthatha Municipal Archives and to the Palace to look for records , meet the Queen and attend a meeting . We also had discussions with people locally , about their family members in cities , in a tourist area an hour away and in a NGO where locals mix with Afrikaan and foreigner volunteers . We observed villagers’ interactions with newspapers brought from town and movements on local transport between villages and to and from Mthatha . Ad - hoc data on digital communication focused on cell - phones as it is the only ICT that villagers tend to access . We observed phone use in the umzi , discussed use with villagers and some of their contacts and gathered data on hand - set models when started to sell airtime in a spaza at the end of Phase 4 . We also observed computer use at an internet café in Mthatha , the NGO Mdumbi education centre , and a backpackers in Coffee Bay , and discussed villagers’ preferences for other media ( e . g . TV , radio ) and its use in generating income . We also influenced initiatives . For example , early in Phase 4 , we introduced the new Not - for - Profit group to an American researcher , Sara , who was consulting for an IT company , which enabled them to raise funds . We also introduced the group to The National Archives & Records Services ( NARS ) , who offered to bring a new outreach program , ‘Taking the Archives to the People’ , to Lwandile . This led to the NPO hosting a 3 . 5 - day workshop in Lwandile school involving the departments of Land Affairs and Environment and the House of Traditional Leaders as well as local views from an emissary of the Chief and the local Councilor . This provided data on communication protocols , and subsidiary data on digital communications in planning ( email , mobile phone ) . Later in Phase 4 one of the NPO , with a researcher in our group , presented a paper about the workshop at a conference on oral history in a distant city . Technology infrastructure set - up in an earlier endeavour was integral to our presence in Lwandile ( Bidwell & Browning 2009 ) and in our introductory meeting the Headman’s son showed most interest in using technology to attract attention and funds for local upliftment initiatives . In Phase 2 ( fig 1 ) we introduced him to various Internet facilities such as searching for relevant information , NGO’s and Facebook web - sites and blogging to appeal to people overseas to sponsor local projects . We undertook various digital storytelling activities . We created a blog and demonstrated uploading photos and the Headman’s son and later his daughter took photos and typed short pieces . More impromptu storytelling arose at the opening of a new school ; we videoed family members in walks criss - crossing Lwandile , when describing photos ( e . g . after a three - day party to honour the Queen ) and an interview with the Headman . We illustrated the Internet to children , residents and visitors to the umzi who came to my room through curiosity , on errands or to charge cellphones . We sent emails for villagers and from Phase 3 spent an hour a day teaching the Headman’s daughter to set - up solar power , send emails and explore the Internet for information of interest to her . In the middle of Phase 4 we set up email for Bongani , extended the Wi - Fi network , set 149 up Facebook accounts for NPO members and created a Group for the FRCC . For 8 months we observed Facebook interactions by members of the FRCC and the local NGO and then discussed use with them . Designing with the Gugu Badhun We draw upon Participatory Design and ethno - methodologically informed methods to co - generate designs with Gugu Badhun women in Australia . Over the last 5 years the second author had gained cultural information and established a familiarity and mutual respect with members of this group , in face - to - face interviews and repeated viewings of videotapes serving a digital history project . As a consequence Elders in the community were willing to collaborate on further research , driven by reciprocity and a keen interest in the empowerment available through the use of technology . In this project we collaborate directly with female members of the Gugu Badhun , who reside in regional Townsville ( pop . 150 , 000 ) or rural Greenvale ( pop . 150 ) , which is 240 kms away . However , these women often handle the activities that enable staying in touch with distant group members including family members in Darwin and Adelaide . Women also carry responsibility for ensuring children are empowered in modern Australia , and prize youth participation in education , community sports and other activities . To understand the women’s priorities for ICT and the constraints and opportunities for communication between the women we undertook 5 individual and group interviews and 3 design workshops over a year and a half . We co - ordinated these via a female Elder of the Gugu Badhun and they generally occurred every 3 - 4 months to suit her busy schedule . The group interviews were semi - structured to allow us to elicit the desires of the participants toward further ICT development . The meetings included 10 women in Townsville and one woman in Greenvale , usually in the homes of the women . After establishing initial understandings we staged a series of 3 workshops over 9 months . Workshop activities included group discussions regarding computer use , security , storytelling , the importance of teaching by doing , and major themes surrounding the importance of education for children and empowerment through the use of technology . We usually undertook these activities after a leisurely dinner at an Elder’s home . While we audio and videotaped interviews and design activities , we gained many more insights into this community during the conviviality of the dinner table , which we recorded in field notes . We transcribed and analysed audio , video and field notes and analysed these in a grounded manner to establish the group’s directions and motivations and determine key categories and themes . The themes emerging in workshops and associated activities centred around communication , education , genealogy and preservation of TK . Thus , we co - designed and deployed a technology probe to gather information on electronic communication patterns , potential relationships between face - to - face and ICT mediated communication to inform the design of software that will enable the Gugu Badhun to track their family history . The probe is a web - based system which enables women to send messages to each other and to construct stories that link between members , and is designed to enable distributed women with varying levels of comfort with technology to participate . We deployed the probe and 10 Gugu Badhun women are using it to exchange messages and record stories both as text and audio . After the probe has been in use for 3 months , the data from the probe will be used to design a more long - term application that the women can use to stay in contact and share family / cultural stories . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 Data collection with Khonjwayo , South Africa ( b ) and Gugu Badhun , Australia ( a ) DILEMMAS Reasoning about our methods and observing their outcomes reveals dilemmas surrounding the tensions in text - based design and orality - focused participants . Recording as Exclusion Participation in design activities by communication through primary orality is effected by the way we recorded those activities beyond a simple reading of the Hawthorne effect . Recording notes is a widely recognised as integral to participant observation methods both in turning observations in field - work or design activities into retrievable , ‘trustworthy’ data and as analytical steps . Deciding what goes into field notes , such as conversational details or the ‘thickness’ of contextual description , of course , contributes to the inherent contradiction of records being both data and analysis ( Clifford 1990 , LeCompte & Schensul 1999 ) . However , note - taking also intervenes within oral communication ; for instance , participants in Lwandile were aware of our field note practices , such as noting comments and actions in meetings or logging more ad hoc , transitory or mobile events at the end of the day . We openly discussed our purposes in note - taking , often with respect to our research ethics and participants did not object , show interest in looking at the notes , nor take notes themselves . Our note - taking distinguishes the way things are ‘made real’ in text - based culture ; consider the extreme ethnographical view that “ if you didn’t write it down in your field notes , then it didn’t happen ( at least as far as being data for analysis is concerned ) ” ( DeWalt & DeWalt 2002 ) . 150 Participants’ response to our note - taking suggest that the behaviour signalled legitimacy , significance and that we only remember the written . For example , in meetings and discussion Thabo and others would comment , with humour , “ why are you not writing this down ? ” or “ write this down in your note - book ” . The way text is used as a fixative in western culture dis - empowers the voices of participants who value orality more highly . Text allows us to delineate the parameters of a discussion , abstract and log complex interactions , permanently state beliefs or ideas and perform legal acts . Text anchors reality in ways that differ from the way reality is anchored in primarily oral communication . Consider officially validating verbal vows of marriage or a job offer by signing and registering a record of the union or a letter conveying terms of the employment . While national laws that effect Indigenous Australian and rural Africans require textual recording more locally agreements are not concretised by text . In Lwandile , and other African societies living under tradition , people resolve disputes and contraventions by protracted oral negotiation and specific oral acts . For example , a man impregnating an unmarried woman or another’s wife follows particular oral customs to apologise to the family , submitting an appropriate ( often monetary ) penance before verbal absolution and no further antagonism . Such oral protocols enable close communities to maintain continuity and cohesion and their nuances are vital to participation . At some meetings in Lwandile participants themselves made notes ( e . g . minuting meetings and or typing as presenters spoke at the workshop ) . But text in these instances demarcated a formality and the resulting texts have not since been consulted . As a concrete reality , text can be used to disenfranchise and oppress ( Freire 1970 ) , and people from oral cultures are often sensitive to such hegemony . Text , on tablets , papyrus and paper , originated to facilitate commerce and establish state - based societies , by recording transactions , decisions , and other actions , between strangers . It is a tangible attribute that serves economic and social capital in modern society , via bank notes and certificates . It controls the currency by which people acquire power through social status and historicity . In a text based culture we are swift to notice the mutability of oral history and more tardy in noticing the politics of text . Consider the contested origins of the people who gave Tuscany its name . In the fifth century BC Greek historian Herodotus wrote that the ancient Etruscans came from western Turkey and colonized parts of Italy , bringing with them all that was needed to start a new life . Herodotus’ contemporaries agreed with his theory but , until the emergence of DNA data of Etruscan gravesites , modern archaeologists held the view of the Roman Dionysius , who around the first Century claimed that the Etruscans originated in Italy . Groups who prioritise oral - based communication draw on intangible “props” to record , distribute and negotiate information . This encompasses organisational structures , such as authority based on genealogy ; conventions for naming group members , relationships relations between members and with their surroundings ; performance , from music , dance to oratory ; and , everyday routines and rituals , from greeting each other to “ walking country ” . Recognising the role played by such cultural props in communication is important to enabling full participation in design activities and “ privileging the voice of Indigenous participants ” ( Laycock et al . 2009 ) . But it presents a dilemma for our data gathering and analytical methods . For example , we can transcribe a story and make thick descriptions but lose much in translation to text . And , we must continuously suspend judgement . For example , consider the need to accept Thabo’s version of the Khonjwayo lineage . In the context of certain missing records , he claims that 5 generations ago the incumbent Chief’s ancestors gained Chieftenship when the British deposed his Great - Great - Great Grandfather . Recording as Boundary Objects Audio , video , photographic recordings and technology probes extended and deepened our time in the field but in deploying these devices and interpreting their data we are acutely aware that as media for secondary orality and text they are objects of cultural translation ( Browning et al . 2008 ) . Whether or not the participant is actively in control of recordings we need to hermeneutically and reflexively analyse the dynamics of the translation . The paradox posed by integrating recording tools in our techniques of analysis can , to some extent , be assisted by involving participants in the designing the translation activities . For example , incompatibilities between classical genealogy software , set in the western hierarchical system of family trees , were uncovered in our discussions with the Gugu Badhun about the intricate connections between families , clans , groups and other culturally mandated relationships . The iterative process through which we designed a probe to gather family histories and cultural stories enabled the Gugu Badhun women to envision longer - term design possibilities that might otherwise have been overwhelming or intimidating . Importantly it also communicated to us the ways that the women understood how their use of the media might reveal issues beneath the surface of the complexity of their social systems . Gathering data through use of Facebook in Lwandile also provided insight into the possible domestication of technology in the service of particular social relationships . However , such insight is not superficially yielded , and requires deep triangulation with data on non - mediated communication . The Gugu Badhun technology probe and Facebook , as used by Thabo’s and others in Lwandile , are boundary objects ( Light 2008 ) which can inspire design . To identify opportunities for design we need to appreciate the way boundary objects are domesticated according to local needs in the whole context of oral communication . The challenge of this is beautifully allegorised in the contents of a joke forwarded recently , by email , from Thabo . It starts “ Bill Gates organized an enormous session to recruit a new Chairman for Microsoft Europe . 5000 candidates assembled in a large room . One candidate was Majola , a Xhosa living in USA . Bill Gates thanked all the candidates for coming and asked those 151 who do not know JAVA programming to leave . 2000 people leave the room . Majola says to himself ‘I do not know JAVA but I have nothing to lose if I stay . I’ll give it a try . ’ The joke continues to filter candidates and Majola staying despite his lack of credentials saying to himself ‘ what have I got to lose ’ . It ends when Majola and one other candidate is left in the room : “ Bill Gates joins them and said ‘Apparently you are the only two candidates who have all the required qualifications and experience I am looking for and speak Serb - Croat , so I’d now like to hear you have a conversation in that language’ . And , calmly , Majola turns to the other candidate and says ‘Molo mfondidni’ , The other candidate answers ‘Tyhini Molo mholoba Wam’ . Thabo has only ever forwarded this one joke , although he does not know about software programming he knows of Microsoft and Bill Gates and that we will understand the irony in the punch - line , that is : both candidates greet one another in Xhosa , not Serb - Croat . This joke reflects the way differing agendas , implicitly contribute to cross - cultural collaboration . It is resonant of Verran and Christie’s view that traditional groups in Australia harness ICT projects to gain empowement despite their culture’s envelopment by westernised society ( Verran et al . 2007 ) . Power Structures & Access Points Through much of our research , access to the participants was facilitated through one key contact in each group . This led to concerns about ‘gate - keeping’ by the single ‘human access points’ ( Marsden et al . 2008 ) through which we engaged with the Khonjwayo and the Gugu Badhun ( i . e . one key cultural guide ) . However , observing the ways that oral culture and power structures entwine helped us to reconcile these tensions . Power may appear to be centred within a small group of highly placed individuals such as Headmen or Elders , however it is maintained by frequent oral interactions with group members . In making decisions the leaders of the Khonjwayo and the Gugu Badhun carry a responsibility for the well being of their tribes and clans . To avoid arbitrary or hastily rendered judgement , which would not be well received . ( Liberman 1985 ) , leaders build consensus . With some restrictions on gender , the whole group participates in discussion which ensures that varied opinions are heard and debated and that the Headman’s or Elder’s decision or words are not altered in the retelling . For example , frequently many decisions relating to Thabos projects were delayed until all appropriate community members were present ; and writing lists of who attended meetings and their contact details was prioritised over minuting the discussions . Relationships and “who you know” are , of course , integral in western systems but they are often obscured by mechanisms of secondary orality and text . Consider the way a small , elite group of individuals , often elected by shareholders or voters , make decisions . They may consult with experts or representatives but rarely receive direct verbal input from the majority . Leadership attempts to appraise wider opinion do not invest in prolonged spoken exchanges but use devices like opinion surveys and ballot papers . Information dissemination from authorities , such as policies , decisions and plans , carry a meagre amount of the messages available face - to - face , be that body language , gestures , posture , and contextual relations , and leave little room for anything but cautiously proffered opinions . Such devices protect individual anonymity but distance leadership from hearing the multiple , often opposing perspectives , that we observed in the prolonged discussions in Lwandile and Townsville . As noted for Indigenous decision - making and problem solution ( Liberman 1985 ) opposing viewpoints are acceptable and often sought and consensus building supports collectivity by negotiating and suspending judgement until all voices have been heard . This has allayed our nervousness about access to the community through particular individuals . Investing Time in Indexicality & Conviviality Values , such as independence and efficiency , inherent in recordings , secondary orality and , indeed , many of the agendas of design , intrude on opportunities to gain insights into the subtleties of oral culture that enable participation . Context carries the burden of meaning in communication and determines semantics , whether people convey meaning by drawing on the intangible , the concrete or the abstract . It has taken us significant time to identify the indexical resources that enable participants to convey the salience of their utterances and enable us to translate the meaning of probe returns . For example , it took several months living in Lwandile and 5 years work with the Gugu Badhun to generate sufficient familiarity to depict , cohesively , aspects of “the language games” ( Crabtree 1998 ) which organise the community and the protocols that mediate interactions between speaker and listener , to make sense of meanings and values in what is said , performed or left unsaid . Gaining familiarity with the nuances of communication when primary orality is prioritised poses problems for abbreviating ways to enable direct participation in design in rural communities . We also believe , unfortunately , that success depends on researcher’s personal characteristics . For example , we need an awareness of and responsivity to tacit rules , embedded in communication , posture , gestures or eye contact such as protocols of access ( e . g . who is allowed to hear a particular story ) . Consider the need to resist reacting as if a youth is not listening when they avert their gaze , according to manners that teach that it is disrespectful for a child to look an elder in the eye when spoken to . However , in devoting this time we learn the cultural dynamics that underlie collaborations in a group . For example , by observing repetition in speech and action we came to understand how repetitive practices embody information in the doing and saying and enable groups with oral traditions to perpetuate the memory of important events and discussion . In our projects , a significant investment of time was required to participate in occasions supporting conviviality . In working with the Gugu Badhun , most of our design workshops were held in a community member’s home where we would first eat and then work at the dining room table , laughing and sharing stories . The participants’ comfort engendered a companionability , which supported creativity and sharing ideas , and , importantly , enabled the women to express feelings regarding connection to the ancestors who still reside on 152 their country , the responsibility to take care of the land and their discomfort in residing on “someone else’s country” . These expressions enabled us to understand phrases such as “being on country” and “connection to country” , by recognising their indexical relationships with personal identity , spirituality , loss , tradition and responsibility . On one occasion , a workshop due to time constraints was held at the university , and participants’ demeanours starkly contrasted with other sessions ; they sat rigidly in their chairs , nodding in agreement , but rarely offering conflicting opinions . CONCLUSION The processes that enable delineating parameters , abstraction , remembering and claiming in oral communication differ from those found in text - based urban settings . Moreover orality may serve several different functions in community , and thus should not be ignored . This has wider implications fundamental to situating design appropriately generally and in facilitating user participation . The inherent power structures found in cultures that favour orality over text should not be discounted , but nor should they be considered to be detrimental to the cause of participatory collaboration . Just as these power structures are mediated by cultural norms , they will also be present in the use of any design . While the dilemmas we have encountered in situating design in the participant’s locale ( such as intrusive recording practices , concerns about power structures and appropriate investment of time ) present ongoing challenges , the advantages in taking a more grounded approach offer the potential to inspire design that is capable of empowering the participants’ communities . REFERENCES Benford , S . , Snowdon , D . , Colebourne , A , O’Brien , J . , Rodden , T . ( 1997 ) Informing the design of collaborative virtual environments , Proc of the intl ACM SIGGROUP Conf . on Supporting group work , p . 71 - 80 , Nov . 16 - 19 , 1997 , Phoenix . Bidwell , N J & Browning , D ( 2009 ) Pursuing Genius Loci : Interaction Design And Natural Places . In Press : Personal & Ubiquitous Computing 217 , Bidwell , N J ( 2009 ) Anchoring Design in Rural Customs of Doing and Saying , in T . Goss et al . ( Eds . ) : Interact 2009 , Part I , LNCS 5726 , pp . 686 - 699 Browning , D . , Bidwell , N . J . , Hardy , D . , & Standley , P . M . , Rural Encounters : Cultural Translations through Proc . of OZCHI 2008 , Cairns , Australia . Clifford , J . ( 1990 ) Notes on ( field ) notes . Fieldnotes : The makings of anthropology 1990 , 47 - 70 . Crabtree , A . ( 1998 ) Ethnography in Participatory Design , Proc . of the 1998 Participatory Design Conf . ( eds . Chatfield , R . , Kuhn , S , Muller , M . ) , 93 - 105 , Seattle , USA , 12 - 14 Nov . 1998 DeWalt , K . M . & DeWalt , B . R . ( 2002 ) . Participant observation : a guide for fieldworkers . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Erickson , T . ( 1996 ) Design as storytelling , interactions , v . 3 n . 4 , p . 30 - 35 , July / Aug . 1996 . Finnegan , R . ( 2007 ) The oral and beyond : doing things with words in Africa . Oxford / Chicago : James Currey / U . of Chicago Pr . Freire , P . ( 1970 ) . Pedagogy of the Oppressed . New York : Seabury . Gaver , W . ( 2007 ) Cultural commentators : Non - native interpretations as resources for polyphonic assessment Int . Journal of Human - Computer Studies Apr . 07 65 ( 4 ) : 292 - 305 . Gilbert , E . , Karahalios , K . , Sandvig , C . ( 2007 ) Network in the Garden : An Empirical Analysis of Social Media in Rural Lives Proc . CHI ’08 1603 1612 12 . Ginsburg , F . ( 1996 ) . Mediating culture : indigenous media , ethnographic film , and the production of identity . In Fields of Vision , ed . L . Deveraux , R . Hillman . Univ of Calif . Pr . Hargreaves , D ( 2008 ) Low - cost ; low - bandwidth online meetings between scientists and farmers . Proc . OZCHI 2008 . Kensing , F . and Muni - Madsen , A . ( 1993 ) , PD : Structure in the toolbox , Communications of the ACM 36 ( 6 ) , 78 - 85 ( June 1993 ) . Klemmer , S . , Hartmann , B . , Takayam , L . ( 2006 ) How bodies matter : five themes for interaction design . Proc 6 th ACM Designing Interactive Systems DIS ’06 140 - 149 . Landsberger , HA ( 1958 ) . Hawthorne Revisited . Ithaca , NY : Cornell Uni . . Laycock , A , Walker , D , Harrison , N & Brands , J ( 2009 ) Supporting Indigenous Researchers : A Practical Guide for Supervisors , Cooperative Res . Centre for Aboriginal Health , Darwin . LeCompte , M . , and J . Schensul . ( 1999 ) . Designing and conducting ethnographic research . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira . Liberman , K . ( 1985 ) Understanding interaction in central Australia : an ethnomethodological study of Australian people . Boston : Routledge and Kegan . Light , A . ( 2008 ) Inclusivity , Interaction Design and Culture Workshop , Proc . of OZCHI 2008 , Dec , 2008 , Cairns , Australia . Light , A . ( 2009 ) Research Project as Boundary Object : researching a Web 2 . 0 bridging tool for Int . development , Proc . ECSCW 2009 ( in press ) , Vienna , Austria . Marcus , G . E . ( 1995 ) Ethnography in / of the world system : The emergence of multi - sited ethnography . Ann . Review of Anthropology , 24 ( 1 ) , 95 - 117 . Marsden , G , Maunder A & Parker , M ( 2008 ) People are people , but technology is not technology Phil . Trans . Royal Soc . , 366 : 3795 - 3804 . Ong , W . J . ( 1982 ) . Orality and literacy : The technologizing of the word , London : Routledge . Palmer , M . H ( 2007 ) Cut from the Same Cloth : The United States Bureau of Indian Affairs , Geographic Information Systems , and Cultural Assimilation , In Information Technology and Indigenous People , L . Dyson , M . Hendriks , S . Grant ( eds ) , Information Science Publishing , Hershey , USA , pp . 220 - 231 . Silverston , R . , Haddon , L . ( 1996 ) Design and Domestication of Information and Communication Technologies . In : Mansell , R . Silverstone , R . ( eds . ) : Communication by Design . The Politics of Information and Communication Technologies . Oxford , New York , OUP . pp . 44 - 74 . Snyder , C . ( 2003 ) . Paper prototyping—The fast and . easy way to design and refine user interfaces . San . Francisco : Morgan . Kaufmann . Sutton , P ( 1973 ) , Gugu - Badhun and its Neighbours : a Linguistic Salvage Study , Masters Thesis , Macquarie Univ . , Sydney . Verran , H . , Christie , M . , Anbins - King , B . , Van Weeren , T . , & Yunupingu , W . ( 2007 ) . Designing digital knowledge management tools with Aboriginal Australians . Digital Creativity , 18 ( 3 ) , 129 – 142 . Turk , A ( 2007 ) Representations of Tribal Boundaries of Australian Indigenous Peoples and the Implications for Geographic Information Systems , In Information Technology and Indigenous People , Laurel Evelyn Dyson , Max Hendriks , Stephen Grant ( eds ) , Information Sci . Publishing , Hershey , USA , pp . 220 - 231 .