Non - melanoma Skin Cancer Understanding your diagnosis 1 888 939 - 3333 | cancer . ca Cover photograph : © Getty Images Licensed material is for illustrative purposes only ; persons depicted are models . Non - melanoma Skin Cancer Understanding your diagnosis When you first hear that you have cancer , you may feel alone and afraid . You may be overwhelmed by the large amount of information you have to take in and the decisions you need to make . All I could hear was ‘cancer . ’ I didn’t hear one word my doctor said after that . The information in this brochure can help you and your family take the first steps in learning about non - melanoma skin cancer . A better understanding may give you a feeling of control and help you work with your healthcare team to choose the best care for you . For more information You can find more in - depth information about non - melanoma skin cancer on cancer . ca . Or call us at 1 - 888 - 939 - 3333 to learn more about cancer , diagnosis , treatment , support and services near you . 1 What is cancer ? Cancer is a disease that starts in our cells . Our bodies are made up of trillions of cells grouped together to form tissues and organs such as muscles , bones , the lungs and the liver . Genes inside each cell tell it when to grow , work , divide and die . Normally , our cells follow these instructions and we stay healthy . But sometimes the cells grow and divide out of control . After a while , a group of abnormal cells forms a lump ( called a tumour ) . Tumours can be either non - cancerous ( benign ) or cancerous ( malignant ) . Non - cancerous tumour cells stay in one place in the body and are not usually life - threatening . Cancerous tumour cells can grow into nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body . It’s important to find and treat cancerous tumours as early as possible . In most cases , finding cancer early increases the chances of successful treatment . When cancer spreads to other parts of the body , it is called metastasis . But most non - melanoma skin cancers do not spread to other parts of the body . 2 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis What is non - melanoma skin cancer ? Non - melanoma skin cancer is the most common cancer in Canada . * It starts in the cells of the skin . The skin is the body’s largest organ . It covers your entire body and protects you against harmful things like the sun , hot temperatures and germs . The skin controls your body temperature , removes waste products from the body through sweat and gives the sense of touch . It also helps make vitamin D . Non - melanoma skin cancer can grow into and destroy nearby tissue . It can also spread ( metastasize ) to other parts of the body , but this is rare for most non - melanoma skin cancers . There are 2 main types of non - melanoma skin cancer : Basal cell carcinoma starts in basal cells in the top layer of the skin ( called the epidermis ) . It is the most common type of non - melanoma skin cancer and makes up about 75 % to 80 % of all skin cancers . Squamous cell carcinoma starts in squamous cells in the outer part of the epidermis . It is the second most common type of non - melanoma skin cancer and makes up about 20 % of all skin cancers . * Melanoma is another type of skin cancer . It’s less common than non - melanoma . Contact us for information about melanoma skin cancer . 3 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 Basal cell and squamous cell cancers tend to grow slowly and are often found early . They are usually treated in a doctor’s office . Other types of non - melanoma skin cancer can develop , but they are rare . Diagnosing non - melanoma skin cancer Your doctor may suspect you have non - melanoma skin cancer after seeing an abnormal area or a change on your skin and taking your health history . Symptoms : How non - melanoma skin cancer looks often depends on the type of cancer . The most common signs and symptoms of non - melanoma skin cancer are : • a sore that doesn’t heal or comes back after healing • pale white or yellow areas that are flat and look like scars • raised and scaly red patches • rough or scaly red patches with uneven borders • small , smooth and shiny lumps that are pearly white , pink or red 4 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis • raised lumps that indent in the centre • a pink growth with raised edges that indents in the centre • a growth that looks like a wart • a sore that is crusty or bleeds easily • a growth that has small blood vessels on the surface • a growth or area that is itchy , irritated or sore Other health problems can also cause these symptoms . To find out for sure if you have non - melanoma skin cancer , your doctor will do one or more of the following tests . These tests may also be used to help plan treatment . Skin exam : During this exam , your doctor will check the entire surface of your skin for any signs of cancer or abnormal areas of skin , especially areas exposed to the sun . Skin biopsy : A biopsy is usually needed to make a definite diagnosis of cancer . Cells are taken from the skin and checked under a microscope . If the cells are cancerous , they will be studied to see how fast they are growing . There are different ways to do a skin biopsy . The type of biopsy you have often depends on what the growth or abnormal area looks like and where it is . A shave biopsy shaves off a growth or abnormal area of skin using a flexible razor blade or a surgical knife ( scalpel ) . It is usually used for raised growths . It can also be used for flat abnormal areas that are only on the outer surface of the skin . 5 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 A punch biopsy removes a round area of skin using a sharp tool called a punch . It is usually used when the growth or abnormal area is under the skin or seems to have grown deep into the skin . An excisional biopsy removes the entire growth or abnormal area using a knife . It is usually done when the doctor thinks the whole growth or area needs to be examined to make a proper diagnosis . Further testing : Your doctor may order other tests to diagnose the cancer , see if it has spread or help plan your treatment . Will I be OK ? Most people with cancer want to know what to expect . Can they be cured ? A prognosis is your doctor’s best estimate of how cancer will affect you and how it will respond to treatment . It looks at many factors including : • where the cancer is on the skin • the size of the cancer and how deep it has grown into the skin • the type of cancer • how the cells look and act compared to normal cells • your overall health Even with all this information , it can still be very hard for your doctor to say exactly what will happen . Each person’s situation is different . The prognosis is usually excellent for most non - melanoma skin cancers because they can be found and treated early . But your doctor is the only person who can give a prognosis . Ask your doctor about the factors that affect your prognosis and what they mean for you . 6 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis Risk groups Doctors often group non - melanoma skin cancers into risk groups depending on things like the size of the cancer , where it is and how quickly it is growing . Doctors use the risk groups to help plan the best treatment and to estimate the chance that the cancer will come back ( recur ) . Basal cell and squamous cell cancers are grouped into a low - risk group or a high - risk group . Treatments for non - melanoma skin cancer Non - melanoma skin cancer is often found early and treated easily . Your healthcare team considers the type and size of the cancer , where the cancer is on the body and your general health to recommend the best treatment for you . You’ll work with your healthcare team to make the final treatment choices . Talk to them if you have questions or concerns . For non - melanoma skin cancer , you might receive one or more of the following treatments . Surgery : Many non - melanoma skin cancers are treated with surgery . The type of surgery you have depends on the size of the tumour and where it is . Surgery is often done using a local anesthetic that freezes ( numbs ) the area . A surgical cut ( excision ) is the standard treatment for many non - melanoma skin cancers . The doctor uses a knife to cut out the cancer from the skin along with some normal tissue around it ( called a surgical margin ) . 7 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 Other types of surgery may be used : • Mohs surgery removes the cancer in layers , little by little , until no cancer remains . • Curettage and electrodessication scrapes away cancer with a sharp tool and then destroys any remaining cancer cells using an electrical current . • Cryosurgery uses extreme cold to freeze and destroy tissue . • A lymph node dissection removes lymph nodes from the body when cancer has spread there . Sometimes the doctor has to remove a large area of skin to make sure all of the cancer is gone . Reconstructive surgery can help fix the area where the cancer was removed and make it look better . After surgery , you may have some pain and bruising . These side effects are usually temporary and can be controlled . Radiation therapy : In external beam radiation therapy , a large machine is used to carefully aim a beam of radiation at the cancer . The radiation destroys cells that are in the path of the beam – both cancer cells and normal cells . External beam radiation therapy is most often used when it is hard to remove the cancer with surgery . The side effects of radiation therapy mainly depend on the size of the area being treated . You may notice changes to the skin where the treatment was given . It may be red , irritated or sore . 8 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis Photodynamic therapy : Photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) uses a special drug ( called a photosensitizer ) applied to the skin and a light to destroy cancer cells . The drug makes cells sensitive to light . PDT is sometimes used instead of surgery if surgery can’t be done . PDT can cause side effects , such as the skin becoming red or itchy or feeling like it’s burning and stinging . Also , the skin and eyes can become very sensitive to light . Drugs : Drugs are sometimes used to treat non - melanoma skin cancer . They can be given in different ways . Some drugs can be put directly on the skin as a cream or gel ( called topical therapy ) . These drugs may be used to treat small cancers that are only on the surface of the skin . They may make your skin red or itchy or you may feel burning in the treated area . Targeted therapy uses drugs to target specific molecules ( such as proteins ) on cancer cells or inside them . The drugs stop the growth and spread of cancer cells but limit harm to normal cells . Targeted therapy is used to treat basal cell cancer . It is given as a pill and used for cancer that has spread to other organs or grown into nearby areas . Flu - like symptoms and fatigue are common side effects of many targeted therapy drugs . Chemotherapy drugs may be given as pills or injected with a needle into a vein to destroy cancer cells throughout the body . But the drugs also damage some normal cells . Although 9 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 the normal cells usually recover over time , the damage can cause side effects like nausea , vomiting , loss of appetite , fatigue , hair loss or a higher risk of infection . Chemotherapy given throughout the body is usually only used for advanced non - melanoma skin cancer that has spread to other areas of the body . For more information on treatment , you may want to read our booklets Chemotherapy and Other Drug Therapies ( including targeted therapy ) and Radiation Therapy . Clinical trials : Clinical trials test new ways to treat cancer , such as new drugs , types of treatments or combinations of treatments . They provide information about the safety and effectiveness of new approaches to see if they should become widely available . Ask your doctor if any clinical trials are available as a treatment option for you . Our brochure Clinical Trials has more information , including how to find a clinical trial . Complementary therapies : Complementary therapies – for example , massage therapy or acupuncture – are used together with conventional cancer treatments that are widely used in Canada . Complementary therapies are often used to help ease tension , stress and other side effects of treatment . They don’t treat the cancer itself . More research is needed to understand if these therapies are effective and how they work . If you’re thinking about using a complementary therapy , learn as much as you can about the therapy and talk to your healthcare team . 10 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis It’s possible that the therapy might affect other treatments or test results . Alternative therapies are used instead of conventional cancer treatments . Alternative therapies haven’t been tested enough for safety or effectiveness . Using only alternative treatments for cancer may have serious health effects . Talk to your healthcare team before you try an alternative therapy . Side effects of treatments Some cancer treatments cause side effects , such as fatigue , hair loss or nausea . Because treatments affect everyone differently , it’s hard to predict which side effects – if any – you may have . Side effects can often be well managed and even prevented . If you’re worried about side effects , tell your healthcare team about your concerns and ask questions . They can tell you which side effects you should report as soon as you can and which ones can wait until your next visit . If you notice any side effects or symptoms that you didn’t expect , talk to a member of your healthcare team as soon as possible . They’ll help you get the care and information you need . 11 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 Living with cancer Many sources of help are available for people with cancer and their caregivers . Our booklet Coping When You Have Cancer has more detailed information and resources . Your healthcare team : If you need practical help or emotional support , members of your healthcare team may be able to suggest services in your community or refer you to cancer centre staff or mental health professionals . Family and friends : People closest to you can be very supportive . People who’ve had a similar experience : Talking with and learning from others who’ve had similar experiences can be helpful . Consider visiting a support group or talking with a cancer survivor in person , over the telephone or online . Yourself : Look after yourself by finding relaxing , enjoyable activities that refresh you mentally , spiritually or physically . Take some time to find ways to cope . You may also want to talk to a counsellor for more help . 12 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis After treatment Self - esteem and body image : It’s natural to worry about the effects of non - melanoma skin cancer and its treatment on your self - esteem and body image . The cancer and its treatments may result in changes to your skin , such as scars and skin colour changes . You may feel the changes are very noticeable , especially if they’re on an area like your face . You may be afraid to go out and worried that others will stare at you . It may help to talk about these feelings with someone you trust . Your doctor can also refer you to specialists and counsellors who can help you with the physical and emotional side effects of treatment . Worry that the cancer will come back : You may be worried that the cancer will come back after treatment , especially if your doctor said the cancer has a high risk of it . So it’s important to check your skin and have regular follow - ups with your doctor . Also , the best way to lower your risk of the same cancer coming back or developing another skin cancer is to protect yourself from the sun . Most non - melanoma skin cancers are caused by ultraviolet radiation from the sun . Talking to someone who’s been there If you would like to talk to someone who’s had a similar cancer experience , you can connect by phone with a trained volunteer who will listen , provide hope and suggest ideas for coping – all from the unique perspective of someone who’s been there . Register for this free program at match . cancer . ca or call us at 1 - 888 - 939 - 3333 . 13 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 Want to connect with people online ? If you’d like to join our online community , visit CancerConnection . ca . You can read news , join discussion groups , get support and help others at the same time . You’ll find caring , supportive people there . What causes non - melanoma skin cancer ? There is no single cause of non - melanoma skin cancer , but some things increase the risk of developing it . Some people can develop cancer without any risk factors , while others have some of these factors but do not get cancer . Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation from the sun , tanning beds or sun lamps is the most important risk for non - melanoma skin cancer . Other factors that increase the risk of non - melanoma skin cancer include : • light - coloured skin , eyes and hair • having had skin cancer before • being around ionizing radiation , such as having had radiation therapy in the past • being around arsenic or certain petroleum products • receiving PUVA therapy for certain skin conditions • having a rare inherited condition , such as xeroderma pigmentosum or basal cell nevus syndrome • a weakened immune system • having a precancerous skin condition such as actinic keratosis 14 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis Canadian Cancer Society We’re here for you . When you have questions about treatment , diagnosis , care or services , we will help you find answers . Call our toll - free number 1 888 939 - 3333 . Ask a trained cancer information specialist your questions about cancer . Call us or email info @ cis . cancer . ca . Connect with people online to join discussions , get support and help others . Visit CancerConnection . ca . Browse Canada’s most trusted online source of information on all types of cancer . Visit cancer . ca . Our services are free and confidential . Many are available in other languages through interpreters . Tell us what you think Email cancerinfo @ cancer . ca and tell us how we can make this publication better . 15 © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 Notes 16 Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding your diagnosis Notes This is general information developed by the Canadian Cancer Society . It is not intended to replace the advice of a qualified healthcare provider . The material in this publication may be copied or reproduced without permission ; however , the following citation must be used : Non - melanoma Skin Cancer : Understanding Your Diagnosis . Canadian Cancer Society 2017 . © Canadian Cancer Society 2017 | Printed November 2018 | 32090 - 1 - NO What we do The Canadian Cancer Society fights cancer by : • doing everything we can to prevent cancer • funding research to outsmart cancer • empowering , informing and supporting Canadians living with cancer • advocating for public policies to improve the health of Canadians • rallying Canadians to get involved in the fight against cancer Contact us for up - to - date information about cancer and our services or to make a donation .