Regulated portals of entry into the cell Sean D . Conner & Sandra L . Schmid Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 , USA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The plasma membrane is the interface between cells and their harsh environment . Uptake of nutrients and all communication among cells and between cells and their environment occurs through this interface . ‘Endocytosis’ encompasses several diverse mechanisms by which cells internalize macromolecules and particles into transport vesicles derived from the plasma membrane . It controls entry into the cell and has a crucial role in development , the immune response , neurotransmission , intercellular communication , signal transduction , and cellular and organismal homeostasis . As the complexity of molecular interactions governing endocytosis are revealed , it has become increasingly clear that it is tightly coordinated and coupled with overall cell physiology and thus , must be viewed in a broader context than simple vesicular trafﬁcking . T he plasma membrane is a dynamic structure that func - tions to segregate the chemically distinct intracellular milieu ( the cytoplasm ) from the extracellular environ - ment by regulating and coordinating the entry and exit of small and large molecules . Essential small molecules , such as amino acids , sugars and ions , can traverse the plasma membrane through the action of integral membrane protein pumps or chan - nels . Macromolecules must be carried into the cell in membrane - bound vesicles derived by the invagination and pinching - off of pieces of the plasma membrane in a process termed endocytosis . Endocytosis occurs by multiple mechanisms that fall into two broad categories , ‘phagocytosis’ or cell eating ( the uptake of large par - ticles ) and ‘pinocytosis’ or cell drinking ( the uptake of ﬂuid and solutes ) . Phagocytosis is typically restricted to specialized mamma - lian cells , whereas pinocytosis occurs in all cells by at least four basic mechanisms : macropinocytosis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , and clathrin - and caveolae - independent endocytosis ( Fig . 1 ) . These mechanistically diverse and highly regulated endocytic pathways function to control such complex physiological processes as hormone - mediated signal trans - duction , immune surveillance , antigen - presentation , and cellular and organismal homeostasis . The mechanistic complexities that govern endocytosis suggest that great evolutionary effort has been expended to control entry into the cell and thereby to control cellular responses to the environment . Endocytosis might have been the ﬁrst vesicular trafﬁcking event to evolve in the prokaryote - to - eukaryote transition . De Duve 1 has suggested that as early cells moved from the concentrated primor - dial soup to the more dilute environment of nascent oceans , the existing strategy of secreting digestive enzymes and pumping small catabolic products across the plasma membrane became untenable . Thus , early cells evolved mechanisms to take up extracellular macromolecules ( pinocytosis ) and secrete digestive enzymes directly into an endocytic vacuole containing the appropriate nutrient pumps ( a lysosome progenitor ) . Subsequently , the acqui - sition of mitochondria and chloroplasts is believed to have occurred by phagocytosis of eubacteria and / or blue – green algae , respectively . The mechanisms of endocytosis have diversiﬁed considerably since its early evolutionary beginnings . In multicellular organisms , dis - tinct endocytic pathways are tightly regulated to control all aspects of intercellular communication . Interestingly , several otherwise mechanistically diverse endocytic pathways are regulated by the large GTPase dynamin , which will be described in some detail . Here we summarize our recent understanding of these pathways and the mechanisms that control endocytic vesicle formation in mammalian cells . Phagocytosis Phagocytosis in mammals is conducted primarily by specialized cells , including macrophages , monocytes and neutrophils , that function to clear large pathogens such as bacteria or yeast , or large debris such as the remnants of dead cells , arterial deposits of fat , and so on 2 . It is an active and highly regulated process involving speciﬁc cell - surface receptors and signalling cascades mediated by Rho - family GTPases 3 . For example , Fc receptors on macrophages recognize and are activated by antibodies bound to surface antigens on bacteria . A signalling cascade involving activation of Cdc42 and Rac triggers actin assembly and the formation of cell - surface Figure 1 Multiple portals of entry into the mammalian cell . The endocytic pathways differ with regard to the size of the endocytic vesicle , the nature of the cargo ( ligands , receptors and lipids ) and the mechanism of vesicle formation . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 37 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup extensions that zipper up around the antibody - coated pathogen to engulf it ( Fig . 2a ) . These signals also activate the cell’s inﬂammatory responses so that once the bacteria are taken up into membrane - bound phagosomes , they are destroyed by the infusion of a barrage of bactericidal weapons , including acids , free oxygen radicals and acid hydrolases . Regurgitated bacterial peptides are then presented on the surface of macrophages to elicit the immune response . Phagocytosis is also crucial for clearing apoptotic cells , both at sites of inﬂammation and tissue damage and during development . Different receptors on the macrophage surface are involved : for example , the complement receptor or phosphatidylserine receptor that recognize damaged cells . These receptors activate other Rho - family GTPases to trigger membrane extension and phagocytosis , but not the accompanying inﬂammatory responses 4 . Phagocytosis is inhibited by overexpression of a dominant - negative dynamin mutant 5 , although it is not clear whether this reﬂects the role of dynamin in vesicle formation or in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton ( see below ) . There are multiple modes of phagocytosis , which are determined by the particle to be ingested and the receptor that recognizes that particle . This ensures that phagocytosis operates in conjunction with other aspects of the cell’s or organism’s physiological response . Some bacteria , like the mycobacteria that cause tuberculosis , use this to their advantage and direct the formation of customized phagocytic vesicles that are ideally suited to house their intracellular replication 6 . Several excellent reviews describe these diverse and specialized phagocytic mechanisms 2 , 7 . Here we will focus on the pinocytic pathways that operate in all mammalian cells . Multiple pathways for pinocytosis Pinocytosis , or ﬂuid - phase uptake , can be measured by the intra - cellular accumulation of tracer molecules ( for example , an enzyme or labelled compound ) present in the medium . The degree of internalization of ﬂuid - phase markers is directly proportional to their concentration in the medium and the volume encased by the transport vesicles . Greater efﬁciency of endocytosis is achieved by nonspeciﬁc binding of solutes to the cell membrane ( adsorptive pinocytosis ) , but the most efﬁcient uptake occurs when dilute solutes are captured by speciﬁc high - afﬁnity receptors ( receptor - mediated endocytosis ) , which are themselves concentrated into specialized endocytic transport vesicles . As for phagocytosis , the cargo molecule and its receptor determine the pinocytic pathway through which they gain entry into the cell . Macropinocytosis Macropinocytosis accompanies the membrane rufﬂing that is induced in many cell types upon stimulation by growth factors or other signals . Like phagocytosis , the signalling cascades that induce macropinocytosis involve Rho - family GTPases , which trigger the actin - driven formation of membrane protrusions . However , unlike phagocytosis , these protrusions do not ‘zipper up’ along a ligand - coated particle , but instead they collapse onto and fuse with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 ) to generate large endocytic vesicles , called macropinosomes , that sample large volumes of the extra - cellular milieu . Little is known about the nature of this fusion process . For example , how frequently do the contacts between collapsed membrane protrusions and the cell surface result in fusion , and is it efﬁcient ? Does fusion occur only at speciﬁc contact sites , and how is it regulated ? What prevents fusion with neighbouring cells ? Although macropinocytosis accompanies seemingly chaotic mem - brane rufﬂing , it is likely to be a highly controlled and regulated process . Macropinocytosis fulﬁls diverse functions . It can be transiently induced in most cells and might have a role in the downregulation of activated signalling molecules . Platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) - induced macropinocytosis , which involves activation of the Rho - GTPase Rac and its downstream kinase , p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) , might have a role in directed cell migration 8 . Activation of antigen - presenting dendritic cells triggers extensive and prolonged macropinocytic activity , enabling these cellular sentries to sample large volumes of the extracellular milieu and to fulﬁl their role in immune surveillance 9 . Finally , some bacteria inject toxins into cells that activate Rho - GTPases , triggering macropino - cytosis and ensuring their own uptake into macropinosomes , which are conducive to their replication 6 . The actin - driven formation of large macropinosomes or phago - somes differs mechanistically from the involution of more selective plasma - membrane domains that give rise to smaller pinocytic vesicles . The remainder of this review focuses on three mecha - nistically distinct pathways of selective uptake : ﬁrst , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; second , caveolae - mediated endocytosis ; and third , caveolin - and clathrin - independent endocytosis , which probably encompasses more than one pathway . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis Caveolae are ﬂask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane that were ﬁrst observed , 50 years ago , on the surface of endothelial cells , where they are extremely abundant . They were proposed to mediate the extensive transcellular shuttling of serum proteins from the bloodstream into tissues across the endothelial cell layer . Caveolae are now known to be present on many cells , and to demarcate cholesterol and sphingolipid - rich microdomains of the Figure 2 Cargo - stimulated signalling pathways induce uptake by phagocytosis and caveolae . a , Fc receptors on the surface of macrophages are activated by immunoglobulin - g molecules bound to a bacterium . A signalling cascade that involves Rac , Cdc42 and downstream kinases triggers actin rearrangements , protrusion of the membrane around the bacterium , and its engulfment into a phagosome . b , Albumin bindstoandpresumablyclustersitsreceptor , gp60 , incaveolaetoactivateG i a andSrc kinases , triggering caveolae endocytosis . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 38 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup plasma membrane , in which many diverse signalling molecules and membrane transporters are concentrated 10 . The shape and struc - tural organization of caveolae are conferred by caveolin , a dimeric protein that binds cholesterol , inserts as a loop into the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , and self - associates to form a striated caveolin coat on the surface of the membrane invaginations ( Fig . 2b ) . Caveolae have been experimentally disrupted by depletion of plasma - membrane cholesterol , by overexpression of dominant - negative caveolin mutants , and most recently through genetic knockout of the caveolin genes 11 , 12 . Caveolin - null mice that lack the main , ubiquitously expressed isoform , caveolin - 1 , are devoid of morphologically detectable caveolae , establishing its structural importance . Surprisingly , caveolin - null mice have no overt phenotype ; how - ever , several tissue - speciﬁc defects have provided important insight into the function of caveolae 12 . For example , numerous signalling molecules are associated with caveolae , pointing to a role in the compartmentalization and regulation of speciﬁc signalling cas - cades 10 , 12 . In support of this hypothesis , some tissues ( for example , lung endothelia ) in caveolin - null mice show a hyperproliferative response , and it is clear that caveolae have an important role in negatively regulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( eNOS ) signalling that controls vasodilation . However , given that the mice develop normally and seem not to be susceptible to tumours , a broader role in the negative regulation of signalling cascades seems unlikely . Caveolae are also thought to be involved in intracellular cholesterol trafﬁcking and intracellular cholesterol homeostasis ; however , there is no evidence for an imbalance of cellular cholesterol in the caveolin - null mice , so other mechanisms must be in place to ensure cholesterol homeostasis . Caveolae are abundant in adipo - cytes , and an imbalance in serum lipid levels in caveolin - null mice suggests that the caveolae in these cells might have a broader , organismal role in lipid homeostasis . Further and more detailed analysis of the caveolin knockout mice should continue to provide insight into the function of these organelles . The role of caveolae and caveolin in endocytosis is more complex than was originally thought . Endothelial cells that lack caveolin are defective in their ability to both bind and take up serum albumin 12 , consistent with the proposed role of caveolae in transcellular transport . However , the levels of albumin in both serum and interstitial spaces are normal in caveolin - null mice 11 . Thus , other pathways for transendothelial transport must exist in the whole organism . Experiments to track caveolae endocytosis in a variety of cultured cells with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - conjugated caveolin show that caveolae are static structures at the plasma membrane 13 , 14 . However , their internalization can be triggered through a signalling cascade that results in tyrosine - phosphoryla - tion of caveolae constituents 15 . Experimentally , this can be achieved by treating cells with phosphatase inhibitors 16 , and more physio - logically , by ligands that bind to receptors in caveolae . For example , activation of the serum albumin receptor gp60 triggers caveolae uptake through G i a - dependent activation of the Src tyrosine kinase 17 ( Fig . 2b ) . Opportunistic ligands such as simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) particles can also activate a signalling cascade 13 , which presumably involves the multivalent crosslinking of caveolae - localized surface receptors , to trigger their own uptake . More work is needed to deﬁne these signalling cascades , the receptors that activate them and the substrates responsible for caveolae uptake . Interestingly , recent evidence suggests that rather than being required for the endocytosis of caveolae , caveolin might negatively regulate their uptake 18 . Although this observation needs further validation , it is consistent with the observed static nature of GFP – caveolin , and with the relatively mild phenotype of caveolin - null mice . Caveolin is tyrosine - phosphorylated by Src in vivo 16 , but it is not known whether this serves as a signal to release inhibition and trigger internalization . Caveolae - mediated endocytosis can be blocked by either overexpressing dominant - negative mutants of dynamin or by disrupting actin assembly 15 . Thus , both dynamin and dynamic rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton seem to be required . In most cells , even after activation , caveolae are only slowly internalized ( half - time , t 1 / 2 , . 20 min ) and the small vesicles ( , 50 – 60 nm in diameter ) carry little ﬂuid - phase volume . Thus , it is unlikely that this process contributes signiﬁcantly to bulk ﬂuid - phase uptake , although the situation is different in endothelia , where caveolae can constitute 10 – 20 % of the cell surface . Rather , caveolae - mediated endocytosis seems to be highly regulated and , as we have seen for phagocytosis and macropinocytosis , driven by the cargo molecules themselves . The molecular basis for this link between cargo molecules , caveolae - localized receptors and triggered endocytosis remains to be elucidated . Clathrin - and caveolin - independent endocytosis Caveolae represent just one type of cholesterol - rich microdomain on the plasma membrane . Others , more generally referred to as ‘rafts’ , are small structures , 40 – 50 nm in diameter , that diffuse freely on the cell surface 19 . Their unique lipid composition provides a physical basis for speciﬁc sorting of membrane proteins and / or glycolipids based on their transmembrane regions 19 , 20 . These small rafts can presumably be captured by , and internalized within any endocytic vesicle . For example , both Shiga toxin and non - aggregated cholera toxins , which bind to raft - associated glycolipids , are internalized by clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) , together with most bulk membrane markers 14 , 21 . By contrast , the interleukin - 2 ( IL - 2 ) receptor on lymphocytes , which is also associated with lipid microdomains , is internalized in a clathrin - and caveolin - independent manner 22 . Dominant - negative mutants of Eps15 , an adaptor protein complex 2 ( AP2 ) binding partner ( see below ) , that inhibit CME fail to inhibit the internalization of IL - 2 receptors , although dominant - negative dynamin mutants do . These alterna - tive endocytic carrier vesicles have been visualized by following GFP - tagged glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins 23 , but little is known about how they are formed . Clathrin - independent mechanisms of endocytosis also occur in neurons and neuroendocrine cells , and function in the rapid recovery of membrane proteins after stimulated secretion . Whereas CME is crucial to synaptic function and synaptic vesicle recycling , this slower ( t 1 / 2 . 1 min ) uptake mechanism might predominate only under conditions of high and sustained synaptic activity . Studies on neuroendocrine cells have shown that rapid endocytosis ( t 1 / 2 , 10 s ) after stimulated secretion occurs in a clathrin - inde - pendent manner , and involves the neuron - speciﬁc isoform of dynamin 24 . The fact that dynamin mutants inhibit the internaliza - tion of caveolae , CCVs and IL - 2 - containing lipid rafts , but ﬂuid - phase uptake continues , indicates the existence of other , as yet uncharacterized mechanisms for pinocytic uptake . Interestingly , in HeLa cells that express a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin , ﬂuid - phase endocytosis is inhibited after a shift to the non - permissive temperature , but is restored within 30 – 60 min to normal levels by a clathrin - and dynamin - independent mechanism 25 . The signals leading to upregulation of these alternative endocytic pathways are unknown . The mechanisms that govern caveolae - and clathrin - independent endocytosis remain poorly understood , as illustrated by the fact that these pathways are described only in negative terms . Nonetheless , it is likely that each of these pathways fulﬁls unique functions in the cell and varies mechanistically not only in how the vesicles are formed , but in terms of which cargo molecules they transport , to what intracellular destination their cargo is delivered , and how their entry is regulated . It is likely that these different pathways have evolved so that pinocytosis can be coordinated with more complex aspects of cell physiology , such as signal transduction , development and modulation of the cell’s responses to and interaction with its environment . Recent identiﬁcation of cargo molecules speciﬁc to review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 39 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup these pathways and of physiological conditions under which they are activated provides important new tools for deﬁning these mechanisms . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis The remainder of this review focuses on the better - understood molecular mechanisms governing CME . Some of these ( for example , the role of dynamin ) will apply directly to other pinocytic pathways . It is also likely that insight into endocytic CCV formation will provide mechanistic paradigms that will guide future analysis of how other pinocytic vesicles form . Finally , elucidation of the molecular links that might coordinate CME with higher - order cellular and organismal functions might provide insight into the physiological basis for the diversity of endocytic pathways . CME occurs constitutively in all mammalian cells , and carries out the continuous uptake of essential nutrients , such as the cholesterol - laden low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) particles that bind to the LDL receptor , and iron - laden transferrin ( Tfn ) that binds to Tfn receptors 26 , 27 . CME was previously referred to as ‘receptor - mediated’ endocytosis , but it is now clear that this is a misnomer , because most pinocytic pathways involve speciﬁc receptor – ligand interactions . CME is crucial for intercellular communication during tissue and organ development 28 , 29 , and throughout the life of the organism , as it modulates signal transduction both by controlling the levels of surface signalling receptors , and by mediating the rapid clearance and downregulation of activated signalling receptors . CME is also involved in cell and serum homeostasis by regulating the internalization of membrane pumps that control the transport of small molecules and ions across the plasma membrane , and by recapturing small serum proteins after ﬁltration through the kidney . The clathrin - mediated internalization of voltage - gated calcium channels in neurons helps to control the strength of synaptic transmission , and might have a role in learning and memory 30 . Finally , CME is required for efﬁcient recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane proteins after neurotransmission 31 . CME involves the concentration of high - afﬁnity transmembrane receptors and their bound ligands into ‘coated pits’ on the plasma membrane , which are formed by the assembly of cytosolic coat proteins , the main assembly unit being clathrin . Coated pits invaginate and pinch off to form endocytic vesicles , CCVs , that are encapsulated by a polygonal clathrin coat and carry concen - trated receptor – ligand complexes into the cell ( Fig . 2 ) . CCVs are very abundant in brain tissue and are relatively easily isolated , allowing identiﬁcation of the main coat proteins . Clathrin is a three - legged structure , called a triskelion , formed by three clathrin heavy chains , each with a tightly associated clathrin light chain 27 , 32 ( Fig . 3 ) . Under non - physiological conditions ( low salt and high calcium concentrations ) , clathrin triskelions spontaneously self - assemble into closed polygonal ‘cages’ . However , clathrin - cage assembly under physiological conditions requires the other main coat con - stituents , the assembly proteins ( APs ) . Two classes of structurally and functionally distinct APs were identiﬁed based on their ability to assemble clathrin 27 , 33 : the monomeric assembly protein AP180 , and heterotetrameric adaptor protein complexes . There are four structurally related adaptor protein complexes ( AP1 – 4 ) , each medi - ating vesicle formation at distinct subcellular localizations 34 ; how - ever , only AP2 is involved in endocytic CCV formation . It consists of two large , structurally related subunits called a - and b 2 - adaptins , a medium subunit , m 2 , and a small subunit , j 2 ( Fig . 3 ) . AP2 com - plexes have a barrel - shaped core comprising the amino termini of the adaptin subunits and the two smaller subunits , and two protruding appendages that are reminiscent of ‘ears’ formed by the carboxy termini of the a - and b 2 - adaptins , respectively . Analysis of high - resolution structures of isolated domains of coat proteins , culminating in the recently described structure of the AP2 core domain 35 , is an active area of research that has provided consider - able insight into their assembly and function 27 , 36 . On the basis of its ability to self - assemble into cages and curved lattices , clathrin might be considered as the coat - machinery ‘brawn’ that drives membrane invagination and vesicle formation . The adaptor protein complexes are the ‘brains’ , as they direct clathrin assembly into curved lattices and couple it to cargo recruitment 27 , 33 . The a - adaptin subunit speciﬁes the site of clathrin assembly by targeting AP2 complexes to the plasma membrane , whereas the divergent g - , d - and 1 - adaptin subunits in AP1 , 3 and 4 complexes , respectively , target them to other organelles . The b - subunits interact with clathrin and alone are capable of triggering clathrin assembly . The m 2 - subunit binds tyrosine - based internalization motifs on the cytoplasmic domains of endocytic receptors to affect their concen - tration into coated pits . The j 2 - subunit seems to have a structural role in stabilizing the core domain 35 . AP180 does not recognize cargo molecules ; however , it has the most potent assembly protein activity 37 and co - assembles with clathrin into uniform coat struc - tures with a restricted size distribution . AP180 is speciﬁcally expressed in neurons , and its functional disruption in vivo greatly inhibits synaptic vesicle recycling 38 . Moreover , the few synaptic vesicles that remain are less uniform in size . Thus , AP180 is thought to be speciﬁcally required for efﬁcient clathrin assembly and the recycling of uniformly sized synaptic vesicles in neurons . However , the discoveries of a distantly related AP180 homologue in yeast 39 and of a ubiquitously expressed AP180 isoform in mammals , called CALM ( for clathrin - assembly lymphoid – myeloid leukaemia ) 40 , suggest a broader role for AP180 / CALM in CME . Together , the coat proteins , clathrin , AP2 and AP180 , would seem to encode all of the functions necessary to select cargo and form a vesicle . Indeed , cell - free assays have established that the targeted assembly of the coat - protein complexes , COPI and COPII , regu - lated by the small GTPases Arf and Sar1 , seems to be both necessary and sufﬁcient to drive vesicle formation from the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum , respectively 41 , 42 . These elegant studies have deﬁned the fundamental mechanisms underlying vesicle formation . By contrast , cell - free assays that have been developed to reconstitute endocytic CCV formation 43 – 45 have estab - lished that coat proteins are necessary , but not sufﬁcient . Indeed , numerous accessory proteins have been implicated in CME , based Figure 3 Core components of the machinery driving clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Clathrin triskelions , composed of three clathrin heavy chains ( CHC ) and three tightly associated light chains ( CLC ) , assemble into a polygonal lattice , which helps to deform theoverlyingplasmamembraneintoacoatedpit . HeterotetramericAP2complexesare targeted to the plasma membrane by the a - adaptin subunits , where they mediate clathrin assembly through the b 2 - subunit , and interact directly with sorting motifs on cargo molecules through their m 2 subunits . Dynamin is a multidomain GTPase that is recruited to the necks of coated pits , where it can assemble into a spiral or ‘collar’ to mediate or monitor membrane ﬁssion and the release of CCVs ( see text for details ) . A subsequent uncoating reaction recycles the coat constituents for reuse . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 40 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup on their ability to bind AP2 , clathrin and / or dynamin . These ﬁndings raise several related questions about CCV formation . First , what are the minimum components required to generate a CCV ? Second , which of the myriad components of the endocytic apparatus thus far identiﬁed have a direct physical role in the formation of the vesicle and which have accessory / regulatory functions ? And third , is endocytic CCV formation mechanistically more complex than vesicle formation from intracellular organelles , and if so , why ? Answers to these questions will require the identi - ﬁcation of the core components of the endocytic apparatus and the function of accessory proteins that impinge on this machinery . Dynamin regulates endocytic vesicle formation The GTPase dynamin is required for phagocytosis , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , CME and some clathrin - and caveolae - independent endocytic pathways 46 , 47 . Thus , it seems to be a master regulator of membrane trafﬁcking events at the cell surface . The function of dynamin is best characterized in the context of CME . Dynamin is an atypically large and modular GTPase ( Fig . 3 ) with domains that support phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) binding ( the pleckstrin homology domain , PH ) , self - assembly ( the GTPase effector domain ( GED ) and the GTPase and middle domains ) , and interaction with other endocytic com - ponents ( the proline / arginine - rich domain , PRD ) . Most intrigu - ingly , dynamin encodes its own GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) within the GED . This domain is required for dynamin to self - assemble into helical rings and stacks . Self - assembly can lead to a , 100 - fold , GED - mediated stimulation of GTPase activity . At the late stages of CCV formation , dynamin is thought to self - assemble into a ‘collar’ at the necks of deeply invaginated coated pits ( Fig . 3 ) . However , the exact function of dynamin is a matter of some debate 47 , and twomodels prevail . One suggests that dynamin , unlike any other GTPase - superfamily member , functions as a mechano - chemical enzyme to physically drive membrane vesiculation . Two variations on this theme are based on nucleotide - dependent con - formational changes undertaken by assembled dynamin molecules . The ﬁrst , based on the observation that assembled dynamin helices become constricted upon GTP hydrolysis , suggests that dynamin acts as a ‘pinchase’ or molecular garrotte to constrict and sever invaginated pits at their necks 48 , 49 . The second , based on the observation that spirals formed by dynamin in the presence of GDP have a larger helical pitch than those formed in the presence of GTP , suggests that dynamin acts as a ‘poppase’ or molecular spring to propel the nearly completed vesicle towards the cytosol 50 . The alternative model suggests that dynamin , like other GTPases , func - tions as a regulatory molecule in endocytic CCV formation to recruit and / or activate downstream effectors while in its GTP - bound form 51 . Regardless of whether dynamin functions as a regulatory GTPase or mechanochemical enzyme , or as some combination of both , there is general agreement that dynamin must undergo GTP - hydrolysis - driven conformational changes for its activity 52 . Indeed overexpression of dominant - negative GTPase domain mutants of dynamin inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis 53 – 55 . The question becomes , does GTP hydrolysis by dynamin function to drive a ‘powerstroke’ , akin to a molecular motor , or does it function to terminate interactions with downstream effectors , akin to a regu - latory GTPase ? The strongest evidence for the latter is that endo - cytosis is stimulated by overexpression of GED mutants , defective in self - assembly and consequently in assembly - dependent GAP activity 51 , 56 . Further studies are needed to address the role of the assembly - stimulated GTPase activity of dynamin in endocytosis . However , if the assembled dynamin collar is indeed a ‘ﬁssion machine’ , then it might be expected that dynamin or some func - tional counterpart would be fundamentally required for vesicle formation throughout the cell . Thus , it is surprising that mutations in the only dynamin gene in Drosophila or Caenorhabditis elegans inhibit endocytic vesicle formation but have not been reported to affect the formation of intracellular transport vesicles . Neither a dynamin - like molecule nor GTP hydrolysis are required for vesicle formation from the ER or Golgi 41 , 57 . Finally , dominant - negative mutants of dynamin speciﬁcally inhibit endocytosis , and not CCV formation at the trans - Golgi network or delivery of newly syn - thesized proteins to the plasma membrane in HeLa cells 53 . Together these data argue against a general requirement for a mechano - chemically driven ﬁssion apparatus and instead suggest that , like other GTPases , dynamin might have some higher - order function in coordinating endocytic activity with other aspects of cellular func - tion and physiology . Accessory molecules that regulate CME A myriad of accessory proteins has been implicated in CME ( Fig . 4 ) , initially based on their ability to bind AP2 , clathrin and / or dynamin . These have been the subject of recent extensive reviews 27 , 58 , and will not be described in detail here . Insight into their speciﬁc functions in CCV formation has been gained through in vivo analyses after interfering with protein interactions by overexpression of truncated mutants or peptide microinjection , and more recently through in vitro analysis of their behaviour on model liposomes 59 – 61 . Genetic studies in multicellular organisms have already suggested that some of these proteins ( for example , Eps15 , endophilin and amphiphy - sin ) might not be essential for CME in all cells . Rather , it is likely that many have regulatory roles that fall into two categories : spatial regulation and / or temporal regulation . Thus , a priority of future studies must be to identify the fundamental mechanisms and the ‘core’ molecular machinery that drives endocytic CCV formation . This will require new cell - free assays that faithfully reconstitute the hierarchy of molecular interactions leading to CCV formation from biological membranes . Will these fundamentals be different from those established for the formation of other coated vesicles , and if so , why ? Once these core components are deﬁned , we can then begin to ‘decorate’ these coats with the accessory proteins . Here , quanti - tative kinetic assays will be needed , both in vivo and in vitro , to deﬁne the temporal and spatial coordination and the dynamic interplay between the weakly interacting components whose func - tions connect distinct cellular processes . This approach will be essential to elucidate the physiological signiﬁcance of ‘accessorizing’ endocytic clathrin coats . Spatial regulation of CME Scaffolding proteins Coated pits do not assemble randomly throughout the plasma membrane . Instead , CME is spatially organized at endocytic ‘hot - spots’ that are , in part , constrained by the actin cytoskeleton 62 . This is especially evident in the neuron , where active zones for synaptic vesicle fusion are encircled by actin - rich regions of high endocytic activity 63 . A growing list of endocytic accessory proteins with multiple domains for protein – protein and / or protein – lipid inter - actions can function as scaffolding molecules that connect the endocytic machinery to the actin cytoskeleton , and perhaps more importantly , to other aspects of cell physiology . Among these are amphiphysin , Eps15 and intersectin , which in addition to their interactions with the endocytic machinery , also bind a functionally diverse array of proteins that reﬂect more complex cellular func - tions . For example , amphiphysin , which binds AP2 , clathrin and dynamin , was originally thought to function in targeting dynamin to coated pits 64 . However , recent amphiphysin knockout studies in mice and Drosophila have failed to reveal an effect on CME at the synapse 65 . Instead , amphiphysin seems to function more generally in coordinating membrane microdomains , perhaps through inter - actions with the actin cytoskeleton . Eps15 , which binds AP2 con - stitutively , has been implicated in regulating coat assembly 66 , although endocytosis is not blocked in Eps15 - deﬁcient C . elegans . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 41 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup Interestingly , tyrosine - phosphorylation of Eps15 is essential for EGF receptor internalization , but not for constitutive uptake of Tfn receptors 67 , suggesting that it might have a more subtle role in regulating speciﬁc aspects of endocytosis in response to prolif - eration signals . Studies with model lipid membranes indicate that epsin , the binding partner of Eps15 , has a role in vesicle formation by inserting into the bilayer and generating membrane curvature 68 . However , indicative of a broader role in cell physiology , both Eps15 and epsin are transported into the nucleus and might have a role in nucleocytoplasmic transport or in transcriptional regulation 69 , 70 . The most striking example of a scaffolding protein that links multiple cellular processes is intersectin 71 . Intersectin not only binds components of the endocytic machinery ( clathrin , AP2 , Eps15 , epsin , dynamin and synaptojanin ) , but also binds to and regulates components of the actin cytoskeleton ( neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) and Cdc42 ) , components of the Ras / mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase signalling path - way ( mammalian son - of - sevenless ( msos ) ) , and components of the secretory apparatus ( secretory carrier membrane proteins ( SCAMPs ) and the synaptosome - associated protein SNAP - 25 ) 27 , 72 . Together , these scaffolding proteins link CME to many other aspects of cell physiology , perhaps providing the means to ﬁne - tune incoming signals and to modulate endocytosis in response to changes in cell physiology . Lipid interactions Many components of the endocytic machinery , including AP2 , AP180 , amphiphysin , epsin , endophilin and dynamin , have domains that interact selectively with the phospholipid PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Several lines of evidence suggest that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding are essential for CME . Most notably , many aspects of endocytosis , including coated - pit assembly , CCV formation and their uncoating , are disrupted when PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels are perturbed by knocking out the phosphatidylinositol - 5 - phosphatase synaptojanin 73 . The lipid - binding afﬁnities of most of these proteins are low , so it is likely that membrane targeting and their lipid - binding functions are enhanced in vivo by multivalency and protein – protein interactions . Lipid interactions might also play a part in generating membrane curvature and perhaps in destabilizing the lipid bilayer to initiate membrane ﬁssion . When incubated with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - containing liposomes , amphiphysin , endophilin , epsin and dynamin are each independently able to introduce membrane curvature , converting them into tubular structures 59 , 74 . Despite the fact that they interact with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 through structurally distinct domains , both dynamin and epsin insert large portions of themselves into lipid monolayers 68 , 75 . Thus , tubulation might reﬂect a disproportionate increase in the surface area of the outer solvent - exposed leaﬂet of the lipid bilayer . Asymmetrical insertion into the cytoplasmic leaﬂet of the plasma membrane could generate curvature during early stages of invagination , and at later stages , could ‘strain’ or destabilize the bilayer to facilitate membrane ﬁssion ( Fig . 4 ) . Another mechanism for increasing curvature and destabilizing the lipid bilayer is to directly modify lipids to change their shape and thus their packing in the lipid bilayer . Endophilin has been reported to have lysopho - sphatidic acid acyl transferase ( LPAAT ) activity , which adds unsatu - rated long - chain fatty acids to lysophosphatic acid , thereby changing it from a ‘cone - shaped lipid’ to an inverted cone - shaped lipid 76 . Such a transition , if it occurs at the neck of deeply invaginated pits , could assist in membrane ﬁssion . However , the LPAAT activity is relatively weak , and only a few lipid molecules would be modiﬁed during the time course of vesicle formation . It seems more likely that direct insertion of endophilin into the bilayer would have more dramatic consequences on membrane properties . The actin cytoskeleton The actin cytoskeleton is essential for endocytosis in yeast , as demonstrated by the acute disruption of endocytosis after treatment with toxins that disrupt the actin cytoskeleton 77 . By contrast , treatment of mammalian cells with actin - disrupting agents has Membrane curvature generation Intersectin Amphipysin Episn DynaminEndophilin AP2 ClathrinAP180Eps15 SynaptojaninAuxilinHSC70 Actin Syndapin PIPK - g PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Figure 4 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is accompanied by the temporally and spatially regulated interactions of multiple factors . The time lines shown are approximate and serve to illustrate the temporal relationships between the dynamic interactions governing CME . Neither the exact hierarchy of these protein interactions nor their exact role in CME is understood . Several accessory proteins involved in endocytosis , including amphiphysin , endophilin , epsin and dynamin , can induce membrane curvature by asymmetrically inserting a portion of their mass into the outer lipid monolayer ( see insets ) , and might function both early and late in CCV formation . PIPK - g , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase gamma ; HSC70 , heat shock cognate 70 . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 42 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup only partial or no effect on CCV formation 78 . Nonetheless , many accessory proteins interact directly or indirectly with both the endocytic machinery and the actin cytoskeleton ( reviewed in ref . 79 ) . What , then , is the non - essential role of actin in endocytosis in mammalian cells ? One possibility , as suggested above , is that actin spatially organizes endocytic hotspots , perhaps serving as an anchor for scaffold assembly . Alternatively , actin assembly might serve to propel nascent endocytic vesicles through the dense cytoskeletal apparatus that lines the cell cortex . Indeed , actin comet tails have been detected on nascent pinocytic vesicles 80 . Recent kinetic data show that actin assembly is spatially and temporally coordinated with the recruitment of dynamin to the necks of coated pits , and with the release of CCVs into the cytosol 81 . Moreover , dynamin has been localized to the actin comet tails , and their assembly dynamics are affected by overexpression of dominant - negative dynamin mutants 82 , 83 . The role of dynamin and / or other accessory proteins in coordinating these events remains to be established . Temporal regulation by protein kinases That CME is spatially and temporally regulated is seen clearly at the synapse , where the role of phosphorylation – dephosphorylation in regulating CCV formation has been most intensively studied . Many components of the endocytic machinery , including dynamin , amphiphysin and AP180 , have been identiﬁed as ‘dephosphins’ , which are phosphorylated in resting neurons and rapidly dephos - phorylated by the calcium - dependent phosphatase calcineurin in response to membrane depolarization 84 . Multiple kinases are thought to be responsible for this regulation at the synapse , including protein kinase C , casein kinase II , and others . Several of these co - purify with CCVs that are isolated from brain extracts , and phosphorylate both clathrin and the AP2 complexes . Phosphoryla - tion of the large and medium subunits of AP2 by these ‘endogenous’ CCV kinases can regulate AP2 recruitment to the plasma mem - brane , AP2 interactions with cargo molecules , and AP2 – clathrin co - assembly 85 – 87 . The kinase ( s ) responsible for phosphorylation of a - and b 2 - adaptins are unknown , but two distantly related kinases , cyclin - G - associated kinase ( GAK , also known as auxilin - 2 ) 88 , 89 and adaptor - associated kinase 1 ( AAK1 ) 90 have been shown to phos - phorylate the m 2 - subunit in vitro . Phosphorylation by AAK1 of m 2 on threonine 156 , a site that is known to be important for the function of this subunit in vivo 87 , markedly increases the afﬁnity of AP2 complexes for tyrosine - based internalization motifs 91 . As we learn more about the hierarchy of interactions that coordinate CME , it will be crucial to identify other kinases and phosphatases , and to discover how they regulate coat assembly and vesicle formation . Cargo selection and regulation of CME Every pathway of endocytosis that we have discussed seems to be regulated by the nature of the cargo molecule and its receptor . What about the ‘constitutive’ clathrin - mediated pathway ? It is now clear that different receptors use different mechanisms for uptake into CCVs . The best - studied endocytic sorting motif , found , for example , on the Tfn receptor , consists of the amino - acid sequence Yx w f ( where x is any amino acid , w a bulky hydrophilic and f a hydrophobic residue ) . This sequence is recognized by the m 2 - subunit of the AP2 complex 33 . The identiﬁcation of a m 2 - kinase that regulates the afﬁnity of AP2 for these sorting motifs 90 would imply that this ‘constitutive’ pathway of endocytosis might , in fact , be subject to regulation . Tfn and LDL receptors do not compete for sorting into coated pits 92 , indicating that there are receptor - speciﬁc components of the sorting machinery . Indeed , a different sorting motif , FxNPxY , found on the LDL - receptor family , is recognized by Disabled - 2 ( Dab2 ) , which also binds AP2 and can mediate clathrin assembly 93 , 94 . However , a role for Dab2 in regulating LDL - receptor uptake remains to be established . Signalling receptors , like receptor tyrosine kinases and G - protein - coupled receptors , have also ‘customized’ their uptake mechanisms . The latter use a third adaptor - like molecule , b - arrestin , which also interacts with AP2 and can facilitate clathrin assembly in vitro 95 . Both classes of signal - ling molecules might use ligand - stimulated mono - ubiquitination to post - translationally add new sorting signals and direct their internalization 96 . Endocytosis of signalling receptors , but not of Tfn receptors , can be further modulated by tyrosine - phosphoryl - ation of clathrin 97 , dynamin 98 and Eps15 67 . Thus , cargo molecules are not passive passengers in these clathrin - coated endocytic vehicles ; instead , they might drive their own uptake . This level of regulation , especially for signalling receptors , might have a crucial role in modulating the cell’s response to incoming messages . The numerous molecular connections between signal transduction and endocytosis argue for the physiological importance of these modu - latory mechanisms 28 , 29 , 72 . Future prospects Evolution has developed diverse mechanisms that are individually and coordinately regulated to control admission into the mamma - lian cell . Endocytosis is no longer just about ‘eating’ and ‘drinking’ . Only by taking a broader ‘systems biology’ approach will we learn how endocytosis affects more complex processes , such as signal transduction , spatial organization , cell migration , polarity , devel - opment , and so on—and vice versa . The mechanisms that regulate clathrin - independent endocytosis , and the role of clathrin accessory proteins , must be elucidated . These more subtle regulatory func - tions are unlikely to be revealed by the overexpression of truncated mutants or other dominant - negative constructs that can wreak havoc because they interfere with the delicate balance of the normal hierarchy of coordinated protein – protein interactions involved . In this regard , new methods of RNA - interference to selectively ‘knock down’ protein expression in mammalian cells will be invaluable . In addition , functional analysis of these proteins in the whole organism , through genetic manipulation , will be essential to deter - mine their speciﬁc effects in coordinating endocytic trafﬁcking , modulating intercellular communication , and maintaining tissue and organismal homeostasis . A doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01451 . 1 . DeDuve , C . BlueprintforaCell : TheNatureandOriginofLife ( Patterson , Burlington , NorthCarolina , 1991 ) . 2 . Aderem , A . & Underhill , D . M . Mechanismsofphagocytosisinmacrophages . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 17 , 593 – 623 ( 1999 ) . 3 . Hall , A . & Nobes , C . D . RhoGTPases : Molecularswitchesthatcontroltheorganizationanddynamics of the actin cytoskeleton . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B 355 , 965 – 970 ( 2000 ) . 4 . Fadok , V . A . & Chimini , G . The phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . Semin . Immunol . 13 , 365 – 372 ( 2001 ) . 5 . Gold , E . S . etal . Dynamin2isrequiredforphagocytosisinmacrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Steele - Mortimer , O . , Knodler , L . A . & Finlay , B . B . Poisons , rufﬂes and rockets : Bacterial pathogens and the host cell cytoskeleton . Trafﬁc 1 , 107 – 118 ( 2000 ) . 7 . Chimini , G . & Chavrier , P . Function of Rho family proteins in actin dynamics during phagocytosis and engulfment . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , E191 – E196 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Ridley , A . J . Rho proteins : Linking signaling with membrane trafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 2 , 303 – 310 ( 2001 ) . 9 . Mellman , I . & Steinman , R . M . Dendriticcells : Specializedandregulatedantigenprocessingmachines . Cell 106 , 255 – 258 ( 2001 ) . 10 . Anderson , R . G . The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 – 225 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Drab , M . et al . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 , 2449 – 2452 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Razani , B . , Woodman , S . E . & Lisanti , M . P . Caveolae : From cell biology to animal physiology . Pharmacol . Rev . 54 , 431 – 467 ( 2002 ) . 13 . Pelkmans , L . , Puntener , D . & Helenius , A . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Thomsen , P . , Roepstorff , K . , Stahlhut , M . & van Deurs , B . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membranemicrodomains , whicharenotinvolvedinconstitutiveendocytictrafﬁcking . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 238 – 250 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Pelkmans , L . & Helenius , A . Endocytosis via caveolae . Trafﬁc 3 , 311 – 320 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . & Simons , K . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 ( 1994 ) . 17 . Minshall , R . D . et al . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafﬁcking via G i - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1057 – 1070 ( 2000 ) . 18 . Le , P . U . , Guay , G . , Altschuler , Y . & Nabi , I . R . Caveolin - 1isanegativeregulatorofcaveolae - mediated endocytosis to the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 3371 – 3379 ( 2002 ) . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 43 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 19 . Edidin , M . Shrinking patchesand slippery rafts : Scales of domains in the plasma membrane . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 492 – 496 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Anderson , R . G . & Jacobson , K . Aroleforlipidshellsintargetingproteinstocaveolae , rafts , andother lipid domains . Science 296 , 1821 – 1825 ( 2002 ) . 21 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Brown , J . E . , Petersen , O . W . & vanDeurs , B . Endocytosisfromcoatedpitsof Shiga toxin : A glycolipid - binding protein from Shigella dysenteriae 1 . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1331 – 1343 ( 1989 ) . 22 . Lamaze , C . etal . Interleukin2receptorsanddetergent - resistantmembranedomainsdeﬁneaclathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 ( 2001 ) . 23 . Nichols , B . J . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Endocytosis without clathrin coats . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 406 – 412 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Artalejo , C . R . , Elhamdani , A . & Palfrey , H . C . Sustained stimulation shifts the mechanism of endocytosis from dynamin - 1 - dependent rapid endocytosis to clathrin - and dynamin - 2 - mediated slow endocytosis in chromafﬁn cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 6358 – 6363 ( 2002 ) . 25 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , vanderBliek , A . M . & Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - independentpinocytosisisinduced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 69 – 80 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Schmid , S . L . Clathrin - coatedvesicleformationandproteinsorting : Anintegratedprocess . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 – 548 ( 1997 ) . 27 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . - Y . , Kneuhl , C . , Towler , M . C . & Wakeham , D . E . Biological basketweaving : Formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 ( 2001 ) . 28 . Di Fiore , P . P . & De Camilli , P . Endocytosis and signaling : An inseparable partnership . Cell 106 , 1 – 4 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Seto , E . S . , Bellen , H . J . & Lloyd , T . E . Whencellbiologymeetsdevelopment : Endocyticregulationof signaling pathways . Genes Dev . 16 , 1314 – 1336 ( 2002 ) . 30 . Beattie , E . C . et al . Regulation of AMPA receptorendocytosis bya signaling mechanismsharedwith LTD . Nature Neurosci . 3 , 1291 – 1300 ( 2000 ) . 31 . DeCamilli , P . & Takei , K . Molecularmechanismsinsynapticvesicleendocytosisandrecycling . Neuron 16 , 481 – 486 ( 1996 ) . 32 . Kirchhausen , T . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 ( 2000 ) . 33 . Kirchhausen , T . Adaptors for clathrin - mediated trafﬁc . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 705 – 732 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Robinson , M . S . & Bonifacino , J . S . Adaptor - related proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 444 – 453 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Collins , B . M . , McCoy , A . J . , Kent , H . M . , Evans , P . R . & Owen , D . J . Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex . Cell 109 , 523 – 535 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Marsh , M . & McMahon , H . T . The structural era of endocytosis . Science 285 , 215 – 220 ( 1999 ) . 37 . Lindner , R . & Ungewickell , E . Clathrin - associated proteins of bovine brain coated vesicles . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 16567 – 16573 ( 1992 ) . 38 . McMahon , H . T . Endocytosis : An assembly protein for clathrin cages . Curr . Biol . 9 , R332 – R335 ( 1999 ) . 39 . Wendland , B . & Emr , S . D . Pan1p , yeast eps15 , functions as a multivalent adaptor that coordinates protein - protein interactions essential for endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 71 – 84 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Tebar , F . , Bohlander , S . K . & Sorkin , A . Clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia ( CALM ) protein : Localization in endocytic - coated pits , interactions with clathrin , and the impact of overexpression on clathrin - mediated trafﬁc . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2687 – 2702 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Springer , S . , Spang , A . & Schekman , R . A primer onvesicle budding . Cell 97 , 145 – 148 ( 1999 ) . 42 . Rothman , J . E . Themachineryandprinciplesofvesicletransportinthecell . NatureMed . 8 , 1059 – 1062 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Lin , H . C . , Moore , M . S . , Sanan , D . A . & Anderson , R . G . W . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated pit budding from plasma membranes . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 881 – 891 ( 1991 ) . 44 . Smythe , E . , Carter , L . L . & Schmid , S . L . Cytosol - andclathrin - dependentstimulationofendocytosis in vitro by puriﬁed adaptors . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1163 – 1171 ( 1992 ) . 45 . Gilbert , A . , Paccaud , J . P . & Carpentier , J . L . Directmeasurementofclathrin - coatedvesicleformation using a cell - free assay . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 3105 – 3115 ( 1997 ) . 46 . Hinshaw , J . E . Dynaminanditsroleinmembraneﬁssion . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Sever , S . , Damke , H . & Schmid , S . L . Garrotes , springs , ratchetsandwhips : Puttingdynaminmodelsto the test . Trafﬁc 1 , 385 – 392 ( 2000 ) . 48 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynaminselfassemblesintoringssuggestingamechanismforcoated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . 49 . Sweitzer , S . & Hinshaw , J . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . 50 . Stowell , M . H . B . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : Evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 51 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . & Schmid , S . L . Impairmentofdynamin’sGAPdomainstimulatesreceptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 ( 1999 ) . 52 . Song , B . D . & Schmid , S . L . A Molecular motoror a regulator ? Dynamin’s in a class of its own . Biochemistry 42 , 1369 – 1376 ( 2003 ) . 53 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . & Schmid , S . L . Inductionofmutantdynaminspeciﬁcallyblocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 ( 1994 ) . 54 . Damke , H . , Binns , D . D . , Ueda , H . , Schmid , S . L . & Baba , T . DynaminGTPasedomainmutantsblock endocytic vesicle formation atmorphologicallydistinctstages . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2578 – 2589 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Marks , B . et al . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 ( 2001 ) . 56 . Sever , S . , Damke , H . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin : GTPcontrolstheformationofconstrictedcoatedpits , the rate limiting step in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1137 – 1148 ( 2000 ) . 57 . Rothman , J . E . Mechanisms of intracellular protein transport . Nature 372 , 55 – 63 ( 1994 ) . 58 . Slepnev , V . I . & De Camilli , P . Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 1 , 161 – 172 ( 2000 ) . 59 . Farsad , K . et al . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated bydirect endophilin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 ( 2001 ) . 60 . Takei , K . et al . Generation of coatedintermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Ford , M . G . etal . SimultaneousbindingofPtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 andclathrinbyAP180inthenucleationof clathrin lattices on membranes . Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . & Keen , J . H . Spatial control of coated pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 ( 1999 ) . 63 . Roos , J . & Kelly , R . B . Theendocyticmachineryinnerveterminalssurroundssitesofexocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1411 – 1414 ( 1999 ) . 64 . Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Theamphiphysinfamilyofproteinsandtheirroleinendocytosisatthe synapse . Trends Neurosci . 21 , 339 – 344 ( 1998 ) . 65 . Zhang , B . & Zelhof , A . C . Amphiphysins : Raising the BAR for synaptic vesicle recycling and membrane dynamics . Trafﬁc 3 , 452 – 460 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . & Dautry - Varsat , A . Inhibitionof clathrin - coatedpit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 – 1311 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Confalonieri , S . , Salcini , A . E . , Puri , C . , Tacchetti , C . & Di Fiore , P . P . Tyrosine phosphorylation of Eps15 is required for ligand - regulated , but not constitutive , endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 905 – 912 ( 2000 ) . 68 . Ford , M . G . et al . Curvatureof clathrin - coated pits driven byepsin . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 ( 2002 ) . 69 . Hyman , J . , Chen , H . , DiFiore , P . P . , DeCamilli , P . & Brunger , A . T . Epsin1undergoesnucleocytosolic shuttling and its eps15 interactor NH 2 - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain , structurally similar to Armadillo and HEATrepeats , interacts with the transcription factor promyelocytic leukemia Zn 2 (cid:135) ﬁnger protein ( PLZF ) . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 537 – 546 ( 2000 ) . 70 . Doria , M . etal . Theeps15homology ( EH ) domain - basedinteractionbetweeneps15andhrbconnects the molecular machinery of endocytosis to that of nucleocytosolic transport . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1379 – 1384 ( 1999 ) . 71 . Yamabhai , M . et al . Intersectin , a novel adaptor protein with two Eps15 homology and ﬁve Src homology 3 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 31401 – 31407 ( 1998 ) . 72 . McPherson , P . S . , Kay , B . K . & Hussain , N . K . Signalingontheendocyticpathway . Trafﬁc 2 , 375 – 384 ( 2001 ) . 73 . Cremona , O . & DeCamilli , P . Phosphoinositidesin membranetrafﬁcatthesynapse . J . CellSci . 114 , 1041 – 1052 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . & DeCamilli , P . Functionalpartnershipbetweenamphiphysinand dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 ( 1999 ) . 75 . Burger , K . N . , Demel , R . A . , Schmid , S . L . & de Kruijff , B . Dynamin is membrane - active : Lipid insertion is induced by phosphoinositides and phosphatidic acid . Biochemistry 39 , 12485 – 12493 ( 2000 ) . 76 . Schmidt , A . et al . Endophilin I mediates synaptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 401 , 133 – 141 ( 1999 ) . 77 . Ayscough , K . R . Endocytosis andthedevelopmentofcellpolarity inyeast requirea dynamicF - actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1587 – 1590 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 79 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 80 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . etal . Endocyticvesiclesmoveatthetipsofactintailsinculturedmastcells . NatureCell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 ( 1999 ) . 81 . Merriﬁeld , C . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . & Almers , W . Imagingactinanddynaminrecruitmentduring invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 ( 2002 ) . 82 . Lee , E . & De Camilli , P . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 83 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 ( 2002 ) . 84 . Cousin , M . A . & Robinson , P . J . Thedephosphins : Dephosphorylationbycalcineurintriggerssynaptic vesicle endocytosis . Trends Neurosci . 24 , 659 – 665 ( 2001 ) . 85 . Wilde , A . & Brodsky , F . M . Invivo phosphorylation of adaptors regulates their interactionwith clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 635 – 646 ( 1996 ) . 86 . Fingerhut , A . , von Figura , K . & Honing , S . Binding of AP2 to sorting signals is modulated by AP2 phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 5476 – 5482 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Olusanya , O . , Andrews , P . D . , Swedlow , J . R . & Smythe , E . Phosphorylationofthreonine156ofthe m 2 subunit of the AP2 complex is essential for endocytosis in vitro and in vivo . Curr . Biol . 11 , 896 – 900 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Greener , T . , Zhao , X . , Nojima , H . , Eisenberg , E . & Greene , L . E . RoleofcyclinG - associatedkinasein uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles from non - neuronal cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 1365 – 1370 ( 2000 ) . 89 . Korolchuk , V . I . & Banting , G . CK2 and GAK / auxilin2 are major protein kinases in clathrin - coated vesicles . Trafﬁc 3 , 428 – 439 ( 2002 ) . 90 . Conner , S . D . & Schmid , S . L . Identiﬁcationofanadaptor - associatedkinase , AAK1 , asaregulatorof clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 921 – 929 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Ricotta , D . , Conner , S . D . , Schmid , S . L . , von Figura , K . & Honing , S . Phosphorylation of the AP2 m subunit by AAK1 mediates high afﬁnity binding to membrane protein sorting signals . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 791 – 795 ( 2002 ) . 92 . Warren , R . A . , Green , F . A . , Stenberg , P . E . & Enns , C . A . Distinct saturable pathways for the endocytosis of different tyrosine motifs . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 17056 – 17063 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Morris , S . M . & Cooper , J . A . Disabled - 2 colocalizes with the LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Trafﬁc 2 , 111 – 123 ( 2001 ) . 94 . Mishra , S . K . etal . Disabled - 2exhibitsthepropertiesof acargo - selectiveendocyticclathrinadaptor . EMBO J . 21 , 4915 – 4926 ( 2002 ) . 95 . Miller , W . E . & Lefkowitz , R . J . Expanding roles for b - arrestins as scaffolds and adapters in GPCR signaling and trafﬁcking . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 139 – 145 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Hicke , L . A new ticket for entry into budding vesicles—ubiquitin . Cell 106 , 527 – 530 ( 2001 ) . 97 . Wilde , A . etal . EGFreceptorsignalingstimulatesSRCkinasephosphorylationofclathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 96 , 677 – 687 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Ahn , S . et al . Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation regulates dynamin self - assembly and ligand - inducedendocytosisoftheepidermalgrowthfactorreceptor . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 26642 – 26651 ( 2002 ) . Acknowledgements We thank R . Milligan , M . G . Finn and C . Waterman - Storer for critically reading the manuscript , and acknowledge the many researchers whose important contributions to the primary literature can be found in the reviews that were cited owing to space limitations . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S . L . S . ( e - mail : slschmid @ scripps . edu ) . review article NATURE | VOL 422 | 6 MARCH 2003 | www . nature . com / nature 44 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup