Technological paradigms and technological trajectories A suggested interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change 147 GIOVANNI DOSI * Science Policy Reseaech Unit , University of Sussex , Brighton U . K . The procedures and the nature of " technologies " are sug - gested to be broadly s ~ milar to those which characterize " sci - ence " . In particular , there appear to be " technological para - dig ~ as " ( or research p , rogrammes ) performing a similar role to " sci ~ : ~ ntific paradigms " ( or research programmes ) . The n . udel tries to account for both continuous changes and discontinui - ties m technological i : anovation . Continuous changes are often related to progress along a technological trajectory defined by a technological paradigm , wMle discontinuities are associated with the emergence < , f a new paradigm . One - directional ex - planations of the i , movative process , and in particular those assuming " the market " as the prime mover , are inadequate to explain the emergence of new technological paradigms , The origin of the latter stems from the interplay between scientific advances , economic factors , institutional variables , and un - solved difficulties on established technological paths . The model tries to establish a sufficiently general framework which accounts for all these factors and to define the process of selection of new technological paradigms among a greater set of notionally possible cnes . The history of a technology is contextual to the history of the industrial structures associated with that technology . The emergence of a new paradigm is often related to new " schumpeterian " companies , while its establishment often shows also a process of oligopolistic stabilization . * Previously at the Sussex European Research Centre . I am grateful to R . Nelson , W . Walker , D . Jones , M . Salvati , A . Merin , L . Bucciarelli and two anonymous referees for their comments and criticisms on previous drafts . The responsi - bility for this draft is obviously mine . A version of this research , more focussed on the effects of technical change upon long - run patterns of growth , is appearing in C . Free - man ( ed . ) , Technical Innovation and Long Waves in World Economic Development , IPC Press , Guildford , 1982 ( forth - coming ) . Research Policy 11 ( 1982 ) 147 - 162 North - Holland Publishing Company 1 . Introduction The strict relationship between economic growth and change , on the one hand , and technical pro - gress on the other is a rather evident and well recognized " ' fact " in economic thought . The nature of the relationship between the two , ho ~ . ' ever , has been a much more controversial issue of economic theory . The th : - oretical problem coecerns the di - rection of causal relationship , the degree of inde - pendence of technical change vis - a - vis endogenous market mechanisms - both in the short and long run , - the role played by institutional factors , the determinants of the " rate and direction " of in - novative activity . Theories of technical change have generally been classified into two broad categories . namely " demand - pull " and " technology - push ' " theories . The distinction is self - explanatory and relates to the degree of autonomy of the innovative activity from short - run changes in the econonuc environment . Section 2 of this paper will attempt a brief critical review of the main difficulties of bq - . th approaches and in particular of demand - pull theo - ries . We will try to show that these latter interpre - tations present a rather crude conception of tech - nical change , as an essentially reactive mechanisnt , based on a " black box " of readily available tech - nological possibilities . Moreover this conception contradicts substantial pieces of empirical evi - dence . On the cther hand , extreme forms of tech - nology - push approaches , allowing for a one - way causal determination ( from science to technology to the economy ) fail to take into account the intuitive importance of economic factors in shap - ing the direction of technical change . Section 3 will attempt an interpretauon of the process of innovative activity , suggesting that there 0048 - 7333 / 82 / 0000 - 0000 / $ 02 . 75 © 1982 North - Holland 14tg G , D . ~ t . lP ~ hnol . g . at parad ~ cm ~ are ~ rong similarities between th : nature and the procedur¢ : s of " ' science " - as defined b ~ modern epistemology - and those of " technology " . The parallel is still rather impressionistic , but leads to the delinition of technological paradigm ~ ( or tech - nt > logical research programme ~ ~ ittl man . ' , fea - ture : , in common with scienf : ic paradigms ( or scientific reseach programmes ) . We shall define a " technc ogical paradigm " broadly in accordance with t ~ e ¢pistemologic ~ l definition as an " ' outlook " . a s ~ of procedures , a definition of the " ' relevant " problems and of the specific knowledge related to , heir solution . We shall argue also that each " technological paradigm " defines its own concept of " progress " based on its specific technological and economi : trade - offs . Then , we will call a " ' technological trajectory ' " the direction of advance witin a technological para - digm . Moreover , we shall analyze the role played by economic and institutional factors in the selection and establishment of those technological para - digms and the interplay between endogenous eco - nomic mechanisms and technological innovations . once a " technological paradigrn " has been estab - lished . Section 4 will consider some implications of the model with respect to industrial structures , in par - ticular , we shall try to translate the logical distinc - tion between the proces ~ of search for new techno - logical patterns and their e , , , tabiishme , ~ t , nt ( ~ an historical distinction , along ~ he development of an industry , between a " ' schumpc , erian ' " phase of emergence of that industry and its " ' maturity " We d , ~ ot provide in this work any empirical backing ( or very little ) . An application of the model to ~ he semiconductor industry can be found in another work by the author 17 . Even that cannot be ccm - sidered an adequate test of its interpretative capa - bility which should be tried upon different tech - nologies and longer time spans . The conclu , , ions m section 5 suggest some of the possible din ctions of inqt . iry , together with some implica , ons in terms of economic theory and of public policies . This paper does not aspire to provide a " general theory " of technical change . It simply attempts to focus on questions l ~ ke " why did certain techno - logical developments emerge instead of others ? " " Are there regularities in the process of generation of new technologies and in technical progress the ~ ' eafter ? . . . . Is there any regularity m the rune - tional relationship between the vast number of economic . . social , institutional , scientific factors which are like y to influence the innovative pro - tess ? ' " Our answers to the ~ questions are neces - . ~ arilv tentative In ~ me ~ a ~ . o ~ r model could t , ~ considered m I ~ | as azZ " ' outlook " , an mtcrpreta - five grid , focussing on questions often neglected by orthodox economic theory which is mainly con . cerned with questions of ins ~ ntancous adjust - meats instead of problems of long - run transforma - tion of the economic and institutional environ - meat . 2 . A critical review of the theories of technical change Although everyone recognL ~ es , tha ~ there can be and generally are different and txmtextual ortl ~ ns of inventive activity , in the economic litera - ture there has been a substantial effort to define the common elements among a wide range of inventions and / or innovations . ~ together with the search for some kind of " prime mover " of inven - tive activity . In the literature on the subject , one used to define two different basic approaches , the first I ~ inting to market forces as the main de - terminants of technical change ( " demand - pull ' " theories ) and the second deft ~ ing technology a ~ an autonomous or quasi - auton . ~ mous factor , at icast in the snort run ( " teehnologypush ' " theories ) . Such a clear - cut distinction is of ¢ ~ , r ~ ¢ hard to make in practise but remain ~ useful for t ! ~ e sake of exposi - tion : there is indeed a furd ~ mental distinction between the two approaeh ~ ~ nd that is the role attributed to market signals ia + hrecting innovative activity and technical change ~ . It sCOrns tO Us thai this distinction ( lh¢ role atmFuk . ~ l to rn ~ rket sig - ~ : alsL altho ~ gh overlapping ~ great deal with the c ; istinctton " ' demand . pull " versus " technology - push " th ~ . ~ rie ~ , , is indeed the main core of the di ~ ' ussion . pr ~ - e ~ s , ~ f system , Such mvcnl / om , . . . do r ~ ot ~ _ ~ ganly lead to technical mno ~ - ~ u ~ ms , , . An innovaion in the ecoromlc ~ n ~ i ~ ac ' comph ~ zed only with the first comnwr - , ( ~ # , ¢ tran ~ , ~ ction invols ~ ng ~ he ne ~ produc - ~ , gro ~ " , Fr , ' , ' man ! 12 ~ , p 22 Acceplmg t ~ d ~ i ~ n ~ l ~ n , ~ e border - hp . e Is m thal the ne ~ de ~ i ~ e or pr ~ ' ~ s ~ s nol , ~ nl ~ posen li , dJx m , ~ / r ~ elab / e but actually nuirl , eled | ~ l | | ~ : : call the d ~ um . ' ~ on when d ~ cussing ~ he rote of the market . t ; . D , ~ t : l ' ~ ' t hm , b , g , al lm ~ l ~ hgm ~ 149 Let us consider first a ' * pure * ' demand - pull the - ory . As di . ~ u , ~ sed exhaustively in a comprehensive critical paper by Rosenberg and Mowery 31 , the causal prime mo ~ - er in those theories is some sup - posed " ' recognition of needs ' " b , , the productive units m the market , to which follows their at - tempts to fulfill those needs through their techno - logical efforts , This " pure " market - pull theory would run more or less as follows ( both causally and chronologically ) , ( i ) There exists a set of consumption and intermediate goods , at a given time , on the market , satisfying different " ' needs " by the purchasers . In passing , one must notice - as we shall recall below - that the same definition of " needs " is quite ambiguous : at the one extreme one may define them in vet ) , general " ' anthropo - k ~ g . icar " terms lthe needs to eat , have shelter , com - aunicate , etc . ~ but then they express a total indif - lerenee to the way they are satisfied and do not have any ecot | omic relevance ; or , at the other extreme , " needs " are expres ~ in relation to the specific means of their satisfaction , but then each " ' need " cannot emerge before the basic invention to which it is related . " ( 2 ) Consumers ( or users ) expre ~ their preferences about the features ot the got ~ ls they desire ( i . e . the features that fulfill their need ~ ~ he most ) through their patterns of demand . Thi ~ . is another way of saying that demand func - tion * are determined by the existence and the forms of utility functions . We may assume now that pattern of demand change ( i . e . that the de - mand function ~ hifts upward or downward ) or just that = which is basically the same - in a growing economy , given the relative prices of the consid - ered commodities , the income elasticities of de - ma : - d o ~ the latter are different . ( 3 ) The theory would ~ , rgue that , with a growing income relaxing the budget constraint of the consumers / users , the latter demand proportionally more of the goods which embodied some relatively preferred char - acteristics ( i . e . those which more adequately satisfy their needs ) . ( 4 ) At this point the producers enter into the picture , realismg - through the move - met ~ ts in demand attd priee : ~ the revealed needs of the consumers / users : some " utility dimensions " have a higher weight ( thel¢ , is more need for them ) . " In other ~ ord . ~ , . m the first definition , the " ' need " to move aruund can be satin , bed either through a horn ' or a space - ~ huttie . In the ~ : , - ~ nd defir ~ Jti , ~ m , obviously the " ' need " for a ~ , pace . shuttle cannot emerge before the space - shuttle it . ll is conctnved ( 5 ) Here the propt : r innovative process begins , and the successful firms will at the end bring to the market their new / improved goods , letting again the " ' market " ( ats above defined ) monitor their increased capabili ' , y to fulfill consumers ' needs . Of course not even the most extremist " demand - pull " theorist would support entirely this crude view . - ~ ' 1 " he basic argument however maintains that there generally exist a possibility of knowing a pt4ori ( before the invention process takes place ) the di - rection in which the market is " ' pulling " the inven - tive activity of prodt cers and furthermore that an important part of the " ' signalling process " operates through movemenls in relative prices and quanti - ties . Thus , in this perspective , the innovative pr ~ 3 - tess can be placed - although with consistent difficuhies ~ inside the ne - classical framework . 4 With respect to producees , this viewpoint implies that the " ' choice se ~ s are given and the outcomes of any choice known " . 5 The assumption of " known outcomes ' * could perhaps be relaxed to introduce risk and stochastic ' , variables , but the first assump - tion has to be maintained ( given and finite sets of choices ) . The viewpoints outlines above might be criti - cised on different levels , namely : ( 1 ) the general theory of prices as determined by supply and demand functions ; ( 2 ) the difficulties of defining demand functions as determined by utility func - tions and the same feasibility of a " utility " con - cept ; and ( 3 ) the logical and practical difficulties in interpreting the innovative process through this approach . The first question is undoubtedly the biggest one because it could undermine the entire theory But this " ' one - directional " determination of the innovative activity from consuw , ers / users needs to producers ' innova - live output agpears clearly in studies like that of Myers and Marquis 21 , In a " we ' , ricer sense " , it is apparent that within this approach the innovative mechanism operates in the same way as lhe usual mechanism of determination of prices and quantities in a general equilibrium analysis . In a % trongcr sense " , it d . es nt ~ t appear impossible - given restrictive a . ~ umption ~ - to construct a neoclassical general equilibrium analysis which takes account of this kind of innovative activity . For the difficulties of this approach , see below . Nel ~ n and Winter 24 in Belassa and Nelson 41 . This work , to which I will refer again later , i . - . . as far as I know , one of the first attempts to formalise a non - neoclassical model of technical progress , embodying rather cor : ~ plex assumptions about firms ' attitudes toward , and responses to the innovative activity . 150 G . D , , st . / Technob , gt ~ al paradtgms on which this approach is based , upon . This is not the place thougk to deal with that issue ~ ' and the discussion will be restricted to the third point . With respect to this more circumscribed ques - tion , some significant problems throw doubts on the entire adequacy of demand - based theories of innovations . ( 1 ) A theory of innovation is sup - posed to explain not only ( and not even primarily ) " incremental " technical progress on the existing products / processes , but first of all it is meant to interpret major and minor technological break - throughs . As far as the latter are concerned the range of " ' potential needs " is nearly infinite and it is difficult to argue that these would - be demands can explain why , in a definite point in time . an invention / innovation occurs ( see Rosenberg 30 and Rosenberg and Mowery 31 ) . ( 2 ) Even after allowing a priori recognition of a " ' need " , it is difficult to explain with this approach what happens between that recognition by pro - ducers and the final outcome of a new product . Either we have to assume a set of technological possibilities already in existence ( but then we must wonder why those possibilities have not been ex - ploited before 7 ) or we must assume a limited time lag t ~ etween research and the outcomes of that research . The concept of technology ( and , at least indirectly ~ of science ) underlying this appraoch is of a very versatile and " responsive " mechanism which can be directed with limited effort and cos : in one direction or another . To a ~ , oid a crudt ~ conception of technology as a " freely available blackbox " , there have been some efforts in the ; theory to consider information as an expensive commodity . K Those attempts , while representing a big advance in that they account for the microeco - nomic aspects of technolo ~ cal efforts ( which ha , , e a cost and an expected return for ctch single firm ) ~ ' For our purposes it is enough to mention ~ hat if we assume , at any point in time , fixed coefficient or " production and constant return to scale , variations in the quantities do net affect relative prices . Therefore we are bouml to loose an important part of the " signalling " mechanism . On the other hand a demand / supply theory of prices might be aban - doned for the unavoidable difficulties of its theory of factor prices and distribution . Excep ' . in the cases in which an already existin 8 inventh , n can become a marketable innovation , at a certain point , n time , due . o changes in income distribution , or in relative prices . Generally wifl " particular features such as limited appropri - ability , indivisi ~ : . ility , etc . See Arrow 2 and 31 . and also in that they somehow account for the interrelation science - technology - production , do not seem to be able to consider the entire complexity of scientific and technological procedures . ' ~ To summarize , there appear to be three basic weaknesses in " strong " versions of demand - pull approaches : first , a concept of passive and mecha - nical " reactiveness " of technological changes vis - a - vis market conditions ; second , the incapability of defining the why and when of certain technological developments instead of others and of a certain timing instead of others ; third , the neglect of changes over time in the inventive capability which do not bear any direct relationship with changing market conditions . The theoretical ambiguities of demand - pull the - ories seem inevitably reflected in the empirical studies on the determinants of innovation ( criti - cally reviewed in Rosenberg and Mowery 31 ) . Not surprisingly , most of the studies find that " ' market is important in determining successful innovations " . 1 find myself in agreement with Ro - senberg and Mowery though , in that most of the studies with a demand - pu ! ! approach fail to pro - duce sufficient evidence that " needs expressed through market signalling " are the prime movers of innovative activity ( see 31 ) . And this is pre - cisely the question at stake . Other important em - pirical works on the contr , Lry point to multi - variables explanations of innovative activity t0 and The effort of " ' endogeni ~ ing ' " the production of knowledge , equated to the production of a commodity , accounts for the evident trend , at least in this century , toward a greater contribution to the innovative activity by institutional centres directly related to production of scientific and tech - nologi¢ ~ advances tand first of all by R & D facilities of big corporations ) . This schumpeterian view ( Schampeter 39 ) is challenged by some scholars , for e ~ ample Jewkes et ai . 16j who maintain that a great percentage of innovation is still attributable to private inventors . For an exhaustive discus - sion of this issue . , see Freemen 12 . The problem crucial to our discussion , however , still remains : how do technological efforts operate ? Can the direction of technological advances be pushed almost frictionless in any direction ? Can the lags between an assumed " ' market demand " and the technologi - cal response be considered fairly limited in time " etc . For a critical discussion of the " black - box approach " to technol - ogy . see again Rosenbreg 30 and 31 } . See project SAPPHO 36 Teubal , Arn , , n , Trachtenberg 441 and Teubal 45 . Those studies , and e pecially the first are primarily concerned with determinants of success and failures in induotrial innovations and not so much with the determinams of the direction of the innovative activity as such . G . D ~ ) it / : Te ~ ' hnoh ~ gtcal t / urachgms I f ~ l to the role of science and technology in fostering innovation along a path leading from initial scien - tific advances to the final innovative product / pro - 11 cess . On a more general level , an analysis of the technology and generally " ' supply - side " factors of innovative process can be found in Freeman 12 , Pavitt and Wald 28 and Pavitt and Soete I29 . ~ 2 Some aspects of the innovative process can , in our view , be considered rather established . Among them : ( ! ) The increasing role ( at least in this century ) of scientific inputs in the innovative process . ( 2 ) The increased complexity of R & D activities which makes the innovative process a matter of long - run planning for the firms ( and not only for them ) and witnesses against an h2ypothesis of prompt innovative answer by producers vis - a - vis changes in market conditions . ( 3 ) A signifitant correlation between R & D ef - forts ( as proxy of the inputs in the innovative process ) and innovative output ( as measured by patent activity ) m several industrial sectors ~ - ~ and the absence , i , : ross - country comparisons , of evi - dent correlations between market and demand patterns on the ~ , ae hand , and innovative output , on the other . ( 4 ) The intrins , : ally uncertain nature of the in - ventive activity which plays against an hypothesis of limited and known sets of choices and out - comes . The difficulties incurred by strong versions of " technology - push " theories are in some respects opposite to those discussed above : there , it was the difficult ) to take into account the complexity , the relative autonomy and the uncertainty : associated with technological change and i ~ inov ~ Ltion . Here . the problem arises in relation to the c , bviou , , fact that " economic factors are important indeed " in shaping the direction of the inn , . ~ vative proces . ~ . The process of growth and economic change , vari - ations in distributive shares and in relative prices are all affecting the direction of the innovative activity and one feels quite uneasy in accepting a view of technical progress - paraphrasing Joan Robinson - as " given by God . scientists and en - gineers " . The nmin theoretical task with respect to supply - side approaches is the avoidance of a one - directional conception " science - technology - production " in which the first would represent a sort of exogenous and neutral deus - e . ~ - mackina . One realises that , in actual fact , there is a complex structure of feed - backs between , : ' . he economic en - vironment and the directions of technological changes . A tentative theory of technical change should define - in a form as general as possible - - the nature of these inter - active mechanisms . In different ways demand - pull and technology - push theories appear to fail to do so . In the former . technical change and innovation are a basically reactive mechanism which certainly shows some consistency with the traditional as : ; umptions of neo - classical economics ( consumer sovereignty . optimising behaviours , general equilibrium , etc . ) but presents also unavoidable logical and empiri - cal difficulties . On the other hand , if supply - side factors manifest some independence - at least in the short - run - from market changes , it must be possible to show how they are affected in the long run by the economic transformation . , i See the TRACES Project 15 , ~ In the first study , an analytical examination of various innovations in the fields of process plant , synthetic materi - als and electronics considers the role of scientific and or ~ nised technological efforts in determining innovation , while the second , in a cross - country analysis , compares demand and market - related factors with technological organisational and supply - related factors . Finally , the third relates indicators of economic performance to indicators of technical efforts and innovativeness ( in a causal relationship which goes from the latter to the , former ) . ~ 3 See also the important findings by Pavitt and Soete 29 and Soete 42 . Moreover , if we measure innovative output in terms on increase in productivity ( as a proxy of technical progress ) the impact of research efforts is significant ( see for example Mansfield 19 and Terleckyi 43 ) . 3 . A proposed inte ~ , retafion : Technological para - digms and technological trajectories Economic theory usually represents technoh ~ gv as a given set of factors ' combination , defined ( qualitatively and quantitatively ) in relation to cer - tain outputs . Technical progress i ' , generally de - fined in terms of a moving production possibilities curve , and / or in terms of the increasing number of producable goods . The definition we sugge . , t here is , on the contrary , much broader . Let us define technology as it ~ , ; et of pieces of knowledge , both directly " practical " ( related to concrete prob - lems and devices ) and " theoretical " ( but practi - 152 ( . ; . D , m / Techm , b ~ gwal puradtgnt ~ calb , applicable although not necessarily alre : tdy applied ) , know - how , methods , procedures , e×peri - ence of successes and fa , lures and also . of course . physical devices and equipment Existing physical de ~ ces embody - so to speak - the achievements in the development of a technology , in a defined problem - solving activity . At the same time , a " dis - cntbodied " part of the technology cmsists of par - titular expertise , experience of past attempts and past technological solutions , together with the knowledge and the achievements ol the " ' state of the art " . Technology , in this view , includes the " ' perception " of a limited set of possible techno - logical alternatives and of notional future develop - ments . This definition of technology is very im - pressionistic , but it seems useful to explore the patterns of technical change . One can see that the c , mceptual distance between this definitio ' a and the attributes of " ' science " - as suggested by mod - ern epistemology - is not so great . We shall push the parallel further and suggest that , in analogy with scientific p ~ . radigms ( or sci - entific research programmes ) , there are " ' techno - logical paradigms " ( or technological research pro - grammes ) . 14 A " scientific paradigm " could be approximately defined ao an " outlook " which defines the relevant problems , a " model " and a " ' pattern " of inquiry . " The success of a paradigm . . . is at the start largely a promise of success discoverable in selected and still incomplete examples . Normal science consists in the actualization of that promise , an actualization achieved by extending the knowledge of those facts that the paradigm displays as partic - u ! arly revealing , by in , creasing the extent of match between those facts and the paradigm ' s predict - ions , and by further articulation of the paradigm itself " ( Kuhn 14 , pp . 23 - 41 ) . nclogical paradigm " as " model " and a " pattern " of solution of selected technological problems . based on selected principles derived from natural sciences and on selected material technologies . First of all . the similarities relate to the mecL a - nism and procedures of " science " , on the o , , e hand . and those of technology , on the other , t . s As a scientific paradigm determines the field of en - quiry , the problems , the procedures and the : asks ( the " ' puzzles " . in Kuhn ' s words ) , so does " tech - nology " in the sense defined above ( it would per - haps be better to talk of " cluster of technologies " . e . g . nuclear technologies , semiconductor technolo - gies . organic chemistry technologies , etc . ) . As " ' normal science " is the " actualization of a promise " contained in a scientific paradigm , so is " technical progress " defined by a certian " techno - logical paradigm " . We will define a technological tra / ectoo ' as the pattern of " ' normal " problem solv - ing activity ( i . e . of " progress " ) on the ground of a technological paradigm . More precisely , if the hypothesis of techno - logical paradigm is to be of some use , one must be able to assess also in the field of technology the existence of something similar to v " ' positive heur - istic " and a " negative heuristic " . ~ 0 In other words a technological paradigm ( or research programme ) 17 embodies stroig prescriptions on the directwns of technical change to pursue and those to neglect . Given some generic technological tasks ( one could call them generic " needs " ) such as , for example , , hose of transporting commodities and passeugers , producing chemical compounds with certain properties or switching and amplify - ing electrical signals , certain specific technologies emerged , with their own " solutions " to those prob - lems and the exclusion of other notionally possible ones : in our three examples , historically these In broad analogy with the Kuhnian definition of a " scientific paradigm " , we shall define a " ' tech - ~ 4 On scientific paradigms , see Kuhn 14 aqd o , 1 scientific research programmes , Lakatos 17 : for a thorough discus - sion Musgrave and kakatos 22 . One does not have any ambition here to argue " v , hat science 5 . ' " or tackle the epistemological disputes on the differences between the Kuhnian approach and kakalos ' on , : . For our purpo . , . es the degreee of overlap between the two approaches is great enough to borrow from them a few . basic dcfinitlons of science which they have in common 15 16 17 A very stimulating paper by Bonfiglioli 5 defines " ' science " as a " ' particular technology " . Although the aims of that paper are different from ours here , there is in common the strict similarity and overlapping between " science " and " technology " and the role of institutienal factors in de - termining the direction of both ( see below ) . " . . . The continuity evolves from a genuine research pro - gramme adumbrated at start . The programme consists of methodological rules : some tell us what paths of research to avoid ( negative heuristic ) and others what paths to pursue ( positive heuristic ) " . Lakatos 17 , p . 47 . Note that here one is impressionistically using the two concepts as equivalent . ( i . Dost / Technoh ) gical ; ar , ' ! dtgms 153 technologies were the internal combustion engine , petrochemical processes and semiconductors , re - . spectively . Technological paradigms have a power - ful exclusion effect : the efforts and the techno - logical imagination of engineers and of the organi - zations they are an are focussed in rather precise directions while they are , so to speak , " blind " with respect to other technological possibilities . At the same time , techaological paradigms define also some idea of " ' progress " . Again in analogy with science , this can hardly be an absolute measure but has some precise meaning within a certain technology . The identification of a technological paradigm relates to generic tasks to which it is applied ( e . g . amplifying and switching electrical signals ) , to the J : naterial technology it selects ( e . g . semiconductors and more specifically silicon ) , to the physicai / & emical properties it exploits ( e . g . tLe " ' transistor , ' ffect " and " field effect " of semi - conductor mate ' ials ) , to the technological and eco - nomic dimensiens and trade - offs it focusses upon ( e . g . density of the circuits , speed , noise - immunity , dispersion , frequency range , unit costs , etc . ) . Once given these t . hnological and economic dimen - sions , it is also possible to obtain , broadly speak - ing , an idea of " progress " as the improvement of the trade - offs related to those dimensions . The broad analogy between " science " and " technology " we have been drawing should clearly not be take ~ as an identity . In addition to the obvious differet ~ ce related to the different nature of the " ' problem solving " activity , technological " knowledge " is much less well articulated than is scientific knowledge ; down and is implicit This implies also that logical paradigm " is much of it is not written in " experience " , skills , etc . the definition of a " techno - bound to be much looser while the distinction between " normal activity " and " problem - shifts " is likely to be hard to make in practice . The same idea of a " technological paradigm " should be taken as an approximation , adequate in some cases but less so in others . In our view , however , the analogy keeps its validity in that both ( " scientific " and " technological " ) activi - ties represent strongly selective gestalten embody - ing powerful heuristics . A crucial question relates to how an established technological paradigm emerged in the first place and how it was " preferred " to other possible ones . Let us consider " downward " the sequence science - technology - production , remembering that it is meant to be just a logical simplification which neglects the cruciad long - run influence of the eco - nomic and technological environments upon sci - ence itself . Even within " science " , the problems and the " puzzles " actually ~ { ackled ( and those solved ) are of course much more limited in nu ~ ber than the total number of problems and puzzles that the scientific theories potentially allow , , and even more , ~ ; o the pieces of theory , puzzles , possibilities of development , " passed - on " from scientific theory to " applied science " and to technology Uhe last two , at least , being significantly overlapping ) . Leaving aside temporarily the problems of feed - backs , the hypothesis is that along the stream science - technology - production , the " economic forces " ( that I will define below ) together with institutional and social factors , operate as a selec - tive device ( the " focussing device " of Rosenoerg 30 ) . Within a large set of possibilities of directions of development , noliionally allowed by " science " , a first level of selection ( at least in the overwhelmicg majority of research activity in the enterprise sec - tor ) operates on the basis of rather ' general ques - tions like : " Is any practical application conceiva - ble ? " ; " Is there some possibility of the hypothe - sised application being marketable ? " , etc . Along the down - stream from " Big Science " to production ( on a path which is much easier to conceive as a continuum instead of a strictly defined discrete set of steps ) , the determinateness of the selection in - creases : at one end we have the " puzzle - solving activity " ( Kuhn 14 ) defined by scientific para - digms stricto sensu ; at the other end we kave a technology totally embodied in devices and equip - ment . In between , in a field that we must already call technology because it is specifically ( " eco - nomically " ) finalised , the activities aimed at " tech - nical progress " have still many procedures and features similar to " science " , namely the problem solving activity along lines defined by the nature of the paradigm . The economic criteria acting as selectors define more and more precisely the actual paths followed inside a much bigger set of possible ones . On the other hand , once a path has been selected and established , it shows a momentum of its own ( Nelson and Winter 24 , Rosenberg 30 ) , which contributes to define the directions toward which the " problem solving activity " moves : those are what Nelson and Winter 25 define as natural 154 G . Do . ~ i / Technolog , ' al paradtgnu " trq / ectories of technical progress t ~ . A technological trajectory , i . e . to repeat , the " normal " problem solving activity determined by a paradigl ~ , , can be represented by the movement of multi - dimensional trade - offs among the technological variaoles which the paradigm defi ~ es as relevant , Progr : ss can be defined as the improvemer ~ t of these trade - offs . J9 One could thus imagine the trajectory as a " ' cylin - der " in the multidimensional space defined by these technological and economic variables . ( Thus , a technological trajectory is a cluster of possible technological directions whose outer boundaries are defined by the nature of the paradigm itself ) , Some features of these technological trajectories , defined on the basis of technological paradigms are worth considering : 1 . There might be more general or more cir - cumscribed as well as more powerful or less powerful 2o " trajectories " . 2 . There generally are complementarities among trajectories ( i . e . , out of the metaphor , there are ~ They suggest two general dimensions , ~ f these " ' natural tra . iectories " , to ~ , ard progressive exploitation of latent econ - omies of scale and toward inc = e . asing mechanization of operations , q , oting as supporting evident : - among others - - the studies by Hughes on electric power equipment , Levin on various petrochemical processes and Rosenberg 30 } . ~ ' ~ To take obvious examples , the tradc - off , ~ between energy consumption and horsepower in int ~ : rt , al combustion en - gin , : s or that between speed and density of the circuits in ser ~ iconductors ( this refers to the comparison between bi - polar and MOS technologiesl . A definition of technical progress in terms of nmhi - dimentional ~ rade - offs is some - times used in technological forecasting models , For a short o , Jerview , see Martino 20 . S ' , thal 3 ~ ' and 34 utilize a similar definition of technology and tedmical pl ~ ot4ress , ap - plied to individual industries and pro ~ ! : ~ ' ts . After the first draft of this paper w , ~ s completed , an im - portant alticle by Sahal 47 was published . He suggests a " ' system approach " to technology and technical change , seeing it as an evolutionary and contiruum process . More - over h : sugg : sts the existence of " technological guide - posts " ~ One can easily see the consistence of his thesis with what is argued here . We hope . in this paper , to throw some light 31 ~ o on tl ' e ~ efinition ~ emergence and selection of his " tech - - olo ~ ical ~ uide - posts " and on the implicatio : ls in terms of evolu ti , m of industrial structures . ~ 0 Agaill one uses the term in analogy with epistemology : in oar case a t ~ ajectory is more powerful the bigger the set of tecla ~ , ologie ~ wifich it excludes . For instance it seems that the u chnological paths defined by nuclear or oil power - gen - erati ~ a equipment is very powerful , mear , ing that many othe ~ sources of energy ( many other ~ echnologies ) are ex - cluded . strong complementarities between different forms of knowledge , experience , skills , etc . ) ( see Rosen - berg 30 and 48 ) . Further ; ore developments or lack of development in one echnology might fos - ter or prevent developments in other technologies . 3 . In terms of our model one can define as the " technological frontier " the highest level reached upon a technological path with respect to the relevant technological and economic dimensions . 2t 4 . " Progress " upon a technological trajectory is likely to retain some cumulative features : the probability of future advances is in this case re - lated also to the position that one ( a firm or a country ) already occupies vis - a - vis the existing technological frontier . This is strictly consistent with Nelson and Winter ' s representation of techni - cal progress at firm and industry levels , with Markovian chains . ( Nelson and Winter 24 ) . 5 . Especially when a trajectory is very " power - ful " , it might be difficult to switch from one trajectory to an alternative one . Moreover , when some comparability is possible between the t ~ vo ( i . e . when they have some " dimensions " in com - mon ) , the frontier on the alternative ( " new " ) trajectory might be far behind that on the old one with , espect to some or all the common dimen - sions . In other words , whenever the technological paradigm changes , one has got o start ( almost ) from the beginning in the problem - solving activity . 6 . It is doubtful whether it is possible a priori to compare and assess the superiority of one tech - nological path over another . There might indeed be some objective criteria , once chosen some indi - cators , but only ex post , 22 This is one of the reasons behind the intimate uncertain nature of 2t 22 One may figure that " frontier " as a set of points in a multidimensional space . For some examples on semiconductors , Dosi 7 . An im - portant attempt to define some precise criteria of " progress " is in Sahal 34 . As shouk ! , be clear from the discussion above , an unequivo , - . e , l criter ' on can be easily identified only within a tcchnologice . I paradigm ( i . e . along a techn , ~ logical trajectory ) . Compari ~ ns ( oven ex post ) between different trajectories might yield . Jmetlmcs , although not always , to ambiguous results . In other words , it might occur that the " new " technology is " better " than the " old " one in several chosen dimensions , but it might still be " worse " in some others . One can see here a loose analogy with the epistemo - logical discussion ( whereby an " e ~ treme " Kuhnian ap - proach claims strict incomparability and a Popper - like ap - proach suggests some progressive commuity ) . ( k Dosi / Techm ; h ~ gwal panaligm . ~ - 155 research activity ( even leaving aside the market evaluations of the results , but just considering purely technological indicators ) . The role of economic , institutional and social factors must be considered in greater detail . A first crucial role - as already mentioned - is the selec - tion operated at each level , from research to pro - duction - related technological efforts , among the possible " paths " , on the ground of some rather obvious and broad criteria such as feasibility , marketability and profitability . On these very general grounds , there might still be many possible technological paradigms that could be chosen . Given the intrinsic uncertainty associated with their outcomes , in terms of both technological and economic saccess , it is hardly possible to compare and rank them ex ante . 23 Othtr more specific variables are likely to come into play such as ( 1 ) the economic interests of the organizations involved in R & D in these new tech - nological areas , ( 2 ) their technological history , the fields of their expertise , etc ; ( 3 ) institutional varia - bles stricto sensu • ch as public agencies , the mili - tary , etc . All the . , ~ factors are iikely to operate as focussing forces upon defined directions of techno - logical development . In particular one must stress the role often played in the establishment of a particular technological trajectory by public ( " political " ) forces . An obvious example is elec - tronics , esp , . - , ! ty in the fields of semiconductors and computers uuring the first two decades of the post - war pe , , od . Military and space programmes operated then as a powerful focassing mechanism toward defined techaological targets , while at the same time providing financial support to R & D and guaranteeing public procurement . 24 Other similar cases can be found throughout the modern history of technology : for example , the emergence of synthetic chemistry in Germany bears a close relationship with the " political " drive of that country towards self - sufficiency in the post - Bismarck period ( see Freeman 12 and Walsh et al . 461 ) . These kinds of institutional effects upon the emergence of new technologies are not a general rule : the point we want to stress , however , is the general weakness of market mechanisms in the ex 23 For a discussion of uncertainty in R & D projects ' evaluation . see Freeman 121 . 24 A more detailed discussion is in 7 . ante selection of technological dir . ctior ~ s especially at the initial stage of the history of an industry . This is , incidentally , one of the reasons Lha ~ mili - tates for the existence of " bridging institutions " between " pure " science and applied R & D . 25 . Even when a significant " institutional focussing " occurs , there are likely to be different technological possi - bilities , an uncertain process of search , with diff > . r - ent organizations , firms and individuals " betting " on different technological solutions . Proceeding in our parallel with epistemology , this resembles a world a la Feyerabend II 1 with different compet - ing technological paradigms : competition does not only occur between the " new " technology and the " old " one which it tends to substitute but also among alternative " new " technological ap - proaches . We did not say very much about positit ' e ex ante criteria of selection among potential techno - logical paradigms apart from rather general ones such as marketability or potential profitability . Another powerful selecting criterion in capitalist economies is likely to be the cost saving capability of the new technology and in particular its labour saving potential : this is obviously consistent with Nelson and Winter ' s suggestion of " natural trajec - tories " toward mechanisation and exploitation of economies of scale . Certainly in societies where industrial conflict and conflict over income distri - bution are structural features , substitution of mac - hines for labour must be a powerful determinant in the search process for new technologies . 26 More generally , the patterns of industrial and social conflict are likely to operate , within the process of selection of new technological para - digms , both as negative criteria ( which possible developments to exclude ) and as positive criteria ( which technologies to select ) . In this respect , one might be able to define some long - run relationship between patterns of social development and actu - ally chosen technological paradigms tone quite clear example could be the relationship between industrial relations at the turn of the last century and the selection and development of " tayloristic ' " 2 . s A convincing and thorough discussion is in Freeman 12 . 26 The discussion of possible biases in cost - saving technical change , long - run cycles , etc . is clearly beyond the scope of this work . Our hypotheses on the procedures of technical change and innovation raight , however , pro ' ride a possible framework for the analysis of these questions . 156 G . Do . ~ i / Technologwal paradigms patterns of technical change in mechanical en - gineering ) . Let us consider the final stage of this logical sequence from science to production , when - in cases of product innovations - a commodity is produced and sold : at this final stage markets operate again as the selective environment . 27 It must be noted that this " final selection " has a different nature from the previous stages . In the choices of the technological paths some kinds of economic indicators were operating as a prwri directing devices among a big number of possible and wide technological choices . Here the market operates ex post as a selecting device , generally among a range of products already determined by the broad t , , chnology patterns chosen on the supply side . To further clarify the distinction , R . Nelson suggested in his comments on a previous draf ~ of this paper , a biological analogy , The final market selection may be equated to the environmental selection on mutations ( Nelson and Winter models describe mainly this " evolutionary " mechanism within the economic environment ) . The discus , don above relates , on the contrary , to the selection of t ~ e " mutalion generating " mechanisms . Thus eco - nomic and social environment affects technologi - cal development it _ two ways , first selecting the " direction of mutation " ( i . e . selecting the techno - logical paradigm ) and then selecting among muta - tions , in a more darwinian manner ( i . e . th2 ex post selection among " schumpeterian " trials and er - r ~ rs ) . At times when new technologies are emerg - i ~ lg . one can often obserxe r , ew ( " schumpeterian " ) companies trying to expl , m different technological inn + avations . Markets perform as a system of re - wards and penaliza : tons , thus checking and select - ing amongst different alternatives . In this respect , the existence oA + a multiplicity of risk - taking actors , in non - planned economies , is crucial to the trial - and - error procedures associated with the search for new tec ' mological paths . These " actors " take risk ~ , of , : nurse , because there are markets which allow high rewards ( i . e . profits ) in case of com - mercial success . Incidentally , one should note that if our inter - pretation of the process of technical change i ~ correct , the emergence of new technological para - digms is contextual to the explicit emerge3ace of economically defined " needs " . In other words , the supply - side determines , so to speak , the " universe " 27 See Nelson and Winter 24 . of possible modalities through which generic " needs " or productive requirements ( which as such do not have any direct economic significance ) are satisfied . ( In this , one can see the element of truth contained in those sociologically - based theories suggesting needs " ' induced " by corporate strate - gies ) . Changing economic conditions clearly interact with the process of selection of new technologies , with their development and finally with their ob - solescence and substitution . One has therefore to analyze the feed - back mechanisms . " upwa " d " , from the economic environment to the technology ( one should also consider the long - run influenc , : of economic and technological factors upon scientific change : this is however well beyond the scope of this article ) . Changing relative prices and distribu - tive share are bound to affect demand for the various commodities and the relative profitabilities in manufacturing them . Producers certainly react to these signals from the economic environment , trying to respond through technical advances . However , this often occurs within the boundaries of a given technological trajectory , which might either be conducive or place increasing constraints to any development consistent with the " ' signals " the economic environment is ddivering . 2s Diffi - culties and unsolved technological puzzles and problems , to use again the Kuianian language , operate upward as focussing devices , sometimes put pressure on other technological fields to go further in their problem solving , and finally facili - tate or hinder the switch to other technological trajectories . It must be stressed , however , that unsolved technological difficulties do not auto - matically imply a change to another " path " . 29 Of course , changes in market conditions and oppor - tunities ( among which changes in demand pat - terns , in relative distributive shares , in costs of production , etc . are very important ) continuously bring pre ; sures " upward " : at various levels , upon technological trajectories , and upon the same selection criteria on the basis of which those trajec - tories are chosen . But this fact does not imply by ~ Take the example of the oil - powered internal combustion engine , Changing oil prices put an increasing pressure on oil substitution and energy saving . The scope for substitution however is limited by the technology which itself defines the range of possible technological advances , 2 , + Precisely as unsolved puzzles or ( " falsifications " ) in a scien - tific paradigm do not imply an alternative paradigm . G . Dost / Technoh ~ gical paradign ~ s 157 any means an assumption of malleable " ready - to - use " alternative technologtcal paths , or , even more so , instantaneous technological responses to changes in market conditions . Furthermore an ina - plicit consequence of what was just said is that the " ' upward " impact of changing economic condi - tions on technological research pattern - : seems di - rectly proportional to the technological determina - teness of the economic stimuli themselves , a° So one would generally expect this determinateness to increase as one naoves from consumers ' goods to investment goods and to other kinds of non - prooerly - marke goods ( such as military equip - " t ) . Iote that changes in the economic environment a permanent feature of the system : those . anges often sin ' ply stimulate technical progress xas defined above ) along one technological trajec - tory . Again in pmallei with epistemology we can call it the " normal ' " technological activity . " Ex - traordinary " technological attempts ( related to the search for new t ~ chnological directions ) emerge either in relation to new opportunities opened - up by scientific developments or to the increasing difficulty in going forward on a given technologi - cal direction ( for technological or economic rea - sons or both ) . 31 4 . Technical change and industrial structures : From a schumpeterian phase to industrial maturity . ~ e tried above t . o make a logical distinction between the process of search and selection on new technological paradigms and technical pro - gress a , ong a defined path . New technologies are selected through a complex interaction between some fundamental economic factors ( search for new profit opportunities and for new marke ~ s , tendency toward cost saving and automation , etc . ) , together with powerful institutional factors ( the interests and the structure of the existing firm . % the 3o This broadly corresponds to Teubal ' s concept of market determinateness 45 . 3 ~ It can be ( and has been ) reasonably argued that scientific developments themselves are fostered in the long - run by technological and economic " loci ' " of attention and that they are somewhat directed by the weltanschauungen that economic systems provide . This very wide issue concern : , fields like epistemology , sociology of knowledge , etc . , aad it is not possible to discuss it here . effects of government agencies , etc . ) . Technical change along established technological paths , on the contrary , becomes more endogenous to the " ' normal " economic mechanism . This distinction between two technological phases is likely to cor - respond historically to two different sets of fea - tures of an industry , related to its emergence and its maturity . In the phase of economic trial and error , primary importance must be attributed to ( 1 ) the institutions which p ~ oduce and direct the accumulation of knowledge , experience , etc . , and ( 2 ) the existence of a multiplicity of risk - taking actors , ready to try different technical and com - mercial solutions . The " % chumpeterian " features properly refer to this second aspect . 32 . Note that breakthroughs and innovations , in this phase , need not be developed by those schumpeterian com - panies themselves . There is evidence , on the con - trary , that often in this century the production of major technological advances has been the result of organized R & D efforts as opposed to the " in - ventiveness ' " of individuals . 33 What matters are the attempts ( either by new companies or old ones ) , in the first phase , to implement and com - mercially exploit " extraordinary technology " , driven by the search for new profit and market opportunities . Often this period of emergence of new technologies is actually characterized by newly emerging firms , even in cases when the major technological advances were originally produced in established firms and institutions ( semiconductors for example ) . 34 In the second phase , which may often corre - spond to an oligopolistic maturity , the production , exploitation and commercial diffusion of innova - tions are much less divorced and technical change often becomes itself part of the pattern of " oligop - olistic competition " . The moa ' e a fundamental technological pattern becomes established , the more the mechanism of generation of innovation : ~ 32 Here one refers to the " first " Schumpeter of the Theor ) ' of Economic Development 38 . 33 A review of the discussion on the subject is in Freeman 12 . Some , however , still hold the opposite view ( Jewkes et al . 16 ) . The history oi : ' chemical innovations is analyzed by Waish et al . 46 . On the role of established firm ~ in semi - conductors , see 7 . 34 We try to analyze the factors which allow it , relate41 to different attitudes toward risk , constraints facing a q ~ ick diffusion of innovations by existing firms , taxation regi : he : , in 9 . 158 G . Do . ~ l / Tcchnob > g . ul paradtgm ~ and of technolo , . i : al advances appears to become endogenous to the " ~ ormal " economic mechanism . In this respect , the possibility of enjoying terr . - porary mo ~ , opoti ~ : vc ( and long - run oligopolistic ) positions on new products and processes appears to act as a powerful incentive to the innovative activity , improvement of existing pro . tucts , etc . The perspective differential advantages accruing to successful technological and market leaders , in my view , are ! ikely to influence and stimulate the process of innovation much more than the ex ante market structure as such . 35 The process of irmova - tion itself is , of ~ : ourse , bound to affect the in - dustrial structure and shape its transformation . The establishment of a defined technological paradigm is likely to be parallelled by a process of " internalization " within companies of the so - called " ~ externalities " related to the innovative activity . capitalizing on the previous experience of at - tempts , successes and failures , etc . : within an established technological paradigm the fluid market structure characterized by the " heroic entrepreneurship ' " : fften described in the literature t , n new industries is likely to disappear . Both pbases are likely to show some " oligopo - listic power " , 3o although the sources of it differ ~ ' he relationship between market structure and incentives to innovate has produced significant discussion tn the litera - ture . See among other , Arrow 21 , Needham 49 . Shrieves 401 . Scherer 50 and Salvati 351 . Salvatl shows , under rather general assumptions that the incentive to introduce it novations is not generall3 , lower under oligopolisti , : condi - tions than in competitive ones . Arrow , in his seminal article , states the opposite view ( at least as far as process innova - tions are ct , ncerned ) , with respect to the incentive to produce innovations . Two implicit and rather questionable assump - tions are , however , crucial to his argument . First , one must as : ~ ume that there are no economies of scale and no mini - mum threshold in R & D activities , no cumulatiwmess of technical progress , or , alternatively , that market mecha - nisms induce an allocation of innovative activities . amongst competitive actors , as tf they were a simple monopolist . Second , one must assume that the " degree of private ap - propnability " of the innovations is the same under competi - tive and oligopolistic conditions , Needham offers a thor - ough a , ad rigorous treatment of R & D and innovation de , : i - sions under rico - classical behavioural assumptions on firms ' conduct . He shows that , depending on elasticities and ex - pected rivals ' reactions , more or less everything may be expected to happen ( i . e , that structural variables like cc n - centr , ~ tion , demand elasticities , etc . may have effects of opposite signs upon f ~ rms ' propensity to innovate ) . One can find in : ~ oete 41 a critical a ' ~ alysis of the available evidence on the subject and a strong support for a significantly : whereas in the first one , oligopolistic positions mainly relate to dvm , nic economies ( " learning curve " , etc . ) and temporary asymme - tries in relation to the capability of successfully innovating , in the second stage tte origins of oligopolistic structures would relate not only to the technological progressiveness of firms but also to some static entry barriers ( economies of scale , etc . ) . 5 . Conclusions : Some theoretical and policy impli - cations We should stress , first of all , the limitations of the suggested model : the analogy between sc : , ence and technology is , in some respects , " impressionis - tic ' " and the parallel should not be pushed too far without reaching decreasing returns . This notwithstanding , the model might prove useful in interpreting some important questions related to the process of technical change . First , it can ex - plain - in rather general terms - the role of eontimaty versus discontinuity in technical change . " Incrementar ' innovation versus " ' radical " innova - tions can be reinterpreted in terms of " normal " technical progress as opposed to n : w emerging technological paradigms . The distinction might still be in practice difficult to draw , but nonetheless can account for the conditions which allow either " ' normal " progress or " ' extraordinary " innovative effort to take place . Second , it can throw some light on the procedures through which technical change occurs . The search for new products or processes is never a random process on the entire set of notional technological opportunities . Para - digms are also an " outlook " which focusses the eye and the efforts of technologists and engineers in defined directions . ( This , incidentally , might have interesting implications in term ~ of the soci - ology of the firms and it would be worth studying the origins attd the backgrounds of " revolutionary " engineers as compared with " normal " ones ) . " Schumpeterian view " . Nelson and Winter 24 interpret , in a genuinely dynamic framework , the process of innovation under oligopolistic conditions and market structure itself , in their models , as an endogenous variable . ~ " I try . to assess the existence of the determinants of ol : gopo - listic margins in the sen 2conductor industry in 9 . ( L Dosi / Technoh ~ gica ! paradigms 15 ' 9 Third , the idea of paradigms and trajectories can account for the often observable phenomenon of cumulativene ~ s of technical advances ( within an established traj , . ' ctory ) . At the same time the in - trinsic uncertaiaty associated with technological shifts caa be clearly appreciated . The same idea of " ' technical progress ' might be r : gorously defined within one technological path ( as the improve - ments o¢ the trade - offs between the technological and economic dimensions it embodies ) but it might prove impossible to compare ex ante two different technological paradigms and even ex post there might be overwhelming difficulties in doing it on solely technological grounds . 37 We tried to suggest some interacting mecha - nisms between techaological factors and economic factors , the latter Irerform ~ ng as selective criteria , as final ( " market " ) checking and as a continuous form of incentives , constraints and " feed - back " stimuli . The evidence on market - induced innova - tive activity ( see Scamookler 37 ) which survives a closer scrutiny of it , empirical foundations 38 may indeed be consister , t with our mode ! : economic growth and transformation of the economy in - volves a permanent re - allocation of resources as well as of research efforts among different sectors , and it is plausible to assume that a greater effort will be put into those areas which offer relatively higher growth and profit opportunities ( although the two might not necessarily coincide ) . This pro - cess , however , relates much more to normal tech - nology than to discontinuous technological ad - vances . In other wc . rds : suppose there are two sectors , both defined by rather stable technological trajectork ; s , which allow broadly similar possibili - 3 ~ Another example from the semiconductor industry : how could it have been possible to compare in the 1950s the thermionic valve technology and the emerging semiconduc - tor technology ? Even ex post ( i . e . now ) when most of the common dimensions ( e . g . size and density , speed , costs , energy consumption , etc . ) show the striking superiority of semiconductor technology , valves still maintain in some narrow technological dimensions their advantage . Note that we took here one of the most extreme examples of a new clear - cut " superior " technology : in many other cases even an ex post comparison between the different technologies may prove rather difficult . 3s Walsh et al . 46 examine Schmookler ' s hypothesis of a dependence of innovative activity upon market growth and in the case of chemical innovations find abundant falsifying evidence . ties of technologicai advance , 3 ' ~ but one experi - ences higher rates of growth of demand than the other . It is plausible that a firm will put l ~ greater research efforts into the first rather than t : : ae sec - ond sector . Moreover , if there is some relation ~ , , hip between research input and innovative output , one may find a higher number of technical innovations ( as measured , say , by patents ) in the former sector . This induced effect , however , does not explai1 ~ the emergence of significantly radical innovations , which is precisely what one tried to do above . This is not to say that the emergence o1 new technologi - cal paradigms is independent of the evolution and the changes in the social system ( of which the economic structure is a crucial component ) . A reconstruction of the history of technology and history of science would almost certainly show the long - run influences of the evolution of the social and economic structure apon the emergence of new scientific and technological opportunities . Simply , what we want to stress is their relative autonomy vis - a - vis short - run adjustment a ~ ad in - ducement mechanisms of the economic system ( changes in prices , quantities , profitabilities , etc . ) . Various hypotheses on the determinant ~ and directions of technical changes have been pro - posed , during the past two decades , in a revived attention to the schumpeterian problematique of the long - run relationship between technical change and economic growth ( one should actually refer also to Marx as the other classical econcmis ~ who focussed on the issue ) . It is worth mentioning these me dels and hypotheses , not only to acknowl - edge our theoretical debts , but also to discuss briefly ~ . he reciprocal consistency . We refer in par - ticular to Freeman 18 , Nelson and Winter 24 - 261 , Rosenberg 30 , Abernathy and Utterback i , Sahal 34 and 7 . In different ways , and with different analytical aims , one may consider these contributions as part of a painstaking attempt to construct a non - neoclassical theory of technical change capable of giving a satisfactory accot : , nt of 11 ) the relationship betwe , m economic force : ~ and the relatively autonomous momentum that techni - 3 , Note that within stable technologies the possibilities of advances ( so to speak , the pote , atial rate of technical pro - gress compatible w , th that technology ) might radically dif - fer . A low possibility of further advances and unsolved ( or " badly " solved ) technical problems might indeed be a stimulus for the seardh for a new technological paradigm . 160 G . Dosi . / Tedlnological paradignls cal progress appears to maintain , ( 2 ) the role of supply - side factors , ( 3 ) the role and effects of technical change in oligopolistic environments . 14 ) its relationship with company behaviour and organizational structures , ( 5 ) the relevance of non - market organizations and first of all of public institutions in shaping the patterns of technical change . Broadly speaking , the ir . terpretation of the pro - cedures , progresses and shift¢ in the innovative process proposed here are , in my view , consistent with the approach of the above cited works , for what they have in common . Few features need mention . In particular , the continuity ( and partial overlapping ) between our hypothesis and Nelson and Wint , ~ r ' s models should be clear enough . The existence of technoiogical paradigms , with the at - tributes one tried to describe , support the ex - istence of " natural trajectories " of technical challge suggested by Nelson and Winter . Their models focus primarily on the endogenous dynamics of technical progress in oligopolistic environments ( and differential innovative success is , in their simulations of the model , one of the main driving forces toward oligopolistic structures ) . Translated in the definitions used above , their model 24 gives us a fascinating ( and rich in terms of firms ' behavioural variables ) account of the transition to oligopolistic maturity and of the technology - based oligopolistic competition ~ hereafter , upon a given technological path . On the other hand , lhe weak - ness of simple market mechanisms ( together with the ! inadequacies of institutional interven - tion ) m the innovative process are discussed by Nelson in 27 . Two incidental remarks related to economic theory : first , if technological paradigms and tech - nological trajectories prove to be a general case in the modern history of technology , then it becomes more plausible to assume - in terms of " aggregate " technical progress in the economy as defined by input coefficients of production - one discrete ( and limited ) set of input combinations . Technical c : mnge should then be strictly associated with their movement " outward " ( using the traditional repre - sentation of production functio ; ls ) along some - thing like a cone , rather than the movement along and of , a smooth curve . Second , this idea of tech - nological paradigms and trajectories bear some relevance within the revived discussion concerning the existence and the determinants of Kondratief ' s long - waves ( see Clark , Freeman and Soete 6 ) . One of the variables affecting long - run cycles of capitalist development may be the establishment of broad new technological trajectories , wbich could explain the " clus : ering " of groups . ) f innovations and , even more important , the " clustering " in time of their economic impact . The innovative process - both in its " normal " procedures and in its " extraordinary " breakthroughs - is shaped by the interplay of economic and institutional factors . One can dis - tinguish , however , the role of public policies re - lated to the search for new technological paths , from that aimed at technological advances along a broadly defined technology . In the former case policies concern what one may call " the burden of the first comer " . Throughout the process of selec - tion and emergence of new technologies , three crucial instituticnal factors appear to be crucial : ( 1 ) the accumulation of knowledge in both " scien - tific " and " ' applied " forms ( in this respect the existence of " bridging institutions " between proper ~ ' science ' " and technology is of the utmost impor - tance ( see Freeman 121 ) . ) ; 12 ) forms of institu - tional intervention which allow " ' a hundred flowers to blossom and a hundred schools to compete " - both in terms of technological explorations and manufacturing attempts ; ( 3 ) the selective and focussing effect induced by various forms of stritto sensu non - economic interests ( such as , for exam - ple , military technological requircr ' aents and pro - curement , specific energy saving programmcs , the national drive toward self - sufficiency in a particu - lar sector , etc . ) . One must notice that even when technological paths are well established , the above - mentioned variables may contribute to shape and determine the rate at which technical advances occur . Moreover , even at this stage when technical advances are in many ways endogenous to the economic dynamics , both the uncertainty related to the R & D process and the existence of untraded aspects of technical change do not disappear . Un - der these circumstances even traditional economics suggest normatively some form of public interven - tion to correct what it calls " market failures " related to differences between social and private rates of return and between social and priva . ' . e discounts of risks , and to " ' externalities " . A particularly interesting case refers to coun - tries lagging behind vis - a - vis the technological frontier on a certain technology . If technical ad - G . Dost / Technoh ~ gical paradign ~ , 161 vances maintain their cumulative ( although sto - chastic ) nature , and if oligopolistic structures tend to appropriate those technological leads , the pro - cess of technical change as such is not likely to yield to convergence between countries starting from different technological levels . 4° Imitative technological policies in this case might not be sufficient and public intervention aimed at catch - ing - up might have to affect trade flows , foreign investment , and the structure of the domestic in - dustry ( I discuss at some length those policies in Europe and Japan for electronics in 8 ) . 1 wish to make our final comment on the heur - istic capability of this interpretation of the process of technical change : and innovation . For our suggestion to prove useful , one should be able to ( 1 ) identify with ~ ufficient precision the " di - mensit , ns " which characterize each broad techno - logical paradigm and differentiate it from others , ( 2 ) serarate the per , ods of " normal " technology from extraordinary , earch , ( 3 ) define the " difficult puzzles " and unsolved difficulties of a technology which are often a , , ; cessary ( although not suffi - cient ) condition f¢ r tl ' ~ e search for other ones ; ( 4 ) describe the transition from one technological path to another and assess the factors which allow the emergence of a " ' winning " technology . Probably this exercise will be possible in some instances and not in others . Technological paradigms and trajectories , are in some respects metaphors of the interplay between continuity and rupt , res in the process of incor - poration of knowledge and technology into in - dustrial growth : the metaphor , however , should help to illuminate its various aspects and actors and to suggest a multi - variables approach to the theory of innovation and technical change . References I W , J . Abernathy and J . M . Utterback , Innovation trod the Evolution of the Firm , Harvard University , mimeo , 1976 . 2 K . Arrow , Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Re - sources for Invention , in NBER 1231 . 40 Of course there are other factors which induce technological diffusion and convergence . A discussion of variables such as differential labour costs , international investments , market " imperfections " which allow countries to develop domestic manufacturing , etc . can be lound in I0 . 3 K . Arrow , The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing , Review of Economic Studies , 1962 . 4 B . Belassa and R . Nelson ( eds . ) , Economic Progress , Prtvate Vah ~ es and Public Policies : Essays in honour of Wtlhant Fel # ter ( North - Holland , Amsterdam , 1977 ) . 5 A . Bonfiglioli , Universal Science , Appropriate Technology and U ~ tderdevelopment : A Reprise of the Latin - American Case , SPRU , University of Sussex , mimec , 1979 . 6 J . Clark , C . Freeman and I _ . Soete , L , , ng Waves and Technological Developments in the 20th Century , paper prepared for the Bochum Conference o a Wirtschafliche Wechsellagen und Sozialer Wondel , SPRIJ , University of Sussex , mimeo , 1980 . 7 G . Dosi , Institutional Factors and Mark ; t Mechanisms in the Innovative Process , SERC , University of Sussex . mimeo . 1979 . 8 G . Dosi , Technical Change and Survival : Europe ' s Semi - conductor lndustr } , , Sussex European Papt : rs , University of Sussex , 1981 . 9 G . Dosi , Structure of the Industry and Pricing Polictes - Some Theoretical Hypotheses and the Evtdence from Senu - conductor Industry , SERC , University of Sussex , mimeo . 1980 . 10 G . Dosi , Transmission Mechanisms o Technical Change . Adjustment Problems and Their International Implications . SERC , University of Sussex , mimeo , 1981 . 11 P . K . Feyerabend , Against Method ( New Left Books , London , 1975 ) . 12 C . Freeman , The Economics of Industrial Innovation Penguin , Harmondsworth , 1974 ) . 13 R . Gilpin , Technology , Economic Growth and lnternattonal Competitiveness ( U . S . Government Printing Office . Washington , 1975 ) . 14 T . Kuhn , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions ( Chicago University Press , Chicago , 1962 ) . 15 Illinois Institute of Technology , Report on Project TRACES ( National Science Foundation , Washington , 1969 ) . 16 J . Jewkes , D . Sawers and R . Sti ~ lerman , The " ourcesof Invention ( Macmillan , London , 1958 ) . 17 I . Lakatos , The Methodology of Scientific Research Pro - grammes ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 1978 ) . 18 R . Levin , Toward an Empirical Model of Schumpeterian Competition , Yale University , mimeo , 1980 . 19 E . Mansfield , Industrial Research and Technological In - novation ( Norton , New York , 1968 ) . 20 J . P . Martino , Technological Forecasting - An Overview . Management Science , January , 1980 . 21 S . Meyers and D . G . Marquis , Successful lndm ' trial Innova - tion , ( National Science Foundation , Washington , 1969 ) . 22 R . A . Musgrave and I . Lakatos ( eds . ) Criticism and Growtt , of Knowledge ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 1973 ) . 23 National Bureau and Economic Research , The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity ( Princeton University Press , Princeton , N J , 1962 ) . 24 R . Nelson and S . Winter , Dynamic Competiti ~ m and Technical Progress , in 4 . 25 R . Nclson and S . Winter , In Search ~ ) f a Useful Theory of Innovation , Research Policy . 6 ( 1977 ~ . 26 R . Nelson and S . Winter , The Schumpeterian Trade - off . ~ Revisited , Yale Univelsity , mimeo , 1980 . 162 G . D ~ . ~ i / Tethnological paradigms 127 R . Nel ' ~ . on , Balancing Market Failure and Go ~ ernm " nt In - adequacy " The Case of Policy Toward Industrial R & D , Working t " aper no . 840 , Yale University , 1980 . 128 K . Favitt and S . Wald , The Conditions for Success in Technological Innovation , ( OECD , Paris , 1971 ) . 29 K . Pavitt and L . Soete , Innovative Activities and Export SI " ares : Some Comparisons between Industr es and Coun - tries , in K . Pavitt ( ed . ) Technical Innovation and British Economic Performance ( Macmillan , London , 1980 ) . 30 N . Rosenberg , Perspectives or Technology ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1976 ) . 31 N . Rosenberg and D . Mowery , The Influence of Market Demand upon Innovation : A Critical Review of some Recent Empirical Studies , Research Policy , 8 ( 1978 ) . 32 D . Sahal , Recent Advances in a Theory of Technological Change ( International Institute of Management , Berlin , 1979 ) . 33 D . Sahal , On the Conception and Measurement of Trade - offs in Engineering S ' ~ stems , Technoh ~ gical Foretasting and Social Change ( 1974 ) . 34 D . Sahal , Law - like Aspects of Technological Development ( International lnstit ~ ate of Management , Berlin , 1978 ) . 35 M . Salvati , Monopt ~ lio Sviluppo e Distribu : ione ( Edizioni dell ' Ateneo , Rome , 1971 ) . 36 Science Policy Research Unit ( SPRU ) , Report on Project SAPPHO ( SPRU , University of Sussex 1971 ) . 37 J . Schmookler , Invention and Economic Growth ( Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA 1966 ) . 38 J . Schumpeler , The Theory of Economic Development ( OU P , New York , 1961 ) ( first ed . 1919 ) . 39 J . Schumpeter . Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy ( Harpers , New York , 1947 ) . 40 R . Shrieves , Market Structure and Innovation : A Nev¢ Perspective , Journal of Industrial Economics , June ( ! 978 ) . 41 L . Soete , Firm Size and Inventive Activity : The Evidence Reconsidered , European Economic Remew , 12 ( 1979 ) . 42 L . Soete , A General Test of Technology Gap Theory , Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv ( ! 981 ) . 43 N . Terleckyj , The Effects of R & D on Productivity Growth in Industry ( National Planning Association , Washington , 1974 ) . 44 M . Teubal , N . Arnon and M . Trachtenberg , The Perfor - mance in the Israeli Electronics Industry : A Case Study of Biomedical Instrumentation , Research Policy ( 1976 ) . 45 M . Teubal , On Users Needs and Need Determmatwn : Aspects of the Theory of Technological Innovation , Mauricc Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel , Discussion Paper No . 774 , Iq77 . 46 V . M . Walsh , J . F . Townsend , B . G . Achilladelis and C . Freeman , Trends in Invention and Innovation in the Chemi - cal Industry , Report to SSRC , SPRU , University of Sus - sex , mimeo , 1979 . 47 D . Sahal , Alternative Conceptions of Technology , Re - search Policy ( 1981 ) . 48 N . Rosenberg , Technological Interdependence in the American Economy , Technology and Culture ( 19 ~ 8 ) . 49 D . Needharn , Market Structure and Firms ; R & D Be - haviour , Journal of Industrial Economics ( 1975 ) . 50 R . Scherer , Firm Size , Market Structure , Oppo ' , ' tunity and the Output of Patented Inventions , American Economic Review ( 1965 ) .