Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 3581 MBoC | ARTICLE Flat clathrin lattices : stable features of the plasma membrane Joe Grove a , b , Daniel J . Metcalf c , Alex E . Knight c , Silène T . Wavre - Shapton a , * , Tony Sun a , Emmanouil D . Protonotarios d , Lewis D . Griffin d , Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz e , and Mark Marsh a a MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and d CoMPLEX , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , United Kingdom ; b Institute of Immunity and Transplantation , University College London , London NW3 2PF , United Kingdom ; c Biophysics and Diagnostics , National Physical Laboratory , Teddington TW11 0LW , United Kingdom ; e Cell Biology and Metabolism Program , Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 ABSTRACT Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a fundamental property of eukaryotic cells . Classical CME proceeds via the formation of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) at the plasma membrane , which invaginate to form clathrin - coated vesicles , a process that is well under - stood . However , clathrin also assembles into flat clathrin lattices ( FCLs ) ; these structures re - main poorly described , and their contribution to cell biology is unclear . We used quantitative imaging to provide the first comprehensive description of FCLs and explore their influence on plasma membrane organization . Ultrastructural analysis by electron and superresolution microscopy revealed two discrete populations of clathrin structures . CCPs were typified by their sphericity , small size , and homogeneity . FCLs were planar , large , and heterogeneous and present on both the dorsal and ventral surfaces of cells . Live microscopy demonstrated that CCPs are short lived and culminate in a peak of dynamin recruitment , consistent with classical CME . In contrast , FCLs were long lived , with sustained association with dynamin . We investi - gated the biological relevance of FCLs using the chemokine receptor CCR5 as a model sys - tem . Agonist activation leads to sustained recruitment of CCR5 to FCLs . Quantitative mole - cular imaging indicated that FCLs partitioned receptors at the cell surface . Our observations suggest that FCLs provide stable platforms for the recruitment of endocytic cargo . INTRODUCTION Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the principal mechanism by which eukaryotic cells internalize cell surface constituents and cargoes from the extracellular environment . The molecular details of CME , borne out by 45 yr of microscopy , biochemical analysis , and genetic studies , have been synthesized into a standard model in which 1 ) adaptor proteins nucleate the assembly of a domed clathrin basketwork—a clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) —on the cyto - plasmic face of the plasma membrane ; 2 ) this CCP specifically sequesters receptor cargoes as it undergoes progressive growth and invagination to form a spherical cavity connected to the cell surface by a narrow membrane neck ; 3 ) a scission machinery , involving the GTPase dynamin , severs the neck to generate an intracellular clathrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) measuring ∼ 100 nm in diameter ; and 4 ) coordinated disassembly of the clathrin basket - work liberates the underlying vesicle , allowing delivery of its cargo via fusion with the endosomal network . There is a wealth of evi - dence to support this model , and the sequential molecular inter - actions that drive the process are relatively well understood ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Brodsky , 2012 ) . However , numerous microscopy studies have revealed a hetero - geneous array of membrane - associated clathrin coats , including large , flat structures , variably referred to as patches , plaques , or flat clathrin lattices , that are not considered in this standard model . Monitoring Editor Sandra L . Schmid University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Received : Jun 26 , 2014 Revised : Aug 14 , 2014 Accepted : Aug 18 , 2014 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 06 - 1154 ) on August 27 , 2014 . * Present address : Molecular Medicine Section , National Heart and Lung Institute , Imperial College London , London SW7 2AZ , United Kingdom . Address correspondence to : Joe Grove ( j . grove @ ucl . ac . uk ) , Mark Marsh ( m . marsh @ ucl . ac . uk ) . © 2014 Grove et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CCS , clathrin - coated structure ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; CME , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; FCL , flat clath - rin lattice ; GPCR , G protein – coupled receptor . http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2014 / 08 / 25 / mbc . E14 - 06 - 1154v1 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : 3582 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell fluorescence microscopy of fixed whole cells confirmed these observations . Live - cell total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy corroborated the coexistence of distinct structures . CCPs exhibited transient lifetimes that culminated in a peak of dy - namin recruitment ; FCLs did not conform to the typical dynamics of CME , being extremely long lived , with persistent recruitment of dynamin . The chemokine receptor CCR5 undergoes CME ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) ; therefore we used this model system to investigate the rele - vance of FCLs to plasma membrane biology . Live - cell TIRF imaging revealed progressive and sustained association of CCR5 with FCLs after stimulation with chemokine ligand . Quantitative dual - color superresolution microscopy suggests that FCLs are able to selectively partition CCR5 at the cell surface . As such , FCLs may provide stable sites for the recruitment of endocytic cargo such as G protein – coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) . RESULTS Flat clathrin lattices are a discrete population of nonclassical CCSs The distinctive polygonal basketwork of CCSs make them easy to identify and particularly amenable to ultrastructural analysis ( Heuser , 1980 ) . We first evaluated clathrin heterogeneity in a variety of cell lines by preparing ventral ( bottom ) and dorsal ( top ) plasma mem - brane sheets for EM . Concordant with the standard model of CME , we observed abundant small , round structures characteristic of CCPs . In some cell types ( e . g . , HEK - 293T and BSC - 1 cells ) , these structures predominated ( Figure 1A , i and ii , and unpublished data ) . However , other cell types ( e . g . , HeLa and CHO cells ) also formed large , irregular FCLs ( Figure 1Aiii and Supplemental Figure S4 ; ex - amples of ventral membrane sheets from HEK - 293T and HeLa cells are provided in Supplemental Figures S1 and S2 ) . We manually segmented discrete CCSs in images of replicate membrane sheets from HEK - 293T and HeLa cells , allowing quanti - tative analysis of clathrin morphology . Scatter plots displaying the surface area and circularity of individual CCSs associated with the ventral plasma membrane are shown in Figure 1B . CCPs are repre - sented by a well - defined population of small , highly circular struc - tures with a two - dimensional surface area of ∼ 10 , 000 and ≤ 30 , 000 nm 2 . These values are in good agreement with prototypical CMEs , in which progressive assembly and invagination of CCPs give rise to spherical vesicles 100 – 200 nm in diameter ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . Whereas these CCPs predominated in HEK - 293T , HeLa cells exhibited greater heterogeneity , with an additional popu - lation of larger structures representing FCLs ( Figure 1B ) . The surface area of individual FCLs was often > 100 , 000 nm 2 , and they were typi - fied by an inverse relationship between size and circularity , a reflection of their irregular shape ( Figure 1Aiii ) . To better represent this cell - type - specific phenotype , we calcu - lated the relative frequency of small ( < 30 , 000 nm 2 ) , medium ( 30 , 000 – 100 , 000 nm 2 ) , and large ( > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) CCSs associated with the ventral and dorsal plasma membrane ( Figure 1C ) . Small CCP - type structures accounted for > 90 % of CCSs in HEK - 293T cells , whereas large structures were virtually absent . In contrast , FCLs ( de - fined as structures > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) represented ∼ 35 % of the CCSs on the ventral surface of HeLa cells . There have been conflicting reports as to whether FCLs only reside on the ventral surface of cells grown in adherent culture ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ; Akisaka et al . , 2008 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ; Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) . Our quantitative analysis clearly demon - strates that FCLs can form on the dorsal surface of HeLa cells , albeit Various techniques allow the preparation of plasma membrane sheets in such a way that the cytoplasmic surface can be examined en face by electron microscopy ( EM ; Heuser , 1980 , 2000 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ) . Using these techniques , early ultrastructural stud - ies of different cell types revealed a variety of clathrin - coated struc - tures ( CCSs ) , including small spherical CCPs , which later came to be understood in the standard model just described , and much larger , irregularly shaped , flat clathrin lattices ( FCLs ; Heuser , 1980 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) . It was initially suggested that these planar CCSs might be an intermediate form of CCP ( Heuser , 1980 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . However , it became clear that in some cell types , FCLs reach sizes much greater than can be resolved into a single CCV ( Heuser , 1980 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ) . Furthermore , invaginating structures were observed emanating from the periph - ery of FCLs ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ; Marsh and McMahon , 1999 ; Hinrichsen et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that they may generate CCVs via rearrangement of their basketwork or nucleation of de novo clathrin assembly ( Heuser , 1989 ; Otter and Briels , 2011 ) . Subsequent EM studies implicated FCLs in the internalization of specific endocytic cargoes , cellular ad - hesion , and the formation of phagocytic cups ( Aggeler and Werb , 1982 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Nicol and Nermut , 1987 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ; Akisaka et al . , 2008 ) . Nonetheless , FCLs have remained a poorly defined facet of plasma membrane biology . The advent of live - cell microscopy with genetically encoded fluo - rescent protein tags in the late 1990s allowed the kinetics of CME to be examined ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . Such studies have been instru - mental in defining the sequence of molecular events that drive the standard model of CME ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 , 2005 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Henne et al . , 2010 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . However , the diffraction properties of light limit the resolution of standard fluorescence microscopes to ∼ 300 nm , making it difficult to distinguish CCSs based on size and geometry . Therefore , to aid systematic analysis , there has been a tendency to either use cell types that exclusively exhibit homoge - neous CCP - type structures or analytically eschew CCSs that do not possess the typical characteristics of CCPs ( transient , diffraction - limited spots ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Consequently , no report has unequivocally examined FCLs and their dynamic characteristics . A number of live - imaging studies observed comparatively large CCSs that may represent FCLs ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Bellve et al . , 2006 ) , and data suggest that these are able to generate multiple successive cargo - laden CCVs ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Saffarian et al . ( 2009 ) described a popula - tion of stable CCSs termed clathrin plaques ( a terminology appro - priated from the original EM literature ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . The assembly and resolution of clathrin plaques were dependent on actin , and , unlike CCPs , plaques inter - nalized as a flat coat without prior invagination . The authors equated these structures to large , flat clathrin coats previously observed by EM ; however , fluorescence and ultrastructural data suggested that these plaques are relatively small ( approximately three times the size of a CCP ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Hence there has yet to be a direct reconciliation of the heterogeneous CCSs viewed by EM with live - cell fluorescence microscopy . In this study we used multimodal microscopy to revisit FCLs and define their principal characteristics . Quantitative EM of plasma membrane sheets from various cell types demonstrated two mor - phologically distinct populations of clathrin structures : small , uniform CCPs and large , heterogeneous FCLs . Superresolution Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3583 Figure S3C ) , indicating a planar topography . However , small , round CCP - like formations were often observed at the periphery of FCLs ( Figure 1Aiii and Supplemental Figure S3D ) . The mean electron in - tensity profile across these budding features appeared very similar to that of CCPs with a diameter of ∼ 100 nm ( Supplemental Figure S3E ) , and this is consistent with the notion that FCLs are capable of generating CCVs that are indistinguishable from those produced by standard CME ( Marsh and McMahon , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Bellve et al . , 2006 ; Hinrichsen et al . , 2006 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Lampe et al . , 2014 ) . EM provides a very high resolution view of the plasma mem - brane ; however , the preparation of membrane sheets requires me - chanical shearing or tearing of cells , which might introduce artifacts . This is a particular concern , given that FCLs might act as sites of adhesion on the ventral surface of cells ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; De Deyne et al . , 1998 ; Akisaka et al . , 2003 ) , and shearing techniques might enrich for membranes with abundant adhesion sites and thus FCLs ( Akisaka et al . , 2003 ) . Sample preparation for fluorescence mi - croscopy is not prone to such artifacts , yet the resolution of standard microscopy techniques is limited to ∼ 300 nm by the intrinsic diffrac - tion of light , making it difficult to discern individual CCSs . Therefore , to corroborate our EM observations , we used superresolution direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( dSTORM ; capable of at approximately twofold lower frequency ( Figure 1C ) , and we also observed dorsal FCLs in CHO cells ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ; Supple - mental Figure S6 ) . When viewed by EM , the two - dimensional projection of a deeply invaginated CCP and CCV generates a characteristic ring of low electron intensity , as exemplified in Supplemental Figure S3B . This is a consequence of the electron beam passing through multiple surfaces as it transits a CCP ( Supplemental Figure S3A ) . This feature provides a surrogate measure of sphericity , allowing us to evaluate the topography of CCSs ( Supplemental Figure S3B ) . We measured the radial electron intensity profiles of CCPs and FCLs in both HEK - 293T and HeLa cells . CCPs ( defined as structures with area < 30 , 000 nm 2 and circularity > 0 . 7 ) exhibited W - shaped profiles in - dicative of a spherical geometry ( Supplemental Figure S3C ) . These profiles measured ∼ 100 nm in diameter , and their characteristics were independent of cell type , further suggesting that classical CME produces uniform CCPs / CCVs in both HEK - 293T and HeLa cells . To accommodate membrane curvature , pentagons must be in - corporated into the hexagonal clathrin basketwork ( Kanaseki and Kadota , 1969 ; Smith et al . , 1998 ; Marsh and McMahon , 1999 ; Otter and Briels , 2011 ) . FCLs were largely composed of a hexagonal arrangement of clathrin ( Figure 1Aiii ) , and there was little variation in the electron intensity profile across their surface ( Supplemental FIGURE 1 : An electron microscopy survey of clathrin heterogeneity . Plasma membrane sheets from the ventral and dorsal cell surfaces were prepared for electron microscopy . ( A ) Representative images of the ventral plasma membrane of HEK - 293T ( i , ii ) and HeLa cells ( iii ) ; Scale bar , 500 nm . In HEK - 293T cells , small , homogeneous CCPs ( arrowheads ) predominate . HeLa cells show similar CCPs but had a propensity to also form large FCLs ( L ) , largely composed of hexagonal clathrin basketwork ( arrows ) . FCLs often displayed budding structures at their periphery ( asterisks ) , which appeared morphologically similar to classical CCPs . ( B ) Morphometric analysis of clathrin heterogeneity was performed by manual image segmentation ( see Materials and Methods ) . Scatter plots display the circularity and two - dimensional surface area of individual CCSs from the ventral surface of i ) HEK - 293T ( n = 2256 structures ) and ii ) HeLa cells ( n = 1329 structures ) . Shading indicates CCSs defined as small , < 30 , 000 nm 2 ( white ) ; medium , 30 , 000 – 100 , 000 nm 2 ( light gray ) ; or large , > 100 , 000 nm 2 ( dark gray ) . ( C ) Stacked histograms expressing the relative frequency of small , medium , and large structures on the ventral ( i ) and dorsal ( ii ) surface of HEK - 293T and HeLa cells ; n = 24 and 19 cells , respectively , surveyed across three independent experiments . Error bars indicate SEM . 3584 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Automated segmentation allowed us to perform morphometric analysis as in Figure 1 , B and C . Despite the lower resolution of dSTORM compared with EM , a distinct population of small , round CCPs was discernible in both cell types , whereas large , irregular FCLs were only common in HeLa cells ( Figure 2C ) . We indepen - dently confirmed these observations in HeLa cells stained with a polyclonal anti – clathrin light chain antibody ( Figure 2 , E – G ) and anti – α - adaptin ( unpublished data ) . Frequency analysis of CCSs in HEK - 293T cells by dSTORM was similar to data generated by EM ( compare Figures 2D and 1Ci ) . In contrast , FCLs were less frequent achieving resolutions of ∼ 20 nm ; Bates et al . , 2007 ; Heilemann et al . , 2008 ) to study clathrin heterogeneity in whole cells . We labeled endogenous clathrin heavy chain in fixed and permeabilized HEK - 293T and HeLa cells with a monoclonal antibody followed by a polyclonal secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 . dSTORM was performed on the ventral surface of the cells under TIRF illumination . dSTORM recapitulated our ultrastructural studies ; HEK - 293T cells possessed numerous small puncta of clathrin , whereas HeLa cells displayed large , heterogeneous arrays ( Figure 2 , A and B ) . FIGURE 2 : A superresolution microscopy survey of clathrin heterogeneity . Whole fixed cells were permeabilized and labeled with a mouse anti – clathrin heavy chain mAb , followed by secondary anti - mouse Alexa Fluor 647 . We imaged CCSs on the ventral cell surface by dSTORM using TIRF illumination . ( A ) dSTORM superresolution images of CCSs in HEK - 293T and HeLa cells . Images were reconstructed using a 25 - nm pixel size ; scale bar , 4 μm . Insets display standard diffraction - limited TIRF images of the same area . ( B ) Enlarged areas from dSTORM images in A , displaying small , round CCPs in HEK - 293T and large , pleomorphic FCLs in HeLa cells ; scale bar , 1 μm . Heat map intensity scale indicates density of localizations / μm 2 . ( C ) Morphometric analysis of clathrin heterogeneity was performed by automated image segmentation ( see Materials and Methods ) . Scatter plots display the circularity and two - dimensional surface area of individual CCSs from HEK - 293T and HeLa cells ; each plot displays 2000 representative structures . Color coding indicates CCSs defined as small , < 30 , 000 nm 2 ( white ) ; medium , 30 , 000 – 100 , 000 nm 2 ( light gray ) ; or large , > 100 , 000 nm 2 ( dark gray ) . ( D ) Stacked histograms displaying the relative frequency of small , medium , and large structures in HEK - 293T and HeLa cells from n = 8 and 13 cells , respectively , surveyed across three independent experiments ; error bars indicate SEM . ( E ) HeLa cells were stained with rabbit anti – clathrin light chain polyclonal serum , followed by secondary anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 647 . Representative dSTORM image ( i ) . The image was reconstructed with a 25 - nm pixel size ; scale bar , 4 μm . An enlarged area is shown in ii ; scale bar , 1 μm . ( F , G ) Morphometric analysis of CCSs stained with clathrin light chain ; the scatter plot displays 2000 structures from n = 4 cells surveyed in one experiment ; error bars indicate SD from the mean . Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3585 live TIRF imaging of HeLa cells expressing LCb - RFP . FCLs were no - table for their stability , displaying no lateral mobility , very little varia - tion in morphology , and typically persisting beyond the time frame of our experiments ( 10 - min acquisition at 0 . 33 frame / s ; Figure 3A and Figure 3 Video 1 ) . On closer examination of the data , numerous transient CCP - type events were also apparent ( highlighted with ar - rows in Figure 3 Video 1 ) . We quantified the dynamics of CCSs in HeLa cells using an unbiased tracking algorithm previously validated for clathrin studies ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Co - cucci et al . , 2012 ; Aguet et al . , 2013 ; Figure 3B ) . A large proportion of events were very short lived ( < 20s ) and are likely to represent small , abortive CCPs and endosomal structures that transiently move into the TIRF field ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . A further population of short - lived events ( 20 – 300 s ) principally con - sisted of diffraction - limited CCP - type structures . Very few events displayed an intermediate lifetime of 300 – 600 s ; however , stable FCL events with lifetimes beyond the duration of our experiments ( > 600 s ) accounted for ∼ 12 % of all clathrin events . Representative kymographs of transient pits and persistent lattice events are shown in Figure 3C . The short - lived CCP events possessed archetypal Dyn - 2 – EGFP recruitment : gradual accumulation of signal in parallel to LCb - RFP , in agreement with an early role for dynamin in CME ( Macia et al . , 2006 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ; Aguet et al . , 2013 ) , followed by an intense peak concomitant with loss of the clathrin signal , indi - cating CCV scission and subsequent uncoating or movement away from the TIRF field ( Figure 3C and Figure 3 Video 1 ) . In striking con - trast , FCLs possessed a continuous Dyn - 2 – EGFP signal , indicating persistent recruitment ( Figure 3 , A and C , and Figure 3 Video 1 ) . This hints that dynamin may play a role in the maturation and / or mainte - nance of planar CCSs , as well as in regulation of invaginated CCPs as previously proposed ( Macia et al . , 2006 ) . The GTPase activity of dynamin is believed to be necessary both for its early role in CCS development and for vesicle scission ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) ; despite this , the catalytically inactive Dyn - 2 – K44A - EGFP ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) was able to associate with FCLs ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that the dynamin GTP cycle does not regulate recruitment to FCLs . Aware that overexpression of Dyn - 2 – EGFP might drive aberrant re - cruitment to CCSs , we evaluated the distribution of endogenous dynamin in fixed HeLa cells by immunofluorescence . TIRF micros - copy confirmed association of endogenous dynamin with large , in - tense FCL structures ( Figure 3Di ) . Superresolution dSTORM imaging revealed a punctate distribution of dynamin , which is reminiscent of previous immunogold EM observations of dynamin associated with flat clathrin structures ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Warnock et al . , 1997 ) and may indicate that it is recruited to discrete sites within the lattice - work ( Figure 3Dii ) . In conclusion , commensurate with their distinct morphology , FCLs are also kinetically distinct from classical CCPs . Flat clathrin lattices are molecularly dynamic The molecular exchange of clathrin triskelia between the cytosolic pool and CCSs at the plasma membrane remains a contentious topic . Various reports used fluorescence recovery after photo - bleaching ( FRAP ) to demonstrate turnover of the constituents of CCSs ( Wu et al . , 2001 ; 2003 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ) , although interpretation of these results is confounded by the intrinsic transitory nature of CCPs . Others studies of pharmaco - logically arrested CCPs found no fluorescence recovery ( Macia et al . , 2006 ; Kleist et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , completion of CME requires the active disassembly of clathrin from CCVs by Hsc70 and auxillin / GAK ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ; Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ; Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ; Böcking et al . , 2011 ) . The latter on the ventral surface of whole HeLa cells assessed by dSTORM ( 10 – 20 % ; Figure 2 , D and G ) when compared with membrane sheets imaged by EM ( 35 % ; Figure 1Ci ) . However , given the likelihood of artifactually enriching for FCLs during EM sample preparation ( Aki - saka et al . , 2003 ) , superresolution imaging of whole cells is likely to provide a more reliable representation of the frequency of CCSs . Furthermore , dSTORM permits the systematic survey of thousands of structures across large fields of view . By quantifying structures in whole cells , we can generate an ac - curate estimate of the proportion of total cell surface clathrin found within small or large structures . FCLs ( defined as > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) ac - counted for ∼ 75 % of clathrin associated with the ventral plasma membrane of HeLa cells , compared with ∼ 20 % in HEK - 293T ( un - published data ) . This equates to ∼ 8 % of HeLa cell plasma mem - brane being covered in FCLs ; this figure is remarkably similar to an estimate based on EM of primary rat myotubes ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ) . As a point of comparison , CCPs cover only ∼ 1 . 5 % of HeLa cell plasma membrane . Almost identical data were derived from morphometric analysis of FCLs in CHO cells ( see later discussion and Supplemental Figure S4 ) . In summary , we used high - resolution EM and dSTORM imaging to demonstrate two morphologically distinct subsets of clathrin - coated structures . CCPs were small ( 100 – 150 nm in diameter ) and spherical , with a uniform geometry . In contrast , FCLs did not con - form to the classical model of CME , being large , irregular , and pla - nar structures with occasional CCP - like invaginations at their periph - ery . Whereas CCPs were ubiquitous , FCLs were present only in certain cell lines ; however , in these cells , FCLs accounted for the vast majority of clathrin associated with the plasma membrane . Flat clathrin lattices are long lived Since the development of live - cell fluorescence and TIRF micros - copy , numerous studies have examined the dynamics of plasma membrane CCSs ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Rappoport and Simon , 2003 ; Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . However , no study has yet reconciled ultrastructural observa - tions of clathrin heterogeneity with live imaging to directly address FCL dynamics . HeLa cells possess extensive arrays of FCLs , many of which cross the intrinsic diffraction limit of optical microscopy ( Figures 1 and 2 ) , making them particularly amenable to analysis by live TIRF imaging . FCLs contain abundant clathrin light chain ( Figure 2E ) , and there - fore we examined their dynamics by transiently transfecting HeLa cells with light chain tagged with red fluorescent protein ( LCb - RFP ) . Of importance , exogenous expression of clathrin light chain did not alter CCS frequency or morphology , as assessed by superresolution microscopy ( unpublished data ) . We also introduced enhanced green fluorescent protein – tagged dynamin - 2 ( Dyn - 2 – EGFP ) , the mecha - noenzyme largely responsible for the scission of CCVs ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . Dynamin exhibits moderate association with nascent CCSs , where it is believed to regulate maturation ( Macia et al . , 2006 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ; Aguet et al . , 2013 ) ; thereafter , a further stage of intense dynamin recruitment oc - curs as it assembles around the membranous neck of CCPs before vesicle scission ( Taylor et al . , 2011 , 2012 ; Grassart et al . , 2014 ) . As such , dynamin recruitment provides information on the maturation of CCSs and registers individual endocytic events . We therefore reasoned that monitoring levels of Dyn - 2 – EGFP would allow us to better describe the lifetime of classical CCPs and possibly afford a view of vesicle scission events occurring at FCLs . As expected following our observations by EM and dSTORM , large , intense CCSs representing FCLs were easily discernible by 3586 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell The turnover of clathrin from FCLs may occur via passive exchange with the cytosolic pool or through active processes such as the quasi - enzymatic disassembly of the clathrin basketwork by Hsc70 and auxil - lin / GAK ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ; Greene and Eisenberg , 1990 ; Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ; Böcking et al . , 2011 ) . To discriminate be - tween these scenarios , we evaluated FCL FRAP in cells depleted of ATP . Recovery of clathrin fluorescence was prevented in the absence of cellular energy ( Figure 4B and Figure 4 Videos 1 and 2 ) , concor - dant with active turnover of FCLs . In contrast , recovery of dynamin remained largely unaffected by ATP depletion ( Figure 4 Videos 1 and 2 ) . This evokes a scenario in which clathrin , an integral component of FCLs , requires active remodeling , whereas dynamin is fleetingly recruited from the cytosolic pool to FCLs , presumably via transient protein – protein interactions . In summary , despite their structural sta - bility ( Figure 3 ) , FCLs are dynamic molecular assemblies . Flat clathrin lattices regulate the cell surface distribution of CCR5 CCR5 is a chemokine receptor responsible for chemotactic migra - tion in a number of leucocytes , including T - cells and macrophages , and , of note , is also a coreceptor for human immunodeficiency viruses ( HIV ; Dragic et al . , 1996 ; Oppermann , 2004 ) . CCR5 is a seven - transmembrane domain GPCR for which ligand binding and activa - tion triggers G α ( i ) / G β signaling . Subsequent phosphorylation of observations suggest that the basketwork of maturing CCPs does not undergo molecular exchange . The long lifetimes of FCLs make them particularly well suited to FRAP analysis . Therefore we exam - ined clathrin and dynamin turnover by simultaneous photobleach - ing of LCb - RFP and Dyn - 2 – EGFP within selected groups of FCLs . Of importance , the interaction between clathrin light and heavy chain is very stable , such that the molecular dynamics of LCb - RFP faithfully represents the behavior of clathrin triskelia subunits ( Hoffmann et al . , 2010 ; Brodsky , 2012 ) . Clathrin fluorescence dis - played gradual but sustained recovery , reaching 50 % after ∼ 115 s ( Figure 4 and Figure 4 Video 1 ) , demonstrating that subunits of the FCL basketwork are being exchanged with the cytosolic pool . Dy - namin recovery also indicated turnover , although with much faster kinetics ; the signal recovered to 50 % in < 9 s . This transitory recruit - ment may be analogous to the “flickering” association of dynamin with maturing CCPs that precedes the stable assembly of the scission machinery , as proposed by Taylor et al . ( 2012 ) or the abor - tive recruitment of dynamin to endocytically immature CCSs recently suggested by Grassart et al . ( 2014 ) . Mean fluorescence recovery profiles ( Figure 4B ) show that LCb - RFP signal recovers to only ∼ 65 % , indicating that a significant proportion of clathrin within FCLs is not available for exchange ; on the contrary , the vast major - ity of dynamin was mobile , with fluorescence reaching > 90 % recov - ery within ∼ 80 s . FIGURE 3 : Flat clathrin lattices are long lived . HeLa cells expressing LCb - RFP and Dyn - 2 – EGFP were imaged by TIRF microscopy for 10 min at 0 . 33 frame / s . FCLs appeared as large , intense clathrin structures that persisted beyond the period of acquisition . ( A ) Stills taken from the beginning ( T = 0 s ) and end ( T = 600 s ) of a representative time course . Images display the cell surface distribution of clathrin ( magenta ) and dynamin ( green ) ; scale , 10 μm . ( B ) The lifetime of clathrin events was quantified using an automated tracking algorithm ( see Materials and Methods ) . The histogram displays the distribution of CCS lifetimes using 9 - s - wide bins , based on 6628 events from three acquisitions across two independent experiments . ( C ) Representative kymographs displaying fluorescent traces from CCPs , including “hot - spot” - type dynamics ( ii ) , and FCLs . Line plots display normalized fluorescence intensity from the lowermost kymographs ( iii , vi ) . Examples were chosen from transient and long - lived structures identified using the tracking algorithm . ( D ) Whole fixed HeLa cells were permeabilized and labeled with mouse anti – clathrin heavy chain mAb and goat anti – dynamin - 2 polyclonal IgG , followed by secondary anti - mouse Alexa Fluor 488 and anti - goat Alexa Fluor 647 . ( i ) Images of the cell surface distribution of clathrin ( magenta ) and dynamin ( green ) were acquired using standard TIRF microscopy ; scale bar , 5 μm . The distribution of dynamin was also examined by superresolution microscopy . ( ii ) A dSTORM reconstruction of the boxed area from i ; the image was reconstructed using a 25 - nm pixel size ; scale bar , 2 μm . Heat map intensity scale indicates density of localizations / μm 2 . Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3587 Figure S4B ) , with morphometric analysis confirming two populations of CCSs—small , spherical pits and large , pleomorphic lat - tices ( Supplemental Figure S4C ) covering ∼ 7 . 5 % of the ventral plasma membrane ( un - published data ) . Live - cell TIRF microscopy of CHO - CCR5 cells expressing LCb - RFP in - dicated that FCLs are long - lived structures ( Supplemental Figure S4D ) . Therefore , fur - ther to our observations in HeLa cells and in agreement with our and other reports ( Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sachse et al . , 2001 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ) , large , stable FCLs are present in CHO cells . To establish the kinetics of CCR5 internal - ization , we monitored receptor levels on ad - herent cells with a fluorescently conjugated anti - CCR5 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) by live - cell microscopy ( Supplemental Figure S5 ) . Before addition of agonist , CCR5 levels remained constant ; treatment with 125 nM CCL5 triggered loss of cell surface receptor , which followed an exponential decay , reach - ing a plateau of ∼ 65 % after 30 min . We inde - pendently verified these results by flow cy - tometry ( Supplemental Figure S5 ) . Of note , internalized CCR5 reaches the recycling en - dosome and / or TGN within 20 – 30 min , after which it recycles back to the plasma mem - brane ( Signoret et al . , 2000 ; Escola et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore the apparent stabilization of cell surface CCR5 by ∼ 30 min may reflect a dynamic equilibrium in which CCR5 is si - multaneously removed from and recycled back to the cell surface . To evaluate changes in receptor distribu - tion that accompany desensitization and in - ternalization , we monitored the codistribu - tion of CCR5 and clathrin by live - cell TIRF microscopy . Before treatment , antibody - labeled CCR5 was evenly distributed across the cell surface with no evidence of association with clathrin ( Figure 5A , top ) . After stimulation with CCL5 agonist , CCR5 exhibited a gradual redistribution to CCSs , which stabilized and persisted for the dura - tion of the study ( 60 - min acquisition at 2 frames / min ; Figure 5A and Figure 5 Video 1 ) . We identified stable FCLs in CHO - CCR5 cells us - ing the tracking algorithm described earlier ( Figure 3B ) and moni - tored CCR5 fluorescence associated with them over the time course . CCR5 redistribution to FCLs occurs with linear kinetics until reaching a persistent plateau at ∼ 12 min poststimulation ( Figure 5B ) . Prelimi - nary FRAP analysis indicated that CCR5 association with FCLs is dy - namic , with CCR5 fluorescence recovery displaying similar kinetics to clathrin turnover ( unpublished data ) . As a further testament to the longevity of FCLs , despite subtle morphological changes , the major - ity of structures persevered for the entire experiment ( > 60 min ; ( Figure 5A and Figure 5 Video 1 ) . This is also in keeping with our previous observation that agonist treatment did not affect the fre - quency and size of FCLs ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) . The temporal resolution used in the experiments illustrated in Figure 5 , A and B , and Figure 5 Video 1 did not allow us to observe CCR5 incorporation into transient CCPs ; therefore we imaged cells after 60 min of treatment using a high frame rate ( 10 - min acquisition at 0 . 33 frame / s ) . Of importance , at 1 h posttreatment , endocytosis C - terminal residues in CCR5 permits recruitment of β - arrestins , which both uncouples CCR5 from G - proteins and targets it for endocytosis via interactions with clathrin and AP - 2 ( Pierce and Lefkowitz , 2001 ; Fraile - Ramos et al . , 2003 ; Oppermann , 2004 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ) . After internalization , CCR5 undergoes trafficking through the early endosome and endosomal recycling compartment to reach the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , from where it returns to the plasma membrane in an iterative recycling loop that can persist for many hours ( Signoret et al . , 2000 , 2004 ; Escola et al . , 2010 ) . The mecha - nisms regulating the plasma membrane levels of CCR5 are critical in determining cellular sensitivities to physiological ligands and coreceptor availability for HIV infection ( Cocchi et al . , 1995 ; Reeves et al . , 2002 ; Oppermann , 2004 ) . Exploiting a well - established CHO - CCR5 cell system ( Mack et al . , 1998 ; Signoret et al . , 2000 , 2004 ) and immunogold EM , we previously demonstrated that CCR5 associates with FCLs after stimulation with native ligand ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore we used this system to reevaluate the relationship be - tween CCR5 and FCLs using advanced fluorescence imaging . We first used the quantitative microscopy approaches devel - oped in Figures 1 – 3 to demonstrate the existence of FCLs in CHO - CCR5 cells . As previously described ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) , EM of plasma membrane sheets revealed classical CCPs as well as FCLs , often with peripheral budding structures ( Supplemental Figure S4A ) . dSTORM recapitulated these observations ( Supplemental FIGURE 4 : Flat clathrin lattices are dynamic molecular assemblies . HeLa cells expressing LCb - RFP and Dyn - 2 – EGFP were imaged by spinning disk microscopy . The fluorescence signals associated with selected groups of FCLs were photobleached , and fluorescence recovery was monitored for 10 min at 0 . 33 frame / s . ( A ) Stills from a representative experiment displaying fluorescence recovery of LCb - RFP ( magenta ) and Dyn - 2 – EGFP ( green ) in a selected group of FCLs ( highlighted by dashed line ) ; scale bar , 10 μm . Clathrin turnover was relatively slow , whereas dynamin exchange occurred very rapidly . ( B ) Mean fluorescence recovery profiles for clathrin and dynamin , n = 32 and 9 selected groups of FCLs , respectively ; error bars indicate SEM . ( C ) Time to 50 % recovery of clathrin fluorescence in control or ATP - depleted HeLa cells ; n = 32 and 10 selected groups of FCLs , respectively ; error bars indicate SEM . 3588 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell of CCR5 is ongoing due to its iterative recy - cling program ( Signoret et al . , 2000 ; Escola et al . , 2010 ) . The cell shown in Figure 5 and Figure 5 Video 2 exhibits sustained associa - tion of CCR5 with stable FCLs , alongside transient diffraction - limited CCPs that accrue receptor ( boxed areas in Figure 5 Video 2 ) . Representative kymographs ( Figure 5C ) display CCP - type events that simultaneously accumulate CCR5 and clath - rin and stable FCLs with sustained recruit - ment of CCR5 . This suggests that CCR5 does not discriminate between FCLs and CCPs , although , it should be noted that at any given moment , CCPs account for a mi - nority of total plasma membrane clathrin ( Figure 2 and Supplemental Figure S4 ) . Coupling of CCR5 to the endocytic path - way is β - arrestin dependent ( Fraile - Ramos et al . , 2003 ; Truan et al . , 2013 ) . However , studies of other receptor systems suggested that recruitment to CCPs and FCLs may oc - cur via different mechanisms ( Sachse et al . , 2001 ) and that GPCR may be sorted to a subset of CCSs in a β - arrestin – independent manner ( Mundell et al . , 2006 ) . Therefore , to evaluate the role of β - arrestin in CCR5 recruitment to FCLs , we studied GFP - tagged β - arrestin - 2 in stimulated CHO - CCR5 cells by live - cell microscopy . Before treatment , β - arrestin displayed modest association with CCSs , with a large proportion appearing as a diffuse cytoplasmic signal . Stimulation with CCL5 induced a sustained association of β - arrestin - 2 with CCSs ( Supplemental Figure S6A and Supplemental Figure S6 Video 1 ) . Quantification revealed that β - arrestin - 2 was rapidly recruited to FCLs , reaching a plateau at ∼ 4 min after stimulation with CCL5 ( Supplemental Figure S6B ) . In contrast , a β - arrestin - 2 construct lack - ing the N - terminal domains necessary for interaction with GPCR ( but possessing the requisite clathrin / AP - 2 – binding sites ) failed to respond to CCL5 stimulation ( Supple - mental Figure S6B and Figure S6 Video 2 ) . This indicates that recruitment of β - arrestin to FCLs is dependent on prior interaction with CCR5 , as would be predicted by the accepted model of GPCR coupling to CME ( Dewire et al . , 2007 ) . Of note , this rapid CCR5 - dependent sequestration of FIGURE 5 : CCL5 agonist triggers persistent association of CCR5 with flat clathrin lattices . CHO - CCR5 cells expressing LCb - RFP and prelabeled with mouse anti - CCR5 mAb directly conjugated to Atto 488 were imaged by TIRF microscopy for 65 min at 2 frames / min . CCL5 was added after 5 min at a final concentration of 125 nM . ( A ) Images from the beginning ( untreated ) and end ( CCL5 ) of a representative time course , displaying the cell surface distribution of clathrin ( magenta ) and CCR5 ( green ) ; scale bar , 5 μm . To better illustrate the redistribution of CCR5 , the images were generated by averaging four consecutive frames from T = 0 and 60 min , respectively . Images without averaging can be seen in Supplemental Video 1 . ( B ) Stable FCLs were identified using an automated tracking algorithm ( see Materials and Methods ) , allowing quantification of their associated CCR5 fluorescence over the time course . The data are presented as normalized fluorescence expressed relative to the signal at T = 0 ; n = 220 stable FCLs from three cells , surveyed across two independent experiments ; error bars indicate SEM . ( C ) After 60 min of treatment with CCL5 ligand , CHO - CCR5 cells were imaged for 10 min at 0 . 33 frame / s . Kymographs display clathrin ( magenta ) and CCR5 ( green ) signals from representative CCPs and FCLs in CHO - CCR5 cells . Line plots display normalized fluorescence intensity from the lowermost kymographs ( iii , vi ) . Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3589 DISCUSSION The progressive nucleation , stabilization , and maturation of clathrin - coated pits to produce endocytic vesicles is an increasingly well un - derstood process . In this study , we used multimodal quantitative microscopy to describe two populations of CCS—archetypal CCPs and FCLs that cannot be easily understood within the standard framework of classical CME . Morphometric analysis by EM and dSTORM imaging ( Figures 1 and 2 and Supplemental Figures S3 and S4 ) confirmed that small , homogeneous CCPs were present in each of the cell lines we evalu - ated . However , some cell types , for example , HeLa and CHO , exhib - ited an additional population of large , heterogeneous FCLs , similar to those observed by others in cultured cells ( normal rat kidney , YT lymphocytes , HeLa , and CHO ) , and ex vivo primary cells ( fibroblasts , adipocytes , myotubes , osteoclasts and macrophage ; Heuser , 1980 ; Aggeler and Werb , 1982 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ; Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Akisaka et al . , 2003 ; Bellve et al . , 2006 ; Edeling et al . , 2006 ; Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) . FCLs were planar ( Figure 1Aiii and Supplemental Figure S3C ) ; however , invaginating structures , indistinguishable from CCPs / CCVs , were frequently observed at their periphery ( Figure 1Aiii and Supplemental Figures S3 and S4A ) . This is consistent with the notion that FCLs can contribute to endocytosis by producing uniform cargo - laden CCVs ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Lampe et al . , 2014 ) . Unlike previous studies , we reconciled our ultrastructural analysis with live - cell microscopy to directly address the dynamics of FCLs ( Figure 3 ) . CCPs appeared as prototypical diffraction - limited spots with transient lifetimes ranging from 20 to 300 s . In contrast , FCLs were remarkably stable , displaying very little change in position or morphology over the duration of study ( 10 min ; Figure 3C ) and were capable of persisting for > 1 h ( Figure 5A ) . Despite this apparent stability , FRAP analysis demonstrated that FCLs are molecularly dy - namic assemblies ( Figure 4 ) . We monitored dynamin association to better describe the lifetime of clathrin events . CCPs displayed a characteristic biphasic recruitment of dynamin , with an initial moder - ate signal , followed by an intense peak commensurate with vesicle scission ( Figure 3C and Supplemental Video S1 ) . On the contrary , FCLs exhibited sustained dynamin recruitment ( Figure 3C and Sup - plemental Video S1 ) , and we were unable to discern discrete peaks in intensity that might signify vesicle scission events . The FCLs described here share some characteristics with the clathrin plaques described by Saffarian et al . ( 2009 ) , such as planar topography and long lifetime . However , we believe that FCLs and plaques are discrete species of CCSs . Of note , clathrin plaques are comparatively small ( only two to three times larger than a pit ) and exhibit intermediate lifetimes ( ∼ 300 s ) , with a burst in dynamin re - cruitment coordinate with endocytosis ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Fur - thermore , whereas clathrin plaques are dependent on HIP1R - medi - ated coupling to the actin cytoskeleton ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) , other studies suggest that flat lattices in HeLa cells are unaffected by HIP1R depletion ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore clathrin plaques may represent a further subset of morphologically and ki - netically distinct CCSs that form alongside FCLs and CCPs and may be present among the medium - sized flat CCSs revealed by EM and dSTORM ( Figure 1 and 2 ) . However , we were unable to analytically discriminate clathrin plaque – type events from CCPs in our live - imag - ing experiments ( unpublished data ) . To probe the relevance of FCLs to plasma membrane biology , we studied CCR5 , a prototypical G protein – coupled chemokine recep - tor ( Oppermann , 2004 ) . Activation by a native agonist ( CCL5 ) induced a rapid redistribution of CCR5 to FCLs that occurred in β - arrestin - 2 ( Supplemental Figure S6B ) may indicate the presence of CCR5 at FCLs earlier than is apparent in Figure 5 . To examine this , we studied the distribution of clathrin , β - arrestin , and CCR5 on the dorsal surface of CHO cells by membrane rip - off and im - munogold EM ( Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ) . In agreement with our earlier reports ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) , FCLs become decorated with gold - labeled β - arrestin and CCR5 within 2 min of agonist ac - tivation ( Supplemental Figure S6C ) , indicating that CCR5 / β - arrestin complexes begin to accumulate in FCLs sooner than can be appreciated by live - cell fluorescence microscopy ( Figure 5 ) . Finally , we performed dSTORM imaging of CHO - CCR5 cells 60 min post agonist stimulation to confirm sustained recruitment of β - arrestin to the plasma membrane ( Supplemental Figure S6C ) . In summary , after activation by agonist , CCR5 undergoes down - regulation from the cell surface to ∼ 65 % of the levels in untreated cells , accompanied by rapid and sustained recruitment of CCR5 / β - arrestin complexes to preexisting FCLs . Flat clathrin lattices partition CCR5 at the plasma membrane A number of reports suggest that FCLs may organize the cell surface distribution of both endocytic and nonendocytic receptors ( Pumplin and Bloch , 1990 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ; De Deyne et al . , 1998 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Kim et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore we evaluated the molecular codistribution of clathrin and CCR5 in our experimental system . To achieve this , we performed dual - color PALM / dSTORM superresolution imaging ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Bates et al . , 2007 ; Heilemann et al . , 2008 ) of photoactivatable , GFP - tagged clathrin light chain ( PAGFP - LCa ) and CCR5 labeled with mAb directly conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 . In untreated cells , CCR5 was distributed throughout the plasma membrane , organized into abundant puncta that likely represent individual or small clus - ters of receptors ( Figure 6A ) . Critically , there was no ostensible as - sociation with FCLs . After 60 min of treatment with CCL5 , the recep - tors had reorganized into larger clusters often arranged in and around FCLs , leaving the remaining plasma membrane predomi - nantly devoid of receptor ( Figure 6A ) . The value of localization microscopy is that it provides the posi - tions of individual molecules as representative point coordinates that are amenable to powerful spatial statistics techniques . We eval - uated the ability of FCLs to recruit endocytically active CCR5 in ag - onist - treated cells compared with unliganded receptor in control cells , using bivariate Hopkins analysis ( Zhang et al . , 2006 ; Mattila et al . , 2013 ) . A particular advantage of this method is that it gener - ates a single value that reflects the spatial relationship between the given points ; a Hopkins index of 0 . 5 indicates a random codistribu - tion , a value significantly < 0 . 5 denotes segregation , and association produces a value > 0 . 5 . We compared the molecular point pattern of CCR5 molecules relative to the centroid positions of individual FCLs ( defined as structures > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) within multiple objectively chosen regions of interest . As a control , we simulated a random codistribution by replacing the positions of individual FCLs with an equal number of arbitrarily chosen points . In CCL5 - treated cells , a bivariate Hopkins index of ∼ 0 . 7 indicated significant association of CCR5 with FCLs ( Figure 6B ) , consistent with the rapid and sustained recruitment ob - served in Figures 5 and Supplemental Figure S6 and previously re - ported ( Signoret et al . , 2005 ) . Critically , a Hopkins index of ∼ 0 . 4 in untreated cells ( Figure 6B ) demonstrates significant segregation of CCR5 and FCLs , indicating that FCLs exclude nonactivated CCR5 . Taken together , these data suggest that FCLs may provide stable platforms for the internalization and / or desensitization of GPCR . 3590 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell parallel to down - regulation of cell surface receptor ( Figure 5 and Supplemental Figure S5 ) . Liganded CCR5 remained associated with FCLs for the duration of the study ( > 1 h ) , such that FCLs dictated the cell sur - face distribution of activated receptor . We also observed rapid recruitment of cytoplas - mic β - arrestin to FCLs ( Supplemental Figure S6 ) . Molecular codistribution analysis by lo - calization microscopy confirmed clustering of CCR5 in and around FCLs ( Figure 6 ) . This suggests that FCLs may provide stable plat - forms for the recruitment of endocytic cargo , including GPCRs ; this notion is supported by the recent work of Lampe et al . ( 2014 ) demonstrating both constitutive endocyto - sis of transferrin receptor and agonist - in - duced internalization of GPCR ( β 2 - adrenergic receptor and Mu - opioid receptor ) occurring from the same large , stable CCSs . Clathrin sculpture Our combined ultrastructural and live mi - croscopy approaches demonstrate that FCLs are morphologically and kinetically distinct from standard CCP - type structures , but it re - mains unclear how clathrin may be fashioned into these disparate forms ( Traub , 2009 ) . The dichotomy in clathrin phenotypes observed between HEK - 293T and HeLa cells ( Figures 1 and 2 ) suggests differentially expressed molecular determinant ( s ) of clath - rin structure morphology . Of note , the cargo - specific adaptor Dab2 is capable of inducing very large , flat clathrin coats when overexpressed in BSC - 1 cells ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . We observed high levels of Dab2 in HeLa cells ( when compared with HEK 293T ) and enrichment of Dab2 within FCLs ; how - ever , small interfering RNA knockdown of Dab2 did not affect the size or frequency of FCLs ( unpublished data ) . Identification of the factor ( s ) that positively or negatively regulate the formation of FCLs will likely require a comprehensive and comparative survey of FCL constituents . However , our preliminary data and observations by others suggest that FCLs contain various typical endocytic components , including some that are capable of inducing curvature to model membranes in vitro ( FCHo , AP - 2 , epsin , Eps15 ; Edeling et al . , 2006 ; Hawryluk et al . , 2006 ; Hinrichsen et al . , 2006 ; unpublished data ) . Alternatively , adjustments to CCS to - pography may be regulated by a biochemi - cal switch ; for example , phosphorylation of clathrin light chain regulates the conforma - tion of clathrin triskelia ( Wilbur et al . , 2010 ; Brodsky , 2012 ) . Critically , FCLs were capable of produc - ing peripheral budding structures that are morphologically indistinguishable from FIGURE 6 : Flat clathrin lattices partition CCR5 at the plasma membrane . CHO - CCR5 cells expressing LCa - PAGFP and prelabeled with mouse anti - CCR5 mAb directly conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 were incubated for 1 h in the presence or absence of 125 nM CCL5 . Cells were fixed and imaged by two - color PALM / dSTORM . ( A ) Representative superresolution images of the cell surface distribution of clathrin ( magenta ) and CCR5 ( green ) in control or CCL5 - treated CHO - CCR5 cells . Images were reconstructed with a 25 - nm pixel size ; scale bar , 1 μm . ( B ) The molecular codistribution of FCLs and CCR5 was quantified using Hopkins spatial statistics in multiple arbitrarily chosen regions of interest ( see Materials and Methods ) . A Hopkins value of 0 . 5 demonstrates a random codistribution , whereas values significantly above or below 0 . 5 indicate association or segregation , respectively . In untreated cells , a Hopkins value of ∼ 0 . 4 indicates that FCLs and CCR5 were segregated . Stimulation with CCL5 resulted in a Hopkins index of ∼ 0 . 7 , demonstrating association of CCR5 with FCLs . As a control , we compared the distribution of CCR5 to simulated random points , which gave a value of 0 . 5 , indicating that the algorithm is functioning correctly . n = 11 ( untreated ) and 10 ( CCL5 ) regions of interest , taken from three fields across two independent experiments for each condition ; error bars indicate SEM ; * * p = 0 . 003 , * * * * p ≥ 0 . 0001 , unpaired t test ( Prism ; GraphPad , La Jolla , CA ) . Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3591 Structurales , Gif - sur - Yvette , France ) , Dyn - 2 - EGFP ( Sandra Schmid , UT Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX ) , PAGFP - LCa ( Subach et al . , 2009 ) , and β - arrestin - 2 – GFP constructs ( Mark Scott , Institut Cochin , Paris , France ) , were introduced by transient transfection us - ing Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies ) . Antibodies and reagents The following primary antibodies were used for immunostaining : mouse anti – clathrin heavy chain X22 ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) ; rabbit anti – clathrin light chain immunoglobulin G ( IgG ; Frances Brodsky , University College London , London , United Kingdom ) ; goat anti – dynamin - 2 IgG C18 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Dallas , TX ) ; mouse anti - CCR5 MC5 ( Mathias Mack ) ; rabbit anti - GFP poly - clonal sera ( David Shima , University College London ) . For live - cell labeling , anti - CCR5 MC5 was directly conjugated to either Alexa Fluor 647 ( Life Technologies ) or Atto 488 ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . All secondary antibodies were obtained from Life Technolo - gies . Recombinant CCL5 was provided by Amanda E . I . Proudfoot ( Merck Serono , Geneva , Switzerland ) . Electron microscopy Plasma membrane sheets were prepared on ice by fluid shearing ( Bloch and Morrow , 1989 ) and rip - off methods ( Sanan and Anderson , 1991 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ) . To prepare ventral sheets by fluid shearing , cells were grown to subconfluency on carbon - coated formvar EM grids that had been pretreated with poly - l - lysine . Samples were rinsed in HEPES buffer ( 25 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid [ HEPES ] , 25 mM KCl , and 2 . 5 mM Mg acetate , pH 7 . 0 ) , and then a jet of buffer was applied across the grids from a syringe through a 25 - gauge needle . This sheared the cell bodies , leaving sheets of adhered ventral membrane on the grids . To prepare dorsal sheets , we rinsed subconfluent cell mono - layers grown on glass coverslips in HEPES buffer and inverted them onto EM grids , prepared as described . A rubber bung was applied to the top of the coverslips with light finger pressure for 10 s before the coverslips were lifted away , leaving portions of dorsal membrane on the EM grids . After shearing or rip - off , samples were immediately rinsed twice in HEPES buffer and fixed in 4 % glutaraldehyde ( or 2 % formaldehyde plus 1 % glutaraldehyde for immunogold labeling ) and sequentially postfixed with 1 % osmium tetraoxide , 10 mg / ml tannic acid , and 1 . 5 % uranyl acetate . Membrane sheets were im - aged using a Tecnai G2 Spirit transmission electron microscope ( Field Emission , Hillsboro , OR ) fitted with a SIS Morada charge - cou - pled device ( CCD ) camera ( Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) . Superresolution imaging For single - channel dSTORM imaging , cells were grown in four - well - chambered coverglass slides ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) to low confluency . Samples were rinsed in ice - cold phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and fixed in 4 % formaldehyde plus 0 . 02 % glu - taraldehyde on ice for 10 min , followed by a further 20 - min incuba - tion at room temperature . Autofluorescence was quenched with three 5 - min incubations in PBS plus 50 mM glycine . Cells were blocked / permeabilized in 0 . 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) plus 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 30 min and then stained sequentially with pri - mary and secondary antibodies for 1 h with gentle rocking , inter - spersed by three 5 - min washes in blocking buffer . dSTORM imaging was performed on an IX71 inverted microscope ( Olympus ) , fitted with a 100 × / 1 . 49 numerical aperture ( NA ) TIRF objective lens ( Olym - pus ) , a 150 - mW , 642 - nm laser ( TOPTICA Photonics , Victor , NY ) , and an iXon 897 electron - multiplying CCD ( EMCCD ) camera ( Andor Technology , Belfast , UK ) . All components were controlled with CCPs / CCVs ( Supplemental Figure S3 ) . Therefore the molecular pro - cesses that dictate the geometry of classical CME must also be bought to bear on endocytic events originating from FCLs . The de - terminants of the uniform shape of CCVs are not fully understood but are likely to involve AP - 2 – dependent recruitment of AP180 / CALM via NECAP ( Zhang et al . , 1998 ; Meyerholz et al . , 2005 ; Aguet et al . , 2013 ; Ritter et al . , 2013 ) . Flat clathrin lattices as membrane scaffolds Despite being first observed > 30 yr ago ( Heuser , 1980 ) , the function and physiological relevance of FCLs remain unclear . This poor un - derstanding is largely attributable to the lack of detailed character - ization of FCLs ; as a point of comparison , “clathrin - coated vesicle” yields > 2000 PubMed results , whereas < 50 articles contain information on flat clathrin structures . However , this and other stud - ies suggest that FCLs act as stable membrane scaffolds for a variety of processes occurring at the cell surface . FCLs likely contribute to CME by acting as endocytic platforms for various cargoes , such as GPCR , transferrin receptor , and low - density - lipoprotein receptor ( Miller et al . , 1991 ; Sanan and Ander - son , 1991 ; Lamaze et al . , 2001 ; Scott et al . , 2002 ; Signoret et al . , 2005 ; Bellve et al . , 2006 ; Lampe et al . , 2014 ) . As another example , neuroendocrine cells possess extensive arrays of preformed CCSs that act as a diffusion trap to capture and internalize acetylcholine transporters after synaptic exocytosis ( Sochacki et al . , 2012 ) . Beyond this conventional role in CME , we demonstrated that FCLs are able to exclude or recruit CCR5 , depending on its activa - tion status ( Figure 6 ) . This suggests that FCLs may offer a mecha - nism to functionally compartmentalize the plasma membrane , for example , by acting as platforms for receptor signaling and / or de - sensitization . In support of this concept , a recent study used dual - color superresolution imaging to show that Wnt3A stimulation induces large clathrin structures that scaffold LRP6 signaling from the cell surface ( Kim et al . , 2013 ) . There are also numerous reports of a role for FCLs in cellular adhesion ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Akisaka et al . , 2003 ; Bonazzi et al . , 2012 ) , possibly via recruitment of receptors such as β 1 / 3 / 5 integrins ( De Deyne et al . , 1998 ; Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) and nu - cleation of actin assembly ( Akisaka et al . , 2008 ) . More specifically , large , flat clathrin structures ( and their associated dynamin ) support actin assembly to form and maintain costameres—complexes that tether sarcomeres to the plasma membrane in skeletal muscle tis - sue . Knockdown of clathrin in mouse muscle leads to degeneration of myotubes , disorganized sarcomeres , and concomitant loss of muscle strength ( Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) . These observations suggest that FCLs also act as molecular scaffolds for the transmis - sion of mechanical force . Many questions remain regarding the determinants and signifi - cance of clathrin heterogeneity . However , we suggest that FCLs are an underappreciated facet of plasma membrane biology . Quantitative imaging tools are likely to reveal more about nonclassical clathrin structures and the unconventional roles they play in cell biology . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture , plasmids , and transfection Tissue culture media and supplements were obtained from Life Technologies ( Carlsbad , CA ) . HeLa ( HEp2 strain ) and HEK - 293T cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum , penicillin , and streptomycin ; CHO - CCR5 cells ( Mathias Mack , University of Regensburg , Regensburg , Germany ) were maintained in α - MEM supplemented as described . Plasmids encoding LCb - RFP ( Christian Merrifield , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie 3592 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell acquisition were automatically segmented by applying a median fil - ter with 3 × 3 pixel support and converting to a binary image . The binary data generated from EM or dSTORM images were then ana - lyzed using the MATLAB Image Processing Toolbox ( MathWorks , Natick , MA ) to extract the size and shape characteristics of individual CCSs . Circularity was calculated from area and perimeter measure - ments using the standard circularity / roundness formula ( 4 π area / perimeter 2 ) . Automated tracking Analysis of live - cell imaging of clathrin in HeLa and CHO cells was performed in MATLAB using the u - track method ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Briefly , CCSs were segmented using an à trous wavelet decomposition ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ) ; the u - track software was then used to identify individual clathrin maxima within each frame and track the lifetime of individual events by linking maxima across frames . A gap - closing step ensured that tracks were not prematurely terminated by a failure in CCS detec - tion ; our analysis was performed using a maximum gap closing window of eight frames and a maximum search radius of 3 pixels , as previously validated by Jaqaman et al . ( 2008 ) . Events that ap - peared for only one frame are likely to be a result of misdetection or originate from highly motile endosomal clathrin and were dis - carded . Events that merged or split were also rejected to avoid ambiguity in tracking and quantification . Lifetime quantification was performed on the remaining events . Representative kymo - graphs were selected from long - lived FCLs and short - lived CCP - type events . To quantify CCR5 redistribution to FCLs , long - lived events were identified using the foregoing method , allowing their associated CCR5 signal to be monitored throughout the time course . FRAP analysis FRAP studies were performed on the spinning disk microscope de - scribed earlier . Photobleaching was performed using an UltraVIEW VoX PhotoKinesis device ( PerkinElmer ) , fluorescence recovery was monitored for 5 min at 0 . 33 frame / s , and the data were analyzed using an ImageJ FRAP plug - in ( Jeff Hardin , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) to extract recovery curves and calculate the time to 50 % recovery . Hopkins spatial statistics Localization microscopy provides the positions of individual mol - ecules in a point set data format that can be exploited to perform spatial statistics analysis . We extended the standard Hopkins algo - rithm ( Hopkins and Skellam , 1954 ; Zhang et al . , 2006 ; Mattila et al . , 2013 ) to bivariate analysis of the codistribution of CCR5 and FCLs . We used a custom MATLAB routine to compare the molecular point distribution of CCR5 to the centroid positions of FCLs ( iden - tified using the morphometric analysis method outlined earlier and defined as structures of > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) . Multiple nonoverlapping rectangular regions of interest were chosen semiarbitrarily to in - clude continuous areas of plasma membrane and exclude cell edges or cell – cell junctions ; the mean size of the regions was 150 μm 2 . Two control situations were used : the analysis was re - peated , but the centroid positions of FCLs were replaced by an equal number of randomly chosen points ( Figure 6 ) , or CCR5 local - ization data were compared with the positions of FCLs that had been rotated 90° around a central point to disrupt any spatial rela - tionship . In both cases the Hopkins analysis indicated a random distribution ( Figure 6 ; unpublished data ) , indicating that the algo - rithm was functioning correctly . custom software packages written in LabVIEW ( National Instruments Corporation , Newbury , UK ) . Photoswitching buffer consisted of 1 μg / ml catalase , 50 μg / ml glucose oxidase , 40 mg / ml glucose , 12 . 5 % glycerin , 1 . 25 mM KCl , 100 mM β - mercaptoethanol , and 1 mM TRIS - HCl ( Metcalf et al . , 2013 ) . Of importance , the imaging conditions were optimized to achieve the Nyquist sampling limit and ensure that continuous clathrin structures could be resolved . For dual - color PALM / dSTORM imaging , CHO - CCR5 cells were grown on 25 - mm coverslips and transiently transfected with PAGFP - LCa 24 h before experiments . Cell surface CCR5 was prela - beled with MC5 conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 for 1 h on ice in binding medium ( RPMI 1640 without bicarbonate containing 0 . 2 % BSA and 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 0 ) , after which the samples were rinsed and allowed to equilibrate to 37°C for 20 min before treat - ment . After stimulation with 125 nM CCL5 , samples were fixed and quenched as described before mounting in an Attofluor chamber ( Life Technologies ) for imaging on an ELYRA PS1 ( Carl Zeiss AG , Oberkochen , Germany ) fitted with a 100 × / 1 . 46 NA TIRF objective ; 50 - mW , 405 - nm , 200 - mW , 488 - nm , and 150 - mW 642 - nm lasers ; and an iXon 897 EMCCD camera . Single - channel dSTORM data were analyzed in rainSTORM ( Rees et al . , 2013 ) , and dual - color PALM / STORM acquisitions were ana - lyzed in Zen 2011 ( Carl Zeiss ) . Mean localization precision was 27 . 8 nm ( ± 2 . 9 ) for dSTORM and 38 . 7 nm ( ± 18 . 9 ) for PALM . Tetraspec beads ( Life Technologies ) were used as fiducial markers to monitor sample drift , correct chromatic offset ( Erdelyi et al . , 2013 ) , and per - form image registration . Live - cell imaging For live imaging , cells were grown in four - well - chambered cover - glass slides ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) to low confluency and trans - fected with the stated fluorescent protein constructs 24 h before study . HeLa cells were imaged in standard complete medium , and CHO - CCR5 cells were imaged in binding medium ( defined earlier ) . Studies were performed at 37°C , with and without 5 % CO 2 for HeLa and CHO - CCR5 cell , respectively . TIRF microscopy was performed in a stage - mounted environmental control chamber on an N - STORM ( Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) fitted with a 100 × / 1 . 49 NA TIRF objective ; 220 - mW , 488 - nm , 110 - mW , 561 - nm , and 220 - mW , 640 - nm lasers ; and an iXon 897 EMCCD camera . FRAP and spinning disk micros - copy were performed in a whole - instrument environmental control chamber with an UltraVIEW VoX Yokowaga spinning disk scanner ( PerkinElmer , Waltham , MA ) on a TiE microscope ( Nikon ) fitted with a 100 × / 1 . 4 NA oil objective ; 220 - mW , 488 - nm and 110 - mW , 561 - nm lasers ; and a C9100 - 13 EMCCD camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Hamamatsu , Japan ) . For live labeling , CHO - CCR5 cells were incubated with MC5 - Atto 488 for 1 h on ice in binding me - dium , after which the cells were rinsed and allowed to equilibrate to 37°C for 20 min before study . Morphometric analysis We performed morphometric analysis of CCSs imaged by EM and superresolution microscopy . For EM analysis , large areas of membrane sheets were acquired by image tiling and stitching , indi - vidual clathrin structures were then identified visually and manually segmented by tracing their outlines in ImageJ ( Research Services Branch , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) using a stylus and pad ( Wacom Co . , Kazo , Japan ) . Segmented structures were then used to generate binary images representing the distribution of clathrin across each membrane . For analysis by superresolution microscopy , dSTORM data were processed in rainSTORM and re - constructed as an image with a 25 - nm pixel size . The CCSs in each Volume 25 November 5 , 2014 Flat clathrin lattices | 3593 De Deyne PG , O’Neill A , Resneck WG , Dmytrenko GM , Pumplin DW , Bloch RJ ( 1998 ) . The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its beta5 subunit . J Cell Sci 111 , 2729 – 2740 . Dewire SM , Ahn S , Lefkowitz RJ , Shenoy SK ( 2007 ) . Beta - arrestins and cell signaling . Annu Rev Physiol 69 , 483 – 510 . Dragic T , Litwin V , Allaway GP , Martin SR , Huang Y , Nagashima KA , Cayanan C , Maddon PJ , Koup RA , Moore JP , et al . ( 1996 ) . HIV - 1 entry into CD4 + cells is mediated by the chemokine receptor CC - CKR - 5 . Nature 381 , 667 – 673 . Edeling MA , Mishra SK , Keyel PA , Steinhauser AL , Collins BM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Owen DJ , Traub LM ( 2006 ) . Molecular switches involving the AP - 2 beta2 appendage regulate endocytic cargo selection and clathrin coat assembly . Dev Cell 10 , 329 – 342 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T ( 2004 ) . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 . Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Zhang CX , Carreno S , Barroso C , Heuser JE , Drubin DG ( 2004 ) . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 . Erdelyi M , Rees E , Metcalf D , Schierle GSK , Dudas L , Sinko J , Knight AE , Kaminski CF ( 2013 ) . Correcting chromatic offset in multicolor super - resolution localization microscopy . Opt Express 21 , 10978 – 10988 . Escola JM , Kuenzi G , Gaertner H , Foti M , Hartley O ( 2010 ) . CC chemokine receptor 5 ( CCR5 ) Desensitization : cycling receptors accumulate in the trans - golgi network . J Biol Chem 285 , 41772 – 41780 . Fraile - Ramos A , Kohout TA , Waldhoer M , Marsh M ( 2003 ) . Endocytosis of the viral chemokine receptor US28 does not require beta - arrestins but is dependent on the clathrin - mediated pathway . Traffic 4 , 243 – 253 . Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH ( 1999 ) . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 1 , 1 – 7 . Grassart A , Cheng AT , Hong SH , Zhang F , Zenzer N , Feng Y , Briner DM , Davis GD , Malkov D , Drubin DG ( 2014 ) . Actin and dynamin2 dynamics and interplay during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 205 , 721 – 735 . Greene LE , Eisenberg E ( 1990 ) . Dissociation of clathrin from coated vesicles by the uncoating Atpase . J Biol Chem 265 , 6682 – 6687 . Hawryluk MJ , Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Watkins SC , Heuser JE , Traub LM ( 2006 ) . Epsin 1 is a polyubiquitin - selective clathrin - associated sorting protein . Traffic 7 , 262 – 281 . Heilemann M , van de Linde S , Schüttpelz M , Kasper R , Seefeldt B , Mukherjee A , Tinnefeld P , Sauer M ( 2008 ) . Subdiffraction - resolution fluorescence imaging with conventional fluorescent probes . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 47 , 6172 – 6176 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT ( 2010 ) . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis . Science 328 , 1281 – 1284 . Heuser J ( 1980 ) . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 84 , 560 – 583 . Heuser J ( 1989 ) . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice mor - phology . J Cell Biol 108 , 401 – 411 . Heuser J ( 2000 ) . The production of “cell cortices” for light and electron microscopy . Traffic 1 , 545 – 552 . Hinrichsen L , Meyerholz A , Groos S , Ungewickell EJ ( 2006 ) . Bending a membrane : how clathrin affects budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 , 8715 – 8720 . Hoffmann A , Dannhauser PN , Groos S , Hinrichsen L , Curth U , Ungewickell EJ ( 2010 ) . A comparison of GFP - tagged clathrin light chains with fluoro - chromated light chains in vivo and in vitro . Traffic 11 , 1129 – 1140 . Hopkins B , Skellam JG ( 1954 ) . A new method for determining the type of distribution of plant individuals . Ann Botany 18 , 213 – 227 . Jaqaman K , Loerke D , Mettlen M , Kuwata H , Grinstein S , Schmid SL , Danuser G ( 2008 ) . Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat Methods 5 , 695 – 702 . Kanaseki T , Kadota K ( 1969 ) . The “vesicle in a basket . ” A morphologi - cal study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mechanism of membrane movements . J Cell Biol 42 , 202 – 220 . Kim I , Pan W , Jones SA , Zhang Y , Zhuang X , Wu D ( 2013 ) . Clathrin and AP2 are required for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - mediated formation of LRP6 signalosomes . J Cell Biol 200 , 419 – 428 . Kleist von L , Stahlschmidt W , Bulut H , Gromova K , Puchkov D , Robertson MJ , Macgregor KA , Tomlin N , Pechstein A , Chau N , et al . ( 2011 ) . Role of the clathrin terminal domain in regulating coated pit dynamics revealed by small molecule inhibition . Cell 146 , 471 – 484 . Topographic analysis of CCSs We inferred topographical information from CCSs imaged by electron microscopy by systematically measuring the electron intensity profile across individual structures . The mean electron intensity signal across CCPs ( defined as structures with area < 30 , 000 nm 2 and circularity > 0 . 7 ) and FCLs ( area > 100 , 000 nm 2 ) was measured using the ImageJ radial profile plot plug - in ( Pål Baggethun , Elkem Technology , Kristian - sand , Norway ) . The profile was measured across a 100 - nm radius from the centroid positions of CCPs and a 500 - nm radius from that of FCLs . Budding structures at the periphery of FCLs were defined as invagina - tions occurring ≤ 50 nm from the edge of a lattice and were then ana - lyzed using a 100 - nm profile radius . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank colleagues in the MRC , Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biol - ogy and National Physical Laboratory for ongoing discussions dur - ing the development of this work and Frances Brodsky , Annegret Pelchen - Matthews , Ricardo Henriques , and Chris Stefan for critically reading the manuscript . We also acknowledge Janos Kriston - Vizi and Schuyler Van Engelenburg for technical assistance . This work was funded by UK Medical Research Council core funding to the MRC - University College London Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biol - ogy University Unit ( Grant MC _ U122665002 ) , a short - term fellow - ship to J . G . from the European Molecular Biology Organization , and the Royal Free Charity . REFERENCES Aggeler J , Werb Z ( 1982 ) . Initial events during phagocytosis by mac - rophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane - particle interactions and clathrin . J Cell Biol 94 , 613 – 623 . Aguet F , Antonescu CN , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G ( 2013 ) . Advances in analysis of low signal - to - noise images link dynamin and AP2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint . Dev Cell 26 , 279 – 291 . Akisaka T , Yoshida H , Suzuki R , Shimizu K , Takama K ( 2003 ) . Clathrin sheets on the protoplasmic surface of ventral membranes of osteoclasts in culture . J Electron Microsc ( Tokyo ) 52 , 535 – 543 . Akisaka T , Yoshida H , Suzuki R , Takama K ( 2008 ) . Adhesion structures and their cytoskeleton - membrane interactions at podosomes of osteoclasts in culture . Cell Tissue Res 331 , 625 – 641 . Bates M , Huang B , Dempsey GT , Zhuang X ( 2007 ) . Multicolor super - resolution imaging with photo - switchable fluorescent probes . Science 317 , 1749 – 1753 . Bellve KD , Leonard D , Standley C , Lifshitz LM , Tuft RA , Hayakawa A , Corvera S , Fogarty KE ( 2006 ) . Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in primary cells . J Biol Chem 281 , 16139 – 16146 . Betzig E , Patterson GH , Sougrat R , Lindwasser OW , Olenych S , Bonifacino JS , Davidson MW , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hess HF ( 2006 ) . Imaging intracellu - lar fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 . Bloch RJ , Morrow JS ( 1989 ) . An unusual beta - spectrin associated with clus - tered acetylcholine receptors . J Cell Biol 108 , 481 – 493 . Böcking T , Aguet F , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T ( 2011 ) . Single - molecule analysis of a molecular disassemblase reveals the mechanism of Hsc70 - driven clathrin uncoating . Nat Struct Mol Biol 18 , 295 – 301 . Bonazzi M , Kühbacher A , Toledo - Arana A , Mallet A , Vasudevan L , Pizarro - Cerdá J , Brodsky FM , Cossart P ( 2012 ) . A common clathrin - medi - ated machinery co - ordinates cell - cell adhesion and bacterial internaliza - tion . Traffic 13 , 1653 – 1666 . Brodsky FM ( 2012 ) . Diversity of clathrin function : new tricks for an old pro - tein . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 28 , 309 – 336 . Cocchi F , DeVico AL , Garzino - Demo A , Arya SK , Gallo RC , Lusso P ( 1995 ) . Identification of RANTES , MIP - 1 alpha , and MIP - 1 beta as the major HIV - suppressive factors produced by CD8 + T cells . Science 270 , 1811 – 1815 . Cocucci E , Aguet F , Boulant S , Kirchhausen T ( 2012 ) . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 150 , 495 – 507 . Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 127 , 915 – 934 . 3594 | J . Grove et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Ritter B , Murphy S , Dokainish H , Girard M , Gudheti MV , Kozlov G , Halin M , Philie J , Jorgensen EM , Gehring K , et al . ( 2013 ) . NECAP 1 regulates AP - 2 Interactions to control vesicle size , number , and cargo during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 11 , e1001670 . Sachse M , van Kerkhof P , Strous GJ , Klumperman J ( 2001 ) . The ubiquitin - dependent endocytosis motif is required for efficient incorporation of growth hormone receptor in clathrin - coated pits , but not clathrin - coated lattices . J Cell Sci 114 , 3943 – 3952 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T ( 2009 ) . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 , e1000191 . Sanan DA , Anderson RG ( 1991 ) . Simultaneous visualization of LDL receptor distribution and clathrin lattices on membranes torn from the upper surface of cultured cells . J Histochem Cytochem 39 , 1017 – 1024 . Schlossman DM , Schmid SL , Braell WA , Rothman JE ( 1984 ) . An enzyme that removes clathrin coats—purification of an uncoating Atpase . J Cell Biol 99 , 723 – 733 . Scott MGH , Benmerah A , Muntaner O , Marullo S ( 2002 ) . Recruitment of activated G protein - coupled receptors to pre - existing clathrin - coated pits in living cells . J Biol Chem 277 , 3552 – 3559 . Signoret N , Christophe T , Oppermann M , Marsh M ( 2004 ) . pH - Independent endocytic cycling of the chemokine receptor CCR5 . Traffic 5 , 529 – 543 . Signoret N , Hewlett L , Wavre S , Pelchen - Matthews A , Oppermann M , Marsh M ( 2005 ) . Agonist - induced endocytosis of CC chemokine recep - tor 5 is clathrin dependent . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 902 – 917 . Signoret N , Pelchen - Matthews A , Mack M , Proudfoot AE , Marsh M ( 2000 ) . Endocytosis and recycling of the HIV coreceptor CCR5 . J Cell Biol 151 , 1281 – 1294 . Smith CJ , Grigorieff N , Pearse BM ( 1998 ) . Clathrin coats at 21 A resolution : a cellular assembly designed to recycle multiple membrane receptors . EMBO J 17 , 4943 – 4953 . Sochacki KA , Larson BT , Sengupta DC , Daniels MP , Shtengel G , Hess HF , Taraska JW ( 2012 ) . Imaging the post - fusion release and capture of a vesicle membrane protein . Nat Commun 3 , 1154 . Subach FV , Patterson GH , Manley S , Gillette JM , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Verkhusha VV ( 2009 ) . Photoactivatable mCherry for high - resolution two - color fluorescence microscopy . Nat Methods 6 , 153 – 159 . Taylor MJ , Lampe M , Merrifield CJ ( 2012 ) . A feedback loop between dy - namin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 10 , e1001302 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merrifield CJ ( 2011 ) . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of Mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 , e1000604 . Traub LM ( 2009 ) . Clathrin couture : fashioning distinctive membrane coats at the cell surface . PLoS Biol 7 , e1000192 . Truan Z , Tarancón Díez L , Bönsch C , Malkusch S , Endesfelder U , Munteanu M , Hartley O , Heilemann M , Fürstenberg A ( 2013 ) . Quantitative morphological analysis of arrestin2 clustering upon G protein - coupled receptor stimulation by super - resolution microscopy . J Struct Biol 184 , 329 – 334 . Ungewickell E , Ungewickell H , Holstein SE , Lindner R , Prasad K , Barouch W , Martin B , Greene LE , Eisenberg E ( 1995 ) . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 378 , 632 – 635 . Vassilopoulos S , Gentil C , Lainé J , Buclez P - O , Franck A , Ferry A , Précigout G , Roth R , Heuser JE , Brodsky FM , et al . ( 2014 ) . Actin scaffolding by clathrin heavy chain is required for skeletal muscle sarcomere organiza - tion . J Cell Biol 205 , 377 – 393 . Warnock DE , Baba T , Schmid SL ( 1997 ) . Ubiquitously expressed dynamin - II has a higher intrinsic GTPase activity and a greater propensity for self - assembly than neuronal dynamin - I . Mol Biol Cell 8 , 2553 – 2562 . Wilbur JD , Hwang PK , Ybe JA , Lane M , Sellers BD , Jacobson MP , Fletterick RJ , Brodsky FM ( 2010 ) . Conformation switching of clathrin light chain regulates clathrin lattice assembly . Dev Cell 18 , 841 – 848 . Wu X , Zhao X , Baylor L , Kaushal S , Eisenberg E , Greene LE ( 2001 ) . Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 155 , 291 – 300 . Wu X , Zhao X , Puertollano R , Bonifacino JS , Eisenberg E , Greene LE ( 2003 ) . Adaptor and clathrin exchange at the plasma membrane and trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 516 – 528 . Zhang B , Koh YH , Beckstead RB , Budnik V , Ganetzky B , Bellen HJ ( 1998 ) . Synaptic vesicle size and number are regulated by a clathrin adaptor protein required for endocytosis . Neuron 21 , 1465 – 1475 . Zhang J , Leiderman K , Pfeiffer JR , Wilson BS , Oliver JM , Steinberg SL ( 2006 ) . Characterizing the topography of membrane receptors and sig - naling molecules from spatial patterns obtained using nanometer - scale electron - dense probes and electron microscopy . Micron 37 , 14 – 34 . Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Lampe M , Pierre F , Al - Sabah S , Krasel C , Merrifield CJ ( 2014 ) . Dual single scission event analysis of constitutive transferrin receptor ( TfR ) endocy - tosis and ligand - triggered β 2 - adrenergic receptor ( β 2AR ) or Mu - opioid receptor ( MOR ) endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 25 , 3070 – 3080 . Larkin JM , Donzell WC , Anderson RG ( 1986 ) . Potassium - dependent assem - bly of coated pits : new coated pits form as planar clathrin lattices . J Cell Biol 103 , 2619 – 2627 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2009 ) . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 7 , e57 . Macia E , Ehrlich M , Massol R , Boucrot E , Brunner C , Kirchhausen T ( 2006 ) . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev Cell 10 , 839 – 850 . Mack M , Luckow B , Nelson PJ , Cihak J , Simmons G , Clapham PR , Signoret N , Marsh M , Stangassinger M , Borlat F , et al . ( 1998 ) . Aminooxypentane - RANTES induces CCR5 internalization but inhibits recycling : a novel inhibitory mechanism of HIV infectivity . J Exp Med 187 , 1215 – 1224 . Marsh M , McMahon HT ( 1999 ) . The structural era of endocytosis . Science 285 , 215 – 220 . Mattila PK , Feest C , Depoil D , Treanor B , Montaner B , Otipoby KL , Carter R , Justement LB , Bruckbauer A , Batista FD ( 2013 ) . The actin and tetraspa - nin networks organize receptor nanoclusters to regulate B cell receptor - mediated signaling . Immunity 38 , 461 – 474 . Maupin P , Pollard TD ( 1983 ) . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation . J Cell Biol 96 , 51 – 62 . McMahon HT , Boucrot E ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 517 – 533 . Merrifield CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 , 691 – 698 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Metcalf DJ , Edwards R , Kumarswami N , Knight AE ( 2013 ) . Test samples for optimizing STORM super - resolution microscopy . J Vis Exp 79 , e50579 . Mettlen M , Loerke D , Yarar D , Danuser G , Schmid SL ( 2010 ) . Cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 188 , 919 – 933 . Meyerholz A , Hinrichsen L , Groos S , Esk P - C , Brandes G , Ungewickell EJ ( 2005 ) . Effect of clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein depletion on clathrin coat formation . Traffic 6 , 1225 – 1234 . Miller K , Shipman M , Trowbridge IS , Hopkins CR ( 1991 ) . Transferrin recep - tors promote the formation of clathrin lattices . Cell 65 , 621 – 632 . Mundell SJ , Luo J , Benovic JL , Conley PB , Poole AW ( 2006 ) . Distinct clathrin - coated pits sort different G protein - coupled receptor cargo . Traffic 7 , 1420 – 1431 . Nicol A , Nermut MV ( 1987 ) . A new type of substratum adhesion structure in NRK cells revealed by correlated interference reflection and electron microscopy . Eur J Cell Biol 43 , 348 – 357 . Oppermann M ( 2004 ) . Chemokine receptor CCR5 : insights into structure , function , and regulation . Cell Signal 16 , 1201 – 1210 . Otter , Den WK , Briels WJ ( 2011 ) . The generation of curved clathrin coats from flat plaques . Traffic 12 , 1407 – 1416 . Pierce KL , Lefkowitz RJ ( 2001 ) . Classical and new roles of beta - arrestins in the regulation of G - protein - coupled receptors . Nat Rev Neurosci 2 , 727 – 733 . Pumplin DW , Bloch RJ ( 1990 ) . Clathrin - coated membrane : a distinct membrane domain in acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 15 , 121 – 134 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM ( 2003 ) . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J Cell Sci 116 , 847 – 855 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM , Benmerah A , ( 2004 ) . Understanding living clathrin - coated pits . Traffic 5 , 327 – 337 . Rees EJ , Erdelyi M , Schierle GSK , Knight A , Kaminski CF ( 2013 ) . Elements of image processing in localization microscopy . J Opt 15 , 094012 . Reeves JD , Gallo SA , Ahmad N , Miamidian JL , Harvey PE , Sharron M , Pohlmann S , Sfakianos JN , Derdeyn CA , Blumenthal R , et al . ( 2002 ) . Sensitivity of HIV - 1 to entry inhibitors correlates with envelope / corecep - tor affinity , receptor density , and fusion kinetics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 , 16249 – 16254 .