Why Does a GSS Fail to Enhance Group Consensus and Satisfaction ? An Investigation from An Influence Process Perspective W . Huangl , K . K . Wei1 & 2 , C . Y . Tanl , andK . S . Ramanl ] Department of Information Systems and Computer Science , National University of Singapore , Singapore 1 19260 , The Republic of Singapore . 2Department of Information Systems , City University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong ABSTRACT Literature review shows that GSS generally fails to increase group consensus and satisfaction . The reasons for this failure are not fully known . This research investigated this issue from an influence process perspective . The independent variables were support ( computer support versus non - computer support ) and task type ( intellective task versus preference task ) . The dependent variables were three influence process variables ( informational influence , normative injluence , and infuence distribution ) and three outcome variables ( consensus , decision satisfaction , and decision process satisfaction ) . The findings suggest that the failure , from influence process perspective , may be attributed to the “oflset effect of GSS“ . In preference task , the increased part of group consensus and satisfaction , due to that GSS increased influence distribution balance , were offset at the same time by the decreasedpart , due to that GSS attenuated normative influence . Likewise , in intellective task , the increased part of consensus and satisfaction , due to that GSS enhanced informational influence , were offset at the same time by the decreased part , due to that GSS decreased influence distribution balance . The implications for the offset effect is discussed . 1 Introduction Substantial research on Group Support System ( GSS ) have been conducted in the last two decades , Some important research results include : ( 1 ) GSS increases group performance in terms of decision quality , idea generation , and equallty of participation but fails to increase ( or even decreases ) group consensus and satisfaction to both decision and decision process [ e . g . , 2 , 361 . But it is not fully known why GSS fails to increase ( or even decreases ) group consensus and satisfaction . ( 2 ) GSS researchers normally adopt an Input - Process - Output framework for their studies [ e . g . , 11 , 121 . A larger proportion of research have been conducted in Output side whereas research in Process [ 17 , 441 and Input [ 7 ] has been largely neglected . ( 3 ) Group work normally occurs in a variety of tasks and settings [ 14 ] , but GSS research on task variable bas been inadequate [ 181 . These three aspects of prior GSS research motivated this study . In general , group output depends on group process [ e . g . , 39 , 531 , which is the central part of a group [ 32 ] . Hence , exploring from group process may help find a satisfactory explanation why GSS fails to increase group consensus and satisfaction . Further , GSS may have different effects on groups when performing different tasks [ 35 ] . The explanation that will be explored in this study can be strengthened if it is based on findings in various tasks . Therefore , this research , focusing on group process , studies the effect of GSS on group consensus and satisfaction in two different tasks . The next section discusses group influence process , task type , and potential GSS effect . Section 3 presents a research model and hypotheses for this study . Section 4 describes research methodology . Following sections report research results and discuss the findings and their implications . 2 . Group influence process , task type , and GSS effect 2 . 1 . Group influence process Group process is studied from influence perspective because the study of influence has a long tradition in group research [ 53 ] and there is a new research interest concerned with influence over group process [ 43 ] . Literature review shows that two theories in social psychology remain as the general models of influence process , i . e . theories of informational and normative influence [ e . g . , 3 , 4 , 13 , 24 , 28 , 481 . Informational influence is based on acceptance of information from others as evidence about reality whereas normative influence is based on the desire to conform to the expectations of other group members [ 13 , 271 . Informational influence normally involves messages such as facts , rationales , and arguments whereas normative influence generally involves information such as values and preferences [ 301 . 1060 - 3425 / 97 $ 10 . 00 0 1997 IEEE 104 on group influence process e . Because informational be better elicited in . Their main findings were : ( 1 ) was dominant in intellective tial GSS effect on group iveness , and chastisement ity provides an equal and GSS would enhance factual factual information through a more complicated path of inception , conflict resolution , and execution [ 50 ] because they need to exchange different preferences and values among members . GSS may hinder this complicated group activity path by dampening exchange of preferences and values , because ( 1 ) different personal preferences and values from different members would be better expressed and exchanged in multiple social cues . Social cues can be dampened by GSS [ 23 , 46 , 491 ; ( 2 ) anonymity and simultaneity of GSS enable members to focus more on ideas , instead of the initiators of the ideas 1393 , because it is difficult to identify who generates these ideas in such a setting [ 8 ] . Recent research reports that status differences can still exist in CMC ( computer - mediated communication ) groups [ 5 11 , but it would be relatively more difficult in GSS groups ( with anonymity ) than in face - to - face groups to identify thereby exchange each member ' s personal preferences and values ; ( 3 ) prior research also shows that GSS tends to decrease non - task comments ( presumably normative influence ) [ e . g . , 5 , 371 . All these suggest that GSS is likely to dampen information exchange of personal preferences and value . Since information relating to personal preferences and values mainly reflects normative influence [ 30 ] , GSS tends to decrease normative influence in preference task . 3 . Research model and hypotheses 3 . 1 . Research model Figure 1 presents the research model for this study . The independent variables are task type and support . The two task types are intellective task and preference task . The supports are computer ( GSS ) support and non - computer support . The dependent variables are classified into two categories : group process variables of informational influence , normative influence , and influence distribution ; group outcome variables of group consensus , decision satisfaction , and decision process satisfaction . The definitions of informational and normative influence are given already in section 2 . 1 . Influence distribution is the variance of the total influence among group members [ 53 ] . Total influence mainly consists of informational and normative influence [ 13 , 271 . Influence distribution is used to reflect even participation in group meetings [ 53 ] , which is an important factor in group decision making [ 12 , 201 . Group consensus is typically used to measure group outcome or performance [ 53 ] and is a desired feature for any group decision [ 2 , 35 3 . Decision satisfaction and decision process satisfaction [ 161 measure contentment of a group with its decision and Its decision making process respectively . 105 Computer ( GSS ) Non - computer 1 I TaskType Group Process Variables : Informational Influence Normative Influence Influence Distribution Intellective Task Preference Task . I Dependent Variables I I I , t 1 Group OutDut Variables : Group Consensus Decision Satisfaction Figure 1 ResearchModel 3 - 2 . Research hypotheses Informational and normative influence Normative influence predominates in preference task and informational influence predominates in intellective [ 27 ] . As discussed in section 2 . 3 , GSS appears to increase informational influence in intellective task and dampen normative influence in preference task . Hla In preference task , normative influence will be less in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . H lb In intellective task , informational influence will be greater in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . Influence distribution Preference task solution mainly requires exchange of personal preferences and values ( or normative influence ) [ 32 ] , which is likely to be dampened by GSS ( discussion in section 2 . 3 and Hla ) . In unsupported face - to - face groups , some members may possess thereby likely exchange more different preferences and values than others , resulting in relatively more dominance in group interaction . Consequently , these dominant members who wopld exchange more preferences and values could be more restrained by GSS than those who would exchange less , which llkely leads to a more even influence distribution . H2a In preference task , influence distribution will be more even in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . Intellective task solution requires more factual information exchange ( or informational influence ) [ 32 ] , which is likely enhanced by GSS ( discussion in section 2 . 3 and Hlb ) . There exists a demonstrably correct answer for the task and some group members may be more knowledgeable about the correct answer than others . As a result , these more knowledgeable members are likely to contribute more factual information to the task solution than others . In GSS groups , these more knowledgeable members are likely to exchange even more factual information because GSS could enhance the factual information exchange . Further , GSS provides an open and simultaneous communication channel to every group member . This would encourage more knowledgeable members contribute further more , because they will not worry about the problems of air - time allocation and production block in face - to - face meetings E391 where members have to wait for the turns of possessing air - time to speak . Hence , these more knowledgeable members would become more dominant than others , which likely leads to more uneven influence distribution . H2b In intellective task , influence distribution will be more uneven in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . Group consensus In preference task , the dampened normative influence by GSS ( Hla ) would decrease group dominance thereby increase influence distribution balance ( H2a ) . This would in tum foster more participation among group members . More participation can ensure more complete information exchange and processing [ 22 ] . It might be possible that more participation may lead to more people voicing their opinion and trying to have their agenda supported by others , which likely results in information overload and more difficult to reach consensus . However , task - related issues in GSS meetings [ e . g . , 15 , 38 , 451 , which therefore fosters group consensus even with increased participation [ 29 ] . On the other hand , nonnative influence reflecting preferences and values would be dampened by GSS ( Hla ) . Hence , it would be more difficult for group members to reconcile their different preferences and values to reach consensus [ 191 . In sum , group consensus would be offset by the GSS effect of dampening normative influence and simultaneously increasing influence distribution balance . The net effect of GSS on consensus is members ' attention and efforts eatl be mare faamed an 106 predicted . Literature review shows that two members is vita task solution [ 32 ] thus likely on the solution . On the other the dampened normative would reduce information information exc ction to decision would be satisfaction to decision and offset by the GSS effect of uence and simultaneously difficult to be increased as we1 whereas two prior research reported less satisfaction with decision and one research reported greater satisfaction with decision [ 181 . Hence , We posit : H4a In preference task , decision process satisfaction will be less in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . H4b In preference task , decision satisfaction will be less in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . In intellective task , enhanced informational influence by GSS ( Hlb ) would indicate more factual information exchange and participation among members . The enhanced factual information exchange thus more participation in group interactions would increase satisfaction to the decision process . Further , the task solution to depends on more factual infonnation exchange [ 3 I ] , hence , the enhanced factual information exchange would increase satisfaction to the decision ( or task solution ) as well . On the other hand , more uneven influence distribution by GSS ( H2b ) would indicate that some members would be more dominant than others . Dominance in group interaction processes decreases satisfaction at least for the less dominant members . Hence , overall group satisfaction to the decision process is likely decreased . Further , dominance also suggests that dominant member ( s ) would contribute more to group f m l decision than less dominant members , which likely decreases satisfaction to group decision as well . In sum , satisfaction to decision and decision process would be offset by the GSS effect of increasing informational influence and simultaneously decreasing influence distribution balance . The net effect of GSS on satisfaction is therefore difficult to be predicted . Based on the same consideration ( from literature review ) as the above hypothesis , we have : H5a In intellective task , decision process satisfaction will be less in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . H5b In intellective task , decision satisfaction will be less in computer support groups than in non - computer support groups . 4 . Research methodology Experimental design and setting The experimental design was a two - by - two factorial design . A group size of five was chosen because the average number of participants in an organizational meeting is five persons [ 91 . Under the condition of non - computer support , groups had normal face - to - face group discussions . Computer support groups was provided with SAMh4 system to communicate . Every group member in computer support groups can key in inputs from 107 hisher private terminal and the inputs are captured and displayed on a public screen of the SAMM system which is accessible to every member . All meeting sessions were recorded by using video camera for group interaction analysis . Generic meeting agenda was provided for GSS groups , as shown as follows . AGENDA 1 . DefineNiew Problem 2 . DefineNiew Selection Criteria 3 . DefmeNiew Alternatives 4 . Rate Altematives 5 . Rank Altematives 6 . Vote or Straw Poll on Alternatives 7 . DefmeNiew Decision 8 . Conclude Meeting a . DefineNiew Comment One hundred and sixty first year students from a large university participated in the experiment . Every participant was given course credit for participation in the experiment . The subjects were assigned to groups randomly to meet the requirement of independent samples . Group interaction analysis and measurement Kaplan and Miller ' s coding method [ 27 ] was specifically designed to capture informational and normative influence in group interaction processes , which could be the few coding method , to our knowledge , for this measuring purpose . The five categories of the coding method are : task facts , inferences from task facts , valueshorms , personal preferences , and others . The first two categories measure informational influence ; the third and fourth category measure normative influence . Each act committed by a individual member were coded using Kaplan and Miller ' s coding scheme by viewing the videotapes and by examining the computer log files . The total informational influence and total normative influence in a group are the sum of five group members ' respective coding scores . A sample of coding can be found in appendix 1 and more detailed coding procedure please refers to Kaplan and Miller [ 27 ] . Since the research results in this study showed that computer support groups had significantly longer meeting time than non - computer support groups , the scores were proportioned by dividing the score sum of information and normative influence to correct for unequal session lengths [ 41 ] . Influence mainly consists of informational and normative influence [ 13 , 271 . Hence , by using the above coding category , the total influence is the sum of informational influence , normative influence , and others . Influence distribution is the variance of the total influence among group members [ 53 ] . Group consensus is computed based on fuzzy set theory [ 47 ] in this study . Decision satisfaction and decision process satisfaction [ 161 measure contentment of a group with its decision and its decision making process respectively ; the formula and respective questionnaires of the dependent variables are attached in appendix 2 . Task type The intellective task was adopted from Zigurs , Poole and DeSanctis [ 53 ] . This task of international studies program asked group members to score a list of competing applicants based on four personality measures of the applicants . The four personality measures were expectations for social success , self concept , expectations for independence , and attitudes about pre - marital sex . Subjects were told that this information was indicative of success in the program . Each of these four personality measures is more or less linearly related to the program success , although the slope of that linear function varies for each measure . Hence , the causal knowledge of the components of success in the program is certain , but its particular nature must be discovered or learned by the subjects in the training session . The preference task was adopted from Watson , DeSanctis and Poole [ 52 ] . This task of personal trust foundation asked group members to allocate funds to a list of competing projects based on their personal values . The projects were based on the personality components scheme described by Allport [ l ] who asserted that the six basic interests or motives in personality were theoretical , economic , aesthetic , social , political , and religious . Experimental procedure The experimental steps of both tasks were : ( 1 ) for both tasks , group members were asked to do warm - up tasks ; ( 2 ) for intellective task groups , individual members were asked to learn task criteria ; ( 3 ) for both tasks , individual members were asked to perform the tasks before the meeting ; ( 4 ) for both tasks , members in computer supported groups were asked to learn the structures and the operations of S A M M system ; ( 5 ) for both tasks , groups were asked to perform the tasks ; ( 6 ) fill in post - meeting questionnaires . No time limit was imposed on each meeting and all meetings were finished in two and half hours . Manipulation check There were two manipulations in this study : support level and task type . Support level varied in manual face - to - face discussion versus computer - supported ( SAMM ) communication . The two levels were physically different thus the manipulation was considered as satisfactory . 108 Informational Influence Normative Table 1 Means ( Standard Deviations ) Intellective Task Preference Task With GSS . 77 ( . 02 ) . 34 ( . 02 ) No GSS . 66 ( . 02 ) . I9 ( . 02 ) With GSS . 17 ( . 02 ) . 58 ( . 01 ) w Distribution No GSS . 86 ( . 22 ) 1 . 88 ( . 48 ) Group With GSS . 55 ( . 01 ) . 55 ( . 07 ) Consensus No GSS . 53 ( . 09 ) . 61 ( . 08 ) Decision With GSS 17 . 43 ( 1 . 16 ) 18 . 78 ( 1 . 23 ) - Influence intellective and preference the task solution requires test showed that in intellective task s and standard deviations for VA tests were shown in reas H3a , H3b , H4a , H4b , No GSS I . 28 i . 02j I . 76 ( . 02j Table 2 ANOVh test results Hypotheses I $ Value I P Value Hla I 1554 . 57 I < fil * Influence . 01 H2b 6 . 34 With GSS 1 . 17 ( . 27 ) . 47 ( - 09 ) 6 . Discussion and implications Satisfaction 6 . 1 . Effect of GSS on group influence process No GSS 18 . 40 ( 1 . 09 ) 18 . 10 ( 1 . 55 ) The research results show that GSS had a significant effect on group influence process . GSS either increased factual informaton exchange ( H 1 b was supported ) and decreased influence distribution balance ( H2b was supported ) in intellective task , or decreased information exchauge relating to personal preferences and values ( Hla was supported ) and increased influence distribution balance ( H2a was supported ) in preference task . Further , the findings indicate that task is an important factor in group influence process because GSS effect on the three group influence variables ( i . e . Hla , Hlb , H2a , and H2b ) varied in the two tasks as described in the above paragraph . Hence , task again appears as an important factor to consider when designing and using GSS technology [ 12 , 421 . 6 . 2 . The effect of GSS on group outcome Decision Proces With GSS Satisfaction No GSS This research explored why GSS failed to enhance ( or even decreased ) group consensus and satisfaction from influence process perspective . Almost all hypotheses ( H3a , H3b , H4a , H4b , and H5b except H5a ) regarding to the effect of GSS on group outcome ( group consensus , decision satisfaction , and decision process satisfaction ) were not supported . In other words , GSS invention into group influence process and group meeting failed to generate desired effect on the outcome variables . In the case of H5a , GSS even decreased satisfaction with decision process ( compared to non - computer support groups ) . Therefore , the findings suggest that from influence process perspective , the failure of increasing ( or even decreasing ) group consensus and satisfaction by GSS might be attributed to the GSS offset effect : ( 1 ) in preference task , the increased components of group 13 . 43 ( 1 . 61 ) 14 . 33 ( 1 . 58 ) 16 . 03 ( 1 . 06 ) 14 . 75 ( 2 . 66 ) 109 consensus and satisfaction , due to that GSS increased influence distribution balance ( H2a was supported ) , were offset at the same time by the decreased components , due to that GSS attenuated normative influence ( Hla was supported ) . ( 2 ) similarly in intellective task , the increased components of consensus and satisfaction , due to that GSS enhanced informational influence ( H1 b was supported ) , were offset at the same time by the decreased components , due to that GSS decreased influence distribution balance ( H2b was supported ) . As a result , the findings support a kind of balance view of GSS use , namely , the beneficial effect of some GSS structures may be balanced ( or offset ) by the negative effect of the same GSS structures . To achieve desirable GSS effect , group interaction processes should be examined carefully , and suitable action should be taken to break the balance effect , driving it to move towards the desirable direction . Taking group consensus as an example , the examination of group interaction processes ( see section 3 . 2 ) showed that in intellective task , the increased components of consensus , due to that GSS could increase factual information exchange , would be offset at the same time by the decreased components , due to that GSS could imbalance members ' participation . Hence , to enhance group consensus , factual information exchange should be enhanced by GSS . At the same time , members ' participation distribution should be maintained to such a satisfactory level that the GSS effect of enhancing factual information exchange on group consensus will be significantly greater than the GSS effect of imbalancing members ' participation . One possible solution is to have a professional GSS facilitator involved in the meetings . The facilitator can encourage more participation from less dominant members in a group , or if necessary , forcefully discourage certain participation from dominant member ( s ) . In this way , the balance effect can be broken and the net effect would move towards the desirable direction , Le . GSS would enhance group consensus in intellective task . Therefore , one implication of the research results may be that researchers should put more attentions to group interaction processes to explore other possible balance effects of GSS , rather than treating group process as a black box as in most previous research [ 44 , 531 . Only in this way , it could be studied and worked out how to break the balance effects and ultimately , achieving the desirable effects of GSS use . 7 . Conclusion While examining the impact of GSS on group output is adequately addressed in the literature , examining the group process is not . This study adopted a group influence perspective to explore an important issue in GSS research literature : why GSS fails to increase group consensus and satisfaction . The research results provided evidence from direct empirical test and suggest that the failure of GSS may be attributed to the offset effect of GSS . More research on group process is needed to further confirm and consolidate the findings in this study , and explore other unresolved issues in GSS research . References [ 11 Allport , G . W . " The historical background of modem social psychology , " In G . Lindzey and E . Aronson ( Eds . ) The handbook of social psychology : Reading , MA : Addision Wesley , 1968 . [ 2 ] Benbasat , I . and Lin , L . " The effects of group , task , context , and technology variables on the usefulness of group support systems : A meta - analysis of experimental studies . " Small Group Research , 24 ( 4 ) , Nov . 1993 , pp . 430 - 462 . [ 3 ] Burnstein , E . and Sentis , K . " Attitude Polarization in Groups , " In R . E . Petty , T . M . Ostrom , and T . C . Brock ( eds . ) , Cognitive Responses in Persuasion , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum , 1981 , [ 4 ] Cartwright , D . " Determinants of scientific progress : The case of the risky shift . " American Psychologies , 28 , 1973 , pp . 222 - 23 1 . [ 5 ] Chidambaram , L . and Bostrom , R . P . " Group Development : A Review and Synthesis of Development Models " , Group Decision and Negotiation ( forthcoming ) , 1996 . [ 6 ] Chidambaram , L . , Bostrom , R . P . and Wynne , B . E . " A Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Group Decision Support Systems on Group Development , " Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 ( 3 ) , 1991 , pp . 7 - 25 . [ 7 ] Clapper , D . L . and Massey , A . P . " Predicting Group Output : Assessing the Relative Impacts of Task - Related Input and GSS Use . " Proceedings of 16th International Conference on Information Systems , Amsterdam , The Netherlands , December 10 - 13 , 1995 . [ 8 ] Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . and Valacich , J . S . " Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups . " Management Science , 36 ( 6 ) , 1990 , pp . 689 - 703 . [ 9 ] Datamation , Hardware : Offline , 32 ( lo ) , 1986 , [ lo ] Delbecq , A . L . and Van de Ven , A . H . " A Group Process Model for Problem Identification and program Planning . " JoumaI of Applied Behavioral Science , 7 ( 4 ) , 1971 , pp . 466 - 492 . [ ll ] Dennis , A . , George , J . F . , Jessup , L . M . , Nunmaker , J . F . and Vogel , D . R . " Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings . " MIS Quarterly , 12 , 4 , 1988 . pp . 197 - 216 . pp . 109 . 110 awrence Erlbaum Associates , . I ' In R . A . Guzzo and E . tiveness and Decision San Francisco : Jossey - logy : A longitudinal study versus face - to - face work in the Design of Group ms , " MIS Quarterly , 8 ( 3 ) , D . R . " Implications for of Empirical Research Review of the 1979 . Abnormal and Social Psychology , 27 , 1932 , [ 25 ] Kaplan , M . F . " The Influencing Process in Group Decision Making " , In C . Hendrick ( Ed . ) Group Processes , Newbury Park , Califomia : Sage , [ 26 ] Kaplan , M . F . and Martin , A . " Relative impact of expert and non - expert group members : Implications for mixed ( European ) juries . " Proceedings of the meeting of the European Association of Experimental Social Psychology and the Society of Experimental Social Psychologists , Leuven , Belgium , July , 1992 . C . E . " Group Decision Making and Normative versus Informational Influence Effects of Type of Issue and Assigned Decision Rule , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , vol . 53 , pp . [ 28 ] Kaplan , M . F . , Schaefer , E . G . and Zinhiewicz , L . " Member preferences for discussion content in anticipated group decisions : Effects of type of issue and group interactive goal . " Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 15 ( 4 ) , 1994 , pp . 489 - 508 . [ 29 ] Kraemer , K . L . and Pinsonneault , A . " Technology and Groups : Assessment of the Empirical Research . " In ( ed . ) J . Galegher , R . E . Kraut and C . Egido Intellectual Teamwork : Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers , USA , 1990 . [ 30 ] La " , H . and Myers , D . G . " Group - induced polarization of attitudes and behavior . " In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social [ 3 11 Laughlin , P . R . and Ellis , A . L . " Demonstrability and social combination processes on mathematical intellective tasks . " Joumal of Experimental Social [ 32 ] McGrath , J . E . Groups : Interaction and Performance . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1984 . [ 33 ] McGrath , J . E . " Time Matters in Groups , " In J . Galegher , R . Kraut , and C . Edigo ( Eds . ) , Intellectual Team work : Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1990 , pp . 23 - 78 . [ 34 ] McGrath , J . E . " Time , Interaction , and Performance ( TIP ) : A Theory of Groups . " Small Group Research , 22 , 1991 , pp . 147 - 174 . [ 35 ] McGrath , J . E . , and Hollingshead , A . B . " Putting the ' Group ' Back in Group Support Systems " , in L . M . Jessup and J . S . Valacich ( Eds . ) , Group Support Systems : New Perspectives , Macmillan , New York , NY , 1993 , pp . 78 - 96 . [ 36 ] McLeod , P . L . " An Assessment of the Experimental Literature on Electronic Support of pp . 279 - 296 . pp . 189 - 212 , 1987 . [ 27 ] Kaplan , M . F . and Miller , 306 - 313 , 1987 . P S ~ C ~ O I O Q . 11 , 1978 , pp . 145 - 195 . PsycholoQ , 22 , 1986 , pp . 177 - 189 . 111 Group Work : Results of a Meta - Analysis , " Human - Computer Interaction , 7 ( 3 ) , 1992 , pp . [ 37 ] McLeod , P . L . and Liker , J . K . " Electronic meeting systems : Evidence from a low structure environment . " Information Systems Research , [ 38 ] Nunamaker , J . F . , Applegate , L . M . and Konsynski , B . R . " Computer - Aided Deliberation : Model Management and Group Decision Support , " Journal of Operations Research , 36 ( 6 ) , [ 39 ] Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . and George , J . F . " Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work " , Communication of The ACM , 34 ( 7 ) , July [ 40 ] Poole , M . S . " An information - task approach to organizational communication " , Academy of Management Review , 30 , 1978 , pp . 493 - 504 . [ 41 ] Poole , M . S . , Holmes , M . and DeSanctis , G . " Conflict Management in a Computer - Supported Meeting Environment , " Management Science , E421 Poole , M . S . , Siebold , D . R . and McPhee , R . D . " Group decision - making as a structurational process " , Quarterly Journal of Speech , 71 , 1985 , 11431 Putnam , L . L . " Procedural message and small group work climates : A lag sequential analysis " , In M . Burgoon ( ed . ) , Communication Yearbook 5 , Transaction Books , New Brunswick , N . J . , E441 Sambamurthy , V . and Poole , M . S . " The Effects of Variations in Capabilities of GDSS Designs on Management of Cognitive Conflict in Groups , " Information Systems Research , 3 ( 3 ) , [ 45 ] Sharda , R . , Barr , S . H . , and McDonnell , J . C . " Decision support system effectiveness : A review and an empirical test " , Management Science , 34 , [ 46 ] Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . and McGuire , T . W . " Group Processes in Computer - mediated Communication , " Organization a I Behavior and Human Performance , 37 , 1986 , [ 47 ] Spillman , B . , Spillman , R . and Bezdek , J . " A Fuzzy Analysis of Consensus in Small Groups . " In P . P . Wang and S . K . Chang ( Eds . ) Fuzzy Sets : Theoiy and Application to Policy Analysis and Information Systems , Plenum , New York , 1980 , [ 48 ] Stoner , J . A . " A comparison of individual and group decision involving risk . " Unpublished master ' s thesis , School of Industrial Management , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 1961 . 257 - 280 . 3 ( 3 ) , 1992 , pp . 195 - 223 . 1988 , pp . 826 - 848 . 1991 , pp . 40 - 61 . 37 ( 8 ) , pp . 926 - 953 , 1991 . pp . 74 - 102 . 1981 , pp . 33 1 - 350 . 1992 , pp . 224 - 25 1 . 1988 , pp . 139 - 159 . pp . 157 - 1 87 . pp . 29 1 - 308 . [ 49 ] Turoff , M . and Hiltz , S . R . The Network Nation : Human Communication via Computer , Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , 1978 . [ 50 ] Valacich , J . S . , Mennecke , B . E . , Wachter , R . M . , and Wheeler , B . C . " Extensions to media richness theory : A test for the task - media fit hypothesis " , Proceedings of the twenty - seventh annual Hawaii international conference on Systems Science , [ 51 ] Weisband , S . P . , Schneider , S . K . , and Connolly , T . " Computer - mediated communication and social information : Status salience and status differences " , Academy of Management Journal , [ 52 ] Watson , R . T . , DeSanctis , G . and Poole , M . S . " Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , " MIS Quarterly , 12 ( 3 ) , 1988 , pp . 463 - 478 . [ 53 ] Zigurs , I . , Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . " A Study of Influence in Computer - Mediated Group Decision Making , " MIS QuarterZy , 12 ( 4 ) , 1988 , 1994 , pp . 11 - 20 . 38 ( 4 ) , 1995 , pp . 1124 - 1151 . pp . 625 - 644 . Appendix 1 Kaplan and Miller ' s Coding Scheme [ 27 ] : the first two categories measure informational influence , and the third and fourth category measure normative influence . 1 . 2 . Task Facts : statements citing task facts that were provided in the task description . Inferences from Task Facts : statements of facts not given in the task description but that were inferred from those given . Values / Nom : statements of personal values or social norms of right or wrong in actions and outcomes , or statements of appropriateness . Personal Preferences : statements alluding to one ' s preference , including both simple declarations and normative pressure to reach a specific consensus . Others : statements not included in the above categories and irrelevant to the task . 3 . 4 . 5 . Sample for Coding Verbal Influence Behaviors : more detailed coding procedures for measuring informational and normative influence can see the paper by Kaplan and Miller [ 27 ] . 112 VERBAL S you feel personally ctness of the group ' s you feel committed to the dissatisfied are you with the asured on a five point scale and has the same ' ATEME " CODIN ( Let D be the decision satisfaction of a group member . 5 j = 1 D [ iJ = C ( QIil ) where Q [ iJ = the rating given by group member i to question j , c = the summation symbol . K = C @ [ i ] ) / m Let K be the decision satisfaction of the group . m i = l whm D [ i ] = the decision satisfaction of group member i , m = the number of members in C = the summation symbol . the group , Decision Scheme Satisfaction The decision scheme satisfaction of a group is measured using an instnunent developed by Green and Taber [ 16 ] . The following five questions measure decision scheme satisfaction . How would you describe the group ' s problem solving process ? 1 . efficient . . . . . 2 . . . . . . 3 . & it - . . . . . d % r . 4 . m - le . . . . . 5 . satisfying . . . . . inefficient . unmrdina ~ . confilsing . dissatisfying . Each question is measured on a five point scale Determine the decision scheme satisfation Let D be the decision scheme satisfaction of a and has the same weight . group member . 5 j = 1 Nil = C ( QUI ) where QUI = the rating given by group member i to question j , Let K be the decision scheme satisfaction of the c = the summation symbol . group . m i = 1 K = C ( D [ i ] ) lm where D [ i ] = the decision scheme satisfaction of group member i , m = the number of members in the group , c = the summation symbol . 113