Neuron Article A Continuous Semantic Space Describes the Representation of Thousands of Object and Action Categories across the Human Brain Alexander G . Huth , 1 Shinji Nishimoto , 1 An T . Vu , 2 and Jack L . Gallant 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute 2 Program in Bioengineering 3 Department of Psychology University of California , Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA * Correspondence : gallant @ berkeley . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 10 . 014 SUMMARY Humans can see and name thousands of distinct object and action categories , so it is unlikely that each category is represented in a distinct brain area . A more efﬁcient scheme would be to represent categories as locations in a continuous semantic space mapped smoothly across the cortical surface . To search for such a space , we used fMRI to measure human brain activity evoked by natural movies . We then used voxelwise models to examine the cortical representation of 1 , 705 object and action categories . The ﬁrst few dimensions of the underlying semantic space were recovered from the ﬁt models by prin - cipal components analysis . Projection of the recov - ered semantic space onto cortical ﬂat maps shows that semantic selectivity is organized into smooth gradients that cover much of visual and nonvisual cortex . Furthermore , both the recovered semantic space and the cortical organization of the space are shared across different individuals . INTRODUCTION Previous fMRI studies have suggested that some categories of objects and actions are represented in speciﬁc cortical areas . Categories that have been functionally localized include faces ( Avidan et al . , 2005 ; Clark et al . , 1996 ; Halgren et al . , 1999 ; Kanw - isher et al . , 1997 ; McCarthy et al . , 1997 ; Rajimehr et al . , 2009 ; Tsao et al . , 2008 ) , body parts ( Downing et al . , 2001 ; Peelen and Downing , 2005 ; Schwarzlose et al . , 2005 ) , outdoor scenes ( Aguirre et al . , 1998 ; Epstein and Kanwisher , 1998 ) , and human body movements ( Peelen et al . , 2006 ; Pelphrey et al . , 2005 ) . However , humans can recognize thousands of different cate - gories of objects and actions . Given the limited size of the human brain , it is unreasonable to expect that every one of these cate - gories is represented in a distinct brain area . Indeed , fMRI studies have failed to identify dedicated functional areas for many common object categories including household objects ( Haxby et al . , 2001 ) , animals and tools ( Chao et al . , 1999 ) , food , clothes , and so on ( Downing et al . , 2006 ) . An efﬁcient way for the brain to represent object and action categories would be to organize them into a continuous space that reﬂects the semantic similarity between categories . A continuous semantic space could be mapped smoothly onto the cortical sheet so that nearby points in cortex would represent semantically similar categories . No previous study has found a general semantic space that organizes the representation of all visual categories in the human brain . However , several studies have suggested that single locations on the cortical surface might represent many semantically related categories ( Connolly et al . , 2012 ; Downing et al . , 2006 ; Edelman et al . , 1998 ; Just et al . , 2010 ; Konkle and Oliva , 2012 ; Kriegeskorte et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ; Op de Beeck et al . , 2008 ; O’Toole et al . , 2005 ) . Some studies have also proposed likely dimensions that organize these representations , such as animals versus nonanimals ( Connolly et al . , 2012 ; Downing et al . , 2006 ; Kriege - skorte et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ) , manipulation versus shelterversuseating ( Justetal . , 2010 ) , largeversussmall ( Konkle and Oliva , 2012 ) , or hand - versus mouth - versus foot - related actions ( Hauk et al . , 2004 ) . To determine whether a continuous semantic space underlies category representation in the human brain , we collected blood - oxygen - level - dependent ( BOLD ) fMRI responses from ﬁve subjects while they watched several hours of natural movies . Natural movies were used because they contain many of the object and action categories that occur in daily life , and they evoke robust BOLD responses ( Bartels and Zeki , 2004 ; Hasson et al . , 2004 , 2008 ; Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . After data collection , we used terms from the WordNet lexicon ( Miller , 1995 ) to label 1 , 364 common objects ( i . e . , nouns ) and actions ( i . e . , verbs ) in the movies ( see Experimental Procedures for details of labeling procedure and see Figure S1 available online for examples of typical labeled clips ) . WordNet is a set of directed graphs that represent the hierarchical ‘‘is a’’ relationships between object or action categories . The hierarchical relationships in WordNet were then used to infer the presence of an additional 341 higher - order categories ( e . g . , a scene containing a dog must also contain a canine ) . Finally , we used regularized linear regres - sion ( see Experimental Procedures for details ; Kay et al . , 2008 ; Mitchell et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ; Nishimoto et al . , 1210 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 2011 ) to characterize the response of each voxel to each of the 1 , 705 object and action categories ( Figure 1 ) . The linear regres - sion procedure produced a set of 1 , 705 model weights for each individual voxel , reﬂecting how each object and action category inﬂuences BOLD responses in each voxel . RESULTS Category Selectivity for Individual Voxels Our modeling procedure produces detailed information about the representation of categories in each individual voxel in the brain . Figure 2A shows the category selectivity for one voxel located in the left parahippocampal place area ( PPA ) of subject A . V . The model for this voxel shows that BOLD responses are strongly enhanced by categories associated with man - made objects and structures ( e . g . , ‘‘building , ’’ ‘‘road , ’’ ‘‘vehicle , ’’ and ‘‘furniture’’ ) , weakly enhanced by categories associated with outdoor scenes ( e . g . , ‘‘hill , ’’ ‘‘grassland , ’’ and ‘‘geological forma - tion’’ ) and humans ( e . g . , ‘‘person’’ and ‘‘athlete’’ ) , and weakly suppressed by nonhuman biological categories ( e . g . , ‘‘body parts’’ and ‘‘birds’’ ) . This result is consistent with previous reports that PPA most strongly represents information about outdoor scenes and buildings ( Epstein and Kanwisher , 1998 ) . Figure 2B shows category selectivity for a second voxel located in the right precuneus ( PrCu ) of subject A . V . The model shows that BOLD responses are strongly enhanced by categories associated with social settings ( e . g . , people , commu - nication verbs , and rooms ) and suppressed by many other categories ( e . g . , ‘‘building , ’’ ‘‘city , ’’ ‘‘geological formation , ’’ and ‘‘atmospheric phenomenon’’ ) . This result is consistent with an earlier ﬁnding that PrCu is involved in processing social scenes ( Iacoboni et al . , 2004 ) . A Semantic Space for Representation of Object and Action Categories We used principal components analysis ( PCA ) to recover a semantic space from the category model weights in each subject . PCA ensures that categories that are represented by similar sets of cortical voxels will project to nearby points in the estimated semantic space , while categories that are represented very differently will project to different points in the space . To maximize the quality of the estimated space , we included only voxels that were signiﬁcantly predicted ( p < 0 . 05 , uncorrected ) by the category model ( see Experimental Procedures for details ) . Because humans can perceive thousands of categories of objects and actions , the true semantic space underlying Figure 1 . Schematic of the Experiment and Model Subjectsviewed2hrofnaturalmovieswhileBOLDresponsesweremeasuredusingfMRI . Objectsandactionsinthemovieswerelabeledusing1 , 364termsfrom the WordNet lexicon ( Miller , 1995 ) . The hierarchical ‘‘is a’’ relationships deﬁned by WordNet were used to infer the presence of 341 higher - order categories , providing a total of 1 , 705 distinct category labels . A regularized , linearized ﬁnite impulse response regression model was then estimated for each cortical voxel recorded in each subject’s brain ( Kay et al . , 2008 ; Mitchell et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ; Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . The resulting category model weights describehowvariousobjectandactioncategoriesinﬂuenceBOLDsignalsrecordedineachvoxel . CategorieswithpositiveweightstendtoincreaseBOLD , while those with negative weights tend to decreaseBOLD . The response of avoxel to a particular scene is predicted as the sum of the weights for all categoriesin that scene . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1211 category representation in the brain probably has many dimen - sions . However , given the limitations of fMRI and a ﬁnite stimulus set , we expect that we will only be able to recover the ﬁrst few dimensions of the semantic space for each individual brain and fewer still dimensions that are shared across individuals . Thus , of the 1 , 705 semantic PCs produced by PCA on the voxel weights , only the ﬁrst few will resemble the true underlying semantic space , while the remainder will be determined mostly by the statistics of the stimulus set and noise in the fMRI data . To determine which PCs are signiﬁcantly different from chance , we compared the semantic PCs to the PCs of the cate - gory stimulus matrix ( see Experimental Procedures for details of why the stimulus PCs are an appropriate null hypothesis ) . First , we tested the signiﬁcance of each subject’s own category model weight PCs . If there is a semantic space underlying category representation in the subject’s brain , then we should ﬁnd that some of the subject’s model weight PCs explain more of the vari - ance in the subject’s category model weights than is explained by the stimulus PCs . However , if there is no semantic space underlying category representation in the subject’s brain , then the stimulus PCs should explain the same amount of variance in the category model weights as do the subject’s PCs . The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 3 . Six to eight PCs from individual subjects explain signiﬁcantly more variance in category model weights than do the stimulus PCs ( p < 0 . 001 , bootstrap test ) . These individual subject PCs explain a total of 30 % – 35 % of the variance in category model weights . Thus , our fMRI data are sufﬁcient to recover semantic spaces for indi - vidual subjects that consist of six to eight dimensions . Second , we used the same procedure to test the signiﬁcance of group PCs constructed using data combined across subjects . To avoid overﬁtting , we constructed a separate group semantic space for each subject using combined data from the other four subjects . If the subjects share a common semantic space , then some of the group PCs should explain more of the variance in the selected subject’s category model weights than do the stimulus PCs . However , if the subjects do not share a common semantic space , then the stimulus PCs should explain the same amount of variance in the category model weights as do the group PCs . The results of this analysis are also shown in Figure 3 . The ﬁrst four group PCs explain signiﬁcantly more variance ( p < 0 . 001 , boot - strap test ) than do the stimulus PCs in four out of ﬁve subjects . Figure 2 . Category Selectivity for Two Individual Voxels Eachpanelshowsthepredictedresponseofonevoxeltoeachofthe1 , 705categories , organizedaccordingtothegraphicalstructureofWordNet . Linksindicate ‘‘isa’’relationships ( e . g . , anathleteisaperson ) ; somerelationships usedinthemodelareomitted forclarity . Eachmarkerrepresentsasinglenoun ( circle ) orverb ( square ) . Red markers indicate positive predicted responses and blue markers indicate negative predicted responses . The area of each marker indicates pre - dictedresponsemagnitude . Thepredictionaccuracyofeachvoxelmodel , computedasthecorrelationcoefﬁcient ( r ) betweenpredictedandactualresponses , is shown in the bottom right of each panel along with model signiﬁcance ( see Results for details ) . ( A ) Category selectivity for one voxel located in the left hemisphere parahippocampal place area ( PPA ) . The category model predicts that movies will evoke positive responses when ‘‘structures , ’’ ‘‘buildings , ’’ ‘‘roads , ’’ ‘‘containers , ’’ ‘‘devices , ’’ and ‘‘vehicles’’ are present . Thus , this voxel appears to be selective for scenes that contain man - made objects and structures ( Epstein and Kanwisher , 1998 ) . ( B ) Category selectivity for one voxel located in the right hemisphere precuneus ( PrCu ) . The category model predicts that movies will evoke positive responses from this voxel when ‘‘people , ’’ ‘‘carnivores , ’’ ‘‘communication verbs , ’’ ‘‘rooms , ’’ or ‘‘vehicles’’ are present and negative responses when movies contain ‘‘atmospheric phenomena , ’’ ‘‘locations , ’’ ‘‘buildings , ’’ or ‘‘roads . ’’ Thus , this voxel appears to be selective for scenes that contain people or animals interacting socially ( Iacoboni et al . , 2004 ) . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1212 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . These four group PCs explain on average 19 % of the total vari - ance , 72 % as much as do the ﬁrst four individual subject PCs . In contrast , the ﬁrst four stimulus PCs only explain 10 % of the total variance , 38 % as much variance as the individual subject PCs . This result suggests that the ﬁrst four group PCs describe a semantic space that is shared across individuals . Third , we determined how much stimulus - related information is captured by the group PCs and full category model . For each model , we quantiﬁed stimulus - related information by testing whether the model could distinguish among BOLD responses to different movie segments ( Kay et al . , 2008 ; Nishi - moto et al . , 2011 ; see Experimental Procedures for details ) . Models using 4 – 512 group PCs were tested by projecting the category model weights for 2 , 000 voxels ( selected using the training data set ) onto the group PCs . Then , the projected model weights were used to predict responses to the validation stimuli . We then tried to match the validation stimuli to observed BOLD responses by comparing the observed and predicted responses . The same identiﬁcation procedure was repeated for the full cate - gory model . The results of this analysis are shown in Figure S2 . The full category model correctly identiﬁes an average of 76 % of stimuli across subjects ( chance is 1 . 9 % ) . Models based on 64 or more group PCs correctly identify an average of 74 % of the stimuli but incorporate information that we know cannot be distinguished from the stimulus PCs . A model based on the four signiﬁcant group PCs correctly identiﬁes 49 % of the stimuli , roughly two - thirds as many as the full model . These results show that the four - PC group space does not capture all of the stimulus - related information present in the full category model , indicating that the true semantic space is likely to have more than four dimensions . Further experiments will be required to determine these other semantic dimensions . To visualize the group semantic space , we formed a robust estimate by pooling data from all ﬁve subjects ( for a total of 49 , 685 voxels ) and then applying PCA to the combined data . Visualization of the Semantic Space The previous results demonstrate that object and action cate - gories are represented in a semantic space consisting of at least four dimensions and that this space is shared across indi - viduals . To understand the structure of the group semantic space , we visualized it in two different ways . First , we projected the 1 , 705 coefﬁcients of each group PC onto the graph deﬁned by WordNet ( Figure 4 ) . The ﬁrst PC ( shown in Figure 4A ) appears to distinguish between categories that have high stimulus energy ( e . g . , moving objects like ‘‘person , ’’ ‘‘vehicle , ’’ and ‘‘animal’’ ) and those that have low stimulus energy ( e . g . , stationary objects like ‘‘sky , ’’ ‘‘city , ’’ ‘‘building , ’’ and ‘‘plant’’ ) . This is not surprising , as the ﬁrst PC should reﬂect the stimulus dimension with the great - est inﬂuence on brain activity , and stimulus energy is already known to have a large effect on BOLD signals ( Fox et al . , 2009 ; Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ; Smith et al . , 1998 ) . We then visualized the second , third , and fourth group PCs simultaneously using a three - dimensional ( 3D ) colormap pro - jected onto the WordNet graph . A color was assigned to each of the 1 , 705 categories according to the following scheme : the category coefﬁcient in the second PC determined the value of the red channel , the third PC determined the green channel , and the fourth PC determined the blue channel ( see Figure 4B ; see Figure S3 for individual PCs ) . This scheme assigns similar colors to categories that are represented similarly in the brain . Figure 4C shows the second , third , and fourth PCs projected onto the WordNet graph . Here humans , human body parts , and communication verbs ( e . g . , ‘‘gesticulate’’ and ‘‘talk’’ ) appear in shades of green . Other animals appear yellow and green - yellow . Nonliving objects such as ‘‘vehicles’’ appear pink and purple , as do movement verbs ( e . g . , ‘‘run’’ ) , outdoor categories ( e . g . , ‘‘hill , ’’ ‘‘city , ’’ and ‘‘grassland’’ ) , and paths ( e . g . , ‘‘road’’ ) . Indoor cate - gories ( e . g . , ‘‘room , ’’ ‘‘door , ’’ and ‘‘furniture’’ ) appear in blue and indigo . This ﬁgure suggests that semantically related cate - gories ( e . g . , ‘‘person’’ and ‘‘talking’’ ) are represented more simi - larly than unrelated categories ( e . g . , ‘‘talking’’ and ‘‘kettle’’ ) . Figure 3 . Amount of Model Variance Ex - plained by Individual Subject and Group Semantic Spaces Principal components analysis ( PCA ) was used to recover a semantic space from category model weights in each subject . Here we show the vari - ance explained in the category model weights by each of the 20 most important PCs . Orange lines show the amount of variance explained in cate - gory model weights by each subject’s own PCs andbluelinesshowthevarianceexplainedbyPCs of combined data from other subjects . Gray lines show the variance explained by the stimulus PCs , whichserve asan appropriate null hypothesis ( see text and Experimental Procedures for details ) . Error bars indicate 99 % conﬁdence intervals ( the conﬁdenceintervalsforthesubjects’ownPCsand group PCs are very small ) . Hollow markers indi - catesubjectorgroupPCsthatexplainsigniﬁcantly more variance ( p < 0 . 001 , bootstrap test ) than the stimulus PCs . The ﬁrst four group PCs explain signiﬁcantly more variance than the stimulus PCs for four subjects . Thus , the ﬁrst four group PCs appear to comprise a semantic space that is common across most individuals and that cannot be explained by stimulus statistics . Furthermore , the ﬁrst six to nine individual subject PCs explain signiﬁcantly more variance than the stimulus PCs ( p < 0 . 001 , bootstrap test ) . This suggests that while the subjects share broad aspects of semantic representation , ﬁner - scale semantic representations are subject speciﬁc . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1213 To better understand the overall structure of the semantic space , we created an analogous ﬁgure in which category posi - tion is determined by the PCs instead of the WordNet graph . Fig - ure 5 shows the location of all 1 , 705 categories in the space formed by the second , third , and fourth group PCs ( Movie S1 shows the categories in 3D ) . Here , categories that are repre - sented similarly in the brain are plotted at nearby positions . Cate - gories that appear near the origin have small PC coefﬁcients and thus are generally weakly represented or are represented simi - larly across voxels ( e . g . , ‘‘laptop’’ and ‘‘clothing’’ ) . In contrast , categories that appear far from the origin have large PC coefﬁ - cients and thus are represented strongly in some voxels and weakly in others ( e . g . , ‘‘text , ’’ ‘‘talk , ’’ ‘‘man , ’’ ‘‘car , ’’ ‘‘animal , ’’ and ‘‘underwater’’ ) . These results support earlier ﬁndings that categories such as faces ( Avidan et al . , 2005 ; Clark et al . , 1996 ; Halgren et al . , 1999 ; Kanwisher et al . , 1997 ; McCarthy et al . , 1997 ; Rajimehr et al . , 2009 ; Tsao et al . , 2008 ) and text ( Co - hen et al . , 2000 ) are represented strongly and distinctly in the human brain . Interpretation of the Semantic Space Earlier studies have suggested that animal categories ( including people ) are represented distinctly from nonanimal categories ( Connolly et al . , 2012 ; Downing et al . , 2006 ; Kriegeskorte et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ) . To determine whether hypothesized semantic dimensions such as animal versus nonanimal are captured by the group semantic space , we compared each of the group semantic PCs to nine hypothesized semantic dimen - sions . For each hypothesized dimension , we ﬁrst assigned a value to each of the 1 , 705 categories . For example , for the dimension animal versus nonanimal , we assigned the value + 1 to all animal categories and the value 0 to all nonanimal cate - gories . Then we computed how much variance each hypothe - sized dimension explained in each of the group PCs . If Figure 4 . Graphical Visualization of the Group Semantic Space ( A ) Coefﬁcientsofall1 , 705categoriesintheﬁrstgroupPC , organizedaccordingtothegraphical structureofWordNet . Linksindicate‘‘isa’’relationships ( e . g . , an athlete is a person ) ; some relationships used in the model have been omitted for clarity . Each marker represents a single noun ( circle ) or verb ( square ) . Red markers indicate positive coefﬁcients and blue indicates negative coefﬁcients . The area of each marker indicates the magnitude of the coefﬁcient . This PC distinguishesbetweencategorieswithhighstimulusenergy ( e . g . , movingobjectslike‘‘person’’and‘‘vehicle’’ ) andthosewithlowstimulusenergy ( e . g . , stationary objects like ‘‘sky’’ and ‘‘city’’ ) . ( B ) The three - dimensional RGB colormap used to visualize PCs 2 – 4 . The category coefﬁcient in the second PC determined the value of the red channel , the third PC determined the green channel , and the fourth PC determined the blue channel . Under this scheme , categories that are represented similarly in the brain are assigned similar colors . Categories with zero coefﬁcients appear neutral gray . ( C ) Coefﬁcientsofall1 , 705categoriesingroupPCs2 – 4 , organizedaccordingtotheWordNetgraph . ThecolorofeachmarkerisdeterminedbytheRGBcolormap in ( B ) . Marker sizes reﬂect the magnitude of the three - dimensional coefﬁcient vector for each category . This graph shows that categories thought to be semantically related ( e . g . , ‘‘athletes’’ and ‘‘walking’’ ) are represented similarly in the brain . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1214 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . a hypothesized dimension provides a good description of one of the group PCs , then that dimension will explain a large fraction of the variance in that PC . If a hypothesized dimension is captured by the group semantic space but does not line up exactly with one of the PCs , then that dimension will explain vari - ance in multiple PCs . The comparison between the group PCs and hypothesized semantic dimensions is shown in Figure 6 . The ﬁrst PC is best ex - plained by a dimension that contrasts mobile categories ( people , nonhuman animals , and vehicles ) with nonmobile categories . The ﬁrst PC is also well explained by a dimension that is an extension of a previously reported ‘‘animacy’’ continuum ( Con - nolly et al . , 2012 ) . Our animacy dimension assigns the highest weight to people , decreasing weights to other mammals , birds , reptiles , ﬁsh , and invertebrates , and zero weight to all nonanimal categories . The second PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts categories associated with social interaction ( people and communication verbs ) with all other categories . The third PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts categories associated with civilization ( people , man - made objects , and vehicles ) with categories associated with nature ( nonhuman animals ) . The fourth PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts biological categories ( animals , plants , people , and body parts ) with nonbiological categories , as well as a similar dimension that contrasts animal categories ( including people ) with nonanimal categories . These results provide quantitative interpretations for the group PCs and show that many hypothe - sized semantic dimensions are captured by the group semantic space . The results shown in Figure 6 also suggest that some hypoth - esized semantic dimensions are not captured by the group semantic space . The contrast between place categories ( build - ings , roads , outdoor locations , and geological features ) and nonplace categories is not captured by any group PC . This is surprising because the representation of place categories is thought to be of primary importance to many brain areas , including the PPA ( Epstein and Kanwisher , 1998 ) , retrosplenial cortex ( RSC ; Aguirre et al . , 1998 ) , and temporo - occipital sulcus ( TOS ; Nakamura et al . , 2000 ; Hasson et al . , 2004 ) . Our results may appear different from the results of earlier studies of place representation because those earlier studies used static images and not movies . Another hypothesized semantic dimension that is not cap - tured by our group semantic space is real - world object size ( Konkle and Oliva , 2012 ) . The object size dimension assigns a high weight to large objects ( e . g . , ‘‘boat’’ ) , medium weight to human - scale objects ( e . g . , ‘‘person’’ ) , a small weight to small Figure 5 . Spatial Visualization of the Group Semantic Space ( A ) All1 , 705categories , organizedbytheircoefﬁcientsonthesecondandthird PCs . Links indicate ‘‘is a’’ relationships ( e . g . , an athlete is a person ) from the WordNet graph ; some relationships used in the model have been omitted for clarity . Eachmarkerrepresentsasinglenoun ( circle ) orverb ( square ) . Thecolor of each marker is determined by an RGB colormap based on the category coefﬁcients in PCs 2 – 4 ( see Figure 4B for details ) . The position of each marker is also determined by the PC coefﬁcients : position on the x axis is determined by the coefﬁcient on the second PC and position on the y axis is determined by the coefﬁcient on the third PC . This ensures that categories that are represented similarly in the brain appear near each other . The area of each marker indicates the magnitude of the PC coefﬁcients for that category ; more important or strongly represented categories have larger coefﬁcients . Thecategories‘‘man , ’’‘‘talk , ’’‘‘text , ’’‘‘underwater , ’’and‘‘car’’havethelargest coefﬁcients on these PCs . ( B ) All 1 , 705 categories , organized by their coefﬁcients on the second and fourth PCs . Format is the same as ( A ) . The large group of ‘‘animal’’ categories has large PC coefﬁcients and is mainly distinguished by the fourth PC . Human categoriesappeartospanacontinuum . Thecategory‘‘person’’isverycloseto indoorcategoriessuchas‘‘room’’onthesecondandthirdPCsbutdifferenton the fourth . The category ‘‘athlete’’ is close to vehicle categories on the second and third PCs but is also close to ‘‘animal’’ on the fourth PC . These semanti - cally related categories are represented similarly in the brain , supporting the hypothesis of a smooth semantic space . However , these results also show thatsomecategories ( e . g . , ‘‘talk , ’’‘‘man , ’’‘‘text , ’’and‘‘car’’ ) appeartobemore important than others . Movie S1 shows this semantic space in 3D . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1215 objects ( e . g . , ‘‘glasses’’ ) , and zero weight to objects that have no size ( e . g . , ‘‘talking’’ ) or can be many sizes ( e . g . , ‘‘animal’’ ) . This object size dimension was not well captured by any of the four group PCs . However , based on earlier results ( Konkle and Oliva , 2012 ) , it appears that object size is represented in the brain . Thus , it is likely that object size is captured by lower - vari - ance group PCs that could not be signiﬁcantly discerned in this experiment . Cortical Maps of Semantic Representation The results of the PC analysis show that the brains of different individuals represent object and action categories in a common semantic space . Here we examine how this semantic space is represented across the cortical surface . To do this , we ﬁrst con - structed a separate cortical ﬂatmap for each subject using stan - dard techniques ( Van Essen et al . , 2001 ) . Then we used the scheme described above ( see Figure 4 ) to assign a color to each voxel according to the projection of its category model weights into the PC space ( for separate PC maps , see Figure S4 ) . The results are shown in Figures 7A and 7C for two subjects ( cor - responding maps for other subjects are shown in Figure S5 ) . ( Readers who wish to explore these maps in detail , and examine the category selectivity of each voxel , may do so by going to http : / / gallantlab . org / semanticmovies . ) These maps reveal that the semantic space is represented in broad gradients that are distributed across much of anterior visual cortex ( some of these gradients are shown schematically in Figure S6 ) . In inferior temporal cortex , regions of animal ( yellow ) and human representation ( green and blue - green ) run along the inferior temporal sulcus ( ITS ) . Both the fusiform face area and occipital face area lie within the region of human repre - sentation , but the surrounding region of animal representation was previously unknown . In a gradient that runs from the ITS toward the middle temporal sulcus , human representation gives way to animal representation , which then gives way to represen - tation of human action , athletes , and outdoor spaces ( red and red - green ) . The dorsal part of the gradient contains the extrastri - ate body area and area MT + / V5 and also responds strongly to motion ( positive on the ﬁrst PC , see Figures 7B and 7D ) . In medial occipitotemporal cortex , a region of vehicle ( pink ) and landscape ( purple ) representation sits astride the collateral sulcus . This region , which contains the PPA , lies at one end of a long gradient that runs across medial parietal cortex . Toward RSC and along the PrCu , the representational gradient shifts toward buildings ( blue - indigo ) and landscapes ( purple ) . This gradient continues forward along the superior bank of the intra - parietal sulcus as far as the posterior end of the cingulate sulcus while shifting representation toward geography ( purple - red ) and human action ( red ) . This long gradient encompasses both the dorsal and ventral visual pathways ( Ungerleider and Mishkin , 1982 ) in one unbroken band of cortex that represents a con - tinuum of semantic categories related to vehicles , buildings , landscapes , geography , and human actions . This map also reveals that visual semantic categories are well represented outside of occipital cortex . In parietal cortex , an anterior - posterior gradient from animal ( yellow ) to landscape ( purple ) representation is located in the posterior bank of the postcentral sulcus ( PoCeS ) . This is consistent with earlier reports that movies of hand movements evoke responses in the PoCeS ( Buccino et al . , 2001 ; Hasson et al . , 2004 ) and may reﬂect learned associations between visual and somatosensory stimuli . In frontal cortex , a region of human action and athlete repre - sentation ( red ) is located at the posterior end of the superior frontal sulcus ( SFS ) . This region , which includes the frontal eye ﬁelds ( FEFs ) , lies at one end of a gradient that shifts toward land - scape ( purple ) representation while extending along the SFS . Figure 6 . Comparison between the Group Semantic Space and Nine Hypothesized Semantic Dimensions For each hypothesized semantic dimension , we assigned a value to each of the 1 , 705 categories ( see Experimental Procedures for details ) and we computed the fraction of variance that each dimension explains in each PC . Each panel shows the variance explained by all hypothesized dimensions in one of the four group PCs . Error bars indicate bootstrap SE . The ﬁrst PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts mobile categories ( people , nonhuman animals , and vehicles ) with nonmobile categories and an ‘‘animacy’’ dimension ( Connolly et al . , 2012 ) that assigns high weight to humans , decreasing weights to other mammals , birds , reptiles , ﬁsh , and invertebrates , and zero weight to other categories . The second PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts social categories ( people and communication verbs ) with all other categories . The third PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts categories associated with civilization ( people , man - made objects , and vehicles ) with categories associated with nature ( nonhuman animals ) . The fourth PC is best explained by a dimension that contrasts biological categories ( people , animals , plants , body parts , and plant parts ) with nonbiological categories and a dimension that contrasts animals ( people and nonhuman animals ) with nonanimals . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1216 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Another region of human action , athlete , and animal representa - tion ( red - yellow ) is located at the posterior inferior frontal sulcus ( IFS ) and contains the frontal operculum ( FO ) . Both the FO and FEF have been associated with visual attention ( Bu¨chel et al . , 1998 ) , so we suspect that human action categories might be correlated with salient visual movements that attract covert visual attention in our subjects . In inferior frontal cortex , a region of indoor structure ( blue ) , human ( green ) , communication verb ( also blue - green ) , and text ( cyan ) representation runs along the IFS anterior to the FO . This region coincides with the inferior frontal sulcus face patch ( Avidan et al . , 2005 ; Tsao et al . , 2008 ) and has also been impli - cated in processing of visual speech ( Calvert and Campbell , 2003 ) and text ( Poldrack et al . , 1999 ) . Our results suggest that visual speech , text , and faces are represented in a contiguous region of cortex . Smoothness of Cortical Semantic Maps We have shown that the brain represents hundreds of categories within a continuous four - dimensional semantic space that is shared among different subjects . Furthermore , the results shown in Figure 7 suggest that this space is mapped smoothly onto the cortical sheet . However , the results presented thus far are not sufﬁcient to determine whether the apparent smoothness of the cortical map reﬂects the speciﬁc properties of the group semantic space , or rather whether a smooth map might result from any arbitrary four - dimensional projection of our voxel weights onto the cortical sheet . To address this issue , we tested Figure 7 . Semantic Space Represented across the Cortical Surface ( A ) The category model weights for each cortical voxel in subject A . V . are projected onto PCs 2 – 4 of the group semantic space and then assigned a color ac - cordingtotheschemedescribedinFigure4B . ThesecolorsareprojectedontoacorticalﬂatmapconstructedforsubjectA . V . Eachlocationontheﬂatmapshown hererepresentsasinglevoxelinthebrainofsubjectA . V . Locations withsimilarcolorshavesimilarsemanticselectivity . Thismaprevealsthatthesemantic space is represented in broad gradients distributed across much of anterior visual cortex . Semantic selectivity is also apparent in medial and lateral parietal cortex , auditory cortex , and lateral prefrontal cortex . Brain areas identiﬁed using conventional functional localizers are outlined in white and labeled ( see Table S1 for abbreviations ) . Boundaries that have been inferred from anatomy or that are otherwise uncertain are denoted by dashed white lines . Major sulci are denoted by dark blue lines and labeled ( see Table S2 for abbreviations ) . Some anatomical regions are labeled in light blue ( abbreviations : PrCu , precuneus ; TPJ , tempor - oparietal junction ) . Cuts made to the cortical surface during the ﬂattening procedure are indicated by dashed red lines and a red border . The apex of each cut is indicatedbyastar . Bluebordersshowtheedgeofthecorpuscallosumandsubcortical structures . RegionsoffMRIsignaldropoutduetoﬁeldinhomogeneityare shaded with black hatched lines . ( B ) Projection of voxel model weights onto the ﬁrst PC for subject A . V . Voxels with positive projections on the ﬁrst PC appear red , while those with negative projections appear blue and those orthogonal to the ﬁrst PC appear gray . ( C ) Projection of voxel weights onto PCs 2 – 4 of the group semantic space for subject T . C . ( D ) Projection of voxel model weights onto the ﬁrst PC for subject T . C . See Figure S5 for maps of semantic representation in other subjects . Note : explore these data sets yourself at http : / / gallantlab . org / semanticmovies . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1217 whether cortical maps under the four - PC group semantic space are smoother than expected by chance . In order to quantify the smoothness of a cortical map , we ﬁrst projected the category model weights for every voxel into the four - dimensional semantic space . Then we computed the corre - lation between the projections for each pair of voxels . Finally , we aggregated and averaged these pairwise correlations based on the distance between each pair of voxels along the cortical sheet . To estimate the null distribution of smoothness values and to establish statistical signiﬁcance , we repeated this proce - dure using 1 , 000 random four - dimensional semantic spaces ( see Experimental Procedures for details ) . Figure 8 shows the average correlation between voxel projec - tions into the semantic space as a function of the distance between voxels along the cortical sheet . In all ﬁve subjects , the group semantic space projections have signiﬁcantly ( p < 0 . 001 ) higher average correlation than the random projections , for both adjacent voxels ( distance 1 ) and voxels separated by one intermediate voxel ( distance 2 ) . These results suggest that smoothness of the cortical map is speciﬁc to the group semantic space estimated here . Because the group semantic space was constructed without using any spatial information , this ﬁnding independently conﬁrms the signiﬁcance of the group semantic space . Importance of Category Representation across Cortex The cortical maps shown in Figure 7 demonstrate that much of the cortex is semantically selective . However , this does not necessarily imply that semantic selectivity is the primary function of any speciﬁc cortical site . To assess the importance of semantic selectivity across the cortical surface , we evaluated predictions of the category model , using a separate data set reserved for this purpose ( Kay et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ; Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . Prediction performance was quan - tiﬁed as the correlation between predicted and observed BOLD responses , corrected to account for noise in the validation data ( see Experimental Procedures and Hsu et al . , 2004 ) . Figure 9 shows prediction performance projected onto cortical ﬂat maps for two subjects ( corresponding maps for other subjects are shown in Figure S7 ) . The category model accurately predicts BOLD responses in occipitotemporal cortex , medial parietal cortex , and lateral prefrontal cortex . On average , 22 % of cortical voxels are predicted signiﬁcantly ( p < 0 . 01 uncor - rected ; 19 % in subject S . N . , 20 % in A . H . , 26 % in A . V . , 26 % in T . C . , and 21 % in J . G . ) . The category model explains at least 20 % of the explainable variance ( correlation > 0 . 44 ) in an average of 8 % of cortical voxels ( 5 % in subject S . N . , 7 % in A . H . , 10 % in A . V . , 12 % in T . C . , and 7 % in J . G . ) . These results show that category representation is broadly distributed across the cortex . This result is inconsistent with the results of previous fMRI studies that reported only a few category - selective regions ( Schwarzlose et al . , 2005 ; Spiridon et al . , 2006 ) . ( Note , however , that the category selectivity of individual brain areas reported in these previous studies is consistent with our results . ) We suspect that previous studies have underestimated the extent of category representation in the cortex because they used static images and tested only a handful of categories . Figure 9 also shows that some regions of cortex that appeared semantically selective in Figure 7 are predicted poorly . This suggests that the semantic selectivity of some brain regions is inconsistent or nonstationary . These inconsistent regions include the middle precuneus , temporoparietal junction , and medial prefrontal cortex . All of these regions are thought to be components of the default mode network ( Raichle et al . , Figure 8 . Smoothness of Cortical Maps under the Group Semantic Space Toquantifysmoothnessofcorticalrepresentationunderasemanticspace , weﬁrstprojectedvoxelcategorymodelweightsintothesemanticspace . Second , we computedthemean correlation between voxel semanticprojections as afunction of the distance between voxelsalong thecorticalsheet . Todetermine whether cortical semantic maps under the group semantic space are signiﬁcantly smoother than chance , we computed smoothness using the same analysis for 1 , 000 random four - dimensional spaces . Mean correlations for the group semantic space are plotted in blue , and mean correlations for the 1 , 000 random spaces are plotted in gray . Gray error bars show 99 % conﬁdence intervals for the random space results . Group semantic space correlations that are signiﬁcantly different from the random space results ( p < 0 . 001 ) are shown as hollow symbols . For adjacent voxels ( distance 1 ) and voxels separated by one intermediate voxel ( distance 2 ) , correlations of group semantic space projections are signiﬁcantly greater than chancein all subjects . This shows that cortical semantic maps under the group semantic space are much smoother than would be expected by chance . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1218 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 2001 ) and are known to be strongly modulated by attention ( Downar et al . , 2002 ) . Because we did not control or manipulate attention in this experiment , the inconsistent semantic selectivity of these regions may reﬂect uncontrolled attentional effects . Future studies that control attention explicitly could improve category model predictions in these regions . DISCUSSION We used brain activity evoked by natural movies to study how 1 , 705 object and action categories are represented in the human brain . The results show that the brain represents categories in a continuous semantic space that reﬂects category similarity . These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the brain efﬁciently represents the diversity of categories in a compact space , and they contradict the common hypothesis that each category is represented in a distinct brain area . Assuming that semantically related categories share visual or conceptual features , this organization probably minimizes the number of neurons or neural wiring required to represent these features . Across the cortex , semantic representation is organized along smooth gradients that seem to be distributed systematically . Functional areas deﬁned using classical contrast methods are merely peaks or nodal points within these broad semantic gradi - ents . Furthermore , cortical maps based on the group semantic space are signiﬁcantly smoother than expected by chance . These results suggest that semantic representation is analogous to retinotopic representation , in which many smooth gradients of visual eccentricity and angle selectivity tile the cortex ( Engel et al . , 1997 ; Hansen et al . , 2007 ) . Unlike retinotopy , however , Figure 9 . Model Prediction Performance across the Cortical Surface To determine how much of the response variance of each voxel is explained by the category model , we assessed prediction performance using separate validation data reserved for this purpose . ( A ) Eachlocationon theﬂatmaprepresentsasinglevoxel inthebrain ofsubjectA . V . Colors reﬂectprediction performanceonthevalidation data . Well - predicted voxels appear yellow or white , and poorly predicted voxels appear gray . The best predictions are found in occipitotemporal cortex , the posterior superior temporal sulcus , medial parietal cortex , and inferior frontal cortex . ( B ) Modelperformance for subject T . C . See Figure S7 for model prediction performance inother subjects . See Table S3 for model prediction performance within known functional areas . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1219 the relevant dimensions of the space underlying semantic representation are not known a priori and so must be derived empirically . Previous studies have shown that natural movies evoke wide - spread , robust BOLD activity across much of the cortex ( Bartels and Zeki , 2004 ; Hasson et al . , 2004 , 2008 ; Haxby et al . , 2011 ; Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . However , those studies did not attempt to systematically map semantic representation or discover the underlying semantic space . Our results help explain why natural movies evoke widely consistent activity across different individ - uals : object and action categories are represented in terms of a common semantic space that maps consistently onto cortical anatomy . One potential criticism of this study is that the WordNet features used to construct the category model might have biased the recovered semantic space . For example , the cate - gory ‘‘surgeon’’ only appears four times in these stimuli , but because it is a descendent of ‘‘person’’ in WordNet , surgeon appears near person in the semantic space . It is possible ( how - ever unlikely ) that surgeons are represented very differently from other people but that we are unable to recover that information from these data . On the other hand , categories that appeared frequently in these stimuli are largely immune to this bias . For example , among the descendents of ‘‘person , ’’ there is a large difference between the representations of ‘‘athlete’’ ( which appears 282 times in these stimuli ) and ‘‘man’’ ( which appears 1 , 482 times ) . Thus , it appears that bias due to WordNet only affects rare categories . We do not believe that these consider - ations have a signiﬁcant effect on the results of this study . Another potential criticism of the regression - based approach used in this study is that some results could be biased by stim - ulus correlations . For example , we might conclude that a voxel responds to ‘‘talking’’ when in fact it responds to the presence of a ‘‘mouth . ’’ In theory , such correlations are modeled and removed by the regression procedure as long as sufﬁcient data are collected , but our data are limited and so some residual correlations may remain . However , we believe that the alter - native—bias due to preselecting a small number of stimulus categories—is a more pernicious source of error and misinter - pretation in conventional fMRI experiments . Errors due to stim - ulus correlation can be seen , measured , and tested . Errors due to stimulus preselection are implicit and largely invisible . The group semantic space found here captures large semantic distinctions such as mobile versus stationary cate - gories but misses ﬁner distinctions such as ‘‘old faces’’ versus ‘‘young faces’’ ( Op de Beeck et al . , 2010 ) and ‘‘small objects’’ versus ‘‘large objects’’ ( Konkle and Oliva , 2012 ) . These ﬁne distinctions would probably be captured by lower - variance dimensions of the shared semantic space that could not be recovered in this experiment . The dimensionality and resolu - tion of the recovered semantic space are limited by the quality of BOLD fMRI and by the size and semantic breadth of the stimulus set . Future studies that use more sensitive measures of brain activity or broader stimulus sets will probably reveal additional dimensions of the common semantic space . Further studies using more subjects will also be necessary in order to understand differences in semantic representation between individuals . Some previous studies have reported that animal and non - animal categories are represented distinctly in the human brain ( Downing et al . , 2006 ; Kriegeskorte et al . , 2008 ; Naselaris et al . , 2009 ) . Another study proposed an alternative : that animal categories are represented using an animacy continuum ( Con - nolly et al . , 2012 ) , in which animals that are more similar to humans have higher animacy . Our results show that animacy is well represented on the ﬁrst , and most important , PC in the group semantic space . The binary distinction between animals and nonanimals is also well represented but only on the fourth PC . Moreover , the fourth PC is better explained by the distinction between biological categories ( including plants ) and nonbiolog - ical categories . These results suggest that the animacy con - tinuum is more important for category representation in the brain than is the binary distinction between animal and nonanimal categories . A ﬁnal important question about the group semantic space is whether it reﬂects visual or conceptual features of the cate - gories . For example , people and nonhuman animals might be represented similarly because they share visual features such as hair , or because they share conceptual features such as agency or self - locomotion . The answer to this question probably depends upon which voxels are used to construct the semantic space . Voxels from occipital and inferior temporal cortex have been shown to have similar semantic representation in humans and monkeys ( Kriegeskorte et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , these voxels probably represent visual features of the categories and not conceptual features . In contrast , voxels from medial parietal cortex and frontal cortex probably represent conceptual features of the categories . Because the group semantic space reported here was constructed using voxels from across the entire brain , it probably reﬂects a mixture of visual and conceptual features . Future studies using both visual and nonvisual stimuli will be required to disentangle the contributions of visual versus conceptual features to semantic representation . Furthermore , a model that represents stimuli in terms of visual and conceptual features might produce more accurate and parsimonious predic - tions than the category model used here . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES MRI Data Collection MRIdata werecollected on a3TSiemens TIM Trioscanner attheUC Berkeley Brain Imaging Center using a 32 - channel Siemens volume coil . Functional scans were collected using a gradient echo - EPI sequence with repetition time ( TR ) = 2 . 0045 s , echo time ( TE ) = 31 ms , ﬂip angle = 70 (cid:1) , voxel size = 2 . 24 3 2 . 24 3 4 . 1 mm , matrix size = 100 3 100 , and ﬁeld of view = 224 3 224 mm . We prescribed 32 axial slices to cover the entire cortex . A custom - modiﬁedbipolar waterexcitationradiofrequency ( RF ) pulsewasusedtoavoid signal from fat . Anatomical data for subjects A . H . , T . C . , and J . G . were collected using a T1 - weighted MP - RAGE sequence on the same 3T scanner . Anatomical data for subjects S . N . and A . V . were collected on a 1 . 5T Philips Eclipse scanner as described in an earlier publication ( Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . Subjects Functional data were collected from ﬁve male human subjects , S . N . ( author S . N . , age 32 ) , A . H . ( author A . G . H . , age 25 ) , A . V . ( author A . T . V . , age 25 ) , T . C . ( age 29 ) , and J . G . ( age 25 ) . All subjects were healthy and had normal or cor - rected - to - normal vision . The experimental protocol was approved by the Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1220 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at University of California , Berkeley . Natural Movie Stimuli Model estimation data were collected in 12 separate 10 min scans . Validation datawerecollectedinnineseparate10minscans , eachconsistingoften1min validation blocks . Each 1 min validation block was presented ten times within the 90 min of validation data . The stimuli and experimental design were iden - tical to those used in Nishimoto et al . ( 2011 ) , except that here the movies were shown on a projection screen at 24 3 24 degrees of visual angle . fMRI Data Preprocessing Each functional run was motion corrected using the FMRIB Linear Image Registration Tool ( FLIRT ) from FSL 4 . 2 ( Jenkinson and Smith , 2001 ) . All volumes in the run were then averaged to obtain a high - quality template volume . FLIRT was also used to automatically align the template volume for each run to the overall template , which was chosen to be the template for the ﬁrst functional movie run for each subject . These automatic alignments were manuallychecked and adjusted for accuracy . The cross - run transforma - tion matrix was then concatenated to the motion - correction transformation matrices obtained using MCFLIRT , and the concatenated transformation wasusedtoresampletheoriginaldatadirectlyintotheoveralltemplate space . Low - frequency voxel response drift was identiﬁed using a median ﬁlter with a 120 s window and this was subtracted from the signal . The mean response for each voxel was then subtracted and the remaining response was scaled to have unit variance . Flatmap Construction Cortical surface meshes were generated from the T1 - weighted anatomical scans using Caret5 software ( Van Essen et al . , 2001 ) . Five relaxation cuts were made into the surface of each hemisphere and the surface crossing the corpus callosum was removed . The calcarine sulcus cut was made at the horizontal meridian in V1 using retinotopic mapping data as a guide . Surfaces were then ﬂattened using Caret5 . Functional data were aligned to the anatomical data for surface projection using custom software written in MATLAB ( MathWorks ) . Stimulus Labeling and Preprocessing One observer manually tagged each second of the movies with WordNet labels describing the salient objects and actions in the scene . The number of labels per second varied between1and 14 , withan average of 4 . 2 . Categories were tagged if they appeared in at least half of the 1 s clip . When possible , speciﬁc labels ( e . g . , ‘‘priest’’ ) were used instead of generic labels ( e . g . , ‘‘person’’ ) . Label assignments were spot checked for accuracy by two addi - tional observers . For example labeled clips , see Figure S1 . Thelabelswerethenusedtobuildacategoryindicatormatrix , inwhicheach second of movie occupies a row and each category occupies a column . A value of 1 was assigned to each entry in which that category appeared in that second of movie and all other entries were set to zero . Next , the WordNet hierarchy ( Miller , 1995 ) was used to add all the superordinate categories entailed by each labeled category . For example , if a clip was labeled with ‘‘wolf , ’’ we would automatically add the categories ‘‘canine , ’’ ‘‘carnivore , ’’ ‘‘placental mammal , ’’ ‘‘mammal , ’’ ‘‘vertebrate , ’’ ‘‘chordate , ’’ ‘‘organism , ’’ and ‘‘whole . ’’AccordingtothisschemethepredictedBOLDresponsetoacategory is not just the weight on that category but the sum of weights for all entailed categories . The addition of superordinate categories should improve model predictions byallowingpoorlysampledcategoriestoshareinformationwiththeirWordNet neighbors . To test this hypothesis , we compared prediction performance of the model with superordinate categories to a model that used only the labeled categories . The number of signiﬁcantly predicted voxels is 10 % – 20 % higher with the superordinate category model than with the labeled category model . To ensure that the PCA results presented here are not an artifact of the added superordinate categories , we performed the same analysis using the labeled categories model . The results obtained using the labeled categories model were qualitatively similar to those obtained using the full model ( data not shown ) . The regression procedure also included one additional feature that described the total motion energy during each second of the movie . This regressor was added in order to explain away spurious correlation between responses in early visual cortex and some categories . Total motion energy was computed as the mean output of a set of 2 , 139 motion energy ﬁlters ( Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) , in which each ﬁlter consisted of a quadrature pair of space - time Gabor ﬁlters ( Adelson and Bergen , 1985 ; Watson and Ahumada , 1985 ) . The motion energy ﬁlters tile the image space witha variety of preferred spacial frequencies , orientations , and temporal frequencies . The total motion energy regressor explained much of the response variance in early visual cortex ( mainlyV1andV2 ) . Thishadthedesiredeffectofexplainingawaycorre - lations between responses in early visual cortex and categories that feature full - ﬁeld motion ( e . g . , ‘‘ﬁre’’ and ‘‘snow’’ ) . The total motion energy regressor was used to ﬁt the category model but was not included in the model predictions . Voxelwise Model Fitting and Testing The category model was ﬁt to each voxel individually . A set of linear temporal ﬁlters was used to model the slow hemodynamic response inherent in the BOLD signal ( Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . To capture the hemodynamic delay , we used concatenated stimulus vectors that had been delayed by two , three , andfoursamples ( 4 , 6 , and8s ) . Forexample , onestimulusvectorindicatesthe presence of ‘‘wolf’’ 4 s earlier , another the presence of ‘‘wolf’’ 6 s earlier , and athirdthepresenceof‘‘wolf’’8searlier . Takingthedotproductofthisdelayed stimulus with a set of linear weights is functionally equivalent to convolution of the original stimulus vector with a linear temporal kernel that has nonzero entries for 4 , 6 , and 8 s delays . For details about the regularized regression procedure , model testing , and correction for noise in the validation set , please see the Supplemental Exper - imental Procedures . All model ﬁtting and analysis was performed using custom software written in Python , which made heavy use of the NumPy ( Oliphant , 2006 ) and SciPy ( Jones et al . , 2001 ) libraries . Estimating Predicted Category Response Inthesemantic category modelusedhere , eachcategory entailsthepresence of its superordinate categories in the WordNet hierarchy . For example , ‘‘wolf’’ entails the presence of ‘‘canine , ’’ ‘‘carnivore , ’’ etc . Because these categories must be present in the stimulus if ‘‘wolf’’ is present , the model weight for ‘‘wolf’’ alone does not accurately reﬂect the model’s predicted response to a stimulus containing only a ‘‘wolf . ’’ Instead , the predicted response to ‘‘wolf’’ is the sum of the weightsfor ‘‘wolf , ’’‘‘canine , ’’‘‘carnivore , ’’ etc . Thus , to deter - minethepredictedresponseofavoxeltoagivencategory , weaddedtogether theweightsforthatcategoryandallcategoriesthatitentails . Thisprocedureis equivalent to simulating the response of a voxel to a stimulus labeled only with ‘‘wolf . ’’ We used this procedure to estimate the predicted category responses shown inFigure 2 , toassign colorsand positionsto thecategory nodes shown in Figures 4 and 5 , and to correct PC coefﬁcients before comparing them to hypothetical semantic dimensions as shown in Figure 6 . Principal Components Analysis For each subject , we used PCA to recover a low - dimensional semantic space from category model weights . We ﬁrst selected all voxels that the model pre - dictedsigniﬁcantly , usingaliberal signiﬁcancethreshold ( p < 0 . 05uncorrected for multiple comparisons ) . This yielded 8 , 269 voxels in subject S . N . , 8 , 626 voxels in A . H . , 11 , 697 voxels in A . V . , 11 , 187 voxels in T . C . , and 9 , 906 voxels in J . G . We then applied PCA to the category model weights of the selected voxels , yielding 1 , 705 PCs for each subject . ( In additional tests , we found that varying the voxel selection threshold does not strongly affect the PCA results . ) Partial scree plots showing the amount of variance accounted for byeachPCareshowninFigure 3 . TheﬁrstfourPCsaccountfor24 . 1 % ofvari - ance in subject S . N . , 25 . 9 % of variance in A . H . , 28 . 0 % of variance in A . V . , 25 . 8 % of variance in T . C . , and 25 . 6 % of variance in J . G . Second , we tested whether the recovered PCs were different from what we would expect by chance . For details of this procedure , please see the Supple - mental Experimental Procedures . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1221 In this paper , we present semantic analyses using PCA , but PCA is only one ofmanydimensionalityreductionmethods . Sparsemethodssuchasindepen - dent components analysis and nonnegative matrix factorization can also be used to recover the underlying semantic space . We found that these methods producedqualitativelysimilarresultstoPCAonthedatapresentedhere . Inthis paper , we present only PCA results because PCA is commonly used , easy to understand , and the results are highly interpretable . Stimulus Identiﬁcation Using Category Model and Models Based on Group PCs To quantify the relative amount of information that can be represented by the full category model and the models based on group PCs , we used the valida - tiondatatoperformanidentiﬁcationanalysis ( Kayetal . , 2008 ; Nishimotoetal . , 2011 ) . For the full category model , we calculated log likelihoods of the ob - served responses given predicted responses to the validation stimuli and the ﬁtted category model ( Nishimoto et al . , 2011 ) . Here we declare correct identiﬁcation if the highest likelihood for aggregated 18 s ( 9 TR ) chunks of responsescanbeassociatedwiththecorrecttimingsforthematchedstimulus chunks within ±1 volume ( TR ) . In order to minimize the potential confound due to nonsemantic stimulus features , we subtracted the prediction of the total motion energy regressor from responses before the analysis . To perform the identiﬁcation analysis for models based on the group PCs , we repeated the same procedures as above but using group PC models . We obtained these models by voxelwise regression using the cate - gory stimuli projected into the group PC space ( see voxelwise model ﬁtting and principal component analysis in Experimental Procedures ) . In order to assess variability in the performance measurements , we performed the iden - tiﬁcation analysis ten times , based on group PCs obtained using bootstrap voxel samples . To reduce noise , the identiﬁcation analyses used only the 2 , 000 most predictable voxels . Prediction performance was assessed using 10 % of the training data that we reserved from the regression for this purpose . Voxel selection was performed separately for each model and subject . Comparison between Group Semantic Space and Hypothesized Semantic Dimensions To compare the dimensions of the group semantic space to hypothesized semantic dimensions , we ﬁrst deﬁned each hypothesized dimension as a vector with a value for each of the 1 , 705 categories . We then computed the variance that each hypothesized dimension explains in each group PC as the squared correlation between the PC vector and hypothesized dimension vector . To ﬁnd conﬁdence intervals on the variance explained in each PC , we bootstrapped the group PCA by sampling with replacement 100 times from the pooled voxel population . We deﬁned nine semantic dimensions based on previous publications and ourownhypotheses . Thesedimensions included mobileversusimmobile , ani - macy , humans versus nonhumans , social versus nonsocial , civilization versus nature , animalversusnonanimal , biological versusnonbiological , placeversus nonplace , and object size . For the mobile versus immobile dimension , we as - signed positive weights to mobile categories such as animals , people , and vehicles , and zero weight to all other categories . For the animacy dimension based on Connolly et al . ( 2012 ) , we assigned high weightsto people and inter - mediate and low weights to other animals based on their phylogenetic distance from humans : more distant animals were assigned lower weights . For the human versus nonhuman dimension , we assigned positive weights to people and zero weights to all other categories . For the social versus non - social dimension , we assigned positive weightsto people and communication verbsandzeroweightstoallothercategories . Forthecivilizationversusnature dimension , we assigned positive weights to people , man - made objects ( e . g . , ‘‘buildings , ’’ ‘‘vehicles , ’’ and ‘‘tools’’ ) , and communication verbs and negative weights to nonhuman animals . For the animal versus nonanimal dimension , we assigned positive weights to nonhuman animals , people , and body parts and zero weight to all other categories . For the biological versus nonbiological dimension , we assigned positive weights to all organisms ( e . g . , ‘‘people , ’’ ‘‘nonhuman animals , ’’ and ‘‘plants’’ ) , plant organs ( e . g . , ‘‘ﬂower’’ and ‘‘leaf’’ ) , body parts , and body coverings ( e . g . , ‘‘hair’’ ) . For the place versus nonplace dimension , weassignedpositiveweightstooutdoorcategories ( e . g . , ‘‘geolog - ical formations , ’’ ‘‘geographical locations , ’’ ‘‘roads , ’’ ‘‘bridges , ’’ and ‘‘build - ings’’ ) andzeroweighttoallothercategories . Forthereal - worldsizedimension based on Konkle and Oliva ( 2012 ) , we assigned a high weight to large objects ( e . g . , ‘‘boat’’ ) , medium weight to human - scale objects ( e . g . , ‘‘person’’ ) , a small weight to small objects ( e . g . , ‘‘glasses’’ ) , and zero weight to objects that have no size ( e . g . , ‘‘talking’’ ) and those that can be many sizes ( e . g . , ‘‘animal’’ ) . Smoothness of Cortical Maps under Group Semantic Space Projecting voxel category model weights onto the group semantic space pro - duces semantic maps that appear spatially smooth ( see Figure 7 ) . However , these maps alone are insufﬁcient to determine whether the apparent smooth - ness of the cortical map is a speciﬁc property of the four - PC group semantic space . If the categorical model weights are themselves smoothly mapped onto the cortical sheet , then any four - dimensional projection of these weights might appear equally as smooth as the projection onto the group semantic space . To address this issue , we tested whether cortical maps under the four - PC group semantic space are smoother than expected by chance . First , we constructedavoxel adjacency matrixbasedon theﬁducial cortical surfaces . The cortical surface for each hemisphere in each subject was repre - sented as a triangular mesh with roughly 60 , 000 vertices and 120 , 000 edges . Two voxels were considered adjacent if there was an edge that connects a vertex inside one voxel to a vertex inside the other . Second , we computed the distance between each pair of voxels in the cortex as the length of the shortest path between the voxels in the adjacency graph . This distance metric doesnotdirectlytranslatetophysicaldistance , becausethevoxelsinourscan arenot isotropic . However , this affects all models that we testand thus willnot bias the results of this analysis . Third , we projected the voxel category weights onto the four - dimensional group semantic space , which reduced each voxel to a length 4 vector . We then computed the correlation between the projected weights for each pair of voxels in the cortex . Fourth , for each distance up to ten voxels , we computed the mean correlation between all pairs of voxels separated by that distance . This procedure produces a spatial autocorrelation function for each subject . These results are shown as blue lines in Figure 8 . To determine whether cortical map smoothness is speciﬁc to the group semanticspace , werepeatedthisanalysis1 , 000timesusingrandomsemantic spaces of the same dimension as the group semantic space . Random ortho - normal four - dimensional projections from the 1 , 705 - dimensional category space were constructed by applying singular value decomposition to randomly generated 4 3 1 , 705 matrices . One can think of these spaces as uniform random rotations of the group semantic space inside the 1 , 705 - dimensional category space . We considered the observed mean pairwise correlation under the group semantic space to be signiﬁcant if it exceeded all of the 1 , 000 random samples , corresponding to a p value of less than 0 . 001 . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures , three tables , Supplemental Experimental Procedures , and one movie and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 10 . 014 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work was supported by grants from the National Eye Institute ( EY019684 ) and from the Center for Science of Information ( CSoI ) , an NSF Science and Technology Center , under grant agreement CCF - 0939370 . A . G . H . was also supported by the William Orr Dingwall Neurolinguistics Fellowship . We thank Natalia Bilenko and Tolga C¸ukur for helping with fMRI data collection , Neil Thompson for assistance with the WordNet analysis , and Tom Grifﬁths and Sonia Bishop for discussions regarding the manuscript . A . G . H . , S . N . , and J . L . G . conceived and designed the experiment . A . G . H . , S . N . , and A . T . V . collected the fMRI data . A . T . V . and Tolga C¸ukur customized and optimized the fMRI pulse sequence . A . T . V . did brain ﬂattening and localizer analysis . A . G . H . tagged the movies . S . N . and A . G . H . analyzed the data . A . G . H . and J . L . G . wrote the paper . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1222 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Accepted : October 8 , 2012 Published : December 19 , 2012 REFERENCES Adelson , E . H . , and Bergen , J . R . ( 1985 ) . Spatiotemporal energy models for the perception of motion . J . Opt . Soc . Am . A 2 , 284 – 299 . Aguirre , G . K . , Zarahn , E . , and D’Esposito , M . ( 1998 ) . An area within human ventral cortex sensitive to ‘‘building’’ stimuli : evidence and implications . Neuron 21 , 373 – 383 . Avidan , G . , Hasson , U . , Malach , R . , and Behrmann , M . ( 2005 ) . Detailed explo - ration of face - related processing in congenital prosopagnosia : 2 . Functional neuroimaging ﬁndings . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 , 1150 – 1167 . Bartels , A . , andZeki , S . ( 2004 ) . Functionalbrainmappingduringfreeviewingof natural scenes . Hum . Brain Mapp . 21 , 75 – 85 . Buccino , G . , Binkofski , F . , Fink , G . R . , Fadiga , L . , Fogassi , L . , Gallese , V . , Seitz , R . J . , Zilles , K . , Rizzolatti , G . , and Freund , H . J . ( 2001 ) . Action observation acti - vates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner : an fMRI study . Eur . J . Neurosci . 13 , 400 – 404 . Bu¨chel , C . , Josephs , O . , Rees , G . , Turner , R . , Frith , C . D . , and Friston , K . J . ( 1998 ) . The functional anatomy of attention to visual motion . A functional MRI study . Brain 121 , 1281 – 1294 . Calvert , G . A . , and Campbell , R . ( 2003 ) . Reading speech from still and moving faces : the neural substrates of visible speech . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 15 , 57 – 70 . Chao , L . L . , Haxby , J . V . , and Martin , A . ( 1999 ) . Attribute - based neural substrates in temporal cortex for perceiving and knowing about objects . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 913 – 919 . Clark , V . P . , Keil , K . , Maisog , J . M . , Courtney , S . , Ungerleider , L . G . , and Haxby , J . V . ( 1996 ) . Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human visual cortex during face matching : a comparison with positron emission tomography . Neuroimage 4 , 1 – 15 . Cohen , L . , Dehaene , S . , Naccache , L . , Lehe´ricy , S . , Dehaene - Lambertz , G . , He´naff , M . A . , and Michel , F . ( 2000 ) . The visual word form area : spatial and temporal characterization of an initial stage of reading in normal subjects and posterior split - brain patients . Brain 123 , 291 – 307 . Connolly , A . C . , Guntupalli , J . S . , Gors , J . , Hanke , M . , Halchenko , Y . O . , Wu , Y . - C . , Abdi , H . , and Haxby , J . V . ( 2012 ) . The representation of biological classes in the human brain . J . Neurosci . 32 , 2608 – 2618 . Downar , J . , Crawley , A . P . , Mikulis , D . J . , and Davis , K . D . ( 2002 ) . A cortical network sensitive to stimulus salience in a neutral behavioral context across multiple sensory modalities . J . Neurophysiol . 87 , 615 – 620 . Downing , P . E . , Jiang , Y . , Shuman , M . , and Kanwisher , N . ( 2001 ) . A cortical area selective for visual processing of the human body . Science 293 , 2470 – 2473 . Downing , P . E . , Chan , A . W . Y . , Peelen , M . V . , Dodds , C . M . , and Kanwisher , N . ( 2006 ) . Domain speciﬁcity in visual cortex . Cereb . Cortex 16 , 1453 – 1461 . Edelman , S . , Grill - Spector , K . , Kushnir , T . , and Malach , R . ( 1998 ) . Toward direct visualization of the internal shape representation space by fMRI . Psychobiology 26 , 309 – 321 . Engel , S . A . , Glover , G . H . , andWandell , B . A . ( 1997 ) . Retinotopicorganizationin human visual cortex and the spatial precision of functional MRI . Cereb . Cortex 7 , 181 – 192 . Epstein , R . , and Kanwisher , N . ( 1998 ) . A cortical representation of the local visual environment . Nature 392 , 598 – 601 . Fox , C . J . , Iaria , G . , and Barton , J . J . S . ( 2009 ) . Deﬁning the face processing network : optimization of the functional localizer in fMRI . Hum . Brain Mapp . 30 , 1637 – 1651 . Halgren , E . , Dale , A . M . , Sereno , M . I . , Tootell , R . B . H . , Marinkovic , K . , and Rosen , B . R . ( 1999 ) . Location of human face - selective cortex with respect to retinotopic areas . Hum . Brain Mapp . 7 , 29 – 37 . Hansen , K . A . , Kay , K . N . , and Gallant , J . L . ( 2007 ) . Topographic organization in and near human visual area V4 . J . Neurosci . 27 , 11896 – 11911 . Hasson , U . , Nir , Y . , Levy , I . , Fuhrmann , G . , and Malach , R . ( 2004 ) . Intersubject synchronization of cortical activity during natural vision . Science 303 , 1634 – 1640 . Hasson , U . , Yang , E . , Vallines , I . , Heeger , D . J . , and Rubin , N . ( 2008 ) . A hierarchy of temporal receptive windows in human cortex . J . Neurosci . 28 , 2539 – 2550 . Hauk , O . , Johnsrude , I . , and Pulvermu¨ller , F . ( 2004 ) . Somatotopic representa - tion of action words in human motor and premotor cortex . Neuron 41 , 301 – 307 . Haxby , J . V . , Guntupalli , J . S . , Connolly , A . C . , Halchenko , Y . O . , Conroy , B . R . , Gobbini , M . I . , Hanke , M . , and Ramadge , P . J . ( 2011 ) . A common , high - dimen - sional model of the representational space in human ventral temporal cortex . Neuron 72 , 404 – 416 . Haxby , J . V . , Gobbini , M . I . , Furey , M . L . , Ishai , A . , Schouten , J . L . , andPietrini , P . ( 2001 ) . Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex . Science 293 , 2425 – 2430 . Hsu , A . , Borst , A . , and Theunissen , F . E . ( 2004 ) . Quantifying variability in neural responses and its application for the validation of model predictions . Network 15 , 91 – 109 . Iacoboni , M . , Lieberman , M . D . , Knowlton , B . J . , Molnar - Szakacs , I . , Moritz , M . , Throop , C . J . , and Fiske , A . P . ( 2004 ) . Watching social interactions produces dorsomedial prefrontal and medial parietal BOLD fMRI signal increases compared to a resting baseline . Neuroimage 21 , 1167 – 1173 . Jenkinson , M . , and Smith , S . ( 2001 ) . A global optimisation method for robust afﬁne registration of brain images . Med . Image Anal . 5 , 143 – 156 . Jones , E . , Oliphant , T . E . , and Peterson , P . ( 2001 ) . SciPy : Open Source Scientiﬁc Tools for Python . http : / / www . scipy . org . Just , M . A . , Cherkassky , V . L . , Aryal , S . , and Mitchell , T . M . ( 2010 ) . A neurose - mantic theory of concrete noun representation based on the underlying brain codes . PLoS ONE 5 , e8622 . Kanwisher , N . , McDermott , J . , and Chun , M . M . ( 1997 ) . The fusiform face area : a module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception . J . Neurosci . 17 , 4302 – 4311 . Kay , K . N . , Naselaris , T . , Prenger , R . J . , and Gallant , J . L . ( 2008 ) . Identifying natural images from human brain activity . Nature 452 , 352 – 355 . Konkle , T . , and Oliva , A . ( 2012 ) . A real - world size organization of object responses in occipitotemporal cortex . Neuron 74 , 1114 – 1124 . Kriegeskorte , N . , Mur , M . , Ruff , D . A . , Kiani , R . , Bodurka , J . , Esteky , H . , Tanaka , K . , and Bandettini , P . A . ( 2008 ) . Matching categorical object representations in inferior temporal cortex of man and monkey . Neuron 60 , 1126 – 1141 . McCarthy , G . , Puce , A . , Gore , J . C . , and Allison , T . ( 1997 ) . Face - speciﬁc pro - cessing in the human fusiform gyrus . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 9 , 605 – 610 . Miller , G . A . ( 1995 ) . WordNet : alexicaldatabaseforEnglish . Commun . ACM 38 , 39 – 41 . Mitchell , T . M . , Shinkareva , S . V . , Carlson , A . , Chang , K . - M . , Malave , V . L . , Mason , R . A . , andJust , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Predictinghumanbrainactivityassociated with the meanings of nouns . Science 320 , 1191 – 1195 . Nakamura , K . , Kawashima , R . , Sato , N . , Nakamura , A . , Sugiura , M . , Kato , T . , Hatano , K . , Ito , K . , Fukuda , H . , Schormann , T . , andZilles , K . ( 2000 ) . Functional delineation of the human occipito - temporal areas related to face and scene processing . A PET study . Brain 123 , 1903 – 1912 . Naselaris , T . , Prenger , R . J . , Kay , K . N . , Oliver , M . , and Gallant , J . L . ( 2009 ) . Bayesian reconstruction of natural images from human brain activity . Neuron 63 , 902 – 915 . Nishimoto , S . , Vu , A . T . , Naselaris , T . , Benjamini , Y . , Yu , B . , and Gallant , J . L . ( 2011 ) . Reconstructingvisualexperiencesfrombrainactivityevokedbynatural movies . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1641 – 1646 . O’Toole , A . J . , Jiang , F . , Abdi , H . , and Haxby , J . V . ( 2005 ) . Partially distributed representations of objects and faces in ventral temporal cortex . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 , 580 – 590 . Oliphant , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Guide to NumPy ( Provo , UT : Brigham Young University ) . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 1223 Op de Beeck , H . P . , Haushofer , J . , and Kanwisher , N . G . ( 2008 ) . Interpreting fMRI data : maps , modules and dimensions . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 123 – 135 . Op de Beeck , H . P . , Brants , M . , Baeck , A . , and Wagemans , J . ( 2010 ) . Distributed subordinate speciﬁcity for bodies , faces , and buildings in human ventral visual cortex . Neuroimage 49 , 3414 – 3425 . Peelen , M . V . , and Downing , P . E . ( 2005 ) . Selectivity for the human body in the fusiform gyrus . J . Neurophysiol . 93 , 603 – 608 . Peelen , M . V . , Wiggett , A . J . , andDowning , P . E . ( 2006 ) . PatternsoffMRIactivity dissociate overlapping functional brain areas that respond to biological motion . Neuron 49 , 815 – 822 . Pelphrey , K . A . , Morris , J . P . , Michelich , C . R . , Allison , T . , and McCarthy , G . ( 2005 ) . Functional anatomy of biological motion perception in posterior temporal cortex : an FMRI study of eye , mouth and hand movements . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 1866 – 1876 . Poldrack , R . A . , Wagner , A . D . , Prull , M . W . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . H . , and Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 1999 ) . Functionalspecializationforsemanticandphonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage 10 , 15 – 35 . Raichle , M . E . , MacLeod , A . M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Powers , W . J . , Gusnard , D . A . , and Shulman , G . L . ( 2001 ) . A default mode of brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 676 – 682 . Rajimehr , R . , Young , J . C . , andTootell , R . B . H . ( 2009 ) . Ananteriortemporalface patch in human cortex , predicted by macaque maps . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 1995 – 2000 . Schwarzlose , R . F . , Baker , C . I . , andKanwisher , N . G . ( 2005 ) . Separate faceand body selectivity on the fusiform gyrus . J . Neurosci . 25 , 11055 – 11059 . Smith , A . T . , Greenlee , M . W . , Singh , K . D . , Kraemer , F . M . , andHennig , J . ( 1998 ) . The processing of ﬁrst - and second - order motion in human visual cortex as - sessed by functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) . J . Neurosci . 18 , 3816 – 3830 . Spiridon , M . , Fischl , B . , and Kanwisher , N . ( 2006 ) . Location and spatial proﬁle of category - speciﬁc regions in human extrastriate cortex . Hum . Brain Mapp . 27 , 77 – 89 . Tsao , D . Y . , Moeller , S . , and Freiwald , W . A . ( 2008 ) . Comparing face patch systems in macaques and humans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 19514 – 19519 . Ungerleider , L . G . , and Mishkin , M . ( 1982 ) . Two cortical visual systems . In Analysis of Visual Behavior , D . J . Ingle , M . A . Goodale , and R . J . W . Masﬁeld , eds . ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , pp . 549 – 596 . Van Essen , D . C . , Drury , H . A . , Dickson , J . , Harwell , J . , Hanlon , D . , and Anderson , C . H . ( 2001 ) . An integrated software suite for surface - based anal - yses of cerebral cortex . J . Am . Med . Inform . Assoc . 8 , 443 – 459 . Watson , A . B . , and Ahumada , A . J . , Jr . ( 1985 ) . Model of human visual - motion sensing . J . Opt . Soc . Am . A 2 , 322 – 341 . Neuron Semantic Representation in the Human Brain 1224 Neuron 76 , 1210 – 1224 , December 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc .