The knowledge management puzzle : Human and social factors in knowledge management by J . C . Thomas W . A . Kellogg T . Erickson Knowledge management is often seen as a problem of capturing , organizing , and retrieving information , evoking notions of data mining , text clustering , databases , and documents . We believe that this view is too simple . Knowledge is inextricably bound up with human cognition , and the management of knowledge occurs within an intricately structured social context . We argue that it is essential for those designing knowledge management systems to consider the human and social factors at play in the production and use of knowledge . We review work—ranging from basic research to applied techniques—that emphasizes cognitive and social factors in knowledge management . We then describe two approaches to designing socially informed knowledge management systems , social computing and knowledge socialization . K nowledge management ( KM ) —also known un - der rubrics such as organizational learning , or - ganizational memory , and expertise management— has received increasing attention over the last decade . Indeed , it is fair to say that knowledge man - agement is well on the way to becoming a distinct ﬁeld , with its own theories , jargon , practices , tools , skills , and other accoutrements of an independent discipline . This paper is motivated by our concern that the codiﬁcation of knowledge management is proceeding a little too rapidly , and that we may end up with a conception of knowledge management that is too neat and too simple to survive in the wilds of the workplace . The dominant conception of knowledge manage - ment—particularly that which has spread beyond the circle of researchers and practitioners into the mar - ketplace—is overly tidy . Knowledge management is seen primarily as a problem of capturing , organiz - ing , and retrieving information , evoking notions of databases , documents , query languages , and data mining . Knowledge is seen as passive , analytic , and atomistic : it is composed of facts that can be stored , retrieved , and disseminated , with little concern for the context in which the facts were originally em - bedded , and little concern for the new and often quite different contexts in which they will be used . In this view , as one widespread advertisement recently claimed , knowledge management is nothing more than getting the right information to the right peo - ple at the right time . This is a nice picture , but one with which we are not comfortable . Whereas there is no denying the im - portance of factual knowledge and the usefulness of information technologies , we believe that there are many other issues that are of critical import . Our goal , therefore , is to bring forward a set of results— ranging from basic research ﬁndings to practical tech - niques—that we believe to be very relevant to knowl - edge management , even as they are at risk of being left out of the KM picture . Overall , our strategy in this paper is to back away from a coherent picture of knowledge management . We suggest that it is more valuable to see knowledge management as a puzzle , especially if we focus on the puzzle pieces : our basic approach will be to add a number of new (cid:1) Copyright 2001 by International Business Machines Corpora - tion . Copying in printed form for private use is permitted with - outpaymentofroyaltyprovidedthat ( 1 ) eachreproductionisdone without alteration and ( 2 ) the Journal reference and IBM copy - right notice are included on the ﬁrst page . The title and abstract , but no other portions , of this paper may be copied or distributed royalty free without further permission by computer - based and other information - service systems . Permission to republish any other portion of this paper must be obtained from the Editor . IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 0018 - 8670 / 01 / $ 5 . 00 © 2001 IBM THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 863 pieces to the puzzle , and to demonstrate that some very different pictures of KM can be assembled from the richer , if less ordered , set . In the next section , “Missing pieces : Cognitive and social research and techniques , ” we begin by survey - ing the conceptual landscape that informs our work in knowledge management . This involves looking closely at some of the human and social factors that are involved in the creation and communication of knowledge . We discuss both research areas and ap - plied techniques that , we believe , have received in - sufﬁcient attention in knowledge management . We do not attempt to provide a single , uniﬁed frame - work for knowledge management , an endeavor that we see as premature ; rather , our goal is to broaden the reader’s view of what is important and relevant for KM . In the following section , “New pictures : So - cially informed knowledge management systems , ” in lieu of offering a uniﬁed KM framework , we describe two distinct projects that , each in its own way , draw upon some of the previously described research and techniques to develop socially grounded approaches to knowledge management . Missing pieces : Cognitive and social research and techniques One of the reasons we are dissatisﬁed with the dom - inant picture of knowledge management is that it pays little attention to human and social factors . In our view , knowledge is bound up with human cog - nition , and it is created , used , and disseminated in ways that are inextricably entwined with the social milieu . Therefore , we argue that knowledge man - agement systems must take both human and social factors into account . In this section we describe a number of the research ﬁndings and applied tech - niques that motivate our work . We believe that these pieces are vital parts of any picture of knowledge management . At the same time , we acknowledge that there are undoubtedly other missing pieces to the KM puzzle , and that many distinct , but still valid , pic - tures of KM are possible . The missing pieces we discuss are quite diverse . They are drawn from a variety of areas ranging from the cognitive and social sciences , to domain - focused dis - ciplines such as social studies of science and com - puter - supported cooperative work . These pieces re - veal the complexity and some of the subtleties underlying the mantra of “the right information to the right people at the right time . ” To show this more clearly and to provide a bit of structure in what fol - lows , we discuss our pieces in terms of knowledge ( “the right information” ) , presentation and commu - nication of that knowledge ( “ . . . to . . . at the right time” ) , and social context ( “the right people” ) . Fol - lowing that , we turn to applied techniques that are relevant to these areas . Knowledge and intelligence . Until fairly recently , the prevailing view of science held that the world was , in principle , knowable and predictable ; that the uni - verse , including human beings , consisted of essen - tially complex but analytically decomposable ma - chines . 1 , 2 A common metaphor for knowledge , still quite common in Western society , is that it consists of separate little “beads” or factoids , 3 and that these knowledge “atoms” can be collected , stored , and passed along . Views like this are what underlie the notion that an important part of knowledge man - agement is getting access to the “right knowledge . ” Although , obviously , it is important to ﬁnd knowl - edge that is relevant to whatever problem is at hand , there is quite a lot of research that paints a consid - erably more complex picture of knowledge . To begin with , let us take a look at some ﬁndings from research in the area of human intelligence . Out - growths from the endeavor to test “intelligence” over the last century have led to an understanding that there are different types of intelligence that work pri - marily on different forms of knowledge . Although there are variants on this theme , the most popular recent work , as well as one having a sound empirical base , is probably that of Sternberg . 4 , 5 Perhaps the most ambitious and elegant theoretical framework was developed by Guilford , 6 who built a three - di - mensional model of mental processes . In this work , there were differently sized Products of mental op - erations : Units , Classes , Relations , Systems , Trans - formations , and Implications . There were different Operations ( processes ) that could be performed : Cognition , Memory , Divergent Thinking , Conver - gent Thinking , and Evaluation . Finally , there were different types of Content : Figural , Symbolic , Seman - tic , and Behavioral . While this system has largely fallen out of favor as a basis for testing intelligence , it is an interesting framework for KM developers to consider . All too often knowledge management sys - tems are designed with an implicit , unquestioned , and unacknowledged limitation on the varieties of knowledge that are supported . The ﬁeld of intelligence testing is relevant to knowl - edge management in yet another way . Early devel - opers of intelligence testing failed to recognize the THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 864 extent to which their tests were measuring , not in - nate capability , but essentially the degree to which someone had acquired socially sanctioned knowl - edge . Test developers struggled to develop “culture - free” IQ ( intelligence quotient ) tests and by and large failed in the attempt , realizing at last that what con - stitutes intelligence is primarily determined by cul - ture . Perhaps the most telling example in this regard comes not from the ﬁeld of intelligence testing per se , but from the work of Tom Evans , 7 an AI ( arti - ﬁcial intelligence ) student of Marvin Minksy , who built a program to solve ﬁgure analogies of the form “A is to B as C is to [ D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , or D5 ] . ” Evans’s program worked—too well . It could parse the ﬁg - ures , construct rule components , and ﬁnd a com - posed rule that made every answer correct ! Fully half the work of the dissertation was essentially to get his program to have the same ordering of “elegance” of rules that was socially agreed upon by the test mak - ers . As one example , the authors of the tests thought it more “elegant” to rotate a ﬁgure in the plane of the paper as opposed to out into three - dimensional space . In other words , even knowledge that could easily be thought of as factual or mathematical is in fact strongly shaped by social and cultural assump - tions . If even factual knowledge is not quite as objective as we might expect , it is not surprising to ﬁnd that other forms of knowledge are even more subjective . For example , one important early debate in psychol - ogy centered on introspectionism versus empiricism . This debate arose in part due to inconsistencies in subjects’ self - reports of experiences of perception and consciousness . At the time , the scientiﬁc com - munity reacted by declaring that only objectively ob - servable phenomena should be used in building a reliable understanding of mental processes ; today , in the wake of the failure of the behaviorist project , there is greater openness toward subjective forms of knowledge . Although it is clear that some kind of “self - knowledge” is essential for people to behave intelligently ( e . g . , without knowledge of the limits and capacities of our bodies we might continually be running into things ) , individuals differ on how such knowledge is best viewed . In addition , research has shown that there are a num - ber of important cases in which a person’s self - knowl - edge is inaccurate . In the “fundamental attribution fallacy” literature , studies show that the behavior of an individual is highly inﬂuenced by context , and yet people give explanations for their behavior based on their own internal values . For example , bystander studies consistently show that people are much more likely to help a person in distress if they are alone rather than if they are with a large group , and yet , when asked whether they would respond differently depending on how many others are present , people claim that it would make no difference . 8 This has important implications for modern knowledge man - agement practices . Not only are people very much inﬂuenced by the social context , they may believe that they are not so inﬂuenced , when they in fact are . Although some have pointed out that the produc - tivity of both teams 9 and large organizations 10 , 11 is pervasively inﬂuenced by social context , we believe the impact is often underestimated , not only by sub - jects in social psychology experiments but also in ev - eryday business decisions about knowledge manage - ment . Communication and learning . If knowledge is not so simple as our ways of talking about it assume , nei - ther is the process of communicating it to others . As Brown and Duguid 12 , 13 note : The idea of a document as a carrier is an example of what Michael Reddy calls a “conduit” meta - phor . People regularly describe most communi - cation technologies in conduit terms , talking of in - formation as “in” books , ﬁles , or databases as if it could just as easily be “out” of them . We ask or are asked to put ideas “down on paper , ” to “send them along , ” and so forth . However , there is quite a lot of research that sug - gests that it is not just a matter of getting the right knowledge to people—people need to engage with it and learn it . One of us has argued that a more re - alistic and useful model of communication is a “design - interpretation” model . In this model , the speaker uses knowledge about the context and the listener to design a communication that , when pre - sented to and interpreted by the listener , will have some desired effect . 14 In the “design - interpretation” model , a knowledge worker would be viewed in an active , constructionist role , consistent with a wide variety of empirical results . There is quite a lot of research that is relevant to this view . Theorists as disparate as Dewey , 15 Vy - gotsky , 16 and Piaget and Inhelder 17 have consistently shown that the mere presentation of information does not necessarily result in learning . People have to become actively involved for behavior to change , for insight to occur , for problems to be solved . Vy - gotsky stressed that this learning and insight had a IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 865 signiﬁcant social component , even if the resulting knowledge was of a type we might classify as math - ematical or scientiﬁc . Yet , all too often , large orga - nizations come to believe that simply making more information available more widely will “solve” knowl - edge management problems . By way of contrast , within IBM much of the management training is done via scenario - based training . In this technique , the in - dividual is asked to make choices in realistically por - trayed situations such as ones that managers face . These scenarios are based on an analysis of real sit - uations , and assume that when the individual makes a “mistake” in the simulator or is “surprised” by a result , it motivates the person to read and under - stand the rationale . 18 In the use of such simulators , even if the individual learner is sitting alone in front of a computer console , learning is very much inﬂu - enced by social context . It is the social context of the scenario that provides much of the motivation and interest as well as guidance on what constitutes a “right answer . ” In addition to arranging interactions so that people actively engage with knowledge , there are other con - siderations from earlier work that are applicable to knowledge management systems . We know , for ex - ample , that people are better able to both distinguish and remember knowledge that is encoded on mul - tiple dimensions . 19 However , in contrast to the va - riety of sensory cues that naturally occur in real - world “paper” systems , many current generation systems provide little in the way of differentiating cues . Given the processing power and memory of today’s com - puters , it would be quite feasible instead to provide sensory “signatures” that are unique to various items . “Folders , ” for instance , could easily be portrayed not only in different colors , but also by different sizes and textures . Indeed , small musical animations could even hint at the structure or content of a folder or its date of last access . Of course , a challenge in con - vincing organizations to adopt sensory - rich ap - proaches to laying out a knowledge space is that per - formance improvements may only be observable after extended usage . A large number of indicators point toward the re - ality of an information - processing world moving toward greater ﬁdelity and multimodality . Over the last four decades , user interfaces have evolved from lights and toggle switches to keyboards , mice , icons , and speech I / O . In the entertainment industry , we now see computer - generated full - length movies . Video games strive toward greater responsiveness , more modes of experience , and more detailed im - ages . Research laboratories continue to push the boundaries of multimodal I / O , including virtual re - ality and augmented reality , 20 , 21 auditory icons , 22 ki - netic typography , 23 and so on . Yet , in a business con - text , knowledge management writings and practice often seem to focus on the content of systems while ignoring the method of presentation . Beyond con - siderations of cost , there sometimes seems to be al - most a puritanical business - culture ethic toward avoiding presentations that stimulate the senses and utilize the complete human brain . Social context . Although it is difﬁcult to argue that knowledge management should not be concerned with getting information to the “right people , ” our common deﬁnition of KM provides little insight into which people are the right people . Here we turn to a body of work—drawn primarily from the social sci - ences and domain - oriented disciplines like Comput - er - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) —that pro - vides some interesting views on the social contexts ( both with and without technology ) within which knowledge work occurs , and the social factors that seem to be important in supporting knowledge work . In the ﬁeld of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , researchers have often made careful exam - inations of how people within organizations conduct their work . One point that these studies make is that knowledge work is not a solitary occupation , nor is it sufﬁcient to say that knowledge work involves many people . Rather , in case after case , it becomes clear that knowledge work involves communication among loosely structured networks and communities of peo - ple , and that understanding it involves identifying the social practices and relationships that are oper - ative in a particular context . One of the best - known concepts to emerge from such studies is Lave and Wenger’s notion of a community of practice . A com - munity of practice is deﬁned by common tasks , meth - ods , goals , or approaches among a group of people . Lave and Wenger show how new workers come to It is becoming clear that knowledge work is not a solitary occupation , but it involves communication among loosely structured networks and communities of people . THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 866 master a body of knowledge through a sort of ap - prenticeship or “legitimate peripheral participation” in the activities of a group of experienced workers . 24 Wenger 25 provides a detailed study of an insurance claims processing ofﬁce , and shows the vital roles that social relationships and processes play in enabling people to meet productivity targets while adhering to corporate policies . Orr’s 26 study of photocopier technicians reveals that technical knowledge is so - cially distributed across a network of technicians , and that it is tapped into and disseminated through oral processes such as storytelling . Similarly , in reviewing ten years of ﬁeld and labo - ratory studies of collocated and remote work , Ol - son and Olson 27 point to a variety of social factors that affect the social context of knowledge manage - ment , and how these interact with technologies in - tended to support remote collaboration . In an in - teresting discussion of the role of common ground 28 among collaborators , for example , the Olsons de - scribe how greater shared background and aware - ness of a coworker’s activities and mental state con - tribute to establishing and maintaining common ground . The Olsons also discuss the role of moti - vation in successful knowledge sharing : Motivation has been established as one of the ma - jor sources of failure in adoption of groupware in general . In Orlikowski’s classic study of the fail - ure to adopt Lotus Notes * * in a consultancy , the failure was attributed to the fact that individuals were compensated according to their competitive talents . 29 There was no incentive to share one’s best ideas if they were then going to be seen as common , no longer unique . In other organizations , where incentives are aligned with how much oth - ers use the knowledge you make available to them , Notes and other jointly authored groupware sys - tems succeed . 27 Churchill and Bly’s 30 study of the use of a MUD ( a kind of text - based conversation environment ) among a group of scientists at Argonne National Labora - tory points to other social factors supporting knowl - edge sharing and collaboration : As Huxor 31 points out , however , “chance” encoun - ters do not occur entirely by chance . Social ties and physical layout can have an effect on who con - tacts whom and how often . Hillier 32 emphasizes the effect of work environment design ( whether virtual or physical ) on the establishment and main - tenance of “weak ties . ” These are contacts that one normally would not make through one’s cen - tral work practices . Arguably these “weak ties” have a strong role to play within an organization’s functioning . In this vein , the MUD provides a set of virtual places wherein one can “bump into” oth - ers or people can be actively sought . Our inter - viewees stressed the importance of such planned and unplanned encounters . Thus , we see that talking about knowledge manage - ment as though it involves delivery of information to a person , or to a set of people , is missing quite a lot . Looking at the individual is , by and large , look - ing at the wrong level of granularity ; instead , we need to shift our focus to the social context . That is , most of the phenomena that have been identiﬁed as im - portant—relationships , awareness , common ground , incentives , and motivation—are network or social phenomena . In the same way , the other “missing pieces” we discussed earlier are also characterized by a shift in granularity : rather than knowledge as isolated , context - free facts that could be “in” doc - uments or databases , and straightforwardly trans - ferred into people’s heads , we see that knowledge is bound up with human intelligence , shaped by so - cial assumptions , and requires active engagement on the part of recipients if it is to be taken up . All of these ﬁndings , although just a small sampling of what is contained in the HCI ( human - computer interface ) and CSCW literatures , demonstrate the pervasiveness of human and social factors in the realm of knowl - edge management . Practical techniques for creating and communicat - ing knowledge . As practitioners of knowledge man - agement we have a repertoire of techniques that are aligned with the research we have discussed thus far . And , as designers of systems for managing knowl - edge , we have conducted a number of explorations on how to provide technological support for some of these techniques . Here we describe the most gen - erally useful techniques , and we examine the ways information technology ( IT ) could support them . To begin with , we turn to an area that , in our view , has received remarkably little attention : the creation of new knowledge . The lack of attention may be be - cause Western culture has a long tradition of treat - ing creativity as tantamount to magic . Nevertheless , there is now a large body of scientiﬁc literature deal - ing with such issues as creativity , problem solving , and design ( see Shneiderman 33 for a nice review ) . While the state of the science and art is not at the point where we can duplicate the accomplishments of a Shakespeare or Einstein on demand , we can craft IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 867 technological and methodological support to in - crease the creation of new knowledge , both by in - dividuals and by groups . Tools can be designed to help with various processes in the creation of new knowledge . We examine several examples of creative processes that could be feasibly supported by tech - nology including : dialog , 34 the use of metaphors , 35 the use of strategies , 36 and the use of stories . 37 Bohm Dialogue . In a Bohm Dialogue , 38 a group of people work together to build new knowledge . This process differs from a typical business meeting in sev - eral ways . First , continued inquiry is balanced with striving for an answer . We know from studies of hu - man problem solving that people’s natural tendency ( at least in American culture ) is to jump on the ﬁrst formulation of a problem and try to solve it , rather than exploring alternative formulations . Second , the dialog is noncompetitive . People ask questions and make observations but are asked to “suspend” their thoughts ; that is , not to own or push for their spe - ciﬁc idea to be adopted by the group as the correct one . Third , the actual conversation is not bound by an analytic agenda that deals with pieces of a prob - lem one by one . Rather , a “container” binds the con - versation ; that is , there is some focus to the conver - sation—it does not wander aimlessly over any topic— but everything said is related to the overall system that the group is attempting to understand . Fourth , the rhythm of the Bohm Dialogue is different from the typical meeting , in which everyone begins men - tally critiquing the speaker and rehearsing a counter - argument before the speaker is even ﬁnished speak - ing . Instead , one person speaks and others listen . After listening , everyone reﬂects on what was just said before someone else speaks . Bohm , a physicist , likened this “cooler” pace to superconductivity . Whether we accept such a metaphor or not , some remarkable breakthroughs have come from using the Bohm Dialogue . 38 Tools have been developed to support Bohm Dia - logue , in face - to - face settings as well as in remote collaborations . Fischer and his colleagues at the Uni - versity of Colorado have built a collaboration space that includes both a horizontal , computerized action space—where collaborators literally design and build “in the center”—and a large - screen , large - scale re - ﬂection space 39 where material designed to help par - ticipants reﬂect on their activity is displayed . It is clear that for Bohm Dialogue to work as a process , how - ever , both formal organizational mechanisms and in - formal cultural aspects of a situation must lend them - selves to the process . If people are operating in a highly competitive culture in which there are higher intrinsic and extrinsic rewards for having their own idea adopted rather than for , as a group , reaching a breakthrough , dialog will just be seen as a slow , inefﬁcient way to run a meeting . Similarly , in order to be effective , the participants will probably need to have at least some minimal familiarity with sys - tems thinking ; otherwise , there will be little moti - vation to attempt to understand the whole rather than attack the parts piecemeal . Systematic use of metaphor . Another creative process that can be supported with information technology is the systematic use of metaphor , as suggested by Gordon , 35 Mattimore , 40 and others . Earlier re - search 41 described a technique for improving per - formance in problem solving and design tasks . In one experiment , a group of subjects spent an hour cre - ating a design for converting an abandoned church into a restaurant . Another group spent 20 minutes designing , 20 minutes looking at a word list designed to evoke concepts from a wide range of domains , and another 20 minutes designing . The latter group pro - duced designs that fulﬁlled signiﬁcantly more of the functions of a restaurant . In another experiment , sub - jects given an arbitrary word list exhibited more in - sightful solutions to problems , despite constant time on task . These results suggest that word lists specif - ically crafted to evoke different metaphors in the mind of a problem solver can aid open - ended de - sign and problem - solving tasks , and that such met - aphor techniques could be extended and improved with today’s interactive software . Preliminary ex - plorations of what such tools might be like can be found in the demonstration prototypes available at www . research . ibm . com / knowsoc / . How such a tool might work is illustrated in the fol - lowing ﬁctitious scenario . Joe is stuck . He has what he thinks is a great idea for making the next version of the ThinkPad * eas - ier to use . But he is getting nowhere with the proj - ect manager who refuses to consider hardware changes at this late date . He logs on to the au - tomated metaphor tool and engages in a struc - tured interaction that encourages him to break down the elements of his problem , rearrange them , make his implicit assumptions explicit , and play “what - if” games with some of these assumptions . He gets a “funny” feeling when he turns the def - initions of hardware and software upside down , but still has no solution . However , later that day , as he is driving home , he realizes that what he THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 868 wanted to include in modiﬁed hardware could also be provided as software . Fulﬁllment would not have to be done through the PC division , per se , but could be downloaded via the company Web site or sent as a CD in response to a call to an 800 number . As a result , PC sales increase dramatically once word gets out that IBM has a very easy - to - use system . Strategy mapping . Recent work at IBM Research has focused on developing a comprehensive compen - dium of strategies for enhancing creativity and knowledge creation . Although there have always been books about strategies for problem solving in particular domains ( e . g . , war , diplomacy , chess , bus - iness ) , we believe that people within a particular com - munity of practice often develop a common set of strategies that are then taken more or less for granted within that community . There may be strategies , however , from a totally different domain that might be successfully applied , if only the practitioners knew about the existence of these strategies . Gordon 36 has collected strategies from a large number of dispar - ate domains and developed an abstract planning lan - guage in which all the strategies can be described . Since it is generative , the abstract planning language might be used to articulate potentially novel strat - egies as well as to help practitioners in one domain ﬁnd unusual strategies from some other domain . For example , in traditional “Western” medicine , germs have been considered the “enemy” and strat - egies of care for someone who has an infection typ - ically have involved attacking and killing these en - emies . However , other strategies might include boosting and supporting the body’s own immune sys - tem , altering the characteristics of the germs so that they become harmless , “leading them out” of the body by providing a more hospitable environment elsewhere , altering the germs so they attack each other , coating the germs so they can no longer affect the body , etc . Our conjecture is that providing al - ternative strategies from other domains might en - able doctors to engage in breakthrough thinking . In fact , various drug companies are considering the use of alternative strategies to facilitate innovative think - ing . Stories and storytelling . Stories and storytelling pro - vide another possible way to foster creativity in in - dividuals and groups , and they also provide a valuable way of presenting and communicating knowledge . In some cases , particular stories can il - lustrate a speciﬁc point . One fairly common yet dif - ﬁcult point to make in teaching the concepts of sys - tems thinking is the kind of mutual impact that people have on each other . For example , a market - ing department may feel that the engineering depart - ment is unresponsive and takes too long to make changes . To counter this , the marketing department may develop a whole suite of requirements and ask for them earlier than is actually necessary , hoping to “speed up” development so that enough features will be provided for a timely , competitive product . Of course , such behavior makes the engineering de - partment feel less like being responsive to market - ing . Breaking out of such “vicious circles” is difﬁ - cult . Direct communication can often backﬁre under these circumstances , because it can trigger defensive - ness and defensive countermoves . An alternative sug - gested here is to provide a story to both groups about another situation in which the same principles ap - ply . Snowden 42 , 43 reports several business cases in which the use of various types of stories has helped to produce breakthroughs . Finding appropriate stories for the situation at hand , however , is nontrivial . In our laboratory , we are de - veloping tools to help . In one such tool , Gordon 44 describes a “script - based browser” that allows a user to ﬁnd stories based on the type of activity they con - tain . This approach has been applied to a very large story collection called the “American Heritage Proj - ect”—stories commissioned in the 1930s by the Works Progress Administration , many of which are available on line . As work progresses on the abstract planning strategy language described previously , the browser can be used to ﬁnd stories about analogous activities as well . In some cases there are other characteristics of a story that may be important in selection . Our lab - oratory has begun developing a Story Markup Lan - guage for describing the various aspects of a story . We plan to develop software for either adding meta - data to stories automatically or helping a user do it in a straightforward fashion . Such meta - data might be used to search for speciﬁc kinds of stories or could be used as the basis for visualizations of the set of stories that users can quickly scan to ﬁnd likely can - didates . The Story Markup Language not only deals with the internal content of the story but also with the social context . Storytelling is fundamentally social : in ev - eryday events , people tell stories to speciﬁc other people ( who are usually physically present ) in par - ticular social contexts ( at dinner , in a meeting , etc . ) . IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 869 Social factors inﬂuence who tells what stories to whom and when . In designing effective ways to col - lect and provide access to stories , we think it is im - portant to attend to some of the basic social dynam - ics that affect everyday storytelling , such as reasons for telling stories , the teller’s knowledge of the au - dience , and the role the audience takes in the tell - ing . As one example of how the social context of story - telling can inﬂuence its teaching effectiveness , we must recall that , in a business context , the audience of a story does not simply “take in” the story . In the case of ﬁctional stories ( e . g . , stories told in an en - tertainment context ) , readers and listeners will “buy” the story as long as it is internally consistent . But in the context of using stories to foster change in the real world , the audience must not only see the story as internally consistent , but also as consistent with external reality . An elaboration of such social fac - tors in storytelling and their implications can be found in Lawrence and Thomas . 45 Expressive communication . Communication is cen - tral to any complex , modern organization . We ﬁnd it useful to draw a distinction between what we might call instrumental versus expressive communication . Instrumental communication is that which is neces - sary for accomplishing tasks related to the immedi - ate organizational goals . It is typically supported by speciﬁc forms and media , for example , job offers , req - uisitions , ratings , invoices , RFPs ( requests for propos - als ) , contracts , formal award certiﬁcates , and so on . Such communications are typically created in well - deﬁned formats ( e . g . , forms ) , delivered in speciﬁc contexts , and need to include speciﬁc information . In contrast , expressive communication is communi - cation in which individuals or teams are primarily motivated by personal or social aims such as sharing experiences , indicating agreement , being humorous , etc . Expressive communication often occurs in in - formal settings including hallway conversations , informal meetings , stories , notes scrawled on con - gratulatory cards or napkins , and e - mail about non - business issues . Organizations clearly rely on instrumental commu - nications , but the role of expressive communications is less clearly understood , with perceived value vary - ing from irrelevant , to disruptive , to vital to the accomplishment of work . Recently some have argued that such communications are important in support - ing innovative thinking 46 and the building of social capital 11 within organizations . In any case , it is clear that the effective use of expressive communication within organizations requires certain conditions , e . g . , appropriate social and cultural norms . Technology can enhance the use of expressive communication . One idea is to simply modify existing forms to in - clude a ﬁeld for comments and contact information for an ombudsman , a person responsible for solving problems associated with a mismatch between the assumptions of the built systems and the workday realities . Providing a place for such commentary and the ensuing conversation could be vital for support - ing the instrumentality of the system . An instructive real - world example is provided by Harris and Henderson . 47 In a shipping ﬁrm , paper forms were being replaced with a more “efﬁcient” computer system . In one case , a shipment was to be delivered to a boat . In the paper version , in the ﬁeld marked “Ship to Address , ” a worker wrote “Call Mr . X at number Y to see where the ship will be at time of delivery . ” Entering the same data in the computer version yielded an error message . The worker would then enter a bogus , but syntactically correct address in the computer form . As a result of many such er - rors , the workers ended up using the computerized system and the old paper system . A two - fold approach can be taken for the preven - tion of such absurdities . First , as a general princi - ple , knowledge systems should provide for expres - sive communication . This will result in fewer errors and more effective operations ; it will also enhance social capital . Second , systems should be designed with an understanding of how work is actually done , and not how IT developers think the work is done . Processes for developing such understanding can be found , for example , in Beyer and Holtzblatt . 48 Expressive communication as a means of building trust . In Arie De Geus’s 49 classic study on the longevity of large organizations , he found that mutual trust was a strong characteristic of long - lived organiza - Expressive communication is communication in which individuals or teams are primarily motivated by personal or social aims such as sharing experiences , indicating agreement , or being humorous . THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 870 tions . In Robert Putnam’s 50 study of various regions and local governments in postwar Italy , he also found that mutual trust , facilitated by various informal groups , clubs , and associations , was an excellent pre - dictor of future economic growth . Instrumental com - munication may inform about a person’s competence and reassure us that the person follows the organi - zational rules . Character , however , is revealed by choices under pressure . 51 , 52 In a well - structured or - ganization , instrumental communication minimizes choice ; hence , it is difﬁcult to learn about someone from purely instrumental communication . On the other hand , if a person tells a story about him or her - self , has a social conversation , or participates in cre - ative design sessions , he or she will inevitably reveal something personal . Over time , we learn something about another person and may come to trust them . In fact , there is some evidence that people prefer people who use more expressive means of commu - nication , even in organizational settings . 53 This may be one reason why effective leaders turn to story . 54 , 55 The importance of mutual trust in coworkers may not be evident if people in an organization are all following a procedure that works . However , in times of change or breakdown , mutual trust will allow col - laborative effort to proceed toward organizational ( as opposed to individualistic , locally optimized ) goals . Looked at another way , what expressive com - munications allow people to do is build up a more complete and complex model of others so that there will be a basis for behavioral prediction in novel sit - uations requiring conjoint but not prechoreographed action . Of course , while stories and other forms of expres - sive communication have the capability of building mutual trust , they also have the capability of reduc - ing mutual trust . As mentioned above , stories in an entertainment context create their own frame . But stories told in the context of an organization will not simply be “accepted” ; they will be viewed against the backdrop of the current context and if the story told is too discrepant from actual behavior , one result will be less trust , not more . 37 Expressive communication is not a sufﬁcient condi - tion to build mutual trust ; however , it may be nec - essary . Hence , the design of knowledge management systems would do well to support expressive com - munications as well as instrumental ones if they are to help organizations thrive in times of change and adversity . Some recent designs seem to be moving in this direction . 37 , 56 Conversation . We conclude our review of practical techniques for supporting a socially informed ap - proach to knowledge management by turning to a technique that is so common as to go unremarked : conversation . We view conversation as essential . We use it as a medium for decision - making . It is through conver - sation that we create , develop , validate , and share knowledge . When systems—automated or bureau - cratic—freeze , or simply prove too rigid , we pick up the phone to ﬁgure out appropriate “workarounds . ” And with all our advances in information retrieval , the preferred method for obtaining information is still to ask a colleague . Why is this ? We suggest that conversation has two characteristics that are central to its power and ubiq - uity . One vital characteristic of talk is that it is a deeply interactive intellectual process ( see Clark 28 for a detailed exposition ) . As we talk we refer to a common ground of already established understand - ings , shared experiences , and past history . As the con - versation proceeds , we are continuously attempting to interpret what is said , verify that we have been understood , and offer new contributions . Sometimes misunderstandings occur , and so we attempt to ﬁx them by rephrasing our words , or “debugging” the previous conversation to reveal that what we thought were shared understandings were not , in fact , shared . What all this amounts to is that conversation is a su - perb method for eliciting , unpacking , articulating , applying , and recontextualizing knowledge . Conversation is more than simply an intellectual en - deavor : it is a fundamentally social process . 57 – 59 Con - versation is social in two ways . First , people speak to an audience . Speakers notice how their audience is reacting and steer their remarks appropriately : nods and eye contact convey one message ; questions and furrowed brows another ; yawns and ﬁdgeting still another . Second , conversation is social in that peo - ple portray themselves through conversation . They advance their personal agendas , project their per - sonal style , take credit , share blame , and accomplish other social ends through their talk , often with a great deal of subtlety . The social nature of talk is not an undesirable side effect , but rather the heart of it : per - sonal motivations fuel conversation and provide the energy for the considerable intellectual work it takes , whether the conversation in question is banter over morning coffee or discussing the composition of a journal paper . IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 871 In addition , conversation within the digital medium , has a property of great importance for our purpos - es : it can persist . Instantiated as text , whether typed in or spoken and recognized , persistence expands conversation beyond those within earshot , render - ing it accessible to those in other places and at later times . Thus , digital conversation may be synchronous or asynchronous , and its audience intimate or vast . Its persistence opens the door to a variety of new uses and practices : persistent conversations may be searched , browsed , replayed , annotated , visualized , restructured , and recontextualized , with what are likely to be profound impacts on personal , social , and institutional practices . Summary . This concludes our review of an array of research ﬁndings and practical techniques that have to do with the cognitive and social factors that come into play in the creation and communication of knowledge . We hasten to note that we do not claim this review is , in any sense , comprehensive . We have focused on pieces of the knowledge management puzzle that , while missing from many accounts , have informed our own explorations . We have no reason to believe that we have somehow , through either good luck or cleverness , uncovered all the missing pieces . In our view , even as it condenses into a co - herent discipline , it is important to recognize that our understanding of the critical factors in manag - ing knowledge is in its infancy . New pictures : Socially informed knowledge management systems So what are we to make of all this ? We have out - lined several new pieces to the knowledge manage - ment puzzle—but how do these new pieces ﬁt with the old ones and provide a new and seamless pic - ture of knowledge management ? As we noted in the introduction , we think such a goal is premature , and that the ﬁeld would be better served by a multiplic - ity of partial models and a commitment to explore multiple perspectives . In line with this view , rather than trying to present a uniﬁed framework , we offer two examples from our own work that suggest how all the pieces might start to come together in a so - cially informed approach to knowledge management systems . The ﬁrst example , a system called “Babble , ” comes from an area known as social computing . 56 Social computing has to do with digital systems that draw upon social information and context to enhance the activity and performance of people , organizations , and systems . Instances of social computing systems include recommender programs ( e . g . , for movies or music ) , “wearware” ( i . e . , showing signs of “wear” or history in a digital system , such as how heavily tra - versed a Web link is ) , social navigation , 60 and social awareness indicators ( e . g . , visualizations of people and their behavior , buddy lists ) . Babble is an on - line multiuser environment that is intended to support the creation , explication , and sharing of knowledge through text - based conversation . The basic rationale underlying Babble is described ﬁrst , and the system and usage experience with Babble follow . The second example , knowledge socialization , de - scribes a constellation of projects around the use of stories and storytelling in business settings . The ra - tionale for knowledge socialization is described ﬁrst , showing how stories can facilitate knowledge cre - ation , sharing , and reuse . Following this , we describe an integrated suite of story - related tools that sup - ports these ends . The rationale for Babble : Visibility yields awareness yields accountability . Imagine a knowledge manage - ment system that was designed from a social perspec - tive , a system predicated on the assumption that knowledge is rooted in a social context . Such a sys - tem would assume that knowledge is produced within , and dispersed among , a network of people ; that only a small proportion of knowledge is captured in concrete form ; that knowledge sharing involves social factors like relationships , trust , obligation , and reputation . One way in which a system might instan - tiate such assumptions is not just by providing ac - cess to data and documents , but also by intercon - necting the social network of people who produced the knowledge . Imagine further that we include not just the people who produce the knowledge , but those who use it as well . Suppose that—just as we look for crowded restaurants , eye fellow shoppers , or look for engag - ing conversations—we could see similar traces of those making use of information in a knowledge management system . After all , some of the knowl - edge users might have to invest considerable effort in order to apply the knowledge to their own ends , developing an understanding of its shortcomings and particularities , as well as building on it . If we could capture traces of this knowledge work , others with similar needs might ﬁnd as much value in talking with users of this knowledge as with the original authors . Such a system would not be just a database from which workers retrieved knowledge , it would be a THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 872 focus for a knowledge community , a place within which people could discover , use , and manipulate knowledge , and encounter and interact with others who are doing likewise . 61 How might we do this ? One way in which this might be achieved is in the context of an on - line computer - supported communication environment . Thus we might imagine a computer - based system that not only allows records and documents to be stored , but al - lows people to converse with one another and to have some visible presence . Such a system would not just make people and knowledge visible , but it would make interactions among them visible . That is , it should be possible to see people interacting with ex - plicitly expressed knowledge ( e . g . , reading ) , and it should be possible to see people conversing with one another ( both as a means of explicating tacit knowl - edge and as a means of building and maintaining the social factors such as trust and relationships that are important in knowledge management ) . For the last four years our research has been focused on ways of making such interactions visible in on - line environments . We have developed the notion of socially translucent systems 46 to guide us in de - signing such environments . By social translucence we mean systems that provide perceptually based in - formation about the presence and activity of users , thus creating social resources that the group as well as individuals can use to structure and enhance their on - line interactions . When such information is made visible to all participants , people become aware of one another’s presence and activity , allowing social conventions and other social dynamics to come into play . With mutual awareness comes accountability for one’s actions ( e . g . , if “I know that you know that I know” of your presence and activity , my activity will be interpreted with respect to that knowledge ; that is , I will be held accountable for my actions ) . By invoking social translucence as a framework , we are attempting to make people and their behavior more prominent , enabling the creation , exercise , and mutual observation of social behavior . By so doing , we aim to create a basis for more coherent , produc - tive , and ﬂuid interactions on line . Socially translu - cent systems make it easier for users to interact in purposeful , coherent ways ; to observe and imitate others’ actions ; to engage in peer pressure ; to cre - ate , notice , and conform to social conventions . We see social translucence as a fundamental requirement for supporting most types of communication and col - laboration in digital spaces . Babble : An infrastructure for a knowledge commu - nity . Babble is an on - line , digital space in which knowledge can be created , discovered , shared , and reused . 56 One of the principal means for fulﬁlling these core knowledge management processes in Bab - ble is its support for blended expressive and instru - mental communication through informal conversa - tion . Babble is therefore particularly concerned with supporting long - running , contextual interactions ( as opposed to short - term , task - focused activities ) . It very deliberately blends work and social talk , syn - chronous and asynchronous interactions , and private and public discourse . The aim is to provide a digital substrate upon which knowledge communities can grow , and where “discourse bases , ” rather than da - tabases , can provide a medium for people to develop , share , and reuse experiences and knowledge , and watch others do the same . The Babble system . Babble resembles a multichan - nel , text - based chat system to which many users can connect , and either select from a list of conversa - tions to participate in , or create their own . Babble differs , however , from conventional chat in two ways , both of which stem from our goal of creating a so - cially translucent system that supports knowledge management . First , the textual conversation that oc - curs in Babble is persistent : that is , unlike conven - tional chat where newly arriving users see only what has transpired since they have joined a channel , Bab - ble users can see everything entered in any existing conversation . These traces give the system the po - tential to function as a knowledge store , or what we prefer to call a “discourse base . ” Second , Babble makes the presence and activity of the participants visible through a variety of means , but principally through what we call a social proxy . Figure 1 shows the Babble user interface . The up - per left pane contains a list of the names of users currently connected to Babble . The middle upper pane contains the social proxy , which we describe shortly . The upper right pane displays a hierarchi - cal list of the conversation topics , grouped in cat - egories and subcategories . The pane that occupies the lower half of the window contains the text of the current conversation , whose topic name is high - lighted in the topics list ; within the pane , each com - ment is prefaced with the name of the user , and the date and time of its creation . Babble conversations need not be synchronous ; indeed , some are asynchro - nous , with hours , days , or weeks separating com - ments . A variety of other functions may be invoked via the menu bar , or through context - sensitive menus IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 873 accessed via right clicks , and keyboard shortcuts . These include functions for creating messages , cre - ating , changing , and deleting topics and categories , conducting private , ephemeral chats , and so forth . The social proxy , also known as the cookie , in the upper middle pane , represents the current conver - sation as a large circle , and the participants as col - ored dots , also known as marbles . Marbles within the circle are involved in the conversation being viewed ; marbles outside the circle represent those who are logged on but are viewing other conversa - tions . What makes the social proxy interesting has to do with the position of the marbles in the circle . When a user becomes active , either “speaking” ( i . e . , typing ) or “listening” ( i . e . , interacting with the con - versation window by clicking or scrolling ) , the us - er’s marble moves rapidly to the center ring of the circle . If the user stops interacting , the marble grad - ually drifts to the inner periphery of the circle over the course of about 20 minutes . Thus , when there is a lot of activity in the conversation , there is a tight cluster of marbles around the center of the circle . The social proxy shown in Figure 1 depicts a situ - ation in which three people have been recently ac - tive ( i . e . , speaking or listening ) in the current con - versation , and one other has been idle for a while ( and a ﬁfth person is off in the “Grapevine” topic ) . When people leave the current conversation their marbles move to the outside of the circle’s periph - ery ( as with the marble at “eleven o’clock” ) ; when they enter the conversation , their marbles move in - side the circle . When a person logs onto the system , a virtual wedge is created for the person’s marble , Figure 1 The Babble interface CURRENT CONVERSATION THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 874 adjusting the position of all the marbles in the social proxy ; when the person departs , the wedge is de - stroyed , and the remaining marbles adjust to uni - formly occupy the space . All marble movements are shown with animation , thus making arrivals , move - ments , and departures visually salient . Although sim - ple in concept , this social proxy gives a sense of the size of the audience and the degree to which the au - dience is actively listening or contributing , indicates whether people are gathering or dispersing , and who is coming or going . In addition to the social proxy , Babble uses additional mechanisms to reveal the presence and activity of users . In the topic list , to the left of the topic names , are “minicookies , ” thumbnails of the social proxy for each topic with at least one participant in it . So , in Figure 1 , we can see that there is a single person in the third topic , “Grapevine . ” Babble also highlights information that the user has not yet seen : the names of topics and categories with new material in them are shown in red ( e . g . , Grapevine and B _ Ethnog - raphies ) , and within the conversation pane , com - ments that have been added since the user last “touched” Babble have their authors’ names in red . The cookie shows only synchronous interactions— that is , it shows only the presence and activities of people who are currently logged on to Babble . This may be a drawback because often the majority of the conversations carried on in Babble are asynchronous , with just a few comments per day ( or per week , or per month ) . As a consequence , we designed a sec - ond , asynchronous social proxy , the timeline , 62 illus - trated in Figure 2 . Figure 2 The timeline IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 875 The basic goal of the timeline is to provide a way for a “speaker” to see that people were “listening” ( or not ) , even when the listening was offset in time . Each user logged on to Babble is represented by a row . When the user “speaks , ” a vertical mark or blip ap - pears on the line . If the line / blip is in color , it means the user was active in the conversation currently be - ing viewed by the user of the timeline ; otherwise the line / blip is shown in gray ( and the line is thinner ) . As the user moves the mouse over the timeline , the name of the topic , the user , and the time being ex - amined are shown in the upper left corner of the win - dow ; the user can scroll back through as much as one week of activity . Other functions of the timeline may be invoked by right - clicking on another user’s row ( e . g . , private chats ) . The timeline in Figure 2 covers about half a day’s worth of activity . We can see that over the course of the afternoon about 20 people have logged onto Babble ( shown by the number of rows ) , most of them have spent some time in the current conversation ( shown by the color / increased thickness of the lines ) , and many , but not all , have “spoken” ( shown by the blips ) . Gaps in the line indicate intervals when the person logged off . In the center of the timeline , a ﬂurry of concentrated activity can be seen . This rep - resents an on - line brainstorming session that took place in midafternoon , involving a majority of the people who logged onto Babble that day . Since this view of the timeline is from the Commons Area , we can see that the brainstorming session started out with people arriving and “hanging out” ( i . e . , not nec - essarily saying very much ) in the Commons Area ( as shown by the multiple colored lines ) , followed by a lot of interaction in topics that the group created for more focused brainstorming by subgroups ( as shown by the colored lines changing to gray as people switch to the focused topics ) . Note that this synchronous use of Babble occurred in conjunction with a con - ference call ( not shown in the timeline visualization ) , so the lack of activity in the Commons Area may have been due to the simultaneous conference call , fol - lowed by a ﬂurry of brainstorming activity in spe - ciﬁc topics just after the phone call ended . After the synchronous interaction , the timeline shows “listen - ers” entering the various topics and spending time there . We can infer that these visitors are reading through conversations they may have missed . The timeline thus can reveal that others in the knowl - edge community have been paying attention to con - versations ( i . e . , listening ) , even if they do not post a comment ( i . e . , speak ) . Although user interviews we have conducted suggest that the timeline is not routinely used by most Babble users , it has been used by more sophisticated users , for example , the hosts of on - line group interaction , to get a sense of how well the group is functioning and who is participat - ing over time . 62 This portrayal of on - line participa - tion that includes both speakers and listeners is meant to increase the amount of social feedback available in the environment . Usage experiences with Babble . Having described the basic Babble functionality , we now turn to describ - ing some of our experiences in using Babble our - selves , and in watching others use Babble . While one must be wary about drawing conclusions concern - ing the usability of software when its developers use it , our aim here is to simply provide a sense for how Babble is actually used by a group and to give some examples of how Babble functions as a knowledge community . Our group has used Babble for the almost four years of its existence . The group consists of a software de - velopment group that designed and implemented the system and includes a mix of computer scientists and social scientists ( including the authors ) . The size of the group has varied in number over the years from four to nineteen users . The variance is due in part to the ebb and ﬂow of people characteristic of groups in large organizations , and in part to current mem - bers inviting “associates”—colleagues with whom they had strong social or professional ties—to join . Over the last several years we have deployed Bab - ble to a number of other work groups : about 15 groups within IBM and one group formed by a uni - versity class outside IBM . We have studied the de - ployments in a variety of ways , ranging from detailed ethnographic studies—see Reference 63 for a study of six IBM Babble groups—to studies based on sur - veys and analysis of log data and conversation ar - chives . 64 We have had mixed experiences with the adoption of Babble . If we consider a Babble deployment suc - cessful when it is used more or less daily , by several people , for more than six weeks , then we can say that about half of our Babble deployments have met with success . Currently we have eight Babble groups run - ning , not including our own . Five of these have passed the six - week mark ( some are far past it ) , with four showing continued robust daily activity , and one in decline . In one of the recent deployments we have seen Babble support a time - limited , speciﬁc group THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 876 exercise—a month - long , global brainstorming exer - cise ( the source of the data in Figure 2 ) . It is evident that when Babble catches on in a group , it supports a variety of communication purposes and practices , often similar to those we have observed in our own usage . Here we describe three social phe - nomena that are most relevant to the knowledge community vision . One social practice we have observed is “waylaying , ” in which a user watches for a particular person to become active on Babble ( signaled by the movement of their marble into the center of the social proxy ) , and then initiates a conversation by greeting the per - son in a public conversation , via private chat , tele - phone , or other means . Because the movement of the marble occurs when the user has just begun in - teracting with the system , it indicates an opportune moment for contact ( since the user’s attention has just shifted to communication with the group ) . Way - laying is used for purposes ranging from asking ques - tions to initiating casual social chat . Babble also supports group awareness through the persistence of its conversation . For example , when members of a Babble group travel , many report read - ing through conversations that occurred in their ab - sence to “ﬁnd out what happened . ” For someone who is a member of the group and understands the context , seemingly trivial comments can convey con - siderable information about what is going on at the individual , group , and organizational levels . Thus , a sign off—“I have to go to the [ project ] meeting now”—reveals that one participant is still involved in a particular project , and a question—“Does any - one know how to do a screen capture”—indicates that another participant is beginning to write a pa - per . In addition to the persistence of conversation , Bab - ble also supports group awareness through the time - line proxy . Babble participants have reported uses such as : looking to see who has visited a topic in which they had posted questions ; looking to see whether a colleague who had not posted recently had been on line ; and using the timeline to get a sense for the activity of the community as a whole . One user wrote : “It’s a little like reading an electrocardiogram , the heartbeat of the community . I noticed that I missed [ Susan ] by an hour on Monday morning . . . . [ Daph - ney ] comes in every so often as a blip . [ Frasier ] jumps from space to space . . . . ” Another phenomenon that can be observed in Bab - ble is the development of social norms . That is , one participant may develop a particular way of doing something , and others will imitate it . Examples of this include what users include in their on - line nick - name ( e . g . , in some Babble groups , users append “ @ mylocation” after their name ) , the types of on - line conversations created ( e . g . , some Babble groups have categories for “personal places” or “ofﬁces” ) , and naming conventions ( e . g . , one Babble group uses the term “chitchat” to signal that a topic is intended for casual conversation . Babble groups also evolve various interactive customs , the most common be - ing to say “hello” upon logging in ( even when no one else is present ) . Waylay , group awareness , and the development of social norms are examples of the effect of social trans - lucence : they are made possible by the mutual vis - ibility and awareness of Babble participants and their activity . These social practices help to forge an iden - tity for the group and allow individuals to become more fully dimensional as communicative partners : that is , they emerge not just as disembodied words on the screen , but as real people who might be liked or disliked , trusted or treated with caution , with rep - utations that can grow or be tarnished , and so forth . The fact that these effects emerge from long - run - ning , day - to - day , work - related interactions in Bab - ble is also important . As Cohen and Prusak 65 state , “Social capital is mainly created and strengthened ( and sometimes damaged ) in the context of real work . The conditions and durable connections that we experience day after day have vastly more inﬂu - ence on it than special events and team - building ex - ercises . ” In our experience , Babble provides an environment where social capital can be built . The following com - ments were drawn from a Babble group whose mem - bership is composed of a worldwide cross - section of people in IBM and Lotus interested in on - line com - munities . In this group , participant comments indi - cate that the social interaction that occurs within the environment is valuable . Several of the participants Babble provides an environment where social capital can be built . IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 877 see the lightweight conversation that is possible in Babble as important in building social capital . One participant points to the role of ongoing , chat - like conversations in establishing what Clark and Bren - nan 66 have referred to as common ground : [ Lightweight conversations ] can have more value than is immediately apparent . This ( rather than with technical discussions ) is often where personalities are exposed . That can make a big difference over time in feeling comfortable about asking for or offering opinions and help . Rapid exchanges often make all the difference in building mutual understanding . Another participant feels that informal interaction helps to build trust among remote collaborators : In today’s world . . . you’d want threaded discussions . . . and also have a chat space that would provide for real - time dialog , not necessarily staying on a par - ticular topic , but a way to build trust , establish deeper relationships , a way to complement what you’re try - ing to address over in the threaded dialog space . It’s needed in the widely distributed , no - travel , matrix managed environment that we have today . Finally , another participant describes a deepening of relationships with colleagues through the daily in - teractions on Babble : Babble has helped me establish a tighter social and professional relationship with all of them—we have much more regular contact with each other , much as we would if we were collocated , via the Babble connection . This in turn has built social capital among us which may be of use in the future . These remarks conﬁrm that the informal interaction in Babble , and the blend of social and work talk , con - tribute to the formation and maintenance of a so - cial fabric that underlies collaboration with distant colleagues . Through our work on Babble , we have begun to create an infrastructure that can support rich forms of social interaction . We have found that social proxies are a promising development , and we continue to be impressed with the power of plain text as a means of supporting interactions that are both complex and subtle . We believe that one of the most important aspects of a knowledge community is that it can be used as a place for unguarded discussion among people who know one another , who share professional interests , and who understand the con - texts within which their remarks are being made . We now turn to our second example of a socially in - formed approach to knowledge management . Knowledge socialization : Using stories to support knowledge creation , sharing , and reuse . We chose the term “knowledge socialization” to describe our work for several reasons . First , as discussed earlier , knowledge is heavily inﬂuenced by social and cul - tural factors : it is entwined , on the one hand , with human cognition , and , on the other , with the social context of teams , organizations , and communities . Second , the term “knowledge socialization” is meant to stand in contrast to the many approaches to knowl - edge management that take a particular technology or family of technologies as a starting point . Third , it connotes a holistic growth of knowledge through a complex , emergent system of richly interconnected processes ( somewhat akin , metaphorically , to the growth of a snow crystal ) . In contrast , we believe the production line metaphor 67 of knowledge being cre - ated , then captured , then disseminated and then in - ternalized can be quite misleading as an overall scheme for knowledge management . While some methods and technologies may legitimately focus on providing support for one of these processes , our work has focused on stories and storytelling as an exemplary holistic knowledge socialization process . We claim that storytelling is useful in creating , cap - turing , disseminating , and internalizing knowledge and that it accomplishes all of these simultaneously , not sequentially . Storytelling is also a representative knowledge socialization process in that it typically includes both instrumental and expressive aspects . In this section , we expand on the role of storytelling as a process that can be used throughout an orga - nization and report on some preliminary tools to sup - port storytelling . We end by claiming that an under - standing of story as a knowledge socialization process is necessary for a deeper understanding of the so - cial aspects of knowledge regardless of whether knowledge is explicitly presented as story . There are many uses of story and storytelling in bus - iness . Stories can be useful ways for a business to ﬁnd out about the needs of its customers in a deeper way . Stories can also help advertise a product or ser - vice ; they help in showing the proper context for the use of a product or service and allow us to see the beneﬁts . Stories can be used as educational mate - rials within a company . Stories can be used as a tool in the design process . 68 , 69 Informally , colocated com - munities of practice may spontaneously share expe - riences in the form of oral stories . 26 Wider , more dis - tributed communities of practice may share stories THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 878 in electronic forms ; e . g . , stories , as well as other kinds of knowledge , were shared successfully via the IBM VM ( virtual machine ) forums . Even more for - mally , stories may be collected and arranged into sce - nario - based learning systems . 18 Stories can be used to help establish or change corporate culture . Sce - narios , a variant of stories , can be used to help or - ganize the design process and keep it focused on real customer needs . Scenarios can be used for strategic planning . Scenarios can also be a useful way for team members from different functions to see how they can relate to solve a problem . As instantiations of a type of knowledge that can be used in so many business processes , stories also have the advantage that they can help knowledge ﬂow through the organization . Not only are stories ca - pable of being used by many different business func - tions ( marketing , design , management ) , they are also capable of being understood by various professions . Thus , stories can serve not only to support commu - nities of practice with a common vocabulary ; they can also serve an important coordinating role within a team whose members come from different com - munities of practice . A story might start with a cus - tomer expressing a need , be used as a scenario dur - ing design of a service to meet that need , and then be included as part of a marketing campaign to show how that need can be met . A different story might encapsulate the experiences of a consultant to the petrochemical industry . This story might seem to of - fer a lesson learned that is at odds with the expe - riences of another consultant . By comparing the sto - ries and examining the apparent contradiction , the two consultants themselves ( or even a third party ) could ﬁnd the differentiating factors between the two situations and , in effect , use the story combination to create new knowledge . Although stories have the capability of serving as a kind of cognitive glue across the many functions and levels of a large organization , there is no guarantee that they will do so . Either the formal organization or the corporate culture may introduce roadblocks of various kinds to the use of stories . Perhaps the organization does not reward people for sharing their experiences . Or , even if the formal organization puts in explicit rewards for sharing experiences , the in - formal corporate culture may discourage people in various ways ; stories may be seen as a kind of second - class knowledge compared to an algorithm or a for - mula ; or stories from the marketing department may be seen as suspect by people in the engineering de - partment . In the latter case , the potential ﬂow of rich information about users and their context that could serve as a competitive differentiator for the company is blocked ; instead people in the engineering depart - ment design products based on their own traditions or biases . Even where the organizational and cultural factors are favorable to the use of stories , however , there may well be technological barriers . Stories are quite a natural way for small groups of trusted colleagues to exchange information . Scaling such a process to a large , global organization requires an integrated set of story tools such as we are developing at IBM Research . Dave Snowden , an IBM colleague work - ing with stories , uses an apt analogy to explain why it may now be necessary to take storytelling to the next level . When the modern Olympics began in 1896 , a natural athlete who trained hard had a good chance at winning a gold medal . At the end of this century , that is no longer true . Only a good athlete who trains hard and trains scientiﬁcally , with expert advice in nutrition , biomechanics , sports medicine , and other ﬁelds has a chance at a gold medal . In the past , great leaders in business have instinc - tively told stories to help motivate people and to cre - ate an organizational reality . Workers have also shared knowledge by telling stories in small , face - to - face groups . But today , we live in a world at once faster paced , more competitive , and more global . Sci - ence and technology might now be used to make sto - ries and storytelling more effective , more appropri - ate , more scalable to large organizations . An integrated suite of story - related tools . In order to provide a common underpinning for the various story - related tools that we have developed , we have proposed a ﬁrst pass at a “StoryML , ” that is , a markup language speciﬁcally geared toward stories . The initial representation is based on a distillation of many different approaches to story . 52 , 70 – 80 Our ini - tial formulation has three different but related “views” of story : Story Form ( what is in the story ) ; Story Function ( what are the purposes of the story ) ; and Story Trace ( what is the history of the story ) . In turn , the Story Form can be broken down into dimensions of environment , character , plot , and nar - rative . The idea of the StoryML is that it is expand - able according to purpose . For some purposes , the user ( e . g . , a student studying mystery plots ) may be satisﬁed with minimal detail concerning function and trace but may need to expand certain aspects of the Story Form in great detail . In another context , a dif - ferent user ( e . g . , a historian comparing certain IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 879 themes across time and cultures ) might have a very high - level view of Story Form and Story Function but want to see a detailed description of Story Trace . At this point , the meta - data in StoryML must be sup - plied by a knowledgeable human being . However , increasingly , it could become feasible to partially au - tomate this process . The following scenario illustrates how a StoryML might support reasoning about a business process . Jane is under the gun to cut costs in the fulﬁll - ment process without increasing delivery time or decreasing customer satisfaction . In fact , her boss , Betty , has strongly suggested that rethinking the fulﬁllment process should allow her to decrease de - livery time and increase customer satisfaction . Jane’s knowledge portal is already personalized to her general proﬁle mostly via a dynamic back - ground process that takes note of what Web sites she visits , what the topics of her e - mail are , and with whom she communicates . She can turn a soft - ware “dial” on any given knowledge scan that de - termines how much the scan will be inﬂuenced by her general proﬁle and how much by the speciﬁc search terms she uses . In this case , Jane wants to see an overall story frequency map . Since stories generally arise when things do not go as planned , the story “hot spots” show her likely places where current fulﬁllment processes are probably inefﬁ - cient or subject to breakdown . At this point , she is not very concerned with the structure of the story or even the function . She is mainly concerned with the Story Trace . Jane focuses on the two most likely trouble areas and sets up two separate story - exchange meetings of people expert in these two areas . The story exchange meetings only last an hour each and the stories exchanged are all digitally re - corded with an associated ( imperfect ) transcript . Although the transcripts are imperfect , they serve adequately to allow her to zoom in accurately on audio versions of some very telling stories . These are referenced throughout the subsequent process re - engineering . Jane quickly assembles another team to explore possible ways to improve the ful - ﬁllment process . In this creative synectics 35 ses - sion , along with other techniques , she again ac - cesses a corporate - wide story base , but this time , she is primarily concerned with Story Function . She is looking for stories that help people think about things in new ways and break old thought habits . From a host of potentially useful ideas , she and her team pick out a few high - leverage , quickly implementable , and practical ideas to pursue . In order to concretize these ideas for dissemina - tion and also to double - check on their practical - ity , Jane develops some scenarios for how fulﬁll - ment will be done under the new process . Before committing further resources , she uses these sce - narios to get feedback from a small but varied set of customers . These customers provide some ad - ditional insights and requirements . In parallel with the development of an improved process , training materials are produced to explain the new process as well as the design rationale be - hind it . In this case , a story creation tool ( which incorporates examples and guidelines ) focuses on Story Form . The materials make it quite clear how to use the new process and also explain why . In addition , related stories are created for market - ing materials stressing to the customers how it is even more desirable now to do business with Jane’s corporation . In the scenario above , we showed how stories can be used in many ways . In each case , however , we were describing what might be termed “endogenous sto - ries . ” That is , the “complete story” in some sense was captured and contained in some explicit record . But the potential use of stories extends considerably beyond “endogenous stories . ” Suppose that Albert Einstein writes an equation such as “Energy (cid:1) mass times speed - of - light squared . ” This is clearly not a story , per se . It is , after all , an equation . And , yet , in the larger sense , stories em - anate in every direction from this equation . How did Einstein come up with this ? How did it lead to the atom bomb ? These might be termed “exogenous sto - ries”—stories created around knowledge . In order to take natural language processing to the next level , it will be necessary to understand such “exogenous stories . ” We will need to understand agents , goals , obstacles , communicative strategies , and intentions . Otherwise , it will not , in general , be possible to understand the import of even such a sim - ple statement as “Alice left the party early . ” Who is making this statement , and to whom ? What do they intend to communicate ? Is it truthful or a lie ? Only by understanding the larger “exogenous story” can we possibly know the function of this statement . Such functional variations in context can easily project into the semantic and even the syntactic domain as the THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 880 well - known example “Time ﬂies like an arrow” il - lustrates . We cannot parse this sentence nor assign lexical items to all the surface tokens without un - derstanding the exogenous story of which this sen - tence is a part . Indeed , understanding the “exogenous story” of which individual statements partake , extends beyond what is typically termed “natural language process - ing . ” Current attempts to incorporate “intelligent agents” into various systems often lead to problems , even in something as simple as automatic spelling and capitalization correction . The reason is essen - tially that the system has no knowledge of the user’s current context and intention . Therefore , a partic - ular “correction” offered by an agent may or may not make any sense in the current context . As an ex - ample , in the immediately preceding sentence , Mi - crosoft Word * * caused a menu to pop up over both instances of the token “may , ” inviting me to substi - tute “May 6 , 2001 , ” which happens to be the current date . In order for computer systems to be more than passive conduits for human knowledge , we will need to develop knowledge representations that can ac - count for and represent the essential elements of sto - ries in terms of their form , their function , and their history . This is not to say that all knowledge is in the form of story ; we claim only that once we understand and can represent story ( StoryML is an initial pro - posal in this direction ) , we will have the concepts nec - essary to produce true knowledge - based systems . Un - til we build such representations , “intelligent agents” will as often constitute an amusing ( or frustrating ) distraction as a collaborative knowledge partner . Without such representations , so - called knowledge - based systems will not be capable “social actors , ” al - though it is possible that they will be temporarily per - ceived as such . Since the social aspects of knowledge management constitute an absolutely critical aspect of the general problem of knowledge management , until we can understand and represent story , we will not have the tools to build the underlying architec - ture for a knowledge - based system in which humans and computers can effectively collaborate . Summary and conclusion The simple picture of knowledge management as get - ting the right information to the right people at the right time is wrong . Knowledge management is not just a matter of managing information . It is , we have argued , deeply social in nature , and must be ap - proached by taking human and social factors into account . We have provided some extra pieces for the knowledge management puzzle and demonstrated how we have used them in our own work to assem - ble some knowledge management systems that are strongly shaped by human and social factors . As the ﬁeld of knowledge management develops , and more widespread and varied experience with different ap - proaches to KM is gained , we believe not only that additional critical pieces of the KM puzzle will be re - vealed , but that it will become clearer how all the pieces ﬁt together to create a rich picture of social and intellectual capital within organizations . Cer - tainly , looking toward the future of work , as it be - comes more centered in virtual relationships and spaces both within and across organizations , creat - ing and maintaining knowledge and its social con - text will only become more vital . We believe that one of the most important aspects of a knowledge management system is that it be - comes what we have termed a knowledge commu - nity : a place within which people discover , use , and manipulate knowledge , and can encounter and in - teract with others who are doing likewise . 46 , 61 We have talked about two approaches for supporting knowledge communities , namely social computing and knowledge socialization . A fundamental char - acteristic of a knowledge community is that it in - cludes conversation and other forms of narrative , for example stories , and / or unguarded discussion among people who know one another , who share profes - sional interests , and who understand the contexts within which their remarks are being made . We have outlined a variety of speciﬁc techniques that can con - tribute to a realistic and effective approach to knowl - edge management , including supporting new forms of group interaction ( e . g . , Bohm Dialogue , stories ) , methods for enhancing creativity ( e . g . , the use of metaphor ) , and support for expressive communica - tion . When such techniques are incorporated into knowledge communities , they result in organizational opportunities to build social capital , including trust and cooperation among colleagues . This notion of a knowledge management environment as a “trust - ed place” is an interesting and challenging one for system designers and for organizations . How—tech - nically , socially , and organizationally—can we bal - ance the need for a safe and trusting place , within which so much knowledge creation and social cap - ital building takes place , with the organizational im - perative to share information more broadly ? We be - lieve that a greater understanding of how to design socially translucent systems that permit social mech - anisms to come into play will help developers of tech - nological systems to negotiate such issues . Similarly , IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 881 we believe that understanding better how to social - ize knowledge through techniques such as storytell - ing and scenarios will offer organizations greater mastery and scope in creating , sharing , and reusing the knowledge that is critical to survival in the twenty - ﬁrst century . Acknowledgments This work is highly collaborative , and we owe a great debt to our colleagues , past and present . Thanks in particular to Andrew Gordon , Christine Halverson , Cynthia Kurtz , Mark Laff , Peter Malkin , Tracee Wolf , Mark Ackerman , John Richards , Rachel Bel - lamy , Cal Swart , David N . Smith , Erin Bradner , Ja - son Ellis , Beth Veinott , Jason Elliot , James Reed , James Hudson , Karrie Karahalios , Barbara Kelly , and Brent Hailpern . We also thank three anonymous reviewers for their comments on an earlier version of this paper . * Trademark or registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation . * * TrademarkorregisteredtrademarkofLotusDevelopmentCor - poration or Microsoft Corporation . Cited references and notes 1 . F . Capra , The Web of Life : A New Understanding of Living Systems , Doubleday , New York ( 1997 ) . 2 . M . Wheatley , Leadership and the New Science , Berrett - Koehler , San Francisco , CA ( 1993 ) . 3 . G . LakoffandM . Johnson , MetaphorsWeLiveBy , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL ( 1983 ) . 4 . R . Sternberg , Defying the Crowd : Cultivating Creativity in a Culture of Conformity , Free Press , New York ( 1995 ) . 5 . R . Sternberg , Advances in the Study of Human Intelligence , Erlbaum , New York ( 1986 ) . 6 . J . Guilford , “IntellectualResourcesandTheirValuesasSeen by Scientists , ” Scientiﬁc Creativity : Its Recognition and Devel - opment , C . TaylorandF . Barron , Editors , JohnWiley & Sons , Inc . , New York ( 1963 ) . 7 . T . G . Evans , “AHeuristicProgramtoSolveGeometricAnal - ogyProblems , ” SemanticInformationProcessing , M . Minsky , Editor , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1968 ) . Based on Ph . D . dissertation , Department of Electrical Engineering , MIT , 1963 . 8 . J . Darley and B . Latane , “Bystander Intervention in Emer - gencies : Diffusion of Responsibility , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8 , 377 – 383 ( 1968 ) . 9 . T . DeMarco and T . Lister , Peopleware : Productive Projects and Teams , Dorset House , New York ( 1987 ) . 10 . J . C . Collins and J . I . Porras , Built to Last : Successful Habits of Visionary Companies , Harper , New York ( 1997 ) . 11 . D . CohenandL . Prusak , InGoodCompany : HowSocialCap - italMakesOrganizationsWork , HarvardBusinessSchoolPress , Boston , MA ( 2001 ) . 12 . J . S . Brown and P . Duguid , The Social Life of Documents . Release 1 . 0 , EDventure Holdings Inc . , New York ( October 11 , 1995 ) , pp . 1 – 18 . Also available at www . parc . xerox . com / ops / members / brown / papers / sociallife . html . 13 . J . S . Brown and P . Duguid , The Social Life of Information , Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA ( 2000 ) . 14 . J . C . Thomas , “A Design - Interpretation Analysis of Natural English , ” International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 10 , 651 – 668 ( 1978 ) . 15 . J . Dewey , How We Think : A Restatement of the Relation of Reﬂective Thinking to the Educational Process , Heath , Bos - ton , MA ( 1933 ) . 16 . L . S . Vygotsky , ThoughtandLanguage , MITPress , Cambridge , MA ( 1962 ) . 17 . J . Piaget and B . Inhelder , The Psychology of the Child , Basic Books , New York ( 1969 ) . 18 . R . Schank , Virtual Learning : A Revolutionary Approach to BuildingaHighlySkilledWorkforce , McGraw - Hill , NewYork ( 1997 ) . 19 . G . Miller , “The Magical Number Seven Plus or Minus Two : Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information , ” Psychological Review 63 , 81 – 97 ( 1956 ) . 20 . R . Stuart , The Design of Virtual Environments , McGraw - Hill , New York ( 1996 ) . 21 . Frontiers of Human - Centered Computing , Online Communi - ties , andVirtualEnvironments , R . Earnshaw , R . Guedj , A . van Dam , andJ . Vince , Editors , Springer - Verlag , London ( 2001 ) . 22 . W . Gaver , “SynthesizingAuditoryIcons , ”S . Ashlund , K . Mul - let , A . Henderson , E . Hollnagel , and T . White , Editors , Pro - ceedingsofINTERCHI’93 , ACM , NewYork ( 1993 ) , pp . 228 – 235 . 23 . S . Ford , J . Forlizzi , and S . Ishizaki , “Kinetic Typography : Time - Based Issues in the Presentation of Text , ” Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’97 ) , Extended Abstracts , ACM , New York ( 1997 ) . See also http : / / www . maedastudio . com . 24 . J . Lave and E . Wenger , Situated Learning : Legitimate Periph - eral Participation , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ( 1991 ) . 25 . E . Wenger , Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , and Identity , CambridgeUniversityPress , Cambridge , UK ( 1998 ) . 26 . J . Orr , Talking About Machines : An Ethnography of a Modern Job , Cornell University Press , Ithaca , NY ( 1996 ) . 27 . G . Olson and J . Olson , “Distance Matters , ” Human - Com - puter Interaction 15 , Nos . 2 – 3 , 107 – 137 ( 2000 ) . 28 . H . H . Clark , Using Language , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ( 1996 ) . 29 . W . Orlikowski , “LearningfromNotes : OrganizationalIssues in Groupware Implementation , ” Proceedings of the Confer - ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM , New York ( 1992 ) , pp . 362 – 369 . 30 . E . F . Churchill and S . Bly , “Virtual Environments at Work : Ongoing Use of MUDs in the Workplace , ” Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Work Activities Coordina - tionandCollaboration ( WACC’99 ) , SanFrancisco , CA , ACM Press , New York ( 1999 ) . 31 . A . Huxor , “AnActiveWorldsInterfacetoBSCWtoEnhance Chance Encounters , ” D . Snowdon and E . F . Churchill , Ed - itors , ProceedingsofCVE’98 ( CollaborativeVirtualEnviron - ments ) , Manchester , UK ( June 1998 ) . 32 . B . Hillier , SpaceIstheMachine , CambridgeUniversityPress , Cambridge , UK ( 1996 ) . 33 . B . Shneiderman , “Creating Creativity : User Interfaces for SupportingInnovation , ” ACMTransactionsonComputer - Hu - man Interaction 7 , No . 1 , 114 – 138 ( 2000 ) . 34 . D . Bohm , On Dialogue , David Bohm Seminars , Ojai , CA ( 1990 ) . THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 882 35 . W . Gordon , Synectics , Harper , New York ( 1961 ) . 36 . A . S . Gordon , “TheRepresentationalRequirementsofStra - tegicPlanning , ”FifthSymposiumonLogicalFormalizationsof Commonsense Reasoning , New York University ( May 20 – 22 , 2001 ) , http : / / www . cs . nyu . edu / faculty / davise / commonsense01 / papers . html . 37 . J . C . Thomas , “Narrative Technologies for the New Millen - nium , ” Knowledge Management 2 , No . 9 , 14 – 17 ( 1999 ) . 38 . W . Isaacs , DialogueandtheArtofThinkingTogether , Double - day , New York ( 1999 ) . 39 . E . Arias , H . Eden , G . Fischer , A . Gorfman , and E . Scharff , “Transcending the Individual Human Mind—Creating SharedUnderstandingThroughCollaborativeDesign , ” ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 7 , No . 1 , 84 – 113 ( 2000 ) . 40 . B . Mattimore , 99 % Inspiration : Tips , Tales , and Techniques for Liberating Your Business Creativity , Amacon , New York ( 1993 ) . 41 . J . C . Thomas , D . Lyon , and L . A . Miller , “Aids for Problem Solving , ” Research Report RC - 6468 , IBM T . J . Watson Re - search Center , Yorktown Heights , NY 10598 ( 1977 ) . 42 . D . Snowden , “TheParadoxofStory , ” JournalofScenarioand Strategy Planning 1 , No . 5 ( Dec . 1999 / Jan . 2000 ) . 43 . D . Snowden , “Storytelling : An Old Skill in a New Context , ” Business Information Review 16 , No . 1 , 30 – 37 ( 1999 ) . 44 . A . S . Gordon , “Accessing Stories with Activities , ” E . Ami - tay , Editor , TextualDisplayinSearch , MITPress , Cambridge , MA ( in press ) . 45 . D . Lawrence and J . Thomas , “Social Dynamics of Storytell - ing : ImplicationsforStory - BasedDesign , ”presentedatAAAI workshop on Narrative Intelligence , N . Falmouth , MA ( No - vember , 1999 ) . 46 . T . EricksonandW . A . Kellogg , “SocialTranslucence : AnAp - proach to Designing Systems That Support Social Process - es , ” ACMTransactionsonComputer - HumanInteraction 7 , No . 1 , 59 – 83 ( 2000 ) . 47 . J . Harris and A . Henderson , “A Better Mythology for Sys - tem Design , ” Proceedings of the Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems ( CHI’99 ) , ACM Press , New York ( 1999 ) , pp . 88 – 95 . 48 . H . Beyer and K . Holtzblatt , Contextual Design : Deﬁning Cus - tomer - CentricSystems , MorganKaufmann , SanFrancisco , CA ( 1998 ) . 49 . A . P . DeGeus , TheLivingCompany , HarvardBusinessSchool Press , Boston , MA ( 1997 ) . 50 . R . D . Putnam , R . Leonardi , and R . Nanetti , Making Democ - racy Work : Civic Traditions in Modern Italy , Princeton Uni - versity Press , Princeton , NJ ( 1993 ) . 51 . Aristotle , Poetics , M . Heath , Translator , Penguin , NewYork ( 1997 ) . 52 . R . McKee , Story , Harper & Row , New York ( 1997 ) . 53 . J . C . Thomas , “StudiesinOfﬁceSystemsI : TheEffectofCom - munication Medium on Person Perception , ” Ofﬁce Systems Research Journal 1 , No . 2 , 75 – 88 ( 1983 ) . 54 . D . Armstrong , ManagingbyStoryingAround , Doubleday , New York ( 1992 ) . 55 . H . Gardner , Leading Minds : An Anatomy of Leadership , Ba - sic Books , New York ( 1996 ) . 56 . T . Erickson , D . Smith , W . A . Kellogg , M . Laff , J . Richards , and E . Bradner , “Socially Translucent Systems : Social Prox - ies , Persistent Conversation and the Design of Babble , ” Pro - ceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’99 ) , ACM Press , New York ( 1999 ) , pp . 72 – 79 . 57 . E . Goffman , Behavior in Public Places : Notes on the Social Organization of Gatherings , Macmillan Publishing Co . , New York ( 1963 ) . 58 . E . Goffman , Interaction Ritual , Anchor Books , New York ( 1967 ) . 59 . A . Kendon , Conducting Interaction : Patterns of Behavior in FocusedEncounters , CambridgeUniversityPress , Cambridge , UK ( 1990 ) . 60 . See Social Navigation of Information Space ( Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work ) , A . J . Munro , K . Hook , and D . Benyon , Editors , Springer - Verlag ( 1999 ) . “Social naviga - tion is a vibrant new ﬁeld that examines how we navigate in - formationspacesin‘real’and‘virtual’environments , howwe orient and guide ourselves , and how we interact with and use others to ﬁnd our way in information spaces . ” 61 . T . Erickson and W . A . Kellogg , “Knowledge Communities : Online Environments for Supporting Knowledge Manage - ment in its Social Context , ” M . Ackerman , V . Pipek , and V . Wulf , Editors , BeyondKnowledgeManagement : SharingEx - pertise , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ( in press ) . 62 . T . EricksonandM . R . Laff , “TheDesignofthe‘Babble’Time - line : A Social Proxy for Visualizing Group Activity over Time , ” TheProceedingsofCHI2001 , ExtendedAbstracts , ACM Press , New York ( 2001 ) . 63 . E . Bradner , W . A . Kellogg , and T . Erickson , “The Adoption andUseofBabble : AFieldStudyofChatintheWorkplace , ” Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer - Sup - ported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW’99 ) , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Norwell , MA ( 1999 ) , pp . 139 – 158 . 64 . T . Erickson , “Making Sense of Computer - Mediated Com - munication ( CMC ) : Conversations as Genres , CMC Sys - tems as Genre Ecologies , ” J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . , and R . H . Sprague , Jr . , Editors , Proceedings of the Thirty - Third Hawaii InternationalConferenceonSystemsScience , IEEEPress , New York ( January 2000 ) . 65 . See Reference 11 , p . 22 . 66 . H . H . Clark and S . E . Brennan , “Grounding in Communi - cation , ” L . Resnick , J . M . Levine , and S . D . Teasley , Editors , PerspectivesonSociallySharedCognition , APA , Washington , DC ( 1991 ) , pp . 127 – 149 . 67 . K . Nonaka and H . Takeuchi , The Knowledge - Creating Com - pany : How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of In - novation , Oxford University Press , New York ( 1995 ) . 68 . T . Erickson , “Notes on Design Practice : Stories and Proto - typesasCatalystsforCommunication , ”J . Carroll , Editor , Sce - nario - Based Design : Envisioning Work and Technology in Sys - temDevelopment , JohnWiley & Sons , Inc . , NewYork ( 1995 ) . 69 . T . Erickson , “DesignasStorytelling , ” interactions , ACMPress , New York ( July / August 1996 ) . 70 . M . Bakhtin , The Dialogic Imagination , C . Emerson and M . Holquist , Translators , University of Texas Press , Austin , TX ( 1981 ) . 71 . M . Bal , Narratology : Introduction to the Theory of Narrative , University of Toronto Press , Toronto ( 1992 ) . 72 . D . Boje , “The Storytelling Organization : A Study of Story Performance in an Ofﬁce - Supply Firm , ” Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly 36 , 106 – 121 ( 1991 ) . 73 . E . Brannigan , NarrativeComprehensionandFilm , Routledge , New York ( 1992 ) . 74 . A . Dundes , The Study of Folklore , Prentice - Hall , Inc . , Engle - wood Cliffs , NJ ( 1963 ) . 75 . W . Labov and J . Waletzsky , “Narrative Analysis : Oral Ver - sion of Personal Experience , ” J . Helm , Editor , Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts , University of Washington Press , Se - attle , WA ( 1967 ) , pp . 12 – 44 . IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON 883 76 . N . Norrick , “Twice - Told Tales : Collaborative Narration of Familiar Stories , ” Language in Society 26 , 199 – 220 ( 1997 ) . 77 . E . Ochs , C . Taylor , D . Rudolph , and R . Smith , “Storytelling asaTheory - BuildingActivity , ” DiscourseProcesses 15 , 32 – 72 ( January – March 1992 ) . 78 . G . Polti , TheThirty - SixDramaticSituations , TheWriter , Inc . , Boston , MA ( 1916 ) . 79 . R . Schank , Tell Me a Story : Narrative and Intelligence , North - western University Press , Evanston , IL ( 1990 ) . 80 . P . Underwood , ThreeStrandsintheBraid : AGuideforLearn - ingEnablers , ATribeofTwoPress , SanAnselmo , CA ( 1999 ) . Accepted for publication August 6 , 2001 . John C . Thomas IBM Research Division , Thomas J . Watson Re - search Center , P . O . Box 704 , Yorktown Heights , New York 10598 ( electronic mail : jcthomas @ us . ibm . com ) . Dr . Thomas ( www . truthtable . com ) is manager of knowledge socialization at the Thomas J . Watson Research Center . He received his Ph . D . degree in experimental psychology in 1971 from the University of Mich - igan . He has worked in a number of areas of human - computer interaction including speech systems , query systems , natural lan - guage systems , and design problem solving . In 1986 , he founded theArtiﬁcialIntelligenceLaboratoryatNYNEXwhereworkwascarriedoutinexpertsystems , human computer interaction , ma - chine vision , robotics , and computer - aided instruction . Dr . Tho - masrejoinedIBMResearchin1998toworkintheareaofknowl - edge management ( www . research . ibm . com / knowsoc / ) . WendyA . Kellogg IBMResearchDivision , ThomasJ . WatsonRe - search Center , P . O . Box 704 , Yorktown Heights , New York 10598 ( electronic mail : wkellogg @ us . ibm . com ) . Dr . Kellogg is manager of social computing at the Thomas J . Watson Research Center . Her current work involves designing and studying socially trans - lucent systems for computer - mediated collaboration in groups and organizations . Dr . Kellogg’s work in human - computer inter - action over the last 15 years has spanned research areas includ - ing HCI theory , evaluation methods , design , and development . She is an author of numerous papers and was coeditor in 2000 of a millennial special issue of Human - Computer Interaction en - titled “New Agendas for Human - Computer Interaction . ” Dr . Kellogg holds a Ph . D . degree in cognitive psychology from the University of Oregon . ThomasErickson IBMResearchDivision , ThomasJ . WatsonRe - search Center , P . O . Box 704 , Yorktown Heights , New York 10598 ( electronicmail : snowfall @ us . ibm . com ) . Mr . Erickson ( http : / / www . pliant . org / personal / Tom _ Erickson ) isaninteractiondesignerand researcher whose approach to systems design is shaped by work insociology , rhetoric , architecture , andurbandesign . Hehascon - tributedtothedesignofanumberofproductsandauthoredabout40publicationsontopicsrangingfrompersonalelectronicnote - books to pattern languages and virtual community . Originally trained as a cognitive psychologist at the University of Califor - nia , San Diego , he spent ﬁve years at a startup company , nine years at Apple Research , and ﬁnally joined IBM in 1997 as a re - search staff member . His primary agenda is studying and design - ing systems that support network mediated group interaction . THOMAS , KELLOGG , AND ERICKSON IBM SYSTEMS JOURNAL , VOL 40 , NO 4 , 2001 884