Semi - Automated Questions as a Cognitive Stimulus in Idea Generation Dominik Siemon University of Braunschweig d . siemon @ tu - bs . de Taras Rarog University of Braunschweig t . rarog @ tu - braunschweig . de Susanne Robra - Bissantz University of Braunschweig s . robra - bissantz @ tu - bs . de Abstract Creativity is the source for innovation and is responsible for ongoing and sustainable progress within companies . Over the years , different theories and practices have been established to enhance creativity and to produce innovative ideas . A number of creativity support systems have been designed , implemented and tested to foster and optimize creativity processes . However , the full potential of information technology has not yet been fully exhausted . For this research we have implemented an innovative creativity support system , which stimulates a user during the stage of idea generation . The system semi - automatically generates external stimuli in the form of questions that represent the core issues of a task . The experiment we conducted shows , that individuals , who are exposed to the semi - automated questions produce better and more versatile ideas than individuals that are not exposed to the semi - automated questions . Our findings endorse the use of novel algorithms for creativity support systems . 1 . Introduction and motivation Creativity is a frequently discussed topic and is often related to the success of companies [ 23 ] . Due to globalization and the increasing pressure to innovate , especially in information technology , competition between various companies increases substantially [ 56 ] . Often , employee generated ideas bring innovations to the market and thus increase business success [ 43 ] . Therefore , managers increasingly work to promote the innovation process . An important aspect in this process is the generation and evaluation of novel and good ideas [ 48 ] . Thus , companies try to promote and enhance the generation of ideas with the use of various creativity techniques . In addition , information technology has benefited creativity support [ 67 , 69 ] . Until now , different Creativity Support Systems ( CSS ) have been developed , using information technology to enhance creativity [ 44 , 46 , 69 ] . Major factors , that enhance and influence creativity , are external sources . These so - called stimuli differ in nature and help to form new associations , that lead to better ideas [ 65 ] . The generation of ideas relies on the ability to combine existing knowledge and to build new associations in order to produce novel ideas [ 1 , 19 , 28 , 49 ] . This ideation process can be enhanced by various creativity techniques , which add external stimuli to expand the solution space [ 21 , 32 , 48 , 72 ] . These stimuli aim to activate new solutions for individuals or groups , who are working on a creative task . Group techniques , such as brainstorming , aim to stimulate creativity in a collective group [ 53 , 74 ] . Working in groups has a high potential of social and cognitive stimulating factors due to other group members and their knowledge , skills and ideas [ 18 , 25 , 52 ] . Group Creativity Support Systems ( GCSS ) improve this by using IT to provide communication and information sharing functionalities . In addition , CSS can help to manually search for inspiration or to get inspired by others . However , automated idea stimulation is rare and creativity techniques rely on manually generated stimuli from moderators or other group members [ 12 , 21 , 27 , 38 , 65 ] . Implementing and adding an IT - system that automatically generates stimulating content to the idea process can enhance individual creativity by acting as an external stimulus [ 7 , 8 , 24 ] . Research however often neglects the actual role of the IT artifact [ 67 ] . In our research we develop a CSS , which supports individuals during the idea generation . The system offers semi - automated questions related to a task that should be addressed by the idea generator . These questions are intended to stimulate her / him in addition to the manually generated content . We hypothesize ( H1 ) that the ideas generated with the additional semi - automated questions are more novel and more effective than the ones without the semi - automated questions . 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 1530 - 1605 / 16 $ 31 . 00 © 2016 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2016 . 39 257 2 . Theoretical background The term creativity is widely used , but not clearly defined nor distinctly operationalized [ 54 , 62 ] . A definition by Amabile ( 1983 ) specifies that a product or response is creative to the extent that it is novel , appropriate , useful , correct and that it addresses a specific task [ 2 ] . Early research focused on the creative individual and what attributes , skills and characteristics creative people exhibit . This resulted in a variety of creativity tests , which intended to evaluate the creative potential of individuals [ 37 ] . In addition , Amabile ( 1983 ) states , that the generation of ideas is heuristic rather than algorithmic in nature [ 2 ] . This implies that a process is required to create an idea . Rhodes ( 1961 ) mentioned this process as one of his four P’s of creativity : person , process , product and press [ 61 ] . He defines the creative process in terms of the communication , learning , and thinking during idea generation . Other researcher specify the process of ideation as a recombination and transformation of existing knowledge [ 6 , 49 ] . A model by Mumford et al . ( 2012 ) divides the creative process into eight core phases : 1 ) problem definition , 2 ) information gathering , 3 ) information organization , 3 ) conceptual combination , 4 ) idea generation , 5 ) idea evaluation , 6 ) implementation planning , and 7 ) solution monitoring [ 51 ] . These eight core phases can be categorized into two sub - processes according to the cognitive ability that is required : a convergent and a divergent sub - process [ 22 ] . In 1950 , Guilford first defined the difference between convergent and divergent thinking [ 30 ] . He discussed various individual characteristics that contribute to creativity . Guilford describes divergent thinking as the ability to develop a variety of unusual and diverse ideas . Convergent thinking is described as focusing on the targeted implementation , and the evaluation of individual ideas [ 30 , 34 , 50 , 74 ] . Apart from Guilford , other researcher also dealt with the question of classifying a creative person and how important the ability of divergent thinking is [ 3 , 5 , 11 , 35 , 75 ] . Divergent processes are phases like information gathering , content sharing , stimulation and combination . Convergent processes are phases like idea organization , evaluation and selection [ 10 , 34 , 74 ] . Divergent processes are highly influential and depend on external stimuli [ 34 , 66 ] , which is why creativity techniques are mainly used during idea generation . Assessing creativity is intensive and cannot be generalized . Approaches to creativity assessment can be divided into two parts [ 59 , 68 , 76 ] : assessing idea quantity and idea quality . Although idea quantity is often used as an indicator for a successful idea generation process , it is often incomplete and neglects the importance of idea quality . Amabile ( 1983 ) discloses that independent judges should assess the idea quality [ 2 ] . This assertion assumes that an idea is tangible and can be assessed . Many researchers use an assessment of the creative outcome as a proxy to evaluate the creative process [ 16 , 59 ] . Amabile ( 1983 ) suggested to use subjective measurements and argues , that judges are reliable in deciding what can be considered creative [ 2 ] . Thus , in our experiment , we use independent judges and creativity dimensions to assess the creative outcome . In this way , we attempt to evaluate the effect of our developed and implemented creativity technique on the creative process . Creativity techniques aim to enhance the creative outcome by altering the creative process , since it is the main factor influencing the creative product [ 22 , 27 , 32 ] . Various creativity support techniques have already been developed and are common practices in the daily business [ 23 , 53 ] . The main goal is to positively influence and stimulate creativity on a cognitive or social level [ 17 , 25 ] . Creativity support systems are implementations of different creativity techniques and aim to additionally support these techniques with the use of information technology [ 4 , 60 , 74 ] . 2 . 1 Creativity support systems Information technology is ubiquitous and already found its way to the research of creativity [ 23 , 26 , 52 , 69 ] . With the help of information systems it is possible to offer support to creative activities . The role of information during the ideation process is vast , which suggests a comprehensive support with information technology . Thereby , IT can support organizing , providing and processing information [ 4 ] . The specification of creativity support systems is imprecise , however , every system that provides , processes or organizes information during the creativity process can be seen as a CSS [ 69 ] . Special attention can be paid to influencing or stimulating information , which is offered or enhanced by a CSS . Furthermore CSS can be grouped into individual ( ICSS ) and group creativity support systems ( GCSS ) . ICSS approach individuals during a creative process , whereas GCSS use information technology to combine the skills and knowledge of a group [ 46 ] . By synchronous communication , information sharing and idea comparison , external stimuli are created . In 2013 , Voigt and Bergener conducted a literature review and developed design principles for GCSS [ 74 ] . They take different negative group effects into account and propose an integrated framework for software developers . The framework consists of 12 258 different design principles , regarding cognitive and social processes . In ICSS , group effects are excluded and the focus is on the creative process of individuals and how they can be supported [ 46 ] . Shneiderman ( 2007 ) especially highlights information visualization tools , development environments or manipulation tools as ICSS [ 69 ] . These systems are based on a passive support , where the user does not actively seek information . Active support however means that an individual seeks supporting and stimulating information on her / his own . General search engines , special association databases or other databases can be seen as active CSS [ 32 , 42 ] . Whether there is an active or passive support , we focus on CSS that attempt to stimulate and influence the ideation process , rather than support the organization and evaluation of ideas . Therefore , we pay special attention to the nature of creative stimuli and develop a semi - automated algorithm that seeks to enhance the ideation process of individuals . 2 . 2 Creative stimuli A stimulus is anything external that may have an effective impact or influence on a system . A creative stimulus is therefore , anything that influences a creative process . Creative stimuli are often referred to as an inspirations and already have a long tradition in research [ 15 , 53 , 61 ] . A creative process results in a creative outcome , thus , it differs when a creative process is or is not exposed to a creative stimulus [ 32 , 36 ] . The creative stimulus is anything external , thus , it originates from the creative environment . Rhodes ( 1961 ) defines this as “the press” of a creative process [ 61 ] . Besides the press , other individuals can influence the creative process by additional contributions or even their presence alone [ 18 , 25 , 26 , 52 ] . Early research dealt with the creative mind and what kind of characteristics a creative person has to have to create novel ideas [ 35 , 63 ] . Results show , that openness and the ability to form associations and to make mental leaps , is related to creativity [ 41 , 63 , 75 ] . In addition , factors like training [ 3 , 9 , 73 ] and motivation [ 3 ] can enhance creativity . In 2000 , Santanen et al . developed the Cognitive Network Theory ( CNT ) to explain why individuals overlook nearly 80 % of the solution space when facing complex problems [ 64 ] . The theory is grounded on the limitations of the human memory and states that various associations ( so - called frames ) are linked in a cognitive network and are activated by stimuli . These associations result from experience and knowledge . However conventional stimuli tend to activate familiar frames , which is why new stimuli should be used to activate other frames and expand the solution space [ 31 , 64 ] . Creative stimuli can be of different nature , depending on their underlying cognitive principle and their general type . In 2010 , Knoll and Horton analyzed 101 creativity techniques in regard to their underlying principle and how they change the perspective of the idea generator . They found out , that only three techniques provoke a change of perspective , which could lead to overall superior ideas [ 38 ] . In our research we , however , do not focus on the underlying principle of a creative stimuli , but on the actual type . For example , random stimuli are creativity techniques that are based on randomization and expose random words , pictures or other randomly generated content to an idea generator [ 36 , 40 , 44 , 58 ] . In our research we created such a stimulus in the form of randomized semi - automated questions . This stimulus can be grouped into the word stimuli . Different studies examined the effect of word stimuli on creativity . Results show that related words , word combinations and lists of words can enhance creativity [ 44 , 47 , 57 ] . Recent research however states that visualizations outperform word stimuli [ 45 ] . Chiu and Shu ( 2012 ) specified the distance of words to the task and found out that opposite words have higher positive impact on the creativity than similar related words [ 12 ] . Knoll and Horton ( 2011 ) support this with their evaluation on near and far analogies as external stimuli , where far analogies have a higher positive impact on ideation outcomes . In our research we focus on word stimuli in the form of questions , which stimulate the ideation by considering different and new aspects [ 38 ] . We hypothesize ( H2 ) , that the use of randomized semi - automated questions enhances the diversity of an idea and the number of aspects that are considered . 3 . Methodology We follow the Design Science Research Methodology to create new insights and results through the design of an innovative artifact [ 33 ] . Principles , practices and procedures of the methodology incorporate a consistent research and include a Design Science process to follow . This process consists of six steps : problem identification and motivation , definition of the objectives for a solution , design and development , demonstration , evaluation and communication [ 55 ] . Even so , recent design science literature suggests substituting the traditional results section with a better description and functionality of the artifact [ 29 ] , we still set a high value on the evaluation results of our conducted experiment . We identified a research gap and recognized the absence of actual creativity supporting 259 artifacts using external stimuli . Especially the use of information retrieval algorithms to automatically generate external stimuli is not present . Therefore a major focus was set on the definition of the objectives , as well as the design and development of the innovative artifact in order to achieve a satisfying solution . The following section shows in detail how this solution was achieved . 3 . 1 Web - based artifact Following the Design Science research method , we designed and developed an artifact , to address our hypotheses [ 33 , 55 ] . Our artifact is a comprehensive web - based creativity support system with a variety of functionalities . For our purposes we disabled group functionalities , like idea sharing , social comparison , idea evaluation , commenting and shared idea generation . Therefore the system can be seen as an ICSS , where users are working individually on an idea . This ensures no influence and stimuli by other group members or content . Users can create a task or a problem to be solved by other users . Creating a task includes a textual description and various questions , which should be answered by the idea generators . The description can additionally be supported by a picture , which can be added to the task . The questions represent the core issues of the task and should be addressed by the idea generators . The system first analyzes the original questions . This is done by tokenization and normalization of the question . Tokenization is the process of breaking a text up into single words , followed by a normalization process , which maps variants of these words to a single and standardized form . In addition , stop words are removed in order to identify significant words . The system then proposes several alternative terms to the task creator , from which she / he can choose . For proposing alternative terms , the lexical database WordNet 3 . 0 is used [ 20 ] . In WordNet , the words ( nouns ) are hierarchically arranged according to their semantic features in synonym groups , so - called synsets . The single synsets are linked according to conceptual - semantic and lexical relations [ 20 ] . For the word suggestions the relations synonymy , hyperonymy and hyponymy between the synsets were used . Hyperonymy describes the compound of the type super ordination ( X is the preamble of Y ) and hyponymy describes a subsumption relation ( X is a kind of Y ) between the synsets . Then , words are suggested to the idea generator , which are arranged in WordNet at higher or deeper hierarchical levels and have one or more related synsets to the input word . From the set of selected words , the shuffle function generates questions , which should serve the idea generator as a stimulus . The following screenshot ( Figure 1 ) shows the task generation with the functionalities of the semi - automated question generation . After the user has provided the first question , it is necessary that she / he also chooses alternative terms for significant words within the question . The grey words are identified by the system as stop words and are considered as insignificant . Therefore , no alternatives are being generated . Other words that have not been identified as stop words are marked as green , or as significant . If the system misjudged a word as not being a stop word it can be manually fixed ( X button next to the word ) . The user can then navigate through the automated generated words and select them . The task generation process is then completed and the task is available to the system . Figure 1 : Semi - automated question generation Every user can then browse through the tasks , select one and write an idea addressing the problem ( see Figure 2 ) . The system provides a textual idea editor with various formatting options and the functionality of adding images to the idea . When creating an idea , the user refers to the problem description and the core issues stated by the original questions . In addition , the system provides the user with the functionality to randomly shuffle the originally generated questions . This is where the semi - automated words , selected by the task generator , are being used . Swapping the prior chosen significant words with alternatives , generates new questions . This can be seen as an external stimulus , which forms new and unknown associations . Figure 2 shows the idea editor , the questions and the shuffle function . 260 Figure 2 : Idea generation with shuffle function 3 . 2 Experiment structure We conducted an experiment with a total of 39 participants ( 27 males and 13 females ) . All participants were German university undergraduate and graduate students . They were students with majors in the fields of technology - oriented business administration , industrial engineering , computer science and other technical related studies . Even thought the experiment was part of a lecture , the participation was not mandatory in order to pass the lecture . Still over 85 % of the students participated . We previously asked all participants to either work as a a ) task generator , b ) idea generator or c ) idea evaluator . Group a ) and c ) each consist of five participants whereas group b ) had 29 participants . To generate unrelated and individual tasks , the task generators were asked to formulate a task , which the idea generators should address in their idea generation . The only requirement given was , that the task or problem should be common and not require specific topic - related knowledge . A task consists of two parts . The first part is a general problem description , which gives background information about the problem . The second part consists of major questions that represent the task to be focused on by the idea generators . For these questions the stated algorithms generates different synonyms and related words , which were added by the task generator ( see Figure 1 ) . Overall five different tasks were generated , four tasks with two questions and one task with three questions . Overall 174 automatically generated synonyms and related words were generated and selected for all five tasks . This means an average of ~ 35 words for each task and approximately 17 words for each question . The following table exemplarily shows one task , the two manually generated questions ( Q1 and Q2 ) and three automatically generated questions ( Alt ) . Fixed words with no alternatives are greyed out . Task By the year 2050 the number of over 80 year olds in Germany will more than double . Many feel abandoned by family and friends . So in addition to their physical health problems they also might have to deal with mental concerns . To this day there is not enough nursing staff to care for and to accompany the elderly . Due to the fact , that those older people are isolated , they often don´t have the chance to speak about their troubles . Q1 How can we protect older person from social isolation ? Alt1 . 2 How can we keep back older parent from social non - engagement ? Alt1 . 2 How can we protect older handicapped person from social non - involvement ? Alt1 . 3 How can we preserve older deaf person from social disconnectedness ? Q2 How can we raise attention in the society for that problem ? Alt2 . 1 How can we increase knowledge in the governance for that matter of fact ? Alt2 . 2 How can we build care in the family for that question ? Alt2 . 3 How can we improve work in the community for that situation ? Table 1 : Exemplarily task with two questions and each with three alternatives The task generators had four days to formulate a task and to insert them into the system . For the second phase of the experiment , the idea generators were asked to generate an idea for a chosen task . We divided the participants into two groups , a control group ( CG ) and a test group ( TG ) . The test group was given the functionality to shuffle between the automatically generated questions . Participants were divided randomly , making up a control group with p TG = 15 participants and a test group with p TG = 14 participants . Both groups were given the same instructions : make use of the system and create an idea addressing the stated task . The selection of the tasks was almost evenly distributed in both groups . However , three tasks were preferred and had six , seven and eight ideas . Two tasks had only four ideas . Nevertheless , both the test group and the control group addressed every task at least once . The idea generators had four days to create an idea for a task . Overall every idea generator created a written idea with an average length of 221 words . The shortest idea had 110 and the longest 410 words . After the ideation , the idea generators ( TG ) were asked to participate in a short survey . This survey aimed to evaluate the experience and its perceived effectiveness by the provided questions and the 261 shuffle functionality . Details and results are presented and discussed in the next section . After all ideas were generated , the five idea evaluators assessed the ideas . Each evaluator assessed every idea ( except of one evaluator , who unintentionally neglected two ideas ) , therefore there were five evaluations per idea and overall 143 evaluations . Assessing a creative outcome is difficult and complex . Many researchers assess idea quantity and idea quality to the same extent . However , we restricted our evaluation to idea quality , as we did not intend to have as many ideas generated as possible . We asked for one idea per participant and concentrated on the evaluation of its diversity . Thus , the respective idea should cover larger areas of the solution space , instead of a variety of ideas that cover different aspects [ 39 ] . By doing so , we were also able to measure the correlation between idea diversity and novelty . Dean et al . ( 2006 ) conducted a comprehensive literature review on how to assess ideas and proposed eight dimensions for idea evaluation [ 16 ] . These eight dimensions cover a wide range of considerations from the novelty and originality of an idea , up to the completeness and implementability . In our research however , we focus on the effect of the external stimuli on the idea generator . Besides of assessing the novelty ( rarity , originality and paradigm relatedness ) and the relevance we additionally evaluated the influence of the semi - automated questions by assessing the aspects and facets of each idea . We added the dimension diversity , aspects and facets of the idea to let the judges assess how versatile the idea is and how many paradigms and aspects are considered . This dimension is supposed to test if the semi - automated questions were able to stimulate new aspects , which were covered in the idea . We assessed this by rating the idea , as an idea , which either considers only one aspect ( 1 ) , some aspects ( 2 ) , a few aspects ( 3 ) , many aspects ( 4 ) or a lot of aspects ( 5 ) . In addition we asked for an actual number of aspects . The following table shows the dimensions and their sub - dimensions assessed by the idea evaluators . Dimension Attribute 5 - point scale Novelty Rarity From 1 = highly rare to 5 = not rare at all Originality From 1 = highly original to 5 = not original at all Paradigm Relatedness From 1 = paradigm preserving to 5 = paradigm modifying Relevance Effectiveness From 1 = highly effective to 5 = not effective at all Stimuli Diversity From 1 = only one aspect to 5 = a lot aspects Number of aspects number Table 2 : Assessment dimensions to be judged by the idea evaluators The idea evaluators had two days to assess all ideas . Instructions and description of every dimension including the article by Dean et al . , were sent to the evaluators before the assessment . This should ensure an identical understanding on how to evaluate an idea amongst each evaluator . In addition to that , the idea evaluators were asked to first read every idea in order to get an overview of the overall quality , before starting the assessment . During the idea assessment , the system also provided information about every rating dimension to the judges . The assessment was done with a five - point rating scale , excluding the dimension number of aspects , where a numeric character was necessary . The results of the assessment and the post idea generation survey are discussed in the next section . 3 . 3 Results The idea generators participated in a survey after the ideation process . This survey aimed to evaluate the effect of the shuffled questions . Only the test group ( p TG = 14 ) , who used the shuffle function , participated in the survey . The following table shows the questionnaire and the results . We used a Likert - scale for the responses ( 1 = strongly agree , 2 = agree , 3 = neither agree nor disagree , 4 = disagree , 5 = strongly disagree ) . Question Results ( p TG = 14 ) Likert - scale 1 2 3 4 5 The shuffled questions helped me to generate my idea . 5 3 4 1 1 Due to the shuffled questions I considered more aspects for my idea . 3 5 5 1 0 Table 3 : Results of the post idea generation survey The results give first evidence , whether the shuffle function was able to stimulate the idea 262 generator and influence the creative outcome . The judges then evaluated , whether this influence was positive , by assessing every generated idea . We calculated the median of all five judges for every idea . Table 4 and table 5 show the median of the five judges , which we used for the discussion . We additionally calculated the mean , but did not list it in the tables , as it did not differ substantially ( < 0 , 8 ) from the median ( average standard deviation of 1 , 0 ) . This means , that the judges evaluated similarly . In only two evaluations , the median deviates from the mean more than 0 , 8 . However , Krippendorf’s alpha ( α = 0 , 423 ) indicates that the training of the idea evaluators could be improved . The following table gives a comprehensive overview of the conducted evaluation . (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:2) p TG = 14 Rarity Originality Paradigm relatedness Effective - ness Diversity Number of aspects  2 , 57 2 , 50 2 , 75 2 , 14 2 , 71 3 , 14 x̃ 2 , 5 2 , 5 3 2 3 3 σ x 0 , 82 0 , 91 0 , 77 0 , 74 1 , 10 1 , 19 Table 4 : Results of the idea evaluation for the test group (cid:2) (cid:12)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:2) p CG = 15 Rarity Originality Paradigm relatedness Effective - ness Diversity Number of aspects  4 , 07 3 , 80 2 , 00 3 , 23 1 , 47 1 , 57 x̃ 4 4 2 3 1 , 5 1 σ x 0 , 65 0 , 73 0 , 73 0 , 54 0 , 46 0 , 70 Table 5 : Results of the idea evaluation for the control group The results show a substantial difference between the test group and the control group . The test group produced ideas of higher rarity , originality and problem relatedness . In addition , the ideas of the test group were rated as more diverse and had on average at least twice as many aspects . However , the difference between the paradigm relatedness is not that substantial . The TG produced slightly more paradigm modifying ideas than the CG . The following section summarizes and discusses the results of the conducted experiment and the survey . 3 . 4 Discussion of the results The post idea generation survey indicated that an influence appeared during the ideation process . The participants of the test group stated that the shuffle function supported the idea generation and that more aspects were considered . The assessment of the ideas confirmed this influence and showed that the external stimuli , due to the additional questions , resulted in overall better ideas . The assessment verifies a positive effect on the idea quality , as the ideas generated by the test group are overall more rare , original , slightly more paradigm modified and more effective . This supports our first hypothesis . Our second hypothesis is also supported by the evaluation of the results . The ideas of the test group are more diverse and consider more aspects . The diversity rating is on average 1 , 24 points higher and on median twice as high for the test group . However , the standard deviation shows that not every idea generated by the test group was better than any idea of the control group . Idea # 14 of the TG for example had a rarity and originality rating of 4 and a diversity rating of 2 . In comparison to the idea # 5 of the CG , which had a rarity and originality rating of 3 and a diversity rating of 2 . This implies that the ideas of the TG are considered to be of higher quality than those of the CG . In general the standard deviation is substantial higher within the test group , especially regarding diversity . This means that on average the test group produced more diverse ideas . However , results show a few outliers . Another interesting fact is the correlation between diversity and idea rarity as well as originality . Every idea that has a diversity rating greater than or equal to three ( ∑ = 8 ; only ideas of the TG ) , has an average rarity rating of 2 , 25 and an average originality rating of 2 , 125 . This shows that versatile ideas are of higher overall quality than ideas with low diversity . However , one idea of the test group has the lowest diversity rating and the second highest rarity and originality rating . The highest given diversity rating in the CG was 2 . The average of all ideas , with a diversity rating of 2 in the CG ( ∑ = 6 ) , has an average rarity and diversity rating of 3 , 83 . These values are lower or equal ( thus better ) to the overall average of all the ideas generated by the CG . That additionally supports the correlation of diversity and idea quality . In summary our hypotheses are supported and a positive influence , due to semi - automated questions , exists . The additional semi - automated questions positively influenced the idea generation and resulted in ideas , which are more diverse and consider more aspects . 4 . Conclusion and outlook The contribution of our research is twofold : First , we developed an innovative artifact that is able to automatically generate word stimuli , which are then manually selected by a task generator to form new questions . Second , this semi - automation results in a positive influence of the ideation process and better 263 ideas . The system uses algorithms and word databases that offer comprehensive stimuli , such as synonyms and related words . The novel artifact and the underlying technology can be used to develop comprehensive creativity support systems , which benefit from large databases that can stimulate the creative process . However , an improvement of the algorithm can insure that a manual selection is not necessary and that the resulting questions are grammatically correct . In addition , the algorithm can be used to form further word combinations or even used to query visual representations of the words . The potential of using automation to create external stimuli is immense , since almost unlimited stimuli can be produced using information technology . Whether these are word stimuli , image stimuli or other stimuli , algorithms can expand the solution space of individuals . Moreover semi - automation , e . g . manual adjustments can enhance the quality of the external stimuli . However , this again would involve time and resources and limit the solution space due to the manual selection . The experiment we conducted demonstrates , that the test group , using the shuffle function , outperformed the control group . This proves that additional stimuli lead to better ideas , as the CG had only two / three questions and the TG had numerous automatically generated questions . More external stimuli therefore result in better and more diverse ideas . The limitation of our evaluation is consequently the actual amount of stimuli the participants were exposed to . In addition , the small number of participants in our experiment hinders the generalizability of the results . An increased number of participants and a longer idea generation period could support the results . Furthermore , an evaluation , whether more questions result in better and versatile ideas , should be conducted . Our findings however show , that an IT system is capable of automatically generating stimulating content that has a positive effect on the creative process and the creative outcome . In order to achieve this result , it is yet desirable to have an automated system in place that generates automated stimuli for which one otherwise would require an intensive formulation of questions by experts . Therefore , automation saves time and resources . In addition , automation or the use of information technology can result in higher and more diverse stimuli . The possibility to use different databases , or the so - called big data , could immensely enhance the creative processes [ 47 ] . Due to the diversity of available data , different and nearly endless stimuli can be generated by automation . Recent studies approach the potential of information technology in the field of creativity . These systems are designed to stimulate and support creativity up to a point where the system itself is capable of human - level creativity [ 13 , 14 , 24 , 70 , 71 ] . Overall it can be said , that the potential of IT is not yet fully exhausted and future research can foster the role of automation in creativity . 5 . References [ 1 ] Adamson , R . E . Functional fixedness as related to problem solving : a repetition of three experiments . Journal of Experimental Psychology 44 , 4 ( 1952 ) , 288 – 291 . [ 2 ] Amabile , T . M . The social psychology of creativity : A componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 45 , 2 ( 1983 ) , 357 – 376 . [ 3 ] Amabile , T . M . Creativity in context : Update to “The Social Psychology of Creativity . ” Westview Press , Boulder , CO , US , 1996 . [ 4 ] Bawden , D . Information systems and the stimulation of creativity . Journal of Information Science 12 , 5 ( 1986 ) , 203 – 216 . [ 5 ] Benedek , M . , Mühlmann , C . , Jauk , E . , and Neubauer , A . C . Assessment of Divergent Thinking by means of the Subjective Top - Scoring Method : Effects of the Number of Top - Ideas and Time - on - Task on Reliability and Validity . Psychology of aesthetics , creativity , and the arts 7 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 341 – 349 . [ 6 ] Boden , M . A . Dimensions of Creativity . MIT Press , 1996 . [ 7 ] Boden , M . A . Creativity and artificial intelligence . Artificial Intelligence 103 , 1 – 2 ( 1998 ) , 347 – 356 . [ 8 ] Boden , M . A . Computer Models of Creativity . AI Magazine 30 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 23 . [ 9 ] de Bono , E . Creativity and quality . : Quality Management in Healthcare 2 , 3 ( 1994 ) , 1 - 4 [ 10 ] Briggs , R . O . , De Vreede , G . - J . , and Nunamaker Jr , J . F . Collaboration engineering with ThinkLets to pursue sustained success with group support systems . Journal of Management Information Systems 19 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 31 – 64 . [ 11 ] Brophy , D . R . Comparing the Attributes , Activities , and Performance of Divergent , Convergent , and Combination Thinkers . Creativity Research Journal 13 , 3 - 4 ( 2001 ) , 439 – 455 . [ 12 ] Chiu , I . and Shu , L . H . Investigating effects of oppositely related semantic stimuli on design concept creativity . Journal of Engineering Design 23 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 271 – 296 . [ 13 ] Colton , S . Creativity Versus the Perception of Creativity in Computational Systems In AAAI Spring Symposium : Creative Intelligent Systems , ( 2008 ) , 14 - 20 . [ 14 ] Colton , S . , López de Mantaras , R . , and Stock , O . Computational Creativity : Coming of Age In AI Magazine 30 , 3 , ( 2009 ) , 11 - 14 . [ 15 ] Csikszentmihalyi , M . Creativity : Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . Harper Perennial , New York , 1997 . 264 [ 16 ] Dean , D . L . , Hender , J . M . , Rodgers , T . L . , and Santanen , E . L . Identifying Quality , Novel , and Creative Ideas : Constructs and Scales for Idea Evaluation . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 7 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 30 . [ 17 ] Dennis , A . R . , Aronson , J . E . , Heninger , W . G . , and Walker , E . D . , II . Structuring Time and Task in Electronic Brainstorming . MIS Quarterly 23 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 95 – 108 . [ 18 ] Duncan , N . and Paradice , D . Creativity in GDSS : an integration of creativity , group dynamics , and problem solving theory . Proceedings of the 25th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 1992 ) , 277 – 287 . [ 19 ] Duncker , K . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs 58 , 5 ( 1945 ) , i – 113 . [ 20 ] Fellbaum , C . WordNet . In The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics . Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2012 . [ 21 ] Fink , A . , Grabner , R . H . , Gebauer , D . , Reishofer , G . , Koschutnig , K . , and Ebner , F . Enhancing creativity by means of cognitive stimulation : Evidence from an fMRI study . NeuroImage 52 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1687 – 1695 . [ 22 ] Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , and Smith , S . M . Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications . A Bradford Book , Cambridge , Mass . , 1996 . [ 23 ] Fischer , G . , Giaccardi , E . , Eden , H . , Sugimoto , M . , and Ye , Y . Beyond Binary Choices : Integrating Individual and Social Creativity . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 63 , 4 - 5 ( 2005 ) , 482 – 512 . [ 24 ] Ford , N . Information retrieval and creativity : towards support for the original thinker . Journal of Documentation 55 , 5 ( 1999 ) , 528 – 542 . [ 25 ] Forster , F . and Brocco , M . Understanding Creativity - Technique Based Problem Solving Processes . In I . Lovrek , R . J . Howlett and L . C . Jain , eds . , Knowledge - Based Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2008 , 806 – 813 . [ 26 ] Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Bastianutti , L . M . , and Nunamaker , J . F . Electronic Brainstorming And Group Size . Academy of Management Journal 35 , 2 ( 1992 ) , 350 – 369 . [ 27 ] Gassmann , O . and Zeschky , M . Opening up the Solution Space : The Role of Analogical Thinking for Breakthrough Product Innovation . Creativity and Innovation Management 17 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 97 – 106 . [ 28 ] Gick , M . L . and Holyoak , K . J . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology 12 , 3 ( 1980 ) , 306 – 355 . [ 29 ] Gregor , S . and Hevner , A . R . Positioning and Presenting Design Science Research for Maximum Impact . MIS Q . 37 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 337 – 356 . [ 30 ] Guilford , J . P . Creativity . American Psychologist 5 , 9 ( 1950 ) , 444 – 454 . [ 31 ] Hender , J . M . , Dean , D . L . , Rodgers , T . L . , and Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . An Examination of the Impact of Stimuli Type and GSS Structure on Creativity : Brainstorming versus Non - Brainstorming Techniques in a GSS Environment . Journal of Management Information Systems 18 , 4 ( 2002 ) , 59 – 85 . [ 32 ] Herring , S . R . , Jones , B . R . , and Bailey , B . P . Idea Generation Techniques among Creative Professionals . Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2009 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 33 ] Hevner , A . R . , March , S . T . , Park , J . , and Ram , S . Design Science in Information Systems Research . MIS Q . 28 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 75 – 105 . [ 34 ] Hilliges , O . , Terrenghi , L . , Boring , S . , Kim , D . , Richter , H . , and Butz , A . Designing for Collaborative Creative Problem Solving . Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition , ACM ( 2007 ) , 137 – 146 . [ 35 ] Hocevar , D . Intelligence , divergent thinking , and creativity . Intelligence 4 , 1 ( 1980 ) , 25 – 40 . [ 36 ] Howard , T . J . , Dekoninck , E . A . , and Culley , S . J . The use of creative stimuli at early stages of industrial product innovation . Research in Engineering Design 21 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 263 – 274 . [ 37 ] Kim , K . H . Can We Trust Creativity Tests ? A Review of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ) . Creativity Research Journal 18 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 3 – 14 . [ 38 ] Knoll , S . W . and Horton , G . The Impact of Stimuli Characteristics on the Ideation Process : An Evaluation of the Change of Perspective ‘Analogy . ’ Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2011 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 39 ] Knoll , S . W . , Horton , G . , Krull , C . , and Dittmar , T . Improving the Effectiveness of Ideation Using Analogies : Choosing the Right External Stimuli . Journal of Creativity and Business Innovation 1 , ( 2015 ) , 5 – 18 . [ 40 ] Kosorukoff , A . Human based genetic algorithm . 2001 IEEE International Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , ( 2001 ) , 3464 – 3469 . [ 41 ] Krampen , G . Promotion of creativity ( divergent productions ) and convergent productions by systematic - relaxation exercises : empirical evidence from five experimental studies with children , young adults , and elderly . European Journal of Personality 11 , 2 ( 1997 ) , 83 – 99 . [ 42 ] Kules , B . Supporting creativity with search tools . Creativity Support Tools , ( 2005 ) , 53 – 64 . [ 43 ] Lopez - Cabrales , A . , Pérez - Luño , A . , and Cabrera , R . V . Knowledge as a mediator between HRM practices and innovative activity . Human Resource Management 48 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 485 – 503 . [ 44 ] MacCrimmon , K . R . and Wagner , C . Stimulating Ideas Through Creativity Software . Management Science 40 , 11 ( 1994 ) , 1514 – 1532 . [ 45 ] Malaga , R . A . The effect of stimulus modes and associative distance in individual creativity support systems . Decision Support Systems 29 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 125 – 141 . [ 46 ] Massetti , B . An Empirical Examination of the Value of Creativity Support Systems on Idea Generation . MIS Quarterly 20 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 83 – 97 . [ 47 ] Massetti , B . , White , N . H . , and Spitler , V . K . The impact of the World Wide Web on idea generation . Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , ( 1999 ) , 1 - 5 . 265 [ 48 ] Mattimore , B . W . 99 % Inspiration : Tips , Tales , and Techniques for Liberating Your Business Creativity . AMACOM , New York , 1993 . [ 49 ] Mednick , S . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review 69 , 3 ( 1962 ) , 220 – 232 . [ 50 ] Müller - Wienbergen , F . , Müller , O . , Seidel , S . , and Becker , J . Leaving the Beaten Tracks in Creative Work – A Design Theory for Systems that Support Convergent and Divergent Thinking . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 12 , 11 ( 2011 ) . [ 51 ] Mumford , M . D . , Medeiros , K . E . , and Partlow , P . J . Creative Thinking : Processes , Strategies , and Knowledge . The Journal of Creative Behavior 46 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 30 – 47 . [ 52 ] Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Applegate , L . M . , and Konsynski , B . R . Facilitating Group Creativity : Experience with a Group Decision Support System . Journal of Management Information Systems 3 , 4 ( 1987 ) , 5 – 19 . [ 53 ] Osborn , A . F . Applied imagination . Scribner’S , Oxford , England , 1953 . [ 54 ] Parkhurst , H . B . Confusion , Lack of Consensus , and the Definition of Creativity as a Construct . The Journal of Creative Behavior 33 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 55 ] Peffers , K . , Tuunanen , T . , Rothenberger , M . , and Chatterjee , S . A Design Science Research Methodology for Information Systems Research . Journal of Management Information Systems 24 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 45 – 77 . [ 56 ] Porter , M . E . and Linde , C . van der . Green and Competitive : Ending the Stalemate . Harvard Business Review , ( 1995 ) . [ 57 ] R . A . Proctor . A Creative Decision Support System . Leadership & Organization Development Journal 14 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 13 – 17 . [ 58 ] Ray , M . and Myers , R . Creativity in Business . Main Street Books , New York , 1988 . [ 59 ] Reinig , B . A . and Briggs , R . O . On The Relationship Between Idea - Quantity and Idea - Quality During Ideation . Group Decision and Negotiation 17 , 5 ( 2008 ) , 403 – 420 . [ 60 ] Resnick , M . , Myers , B . , Nakakoji , K . , et al . Design Principles for Tools to Support Creative Thinking . Institute for Software Research , ( 2005 ) . [ 61 ] Rhodes , M . An Analysis of Creativity . The Phi Delta Kappan 42 , 7 ( 1961 ) , 305 – 310 . [ 62 ] Runco , M . A . Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology 55 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 657 – 687 . [ 63 ] Runco , M . A . and Acar , S . Divergent Thinking as an Indicator of Creative Potential . Creativity Research Journal 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 66 – 75 . [ 64 ] Santanen , E . L . , Briggs , R . O . , and de Vreede , G . The cognitive network model of creativity : a new causal model of creativity and a new brainstorming technique . Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2000 ) , 1 - 10 . [ 65 ] Santanen , E . L . , Briggs , R . O . , and de Vreede , G . The impact of stimulus diversity on creative solution generation : an evaluation of the cognitive network model of creativity . Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2003 ) , 1 - 10 . [ 66 ] Santanen , E . L . , Briggs , R . O . , and de Vreede , G . - J . A Cognitive Network Model of Creativity : A Renewed Focus on Brainstorming Methodology . Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Information Systems , Association for Information Systems ( 1999 ) , 489 – 494 . [ 67 ] Seidel , S . , Müller - Wienbergen , F . , and Becker , J . The Concept of Creativity in the Information Systems Discipline : Past , Present , and Prospects . Communications of the Association for Information Systems 27 , 1 ( 2010 ) . [ 68 ] Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , and Vargas - Hernandez , N . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies 24 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 111 – 134 . [ 69 ] Shneiderman , B . Creativity Support Tools : Accelerating Discovery and Innovation . Commun . ACM 50 , 12 ( 2007 ) , 20 – 32 . [ 70 ] Siemon , D . , Eckardt , L . , and Robra - Bissantz , S . Tracking Down the Negative Group Creativity Effects with the Help of an Artificial Intelligence - Like Support System . Proceedings of the 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2015 ) , 236 – 243 . [ 71 ] Siemon , D . and Robra - Bissantz , S . Integration of Information Retrieval in Creativity Support : A Prototype to Support Divergent Thinking . In M . C . Tremblay , D . VanderMeer , M . Rothenberger , A . Gupta and V . Yoon , eds . , Advancing the Impact of Design Science : Moving from Theory to Practice . Springer International Publishing , 2014 , 388 – 392 . [ 72 ] Smith , G . F . Idea - Generation Techniques : A Formulary of Active Ingredients . The Journal of Creative Behavior 32 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 107 – 134 . [ 73 ] VanGundy , A . B . Idea power : Techniques & resources to unleash the creativity in your organization . American Management Association , 1992 . [ 74 ] Voigt , M . and Bergener , K . Enhancing Creativity in Groups – Proposition of an Integrated Framework for Designing Group Creativity Support Systems . Proceedings of the 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 2013 ) , 225 – 234 . [ 75 ] Ward , W . C . Convergent and Divergent Measurement of Creativity in Children . Educational and Psychological Measurement 35 , 1 ( 1975 ) , 87 – 95 . [ 76 ] Wierenga , B . and Bruggen , G . H . van . The Dependent Variable in Research into the Effects of Creativity Support Systems : Quality and Quantity of Ideas . MIS Quarterly 22 , 1 ( 1998 ) , 81 – 87 . 266