The Effect of Using a Visual Representation Tool in a Teaching - Learning Sequence for Teaching Newton ’ s Third Law Antti Savinainen & Asko Mäkynen & Pasi Nieminen & Jouni Viiri Published online : 7 September 2015 # Springer Science + Business Media Dordrecht 2015 Abstract This paper presents a research - based teaching - learning sequence ( TLS ) that focuses on the notion of interaction in teaching Newton ’ s third law ( N3 law ) which is , as earlier studies have shown , a challenging topic for students to learn . The TLS made systematic use of a visual representation tool — an interaction diagram ( ID ) — highlighting interactions between objects and addressing the learning demand related to N3 law . This approach had been successful in enhancing students ’ understanding of N3 law in pilot studies conducted by teacher - researchers . However , it was unclear whether teachers , who have neither been involved with the research nor received intensive tutoring , could replicate the positive results in ordinary school settings . To address this question , we present an empirical study conducted in 10 Finnish upper secondary schools with students ( n = 261 , aged 16 ) taking their mandatory physics course . The study design involved three groups : the heavy ID group ( the TLS with seven to eight exercises on IDs ) , the light ID group ( two to three exercises on IDs ) and the no ID group ( no exercises on IDs ) . The heavy and light ID groups answered eight ID questions , and all the students answered four questions on N3 law after teaching the force concept . The findings clearly suggest that systematic use of the IDs in teaching the force concept significantly fostered students ’ understanding of N3 law even with teachers who have no intensive tutoring or research background . Keywords Physics education . Secondary school . Conceptual understanding . Teaching - learning sequence . Force concept Introduction A large body of research indicates that students ’ views of scientific concepts differ from the school science view ( Duit 2009 ) . The research literature can be used to inform researchers and teachers alike in designing teaching sequences that address the identified difficulties . Indeed , science education research has produced many teaching - learning sequences ( TLS ) that have Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 015 - 9492 - 8 A . Savinainen ( * ) : A . Mäkynen : P . Nieminen : J . Viiri Department of Teacher Education , University of Jyväskylä , 40014 Jyväskylä , Finland e - mail : antti . savinainen @ kuopio . fi been shown to improve learning ( see reviews by Meheut and Psillos 2004 ; Meltzer and Thornton 2012 ) . In many cases , the teacher utilizing a TLS has worked closely with the research team or might actually be the researcher herself / himself . Because of this , the teacher ’ s effectiveness in engaging with students ’ thinking in the domain to be taught is likely to have significantly improved , whereas a comparison group teacher may not have such skills to the same extent ( Leach and Scott 2003 ) . These concerns lead to an important question : Can teachers who did not participate in the development of an TLS teach it effectively ? This study aims to provide an answer to this question in the context of teaching the force concept in upper secondary school . More specifically , we present a TLS on Newton ’ s third law ( N3 law ) , which starts with introducing force as a property of an interaction . There is evidence that using a specific visual tool — an interaction diagram ( ID ) — for identifying and representing interactions between objects can significantly foster students ’ understanding of N3 law ( Hinrichs 2005 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) . In addition , we have shown in our related study that using the IDs is beneficial in constructing free - body diagrams ( FBDs ) ( Savinainen et al . 2013 ) . The aforementioned studies on the benefits of IDs for understanding of N3 law are limited since the researcher was the teacher at the same time , which leaves open the question whether schoolteachers not involved in research could replicate the strongly favourable outcomes . Our present study investigated the relation between the use of IDs with students ’ understanding of N3 law where teachers had not participated in the development of the TLS . We believe that this kind of research is crucial in order to enhance the small impact that science education currently has on day - to - day teaching in science classrooms ( Treagust and Duit 2009 ) . Firstly , we briefly review earlier studies on students ’ difficulties with N3 law and discuss various versions of a visual representation tool emphasizing the notion of interaction in teaching the force concept . Secondly , we present a TLS for teaching interactions and N3 law . Thirdly , we explain the aims of the present study that evaluated the use of the visual representational tool at varying degrees ( heavy , light and not at all ) and learning outcomes related to N3 law . Research on Students ’ Difficulties with Newton ’ s Third Law Many articles have been published on students ’ difficulties with N3 law ( e . g . , Bao et al . 2002 ; Brown 1989 ; Kariotoglou et al . 2009 ; Maloney 1984 ; Montanero et al . 2002 ) . The findings commonly indicate that after teaching , most students still have a limited understanding of N3 law and of the force concept . The studies show that students ’ difficulties with N3 law appear to persist from lower secondary school to the graduate level . Perhaps the most common view among students is that of force as an innate or acquired property of objects ( ‘ impetus ’ ) , which implies that forces are not seen as arising from an interaction between objects . Many students also seem to think in terms of a ‘ dominance principle ’ , which can take various forms depending on the features of the situation ( Hestenes et al . 1992 ) . Bao et al . ( 2002 ) identified four features in students ’ ( incorrect ) reasoning regarding N3 law : & Velocity : faster objects exert a larger force . & Mass : bigger objects exert a larger force . & Pushing : objects that do the pushing , i . e . are more ‘ active ’ , exert a larger force . & Acceleration : objects that are speeding up exert a larger force . These and other findings indicate that students ’ understanding of the force concept is very often context dependent ; a student may show correct understanding in some exercises 120 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 involving the force concept but fail to apply this knowledge in other situations ( Palmer 1997 ; Steinberg and Sabella 1997 ) . In addition , student understanding of the force concept is representation dependent ( Meltzer 2005 ; Nieminen et al . 2012 ) . In other words , students may be able to recognize a correct answer in a multiple - choice format in a verbal represen - tation but not , for instance , in a vectorial or bar chart representation . Furthermore , it has been argued that conceptual difficulties with the concept of force are fundamentally representational in nature , since learning the force concept involves active generation and coordinating of relevant representations ( Huber et al . 2010 ) . All these difficulties might appear surprising , since a standard statement of N3 law seems simple enough : “ Whenever an object exerts a force on a second object , the second object exerts an equal and opposite force on the first ” ( Giancoli 2005 , p . 83 ) . However , a closer look shows that N3 law entails several aspects ( Brown 1989 ) : & An object cannot experience a force in isolation nor can it exert a force in isolation . & At all moments , interaction is symmetrical , i . e . two interacting objects exert the same magnitude of force on each other . & In an interaction , neither force ( ‘ action ’ ) precedes the other force ( ‘ reaction ’ ) . & Forces arising from an interaction are always exactly opposite in direction . As can be seen , the notion of interaction is central to understanding the force concept . Consequently , many researchers recommend that the force concept might be more effectively taught by emphasizing forces as interactions between objects ( Brown 1989 ; Jauhiainen et al . 2006 ; Jiménez and Perales 2001 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) . We next consider a visual tool that makes the notion of interaction explicit for students . A visual Representation Tool for Teaching Forces as Interactions There are various ways of visualizing the objects and interactions between them : system schema ( Hinrichs 2005 ) , symbolic representations of interactions ( SRI , Jiménez and Perales 2001 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) , system - interaction diagrams ( Tiberghien et al . 2009 ) and the interaction diagram ( ID ; Hatakka et al . 2004 ) , which is used in this study . We consider all these methods to be variants of the same representation tool , since each provides a visual tool for identifying and representing interactions between objects , thus helping students to perceive force as a property of an interaction instead of a property of an object . A situation in which a block is pulled by a hand along a horizontal table is presented using ID ( Fig . 1 ) . There is only one contact between the block and the table , but it is helpful to divide this contact interaction into two components ( related to friction and normal force ) , as is done in the ID . This facilitates a complete correspondence with a free - body diagram ( FBD ) ; the number of interaction lines or arrows corresponds to the number of forces in the FBD . The ID differs from the system schema and the SRI in explicitly stating the interacting objects and by describing the interactions in terms of pushing and pulling . The notion of learning demand ( Leach and Scott 2002 ) is useful in analysing how the ID addresses students ’ difficulties with N3 law . The learning demand is an analysis tool for designing a TLS ; it confronts differences between everyday and scientific ways of thinking and talking . In the case of the force concept and N3 law , there is a significant learning demand , i . e . a large difference between the student way of thinking about forces and the scientific one , as indicated in our review on students ’ difficulties with N3 law . The learning demand addressed in the present study is described in Table 1 . Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 121 The ID addresses all aspects of the learning demand identified in Table 1 . Firstly , it provides a visual tool for identifying and representing interactions between objects , which helps students to perceive forces as a property of an interaction instead of a property of an object ( ontological aspect ) . Secondly , a symmetrical interaction between two objects is made explicit by writing down the interactions ( conceptual aspects ) . Thirdly , systematically applying the ID in various situations helps students to see that N3 law is valid in all situations regardless of contextual features ( epistemological aspect ) . Indeed , there is evidence that the difficulties with N3 law can be overcome to a great extent with the use of a visual representation of the interactions ( Hinrichs 2005 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) . However , each study was conducted at one institute with one teacher who was also the researcher at the same time . In contrast , our study was designed to investigate whether the positive outcomes of these case studies could be replicated with teachers who were not involved with the research and who received only brief written advice on how to implement the TLS . In addition , earlier studies used only verbal representations to evaluate students ’ understanding of N3 law , and the test questions did not require students to identify the Surface of the table Earth Block Hand pulls the block Block pulls the hand Surface of the table pulls the block ( friction ) Block pulls the earth Block pushes the table Table pushes the block ( normal force ) Hand Table Earth pulls the block Block pulls the surface of the Fig . 1 Interaction diagram ( ID ) presenting interactions when a block is pushed by hand on a table Table 1 Learning demand analysis of the force concept ( based on Savinainen et al . 2005 ) Aspects of school science to be addressed Students ’ typical everyday views Ontological aspect : Force is the property of an interaction between two objects Force is an innate or acquired property of objects ( ‘ impetus ’ ) Conceptual aspects : Interaction between two objects implies that they exert forces on each other Interaction always creates a pair of forces The pair of forces always has the same magnitude and opposite directions ( symmetrical interaction ) Inert or inanimate objects cannot exert forces When one object rests on top of another , only the object on top exerts a force A larger or more active object exerts a greater force ( ‘ dominance principle ’ ) Epistemological aspect : The notion of symmetrical interaction can be applied to all situations N3 law is used in some situations but not others , depending on the context or representation of the situation 122 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 interaction force pairs , which is an essential aspect in understanding N3 law . These limitations are addressed in this study . Aims of the Study Our research questions concerned students who had experienced heavy , light or no use of the IDs in studying the force concept , and they were as follows : 1 . How do the heavy ID group ’ s interaction diagrams compare with those of the light ID group ? 2 . How does the heavy ID group ’ s post - test understanding of N3 law compare with that of the light ID group ? 3 . How does the no ID group ’ s post - test understanding of N3 law compare with that of the heavy and light ID groups ? 4 . Is there a correlation between the quality of interaction diagrams constructed by the students and their performance in questions addressing N3 law ? We hypothesized that students who participated in the TLS ( heavy ID ) would create better IDs than students who just used the textbook with IDs ( light ID ) . Further , we assumed that IDs would increase students ’ understanding of N3 law . Hence , we hypothesized that heavy ID students would show better understanding of N3 law than light ID or no ID students , and light ID students would show better understanding than no ID students . Methods Participants and Teaching The data for this study were collected from 261 Finnish upper secondary school students ( aged 16 ) . All students were studying their first physics course in upper secondary school ( with a teaching time of approximately 30 lessons , 45 min each , or 18 lessons , 75 min each , depending on the school timetable ) , which includes a general introduction to physics , elementary kinematics , force , Newton ’ s laws , energy , waves and radiation , the basics of matter , funda - mental interactions and cosmology . The students were taught by 11 experienced teachers who had at least 9 years of teaching experience . In the analysis of this study , the students were combined in three groups : heavy ID , light ID and no ID groups , as Table 2 shows . The grouping was based on the how often ( or not at all ) the IDs were utilized in studying Newton ’ s laws ( Table 2 ) . The grouping decisions are justified in the “ Results ” section . The heavy ID group ( n = 51 ) used the intervention material designed by the authors and included a textbook supporting an ID approach . The intervention material contained teaching Table 2 Description of participant groups Group n ( students ) n ( teachers ) n ( classes ) TLS for IDs Textbook includes IDs Heavy ID 51 3 3 Yes Yes Light ID 24 2 2 No Yes No ID 186 6 8 No No Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 123 and practice exercises that introduced the ID and N3 law and FBDs for the lessons and homework . The teachers implementing the TLS received no special training ; instead , they were provided with the intervention material and brief written instructions on how to imple - ment the TLS . Table 3 gives an outline for the first and second lessons and a brief description of the practice exercises . In addition , the first portion of the third lesson was intended to reinforce the notion of interaction and N3 law using a handout . The light ID group ( n = 24 ) did not use the intervention materials , but they used the same textbook as the heavy ID group . Hence , the heavy and light ID groups were exposed to IDs but with different intensities ; the light ID students had two to three exercises on IDs , whereas the heavy ID students were given seven to eight exercises on IDs . The data from heavy and light ID groups were collected during the 2006 and 2007 school years . The textbook presents material in approximately the same order as the intervention material provided for the heavy ID group ( see Table 3 ) when introducing forces as interactions and the ID approach : & The notions of interaction and the ID are introduced with examples and exercises . & N3 law is introduced : “ Force and opposite force are created from an interaction between two objects . The force and opposite force are equal in magnitude but opposite in directions , and they act on different objects ” . & Different types of forces are discussed . & Examples and exercises are given on forces and N3 law . The no ID group ( n = 186 ) used a different textbook , which followed the same national curriculum as the heavy and light ID groups but without IDs . The data from the no ID group were collected in the fall semester of 2012 . All teachers except one reported that they used the concept of interaction in their teaching . Table 3 Description of two lessons ( 2×45 min ) used in the heavy ID group Time Activity Comments 5 – 10 min Homework check The previous topic was kinematics 15 min Teaching exercise : a book on a table with a weight on top of the book Teacher introduces the notion of the ID 15 min Practice exercises : handout containing three Physics l contexts ( elephant on a hanging bridge , curling puck on ice , water drawn from a well using a bucket ) Students work in pairs constructing IDs and identifying contact and distance interactions . They present their work to others 5 – 10 min Textbook exercises on interactions Working in pairs / with the teacher Homework More textbook exercises 5 – 10 min Homework check 10 min Force is defined as a measure of the strength of an interaction . Force vector and force diagram are introduced The relationship between the ID and the force diagram is pointed out 15 min N3 law is introduced : interaction is symmetric regardless of the state of motion Demonstration of N3 law ( e . g . students ’ hands pushing against each other ) is given 10 min Different types of forces are presented using a table in the textbook For instance , normal force , tension force and friction Homework Draw force diagrams for the ID practice exercises Complete some revision work at the start of the third lesson 124 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 Only students who answered all the test questions were included in the data analysis . This criterion reduced the reported number of students in all the classes , especially in the heavy and light ID classes , which is why the numbers in these classes are quite small ( Table 2 ) . The possible selection bias will be addressed in the “ Results ” section . Neither the classes nor the students were randomly selected for the study . One of the authors determined the teachers ’ willingness to participate in the research project . In addition , permission to implement the study was received from principals and / or teachers of the chosen schools . The selection of the teachers was based on two criteria . Firstly , the teachers in the ID groups had to use the textbook that supported the ID approach . Secondly , the teachers in the no ID group had to use a different textbook , which addressed the notion of interactions but did not include IDs . We managed to have different sized schools from both urban and rural areas . This variety provided some diversity in terms of the settings in which this study was implemented . Data Collection Two different competences were measured in this study : the students ’ ability to construct IDs and their understanding of Newton ’ s third law . Obviously , understanding Newton ’ s third law demands understanding of the concept of interaction . Further , any understanding is always presented using some representation . The ID is a specific representation for presenting interactions between objects , but it is not commonly used in learning Newton ’ s laws . The data also included students ’ responses to FBD questions , although this is not reported here ( see Savinainen et al . 2013 ) . As Table 4 shows , students ’ understanding of N3 law , which was the goal of instruction , was measured by a post - test in all groups . However , the pre - test was administered only in the heavy ID group . In this sense , the study followed a quasi - experimental ( not a random sample ) post - test design . Next , we present the pre - test questions for N3 law and justify the pre - testing only in the heavy ID group . Subsequently , we present the post - test for N3 law and ID questions . The heavy ID group took the Force Concept Inventory ( FCI ; Halloun et al . 1995 ) as a pre - test , which includes four multiple - choice questions ( item numbers 4 , 15 , 16 and 28 ) that address N3 law using a verbal representation . We implemented a pre - test for two reasons : to verify that there were no significant differences in understanding N3 law between the heavy ID classes prior to instruction ( based on earlier research , we did not expect any ) and to determine whether pre - instructional scores would correlate with post - instruction scores on N3 law questions . As we did not administer these pre - test questions to the light ID or the no ID groups , it is possible that this difference might threaten the validity of the study . The light ID or no ID groups may have been significantly different from the heavy ID group in their understanding of N3 law . However , this explanation is unlikely because abundant research shows that students do not typically understand N3 law without special instruction , as Table 4 Measured competences in different groups Group Ability to construct IDs Understanding of N3 law ( pre - test ) Understanding of N3 law ( post - test ) Heavy ID Yes Yes Yes Light ID Yes No Yes No ID No No Yes Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 125 explained in the “ Introduction ” . Therefore , we would expect poor results on a pre - test addressing N3 law . Another concern might be that administering a pre - test could affect the performance of students in the heavy ID group in post - tests , possibly sensitizing them to similar questions . However , this issue was addressed in Henderson ’ s ( 2002 ) study ; he found no evidence of such an effect when the FCI was used . All groups answered the following post - test questions on N3 law ( see Table 5 ) : one open question requiring written identification of the force pairs in interactions , two multiple - choice questions utilizing verbal representation and one multiple - choice question framed in a vectorial representation with a written justification . All the questions were adapted from research - based materials , so they had already been validated . However , the vectorial question was originally presented using verbal representation ( Bao et al . 2002 ) . Thus , we gathered students ’ written justifications to support the validity of the question in the vectorial representation . We identified the representation used in all questions regarding N3 law because student under - standing tends to be representation dependent , as argued in the “ Introduction ” . The students in the heavy and light ID groups were required to construct IDs in various situations ( Table 6 ) . The variation in contexts and the state of motion were included to take into account the epistemological aspect of the learning demand ( see Table 1 ) . The activities of the heavy ID group teachers were video - recorded during the intervention lessons . The video recordings were used to determine how much time the teachers spent on various parts of the TLS . We were also interested in what kind of classroom discourse the teachers used ; the findings have been published elsewhere ( Nurkka et al . 2012 ) . Data Analysis Interaction Diagrams Students ’ ability to construct IDs was evaluated by analysing the quality of answers to ID questions . The quality of ID responses was classified into three quality categories : excellent , good and poor ( Table 7 ) . An interrater reliability analysis using Cohen ’ s kappa coefficient was performed by the first and second authors to determine consis - tency among raters for 15 randomly selected students . The total number of IDs analysed was 117 . The categories were assigned a score : excellent = 2 , good = 1 and poor or missing interac - tion = 0 ( the scale is ordinal ) . Accordingly , the sum scores of the eight IDs ranged from 0 to 16 . Table 5 Post - test N3 law questions Type Representation Context Open - ended ( written answer ) Verbal representation Book rests on a horizontal table ( Bryce and MacMillan 2005 ) Multiple - choice Verbal representation Two questions from Bao et al . ( 2002 ) – Girl in an elevator that is accelerating down – Two boys of equal masses run into each other at different speeds Multiple - choice Vectorial representation with a written justification Two boys of different masses run into each other at equal speeds ( adapted from Bao et al . 2002 ) 126 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 The sum score allowed us to compare the heavy and light ID groups with each other and also to determine whether or not there was a correlation between the quality of IDs and students ’ performance on N3 law questions . Newton ’ s Third Law Questions Three multiple - choice questions on N3 law were straightforward to score ( 1 point for the correct choice , 0 point for an incorrect choice ) . One question required the written identification of two interaction force pairs ( see Table 5 ) . The scoring was as follows : & 0 point if both force pairs were incorrect & 0 . 5 point if one force pair was correct & 1 point if both force pairs were correct The sum of the four questions provides the post - test N3 law sum score , giving a range from 0 to 4 . The multiple - choice question in vectorial representation had a written component , which was used to detect possible false positives ( a correct answer with incorrect reasoning ) or false negatives ( an incorrect answer with correct reasoning ) . The written component was considered correct if it explained that the force and its opposite forces have equal magnitudes or if it made a reference to N3 law . The sum score of N3 law questions was used as a measure for students ’ understanding of N3 law . Table 6 ID questions in the heavy and light ID groups during the course Timing Context State of motion After teaching the ID and the FBD Parachute Uniform motion Cork in water At rest After completing the force concept teaching sequence Book on a table At rest Box lowered down by a rope Uniform motion A girl in an elevator going down Downward acceleration Final exam Ice hockey puck hit Acceleration Ice hockey puck sliding Deceleration Ice hockey puck is still At rest Table 7 Classification of the quality of students ’ interaction diagrams Excellent Good Poor All interacting objects identified Interaction line or two - headed arrow presented Type of interaction ( contact or distance ) identified or A written explanation of interactions presented All interacting objects identified Interaction line or two - headed arrow presented Type of interaction is not presented and No written expression of the interactions is presented At least one interaction is missing or an extra interaction is included or Forces are identified instead of interactions or Diagram lacks essential features of an interaction diagram Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 127 Results Students ’ Ability to Construct Interaction Diagrams The results regarding students ’ ability to construct IDs are shown in Table 8 . The quality of the IDs was better in the heavy ID group than it was in the light ID group ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 72 . 9 , p < 0 . 001 ; Cramer ’ s V = 0 . 35 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 28 , 0 . 42 ] ) . Cramer ’ s V is a measure of effect size , indicating a moderate effect . Students ’ Understanding of Newton ’ s Third Law Results regarding N3 law are presented in Table 9 as percentages of the maximum . The initial understanding of N3 law in the heavy ID group was poor , with the average of the four FCI questions being 28 % ( n = 50 , as one student was absent ) . In comparison , random guessing had an expected value of 20 % for the pre - test questions . Furthermore , the pre - test score on the four FCI questions did not correlate with the post - test N3 law sum score ( Spearman ’ s rho = 0 . 197 , p = 0 . 171 ) or with the ID sum score ( Spearman ’ s rho = 0 . 103 , p = 0 . 476 ) . All these considerations supported our decision not to pre - test the light ID and no ID groups . On inspecting Table 9 , the results seem to match the intensity of the use of IDs except in two verbal questions . To find out whether the differences were statistically significant , we used non - parametric tests , as the data did not follow a normal distribution . The Kruskal - Wallis test showed that there was a statistically significant difference between the groups in all N3 law categories in Table 9 ( χ 2 ( 2 ) varied between 39 . 99 and 79 . 73 , p < 0 . 001 in all cases ) . Pairwise comparisons ( Mann - Whitney test ) revealed that the heavy ID group outperformed the others in all N3 law categories ( z varied between 3 . 41 and 8 . 93 , p = 0 . 001 or less in all cases ) . The effect size was estimated using the correlation coefficient effect size r ( Wilson 2010 ) , where 0 . 10 = small effect , 0 . 24 = medium effect and 0 . 37 = large effect ( McGrath and Meyer 2006 ) . The effect size ( r ) varied between 0 . 32 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 10 , 0 . 51 ] ; the vectorial question between the heavy and light ID groups ) and 0 . 58 ( 95 % CI [ 0 . 49 , 0 . 66 ] ; N3 law sum scores between the heavy ID and no ID groups ) . The effect sizes were large in all the other categories except in the vectorial question between the heavy and light ID groups . To sum up , the heavy ID group constructed better IDs than the light ID group and clearly outperformed both the light ID and no ID groups in demonstrating understanding of N3 law . The light ID group had a high average score in the vectorial question ( 71 % ) and a moderate average score for two verbal questions ( 56 % ) , whereas the no ID group did quite well on the verbal questions ( 62 % ) but poorly with the other questions . The differences between the light ID group and the no ID group were not statistically significant except in one case : the light ID group showed a statistically significant difference in the vectorial question ( z = 3 . 87 , p < 0 . 001 ; r = 0 . 27 , 95 % CI [ 0 . 14 , 0 . 39 ] , a medium effect ) . There was a statistically significant correlation between the ID sum score and the post - test N3 law sum score ( Spearman ’ s rho = 0 . 402 , p < 0 . 001 ) when the heavy and light ID groups Table 8 Distribution of the results in the ID questions Group n Excellent ( % ) Good ( % ) Poor ( % ) Heavy ID 408 63 23 14 Light ID 192 28 32 40 n refers to the total number of ID questions answered by the students 128 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 were combined ( n = 75 ) . We used the combined group because both groups constructed the same test IDs and answered the same post - test questions on N3 law . Validity Analysis The reliability of ID quality analysis ( Tables 8 and 9 ) was evaluated using Cohens ’ kappa coefficient . The interrater reliability for the raters was found to be 0 . 958 ( p < 0 . 001 ) , indicating excellent agreement . The reliability of the ID questions was evaluated using Cronbach ’ s alpha ; it was 0 . 84 , indicating very good reliability . Furthermore , the alpha for the four post - test questions on N3 law was 0 . 65 , which is a bit low . The open - ended question ( Table 5 ) lowered the reliability to some extent ; for the three other N3 law questions , the alpha was 0 . 71 , which is acceptable . We used the Kruskal - Wallis test and the sum scores for the eight ID questions for comparisons within the groups . There were no statistically significant differences between the ID categories ( p = 0 . 462 ; Kruskal - Wallis test ) between the light ID groups . In contrast , we found a statistically significant difference ( χ 2 ( 2 ) = 155 . 75 , p < 0 . 001 ) among the three classes in the heavy ID group . Pairwise comparisons ( Mann - Whitney U test ) revealed that the IDs in heavy ID class 2 differed from heavy ID classes 1 and 3 . One reason for this difference was likely the teacher ’ s decision not to include a written explanation of interactions or an interaction type in the IDs ( see Fig . 1 ) . It seems that most students followed the teacher ’ s examples instead of the textbook and consequently obtained ‘ good ’ instead of ‘ excellent ’ scores for their IDs ( see Table 7 ) . However , a video recording of the lesson revealed that the teacher did explain the IDs in terms of interaction force pairs . We used the N3 law sum score as a criterion when comparing the learning outcomes of N3 law between the classes within each group . There were no statistically significant differences between the three heavy ID classes in N3 ( p > 0 . 800 ) or between the light ID groups ( p = 1 . 000 ) . These results support our decision to combine the three heavy ID classes into one group and the two light ID classes into another group . The comparisons between the no ID classes showed that the differences in N3 law sum scores were not statistically significant for the majority of the classes . However , there were three cases in which there were statistically significant differences between the no ID classes ( z values were 3 . 07 , 3 . 97 and 5 . 03 , whereas p values were 0 . 032 , 0 . 001 and < 0 . 001 , respective - ly ) . Some differences were expected , especially when the no ID teachers spent different amounts of time teaching interactions and N3 law ; the times varied between 25 and 115 min , with an average of 60 min . This example is evidence of diversity in teaching interactions and N3 law in the no ID group schools even when using the same textbook . Table 9 Averages of students ’ correct answers for the N3 law questions Group n Pre - test Post - test Four FCI questions ( % ) Verbal open - ended ( % ) Two verbal MCQ ( % ) VectorialMCQ ( % ) Sum score ( % ) Heavy ID 51 28 ( 27 ) 64 ( 46 ) 93 ( 17 ) 94 ( 24 ) 86 ( 16 ) Light ID 24 – 23 ( 42 ) 56 ( 50 ) 71 ( 46 ) 52 ( 34 ) No ID 186 – 15 ( 32 ) 62 ( 36 ) 31 ( 46 ) 42 ( 27 ) Standard deviations are in parentheses MCQ multiple - choice question Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 129 Next we turn to reporting differences in time devoted to teaching IDs and N3 laws . Analysis of the video recordings revealed that the heavy ID group teachers used different amounts of time in teaching IDs and N3 law ( from 55 to 65 min ) . The light ID group teachers estimated that they used 35 – 45 min for classroom discussions of IDs and N3 law . The reported times did not include time the students spent doing exercises in small groups or alone . The light ID group teachers spent four lessons ( one lesson = 45 min ) teaching the force concept and Newton ’ s three laws , whereas the heavy ID group teachers used five lessons . Hence , we estimated that the total time difference in teaching and practising IDs and N3 law was at most 45 min . We regarded this as a relatively small time investment . Again , we will address the time difference in the “ Discussion ” . There was a large number of students ( 22 students in the heavy ID group and 29 students in the light ID group ) who were either absent from the test or chose not to answer some of the questions ; these students ’ data were excluded from the analysis . However , most of them answered the majority of the questions . We examined the results when answers from all students were included in order to determine whether a selection bias threatening the validity of our conclusions was present . We put together the data regarding all the constructed IDs and all the answered N3 law questions ( i . e . the ‘ full ’ data , n = 126 ) and compared the results with those reported in Tables 8 and 9 ( n = 75 ) . We do not present the ‘ full ’ data here . Instead , we report the results of comparing the reported data and the ‘ full ’ data set . The comparison showed that the figures in the three ID categories changed slightly in both the heavy and light ID groups but the overall situation did not change ; a statistically significant difference also existed between the heavy and light ID groups with the ‘ full ’ data , ( χ 2 = 113 . 5 , p < 0 . 001 ) . A similar result was found when the sum scores for the four post - test N3 law questions were considered . The heavy ID group outperformed the light ID group when the ‘ full ’ data were used ; the average scores for the N3 law questions were 84 and 49 % respectively , whereas the corresponding averages ( Table 9 ) were 86 and 52 % , respectively . Hence , we concluded that our decision to run the analysis using only students who answered all the ID and N3 law questions did not bias the results . The written responses of all the students who answered both the vectorial N3 law question and the written part showed that 5 % of the responses were false positives and 4 % were false negatives ; these results support the validity of the vectorial question . Furthermore , four students included in the data reported in Table 8 chose the alternative ‘ none of the above ’ in the vectorial question because they thought that the vectors were incorrectly positioned ( the positioning of the force vectors differed slightly from that in the textbook ) . These students explained in the written part that the forces had equal magnitudes . We accepted their answers as correct in the analysis , since the students clearly understood N3 law . Discussion Answers to the Research Questions Our first research question examined possible differences in the ability to construct IDs between the heavy and light ID groups . The heavy ID group performed statistically signifi - cantly better , and the difference was easily observable when the proportion of excellent IDs in the heavy and light ID groups was compared : 63 vs . 28 % , respectively . On the other hand , it was expected that the heavy ID group would construct better IDs since they had more practice . The more important question was whether this better command of IDs was associated with a deeper understanding of N3 law , which was addressed in the second research question . 130 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 Again , the heavy ID group performed significantly better in all the evaluated aspects . The heavy ID group did exceptionally well both in verbal and vectorial representations , scoring over 90 % , which suggests that these representations were internalized as tools for thinking about forces and interactions . In comparison , the pre - test average score on N3 law in a verbal representation was less than 30 % ; there was a very substantial learning gain in this respect . Heavy ID group members also did fairly well in the open - ended questions demanding identification of force pairs in interactions ( 64 % correct ) . The light ID group members did somewhat better in vectorial than verbal representations ( 71 and 56 % correct , respectively ) , but they did poorly on the force pair question ( 23 % correct ) . However , it must be noted that the reliability of the force pair question was somewhat lower than that of the other three N3 questions . Still , these results suggest that relative success in multiple - choice questions does not guarantee good performance on other tasks . Furthermore , our findings suggest that claiming that a student ‘ really ’ understands N3 law on the basis of multiple - choice questions alone is not warranted . Earlier studies on the use of the ID were limited in this regard as they did not address anything other than verbal representations and had no force pair questions ( Hinrichs 2005 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) . In future studies , it would be interesting to have more questions with higher reliability for investigating students ’ ability to identify force pairs . The third research question compared the students ’ post - test understanding of N3 law between the three groups . Our data showed that the heavy ID group outperformed the light ID and the no ID groups . However , the enhanced learning gains were associated with the heavy use of IDs , since the light ID group was not generally better than the no ID group . We noted that the light ID group teachers did not use IDs throughout their teaching in the same way that the heavy ID group teachers . This observation is related to the finding by Jauhiainen et al . ( 2006 ) that upper secondary school teachers who systematically talked about interactions — without IDs — throughout teaching had better success in fostering conceptual understanding of N3 law than teachers who did not do so . The fourth research question asked about the possible correlation between the quality of the IDs constructed by the students and their learning outcomes regarding N3 law . There was a statistically significant correlation between the ID sum scores and the N3 law sum scores in our data . However , the correlation ( 0 . 402 ) was not particularly strong , indicating that other factors were also present . One might expect that prior instruction on the target concept might be one such factor , but this was not the case in our study ; the pre - test score on N3 law did not correlate with the post - test scores , indicating that prior instruction on this concept played no role in the learning outcomes . Why was the ID approach of the TLS successful ? Firstly , the ID explicitly addressed the learning demand in the case of N3 law , as explained in the “ Introduction ” . Secondly , as argued by Savinainen et al . ( 2005 ) , the ID offers a bridging representation between a concrete physical situation and the more abstract vectorial representation of forces . It helps students to perceive forces as symmetric interactions and provides the means to identify other objects with which the target object interacts . Further , different representations contain different information and , thus , may complement each other ( Ainsworth 2006 ) . We think this is one reason why it is better to use the combination of IDs and FDBs for learning of forces than to use only FDBs , which is the traditional approach . IDs do not include information about the magnitude and direction of force vectors as FDBs do , but they clearly visualize the interaction between objects and help students to identify relevant forces . Thirdly , it seems that the use of IDs helps to override strong intuitions related to the dominance principle . We note that this is not an easy task , as shown by the studies reviewed in the “ Introduction ” . Then again , we also acknowledge that the combination of IDs and FDBs is beneficial for genuine understanding of Newton ’ s laws . Different representations may aid Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 131 learning because one representation constrains the interpretation of a second representation ( Ainsworth 2006 ) . In our case , the ID constrains the interpretation or misinterpretation of the FDB . Therefore , students do not forget relevant forces or invent their own forces when using IDs , and thus , they will succeed in the construction of FDBs . Of course , this success requires that students understand that all forces are always the result of an interaction ; this is one aspect that can be taught well using IDs . In earlier studies using a visual representation tool ( Hinrichs 2005 ; Savinainen et al . 2005 ) , interactive teaching approaches based on peer discussions were used . There were some peer discussions related to IDs and N3 law in the TLS used in this study as well . However , video analysis of the types of classroom discourse used by the heavy ID group teachers revealed that teacher presentation was the dominant method of instruction ( Nurkka et al . 2012 ) . This finding suggests that the ID approach can be useful even in settings that are less interactive than those used in earlier studies . Consequently , the use of IDs also has the potential to enhance learning in a traditional classroom in which teacher presentation is the most frequently - used mode of teaching , as long as students have some time and opportunities for peer discussions related to IDs and N3 law . Validity Issues As one might expect , there were differences in how the heavy ID group teachers implemented the TLS . Firstly , they used different amounts of time to teach each of IDs and N3 law ; the overall times were also somewhat different . Secondly , they staged the activities in different ways — there were differences in the frequency and duration of shifts between teacher presentations , teacher - guided authoritative discus - sions and dialogic discussions ( Nurkka et al . 2012 ) . However , all three teachers used the same exercises that addressed IDs and Newton ’ s third law . Despite the differences in implementing the TLS , there were no statistically signifi - cant differences in the understanding of N3 law between the heavy ID classes , suggesting that the TLS using IDs played a key role in promoting the learning outcomes . In this respect , our study corroborates both our earlier study ( Savinainen et al . 2013 ) , and the study of Hoellwarth and Moelter ( 2011 ) , which showed that the structure ( i . e . content , topic order , exercises ) of a TLS was the important factor in promoting student learning , not the characteristics of the instructors who implemented the TLS . Furthermore , it is important to note that the heavy ID group teachers received no special training ; they were simply provided the intervention material and brief written instructions on how to implement the TLS . However , all the heavy and light ID group teachers were somewhat familiar with IDs as they had been using the same textbook , which includes IDs , for several years . It is plausible that teachers with no prior familiarity with IDs would need some coaching and help to see the value of using IDs , and this could be an area for future research . One might ask whether it is valid to compare the learning outcomes of the heavy ID group with those of other groups that did not take a pre - test and in most cases spent a smaller amount of time with the ID and N3 law . We already provided arguments supported by earlier research to justify our belief that the lack of a pre - test is not an issue here ( see “ Data Collection ” ) . However , the time difference ( at most 45 min , probably less ) between the heavy and light ID groups in teaching and practising IDs and N3 law may be a significant factor , which means that the comparisons between the groups should be interpreted with some caution . On one hand , it is plausible to expect that more time on the topic would yield better learning outcomes . On the other hand , one 132 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 no ID group teacher spent more time ( 115 min ) in teaching interactions and N3 law than the heavy ID group teachers , yet the results in N3 law were poorer , suggesting that time was not the only factor that affected learning outcomes . Note that the time difference between the heavy and light ID groups was built into the study design ; we wished to determine what happens when the ID receives heavy ( i . e . more time and examples ) and light emphasis ( i . e . less time and examples ) . One could argue that the extra time investment was moderate , especially when our data suggest that this extra time devoted to IDs and N3 law was well warranted . Furthermore , the notion of interaction underpins the force concept and Newton ’ s laws , forming the basis for any scientifically correct understanding in this domain , which further justifies the use of extra time . Finally , the time spent with IDs had benefits beyond Newton ’ s third law ; it helped students to identify forces correctly when constructing FBDs ( Savinainen et al . 2013 ) . Naturally , it is up to the teacher to decide how much time she or he wants to devote to this topic , but both the present study and our related study ( Savinainen et al . 2013 ) present evidence that will help teachers make an informed decision . Implications for Teaching Our results showed that a teaching - learning sequence concerning IDs ( heavy ID group ) helped enhance students ’ understanding of Newton ’ s third law compared to teaching without IDs ( no ID group ) . However , comprehension of N3 law was not better in the light ID group ( no TLS ) than in the no ID group . This finding indicated that a potential learning tool or method like IDs does not necessarily enhance learning when students are just presented with a textbook . Obviously , teachers should be well aware of the method : how to use it and why it is useful to challenge students ’ preconceptions and to support their learning . Some teachers may not even recognize how problematic the learning of Newton ’ s third law is . In our study , we did not provide extra training for teachers , but the short instructions and teaching materials given were evidently enough for teachers to successfully teach with IDs . Thus , in addition to a textbook , a guide for the use of a method with examples that have been solved should be provided if a training session is not feasible . IDs are a useful suitable learning tool , especially when interaction and forces are introduced in lower and secondary schools . When students ’ understanding becomes more advanced , they may cease constructing IDs as external representations . They do not necessarily abandon the use of IDs , but they are able to use them as internal representations in their mental processing . For example , some students do not draw complete FBDs because they can use them mentally ( Kohl et al . 2007 ) . However , external IDs can still be profitable for advanced students when a physical problem demands deeper elaboration . Conclusion We conclude that the favourable learning outcomes of N3 law in the pilot studies , which were implemented by the researchers who also taught the classes , were replicated in the case of heavy ID group teachers who did not participate in the development of TLS . However , the results suggest that the ID approach should be used systematically throughout teaching of the force concept in order to achieve enhanced understanding in N3 law . The light use of the ID approach or emphasizing forces as interactions with no IDs had only a limited impact on students ’ understanding of N3 law . Overall , our study showed that the successful Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 133 dissemination of evidence - based practice into physics classrooms is feasible without extensive teacher training . Acknowledgments This work has been supported by the Academy of Finland ( Project no . 132316 ) and the Finnish Cultural Foundation — South Ostrobothia Regional Fund . References Ainsworth , S . ( 2006 ) . DeFT : a conceptual framework for considering learning with multiple representations . Learning and Instruction , 16 ( 3 ) , 183 – 198 . Bao , L . , Zollman , D . , Hogg , K . , & Redish , E . F . ( 2002 ) . Model analysis of fine structures of student models : an example with Newton ’ s third law . Physics Education Research : A Supplement to the American Journal of Physics , 70 ( 7 ) , 766 – 778 . Brown , D . E . ( 1989 ) . Students ’ concept of force : the importance of understanding Newton ’ s third law . Physics Education , 24 , 353 – 358 . Bryce , T . , & MacMillan , K . ( 2005 ) . Encouraging conceptual change : the use of bridging analogies in the teaching of action - reaction forces and the “ at rest ” condition in physics . International Journal of Science Education , 27 ( 6 ) , 737 – 763 . Duit , R . ( 2009 ) . Bibliography — STCSE students ’ and teachers ’ conceptions and science education . Online at http : / / www . ipn . uni - kiel . de / aktuell / stcse / stcse . html . Accessed March 22 , 2014 . Giancoli , D . ( 2005 ) . Physics — principles with applications ( 6th ed . ) . Englewood , Cliffs : Prentice - Hall . Halloun , I . , Hake , R . R . , Mosca , E . P . , & Hestenes , D . ( 1995 ) . Force concept inventory . Online ( password protected ) at http : / / modeling . asu . edu / R & E / Research . html . Accessed March 22 , 2014 . Hatakka , J . , Saari , H . , Sirviö , J . , Viiri , J . , & Yrjänäinen , S . ( 2004 ) . Physica 1 . Porvoo : Werner Söderström Oy . Henderson , C . ( 2002 ) . Common concerns about the force concept inventory . The Physics Teacher , 40 , 542 – 547 . Hestenes , D . , Wells , M . , & Swackhamer , G . ( 1992 ) . Force concept inventory . The Physics Teacher , 30 , 141 – 158 . Hinrichs , B . ( 2005 ) . Using the system schema representational tool to promote student understanding of Newton ’ s third law . In J . Marx , P . Heron , & S . Franklin ( Eds . ) , AIP Conference Proceedings — 2004 Physics Education Research Conference , 790 ( pp . 117 – 120 ) . New York : Melville . Hoellwarth , C . , & Moelter , M . J . ( 2011 ) . The implications of a robust curriculum in introductory mechanics . American Journal of Physics , 79 ( 5 ) , 540 – 545 . Huber , P . , Russel , T . , & Haslam , F . ( 2010 ) . Teaching and learning about force with representational focus : pedagogy and teacher change . Research in Science Education , 40 , 5 – 28 . Jauhiainen , J . , Koponen , I . T . , & Lavonen , J . ( 2006 ) . Teachers ’ beliefs about the role of interaction in teaching Newtonian mechanics and its influence on students ’ conceptual understanding of Newton ’ s third law . Science education international : the journal of the International Council of Associations for Science Education ( ICASE ) , 17 ( 3 ) , 149 – 160 . Jiménez , J . D . , & Perales , F . J . ( 2001 ) . Graphic representation of force in secondary education : analysis and alternative educational proposals . Physics Education , 36 , 227 – 235 . Kariotoglou , P . , Spyrtou , A . , & Tselfes , V . ( 2009 ) . How student teachers understand distance force interactions in different contexts . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 7 , 851 – 873 . Kohl , P . , Rosengrant , D . , & Finkelstein , N . ( 2007 ) . Strongly and weakly directed approaches to teaching multiple representation use in physics . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 3 ( 1 ) , 010108 . Leach , J . , & Scott , P . ( 2002 ) . Designing and evaluating science teaching sequences : an approach drawing upon the concept of learning demand and a social constructivist perspective on learning . Studies in Science Education , 38 , 115 – 142 . Leach , J . , & Scott , P . ( 2003 ) . Individual and sociocultural views of learning in science education . Science and Education , 12 ( 1 ) , 91 – 113 . McGrath , R . E . , & Meyer , J . M . ( 2006 ) . When effect sizes disagree : the case of r and d . Psychological Methods , 11 ( 4 ) , 386 – 401 . Maloney , D . P . ( 1984 ) . Rule - governed approaches to physics — Newton ’ s third law . Physics Education , 19 ( 1 ) , 37 – 42 . Meheut , M . , & Psillos , D . ( 2004 ) . Teaching - learning sequences : aims and tools for science education research . International Journal of Science Education , 16 , 515 – 535 . 134 Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 Meltzer , D . E . ( 2005 ) . Relation between students ’ problem - solving performance and representational format . American Journal of Physics , 73 ( 5 ) , 463 – 478 . Meltzer , D . E . , & Thornton , R . K . ( 2012 ) . Resource letter ALIP - 1 : active - learning instruction in physics . American Journal of Physics , 80 ( 6 ) , 478 . Montanero , M . , Suero , M . I . , Perez , A . L . , & Pardo , P . J . ( 2002 ) . Implicit theories of static interactions between two bodies . Physics Education , 37 , 318 – 323 . Nieminen , P . , Savinainen A . & Viiri , J . ( 2012 ) . Relations between representational consistency , conceptual understanding of the force concept , and scientific reasoning . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research 8 , 010123 . Nurkka , N . , Mäkynen , A . , Viiri , J . , Savinainen , A . & Nieminen , P . ( 2012 ) . Classroom discourse types and students ’ learning of an interaction diagram and Newton ’ s third law . In C . Bruguière , A . Tiberghien & P . Clément ( Eds . ) , E - Book proceedings of the ESERA 2011 conference : science learning and citizenship ( coeds . Manuela Wenzel - Breuer and Conxita Marquez ) ( pp . 58 – 64 ) . Lyon , France : European Science Education Research Association . Palmer , D . ( 1997 ) . The effect of context on students ’ reasoning about forces . International Journal of Science Education , 6 , 681 – 696 . Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . , & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change : designing and evaluating an instructional sequence for Newton ’ s third law . Science Education , 89 ( 2 ) , 175 – 195 . Savinainen , A . , Mäkynen , A . , Nieminen , P . , & Viiri , J . ( 2013 ) . Does using a visual - representation tool foster students ’ ability to identify forces and construct free - body diagrams ? Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 9 ( 1 ) , 010104 . Steinberg , R . , & Sabella , M . ( 1997 ) . Performance on multiple - choice diagnostics and complementary exam problems . The Physics Teacher , 35 , 150 – 155 . Tiberghien , A . , Vince , J . , & Gaidioz , P . ( 2009 ) . Design - based research : case of a teaching sequence on mechanics . International Journal of Science Education , 31 ( 17 ) , 2275 – 2314 . Treagust , D . F . , & Duit , R . ( 2009 ) . Multiple perspectives of conceptual change in science and the challenges ahead . Journal of Science and Mathematics Education in Southeast Asia , 32 ( 2 ) , 89 – 104 . Wilson , D . B . ( 2010 ) . Practical meta - analysis effect size calculator . The Campbell Collaboration . Online at http : / / www . campbellcollaboration . org / resources / effect _ size _ input . php . Accessed March 22 , 2014 . Res Sci Educ ( 2017 ) 47 : 119 – 135 135