Understanding International Benchmarks on Student Engagement - Awareness , Research Alignment and Response from a Computer Science Perspective Michael Morgan Monash University Melbourne , Australia michael . morgan @ monash . edu Matthew Butler Monash University Melbourne , Australia matthew . butler @ monash . edu Jane Sinclair University of Warwick Coventry , UK j . e . sinclair @ warwick . ac . uk Gerry Cross Mount Royal University Calgary , Canada gcross @ mtroyal . ca Janet Fraser Monash University Melbourne , Australia janet . fraser @ monash . edu Jana Jackova Matej Bel University Bystrica , Slovakia jana . jackova @ umb . sk Neena Thota University of Massachusetts Amherst , USA nthota @ cs . umass . edu ABSTRACT There is an increasing trend to use national benchmarks to measure student engagement , with instruments such as North American National Survey of Student Engagement ( NSSE ) in the USA and Canada , Student Experience Survey ( SES ) in Australia and NZ ( previously known as the Uni - versity Experience Survey UES ) , and Student Engagement Survey ( SES ) in the UK . Unfortunately , Computer Science ( CS ) rates fairly poorly on a number of measures in these surveys , even when compared to related STEM disciplines . Initial research suggests there may be several reasons for this poor performance : i ) the suitability of the instruments to the CS context , ii ) a lack of awareness of CS academics of these instruments and the student engagement measures they are based on , and iii ) a misalignment between these instruments and the research focus of computing educators , leading to misdirected eﬀorts in research and teaching prac - tice . This working group focused on the last two aspects of this issue . We carried out an in - depth analysis of in - ternational student engagement instruments to facilitate a greater awareness of the international benchmarks and what aspects of student engagement they measure . The working group also examined the focus of current computing educa - tion research and its alignment to student engagement mea - sures on which these instruments are based . Armed with this knowledge , the computing education community can make informed decisions on how best to respond to these measures and consider ways to improve our performance in Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . ITiCSE ’17 July 03 - 05 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy c (cid:13) 2017 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4704 - 4 / 17 / 07 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059009 . 3081324 relation to other disciplines . In particular it is important to understand why certain measures of student engagement are built into these instruments and how these align to our current research practice . Given the global nature of these benchmarks , an ITiCSE working group was needed to obtain the perspectives needed to address these challenges . This ITiCSE working group facilitated international input to the following activities : Stage 1 - A study examining the trends and variations in the data for the computing discipline from several in - ternational student engagement instruments ( NSSE , SES , UKSES ) over the past decade , including : • A longitudinal study of the data , comparing the results from the various instruments . • Benchmarking of the performance of CS , with a focus on comparisons to other STEM disciplines • A summary of the published data and the perceptions this may generate of CS for perspective students and university administrators . Stage 2 - Analysis of the instrument design and the stu - dent engagement measures they use . This is examined through : • A comparative analysis of the various survey instru - ments of student engagement . • An analysis of the engagement measures used in the in - struments ( this analyse was contrasted with the focus of current computing education research ) . • A survey of research literature used to justify the use of these student engagement measures . Working Groups Session ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 383 Stage 3 - Meta - analysis of current CS research literature related to computing education with speciﬁc focus on any initiatives to promote student engagement , including : • A survey of current topics in computing education re - search literature to establish the current research focus of the discipline . • A focus on any research and teaching initiatives to promote student engagement . • An analysis of the alignment of current CS research to student engagement measures used in international survey instruments . Stage 4 - Interviews on the perceptions of CS academics to the various survey instrument student engagement mea - sures / questions , focusing on : • Interviews with academics to examine how they re - spond to speciﬁc questions extracted from current sur - vey instruments , how they interpret the question in the context of CS and how the questions relate to their teaching practice . • Analysis of the response of academics to international student engagement survey instruments and the en - gagement measures used . Stage 5 - Responding to ﬁndings by : • Providing suggestions for adapting the focus of future computing education research to maximise outcomes from existing international benchmarks on student en - gagement . • Presenting ways of increasing staﬀ awareness of in - ternational benchmarks and student engagement mea - sures . Since these student engagement measures are widely pub - licised , and are used by students to make course selection decisions and by administrators to assess courses , it is im - portant for the computing education discipline to have a greater awareness of these instruments and their design . We need to better understand how current computing educa - tion research relates to these instruments and the engage - ment measures they use . A better understanding of the engagement measures used in these instruments , why they are considered important , and how they align to our teach - ing and research practice , is crucial if we are to improve the performance of the computing discipline in these national benchmarks . Finally , we must investigate ways in which we might respond as a discipline in order to improve the per - formance of CS on these student engagement measures . CCS Concepts • Social and professional topics → Computer science education ; Keywords Student Engagement ; Computer Science ; International Bench - marks 1 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Support for this project has been provided by the Monash Education Academy and also by KEGA , The Ministry of Ed - ucation , Science , Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic ( KEGA 009KU - 4 / 2017 ) . Working Groups Session ITiCSE ' 17 , July 3 - 5 , 2017 , Bologna , Italy 384