Overview Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology Mehmet Koyut ¨urk 1 , 2 ∗ During genomic revolution , algorithmic and analytical methods for organizing , integrating , analyzing , and querying biological sequence data proved invaluable . Today , increasing availability of high - throughput data pertaining functional states of biomolecules , as well as their interactions , enables genome - scale studies of the cell from a systems perspective . The past decade witnessed signiﬁcant efforts on the development of computational infrastructure for large - scale modeling and analysis of biological systems , commonly using network models . Such efforts lead to novel insights into the complexity of living systems , through development of sophisticated abstractions , algorithms , and analytical techniques that address a broad range of problems , including the following : ( 1 ) inference and reconstruction of complex cellular networks ; ( 2 ) identiﬁcation of common and coherent patterns in cellular networks , with a view to understanding the organizing principles and building blocks of cellular signaling , regulation , and metabolism ; and ( 3 ) characterization of cellular mechanisms that underlie the differences between living systems , in terms of evolutionary diversity , development and differentiation , and complex phenotypes , including human disease . These problems pose signiﬁcant algorithmic and analytical challenges because of the inherent complexity of the systems being studied ; limitations of data in terms of availability , scope , and scale ; intractability of resulting computational problems ; and limitations of reference models for reliable statistical inference . This article provides a broad overview of existing algorithmic and analytical approaches to these problems , highlights key biological insights provided by these approaches , and outlines emerging opportunities and challenges in computational systems biology .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Syst Biol Med I n post - genomic biology , the nature and scale of data that pertain to the structure , function , and organi - zation of biomolecules present novel opportunities for exploratory research . Along with these opportunities , the large volume and high dimensionality of data pose signiﬁcant challenges in terms of management , annotation , and integration of data , as well as trans - formation of data into biological knowledge through large - scale mining and analysis . As demonstrated by the large - scale application of sequence alignment tools , such as BLAST 1 and CLUSTAL , 2 computational models and algorithms prove extremely useful in the development of tools for exploring , manipulating , and ∗ Correspondence to : koyuturk @ eecs . case . edu 1 Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH 44106 , USA 2 Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH 44106 , USA DOI : 10 . 1002 / wsbm . 061 interpreting large data sets . Furthermore , algorithmic and analytical approaches render the study of complex biological systems tractable , through development of sophisticated abstractions . 3 This article presents a broad overview of computational algorithms and analytical techniques that provide useful insights into the complexity of biological systems . GENOME - SCALE DATA ON BIOMOLECULES AND THEIR INTERACTIONS Recent technological advances in biological data collection and acquisition enable interrogation of biological systems at multiple levels , generating genome - scale data on the structure , abundance , activity , and interactions of biomolecules . These diverse data sources , often referred to as omic data ,  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio are illustrated in the context of the central dogma of molecular biology in Figure 1 . Genome At the level of DNA , genomic data uncover the infor - mation that is stored in the genomes of organisms and passed across generations . These include sequences of genes coding for functional proteins , regulatory motifs that serve as markers for the regulation of the expression of speciﬁc genes , as well and individual differences in the genetic composition of populations , such as single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs—com - mon individual differences at a single nucleotide base 4 ) and copy number variations ( CNVs—multiplicity or lack of certain DNA segments in genomic sequences 5 ) . Genome sequencing is traditionally achieved through exploitation of the natural process of DNA replica - tion . On the other hand , identiﬁcation of SNPs 6 and CNVs , 7 as well as precise sequences of small genomes ( e . g . , human immunodeﬁciency virus ) are often carried out using DNA microarrays , which exploit the nat - ural process of hybridization . However , sequencing technology and associated computational techniques are being transformed by the emergence of short - read sequence data , also known as next - generation sequencing . 130 Transcriptome DNA microarrays are also commonly used to monitor the retrieval of genomic information under various conditions . 8 More speciﬁcally , the relative amount of mRNA molecules that are present in a sample can be measured simultaneously for thousands of mRNA sequences ( transcriptome ) , enabling comparison of the expression of thousands of genes in a given sample or across samples . 9 Although the expression of a gene at the transcriptomic level serves as a proxy to the abundance of the corresponding protein in the sample , it does not necessarily capture the functional activity of the protein 10 because protein expression is also regulated after transcription , through several mechanisms including mRNA degradation , alternative splicing , and post - translational modiﬁcation . 11 Proteome Proteomic screening , on the other hand , captures molecular activity at the functional level . 12 A common method , 2 - D polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis enables separation of proteins in a given sample based on their electrochemical properties ( e . g . , isoelectric point or mass ) . Separated proteins can then be identiﬁed using mass spectrometry ( MS ) . 13 Although proteomic screening techniques are useful in quantifying the expression , as well as modiﬁcation of proteins at the functional level , established proteomic screening techniques can only monitor the expression of a limited subset of proteins in the cell at a time . Furthermore , techniques such as ﬂow cytometry allow screening of protein activity at the resolution of thousands of individual cells ; however , this comes at the price of a very limited coverage of the proteome . 14 Interactome In addition to abundance at the level of single molecules , current high - throughput screening tech - niques enable identiﬁcation of physical interactions DNA RNA Protein Replication Transcription Translation Genome : Gene sequences Regulatory motifs SNPs , CNVs Transcriptome : mRNA expression Protein - DNA interactions Proteome : Protein expression Protein structure Interactome : Protein interactions Domain interactions Protein complexes Metabolome : Metabolite concentration Metabolic pathways Storage Execution Retrieval FIGURE 1 | Description of omic data sets in the context of central dogma .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology between proteins . A common method , yeast two - hybrid ( Y2H ) screening identiﬁes interactions between pairs of proteins by exploiting the modularity of the activating and binding domains of eukaryotic tran - scription factors . 15 Namely , in Y2H , the activating and binding domains of a speciﬁc transcription factor are separated , and each domain is fused to one of the two ( prey and bait ) proteins . Subsequently , the interaction between the two proteins is captured by the expression of a reporter gene that is the target of the transcription factor . Tandem afﬁnity puriﬁca - tion ( TAP ) , on the other hand , identiﬁes interactions between a single bait protein and multiple other proteins . 16 This is achieved by tagging the protein of interest and introducing it to the host . Once the bait protein is retrieved along with other proteins attached to it , these interacting partners are identiﬁed using MS . Experimentally identiﬁed protein – protein inter - actions ( PPIs ) are organized into PPI networks , which provide a high - level and static description of cellular organization , commonly referred to as the inter - actome . Currently , established PPI network models assume binary interactions between pairs of proteins , which is naturally descriptive of the outcome of Y2H screening . On the other hand , multiple interactions identiﬁed by TAP are represented by either a star net - work around the bait protein ( spoke model ) or a clique of all proteins retrieved by the bait protein , includ - ing itself ( matrix model ) . 17 An important limitation of high - throughput PPIs , however , is their incomplete and noisy nature . 15 , 18 Furthermore , these interactions only represent a snapshot of the dynamical organiza - tion of proteins in the cell . 19 Currently available PPI data sets are also highly prone to ascertainment bias . Metabolome Metabolism , i . e . , chains of chemical reactions that transform various forms of matter and energy into one another , is one of the fundamental processes in living systems . The organization of metabolic reactions is generally abstracted using metabolic network models , which represent the complex web of relationships between metabolites ( compounds consumed and / or produced by reactions ) and enzymes ( gene products that catalyze reactions ) . Today , several well - characterized metabolic pathways for diverse species are available in public databases . However , large - scale analyses of the kinetics of metabolic networks are bound by data availability and computational complexity . Nevertheless , ﬂux balance analyses that rely on steady - state assumption provide signiﬁcant insights into the dynamics of metabolism . 20 The logistic support for such analyses comes from monitoring of the abundance of metabolites via nuclear magnetic resonance and MS , as well as monitoring of the abundance and functional activity of enzymes through transcriptomic and proteomic screening . NETWORK INFERENCE : GENETIC REGULATION AND CELLULAR SIGNALING The cell adapts to its environment by recognition and transduction of a broad range of environmental signals , which in turn activate response mechanisms by regulating the expression of proteins that take part in the corresponding processes . 21 Mechanisms of cellular signaling and genetic regulation also play key roles in cellular communication in multicellular organisms , including developmental processes . A fundamental challenge in systems biology is therefore to reconstruct networks that describe cellular signaling and regulation , with a view to deriving maps of interconnectivity and functional relationships between molecules . 22 These maps are then used to derive chemically accurate representations of biochemical events within signaling networks , through detailed mathematical models that capture the dynamics of cellular systems . Inference of protein interactions Transduction of cellular signals is generally carried out through a complex web of interactions between proteins . Therefore , an important step toward recon - structing cellular networks involves identiﬁcation of PPIs . As discussed in the previous section , although high - throughput screening techniques such as Y2H and TAP can identify physical interactions between many proteins , the interactions identiﬁed by these techniques are often incomplete and highly noisy . 18 For this reason , many bioinformatics approaches also utilize other sources of molecular data for in silico identiﬁcation of PPIs . 23 Common approaches to computational predic - tion of PPIs are illustrated in Figure 2 . As seen in the ﬁgure , the recurring idea in computational prediction of PPIs is the premise that functionally associated proteins are likely to consistently appear together in different contexts . At the evolutionary level , such correlations are detected through assessment of co - evolution between proteins—that is , the degree of correlation between the conservation of two or more proteins in diverse species . 24 For this purpose , a phy - logenetic proﬁle is constructed for each protein of  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio Protein A B C A B C Genomes Interactions ? D E F D E F ? Conditions Co - evolution Co - expression FIGURE 2 | Illustration of the general principles of common computational methods for predicting protein – protein interactions . In the upper panel , black and white boxes , respectively , indicate existence and absence of a homolog in the corresponding genome . In the lower panel , the red and green shades of boxes , respectively , indicate the degree of up - and down - regulation of the coding gene with respect to the corresponding condition . interest , which is a vector of values indicating the presence of a homolog of the protein in a range of species , for which comprehensive genomic data are available . Subsequently , the correlation between phy - logenetic proﬁles , often quantiﬁed in terms of their mutual information , 25 is used to assess the likelihood of functional association between the corresponding proteins . This approach is further enhanced by embed - ding the phylogenetic vector in phylogenetic trees that represent evolutionary histories thereby captur - ing the underlying evolutionary relationships more accurately . 26 , 27 Similarly , detection of evolutionary events such as gene fusion ( i . e . , two independent pro - teins in one organism are part of a single polypeptide chain in another organism ) or conserved gene neigh - borhoods also provides a handle to the identiﬁcation of interacting proteins . 23 , 68 At a ﬁner timescale , correlation of gene expres - sion proﬁles is often utilized to identify interact - ing proteins , based on the premise that interacting proteins are likely to be co - expressed under differ - ent conditions . 29 It should be noted , however , that some interactions are permanent ( e . g . , protein com - plexes that are maintained through most conditions ) , whereas some are transient ; transient interactions exhibit weaker relationship with correlation of gene expression . 19 This observation suggests that , for accu - rate identiﬁcation of functional relationships between proteins , it is important to consider local correlations in expression , i . e . , those that manifest themselves only in a subset of various conditions . 30 In general , the problem of identifying multiple genes with correlated expression in a subspace of the sample space is known as biclustering or co - clustering , and is studied exten - sively in the bioinformatics literature . 31 Availability of a wide variety of experimental and computational methods for predicting interac - tions naturally calls for the integration of interac - tions identiﬁed by various methods . This can be achieved using statistical models that characterize the likelihood of predicted interactions based on gold standard interactions . 32 Similarly , classiﬁcation based approaches treat pairs of proteins as data items , pre - dictions of various inference schemes as features , interactions as labels to be assigned to pairs of proteins , and known interactions as training data . They then learn models that specify the relationship between the outcome of various predictions and the existence of interactions between pairs of proteins . 33 Large - scale integration of PPIs for model organisms demonstrates that the integrated network represents functional association between pairs of proteins bet - ter than any method alone , 32 suggesting that different methods capture different aspects of functional asso - ciation between proteins . Once interactions between proteins are characterized at genome scale , these inter - actions are mined in conjunction with other data sources to identify signaling pathways . 34 Inference of domain interactions Proteins are composed of multiple domain s , which are often regarded as their primary structural and func - tional units . As similar domains can be utilized by dif - ferent proteins that are involved in diverse processes , domains are often classiﬁed into domain families , based on their evolutionary , structural , and func - tional relationships . 35 Consequently , identiﬁcation of domain – domain interactions ( DDIs ) that mediate PPIs is likely to provide structural insights on the nature of interactions , leading to insights that can be trans - ferred across different processes . 36 Indeed , it is shown that , if phylogenetic proﬁles are constructed by taking into account the conservation of domains ( as opposed to whole proteins ) , the performance of phylogenetic proﬁling in predicting interactions can be improved signiﬁcantly . 37 However , information on the domain decomposition of many proteins may not be readily available . Consequently , computational approaches incorporate domain information by constructing and clustering phylogenetic proﬁles at the residue level 123 or identifying correlated mutations between residues through alignment of multiple protein sequences . 39 A key advantage of these methods is that , they can identify novel domains and DDIs concurrently . If the domain decomposition of a large number of proteins is available , then PPIs identiﬁed via high - throughput screening can also be used to infer DDIs . 40  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology Protein A B C A B Domains Protein D C D X Y Z W X Y W X Y W Z ? ? Domain interactions X Y W Z ? ? Parsimony Maximum likelihood ? FIGURE 3 | Inferring domain – domain interactions ( DDIs ) from protein – protein interactions ( PPIs ) . Given the domain decomposition of proteins and a set of PPIs , DDI inference methods target identiﬁcation of DDIs that mediate these interactions . Different formulations of the problem optimize different criteria , leading to different solutions for DDI inference problem . As illustrated in Figure 3 , this is achieved by assuming that the observed PPIs are generated by a hidden model that speciﬁes DDIs , and reconstructing the hidden model by optimizing an objective function derived from a particular assumption on the generating principles of the model ( e . g . , maximum likelihood 41 or parsimony 42 ) . Furthermore , through consideration of experimental PPIs and phylogenetic proﬁles together , DDIs can be inferred more precisely . 43 Recent studies show that organization of DDIs into networks is likely to provide useful information on the functional relationships between biomolecules . 129 Inference of regulatory networks At the transcriptional level , gene expression is reg - ulated through interaction of transcription factor proteins with the DNA at speciﬁc locations . The combinatorial relationship between transcription fac - tors and their target genes are organized into tran - scriptional regulatory networks , providing qualita - tive models of genetic regulation at the level of transcription . 45 Although transcriptional networks can be reconstructed through identiﬁcation of speciﬁc protein – DNA interactions , 46 correlations between expression levels of genes also provide valuable infor - mation for the inference of regulatory interactions that extend beyond transcriptional regulation . 28 The simplest model for gene regulatory networks is based on Boolean networks , where the expression of each gene in the network is represented by a binary variable and the regulatory effect of the genes that regulate a particular gene is represented as a Boolean function . 47 Assuming that regulation is synchronized across well - deﬁned time steps and quantizing gene expression properly into binary values , 48 one can construct truth tables for each gene . By subsequent mining of these truth tables , the minimum set of regulators that can explain the variation in the expression of each gene can be identiﬁed , along with their effects . 49 Boolean networks provide simple , yet useful models of causal relationships in the cell , and they can be surprisingly powerful in predicting cellular behavior in various contexts . 50 However , they do not account for many important factors , including the quantitative and asynchronous nature of cellular signaling and regulation , as well as variables that are not measured . Bayesian networks utilize stochasticity to account for such factors that are otherwise intractable . 51 They represent the expression of a gene as a random variable and characterize the relationship between a gene and its regulators in terms of the conditional probability distribution of this random variable with respect to the expression of regulators . Consequently , inference of the structure of regulatory networks is reduced to the problem of identifying Markov blankets for all genes in the network . Here , the Markov blanket of a random variable is deﬁned as the minimum set of random variables that satisfy the following property : distribution of the variable of interest is independent of all other variables in the network , given the variables in this set , its Markov blanket . 52 Identiﬁcation of Markov blankets is a computationally difﬁcult problem that is studied extensively , and there exists a wealth of publicly available software tools that can be used for this purpose . However , in general , existing tools do not scale to thousands of genes in terms of the computational resources they require . Once the structure of the network is inferred , the parameters that characterize the dependency between genes and their regulators can be identiﬁed using various model ﬁtting algorithms . Bayesian networks are also used successfully to identify signaling pathways for a small number of signaling proteins based on high - resolution pro - teomic data . 14 An important limitation of Bayesian network models , however , is that they represent prob - abilistic dependencies rather than causal relationships . Dynamic Bayesian networks overcome these difﬁcul - ties by laying out the network across time steps and conditioning a gene’s expression on the expression of its regulators in the previous time step . 53 In a  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio dual manner , probabilistic Boolean networks intro - duce stochasticity to Boolean networks by modeling the Boolean function that characterizes the expression of a gene as a random variable . 54 UNDERSTANDING COMMONALITIES : CANONICALIZATION OF NETWORKS One of the deﬁning characteristics of complex systems is their modularity , which has important implications in their robustness and adaptability . 55 , 56 Indeed , biological systems are observed to exhibit modularity at multiple levels , and evolutionary mechanisms such as gene duplication facilitate recurrent use of similar principles in different processes . 57 , 58 Consequently , identiﬁcation of common and coherent patterns in large - scale molecular networks is likely to provide insights into the richness of the design principles of cellular circuitry , which , through canonicalization of common patterns , has the potential to uncover the periodic table of systems biology . 3 Identiﬁcation of functional modules Functional modules are generally deﬁned as groups of proteins that perform a distinct biological function together . In PPI networks , functional modules manifest themselves as subnetworks with high connectivity , while being somewhat isolated from the rest of the network . 59 Consequently , graph clustering algorithms are commonly utilized to modularize networks . An important challenge in functional module identiﬁcation is the establishment of formal criteria for assessing the likelihood of a subnetwork to be a functional module . Subnetwork density , i . e . , the fraction of observed interactions among all possible interactions between a given set of proteins , is often used for this purpose . Similarly , edge connectivity , i . e . , the minimum number of edges that must be removed to break the subnetwork apart , is a useful measure in assessing the modularity of a subnetwork . 60 A major problem associated with these modularity measures is that they are rather arbitrary , i . e . , they are not directly associated with a quantitative model of underlying biological processes . However , assessment of the signiﬁcance of these quantities with respect to a reference statistical model may provide a statistical basis to establish the potential biological relevance of a module . 61 For example , with respect to a particular generating model for the network , one can develop an analytical framework to characterize the distribution of the size of the largest subnetwork with given density . 62 Indeed , assessment of the modularity of a subnetwork with respect to such a distribution is shown to signiﬁcantly improve the quality of identiﬁed modules compared to those identiﬁed via ad hoc measures , in terms of the functional coherence of identiﬁed modules . 62 The functional coherence of a group of proteins is often assessed with respect to established standardized libraries of molecular function ( e . g . , Gene Ontology 63 ) . Using functions assigned to individual molecules in these libraries , the coherence of each module is assessed by the signiﬁcance of the observed enrichment of a particular function in the module , based on hypergeometric models . 64 , 65 Identiﬁcation of functions that are signiﬁcantly enriched in network modules is useful in functionally annotating the modules , as well as calibrating and comparing module identiﬁcation algorithms . From an algorithmic perspective , the problem of ﬁnding dense subnetworks in a network is computa - tionally intractable in its most general setting . There - fore , most of the existing algorithmic approaches utilize heuristics that either greedily grow subnet - works starting from a seed protein 66 , 67 or recursively partition the subnetwork until the resulting subnet - works are sufﬁciently dense . 60 Furthermore , algebraic models that are based on random walks 128 or spectral network decomposition 69 are also effective in modu - larizing networks , through continuous relaxation of the problems . Because PPI networks are incomplete , noisy , and provide only a static description of cel - lular organization , module identiﬁcation algorithms are also enriched via incorporation of knowledge on gene expression , to capture dynamic organization of modularity in biological systems . 70 Network alignment Availability of interaction data for multiple species is commonly utilized to identify network structures that are conserved throughout evolution . 71 Such conserved subnetworks are likely to underlie modular processes that are essential to the respective taxa . The prob - lem of local network alignment , i . e . , identiﬁcation of subnetworks with approximate matches in multiple networks ( in terms of conservation of proteins , as well as interactions between them ) , leads to computation - ally challenging problems as the mapping of homolog proteins between different species ( networks ) is not one - to - one . 72 Consequently , the resulting computa - tional problem is a generalization of the intractable subgraph isomorphism problem . While aligning pairs of networks , existing algo - rithms generally construct a Cartesian - product graph , in which each node represents a pair of homolog pro - teins , one from each species . 73 Homology between two  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology FIGURE 4 | Arp 2 / 3 complex , which plays a signiﬁcant role in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton , is identiﬁed as a conserved subnetwork through mining of protein – protein interaction networks of multiple organisms , using a fast algorithm that relies on contraction of ortholog proteins . 126 The conserved subnetwork is shown on the left with nodes annotated by cluisters of ortholog groups ( COG ) identiﬁers . 127 The occurrence of the subnetwork in three eukaryotic organisms is shown on the right . Dashed links indicate indirect interactions . Such knowledge discovery based analyses are likely to lead to the construction of canonical module libraries . Pattern KOG0677 KOG3380 KOG18767 KOG1523 KOG2826 KOG0678 H . sapiens Arp2 Arp23 - p16 Arp23 - p20 Arp23 - p41 Arp23 - p34 Arp3 S . cerevisiae Arp2 Arc15 Arc19 Arc40 Arc35 Arp3 B . taurus Arp2 Arp23 - p16 Arp23 - p20 Arp23 - p41 Arp23 - p34 Arp3 proteins is often quantiﬁed in terms of the sequence similarity between proteins . Because an important objective of network alignment is the use of network information to enhance identiﬁcation of orthologs , these algorithms treat sequence homology in a ﬂex - ible way . Subsequently , by assigning weights to the edges of the product graph based on the conserva - tion of respective interactions , these algorithms reduce the problem into one of ﬁnding heavy subgraphs in the product graph . Here , assignment of conserva - tion scores to interactions requires sound modeling of the constraints on the conservation and divergence of interactions . Existing approaches to tackling this challenge include assignment of likelihood scores to subgraphs based on Bayesian modeling of the exis - tence and observation of interactions in modular and conserved subnetworks , which can be decomposed into edge weights . 74 On the other hand , assign - ment of match ( conserved interaction ) , mismatch ( missing homologous interaction ) , and duplication ( homologous proteins in the same network ) scores based on network evolution models 57 , 58 enables tun - ing and adjustment of alignment parameters based on empirically derived statistics on conservation of interactions 75 , 76 —a generalization of the framework employed by popular sequence alignment algorithms ( e . g . , BLAST ) and aminoacid similarity matrices ( e . g . , PAM , BLOSUM ) . Existing network evolution mod - els are quite powerful in capturing the basic struc - tural properties of extant networks , including degree distribution , clustering coefﬁcient distribution , and subgraph distribution . 77 – 81 As the size of a product graph grows expo - nentially with the number of networks , pairwise network alignment algorithms do not scale well to large numbers of networks . This problem is alleviated through construction of a layered representation of multiple networks that represents groups of poten - tially orthologous proteins as subgraphs ( as opposed to vertices ) . 82 Furthermore , by summarizing PPI net - works through contraction of nodes that correspond to ortholog proteins , and by using dedicated frequent subgraph mining algorithms on the resulting uniquely labeled graphs , the problem of ﬁnding exact subgraph matches in multiple networks is rendered tractable . 83 A conserved subgraph identiﬁed by frequent subgraph mining on the PPI networks of nine eukaryotic species is shown in Figure 4 . Finally , by formulating multiple graph alignment problem as one of assigning nodes into equivalence classes , the complexity of the problem is rendered linear in the number of networks . 84 Local network alignment algorithms are also extended to the application of small subgraph match queries , and efﬁcient algorithms are developed for searching for paths , 85 trees and graphs with bounded tree width , 86 and general subnetworks . 87 The idea of network alignment is also applied to global alignment of networks that belong to different species , with a view to enhancing identiﬁcation of orthologous proteins in multiple species . 88 Global network alignment algorithms aim to assign pairwise similarity scores to pairs of proteins from different networks to reﬂect the topological similarity of the proteins in the corresponding networks . 89 The principle here is that two proteins can be considered topologically similar if their interacting partners are topologically similar ; therefore , the problem can be formulated as a mutually reinforcing relation , which lends itself to iterative solution of an algebraic system . Network motifs An important feature of molecular networks is that certain subnetworks with coherent topological  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio Annotation Gene network Occurrence of a pathway in gene network Query Filter common terms Significant pathways FIGURE 5 | Screenshots from a sample computational tool , NARADA , 44 that enables identiﬁcation and browsing of canonical network patterns in regulatory networks . NARADA takes gene regulatory networks and functional annotation of individual genes as input and processes queries on regulatory pathways that involve speciﬁc biological processes ( e . g . , what are the processes that regulate ciliary or ﬂagellar motility in E . coli ? Are these regulatory pathways mediated by other processes ? ) . NARADA is available as an open source at http : / / www . cs . purdue . edu / ∼ jpandey / narada / . With the availability of such sophisticated tools , browsing basic biological information becomes a visually rich and interactive activity , moving beyond basic text and database searches . properties are signiﬁcantly over - represented in these networks . 90 Many of these common motifs are shared with other natural , social , and built networks , including electronic circuits , World Wide Web , and food webs , indicating that such topological structures may have essential functionality in the system . Indeed , algorithmic studies at multiple levels of complexity , from evolutionary timescale to cellular dynamics , demonstrate the key role of network motifs in biological systems : ( 1 ) proteins that are clustered into coherent motifs are likely to be conserved together ; 91 ( 2 ) network motifs provide signatures that are useful in comparison and classiﬁcation of networks , 92 also highlighting the basic mechanisms of network evolution ; 93 and ( 3 ) abundance of network motifs correlates signiﬁcantly with their dynamic properties , in terms of stability and robustness . 94 Functional annotation of the nodes of network motifs gives rise to functional network motifs , providing high - level descriptions of the crosstalk between different processes . 44 , 95 One such software tool that enables exploration of canonical regulatory pathways in various organisms is demonstrated in Figure 5 . These canonical representations of the wiring of cellular networks are useful in projecting information across different processes or species in many ways , including inference of molecular function 96 and identiﬁcation of novel pathways . 97 It should be noted , however , that the identiﬁcation of statistically signiﬁcant network motifs poses signiﬁcant computational challenges . 44 , 98 , 99 Network based functional inference A common application of canonical network analysis is the prediction of molecular function based on partial knowledge of the functions of some of the proteins in the network . 100 As illustrated in Figure 6 , current computational approaches to this problem exploit three distinct observations on the functional coherence of molecular networks : 1 . Connectivity : As functional modularity is closely related to network connectivity , proteins  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology Connectivity / modularity ? ? ? ? Proximity ? Recurrent patterns FIGURE 6 | Overview of common approaches to network based functional annotation . In each hypothetical example , the proteins with known function are annotated by a symbol that represents their function . Proteins with unknown function are labeled with question marks . As seen on the left , connectivity / modularity based schemes transfer function based on direct interactions . As seen in the middle , proximity based schemes diffuse function through the network . Finally , as seen on the right , pattern based schemes derive templates of functional interactions and interpolate these patterns accordingly to infer novel functions for proteins . that are highly connected to each other in PPI networks are likely to be functionally associated . 101 2 . Proximity : Generalizing this observation fur - ther , multiple lines of evidence suggest that functional similarity of proteins correlates with their proximity in PPI networks . 44 , 100 3 . Recurrent patterns : As similar design princi - ples of cellular signaling are used recurrently in various contexts , partial occurrences of recur - rent patterns in networks can be interpolated to assign new functions to proteins involved in these patterns . 38 A basic approach to connectivity based func - tional inference is to assign a function to a pro - tein if the function is signiﬁcantly enriched in its neighborhood . 102 This approach is generalized to incorporate network topology by identifying network modules , annotating the modules based on functional enrichment of proteins in the module , and projecting this annotation to other proteins in the module . 100 Further improvement on this approach is achieved through incorporation of proximity , by letting func - tions diffuse across the network . 103 , 104 Pattern based functional inference algorithms consider the problem from a different angle . Rather than relying primarily on the interactions between functionally similar proteins , these approaches exploit the recurrence of interactions between different functional classes . Although this approach leads to challenging computational problems in that it requires identiﬁcation of over - represented subnetworks , it captures information that cannot be captured by traditional functional annotation schemes and it enables propagation of knowledge across different organisms . 38 UNDERSTANDING DIFFERENCES : NETWORKS AND PHENOTYPE Recent advances in high - throughput molecular screen - ing enable studies of phenotypic differences in terms of their signatures in cellular mechanisms . While genetic studies ( gene association , haplotype mapping , etc . ) are useful in discovering genetic differences that relate to certain phenotypes , differential analysis of molec - ular expression ( gene expression , protein expression , metabolomics ) helps to elucidate the variation in the activity of cellular systems . However , cellular systems are orchestrated through combinatorial organization of thousands of biomolecules . 22 This complexity is reﬂected in the diversity of phenotypic effects , which generally present themselves as weak signals in terms of the changes in the expression of single molecules . For this reason , studies often focus on identiﬁcation of multiple markers that together differentiate various phenotypes . Integrating genomic data with network information Interpretation of the ﬁndings of gene association studies in the context of molecular networks may highlight the cellular mechanisms that underlie various phenotypes , including human disease . 105 Indeed , preliminary studies on the relationship between genes that are implicated in similar phenotypes indicate that these genes tend to interact with each other ; they are likely to be expressed in similar tissues , and their mRNA expression proﬁles are often correlated . 106 Capitalizing on these ﬁndings , several algorithmic approaches utilize network information to identify novel genetic markers . 107 For example , if the linkage interval for a particular phenotype spans a large number of genes and some genes that are associated with similar phenotypes are known , then these two sources of information can be integrated within  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio network context to rank the genes that are potentially associated with the phenotype . 108 Molecular networks also provide a basis for interpreting genetic interactions . 109 In the context of synthetic lethal interactions in yeast ( i . e . , pairs of genes such that the cell survives without any one of these genes , but dies if both are knocked out ) , two hypotheses are tested systematically to explain the network mechanisms behind genetic interactions : ( 1 ) within - pathway model assumes that many of the pairs of genes that are involved in a single pathway are synthetic lethal , indicating cooperation and ( 2 ) between - pathway model assumes that several pairs of genes , each from one of two ‘parallel’ pathways are synthetic lethal , indicating complementation . Through generalization of module identiﬁcation algorithms , many clusters of genetic interactions that correspond to one of the two categories are identiﬁed , suggesting that both models can explain a certain fraction of observed genetic interactions . 109 Integrating molecular expression data with network information Molecular networks provide static and qualitative descriptions of the wiring of cellular systems . Molecu - lar expression data , on the other hand , provides quan - titative information on the functional states of con - stituent molecules under different conditions / samples , or over time . Consequently , it is natural to integrate these two sources of information to gain insights into alterations of the dynamic organization of cellular systems . 70 Toward this end , preliminary studies par - ticularly focus on the functional behavior of metabolic networks , as metabolism is one of the relatively well - characterized processes in biological systems . 20 Systematic studies of the behavior of gene expression with respect to metabolic networks of model organ - isms indicate that divergent reactions ( in which the product of an enzyme is consumed by two different enzymes ) often act as switches , where the expression of the upstream enzyme is correlated with only one of the downstream enzymes . 110 Furthermore , metabolic networks can be dissected into tissue - speciﬁc path - ways based on coupled analysis of ﬂux models and tissue - speciﬁc gene expression within an optimiza - tion framework that maximizes the inconsistency between the ﬂux through reactions and the expression of the genes coding for enzymes that catalyze cor - responding reactions . 111 Similarly , in the context of transcriptional regulation , the transcriptional network is dissected into subnetworks based on the expression of transcription factors in various processes , reveal - ing that the transcription networks that correspond to different processes exhibit different topological properties . 112 Recently , tissue - speciﬁcity of protein interaction networks is also explored , demonstrating that tissue - speciﬁc proteins make only a few interac - tions , whereas proteins that are universally expressed actually have many tissue - speciﬁc interactions . 113 Identiﬁcation of implicated subnetworks In the context of a particular phenotype or perturba - tion , identiﬁcation of implicated ( or , more speciﬁcally , differentially expressed or dysregulated ) subnetworks enables discovery of multiple phenotype markers , i . e . , multiple genes that are linked to each other in the network and are differentially expressed in samples that belong to different phenotypes , when considered together . In one of the early algorithmic studies , Ideker et al . 114 propose a method for identifying differentially expressed subnetworks with respect to GAL80 dele - tion in yeast . This method is based on quantifying the differential expression of each gene individually and subsequently searching for connected subgraphs with high aggregate signiﬁcance of differential expression . Variations of this method are shown to be effec - tive in identifying multiple gene markers in various other diseases , including melanoma , 115 diabetes , 116 and others . A similar approach is to binarize differen - tial expression of genes in the network and formulate dysregulated pathway identiﬁcation as a problem of ﬁnding maximal subnetworks with a limited number of genes that are not differentially expressed . 117 Although such network based approaches are useful in retrieving weak signals by considering interactions between multiple genes , they do not capture the sample - speciﬁc variation in the expression of different genes . 118 Recent approaches assess the coordinate differential expression of multiple genes by aggregating the expression of a group of genes for each sample and then quantifying the mutual information between this aggregate expression proﬁle and phenotype . 119 It has been shown that classiﬁers that are trained by subnetwork markers identiﬁed via such integrative approaches are more successful in predicting breast cancer metastasis , as compared to those that incorporate single - gene markers . 119 Anastassiou 118 further elaborates these information - theoretic measures to capture the synergy of the dysregulation of a group of proteins , i . e . , the overall differential expression of the subnetwork that is not explained by the differential expression of individual genes in the subnetwork . This approach leads to construction of phenotype - speciﬁc synergy networks that provide global insights into the coordination of multiple genes in the manifestation  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology FIGURE 7 | Framework for the integration of omic data for the discovery of subnetworks implicated in complex phenotypes . Proteomic screening provides functional data for a limited set of proteins , transcriptomic screening provides genome - scale data on mRNA expression , and curated or high - throughput protein – protein interactions provide a framework for the integration of these two complementary , valuable sources of data . This framework also illustrates how researchers can couple speciﬁc data sets generated in their labs with public data to broaden the scope of their analyses . Wild type Y2H , TAP , curated interactions Wild type Phenotype DNA Microarray Wild type Phenotype 2D - PAGE MS Human PPI Network Genome scale mRNA expression Proteomic targets ( seeds ) Network algorithms Implicated subnetworks Public data of a particular phenotype . 120 It should be noted , however , that the task of identifying multiple genes with synergistic differential expression leads to intractable computational problems . 118 As synergy by deﬁnition does not exhibit monotonicity properties , these problems may not be adequately addressed by greedy approximations . Incorporation of proteomic data mRNA expression provides genome - scale information on gene expression , whereas proteomic screening provides information with relatively less coverage at the functional level . Knowledge of molecular interactions is useful in integrating these two complementary data sources to identify multiple phenotype markers . In a recent study on human colorectal cancer ( CRC ) , Nibbe et al . 122 propose a general framework for the integration of omic data sets , which is illustrated in Figure 7 . In this framework , they ﬁrst identify proteomic targets with signiﬁcant fold change in late stages of CRC and map these proteins on a network of PPIs to extract candidate subnetworks that are signiﬁcantly associated with these proteomic seeds . Subsequently , using genome - scale mRNA expression data , they quantify the synergistic differential expression of these candidate subnetworks , extracting known as well as novel markers for CRC . The basic premise here is that small changes in the expression of multiple gene products in the neighborhood of a protein may be synergistically associated with signiﬁcant changes in the functional activity of the corresponding protein . Indeed , systematic analyses in the context of CRC show that differential mRNA expression is not necessarily correlated with proximity to proteomic targets on a single gene basis , but it is signiﬁcantly correlated with the synergistic differential expression when multiple genes are considered . CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK Scientiﬁc and technological developments in the genomic era establish systems biology as a fun - damental interdisciplinary science that marks the transformation of scientiﬁc research into a synergistic effort across multiple disciplines . To this end , devel - opments in biotechnology are coupled with parallel developments in information technology . Besides their contribution to the development of tools for handling data , computational approaches play a key role in systems biology through development of sophisticated abstractions , computational models , and algorithms . In the past decade , such approaches utilized novel TABLE 1 A Summary of Common Problems in Network Biology and Corresponding Computational Tools Available in the Public Domain Problem Tools Prediction of protein / domain interactions Insilicotwo - hybrid , 39 MORPH , 26 Coevolutionary - Matrix , 123 GPE , 42 MLE , 124 DPEA 41 Inference of gene regulatory networks REVEAL , 47 BN / PBN , 49 DBN 53 Identiﬁcation of functional modules and signaling pathways SiDeS , 62 MCODE 8 , HCS , 60 SEEDY , 67 PathFinder , 34 MATISSE 125 Identiﬁcation of functional subnetworks , annotation of network modules , network based inference of protein function Narada , 44 NetGrep , 10 Ontologizer , 64 VAMPIRE , 65 GAIN , 104 PROTAN 37 Network alignment MaWISh , 76 PathBLAST , 73 NetworkBLAST , 74 Graemlin , 75 MULE , 68 IsoRank 88 Querying protein – protein interaction networks for subgraph matches QPath , 56 QNet , 86 TORQUE 87 Identiﬁcation of subnetworks implicated in a particular phenotype Chuang et al . , 99 GNEA , 116 DEGAS 117  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio data sources in innovative ways to characterize the basic working principles of cellular systems , identify common patterns in cellular organization , effectively transfer knowledge across platforms , and identify and interpret the markers , signatures , and mechanisms that underlie differences among living systems . A summary of publicly available tools for the problems discussed in this article is given in Table 1 . As more data become available and algorithmic approaches mature , high - level , large - scale analyses will generate a knowledge base , which , in turn , will enrich low - level , detailed models of biological systems , making it possible to precisely characterize the dynamics of cellular processes at larger scales . To this end , models and algorithms that facilitate effective integration of multiple data sources are likely to dominate the next generation of algorithms for systems biology . Although integrative approaches to network analysis have already been commonly applied , many data classes are not yet fully utilized . In particular , mRNA expression data are still used as the princi - pal indicator of molecular expression and activity , although techniques that enable monitoring of pro - tein expression , protein states and modiﬁcation , and metabolic activity are available . Incorporation of such sources of information will enable modeling of cel - lular activity more accurately ; however , such data sets often do not provide information at the genome scale . Network data provide the ideal substrate for the use of such data sets to extract information beyond their scale . In the near future , with the availabil - ity of more comprehensive and reliable interaction data , proteomic and metabolomic data are likely to be more commonly utilized in large - scale analysis of cellular systems . Furthermore , availability of informa - tion at multiple levels of cellular organization will also facilitate annotation of high - throughput interactions , providing more detailed models of cellular networks . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work is supported in part by an endowment from Theodore and Dana Schroeder Assistant Professorship in Computer Science and Engineering . This work was also supported , in part , by the National Institutes of Health Grant , UL1 - RR024989 Supplement , from the National Center for Research Resources ( Clinical and Translational Science Awards ) . The author would also like to thank Rod Nibbe ( CWRU ) , Mark Chance ( CWRU ) , Shankar Subramaniam ( UCSD ) , and Ananth Grama ( Purdue ) for many useful discussions . REFERENCES 1 . Altschul SF , Gish W , Miller W , Myers EW , Lipman DJ . Basic local alignment search tool . J Mol Biol 1990 , 215 : 403 – 410 . 2 . Larkin MA , Blackshields G , Brown NP , Chenna R , Mcgettigan PA , Mcwilliam H , et al . Clustal W and Clustal X version 2 . 0 . Bioinformatics 2007 , 23 : 2947 – 2948 . 3 . Kitano H . Systems biology : a brief overview . Science 2002 , 295 : 1662 – 1664 . 4 . Wang DG , Fan JB , Siao CJ , Berno A , Young P , et al . Large - scale identiﬁcation , mapping , and genotyping of single - nucleotide polymorphisms in the human genome . Science 1998 , 280 : 1077 – 1082 . 5 . Pollack JR , Perou CM , Alizadeh AA , Eisen MB , Perga - menschikov A , et al . Genome - wide analysis of DNA copy - number changes using cDNA microarrays . Nat Genet 1999 , 23 : 41 – 46 . 6 . Gunderson KL , Steemers FJ , Lee G , Mendoza LG , Chee MS . A genome - wide scalable SNP genotyping assay using microarray technology . Nat Genet 2005 , 37 : 549 – 554 . 7 . Carter NP . Methods and strategies for analyzing copy number variation using DNA microarrays . Nat Genet 2007 , ( suppl 7 ) : 39 . 8 . Schulze A , Downward J . Navigating gene expression using microarrays - a technology review . Nat Cell Biol 2001 , 3 : E190 – E195 . 9 . Slonim DK . From patterns to pathways : gene expres - sion data analysis comes of age . Nat Genet 2002 , 32 ( suppl ) : 502 – 508 . 10 . Greenbaum D , Colangelo C , Williams K , Gerstein M . Comparing protein abundance and mRNA expression levels on a genomic scale . Genome Biol 2003 , 4 ( 9 ) 117 . 11 . Mata J , Marguerat S , B¨ahler J . Post - transcriptional control of gene expression : a genome - wide perspec - tive . Trends Biochem Sci 2005 , 30 : 506 – 514 . 12 . Ghaemmaghami S , Huh WK , Bower K , Howson RW , Belle A , et al . Global analysis of protein expression in yeast . Nature 2003 425 : 737 – 741 .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology 13 . Ferguson LP , Smith RD . Proteome analysis by mass spectrometry . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2003 , 32 : 399 – 424 . 14 . Sachs K , Perez O , Pe’er D , Lauffenburger DA , Nolan GP . Causal protein - signaling networks derived from multiparameter single - cell data . Science 2005 , 308 : 523 – 529 . 15 . Ito T , Chiba T , Ozawa R , Yoshida M , Hattori M , et al . A comprehensive two - hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 , 98 : 4569 – 4574 . 16 . Puig O , Caspary F , Rigaut G , Rutz B , Bouveret E , et al . The tandem afﬁnity puriﬁcation ( TAP ) method : a general procedure of protein complex puriﬁcation . Methods 2001 , 24 : 218 – 229 . 17 . Scholtens D , Vidal M , Gentleman R . Local modeling of global interactome networks . Bioinformatics 2005 , 21 : 3548 – 3557 . 18 . von Mering C , Krause R , Snel B , Cornell M , Oliver SG , et al . Comparative assessment of large - scale data sets of protein - protein interactions . Nature 2002 , 417 : 399 – 403 . 19 . Jansen R , Greenbaum D , Gerstein M . Relating whole - genome expression data with protein - protein interac - tions . Genome Res 2002 , 12 : 37 – 46 . 20 . Papin JA , Price ND , Wiback SJ , Fell DA , Palsson BO . Metabolic pathways in the post - genome era . Trends Biochem Sci 2003 , 28 : 250 – 258 . 21 . Beckerman M . Molecular and Cellular Signaling . New York : Springer ; 2005 . 22 . Papin JA , Hunter T , Palsson BO , Subramaniam S . Reconstruction of cellular signalling networks and analysis of their properties . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 , 6 : 99 – 111 . 23 . Valencia A , Pazos F . Computational methods for the prediction of protein interactions . Curr Opin Struct Biol 2002 , 12 : 368 – 373 . 24 . Pellegrini M , Marcotte EM , Thompson MJ , Eisenberg D , Yeates TO . Assigning protein functions by compar - ative genome analysis : protein phylogenetic proﬁles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 , 96 : 4285 – 4288 . 25 . Wu J , Kasif S , DeLisi C . Identiﬁcation of functional links between genes using phylogenetic proﬁles . Bioin - formatics 2003 , 19 : 1524 – 1530 . 26 . Jothi R , Kann MG , Przytycka TM . Predicting protein - protein interaction by searching evolution - ary tree automorphism space . Bioinformatics 2005 , 21 ( suppl 1 ) : 241 – 250 . 27 . Pazos F , Valencia A . Similarity of phylogenetic trees as indicator of protein - protein interaction . Protein Eng 2001 , 14 : 609 – 614 . 28 . D’Haeseleer P , Liang S , Somogyi R . Genetic network inference : from co - expression clustering to reverse engineering . Bioinformatics 2000 , 16 : 707 – 726 . 29 . Stuart JM , Segal E , Koller D , Kim SK . A Gene - coexpression network for global discovery of con - served genetic modules . Science 2003 , 302 : 249 – 255 . 30 . Cheng Y , Church GM . Biclustering of expression data . Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 2000 , 8 : 93 – 103 . 31 . Madeira SC , Oliveira AL . Biclustering algorithms for biological data analysis : a survey . IEEE / ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2004 , 1 : 24 – 45 . 32 . Lee I , Date SV , Adai AT , Marcotte EM . A probabilis - tic functional network of yeast genes . Science 2004 , 306 : 1555 – 1558 . 33 . Srinivasan BSS , Shah NHH , Flannick JAA , Abeliuk E , Novak AFF , et al . Current progress in network research : toward reference networks for key model organisms . Brief Bioinform 2007 , 8 ( 5 ) : 318 – 332 . 34 . Bebek G , Yang J . PathFinder : mining signal transduc - tion pathway segments from protein - protein interac - tion networks . BMC Bioinform 2007 , 8 : 335 . 35 . Bateman A , Coin L , Durbin R , Finn RD , Hollich V , et al . The Pfam protein families database . Nucleic Acids Res 2004 , ( Database issue ) 32 : D138 – D141 . 36 . Aloy P , Russell RB . Structural systems biology : mod - elling protein interactions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 , 7 : 188 – 197 . 37 . Kim Y , Subramaniam S . Locally deﬁned protein phy - logenetic proﬁles reveal previously missed protein interactions and functional relationships . Proteins 2006 , 62 : 1115 – 1124 . 38 . Kırac¸ M , ¨Ozsoyo˘glu G . Protein Function Prediction Based on Patterns in Biological Networks . Res Com - put Mol Biol 2008 , 197 – 213 . 39 . Pazos F , Valencia A . In silico two - hybrid system for the selection of physically interacting protein pairs . Proteins Struct Function Genet 2002 , 47 : 219 – 227 . 40 . Lee H , Deng M , Sun F , Chen T . An integrated approach to the prediction of domain - domain inter - actions . BMC Bioinform 2006 , 12 : 7 . 41 . Riley R , Lee C , Sabatti C , Eisenberg D . Inferring pro - tein domain interactions from databases of interacting proteins . Genome Biol 2005 , 6 : R89 . 42 . Guimaraes KS , Przytycka TM . Interrogating domain - domain interactions with parsimony based approaches . BMC Bioinform 2008 , 9 : 171 . 43 . Jothi R , Cherukuri PF , Tasneem A , Przytycka TM . Co - evolutionary analysis of domains in interacting proteins reveals insights into domain - domain Inter - actions mediating protein - protein interactions . J Mol Biol 2006 , 362 : 861 – 875 . 44 . Pandey J , Koyut¨urk M , Kim Y , Szpankowski W , Subramaniam S , et al . Functional annotation of regu - latory pathways . Bioinformatics 2007 , 23 : i377 – i386 . 45 . Alon U . An Introduction to Systems Biology : Design Principles of Biological Circuits : Chapman & Hall / CRC ; 2006 .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio 46 . Lee TI , Rinaldi NJ , Robert F , Odom DT , Bar - Joseph Z , et al . Transcriptional regulatory networks in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . Science 2002 , 298 : 799 – 804 . 47 . Akutsu T , Miyano S , Kuhara S . Identiﬁcation of genetic networks from a small number of gene expres - sion patterns under the Boolean network model . Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing Paciﬁc Sympo - sium on Biocomputing , Maui , HI . 1999 , 17 – 28 . 48 . Shmulevich I , Zhang W . Binary analysis and optimization - based normalization of gene expression data . Bioinformatics 2002 , 18 : 555 – 565 . 49 . L¨ahdesm¨aki H , Shmulevich I , Yli - Harja O . On Learning Gene Regulatory Networks Under the Boolean Network Model . Machine Learning 2003 , 52 : 147 – 167 . 50 . Genoud T , M´etraux JP . Crosstalk in plant cell sig - naling : structure and function of the genetic network . Trends Plant Sci 1999 , 4 : 503 – 507 . 51 . Friedman N . Inferring cellular networks using proba - bilistic graphical models . Science 2004 , 303 : 799 – 805 . 52 . Friedman N , Linial M , Nachman I , Pe’er D . Using Bayesian networks to analyze expression data . J Com - put Biol 2000 , 7 : 601 – 620 . 53 . Kim SY , Imoto S , Miyano S . Inferring gene net - works from time series microarray data using dynamic Bayesian networks . Brief Bioinform 2003 , 4 : 228 – 235 . 54 . Shmulevich I , Dougherty ER , Kim S , Zhang W . Prob - abilistic Boolean Networks : a rule - based uncertainty model for gene regulatory networks . Bioinformatics 2002 , 18 : 261 – 274 . 55 . Hartwell LH , Hopﬁeld JJ , Leibler S , Murray AW . From molecular to modular cell biology . Nature 1999 , 402 ( suppl 6761 ) : C47 – 52 . 56 . Przulj N , Wigle DA , Jurisica I . Functional topology in a network of protein interactions . Bioinformatics 2004 , 20 : 340 – 348 . 57 . Bebek G , Berenbrink P , Cooper C , Friedetzky T , Nadeau J , et al . The degree distribution of the gener - alized duplication model . Theor Computer Sci 2006 , 369 : 239 – 249 . 58 . Pastor - Satorras R , Smith E , Sol´e RV . Evolving pro - tein interaction networks through gene duplication . J Theor Biol 2003 , 222 : 199 – 210 . 59 . Spirin V , Mirny LA . Protein complexes and functional modules in molecular networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 , 100 : 12123 – 12128 . 60 . Hartuv E , Shamir R . A clustering algorithm based on graph connectivity . Inform Processing Lett 2000 , 76 : 175 – 181 . 61 . Itzkovitz S , Milo R , Kashtan N , Ziv G , Alon U . Subgraphs in random networks . Phys Rev E 2003 , 68 : 026127 . 62 . Koyut¨urk M , Szpankowski W , Grama A . Assess - ing signiﬁcance of connectivity and conservation in protein interaction networks . J Comput Biol 2007 , 14 : 747 – 764 . 63 . Ashburner M , Ball CA , Blake JA , Botstein D , Butler H , et al . Gene ontology : tool for the uniﬁcation of biology . The Gene Ontology Consortium . Nat Genet 2000 , 25 : 25 – 29 . 64 . Grossmann S , Bauer S , Robinson PNN , Vingron M . Improved detection of overrepresentation of gene - ontology annotations with parent - child analysis . Bioinformatics 2007 , 24 : 1650 – 1651 . 65 . Hsiao A , Ideker T , Olefsky JM , Subramaniam S . VAMPIRE microarray suite : a web - based platform for the interpretation of gene expression data . Nucleic Acids Res 2005 , 33 : W627 – W632 . 66 . Bader GD , Hogue CW . An automated method for ﬁnding molecular complexes in large protein interac - tion networks . BMC Bioinform 2003 , 4 2 . 67 . Bader JS . Greedily building protein networks with conﬁdence . Bioinformatics 2003 , 19 : 1869 – 1874 . 68 . Enright AJ , Iliopoulos I , Kyrpides NC , Ouzounis CA . Protein interaction maps for complete genomes based on gene fusion events . Nature 1999 , 402 : 86 – 90 . 69 . Bu D , Zhao Y , Cai L , Xue H , Zhu X , et al . Topologi - cal structure analysis of the protein - protein interaction network in budding yeast . Nucl Acids Res 2003 , 31 : 2443 – 2450 . 70 . Hanisch D , Zien A , Zimmer R , Lengauer T . Co - clustering of biological networks and gene expression data . Bioinformatics . 2002 , 18 ( suppl 1 ) : S145 – S154 . 71 . Sharan R , Ideker T . Modeling cellular machinery through biological network comparison . Nat Biotech - nol 2006 , 24 : 427 – 433 . 72 . Koyut¨urk M . Comparative Analysis of Biological Net - works . New York : VDM Verlag Dr . M¨uller ; 2009 . 73 . Kelley BP , Sharan R , Karp RM , Sittler T , Root DE , et al . Conserved pathways within bacteria and yeast as revealed by global protein network alignment . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 , 100 : 11394 – 11399 . 74 . Sharan R , Ideker T , Kelley B , Shamir R , Karp RM . Identiﬁcation of protein complexes by comparative analysis of yeast and bacterial protein interaction data . J Comput Biol 2005 , 12 : 835 – 846 . 75 . Flannick J , Novak A , Srinivasan BS , McAdams HH , Batzoglou S . Graemlin : general and robust alignment of multiple large interaction networks . Genome Res 2006 , 16 : 1169 – 1181 . 76 . Koyut¨urk M , Kim Y , Topkara U , Subramaniam S , Szpankowski W , et al . Pairwise alignment of pro - tein interaction networks . J Comput Biol 2006 , 13 : 182 – 199 . 77 . Barabasi AL , Albert R . Emergence of scaling in ran - dom networks . Science 1999 , 286 : 509 – 512 . 78 . Chung F , Lu L , Dewey TG , Galas DJ . Duplication models for biological networks . J Comput Biol 2003 , 10 : 677 – 687 .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine Algorithmic and analytical methods in network biology 79 . C¸olak R , Hormozdiari F , Moser F , Schonhuth A , Holman J , Ester M , Sahinalp C . Dense graphlet statistics of protein interaction networks and ran - dom networks . Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing , 2009 . 80 . Hormozdiari F , Berenbrink P , Przulj N , Sahinalp SC . Not all scale - free networks are born equal : The role of the seed graph in PPI network evolution . PLoS Comput Biol 2007 , 3 ( 7 ) : e118 . 81 . Przulj N , Corneil DG , Jurisica I . Modeling interac - tome : scale - free or geometric ? Bioinformatics 2005 , 20 : 3508 . 82 . Kalaev M , Bafna V , Sharan R . Fast and accurate alignment of multiple protein networks . Res Comput Mol Biol 2008 , 12 : 246 – 256 . 83 . Koyut¨urk M , Grama A , Szpankowski W . An efﬁcient algorithm for detecting frequent subgraphs in biolog - ical networks . Bioinformatics 2004 , 20 : 200 – 207 . 84 . Flannick J , Novak A , Do JB , Srinivasan BS , Bat - zoglou S . Automatic parameter learning for multiple network alignment . Res Comput Mol Biol 2008 , 4955 : 214 – 231 . 85 . Shlomi T , Segal D , Ruppin E , Sharan R . QPath : a method for querying pathways in a protein - protein interaction network . BMC Bioinform 2006 , 7 : 199 . 86 . Dost B , Shlomi T , Gupta N , Ruppin E , Bafna V , et al . QNet : a tool for querying protein interaction networks . J Comput Biol 2008 , 15 : 913 – 925 . 87 . Bruckner S , H¨uffner F , Karp RM , Shamir R , Sha - ran R . Topology - free querying of protein interaction networks . Res Comput Mol Biol 2009 , 13 : 74 – 89 . 88 . Singh R , Xu J , Berger B . Global alignment of multiple protein interaction networks with application to func - tional orthology detection . Proc Nat Acad Sci 2008 , 105 : 12763 – 12768 . 89 . Singh R , Xu J , Berger B . Pairwise global align - ment of protein interaction networks by matching neighborhood topology . Res Comput Mol Biol 2007 , 11 : 16 – 31 . 90 . Milo R , Shen - Orr S , Itzkovitz S , Kashtan N , Chklovskii D , et al . Network motifs : simple build - ing blocks of complex networks . Science 2002 , 298 : 824 – 827 . 91 . Wuchty S , Oltvai ZN , Barab´asi AL . Evolutionary conservation of motif constituents in the yeast protein interaction network . Nat Genet 2003 , 35 : 176 – 179 . 92 . Przulj Natasa . Biological network comparison using graphlet degree distribution . Bioinformatics 2007 , 23 : e177 – e183 . 93 . Middendorf M , Ziv E , Wiggins CH . Inferring net - work mechanisms : the Drosophila melanogaster pro - tein interaction network . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2005 , 102 : 3192 – 3197 . 94 . Prill RJJ , Iglesias PAA , Levchenko A . Dynamic prop - erties of network motifs contribute to biological network organization . PLoS Biol 2005 , 3 ( 11 ) : e343 . 95 . Banks E , Nabieva E , Peterson R , Singh M . Net - Grep : fast network schema searches in interactomes . Genome Biol 2008 , 9 . 96 . Kırac¸ M , ¨Ozsoyoglu G , Yang J . Annotating proteins by mining protein interaction networks . Bioinformat - ics 2006 , 22 : e260 – e270 . 97 . C¸akmak A , ¨Ozsoyodlu G . Mining biological net - works for unknown pathways . Bioinformatics 2007 , 23 : 2775 – 2783 . 98 . Alon N , Dao P , Hajirasouliha I , Hormozdiari F , Sahinalp CS . Biomolecular network motif counting and discovery by color coding . Bioinformatics 2008 , 24 : i241 – i249 . 99 . C¸akmak A , ¨Ozsoyoglu G . Taxonomy - superimposed graph mining . ACM Int Conf Extend Database Tech - nol 2008 , 261 : 217 – 228 . 100 . Sharan R , Ulitsky I , Shamir R . Network - based pre - diction of protein function . Mol Syst Biol 2007 , 3 : 88 . 101 . V´azquez A , Flammini A , Maritan A , Vespignani A . Global protein function prediction from protein - protein interaction networks . Nat Biotechnol 2003 , 21 : 697 – 700 . 102 . Samanta MP , Liang S . Predicting protein functions from redundancies in large - scale protein interac - tion networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 , 100 : 12579 – 12583 . 103 . Deng M , Zhang K , Mehta S , Chen T , Sun F . Prediction of protein function using protein - protein interaction data . J Comput Biol 2003 , 10 : 947 – 960 . 104 . Karaoz U , Murali TM , Letovsky S , Zheng Y , Ding C , et al . Whole - genome annotation by using evidence integration in functional - linkage networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 , 101 : 2888 – 2893 . 105 . Ideker T , Sharan R . Protein networks in disease . Genome Res 2008 , 18 : 644 – 652 . 106 . Goh KI , Cusick ME , Valle D , Childs B , Vidal M , et al . The human disease network . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2007 , 104 : 8685 – 8690 . 107 . Oti M , Snel B , Huynen MA , Brunner HG . Predict - ing disease genes using protein - protein interactions . J Med Genet 2006 , 43 : 691 – 698 . 108 . Lage K , Karlberg OE , Størling ZM , Olason PI , Pedersen AG , Rigina O , et al . A human phenome - interactome network of protein complexes impli - cated in genetic disorders . Nat Biotechnol 2007 , 25 : 309 – 316 . 109 . Kelley R , Ideker T . Systematic interpretation of genetic interactions using protein networks . Nat Biotechnol 2005 , 23 : 561 – 566 . 110 . Ihmels J , Levy R , Barkai N . Principles of transcrip - tional control in the metabolic network of Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . Nat Biotechnol 2004 , 22 : 86 – 92 .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Overview www . wiley . com / wires / sysbio 111 . Shlomi T , Cabili MN , Herrgard MJ , Palsson BO , Ruppin E . Network - based prediction of human tissue - speciﬁc metabolism . Nat Biotechnol 2008 , 26 : 1003 – 1010 . 112 . Luscombe NM , Babu MM , Yu H , Snyder M , Teich - mann SA , et al . Genomic analysis of regulatory net - work dynamics reveals large topological changes . Nature 2004 , 431 : 308 – 312 . 113 . Bossi A , Lehner B . Tissue speciﬁcity and the human protein interaction network . Mol Syst Biol 2009 , 5 : 260 . 114 . Ideker T , Ozier O , Schwikowski B , Siegel AF . Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits in molecular interaction networks . Bioinformatics 2002 , ( supp . 1 ) : S233 – S240 . 115 . Nacu S , Critchley - Thorne R , Lee P , et al . Gene expres - sion network analysis and applications to immunol - ogy . Bioinformatics 2007 , 23 : 850 – 858 . 116 . Liu M , Liberzon A , Kong SW , Lai WR , Park PJ , et al . Network - based analysis of affected biological pro - cesses in type 2 diabetes models . PLoS Genet 2007 , 3 : e96 . 117 . Ulitsky I , Karp RM , Shamir R . Detecting disease - speciﬁc dysregulated pathways via analysis of clinical expression proﬁles . Res Comput Mol Biol 2008 , 12 : 347 – 359 . 118 . Anastassiou D . Computational analysis of the synergy among multiple interacting genes . Mol Syst Biol 2007 , 3 : 83 . 119 . Chuang HY , Lee E , Liu YT , Lee D , Ideker T . Network - based classiﬁcation of breast cancer metastasis . Mol Syst Biol 2007 , 3 : 140 . 120 . Watkinson J , Wang X , Zheng T , Anastassiou D . Iden - tiﬁcation of gene interactions associated with disease from gene expression data using synergy networks . BMC Syst Biol 2008 , 2 : 10 . 121 . Nibbe RK , Chance M , Koyut¨urk M . Integrating proteomic , transcriptomic , and interactomic data to identify subnetworks implicated in human colorectal cancer . PLoS Comput Biol . Submitted . 122 . Nibbe RK , Markowitz S , Myeroff L , Ewing R , Chance M . Discovery and scoring of protein interaction sub - networks discriminative of late stage human colon cancer . Mol Cell Prot 2009 . 123 . Kim Y , Koyut¨urk M , Topkara U , Grama A , Subrama - niam S . Inferring functional information from domain co - evolution . Bioinformatics 2006 , 22 : 40 – 49 . 124 . Deng M , Mehta S , Sun F , Chen T . Inferring domain - domain interactions from protein - protein interac - tions . Genome Res 2002 , 12 : 1540 – 1548 . 125 . Ulitsky I , Shamir R . Identiﬁcation of functional mod - ules using network topology and high - throughput data . BMC Syst Biol 2007 , 1 : 8 . 126 . Koyut¨urk M , Kim Y , Subramaniam S , Szpankowski W , Grama A . Detecting conserved interaction pat - terns in biological networks . J Comput Biol 2006 , 13 : 1299 – 1322 . 127 . Tatusov RL , Fedorova ND , Jackson JD , Jacobs AR , Kiryutin B , et al . The COG database : an updated version includes eukaryotes . BMC Bioinform 2003 , 4 : 41 . 128 . Enright AJ , Van Dongen S , Ouzounis CA . An efﬁcient algorithm for large - scale detection of protein families . Nucleic Acids Res 2002 , 30 : 1575 – 1584 . 129 . Pandey J , Koyut¨urk M , Subramaniam S , Grama A . Functional coherence in domain interaction networks . Bioinformatics 2008 , 24 : i28 – i34 . 130 . Schuster C . Next generation sequencing transforms today’s biology . Nature Methods 2008 , 5 : 16 – 18 . FURTHER READING Barabasi AL , Oltvai ZN . Network biology : understanding the cell’s functional organization . Nat Rev Genet 2004 , 5 : 101 – 113 . Joyce AR , Palsson BØ . The model organism as a system : integrating ‘omics’ data sets . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 , 7 : 198 – 210 . Bornholdt S . Less is more in modelling large genetic networks . Science 2005 , 310 : 449 – 451 .  2009 John Wiley & Sons , Inc .