189 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 , 2011 , pp 189 – 199 doi : 10 . 5367 / ijei . 2011 . 0037 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in young people Empirical insights from business school students Leonidas A . Zampetakis , Manto Gotsi , Constantine Andriopoulos and Vassilis Moustakis Abstract : The authors examine the link between creativity and entrepre - neurial intention in young people and the roles that family and education may play in encouraging this link . The results from a survey of 180 under - graduate business school students show that the more creative young people consider themselves to be , the higher are their entrepreneurial intentions . Students’ creativity also fully mediates the effect of family support for creativity on their entrepreneurial intention . Support for creativity in the university is found to have no effect on their creativity or on their entrepreneurial intention . Entrepreneurship course attendance moderates the effect of individual creativity on entrepreneurial intention . Keywords : entrepreneurial intention ; creativity ; entrepreneurship educa - tion ; young entrepreneurs Leonidas A . Zampetakis and Vassilis Moustakis are with the Technical University of Crete , Kounoupidiana , 73100 Chania , Greece . E - mail : lzabetak @ dpem . tuc . gr ; moustaki @ dpm . tuc . gr . Manto Gotsi and Constantine Andriopoulos ( corresponding author ) are with the Cardiff Business School , Cardiff University , Aberconway Building , Cardiff CF10 3EU , UK . E - mail : gotsim @ cardiff . ac . uk ; andriopoulosc @ cardiff . ac . uk . Entrepreneurship is one of the major triggers of eco - nomic growth and job creation ( McMullan and Long , 1987 ) . Yet alarmingly , studies highlight the fact that entrepreneurial activity is lowest among young people under 25 ( Harding and Bosma , 2006 ) . In response , there has been an explosion of government initiatives seeking to unlock the entrepreneurial intention of young people ( Robson et al , 2009 ) . Universities , for instance , are called to mobilize a more entrepreneurial workforce and help students overcome misconceptions about entrepre - neurship ( Warren et al , 2010 ) . Understanding the factors that drive entrepreneurial intention in young people is paramount in this effort . Traditionally , researchers have focused heavily on the role that an individual’s attitude towards entrepreneurship , perceived social norms and self - efficacy plays in influencing the intention to become an entrepreneur ( Krueger et al , 2000 ) . Scholars have highlighted the dynamic interaction between the individual and the environment in explaining entrepre - neurial behaviour ( Shane and Venkataraman , 2000 ) . Yet studies have also shown growing interest in the cogni - tive properties that trigger individuals to identify and exploit opportunities and , hence , mobilize entrepre - neurial intention ( for example , Smith et al , 2009 ) . In this cognitive perspective on entrepreneurship , a burgeoning stream of research highlights the link between creativity – that is , the generation of novel and useful ideas ( Amabile , 1996 ) – and entrepreneurship ( Ward , 2004 ) . Creativity has long been identified as a major component of entrepreneurship , as entrepreneurs need to be able to recognize opportunities , generate ideas and innovate ( Schumpeter , 1934 ) . It therefore 190 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young comes as no surprise that creativity has been proposed as an antecedent of entrepreneurial intentions ( Gorman et al , 1997 ) . Hamidi et al ( 2008 ) , for instance , find that the more creative individuals are , the more likely they are to engage in entrepreneurship . Creativity can also influence the degree and type of novelty that entrepre - neurs introduce to the economy , promoting innovative entrepreneurship ( Koellinger , 2008 ) . Creativity , innova - tion and entrepreneurship are , hence , inextricably linked . Yet scholars also indicate that this link may be responsive to social and individual variations ( Drennan et al , 2005 ; Krueger et al , 2000 ; Schmitt - Rodermund , 2004 ) . The roles of family ( Drennan et al , 2005 ) and education ( Davidsson , 1995 ) have been highlighted in extant studies . However , entrepreneurial intention models have largely ignored the creativity – entrepre - neurial intention link and the potential social and individual influences on this relationship . To shed some light on the influence of creativity on the entrepreneurial intention of young people , as well as the roles that family and education may play in mobiliz - ing this link , we draw on extant literature on the cognitive perspective of entrepreneurship and creativity theory . We propose that the more creative young people consider themselves to be , the higher their entrepre - neurial intentions . In addition , we argue that young people’s creativity mediates 1 the effect of creativity supported in their family and in the university environ - ment on their entrepreneurial intention . Drawing on entrepreneurship literature , we also propose that entre - preneurship course attendance moderates ( see note 1 ) the effect that young people’s creativity has on entrepre - neurial intention . We test our hypotheses across 180 randomly selected undergraduate students in a British business school . The paper is structured as follows . Building on entrepreneurial cognition and creativity literature , we first present our entrepreneurial intention model and discuss our hypotheses . We then describe our methodol - ogy and discuss our results . The paper concludes with the implications of our results for theory and practice . Drawing on the limitations of our study , we also high - light future research opportunities . Theoretical foundations Creativity – entrepreneurial intention : a conceptual model Entrepreneurial intention refers to a conscious state of mind that directs a person’s attention to fulfilling the goal of venture creation ( Bird , 1988 ) . Intentions have been highlighted as a predictor of entrepreneurship ( Krueger et al , 2000 ) . Hence , understanding the factors that trigger entrepreneurial intentions has occupied much of the entrepreneurship literature . Early research on the factors that influence the decision to start a new business focused primarily on personality traits ( Low and MacMillan , 1988 ) . Yet entrepreneurship literature has not identified a unique set of personality traits that characterize the entrepreneur ( Shaver , 1995 ) . Studies have , therefore , focused on Ajzen’s ( 1991 ) theory of planned behaviour ( TPB ) and Shapero and Sokol’s ( 1982 ) entrepreneurial event ( SEE ) model to understand the drivers of entrepreneurial intentions ( Souitaris et al , 2007 ) . Drawing insights from the TPB , attitudes towards entrepreneurship , subjective norms and perceived behavioural control have been identified as antecedents of entrepreneurial intentions ( Krueger et al , 2000 ) . Similarly , the SEE model highlighted perceptions of the desirability and feasibility of starting a business , as well as the propensity to act upon opportunities , as key drivers of entrepreneurial intentions ( Shapero and Sokol , 1982 ) . To shed further light on triggers of entrepre - neurial intentions , scholars have also turned their attention to cognitive dimensions of entrepreneurship . In this realm , studies highlight the influence of ‘knowledge structures that people use to make assessments , judge - ments or decisions involving opportunity evaluation and venture creation’ ( Mitchell et al , 2002 , p 97 ) on entre - preneurial intention . An entrepreneur is ‘an individual who recognizes or discovers an opportunity to create something new ( e . g . , a new product or service , new market , new production or raw material , or new way of organizing existing technologies ) , and who then uses various means to exploit or develop this opportunity’ ( Baron and Ward , 2004 , p 554 ) . The underlying premise of entrepreneurial cognition studies is that some indi - viduals are more likely than others to engage in entrepreneurial conduct due to their cognitive orienta - tion on the nature of the venturing process ( Baron , 2004 ) . Cognitive approaches to entrepreneurship hence emphasize a person’s creativity as an important , yet understudied antecedent of entrepreneurial intention ( Ward , 2004 ) . Building on existing findings in cognitive entrepre - neurship , entrepreneurial intention and creativity literature , Figure 1 presents our proposed model on the link between creativity and young people’s entrepre - neurial intentions . Drawing on cognitive entrepreneurship studies , we argue that entrepreneurial intention in young people is dependent on the extent to which they perceive themselves as creative . Previous empirical studies have highlighted the importance of the family and the university in influencing young people’s creativity . Entrepreneurship course attendance has also been identified as a factor that is likely to influence entrepreneurial intention . In the following sections , we 191 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Figure 1 . The conceptual model . present the hypotheses that describe the relationships conceptualized in our model . We begin by discussing the role of creativity as a key driver of entrepreneurial intention . Creativity and young people’s entrepreneurial intention Entrepreneurship has long been described as an act of creativity ( Schumpeter , 1934 ) . Schumpeter ( 1934 ) was one of the first to propose that opportunities are created when new resource combinations result in superior products , services or processes . Yet recognizing and developing new opportunities relies on individuals’ ability to see new connections between ideas or con - cepts ( Davidsson , 2002 ) . The entrepreneurial cognition literature has sharpened our understanding on the cognitive properties that help individuals to become alert to and recognize opportunities ( Baron , 2004 ) . Creativity has been featured as playing a key role in this process ( Hills et al , 1999 ) . Creativity is a broad term that has received different conceptualizations in diverse fields , such as art , music , science , education , advertising and management ( El - Murad and West , 2004 ) . In entrepre - neurship studies , Amabile’s ( 1996 ) definition of creativity ( the production of novel and useful ideas ) is often adopted , since ‘novel and useful ideas are the lifeblood of entrepreneurship’ ( Ward , 2004 , p 174 ) . Sternberg ( 2004 ) suggests that entrepreneurs , more so than non - entrepreneurs , have mental frameworks that endorse ‘thinking outside the box’ when it comes to opportunity recognition . Baron ( 2004 ) similarly argues that entrepreneurs tend to be more proficient than others at object or pattern recognition . Ames and Runco ( 2005 ) also note that entrepreneurs are able to produce a large number of ideas and often have unusual and novel ideas . Entrepreneurs tend to apply conceptual combinations , analogical reasoning , abstraction , problem formulation and other processes in order to come up with new ideas ( Ward , 2004 ) . Not surprisingly , creativity has therefore been indicated as a trigger of entrepreneurial intention ( Hills et al , 1999 ) . Gorman et al ( 1997 ) and Feldman and Bolino ( 2000 ) , for example , propose that individuals with a strong creativity anchor are motivated to become self - employed . Sternberg ( 2004 ) similarly argues that creative intelligence – the capacity to think outside the box – may influence an individual’s decision to form a new venture . Hmieleski and Corbett ( 2006 ) also find that improvisation , a construct that is associated with creativity , accounts for a significant amount of variance in entrepreneurial intentions . Hamidi et al ( 2008 ) provide further evidence that high creativity scores yield a strong positive effect on entrepreneurial intentions , and argue that individual creativity should be incorpo - rated in models of entrepreneurial intentions . On the basis of these findings , we argue that the more students perceive themselves as creative , the higher their entrepreneurial intention . Therefore , we posit the following hypothesis : H1 : Students’ individual creativity is positively related to entrepreneurial intention . The role of family and university Although creativity was traditionally considered as a personality trait , studies increasingly underline the fact that creativity is responsive to the context in which an individual develops ( Simonton , 2000 ) . Creativity is therefore portrayed as the result of an interactive process in interpersonal settings ( Walton , 2003 ) . For instance , studies highlight the role of the family in influencing individuals’ creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ) and shaping entrepreneurial attitudes ( Drennan et al , 2005 ) . Low levels of authoritarianism and restrictiveness , along with an encouragement of independence , have been found to characterize families that are most likely to foster creativity in their children ( Miller and Gerard , 1979 ) . Such adaptive families promote knowledge structures around divergent thinking , problem solving , imagina - tion , flexibility and playfulness , and tend to equip their children with more developed creativity scripts ( Deacon and Thomas , 2000 ) . Gardner and Morgan’s ( 1990 ) study among university students reveals that students with high individual creativity scores tend to come from families that promote creativity . In addition , creativity researchers posit that educational environments influ - ence young people’s creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Studies highlight , for instance , the effects of teacher characteris - tics and behaviour on pupil creativity in elementary schools ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Turning their attention to universities , scholars agree that exposing students to creative role models within the university context endorses students’ individual creativity ( Elzubeir and Rizk , 2001 ) . Chambers ( 1977 ) states that discouraging Creativity supported in the family ( FC ) Creativity supported in the university ( UC ) Individual creativity ( IC ) Entrepreneurialintention ( EI ) Entrepreneurshipcourse attendance H 3 ( a ) ( b ) ( e ) ( d ) ( c ) 192 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young student ideas and being too critical about novel concepts are practices that are likely to hamper creativity amongst university students . Based on this discussion , we argue that when creativ - ity is supported in the family and university environment , this impacts on young people’s individual creativity , which in turn influences their entrepreneurial intention . Thus we propose the following hypothesis : H2 : Students’ individual creativity mediates the effect of creativity supported in the family and university environment on entrepreneurial intention . The moderating role of entrepreneurship course attendance Career socialization theory proposes that career decisions are influenced by educational experiences ( Dyer , 1994 ) . Yet traditionally , business education has been accused of primarily preparing students for the corporate world , while impairing creativity and entre - preneurship in young people ( Chamard , 1989 ) . In response , universities are increasingly being called to act as a catalyst in mobilizing entrepreneurial intention amongst young people ( Peterman and Kennedy , 2003 ) . This has triggered an explosion of specialized entrepre - neurship courses and programmes in universities around the world , with a view to providing social experiences that will encourage young people to start their own businesses ( Kuratko , 2005 ) . A number of studies provide some support for this premise . Peter - man and Kennedy ( 2003 ) found that entrepreneurship education programmes could significantly change the entrepreneurial intentions of their participants . Souitaris et al ( 2007 ) also highlighted the fact that entrepreneurship programmes raised some entrepre - neurial intentions among students enrolled in an entrepreneurship programme in one British and one French university . Similarly , Hamidi et al ( 2008 ) found that students engaged in entrepreneurship programmes had higher intentions to start their own businesses in the future . Yet other studies point to the opposite effect ( Kolvereid and Moen , 1997 ) . Results on the effective - ness of formal entrepreneurship education , therefore , remain inconclusive ( Cox et al , 2002 ) . Gupta ( 1992 ) , for instance , argued that compared with family condition - ing , formal education had a minimal impact on entrepreneurial attitudes . University entrepreneurship programmes tend to emphasize the teaching of technical skills rather than creative thinking , and this may actually discourage entrepreneurial intention ( for example , see Gorman et al , 1997 ) . Studies also tend to be inconclu - sive on whether entrepreneurship programmes actually promote entrepreneurship or whether this influence is attributable to selection and self - selection in these programmes of students with entrepreneurial potential ( Kolvereid and Moen , 1997 ) . Moreover , Pittaway and Cope ( 2007 ) note that the extent to which entrepreneur - ship education impacts on the level and effectiveness of graduate entrepreneurship is unclear . Based on this discussion , we argue that entrepreneur - ship course attendance moderates the influence of individual creativity on entrepreneurial intention . We therefore put forward the following hypothesis : H3 : Entrepreneurship course attendance moderates the effect of students’ individual creativity on entre - preneurial intention . Methodology The methodology is discussed in terms of our measures , the questionnaire development , sampling and data collection process and , lastly , data analysis . We begin by outlining the measures used in our study . Measures Similar to the vast majority of extant studies , the measurement of key variables is based on self - reporting ( Gorman et al , 1997 ) . Entrepreneurial intention ( EI ) . We measured entrepre - neurial intention with two items adapted from Krueger et al ( 2000 ) : ‘I like the idea of becoming an entrepre - neur’ and ‘I intend to start my own business in the near future’ . Responses to both items were made on a 5 - point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( ‘strongly disagree’ ) to 5 ( ‘strongly agree’ ) . The coefficient alpha for this scale was 0 . 75 . Individual creativity ( IC ) . Self - reporting is often used when measuring individual creativity ( Farmer et al , 2003 ) , since creative individuals have a firm sense of self as a creative person ( Shalley and Gilson , 2004 ) . Research also indicates that creative people are open to new experiences and that divergent thinking leads to novel and useful ideas ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Individual creativity was therefore assessed using three items adapted from Zhou and George ( 2001 ) : ‘I think I am a very creative person’ , ‘I like to try novel things despite the risk of failing’ , and ‘I can easily think a lot of different and useful ideas’ . Responses to these items were made on a 5 - point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( ‘strongly disagree’ ) to 5 ( ‘strongly agree’ ) . We introduced Amabile’s ( 1996 ) definition of creativity to our respondents at the beginning of the survey to ensure that creativity meant the same thing to all our respondents . The coefficient alpha for this scale was 0 . 60 . 193 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Creativity supported in the family ( FC ) . Creativity literature suggests that the family may support or stifle individual creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ) . The study used three items to assess creativity supported in the family : ‘My family members easily adapt to different circum - stances’ ( based on Miller and Gerard , 1979 ) , ‘My family members are always thinking about new ideas for making their life easier’ ( based on Deacon and Thomas , 2000 ) , and ‘I can freely talk to my family members about new ideas’ ( adapted from Amabile et al , 1996 ) . The coefficient alpha for this scale was 0 . 62 . Creativity supported in the university ( UC ) . Creativity supported in the university was assessed using three items ( adapted from Amabile et al , 1996 ) : ‘In my university you learn that there is more than one solution to a problem’ , ‘In my university you learn to examine old problems in new ways’ , and ‘In my university the faculty encourages students to produce new and useful ideas’ . The coefficient alpha for this scale was 0 . 65 . Entrepreneurship course attendance . To study the moderating role of entrepreneurship course attendance ( outlined in hypothesis 3 ) , we also asked students to report whether they had taken an entrepreneurship module while studying for their undergraduate degree in business . The business school in this study offers two elective ( second and third year ) modules in entrepre - neurship within the curriculum . Lectures in these entrepreneurship modules cover theoretical studies on entrepreneurship , but students’ efforts are largely focused towards identifying an opportunity ( in the form of a new product or service ) , developing a business plan and then presenting this for funding in front of a panel of potential investors . Hence , pedagogical tools in these modules included lectures by the module leaders and guest speakers , readings ( textbooks and articles ) , case studies , actual and fictional business plans , as well as student - led presentations of business plans in front of practising entrepreneurs and potential investors . Questionnaire development , sampling and the data collection process We followed Dillman’s ( 2000 ) suggestions for question - naire development . Our pre - testing of the questionnaire included reviews by three professors of entrepreneurship and 10 non - participating students , observation and ‘think - aloud’ protocols , followed by interviews with respondents and a final check . The sample consisted of 180 randomly selected final year undergraduate students in business from a British university based in England . Two of the authors administered the questionnaires . Students were randomly approached as they exited lectures and seminars in business subjects , and were Table 1 . Demographic characteristics of the sample ( business school students in a British university located in England ; sample size = 180 ) . Gender : Male 50 . 6 % Female 49 . 4 % Mean age ( SD ) 20 . 17 ( 1 . 73 ) Nationality : British 55 % Chinese ( excluding Hong Kong ) 11 . 7 % Indian 4 . 4 % Hong Kong 3 . 9 % Nigerian 3 . 3 % Pakistani 2 . 8 % Kenyan 2 . 2 % Bahrain 2 . 2 % French 1 . 7 % Other 12 . 8 % Entrepreneurship course 47 . 8 % asked to participate voluntarily in a research project regarding factors influencing entrepreneurial intentions . Questionnaires were completed by the students , with one of the researchers present in order to answer any questions . Researchers explained clearly that the questionnaires would be used for research purposes only , and that students’ views would not affect their grades . Table 1 reports the demographic characteristics of our student sample . Data analysis We assessed potential non - response bias by comparing early and late responses of returned surveys ( Armstrong and Overton , 1977 ) . We did not identify any missing data . To assess the hypothesized relationships , we used Structural Equation Modeling ( SEM ) . In SEM , param - eters are estimated by minimizing the difference between the observed covariances and those implied by the model . In this study , Analysis of Moment Structures ( AMOS version 4 . 01 ) was used to test the hypotheses ( Arbuckle , 1999 ) . The estimation method employed was maximum likelihood ( ML ) . An underlying assumption in SEM is that data are normally distributed , so data screening was performed prior to analysis ( West et al , 1995 ) . Our data presented no severe non - normality . Following recommendations by McCallum et al ( 1996 ) , Steiger’s Power Analysis module in STATISTICA 6 ( StatSoft , 2001 ) , which estimates model - level power in SEM , was then applied . The Power Analysis ( given that ε 1 = 0 . 09 , α = 0 . 05 , N = 180 , df = 40 ) concluded that if the final model did not actually have a close fit to the population , the estimated probability to reject a model that was actually incorrect was 85 . 52 % . A two - step modelling approach examined the measurement model and the structural model in 194 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young separate stages ( Anderson and Gerbing , 1988 ) . In the first stage , the study assessed the discriminant validity of the proposed constructs by conducting a confirma - tory factor analysis . This step assessed a measurement model that allowed the underlying latent constructs to correlate freely , and constrained each item to load only to the factor for which it was a proposed indicator . To assess the discriminant validity of the proposed con - structs further , the measurement model was compared with a model that constrained the correlations among the constructs to unity and examined the change in the chi - square ( χ 2 ) . The χ 2 difference was used to assess nested model comparisons by examining the difference in chi - square values between the two nested models . A non - significant χ 2 value indicates acceptance of the more parsimonious of the nested models . In contrast , a significant value demonstrates acceptance of the less constrained model ( Kline , 2005 ) . In addition , the one - factor model provides a test for common method bias . Through the nesting process , the relationships between the constructs are not explained solely or predomi - nantly by common measurement methods used in collecting the data ( Podsakoff et al , 2003 ) . During the second step , the analysis combined both the measure - ment model and the structural model , depicting the hypothesized relationships between constructs . In addition , for each estimated structural path coefficient , the null hypothesis that the estimate is zero was tested using AMOS critical ratios ( also known as z - test ) ( Arbuckle , 1999 ) . Taking into account the lack of a single optimum or universally accepted measure of model fitness in SEM , several measures of model fit were applied ( Shook et al , 2004 ) . To examine whether entrepreneurship course attend - ance has an effect in the model with the best fit to the data , multi - sample analysis of AMOS was then applied ( Arbuckle , 1999 ) . First the study tested the invariance of factorial measurement and structure across groups ( Byrne , 2001 ) . The measurement model ( see Figure 2 ) , in which all parameters were freely estimated , was compared with the one in which all factor loadings , all factor variances and covariances , error variances and item intercepts were constrained to be equal across groups ; the Δχ 2 was also examined ( Ployhart and Oswald , 2004 ) . Parameters found to be invariant across groups were cumulatively constrained . Then analysis proceeded to a latent means test and tested group differences in structural pathways . This procedure provides evidence that group differences in structural pathways are not a function of differences in other parts of the underlying theoretical structure or instabil - ity of the model ( Byrne , 2001 ) . Figure 2 . Four - factor measurement model . Note : Circles represent factors ; boxes represent indicators . Unidirectional arrows depict factors’ effects on indicators and double - headed arrows signify factor correlations . Standardized factor loadings ( all statistically significant at the 0 . 001 level ) appear along unidirectional arrows . Measurement errors are omitted for clarity . Results Model fitness To assess the fitness of the measurement model , we present the confirmatory factor analysis of the four underlying constructs and associated goodness of fit measures ( Figure 2 ) . Results suggest an excellent fit to the data . All factor loadings are significant at the 0 . 001 level . A model comparison between the unconstrained measurement model and a model that constrained the correlations among the constructs to unity produces a significant difference in χ 2 , suggesting the presence of discriminant validity among the selected constructs ( Δχ 2 = 154 . 293 , Δ df = 6 , p < 0 . 001 ) . In summary , these results support the multidimensionality of the measure - ment model . To assess the structural model , Table 2 presents fit indices for the proposed four - factor benchmark model ( Model 1 – the partially mediated model ; see Figure 1 ) . 0 . 61 Individualcreativity ( IC ) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q9 Q8 Q7 Q11 Q10 Creativity supported in the university ( UC ) Entrepreneurialintention ( EI ) 0 . 52 0 . 61 0 . 55 0 . 72 0 . 62 0 . 66 0 . 73 0 . 45 0 . 74 0 . 82 0 . 37 0 . 28 0 . 11 0 . 29 0 . 23 0 . 48 Creativity supported in the family ( FC ) 195 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Table 2 . Fit indices for nested models . Model df χχχχχ 2 AIC CFI RMSEA χχχχχ 2 difference 1 . Benchmark Model 1 38 38 . 2384 , ns 94 . 2384 0 . 9992 0 . 0059 2 . Additional variance model 40 44 . 4331 , ns 96 . 4331 0 . 9858 0 . 0249 Difference between Models 1 and 2 6 . 1947 * 3 . Model 3 40 44 . 7948 , ns 96 . 7948 0 . 9847 0 . 0259 Difference between Models 1 and 3 6 . 5564 * Note : N = 180 ; * p < 0 . 05 ( two - tailed ) . Table 3 . Assessment of hypothesized relationships . Hypothesis Supported Explanation for sample H1 Students’ individual creativity is positively related to Yes The corresponding standardized path coefficient is entrepreneurial intention . 0 . 41 . The null hypothesis – that the path coefficient is 0 – is rejected at p < 0 . 002 . H2 Students’ individual creativity mediates the effect of Yes Hypothesis is partially supported . creativity supported in the family and university environment on entrepreneurial intention . H3 Entrepreneurship course attendance moderates the effect Yes Path a ( Figure 1 ) , indicating the effect of individual of students’ individual creativity on entrepreneurial intention . creativity on entrepreneurial intention , is stronger for students who did not attend an entrepreneurship course . Additionally , Table 2 presents the fit statistics of two additional nested models . In Model 2 , individual creativity simply adds to the variance in entrepreneurial intention accounted for by creativity supported in the family and in the university . Model 3 evaluates whether the effects of individual creativity take the role of a mediator in the family / university and entrepreneurial intention link . Results indicate that Model 1 provides the best fit to the data . Assessment of the hypothesized relationships Table 3 presents a summary of our results against the hypotheses of this study . In testing Hypothesis 1 , results indicate that the more students perceive themselves to be creative , the more likely they are to show high entrepre - neurial intentions ( path ( a ) in Figure 1 , 0 . 41 , p = 0 . 002 ) . This supports Hypothesis 1 . We then tested whether students’ individual creativity mediated the effect of creativity supported in the family and university envi - ronments on entrepreneurial intention . We found that creativity supported in the university had no effect on students’ reported individual creativity ( path ( c ) in Figure 1 has a standardized path coefficient of 0 . 03 , p = 0 . 812 ) or on students’ entrepreneurial intention ( path ( b ) in Figure 1 has a standardized path coefficient of 0 . 12 , p = 0 . 254 ) . In contrast , findings highlight that creativity supported in the family has a direct effect on students’ reported individual creativity ( path ( d ) in Figure 1 has a standardized path coefficient of 0 . 28 , p = 0 . 04 ) . How - ever , creativity supported in the family does not seem to pose a direct effect on students’ entrepreneurial intention ( path ( e ) in Figure 1 has a standardized path coefficient of 0 . 21 , p = 0 . 112 ) . Taken together , these results confirm only part of Hypothesis 2 . Specifically , we find that students’ individual creativity fully mediates the effect of creativity supported in the family on their entrepre - neurial intention . Thus , Hypothesis 2 is partially supported . We then tested for differences in structural pathways in terms of entrepreneurship course attendance to examine whether entrepreneurship course attendance moderated the effect of students’ individual creativity on entrepreneurial intention ( Table 4 ) . We find that paths from individual creativity to entrepreneurial intention ( path ( a ) in Figure 1 ) are stronger for students who have not attended an entrepre - neurship course compared with those who have ( Table 4 ) . Results indicate that entrepreneurship course attend - ance moderates the effect of individual creativity on entrepreneurial intention , hence providing support for Hypothesis 3 . . Positive paths from creativity supported in the family to individual creativity ( path ( d ) in Figure 1 ) are also stronger for students who have not attended an entrepreneurship course compared with those who have . Path ( c ) in Figure 1 is not significant for either group . Paths ( e ) and ( b ) in Figure 1 are not significant for students who have not attended an entrepreneurship course ; and neither is path ( b ) in Figure 1 significant for 196 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Table 4 . Structural paths for entrepreneurship course attendance ( standardized estimates ) . Structural Entrepreneurship course attendance path Yes p No p a 0 . 30 0 . 05 * 0 . 55 0 . 01 * b ns – ns – c Not significant d 0 . 29 0 . 08 * 0 . 32 0 . 09 * e 0 . 40 0 . 02 * ns – Note : * ( two - tailed ) ; ns = not significant . students who have attended an entrepreneurship course . Path ( e ) in Figure 1 is statistically significant for stu - dents who have attended an entrepreneurship course . In sum , results suggest that for students who have attended an entrepreneurship course , individual creativity par - tially mediates the effects of creativity supported in the family on entrepreneurial intention . For those who have not attended an entrepreneurship course , the findings show a fully mediated relationship . For both groups , creativity supported in the university seems to have no effect on their self - reported creativity and entrepre - neurial intention . Discussion , implications and directions for future research This study contributes to our understanding of entrepre - neurial intention in young people by helping to explain further the link between young people’s creativity and their intention to start a business . Our proposed concep - tual framework highlights the role of the family and the university in this relationship , and also underlines the potential moderating influence of entrepreneurship course attendance . Overall , our results support the notion that the more creative young people consider themselves to be , the higher their entrepreneurial intentions . This provides further support for conceptualizations in the cognitive entrepreneurship literature that underline the somewhat ignored link between individual creativity and entrepreneurial intentions ( Hmieleski and Corbett , 2006 ; Ward , 2004 ) . Not surprisingly , in our study , creativity supported in the family had a direct effect on young people’s individual creativity . This mirrors writings in the creativity litera - ture that highlight the role of the family in shaping an individual’s creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ) . Our results further show that for young people who consider themselves as creative and exhibit higher entrepreneurial intentions , family role models seem to exert a direct influence on their entrepreneurial intentions . This supports studies on the link between family role models and entrepreneurial intentions ( Walstad and Kourilsky , 1998 ) . Interestingly , in contrast , for young people who consider themselves as less creative and who have lower entrepreneurial intentions , their self - reported creativity fully mediates the influence of the creativity supported in their families on their entrepreneurial intentions . Contrary to the promise that business school educa - tion will be geared towards creativity and will foster entrepreneurship ( Plaschka and Welsch , 1990 ; Solomon and Fernald , 1991 ) , in our study , creativity supported in the university was found to have no effect on students’ individual creativity or on their entrepreneurial inten - tion . Disappointingly , as Heinonen and Poikkijoki ( 2006 , p 8 ) point out , ‘…a typical university setting is unlikely to include many entrepreneurial elements…The budding entrepreneur needs not only knowledge ( sci - ence ) , but also new ways of thinking , new kinds of skills and new modes of behaviour ( arts ) . ’ Interestingly , the path from individual creativity to entrepreneurial intention was stronger for students who had not attended an entrepreneurship course at their university compared with those who had . The two elective modules in entrepreneurship offered in this business school focused students’ efforts towards developing a business plan around a new product / service and then competing for funding in front of potential investors . Perhaps this overemphasis on the business plan approach and the potential pitfalls / risks / failure involved in starting a new venture may actually discourage young people from starting up their own businesses ( Gorman et al , 1997 ) . On a broader theoretical level , this study highlights the need to incorporate individual creativity in studies of entrepreneurial intention . Results presented herein extend studies that depict cognitive factors as key influences on the decision to engage in business start - up activity ( Ward , 2004 ) . In particular , creativity should be considered as a factor that can influence young people’s entrepreneurial intentions . Several implications for entrepreneurship educators , career counsellors and policy makers can be gleaned from our findings . First , to unlock the entrepreneurial intentions of young people , it is important that universities should seek to nurture individual creativity , since students’ creativity can mediate the link between the creativity that they have experienced in their families and their entrepreneurial intention . We agree with Dewett and Gruys ( 2007 ) that creativity should occupy a more central role in business education . A cognition - based entrepreneurial instruction pedagogy may help to foster students’ creativity and overcome the shortcomings of the traditional ‘business - plan - only’ approach ( Mitchell and Chesteen , 1995 ) . Similar to Peterman and Kennedy ( 2003 ) and Jack and Anderson ( 1999 ) , our study supports entrepreneurship education focusing not only on the technical aspects of entrepreneurship , but also on the person as a whole . 197 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Entrepreneurship education can help to enhance stu - dents’ need for achievement and locus of control ( Hansemark , 1998 ) , their perception of self - efficacy and the likelihood of entrepreneurial action at some point in the future ( Fayolle , 2005 ) ; but it should also aid the development of young people’s creativity . Mobilizing creativity in young people may not only influence their intention to start a business , but also , potentially , the degree and type of novelty that they introduce to the economy ( Koellinger , 2008 ) . Although our study sheds some light on the influence of creativity on the entrepreneurial intention of young people , it has several limitations that further research can seek to address . First , our study was limited to a sample of business school students in a British univer - sity based in England . To extend the generalizability of our results , we encourage scholars in this area to examine our proposed model with students in other disciplines and across different universities , regions and countries . Future research could also look into the influence of creativity training programmes on entrepre - neurial intentions . Finally , our study highlighted interesting insights into the role that the family , univer - sity and entrepreneurship course attendance may play in mobilizing the creativity – entrepreneurial intention link in young people . Yet our understanding of why and how these factors interact could be further explored . Further research can delve deeper in understanding these relationships by employing a qualitative approach . Note 1 Based on Baron and Kenny ( 1986 ) , a mediator explains the relationship between an independent / predictor variable and a dependent / criterion variable . Mediators often represent proper - ties of a person that transform the predictor variables in some way . A moderator is a variable that affects the strength of the relationship between an independent variable and a dependent variable . References Ajzen , I . ( 1991 ) , ‘Theory of planned behavior’ , Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes , Vol 50 , pp 179 – 211 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) , Creativity in Context . Update to Social Psychology of Creativity , Westview Press , Boulder , CO . Amabile , T . M . , Conti , R . , Coon , H . , Lazenby , J . , and Herron , M . ( 1996 ) , ‘Assessing the work environment for creativity’ , Academy of Management Review , Vol 29 , pp 1154 – 1181 . Ames , M . , and Runco , M . A . ( 2005 ) , ‘Predicting entrepreneurship from ideation and divergent thinking’ , Creativity and Innova - tion Management , Vol 14 , pp 311 – 315 . Anderson , J . C . , and Gerbing , D . W . ( 1988 ) , ‘Structural Equation Modeling in practice : a review and recommended two - step approach’ , Psychological Bulletin , Vol 103 , pp 411 – 423 . Arbuckle , J . L . ( 1999 ) , Amos ( Version 4 . 01 ) [ Computer Software ] , SmallWaters Corp . , Chicago , IL . Armstrong , J . S . , and Overton , T . S . ( 1977 ) , ‘Estimating non - response bias in mail surveys’ , Journal of Marketing Research , Vol 14 , pp 396 – 402 . Baron , M . B . , and Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) , ‘The moderator – mediator variable distinction in social psychological research : concep - tual , strategic , and statistical considerations’ , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Vol 51 , No 6 , pp 1173 – 1182 . Baron , R . A . ( 2004 ) , ‘The cognitive perspective : a valuable tool for answering entrepreneurship’s basic “why” questions’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 19 , pp 221 – 239 . Baron , R . A . , and Ward , T . B . ( 2004 ) , ‘Expanding entrepreneurial cognition’s toolbox : potential contributions from the field of cognitive science’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 28 , pp 553 – 575 . Bird , B . ( 1988 ) , ‘Implementing entrepreneurial ideas : the case for intention’ , Academy of Management Review , Vol 13 , pp 442 – 453 . Byrne , B . M . ( 2001 ) , Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS . Basic Applications Concepts and Programming , Lawrence Erlbaum , London . Chamard , J . ( 1989 ) , ‘Public education : its effect on entrepre - neurial characteristics’ , Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship , Vol 6 , pp 23 – 30 . Chambers , J . A . ( 1977 ) , ‘College teachers : their effect on creativity of students’ , Journal of Educational Psychology , Vol 65 , pp 326 – 334 . Cox , L . , Mueller , S . , and Moss , S . ( 2002 ) , ‘The impact of entrepreneurship education on entrepreneurial self - efficacy’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurship Education , Vol 1 , p 2 . Davidsson , P . ( 1995 ) , ‘Determinants of entrepreneurial inten - tions’ , paper presented at the RENT IX Workshop , Piacenza , Italy . Davidsson , P . ( 2002 ) , ‘What entrepreneurship research can do for business and policy practice’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurship Education , Vol 1 , pp 5 – 24 . Deacon , S . A . , and Thomas , V . ( 2000 ) , ‘Discovering creativity in family therapy : a theoretical analysis’ , Journal of Systemic Therapies , Vol 19 , pp 4 – 17 . Dewett , T . , and Gruys , M . ( 2007 ) , ‘Advancing the case for creativity through graduate business education’ , Thinking Skills and Creativity , Vol 2 , pp 85 – 95 . Dillman , D . A . ( 2000 ) , Mail and Internet Surveys : The Tailored Design Method , John Wiley , New York , NY . Drennan , J . , Kennedy , J . , and Renfrow , P . ( 2005 ) , ‘Impact of childhood experiences on the development of entrepreneurial intentions’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation , Vol 6 , No 4 , pp 231 – 238 . Dyer , G . W . Jr ( 1994 ) , ‘Toward a theory of entrepreneurial careers’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 19 , pp 7 – 21 . El - Murad , J . , and West , D . C . ( 2004 ) , ‘The definition and measurement of creativity : what do we know ? ’ Journal of Advertising Research , June , pp 188 – 201 . Elzubeir , M . A . , and Rizk , D . E . ( 2001 ) , ‘Identifying characteristics that students , interns and residents look for in their role models’ , Medical Education , Vol 35 , pp 272 – 277 . Farmer , S . M . , Tierney , P . , and Kung - McIntyre , K . ( 2003 ) , ‘Employee creativity in Taiwan : an application of role identity theory’ , Academy of Management Journal , Vol 46 , pp 618 – 630 . Fayolle , A . ( 2005 ) , ‘Evaluation of entrepreneurship education : behaviour performing or intention increasing ? ’ International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business , Vol 2 , pp 89 – 98 . Feldman , D . C . , and Bolino , M . C . ( 2000 ) , ‘Career patterns of the self employed : career motivations and career out - comes’ , Journal of Small Business Management , Vol 38 , pp 53 – 67 . Gardner , K . G . , and Morgan , J . D . ( 1990 ) , ‘Family adaptability , cohesion and creativity’ , Creativity Research Journal , Vol 3 , pp 281 – 286 . Gorman , G . , Hanlon , D . , and King , W . ( 1997 ) , ‘Some research perspectives on entrepreneurship education , enterprise 198 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young education and education for small business management : a ten - year literature review’ , International Small Business Journal , Vol 15 , pp 56 – 78 . Gupta , A . ( 1992 ) , ‘The informal education of the Indian entrepre - neur’ , Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship , Vol 9 , pp 63 – 70 . Hamidi , D . Y . , Wennberg , K . , and Berglund , H . ( 2008 ) , ‘Creativity in entrepreneurship education’ , Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , Vol 15 , pp 304 – 320 . Hansemark , O . C . ( 1998 ) , ‘The effects of an entrepreneurship program on need for achievement and locus of control of reinforcement’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research , Vol 4 , pp 28 – 50 . Harding , R . , and Bosma , N . ( 2006 ) , Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2006 Results , Babson College and London Business School , Babson Park , Wellesley , MA . Heinonen , J . , and Poikkijoki , S . A . ( 2006 ) , ‘An entrepreneurial - directed approach to entrepreneurship education : mission impossible ? ’ Journal of Management Development , Vol 25 , pp 80 – 94 . Hills , G . E . , Shrader , R . C . , and Lumpkin , G . T . ( 1999 ) , ‘Opportu - nity recognition as a creative process’ , Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research , pp 216 – 227 . Hmieleski , K . M . , and Corbett , A . C . ( 2006 ) , ‘Proclivity for improvisation as a predictor of entrepreneurial intentions’ , Journal of Small Business Management , Vol 44 , pp 45 – 63 . Jack , S . L . , and Anderson , A . R . ( 1999 ) , ‘Entrepreneurship education within the enterprise culture . Producing reflective practitioners’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurship Behaviour & Research , Vol 5 , pp 110 – 125 . Johannisson , B . , Landström , H . , and Rosenberg , J . ( 1998 ) , ‘University training for entrepreneurship – an action frame of reference’ , European Journal of Engineering Education , Vol 23 , pp 477 – 496 . Kline , R . B . ( 2005 ) , Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling , Guilford Publications , New York , NY . Koellinger , P . ( 2008 ) , ‘Why are some entrepreneurs more innovative than others ? ’ Small Business Economics , Vol 31 , No 1 , pp 21 – 37 . Kolvereid , L . , and Moen , Ø . ( 1997 ) , ‘Entrepreneurship among business graduates : does a major in entrepreneurship make a difference ? ’ Journal of European Industrial Training , Vol 21 , pp 154 – 160 . Krueger , N . F . Jr , Reilly , M . D . , and Carsrud , A . L . ( 2000 ) , ‘Competing models of entrepreneurial intention’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 15 , pp 411 – 432 . Kuratko , D . F . ( 2005 ) , ‘The emergence of entrepreneurship education : development , trends , and challenges’ , Entrepre - neurship Theory and Practice , Vol 29 , pp 577 – 597 . Low , M . B . , and MacMillan , I . C . ( 1988 ) , ‘Entrepreneurship : past research and future challenges’ , Journal of Management , Vol 14 , pp 139 – 161 . McCallum , R . C . , Browne , M . W . , and Sugawara , H . M . ( 1996 ) , ‘Power analysis and determination of sample size for covariance structure modelling’ , Psychological Methods , Vol 1 , pp 130 – 149 . McMullan , W . E . , and Long , W . A . ( 1987 ) , ‘Entrepreneurship education in the nineties’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 2 , pp 261 – 275 . Miller , B . C . , and Gerard , D . ( 1979 ) , ‘Family influences on the development of creativity in children . An integrative review’ , Family Coordinator , Vol 28 , pp 295 – 312 . Mitchell , R . K . , Busenitz , L . , Lant , T . , McDougall , P . P . , Morse , E . A . , and Smith , J . B . ( 2002 ) , ‘Toward a theory of entrepre - neurial cognition : rethinking the people side of entrepreneurship research’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 27 , pp 93 – 104 . Mitchell , R . K . , and Chesteen , S . A . ( 1995 ) , ‘Enhancing entrepre - neurial expertise : experiential pedagogy and the entrepreneurial expert script’ , Simulation and Gaming , Vol 26 , pp 288 – 306 . Peterman , M . E . , and Kennedy , J . ( 2003 ) , ‘Enterprise education : influencing students’ perception of entrepreneurship’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 28 , pp 129 – 144 . Pittaway , L . , and Cope , J . ( 2007 ) , ‘Entrepreneurship education : a systematic review of the evidence’ , International Small Business Journal , Vol 25 , pp 479 – 510 . Plaschka , G . , and Welsch , H . ( 1990 ) , ‘Emerging structures in entrepreneurship education : curricular designs and strate - gies’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 14 , pp 55 – 71 . Ployhart , R . E . , and Oswald , F . L . ( 2004 ) , ‘Applications of mean and covariance structure analysis : integrating correlational and experimental approaches’ , Organizational Research Methods , Vol 7 , pp 27 – 65 . Podsakoff , P . M . , MacKenzie , S . B . , Lee , J . Y . , and Podsakoff , N . P . ( 2003 ) , ‘Common method biases in behavioural research : a critical review of the literature and recommended remedies’ , Journal of Applied Psychology , Vol 88 , pp 879 – 903 . Robson , P . J . A . , Wijbenga , F . , and Parker , S . C . ( 2009 ) , ‘Entre - preneurship and policy : challenges and directions for future research’ , International Small Business Journal , Vol 27 , pp 531 – 535 . Schmitt - Rodermund , E . ( 2004 ) , ‘Pathways to successful entrepreneurship : parenting , personality , early entrepreneurial competence , and interests’ , Journal of Vocational Behavior , Vol 65 , pp 498 – 518 . Schumpeter , J . A . ( 1934 ) , The Theory of Economic Develop - ment : An Inquiry into Profits , Capital , Credit , Interest , and the Business Cycle , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Shalley , C . E . , and Gilson , L . L . ( 2004 ) , ‘What leaders need to know : a review of social and contextual factors that can foster or hinder creativity’ , Leadership Quarterly , Vol 15 , pp 33 – 55 . Shane , S . , and Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) , ‘The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research’ , Academy of Manage - ment Review , Vol 25 , pp 217 – 226 . Shapero , A . , and Sokol , L . ( 1982 ) , ‘The social dimensions of entrepreneurship’ , in Kent , C . , Sexton , D . , and Vesper , K . , eds , The Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship , Prentice Hall , New York , NY , pp 72 – 90 . Shaver , K . G . ( 1995 ) , ‘The entrepreneurial personality myth’ , B & E Review , April – June , pp 20 – 23 . Shook , C . L . , Ketchen , D . J . Jr , Hult , G . T . M . , and Kacmar , K . M . ( 2004 ) , ‘An assessment of the use of structural equation models in strategic management research’ , Strategic Management Journal , Vol 25 , pp 397 – 404 . Simonton , D . K . ( 2000 ) , ‘Creativity : cognitive , personal , develop - mental and social aspects’ , American Psychologist , Vol 55 , pp 151 – 158 . Smith , J . B . , Mitchell , J . R . , and Mitchell , R . K . ( 2009 ) , ‘Entrepre - neurial scripts and the new transaction commitment mindset : extending the expert information processing theory approach to entrepreneurial cognition research’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 33 , pp 815 – 844 . Solomon , G . T . , and Fernald , L . W . Jr ( 1991 ) , ‘Trends in small business management and entrepreneurship education in the United States’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 15 , pp 25 – 39 . Souitaris , V . , Zerbinati , S . , and Al - Laham , A . ( 2007 ) , ‘Do entrepreneurship programmes raise entrepreneurial intention of science and engineering students ? The effect of learning , inspiration and resources’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 22 , pp 566 – 591 . StatSoft Inc ( 2001 ) , STATISTICA ( Data Analysis Software System ) , Version 6 , website : www . statsoft . com . Sternberg , R . J . ( 2004 ) , ‘Successful intelligence as a basis for entrepreneurship’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 19 , pp 189 – 201 . Walstad , W . B . , and Kourilsky , M . L . ( 1998 ) , ‘Entrepreneurial attitudes and knowledge of black youth’ , Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , Vol 23 , pp 5 – 29 . Walton , A . P . ( 2003 ) , ‘The impact of interpersonal factors on creativity’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research , Vol 9 , pp 146 – 162 . 199 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION Vol 12 , No 3 Creativity and entrepreneurial intention in the young Ward , T . B . ( 2004 ) , ‘Cognition , creativity and entrepreneurship’ , Journal of Business Venturing , Vol 19 , pp 173 – 188 . Warren , L . , Kitagawa , F . , and Eatough , M . ( 2010 ) , ‘Developing the knowledge economy through university linkages’ , International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation , Vol 11 , No 4 , pp 293 – 306 . West , S . G . , Finch , J . F . , and Curran , P . J . ( 1995 ) , ‘Structural Equation Models with non normal data variables : problems and remedies’ , in Hoyle , R . H . , ed , Structural Equation Modeling : Concepts , Issues , and Applications , Sage , London , pp 56 – 75 . Wilson , K . ( 2004 ) , Entrepreneurship Education at European Universities and Business Schools , Working Paper , Euro - pean Foundation for Entrepreneurship Research , Hilversum . Zhou , J . , and George , J . M . ( 2001 ) , ‘When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity : encouraging the expression of voice’ , Academy of Management Journal , Vol 44 , pp 682 – 696 .