Calhoun : The NPS Institutional Archive Faculty and Researcher Publications Faculty and Researcher Publications 2006 What to do next ? The case for non - predictive strategy Wiltbank , Robert http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10945 / 41242 Strategic Management Journal Strat . Mgmt . J . ( in press ) Published online in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj . 555 Received 15 December 2004 ; Final revision received 17 March 2006 WHAT TO DO NEXT ? THE CASE FOR NON - PREDICTIVE STRATEGY ROBERT WILTBANK , 1 * NICHOLAS DEW , 2 STUART READ 3 and SARAS D . SARASVATHY 4 1 AtkinsonGraduateSchoolofManagement , WillametteUniversity , Salem , Oregon , U . S . A . 2 NavalPostgraduateSchool , Monterey , California , U . S . A . 3 IMD , Lausanne , Switzerland 4 The Darden Graduate School of Business Administration , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , Virginia , U . S . A . Two prescriptions dominate the topic of what ﬁrms should do next in uncertain situations : planning approaches and adaptive approaches . These differ primarily on the appropriate role of prediction in the decision process . Prediction is a central issue in strategy making owing to the presumption that what can be predicted can be controlled . In this paper we argue for the independence of prediction and control . This implies that the pursuit of successful outcomes can occur through control - oriented approaches that may essentially be non - predictive . We further develop and highlight control - oriented approaches with particular emphasis on the question of what organizations should do next . We also explore how these approaches may impact the costs and risks of ﬁrm strategies as well as the ﬁrm’s continual efforts to innovate . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Among the most difﬁcult challenges in business is creating strategy for the future of an organization that is doing well . No pending doom , rallying cry , or clear problem to solve . How do we know where to go from here ? In many of these situations the question isn’t asked or answered , the course simply maintained until a challenge or opportunity crashes into the organization . In others , however , a lot of effort is put into this innocent little question . What to do next ? Keywords : strategy making ; uncertainty ; decision mak - ing ; market creation ; construction ; effectuation * Correspondence to : Robert Wiltbank , Atkinson Graduate School of Management , Willamette University , Salem , OR 97301 , U . S . A . E - mail : wiltbank @ willamette . edu Williamson ( 1998 : 49 ) formalizes this as a ‘level III’ resource - based question : How should ﬁrm A , with its pre - existing strengths and weaknesses , reposition for the future in rela - tion to the strategic situation ( actual and poten - tial rivalry ; actual and potential market niches ) of which it is a part or to which it can relate ? The question has also been formulated in other ways : How can a ﬁrm sustain its competitive advantage over time ? How can a ﬁrm remain effectively matched to a changing environment ? And so on . These are different ways of asking the same fundamental question : How can a ﬁrm know what to do next ? Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . R . Wiltbank et al . Imagine , for example , the situation of a local radio station . Let’s call it KEEP180 . KEEP180 has established a solid market posi - tion , anchored in a passion for new and cre - ative music of all types . From its roots as a col - lege station , it has found a very unique identity over the past decade . The station has no com - mercials ; instead funded by listeners and ‘day sponsor’ corporate sponsorship , mostly from local businesses . A unique mix of music covers many genres ( from Alternative to Reggae to Country to French rap , most of it very novel ) and substantiates KEEP180’s motto of ‘where the music matters . ’ Investment in an Internet presence has led to a fast - growing worldwide popularity among a loyal segment of music listeners . The station occasion - ally broadcasts from other cities to support remote Internet listeners . The local audience has expanded to the next major city to the south through exten - sion of its traditional broadcast . All of this has inspired great loyalty among musicians and listen - ers alike . Winning a Webby award has reinforced KEEP180’s candidacy for being the best radio sta - tion site in the world . What should this ﬁrm do next ? Often we simply pass this question back to the owners of the ﬁrm : they should pursue whatever they want to , their preferences . This begs the question from the managers of KEEP180 : what should we prefer to do next ? Owner - managers may have a clear high - level goal of continuing to be successful . In our example , this might be stated as : to share great music with the world . But this does not meaningfully narrow their choices about what to do next . The range of imagined choices in pursuit of such high - level goals is central to why the question is interesting . Decision makers can have a pronounced impact on outcomes in exactly these kinds of situations where discretion is very high ( Finkelstein and Hambrick , 1990 ) . Let us examine a few of the suggestions that strategic management scholarship has to offer our successful radio station : • Suggestion # 1A . If they could predict the future , perhaps the managers of KEEP180 would know exactly what to do . They could position their ﬁrm to proﬁt greatly from their predictive power ; buying the winning lottery ticket for tomorrow’s lottery , so to speak . For example , if they could reliably predict that all radio listening would occur through the Internet in 4 years , they could insightfully avoid moving into more transmit - ters or buying radio stations and instead more aggressively develop their broadband customer base and content . • Suggestion # 1B . Of course , we know we can - not ‘know’ this , and there’s the rub . All we can do is make an educated guess . KEEP180 , for example , could work hard to analyze broadcast market trends , track competitors , evaluate ﬁnan - cial indicators , and assess their own strengths and weaknesses for pursuing particular positions in multiple future situations . Based on their best estimates of what the future may bring , they could choose to continue to invest in the broad - band business to position for a world where 75 percent of radio listening occurs over the inter - net in the next 4 – 6 years . • Suggestion # 2A . Not all predictions are created equal—in fact , if the history of Internet ﬁrms is any indication , most predictions are erroneous at best . As an alternative to investing in predic - tion , our radio broadcasters could instead watch how other radio stations are growing , examine what formats are working well , and pay atten - tion to what customers love right now . Being particularly attentive to the situation they are actually in , rather than guessing the future , man - agers of KEEP180 might join in the consoli - dation of the broadcast industry—buying other stations , for example , or perhaps take advan - tage of their Internet strength to create dozens of different stations that reach many market seg - ments . • Suggestion # 2B . One might even suggest they do both , moving forward slowly on their short list of possible ‘things to do next . ’ If they keep their options open they will be able to react to real learning without betting the business on predictions about Internet radio , yet keep a foothold in the Internet market in case it turns out to be a great opportunity . Likewise they would be involved in the consolidation of traditional radio stations in case that turns out to be most attractive . This is particularly relevant when the risk - adjusted expected values of the short list of options are comparable . A substantial proportion of strategy research is devoted to this very discussion of how the radio station can know what to do next , or how it can reposition for the future . Scholars will recognize the suggestions above as different operationaliza - Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy tions of the classic planning and learning debates over strategy making under different ‘degrees’ of uncertainty ( see Ansoff , 1991 , as an example of the former and Mintzberg , 1994 , for the latter ) . Both focus on the appropriate role of prediction in the decision process . Planning looks at pre - diction from a natural sciences standpoint , where prediction is quite valuable . In this view , prediction enables control , allowing us to choose the appro - priate means to proceed toward desired outcomes . Learning , which enables adaptation , comes at pre - diction from the opposite direction , avoiding it as much as possible . Adaptation argues that , in chang - ing environments , moving faster to adapt will lead organizations forward more effectively than trying harder to predict . We begin this paper with a review of strategic management research to clarify the role of pre - diction in deciding what to do next . In particular , we show that prediction is fundamental to current conceptions of how to control future outcomes . We then turn the tables by separating the dimensions of prediction and control ( see Figure 1 ) . We use the resultant taxonomy to explore KEEP180’s answer to its question of what to do next and examine implications for future research . STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT THEORIES : THE ROLE OF PREDICTION Studies in mainstream strategic management boil down to two fundamental prescriptions for how ﬁrms can decide what to do next ( Brews and Hunt , 1999 ) : They should either try harder to predict better ( rational strategies advocated by the planning school ) or move faster to adapt bet - ter ( adaptive strategies espoused by the learn - ing school ) . Which prescription a ﬁrm is to fol - low depends upon how conﬁdent the ﬁrm is in its ability to predict changes in its environment . Whether stated as distinct or as a continuum from deliberate to emergent ( Mintzberg and Waters , 1985 ) , a key characteristic of both adaptive and planning approaches is their emphasis on posi - tioning the organization within an exogenously given environment . The two approaches differ pri - marily in how they cope with that given uncer - tainty . We drew the above conclusion based on an extensive literature review . We began the review with a citation search of two major databases ( JSTOR and EBSCO’s Business Source Premier ) E m ph a s i s O n P re d i c t i o n Emphasis on Control Low High Low High POSITIONING CONSTRUCTION Visionary Persistently build your clear vision of a valuable future Non - Predictive Control Planning Adaptive Predictive Control Try harder to predict and position more accurately Transformative Transform current means into co - created goals with others who commit to building a possible future Move faster to adapt to a rapidly changing environment Figure 1 . Framework of prediction and control Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . using broad conceptual keywords—namely , ‘strategy making , ’ ‘strategy formulation , ’ and ‘strategy design . ’ We searched seven peer - review - ed journals ( SMJ , AMJ , AMR , ASQ , MS , OS , and JIBS ) and three practitioner journals ( HBR , CMR , and SMR ) in all . This resulted in 169 articles . To this , we added 18 articles suggested by strategic management scholars we consulted . We then itera - tively narrowed the search by reading the abstracts to eliminate irrelevant articles , and grouping rele - vant articles that overlapped on key ideas . Finally we worked through the relevant articles in full , from which we identiﬁed 16 articles that exem - pliﬁed cornerstone approaches to strategy making , although there is certainly some overlap in their positions . In some cases , a book summarizes the position from several of an author’s articles and was used as a reference point . Each of the ﬁnal 16 ( listed in the Appendix and organized into four categories that will be explicated later in the paper ) addresses the question of overarching interest to us , namely , how organizations can decide what do to next . Assumptions about prediction and control are either explicit or implicit in virtually all formu - lations of strategic management research . So the focus of our literature analysis was on extracting those positions . Quotes from each article are pre - sented in the Appendix to encapsulate the emphasis of each article with regard to prediction and con - trol as the two concepts are discussed throughout this paper . We began our analysis by positioning exemplar articles graphically along the dimension of predic - tion ( high and low ) , as presented in the left - hand side ( LHS ) of Figure 2 . For the moment , we will ignore the right - hand side ( RHS ) and return to it later in the paper . E m ph a s i s O n P re d i c t i o n Emphasis on Control Low High Low High POSITIONING CONSTRUCTION Visionary Planning Adaptive Transformative Competitive Analysis ( Porter , 1980 ) Planning & Positioning ( Ansoff , 1979 ) Real Options ( McGrath , 1999 ) Scenario Planning ( Schoemaker , 2002 ) Fast Decision Making ( Eisenhardt , 1989 ) Emergent Strategy ( Mintzberg , 1994 ) Incrementalism ( Quinn , 1980 ) Dynamic Capabilities ( Teece , Pisano , and Shuen , 1997 ) Shaping Strategies ( Courtney et al . , 1997 ) Value Curve Creation ( Kim and Maubourgne , 1997 ) Strategic Projection ( Rindova & Fombrun , 1999 ) Effectuation ( Sarasvathy , 2001a ) Will & Vision ( Tellis and Golder , 2002 ) Corporate Imagination ( Hamel and Prahalad , 1991 ) Backing into the Future ( Hayes , 1985 ) Figure 2 . Representative literature on speciﬁc approaches to situational control Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy Planning The planning school is perhaps the oldest in strate - gic management and contains several widely read pieces such as Ansoff ( 1979 ) and Porter ( 1980 ) , who emphasize the importance of systematic anal - ysis and integrative planning . Discipline in the generation of alternatives , rational evaluation of important information , and signiﬁcant integration into a ﬁrm’s existing operations are earmarks of the rational planning process ( Andrews , 1987 ; Fredrickson and Mitchell , 1984 ; Ansoff , 1991 ; Miller and Cardinal , 1994 ) . In these approaches , more attention to situational detail , more frequent analysis , more scanning for trends , and evalua - tion of more alternatives guide the ﬁrm to their best possible strategy going forward ( Schendel and Hofer , 1979 ) , and a set of ‘no regrets’ moves ( Courtney , Kirkland , and Viguerie , 1997 ) . The rational planning view predicts that as uncertainty increases , organizations that work more diligently to analyze and predict more accurately the changing situation in which they operate will outperform those that do not . Several empirical studies support this notion . Goll and Rasheed ( 1997 ) looked at the use of rational decision - making efforts through surveys of 62 manufac - turing ﬁrms , evaluating the relationship of those efforts to return on sales and return on assets under different levels of environmental muniﬁ - cence and dynamism . They found that rational decision making positively impacted performance as dynamism increased . Similarly , Brews and Hunt ( 1999 ) found , through a survey of 426 man - agers enrolled in 39 executive education programs , that more speciﬁcity in the planning process was related to increased ﬁnancial market performance vs . competitors over the prior 5 – 10 years . Also , Priem , Rasheed , and Kotulic ( 1995 ) report results from their study of 63 manufacturing ﬁrms where increased rationality in terms of scanning , analy - sis , and comprehensiveness in the strategy process was related to increased performance on several measures of performance relative to their peers , especially in dynamic situations . Similar results are reported in the Miller and Cardinal ( 1994 ) meta - analysis of 26 planning vs . learning stud - ies ; planning rationality is related to proﬁtability even in turbulent environments . Additional notable studies of these relationships include Miller and Friesen , ( 1983 ) , Pearce , Robbins , and Robinson ( 1987 ) and Dean and Sharfman ( 1996 ) , where they looked speciﬁcally at decision effectiveness lon - gitudinally , rather than overall ﬁrm performance . Broadly these ﬁndings suggest that rational plan - ning can guide organizations to successfully repo - sition for the future even in uncertain situations . Champions of these notions make two key argu - ments for the enhanced role of rational plan - ning with renewed vigor under uncertainty . First , short cuts , such as intuition , heuristics , and other avenues for handling the challenge , suffer from numerous personal and group biases ( Staw , 1981 ; Schwenk , 1984 ; Bazerman , 1990 ) . Systematic planning processes help to overcome the gaps and inconsistencies that can result from these biases ( Ansoff , 1979 ; Priem et al . , 1995 ) . The predictive approach may not be perfect because prediction is obviously difﬁcult , but it represents the best method of remaining effectively ‘aligned’ with one’s environment ( Hough and White , 2003 ) . Sec - ond , even if prediction is too inaccurate to be useful for strategy making under uncertainty , the discipline and systematic nature of rational plan - ning is a valuable frame for the development and evaluation of emergent strategies ( Ansoff , 1991 ; Szulanksi and Amin , 2001 ) . Adapting The learning school , as opposed to the planning school , suggests organizations learn what to do next by minimizing the use of predictive rational - ity , and instead experimenting and moving quickly to capture new opportunities ( Mosakowski , 1997 ) . By being ﬂexible and adaptive to situations as they develop , organizations successfully out - maneuver competitors who also struggle to deal with the challenge of an uncertain future ( Fredrickson and Mitchell , 1984 ; Nutt , 1976 ) . Purely adaptive ap - proaches avoid deﬁning future event spaces , and instead position the ﬁrm for quick responses to uncertain and unpredictable events as they emerge . The basic strategic principle of adaptive ap - proaches is incrementalism , as emphasized by Lindblom ( 1959 ) , Quinn ( 1980 ) , and Mintzberg ( 1978 ) : the ﬁrm learns from environmental feed - back ; and subsequent strategy reﬂects this learning . As the cycle of action and feedback is short , adap - tive approaches emphasize recognizing where the environment is rather than predicting where it will be , placing a premium on rapid adaptation rather than strategic intentions ( Schoemaker , 2002 ) . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . Adaptation research argues that in dynamic and uncertain situations planning slows adaptation and that comprehensive planning can actually blind the organization to important changes in its environ - ment ( Mintzberg , 1990 ; Schoemaker , 1993 ) . Also , predictions lead to commitments that lock orga - nizations into planned strategy despite acknowl - edging huge challenges in making the predictions that justify those commitments . In this case , even if organizations see the need to make changes in their plan , they may not be able to effectively adapt ( Ghemawat , 1999 ; Christensen and Bower , 1996 ) . Boeker ( 1989 ) referred to the effects of these commitments as ‘imprinting’ and showed that as strategies are set up they lock in and ﬁrms are subsequently much less likely to adapt . Empirical support for adaptive approaches to strategy making in uncertain situations is also sig - niﬁcant . In two studies , Fredrickson and Mitchell ( 1984 ) and Fredrickson and Iaquinto ( 1989 ) look - ed at the consequences of comprehensive strategy making using a decision scenario survey with man - agers from ﬁrms in two industries , differing in the extent of instability . In both cross - sectional and longitudinal evaluations , they found compre - hensive planning efforts were negatively related to performance in unstable environments . Miller ( 1993 ) , through interviews with 53 ﬁrms , found that more successful ﬁrms were signiﬁcantly more adaptive . Hough and White ( 2003 ) , in an experi - mental design with 219 participants making 400 decisions , reported that a more comprehensive rational decision approach only enhanced decision quality in certain , rather than uncertain , situations . Also , based on an in - depth review of 8 of the 10 major oil companies , Grant ( 2003 ) reports that all of the ﬁrms have responded to increasing indus - try uncertainty by de - emphasizing their planning approach in exchange for more adaptive and ﬂex - ible solutions , establishing a balance of corporate strategy guidelines and pure emergent strategy in what he refers to as ‘planned emergence . ’ This notion of planned emergence , combining predic - tive planning with adaptive approaches , has grown signiﬁcantly over the past decade and offers inter - esting combinations of the two approaches . Bridging planning and adaptation Several streams of research point to planned emer - gence as a concept that bridges the gap between planning and adaptive approaches . Studies of fast decision making show that in dynamic situations decision makers actually can arrive at faster deci - sions by pursuing a strategy - making process with many of the hallmarks of rationality ( Bourgeois and Eisenhardt , 1988 ; Eisenhardt , 1989 ) . Fast deci - sion making allows for quick reactions to changing environments , central to adaptation , while retain - ing many of the rational strategy - making pro - cesses : more alternatives , more information , and more integration . Judge and Miller ( 1991 ) stud - ied 32 hospital executives and found that fast and comprehensive strategic decisions were related to enhanced organizational performance . Similarly , Baum and Wally ( 2003 ) used a scenario - based sur - vey to assess decision speed with 318 CEOs from 1996 to 2000 , to show that fast rational decision making was related to higher proﬁt and growth performance . Work on dynamic capabilities also presses the notion of planned adaptation ( Teece , Pisano , and Shuen , 1997 ; Eisenhardt and Martin , 2000 ) . Ratio - nal planning can focus on predictive strategies that set the stage for fast adaptation . Organizations can rationally plan and develop systems that facili - tate innovation and change , for example , through modular organizational structures that smooth sig - niﬁcant organizational challenges to change , and / or establish formal but simple rules that guide the evaluation and pursuit of emergent opportunities ( Simon , 1993 ; Eisenhardt and Sull , 2001 ) . Sce - nario planning echoes this theme of connecting rational planning with effective adaptation by plan - ning in advance for several scenarios that are indi - vidually challenging to predict , thereby accelerat - ing adaptation when uncertainty is reduced ( Schoe - maker 2002 ) . Real options techniques have further reﬁned the core approach of rational planning in uncertain situations ( McGrath , 1999 ) . By looking at dif - ferent exercise options for alternative scenarios and their expected future outcomes , real options attempt to retain ﬂexibility while providing a framework for decisions and valuation that is premised on alternatives predicted by the deci - sion maker . As a result , strategy making is less dependent on any one prediction , and prepares the organization for major decisions as new real - time information becomes available . However , real options approaches are still signiﬁcantly predic - tive as prediction underlies the estimated value of each individual option , both ﬁnancially and Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy strategically ; see Luehrman ( 1998 ) for an exam - ple of the extent to which predicted information is required . This review of the planning vs . learning debate lays out several issues with prediction as a core aspect of strategy making . First , both planning and adaptive approaches to strategy making cen - ter around the appropriate role and / or effective - ness of prediction . Second , empirical support exists for the use of prediction as an effective way to decide what to do next , even in uncertain situa - tions ; there is also signiﬁcant support for adaptive efforts . Third , several recent strategic approaches attempt to resolve this conﬂict by connecting the planning and adaptive approaches , encouraging ﬁrms to carefully plan to quickly adapt . Finally , both planning and adaptive strategies focus on positioning within an environment that is exoge - nous to the efforts of the organization . Under this assumption of exogeneity , predicting and posi - tioning are the logical ways for organizations to seek control of their outcomes , and successfully reposition for the future . In the next section we relax the exogeneity assumption and suggest that viewing the environments of an organization as endogenous to the efforts of actors / organizations may help overcome this planning vs . learning dichotomy . CONCEPTUALIZING CONTROL AS INDEPENDENT FROM PREDICTION The above insights from strategy research orig - inate in observations about how managers have consistently guided organizations to favorable out - comes over time ( Ansoff , 1965 ; Chandler , 1962 ) . Favorable outcomes were considered outcomes that enhanced the survival prospects of organi - zations ( Fligstein , 1996 ) and their proﬁtability ( Porter , 1980 ) . Strategy was deﬁned as the ‘big decisions’ made in the pursuit of these outcomes . As pointed out earlier , prediction has played a central role in crafting strategy . At least in prin - ciple , predicting the organization’s environment enables them to position for the future in order to produce favorable outcomes . Cornerstones of this predictive effort involve predicting responses of competing ﬁrms , the path of market development ( especially demand ) with its attendant opportuni - ties and threats , and factors affecting the costs of resources . Deterministic frameworks in strategic manage - ment all share a basic conception : prediction is use - ful in strategy making because the consequences of what can be predicted can be controlled . This approach mirrors science , where prediction is used to test theories about causal connections in the natural environment and those theories are then used either to manipulate nature for our ends , or to safely position ourselves against the uncontrollable forces of nature . As managers face uncertainties in market environments , then , successful prediction of that environment enables them to navigate it , and to preemptively capture the resources that will become valuable , leading to continued favorable outcomes for the organization . Naturally , these efforts in strategy draw on a deep history of thinking about chance and uncer - tainty . Written scholarship on how to make good decisions under uncertainty can be traced back at least to 1654 , when Blaise Pascal wrote to Pierre Fermat about a gambling problem that launched the development of mathematical prob - ability ( Gigerenzer et al . , 1990 ) . Hacking ( 1975 ) chronicles the endeavors of gamblers , scientists , philosophers , and kings to identify predictable pat - terns in nature and human behavior that allow them to produce desirable outcomes . It has become one of the basic tenets of science—from celestial mechanics to economics and management—that prediction and control are tied together , that they are co - extensive . Yet , the practical usefulness of prediction as a means of control depends crucially on certain features of the environment ( Mintzberg , 1994 ) . Empirically , ‘How to achieve control , and how much control is achievable , depends upon the fore - sight horizon’ ( Lane and Maxﬁeld , 1996 : 217 ) . When the strategist’s foresight horizon appears rel - atively certain , prediction and control appear to have a co - extensive relationship . As this horizon becomes more uncertain , the relationship between prediction and control changes . In highly uncer - tain environments , such as those characterized by complexity ( Axelrod and Cohen , 1999 ) , rife with strong path dependencies and punctuated change , the independence of control from predic - tion becomes stark . How control over outcomes is achieved in these settings changes . Efforts to con - trol , directly working to create and inﬂuence the evolution of market elements , can be seen more clearly as competing alternatives to prediction for achieving favorable outcomes . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . The conceptual framework for understanding prediction and control as distinct dimensions is grounded in Frank Knight’s ( 1921 ) seminal work on the relationship between unpredictability and proﬁt . Knight identiﬁed three types of uncer - tainty : the ﬁrst consisting of known distribu - tions and unknown draws , the second consist - ing of unknown distributions and unknown draws , and the third consisting of non - existent distribu - tions where the very instances are unclassiﬁable ( subsequently known as Knightian uncertainty ) . Knight’s ﬁrst two categories of uncertainty par - allel the mathematical notions of classical proba - bility and statistical probability ; they also suggest scientists’ and philosophers’ distinctions between the known and the unknown . The third type of uncertainty—which has recently attracted interest from scientists attempting to work out quantum mechanics and its attendant theoretical puzzles—is the unknowable , summarized in Ralph Gomory’s 1995 Scientiﬁc American article , ‘The known , the unknown , and the unknowable . ’ In biology , economics and social philosophy , analyses of this type of uncertainty consistently conceptualize it as a product of purposeful human creative action ( Lewontin , 1992 ; Buchanan and Vanberg , 1991 ; Joas , 1996 ) . In this third case , efforts to predict are distinctly severed from efforts to control . In environments characterized by Knightian uncertainty , prediction and control are not just empirically mismatched ; they are concep - tually at odds . Prediction can never be adequate for the purpose of control , even in principle , because of the role of human creative action in actually pro - ducing a non - existent , not just a hard - to - predict , future . The conceptual co - extensiveness of prediction and control depends on classifying the environ - ment as a dichotomy consisting of ‘knowns’ and ‘unknowns . ’ Based on these classiﬁcations , it is in principle always possible to make predictions ( even if it takes time to learn how to do it well ) , and use prediction as a means of control - ling outcomes . In environments characterized by Knightian uncertainty , however , the very instances are unclassiﬁable . While after an innovative event occurs we may conclude that we could certainly have classiﬁed and predicted the probabilities of its success or failure , Knightian uncertainty refers to the actual instance of innovation ( the pet rock , the Internet , Google ) as unclassiﬁable ( Buchanan and Vanberg , 1991 ) . There simply was no category of ‘pet rock’ to which we could assign probabilities ex ante . In settings of true uncertainty strategists of course still seek favorable outcomes , but this may result from directly shaping these categories rather than predicting their probable shapes and navigating those probability estimates . To the extent we seek to understand reality as exogenous to human action , unknowability ( true unpredictability ) can be a disquieting and disrup - tive phenomenon . However , if we focus on human action as a primary factor in the creation of real - ity , we then need to develop approaches that don’t involve prediction—i . e . , to explore the potential of non - predictive techniques for generating favorable outcomes ( March , 1982 ) . The practical meaning of predicting and control - ling future events can be illustrated by reexamining the KEEP180 example that began the paper . Let us for a moment assume that the radio station car - ries out market research predicting an explosion in a new genre of French music . It can then invest in bringing that music to its audience and con - sequently capitalize on higher ratings . Prediction efforts can include modeling a future event space , estimating probabilities for events , and evaluat - ing consequences , as well as more sophisticated portfolio strategies , initiation of multiple contin - gent efforts , and reﬁning probability estimates over time . Alternatively , the producer at KEEP180 may simply love the French language , and leverage friendships with an executive at a French record - ing label and a current American music icon to create an explosion in French rap music and proﬁt from a distribution relationship . Both cases involve beliefs about what is possible , but the ﬁrst strategy operates primarily on the prediction of the future market , while the second operates primarily on the interest in and ability to create that future market . In both cases , actors want to guide themselves towards favorable outcomes ; our argument is sim - ply that prediction is not the only point of lever - age in achieving those outcomes . Planning and / or adapting to succeed in an essentially exogenous environment might be effective , but attempting to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence / control an endogenous environment directly may also lead to favorable outcomes . Control over favorable outcomes need not be co - extensive to the efﬁcacy or even neces - sity of prediction . Putting prediction and control on separate dimensions clariﬁes these approaches , while showing how they relate to more traditional strategic approaches . Figure 1 , alluded to earlier , Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy outlines our framework and suggests four key approaches for strategic managers : 1 . They can assume the environment is beyond their control and predictable , investing in pre - dictive techniques that allow them to position favorably for the future—we call these plan - ning strategies . Example : Walmart’s original push into C & D tier markets with supply chain expertise . 2 . They can assume the environment is unpre - dictable , shorten their planning horizons , and invest in ﬂexible strategies that effectively res - pond to changes in the environment—we call these adaptive strategies . Example : Dell’s cre - ation of a build - to - order PC system , and orga - nization to support it . 3 . They can assume the environment is predictable but malleable and impose their vision of the future , shaping the environment to achieve their desired outcomes—we call these vision - ary strategies . Example : Microsoft’s initial push toward a PC on every desk . 4 . They can assume future environmental factors are largely non - existent , and seek to create them through cooperation and goal creation with oth - ers to imagine possible futures extending from current means—we call these transformative strategies . Example : Uhaul’s creation of a one - way truck rental business . On the right - hand side ( RHS ) of Figures 1 and 2 , the two approaches emphasizing control are referr - ed to as construction because they tend to more clearly focus on the types of efforts actors may pursue to create their future , at least in part . Con - struction represents this well as it not only calls to mind ideas of social construction , but also the more straightforward idea that markets develop through the construction of artifacts such as organizations and surrounding institutions , patterns of exchange , and preferences of important stakeholders . Not sur - prisingly , much of the work relating to control as an approach to repositioning for the future orig - inates in research related to entrepreneurship and new markets . In an entrepreneurial setting , not only is prediction difﬁcult , but efforts to directly con - struct the future of those structures and traditions may be particularly effective . These situations have been shown to present greater managerial discre - tion , allowing actor / organizations to pursue unique approaches to inﬂuence their environment ( Finkel - stein and Hambrick 1990 ) . With this in mind , we turn to a more detailed exposition of the RHS of Figures 1 and 2 . EMPHASIZING CONTROL The word ‘construction’ immediately brings to mind images of blueprints and visions as well as the proper materials and methods to transform them into reality . Construction evokes means – ends relationships rather than organism – environment interactions invoked by positioning concepts such as planning and adaptation . While positioning deals with the relative emphasis on prediction and navigating an exogenous environment , construc - tion deals with deliberate efforts to make the envi - ronment endogenous . In this section , we outline two different approaches to construction : vision - ary strategy , and strategy as transformation . These approaches differ depending on the existence and clarity of goals , the availability and quality of means , and the skills of the constructor ( strate - gist ) . 1 As opposed to an exogenous evolving environ - ment posited by positioning strategies , construc - tive approaches assume either the non - existence of key elements of the environment ( presenting opportunities for constructing them ) , or the orga - nization’s ability to affect the evolution of those elements in signiﬁcant ways . Elements that orga - nizations attend to most closely are those that supply resources to the organization , particularly markets for outputs . Mature output markets con - sist of deﬁned products and services ( the artifacts exchanged ) , a set of consumers with well - ordered preferences ( demand for products and services ) , and a set of market structures and institutions ( such as distribution channels , product standards and marketing practices ) that facilitate exchange at low transaction costs ( Geroski , 2002 ; Coase , 1988 ; North , 1990 ) . Construction strategies capture organizations’ efforts to shape the development of these mar - ket elements over time with other market partici - pants ( Lazonick , 1991 ) . For example , before the 1 In the language of Aristotelian causation , this sentence can be rewritten as : In each of these , construction ( formal cause ) depends on the availability and quality of means ( material cause ) , skills of the constructor ( efﬁcient cause ) , and the existence and clarity of goals ( teleology or ﬁnal cause ) . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . invention of the Internet , while the market for high - speed communication existed , most of the products ( e . g . , e - mail ) did not exist . Even after the invention of the Internet , structures such as stan - dardized protocols ( e . g . , IP addresses ) and chan - nels ( e . g . , ISPs ) had to be invented before e - mail could become a viable product . If we go back to the ﬁrst 15 years after the invention of the Internet , not only did market structures not exist but also demand itself had not been formulated in ways that would connect the Internet with the need for high - speed communications . It is plausible to hypothe - size that well - organized preferences for digital vs . other forms of communication were constructed in a similar way to the construction of consumer perceptions in Rosa et al . ’s ( 1999 ) account of the emergence of the minivan segment of the automo - bile market . Geroski ( 2002 ) has expressed this as the process of transforming ‘inchoate’ demand into ‘articu - lated’ demand , arguing that one key consequence of new entrants rushing into emerging niches in industries is the generation of product variety . This variety enables users to sample and learn which product variations best meet their needs and more clearly articulate demand preferences . Research has shown numerous ways in which pro - ducers effect consumer preferences : preferences are effected by the order of entry of competi - tors into markets ( Carpenter and Nakamoto , 1989 ) ; consumer preferences evolve based on the bas - ket of available consumer products ( Aversi et al . , 1999 ) ; advertising shapes preferences ( Kotler , 1994 ) ; and organizations inﬂuence market take - up of innovations by their choice of lead users ( von Hippel , 1986 ; Rogers , 1995 ) . Assumptions about the ability to inﬂuence these interlocking components of the environment are fundamental to construction , emphasizing control in deciding what to do next . As outlined on the RHS of Figures 1 and 2 , construction strategies differ in their emphasis on prediction , thereby separated into Vision - ary and Transformative strategies . Visionary approaches have strong connections with predic - tive approaches to strategy , and embody heroic notions of insightful and persistent entrepreneurs that seem to impose their will upon the world . Transformative approaches focus on co - creating goals with others in a mutually persuasive pro - cess where action often precedes clear goals and predicted outcomes . Actors using this type of strategy transform extant means into new futures . Visionary approaches Visionary approaches are more familiar to strategic management than transformative ones . This type of strategy emphasizes constructing an organization and its environment by imagining future possibili - ties and proactively bringing them to fruition . The essence of vision is to set tremendous goals to cre - ate and colonize new spaces in the environment . Hamel and Prahalad ( 1989 ) articulate the approach in their discussion of strategic intent : Too often strategy is seen as a positioning exercise in which options are tested by how they ﬁt the existing industry structure . . . The strategist’s goal is not to ﬁnd a niche within the existing industry space , but to create a new space uniquely suited to the company’s own strengths , space that is off the map . ( Hamel and Prahalad , 1989 : 74 ) The visionary approach simultaneously empha - sizes high control and high prediction . The future that comes to exist does so in large part sim - ply because visionary leaders chose to create it . In Will and Vision , Tellis and Golder ( 2002 : 58 ) state that ‘Vision is the starting point . It motivates and directs [ other factors ] . ’ A steadfast commit - ment to a particular vision guides prediction and evaluation of alternative paths for achieving that vision , and the persistent pursuit of the means required to ‘make it happen . ’ The oft - quoted deﬁ - nition of entrepreneurship as the pursuit of oppor - tunity without regard to resources currently con - trolled ( Stevenson and Jarillo , 1990 ) also captures this idea . Clear goals and predictions form the criteria for selecting between alternate means for constructing favorable outcomes . Note for exam - ple , ‘ [ W ] hile strategic intent is clear about ends , it is ﬂexible as to means’ ( Hamel and Prahalad , 1989 : 68 ) . Several researchers have pointed to key suc - cess factors involved in the visionary approach . In assessing the impact of being a ﬁrst mover in a product market , Tellis and Golder ( 2002 ) his - torically evaluated 66 different product categories . They found that commitment to a clear vision , a unique view of how things could be in the future , supported by incredible persistence and willing - ness to commit ﬁnancial and reputation resources , is key to enduring market leadership . Collins and Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy Porras ( 1994 ) studied ﬁrms that created substan - tial wealth from their founding , in matched pairs with relatively underachieving ﬁrms . They also showed that success involved ‘cult - like’ commit - ment to a motivating vision of where the organi - zation is taking the market , as opposed to posi - tioning for where the market is heading . Rindova and Fombrun ( 1999 ) describe the role of strategic projections , where consistency between the com - munication and resource commitments in line with the organization’s vision is critical to increasing reputation and a desire by others to support that organization’s particular visionary efforts . The RHS of Figure 2 lists representative re - search for construction approaches that parallel the research we identiﬁed earlier for positioning on the LHS . As is obvious from the graphical representation , research in the lower right - hand quadrant of Figure 2 is rather sparse . One of the challenges for this area is in articulating it as an approach in which actors / organizations can actu - ally engage a priori . Earlier inﬂuential research in relation to construction of the future descrip - tively outlines non - predictive action but not as a proactive approach . Weick’s ( 1979 ) work on enact - ment is a primary example . The challenge here is to translate the description of human involve - ment in the process of resolving the future into a ‘strategic approach’ that guides their inﬂuencing of that process . Transforming represents an attempt at this , emphasizing control and construction in the absence of prediction . Transformative approaches Fortunately , preliminary steps have already been taken by several eminent scholars . Simon ( 1996 ) , for example , explained in Sciences of the Artiﬁ - cial the importance of theories of non - predictive design ; and March ( 1978 , 1982 ) has argued that a technology of foolishness , both non - predictive and non - visionary , might actually be useful . Sarasvathy ( 2001a , 2001b ) builds upon both Simon and March to show how expert entrepreneurs use an effectual logic that is transformative without calling for pre - diction or vision in creating new markets and new environments . A small but growing number of empirical pro - jects are pursuing research in this direction . ogilvie ( 1998 ) describes an experimental design manip - ulating the uncertainty faced by decision mak - ers , and compares the outcomes of rational - logical efforts with creative - action based ideas . The study ﬁnds that in unstable situations decision makers who emphasized an orientation toward creation and action showed enhanced decision quality . Kim and Maubourgne ( 1997 ) describe their work with ‘value curves’ which falls into the set of trans - formative approaches . They suggest that strategies are more effective as they move beyond reacting to traditional market speciﬁcations of success , toward leveraging means entirely toward overachieving on co - created product features with customers and leaving other predicted success factors out com - pletely . Our primary model for this quadrant comes from Sarasvathy ( 2001a ) , Dew ( 2003 ) , and Sarasvathy and Dew ( 2005 ) . These studies have worked out a model of effectuation induced from two empirical studies : one consisting of a think - aloud protocol analysis of 27 expert entrepreneurs and the other consisting of historical analyses of new markets created by the Radio Frequency Identity industry . The dynamic and interactive model of effectua - tion , graphically presented in Figure 3 , outlines a speciﬁc process for how organizations can know ‘what to do next ; ’ the process is action oriented , inter - subjective , and non - predictively transforms an organization’s means into newly constructed settings . As Figure 3 shows , effectuation begins with three categories of means : Identity ; Knowledge ; and Networks . Actors begin with who they are , what they know , and whom they know to imag - ine things they can accomplish . This reﬂects an emphasis on future events they can control rather then those they can predict . For example , an endocrinologist thinking of starting an obesity clinic begins with the fact that she understands the causes of obesity and some ideas for helping peo - ple with the problem ; a real estate professional may also start an obesity clinic because he has found a prime location next to a thriving teaching hospital specializing in obesity research , but he is likely to begin with possibilities suggested by the location of the property rather than the needs of obese peo - ple . The possible directions to take next emphasize strategies of control , pieces of the future that they can shape through their relatively unique abilities , prior knowledge , and social network . In the next step of the process , they start reach - ing out to other people with a view to obtaining input on how to proceed with some of the things they could ( possibly ) do . The people they talk with Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . Both new means and new goals are changes in constraints Newmeans Newgoals Who I am What I know Whom I know Expanding cycle of resources Means Converging cycle of constraints on goals Goals What can I do ? Call people I know Stakeholdercommitments Figure 3 . A transformative approach : the effectual process—dynamic and interactive could be potential stakeholders , friends and fam - ily , or random people they meet in the routines of their lives . As they ﬁnd people who want to partic - ipate in the efforts to build something ( at this point the ‘something’ may be vague or concrete , but is always very much open to change ) they move toward obtaining actual commitments from these potential stakeholders . What counts is the willing - ness of stakeholders to commit to the construction process ; and not their ﬁt with or alignment to some pre - conceived vision or opportunity . Each person who actually stakes something to come on board contributes to shaping the vision and the opportunity , as well as enabling and executing par - ticular strategies to achieve them . Whatever each stakeholder commits becomes a patch in a grow - ing quilt whose pattern becomes meaningful only through the continual negotiation and renegotiation of its appeal to new stakeholders coming on board . In other words , stakeholders commit resources in exchange for a chance to reshape the goals of the project , to inﬂuence what future will ultimately result . This process of negotiation and persuasion sets up two cycles in the concurrent formation of a new ﬁrm and new market : an expanding cycle that increases the means available ; and a converging set of constraints on the goals of the growing stake - holder network . These constraints help solidify structures of the new market as well as clarify and reorder preferences of stakeholders in the market . At some point in the process , the converging cycle ends the stakeholder acquisition process ; there is no more room for negotiating and maneuvering the shape of what will be created , and path depen - dency takes over . As the structures of the market begin to take visible shape it may be important to reevaluate the balance of prediction and control in one’s strategic approach . Stakeholder commitments drive the dynamics of the effectual model . More ﬁne - grained details of the dynamic model are provided by three key principles that stakeholders use . These principles provide criteria for taking effectual action and help stakeholders decide how to make effectual commitments : • Means - driven ( rather than goal - oriented ) action . Each effectual stakeholder considers who he is , what he knows , and whom he knows . Stakehold - ers imagine possible courses of action based on their means and engage others whose strategies are driven by other types of identity , knowl - edge , and networks . When exciting overlaps are discovered and valuable new combinations are engineered , stakeholders commit those elements of their means that make worthwhile contribu - tions to the new world being fabricated , thereby enabling the fabrication . Initially , every stake - holder interaction is as likely to change the shape of the new market or artifact being created as it is to change the original set of means . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy • Affordable loss ( rather than expected return ) as evaluation criterion . Each effectual stakeholder strives to invest only what he or she can afford to lose . Since it is not clear at the early stages of the effectual process what the pie will be , let alone how much each piece will be worth down the road , stakeholders cannot effectively use expected return as their immediate criterion for selecting resource investments . Instead , each has to reconcile within his own mind whether they can live with the loss of what they are investing in the enterprise . This takes away the need to predict what the returns will be ; calculation of affordable loss depends only on the investor’s current situation and their subjective judgment of what they are able to afford ; it is entirely within their control . • Leveraging ( rather than avoiding ) contingen - cies . Any environment and epoch in human affairs contains unexpected contingencies ; thus predictions come with disclaimers about degrees of conﬁdence . While predictive efforts seek to avoid or hedge against contingencies , effectu - ation seeks to capitalize on these occurrences . In other words , surprises can offer unexpected opportunities as well as present unanticipated problems . Contingencies don’t only undermine the value of current means in achieving the goal , but also provide opportunities to create new value through those means in pursuit of new goals . Therefore , stakeholders in the effectual process deliberately keep open room for sur - prises . In the case of KEEP180 , for example , if funding for a new transmitter falls apart , the focus can go beyond absorbing that blow to ﬁnd - ing alternative funding in pursuit of operation as a record label through a relationship created with one of those withdrawing investors in the transmitter . The taxonomy in Figure 1 presents strategists with interesting new possibilities in addition to ( a ) trying harder to predict and position more accu - rately , or ( b ) moving faster to adapt to rapidly changing environments . Having all four quadrants available for analysis opens up further possibilities for theorizing and practice in strategic manage - ment . In particular , it forces us to confront the question : What are the advantages , if any , of not trying to predict the future ? There are at least two . First , it points to creativity and entrepreneurship as important elements of strategizing ; second , it makes strategizing cheaper by eliminating costs of trying to predict the future as well reducing the costs of failure . Exogenous or preselected goals and environ - ments are ways for problem solvers to reduce the size and dimensionality of their problem space . Creative problem solving , however , is about gener - ating more alternatives ( Wallace and Gruber , 1992 ) and increasing the size and dimensionality of the problem space . Creativity also is more about prob - lem formulation than about problem solving . It is certainly the case that strategy involves the gen - eration of new alternatives in all four quadrants of Figure 1 . However , by making both the gener - ation of new goals and new environments endoge - nous to the strategy - making process , construction demands and facilitates the widest possible inno - vative range . This is particularly the case in transformative approaches given the emphasis on the co - creation of goals with others , based on their means . This quadrant calls for exaptive efforts , pulling those means into new applications . According to Mokyr , the basic idea of exaptation is that , ‘a technique that was originally selected for one trait owes its later success and survival to another trait which it happens to possess’ ( Mokyr , 2000 : 57 ) . In the transformative quadrant strategists engage in exap - tation whenever they ask , for any speciﬁc set of preexisting resources , not only ‘What can we do with these resources ? ’ but also ‘What else can we do with them ? ’ ( Dew , Sarasvathy , and Ventakara - man , 2004 ) . Continual imagination on a variety of fronts including new goals , new means , new environments and new institutions is a cornerstone of transforming extant realities into new possibil - ities . As a result , this perspective on control pro - vides insight into how research in creativity and entrepreneurship can connect more effectively to strategy making under uncertainty . In sum , whereas predictive strategies are ways to manipulate current realities to reach preselected goals , and adaptive strategies are ways to map resources onto given environments , transforma - tive strategies generate new goals and new envi - ronments from current realities . Reconceptualiz - ing prediction and control as independent sug - gests new relationships between strategy making and : ( a ) particular types of environments , such as levels of uncertainty , institutional stability and maturity , etc . ; ( b ) speciﬁc aspects of dynamics such as speed , magnitude , and quantity of changes Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . over time , etc . ; ( c ) various types of technological regimes ; ( d ) macro - economic factors ; and ( e ) be - havioral assumptions about the actors involved . We leave these explorations to future endeavors , and end by returning to the example of the radio station KEEP180 and what it might do next . CONCLUSION If KEEP180 considers itself a radio station with a speciﬁc market niche and a stable business model , it might ask itself , ‘What should we do next to serve our market ? ’ The answer will probably be to invest in in - depth market research and tailor its future strategies to predicted trends in its market niche . If it believes more in its passion as a trend - setter in music broadcasting , it will ask , ‘What should we do next to achieve our vision ? ’ The answer could be to try to expand its niche and cre - ate new niches in alternate geographic regions or through alternate media for propagating its music . If it perceives its market is changing or that its niche is being invaded by other competitors , it will ask , ‘What can we do to respond ? ’ and hopefully move quickly to adapt its products and business model . But it can also assess its current situation , both in terms of its resources and its product - market positioning , and ask itself , ‘What else can we do ? ’ In particular , it can engage and leverage its stakeholders’ imagination and their expanding network of relationships to come up with com - pletely unanticipated new markets—sell sporting goods , agricultural equipment , marine products , lawn - mowers , and snowmobiles as J . B . Fuqua did , or start a 24 - hour TV news channel , the world’s largest bison herd and a chain of restaurants , not to mention millions of acres for conservation , as Ted Turner did . 2 Or , perhaps , join hands with another entrepre - neur in the music business , Richard Branson , to send rich tourists off to space , and who knows , bring home the very ﬁrst alien contact from Alpha Centauri . 3 The essence of non - predictive strategy is that it is , well , unpredictable . What we argue here is that emphasizing control and managing any 2 The early ventures of both Fuqua and Turner included radio stations in Georgia . 3 Branson has recently founded Virgin Galactic , which , in part - nership with Paul Allen and Burt Rutan ( Designer of Spaceship One , the ﬁrst privately manned space ﬂight ) is planning to put ordinary people into space by 2007 . failures it might entail—keeping them small and quick—offers a whole new world of fascinating intellectual opportunities for strategic management and entrepreneurship . REFERENCES Andrews KR . 1987 . The Concept of Corporate Strategy ( 3rd edn ) . Irwin : Homewood , IL . Ansoff HI . 1965 . Corporate Strategy : An Analytic Approach to Business Policy for Growth and Expansion . McGraw - Hill : New York . Ansoff HI . 1979 . Strategic Management . Macmillan : London . Ansoff HI . 1991 . Critique of Henry Mintzberg’s The Design School : reconsidering the basic premises of strategic management . Strategic Management Journal 12 ( 6 ) : 449 – 461 . Aversi R , Dosi G , Fagiolo G , Meacci M , Olivetti C . 1999 . Demand dynamics with socially evolving preferences . Industrial and Corporate Change 8 ( 2 ) : 353 – 408 . Axelrod R , Cohen MD . 1999 . Harnessing Complexity : Organizational Implications of a Scientiﬁc Frontier . Free Press / Simon & Schuster : New York . Baum JR , Wally S . 2003 . Strategic decision speed and ﬁrm performance . Strategic Management Journal 24 ( 11 ) : 1107 – 1129 . Bazerman M . 1990 . Judgment in Managerial Decision - Making ( 2nd edn ) . Wiley : New York . Boeker WB . 1989 . Strategic change : the effect of founding and history . Academy of Management Journal 32 ( 3 ) : 489 – 515 . Bourgeois III LJ , Eisenhardt KM . 1988 . Strategic deci - sion processes in high velocity environments . Man - agement Science 34 ( 7 ) : 816 – 835 . Brews PJ , Hunt MR . 1999 . Learning to plan and planning to learn : resolving the planning school / learning school debate . Strategic Management Journal 20 ( 10 ) : 889 – 913 . Buchanan JM , Vanberg VJ . 1991 . The market as a creative process . Economics and Philosophy 7 ( 2 ) : 167 – 186 . Carpenter GS , Nakamoto K . 1989 . Consumer preference formation and pioneering advantage . Journal of Marketing Research 26 ( 3 ) : 285 – 299 . Chandler AD . 1962 . Strategy and Structure : Chapters in the History of the Industrial Enterprise . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Christensen C , Bower J . 1996 . Customer power , strategic investment , and the failure of leading ﬁrms . Strategic Management Journal 17 ( 3 ) : 197 – 218 . Coase RH . 1988 . The Firm , the Market , and the Law . University of Chicago Press : Chicago , IL . Collins JC , Porras JI . 1994 . Built to Last : Successful Habits of Visionary Companies . HarperBusiness : New York . Courtney H , Kirkland J , Viguerie P . 1997 . Strategy under uncertainty . Harvard Business Review 75 ( 6 ) : 67 – 79 . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy Dean Jr JW , Sharfman MP . 1996 . Does decision process matter ? A study of strategic decision - making effectiveness . Academy of Management Journal 39 ( 2 ) : 368 – 396 . Dew N . 2003 . Lipsticks and razorblades : how the auto ID center used pre - commitments to build the Internet of things . Dissertation , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA . Dew N , Sarasvathy S , Ventakaraman S . 2004 . The economic implications of exaptation . Journal of Evolutionary Economics 14 ( 1 ) : 69 – 84 . Eisenhardt KM . 1989 . Making fast strategic decisions in high - velocity environments . Academy of Management Journal 32 ( 3 ) : 543 – 576 . Eisenhardt KM , Martin JA . 2000 . Dynamic capabilities : what are they ? Strategic Management Journal , Special Issue 21 ( 10 – 11 ) : 1105 – 1121 . Eisenhardt KM , Sull DN . 2001 . Strategy as simple rules . Harvard Business Review 79 ( 1 ) : 106 – 116 . Finkelstein S , Hambrick DC . 1990 . Top - management - team tenure and organizational outcomes : the mod - erating role of managerial discretion . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 3 ) : 484 – 503 . Fligstein N . 1996 . Markets as politics : a political - cultural approach to market institutions . American Sociological Review 61 ( 4 ) : 656 – 673 . Fredrickson JW , Iaquinto AL . 1989 . Inertia and creeping rationality in strategic decision processes . Academy of Management Journal 32 ( 3 ) : 516 – 542 . Fredrickson JW , Mitchell TR . 1984 . Strategic deci - sion processes : comprehensiveness and perfor - mance in an industry with an unstable envi - ronment . Academy of Management Journal 27 ( 2 ) : 399 – 423 . Geroski PA . 2002 . The Evolution of New Markets . Oxford University Press : Oxford . Ghemawat P . 1999 . Strategy and the Business Landscape . Addison - Wesley : Reading , MA . Gigerenzer G , Swijtink Z , Porter T , Daston L , Beatty J , Kruger L . 1990 . The Empire of Chance : How Probability Changed Science and Everyday Life . Cambridge University Press : New York . Goll I , Rasheed AMA . 1997 . Rational decision - making and ﬁrm performance : the moderating role of environment . Strategic Management Journal 18 ( 7 ) : 583 – 591 . Grant RM . 2003 . Strategic planning in a turbulent environment . Strategic Management Journal 24 ( 6 ) : 491 – 517 . Hacking I . 1975 . The Emergence of Probability : A Philo - sophical Study of Early Ideas about Probability , Induc - tion and Statistical Inference . Cambridge University Press : London . Hamel G , Prahalad CK . 1989 . Strategic intent . Harvard Business Review 67 ( 3 ) : 63 – 76 . Hamel G , Prahalad CK . 1991 . Corporate imagination and expeditionary marketing . Harvard Business Review 69 ( 4 ) : 81 – 92 . Hayes RH . 1985 . Strategic planning : forward in reverse ? Harvard Business Review 63 ( 6 ) : 111 – 119 . Hough JR , White MA . 2003 . Environmental dynamism and strategic decision making rationality : an exam - ination at the decision level . Strategic Management Journal 24 ( 5 ) : 481 – 489 . Joas H . 1996 . The Creativity of Action ( Gaines J , Keast P , transl . ) . University of Chicago Press : Chicago , IL . Judge WQ , Miller A . 1991 . Antecedents and outcomes of decision speed in different environmental contexts . Academy of Management Journal 34 ( 2 ) : 449 – 483 . Kim WC , Mauborgne R . 1997 . Value innovation : the strategic logic of high growth . Harvard Business Review 75 ( 1 ) : 103 – 112 . Knight FH . 1921 . Risk , Uncertainty and Proﬁt . Houghton Mifﬂin : New York . Kotler P . 1994 . Marketing Management . Prentice - Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Lane D , Maxﬁeld R . 1996 . Strategy under complexity : fostering generative relationships . Long Range Plan - ning 29 ( 2 ) : 215 – 231 . Lazonick W . 1991 . Business Organization and the Myth of the Market Economy . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , U . K . Lewontin RC . 1992 . Biology as Ideology : The Doctrine of DNA : Harper Perennial : New York . Lindblom CE . 1959 . The science of muddling through . Public Administration Review 19 : 79 – 88 . Luehrman TA . 1998 . Investment opportunities as real options : getting started on the numbers . Harvard Business Review 76 ( 4 ) : 51 – 67 . March JG . 1978 . Bounded rationality , ambiguity , and the engineering of choice . Bell Journal of Economics 9 ( 2 ) : 587 – 604 . March JG . 1982 . The technology of foolishness . In Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations , March JG ( ed ) . Universitetsforlaget : Bergen , Norway : 69 – 81 . McGrath RG . 1999 . Falling forward : real options reasoning and entrepreneurial failure . Academy of Management Review 24 ( 1 ) : 13 – 30 . Miller CC , Cardinal LB . 1994 . Strategic planning and ﬁrm performance . Academy of Management Journal 37 ( 6 ) : 1649 – 1665 . Miller D . 1993 . The architecture of simplicity . Academy of Management Review 18 ( 1 ) : 116 – 138 . Miller D , Friesen PH . 1983 . Strategy - making and envi - ronment : the third link . Strategic Management Journal 4 ( 3 ) : 221 – 235 . Mintzberg H . 1978 . Patterns in strategy formation . Management Science 24 ( 9 ) : 937 – 948 . Mintzberg H . 1990 . The design school : reconsidering the basic premises of strategic management . Strategic Management Journal 11 ( 3 ) : 171 – 195 . Mintzberg H . 1994 . The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning : Reconceiving Roles for Planning , Plans , Planners . Free Press : New York . Mintzberg H , Waters JA . 1985 . Of strategies , deliberate and emergent . Strategic Management Journal 6 ( 3 ) : 257 – 272 . Mokyr J . 2000 . Evolutionary phenomena in technologi - cal change . In Technological Innovation as an Evolu - tionary Process , Ziman J ( ed ) . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , U . K . ; 52 – 65 . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . Mosakowski E . 1997 . Strategy making under causal ambiguity : conceptual issues and empirical evidence . Organization Science 8 ( 4 ) : 414 – 442 . North DC . 1990 . Institutions , Institutional Change , and Economic Performance . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , U . K . Nutt PC . 1976 . Models for decision making in organizations and some contextual variables which stipulate optimal use . Academy of Management Review 1 ( 2 ) : 84 – 98 . ogilvie dt . 1998 . Creative action as a dynamic strategy : using imagination to improve strategic solutions in unstable environments . Journal of Business Research ( 41 ) : 49 – 56 . Pearce JA II , Robbins DK , Robinson RB Jr . 1987 . The impact of grand strategy and planning formality on ﬁnancial performance . Strategic Management Journal 8 ( 2 ) : 125 – 134 . Porter ME . 1980 . Competitive Strategy : Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors . Free Press : New York . Priem RL , Rasheed AMA , Kotulic AG . 1995 . Rational - ity in strategic decision processes , environmental dynamism , and ﬁrm performance . Journal of Manage - ment 21 ( 5 ) : 913 – 929 . Quinn JB . 1980 . Strategies for Change : Logical Incre - mentalism . Dow - Jones - Irwin : Homewood , IL . Rindova VP , Fombrun CJ . 1999 . Constructing compet - itive advantage : the role of ﬁrm – constituent interac - tions . Strategic Management Journal 20 ( 8 ) : 691 – 710 . Rogers EM . 1995 . Diffusion of Innovations ( 4th edn ) . Free Press : New York . Rosa JA , Porac JF , Runser - Spanjol J , Saxon MS . 1999 . Sociocognitive dynamics in a product market . Journal of Marketing 63 : 64 – 77 . Sarasvathy SD . 2001a . Causation and effectuation : toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency . Academy of Manage - ment Review 26 ( 2 ) : 243 – 263 . Sarasvathy SD . 2001b . Effectual reasoning in entrepre - neurial decision making : existence and bounds . Best paper proceedings , Academy of Management , 2001 . Washington , DC . Sarasvathy SD , Dew N . 2005 . New market creation through transformation . Journal of Evolutionary Economics 15 ( 1 ) : 533 – 565 . Schendel DE , Hofer CW . 1979 . Strategic Management : A New View of Business Policy and Planning . Little , Brown : Boston , MA . Schoemaker PJH . 1993 . Multiple scenario development : its conceptual and behavioral foundation . Strategic Management Journal 14 ( 3 ) : 193 – 213 . Schoemaker PJH . 2002 . Proﬁting from Uncertainty : Strategies for Succeeding No Matter What the Future Brings . Free Press : New York . Schwenk CR . 1984 . Cognitive simpliﬁcation processes in strategic decision - making . Strategic Management Journal 5 ( 2 ) : 111 – 128 . Simon HA . 1993 . Strategy and organizational evolution . Strategic Management Journal , Winter Special Issue 14 : 131 – 142 . Simon HA . 1996 . Sciences of the Artiﬁcial ( 3rd edn ) . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Staw B . 1981 . The escalation of commitment to a course of action . Academy of Management Review 6 : 577 – 587 . Stevenson HH , Jarillo JC . 1990 . A paradigm of entrepre - neurship : entrepreneurial management . Strategic Man - agement Journal , Summer Special Issue 11 : 17 – 27 . Szulanksi G , Amin K . 2001 . Learning to make strategy : balancing discipline and imagination . Long Range Planning 34 : 537 – 556 . Teece DJ , Pisano G , Shuen A . 1997 . Dynamic capabili - ties and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal 18 ( 7 ) : 509 – 533 . Tellis GJ , Golder PN . 2002 . Will and Vision : How Latecomers Grow to Dominate Markets . McGraw - Hill : New York . von Hippel E . 1986 . Lead users : a source of novel product concepts . Management Science 32 ( 7 ) : 791 – 805 . Wallace DB , Gruber HE . 1992 . Creative People at Work : Twelve Cognitive Case Studies . Oxford University Press : Oxford . Weick KE . 1979 . The Social Psychology of Organizing ( 2nd edn ) . Addison - Wesley : Reading , MA . Williamson OE . 1998 . Transaction cost economics : how it works , where it’s headed . De Economist 146 : 23 – 58 . Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj Non - predictive Strategy A pp e nd i x : Q uo t e s fr o m E x e m p l a r A r ti c l e s E xp l a i n i n g T h e i r P l ace i n t h e F r a m e w o r k Q u a d r a n t A r ti c l e E m ph a s i s on p r e d i c ti on E m ph a s i s on c on t r o l Q uo t a ti on fr o m e x e m p l a r a r ti c l e P l a nn i ng P l a n n i ng a nd po s iti on i ng ( A n s o ff , 1979 ) H i gh T h r oughp r e d i c ti on . . . w h e n [ ﬁ r m s ] a rr i v e on a m a r k e t w it h a n e w p r odu c t / s e r v i ce , s u c h ﬁ r m s ( t ho s e no t f o r eca s ti ng ) ﬁ nd t h e m a r k e t p r e - e m p t e d by m o r e f o r e s i gh t f u l c o m p e tit o r s , w ho h a d p l a nn e d t h e i r s t r a t e g i c m ov e s i n a dv a n ce ( p . 17 ) C o m p e titi v e a n a l y s i s ( P o r t e r , 1980 ) H i gh T h r oughp r e d i c ti on . . . s t r a t e gy i nvo l v e s po s iti on i ng a bu s i n e ss t o m a x i m i ze t h e v a l u e o f t h e ca p a b iliti e s t h a t d i s ti ngu i s h it fr o m it s c o m p e tit o r s . I t f o ll o w s t h a t a ce n t r a l a s p ec t o f s t r a t e gy f o r m u l a ti on i s p e r ce p ti v e c o m p e tit o r a n a l y s i s . . . t o d e v e l op a p r o ﬁ l e o f t h e n a t u r e a nd s u cce ss o f t h e li k e l y s t r a t e gy c h a ng e s eac h c o m p e tit o r m i gh t m a k e ( p . 47 ) R ea l op ti on s ( M c G r a t h , 1 999 ) M od e r a t e L o w . . . r ea l op ti on s r ea s on i ng , . . . e m ph a s i z e s m a n a g i ng un ce r t a i n t y by pu r s u i ng h i gh v a r i a n ce ou t c o m e s bu t i nv e s ti ng on l y i f c ond iti on s a r e f a vo r a b l e ( p . 13 ) S ce n a r i o p l a nn i ng ( S c ho e m a k e r , 1993 ) M od e r a t e L o w . . . s ce n a r i o s do no t a i m t o p r e d i c t t h e f u t u r e , bu t r a t h e r bound it . . . A c on ce r t e d , c o ll ec ti v e s ce n a r i o bu il d i ng e ff o r t w ill g i v e t h e ﬁ r m ’ s m a n a g e r s a h ea d s t a r t , a s w e ll a s a c on ce p t u a l fr a m e w o r k w it h i n w h i c h t o s ca n , e n c od e , upd a t e , a nd und e r s t a nd t h e f u t u r e a s it un f o l d s ( p . 200 ) A d a p ti v e F a s t d ec i s i on m a k i ng ( E i s e nh a r d t , 1989 ) M od e r a t e L o w F a s t d ec i s i on m a k e r s u s e m o r e no t l e s s i n f o r m a ti on . . . d e v e l op m o r e no t f e w e r a lt e r n a ti v e s . ( p . 543 ) . . . t h a t i n f o r m a ti on w a s no t f o r eca s t i n f o r m a ti on . R a t h e r , it w a s r ea l ti m e i n f o r m a ti on , e s p ec i a l l y on a ﬁ r m ’ s c o m p e titi v e e nv i r on m e n t a nd op e r a ti on s ( p . 549 ) D yn a m i c ca p a b iliti e s ( T e ece , P i s a no , a nd S hu e n , 1997 ) M od e r a t e L o w T h e a b ilit y t o ca li b r a t e t h e r e qu i r e m e n t s f o r c h a ng e a nd t o e ff ec t u a t e t h e n ece ss a r y a d j u s t m e n t s w ou l d a pp ea r t o d e p e nd on t h e a b ilit y t o s ca n t h e e nv i r on m e n t , t o e v a l u a t e m a r k e t s a nd c o m p e tit o r s , a nd t o qu i c k l y acc o m p li s h r ec on ﬁ gu r a ti on a nd t r a n s f o r m a ti on a h ea d o f c o m p e titi on ( p . 521 ) I n c r e m e n t a li s m ( Q u i nn , 1 980 ) L o w L o w O n e w a n t s t o a dop t t h e b e s t c u rr e n tl y a v a il a b l e t ec hn i ca l s o l u ti on s a nd t o a d a p t t o t h e c u s t o m e r s m o s t c u rr e n t p e r ce i v e d n ee d s ( p . 23 ) E m e r g e n t s t r a t e g i e s ( M i n t z b e r g , 1994 ) L o w L o w S t r a t e gy f o r m a ti on t h e n b ec o m e s a l ea r n i ng p r o ce ss , w h e r e by s o - ca ll e d i m p l e m e n t a ti on f ee d s b ac k t o f o r m u l a ti on a nd i n t e n ti on s g e t m od i ﬁ e d e n r ou t e , r e s u lti ng i n a n e m e r g e n t s t r a t e gy ( p . 946 ) V i s i on a r y C o r p o r a t e i m a g i n a ti on ( H a m e l a nd P r a h a l a d , 1 991 ) H i gh H i gh . . . b a ttl e s w ill b e w on by c o m p a n i e s t h a t ca n bu il d a nd do m i n a t e f und a m e n t a ll y n e w m a r k e t s . . . t o r ea li ze t h e po t e n t i a l t h a t c o r e c o m p e t e n c i e s c r ea t e , a c o m p a ny m u s t a l s o h a v e t h e i m a g i n a ti on t o e nv i s i on m a r k e t s t h a t do no t y e t e x i s t a nd t h e a b ilit y t o s t a k e t h e m ou t a h ea d o f t h e c o m p e titi on ( p . 81 ) W ill a nd v i s i on ( T e lli s a nd G o l d e r , 2002 ) H i gh H i gh R ea li z i ng t h e v i s i on r e qu i r e s p e r s i s t e n c e , i nnov a ti on , a nd ﬁ n a n c i a l c o mm it m e n t . F o r t h e s e r ea s on s , t h e v i s i on a r y no t o n l y s ee s t h e f u t u r e o f t h e m a r k e t bu t c r ea t e s t h e f u t u r e by b r i ng t h a t v i s i on t o fr u iti on ( p . 83 ) S h a p i ng s t r a t e g i e s ( C ou r t n e y e t a l . , 1997 ) H i gh M od e r a t e S h a p e r s a i m t o d r i v e t h e i r i ndu s t r i e s t o w a r d a n e w s t r u c t u r e o f t h e i r o w n d e v i s i ng . T h e i r s t r a t e g i e s a r e a bou t c r ea ti ng n e w oppo r t un iti e s i n a m a r k e t — e it h e r by s h a k i ng up s t a b l e l e v e l 1 i ndu s t r i e s , o r by t r y i ng t o c on t r o l t h e d i r ec ti on o f t h e m a r k e t i n i ndu s t r i e s w it h h i gh l e v e l s o f un ce r t a i n t y ( p . 73 ) ( c on ti nu e d o ve r l e a f ) Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj R . Wiltbank et al . A pp e nd i x : ( C on ti nu e d ) Q u a d r a n t A r ti c l e E m p h a s i s on p r e d i c ti on E m ph a s i s on c on t r o l Q uo t a ti on fr o m e x e m p l a r a r ti c l e S t r a t e g i c p r o j ec ti on s ( R i ndov a a nd F o m b r un , 1999 ) M od e r a t e M od e r a t e I n a dd iti on t o i n ﬂ u e n c i ng i n t e r p r e t a ti on s , s t r a t e g i c p r o j ec ti on s c on t r i bu t e t o t h e f o r m a ti on o f ﬁ r m - r e l a t e d s c h e m a t a , s u c h a s c o r po r a t e r e pu t a ti on s . S p ec i ﬁ c i n t e r p r e t a ti on s a nd r e pu t a ti on a l s c h e m a t a a ff ec t ho w c on s tit u e n t s e v a l u a t e a ﬁ r m a nd ho w t h e y c hoo s e t o a ll o ca t e t h e r e s ou r ce s t h e y c on t r o l ( p . 697 ) T r a n s f o r m a ti v e V a l u e c u r v e c r ea ti on ( K i m a nd M a ubou r gn e , 1997 ) M od e r a t e H i gh . . . h i gh - g r o w t h c o m p a n i e s p a i d littl e a tt e n ti on t o m a t c h i ng o r b ea ti ng t h e i r r i v a l s . I n s t ea d , t h e y s ough t t o m a k e t h e i r c o m p e tit o r s i rr e l e v a n t t h r ough a s t r a t e g i c l og i c w e ca ll v a l u e i nnov a ti on ( p . 1 0 4 ) B ac k i ng i n t o t h e f u t u r e ( H a y e s , 1985 ) L o w H i gh E a r li e r I qu e s ti on e d t h e no ti on t h a t m ea n s s hou l d f o ll o w w a y s on t h e g r ound t h a t i m po r t a n t r e s ou r ce s . . . ca nno t a l w a y s b e pu r c h a s e d w h e n n ee d e d . N o w I a l s o qu e s ti on w h e t h e r m a n a g e r s s hou l d d ec i d e on e nd s b e f o r e s e l ec ti ng w a y s ( p . 117 ) . T h e l og i c o f e nd s – w a y s – m ea n s t h a t go t t h e h a r e s i n t o t h i s s it u a ti on i s un li k e l y t o g e t t h e m ou t . T h e y w ill n ee d t o e xp l o r e a n e w l og i c , po ss i b l y a r e v e r s e l og i c ( p . 119 ) E ff ec t u a ti on ( S a r a s v a t hy , 2001 a ) L o w H i gh C a u s a ti on p r o ce ss e s a r e e ff ec t - d e p e nd e n t — f o c u s i ng on e xp ec t e d r e t u r n s , c o m p e titi v e a n a l y s e s , p r e - e x i s t e n t kno w l e dg e , a nd p r e d i c ti on ; e ff ec t u a ti on p r o ce ss e s a r e ac t o r - d e p e nd e n t — e m p h a s i z i ng a ff o r d a b l e l o ss , s t r a t e g i c p a r t n e r s h i p s , c on ti ng e n t ac ti on , a nd c on t r o l ( p . 243 ) Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , ( in press ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj