Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework JIAYING LIU , The University of Texas at Austin , USA YAN ZHANG , The University of Texas at Austin , USA Prior research on young adults’ mental health help - seeking mostly focuses on one particular resource such as a mobile app or digital platform , paying less attention to their lived experiences interacting with the ecosystem of resources . We conducted in - depth interviews with 18 participants about their help - seeking and non - help - seeking experiences . Guided by Social Ecological Theory , we proposed a Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework for mental health care , consisting of four levels of resources , including technological - , interpersonal - , community - , and societal level resources . Using this framework , we identified two types of support systems for help - seeking , single - resource support system and multi - resource support system . These resources support young adults’ help - seeking via three mechanisms , care - giving , care - mediating , and care - outreaching , forming various pathways to care . We then pointed out the barriers to resource use at each level and the general challenges in finding a support system . Our findings contributed to a conceptual framework to categorize mental health care . It also serves as a practical framework to identify challenges in the pathways to care and discover design implications . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Social Ecological Theory , Socio - technical system , Qualitative , Pathway to Care , Community Health ACM Reference Format : Jiaying Liu and Yan Zhang . 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework . 1 , 1 ( January 2024 ) , 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / nnnnnnn . nnnnnnn 1 INTRODUCTION The Mental Health crisis in the United States is on the rise , especially after the Covid - 19 pandemic . According to the National Institute of Mental Health ( 2023 ) [ 58 ] , around 57 . 8 million U . S . adults live with a mental illness in 2021 , taking up 22 . 8 % of all U . S . adults . Young adults between 18 - 25 have the highest prevalence of mental health concerns ( 33 . 7 % ) compared with other age groups ( e . g . , 26 - 49 ( 28 . 1 % ) and > 50 ( 15 % ) ) , but have the lowest rate of receiving outpatient mental health treatments . Exploring effective strategies for promoting help - seeking behaviors is essential to enhance the well - being of young adults and other populations [ 32 ] . A significant portion of existing research in HCI and CSCW related to mental health adopts a technological perspective , focusing on designing mobile apps [ 2 , 83 ] , digital platforms [ 84 ] , and wearable sensors [ 31 ] to facilitate self - management [ 63 ] and online group interactions [ 86 ] . However , the real - world adoption rate of these tools remains relatively low . For example , a study surveyed 662 students from two U . S . Midwestern colleges , indicating that only 10 . 1 – 13 . 8 % had experience with such digital technologies [ 79 ] . The engagement with such online resources is also Authors’ addresses : Jiaying Liu , The University of Texas at Austin , USA , jiayingliu @ utexas . edu ; Yan Zhang , The University of Texas at Austin , Austin , USA , yanz @ utexas . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2024 Association for Computing Machinery . XXXX - XXXX / 2024 / 1 - ART $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / nnnnnnn . nnnnnnn , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . a r X i v : 2401 . 08994v1 [ c s . H C ] 17 J a n 2024 2 limited , primarily involving online searches and information seeking [ 65 ] . Some scholars have suggested that the disconnection of these tools from the everyday lives of young adults may be a potential reason for their relatively low ecological validity [ 56 ] . In the actual practice of seeking help , young adults navigate a diverse ecosystem of resources spanning formal treatment to informal social support , and online sources to offline relationships [ 11 ] . A variety of resources play distinct roles in different stages and contexts of mental health help - seeking [ 19 ] . Yet , an in - depth comprehension of the ecosystem of mental health resources is crucial to identifying opportunities and barriers for developing valid behavior change interventions [ 35 ] . This understanding not only ensures mental health technology adoption but also maximizes the financial and social benefits of investing in these technologies . We applied the Social Ecological Theory [ 77 ] as our guiding framework to explore young adults’ lived experiences interacting with the broad and dynamic ecosystem of resources during mental health help - seeking . We specifically focused on their resource use practices since it is the essential and most central part of mental health help - seeking [ 79 ] . The research questions are : • RQ1 : What are young adults’ resource use practices when seeking help for their mental health concerns ? • RQ2 : What are the barriers to young adults’ mental health help - seeking ? A Socio - Technical Ecosystem Framework emerged from this study . We iteratively interviewed 18 young adults with varying mental health concerns about their help - seeking practices . In the data analysis , we focused on resource use in young adults’ mental health help - seeking process under the guidance of the Social Ecological Theory . Our proposed Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework of mental health resources presents the hierarchical resources consisting of four levels ( i . e . , societal , community , interpersonal , and technological ) that cover professional service , informal help , digital mental health tools , etc . Using this framework , we further identified two types of support systems of help - seeking , single - resource support system , and multi - resource support system , which helps evaluate the stability of the support system of an individual . These resources support help - seeking via three mechanisms , care - giving , care - mediating , and care - outreaching . We illustrated how the three mechanisms function in the lived experiences of participants by analyzing their pathways to care in the ecosystem . We then summarized the barriers at each level and general challenges in young adults’ practices to find a support system . Our contributions include : • We developed a Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework for mental health help - seeking re - sources , providing a conceptual understanding of the hierarchy of four levels of resources and three mechanisms of support . • We demonstrated how to leverage this unifying framework to categorize individuals’ support systems , analyze their pathways to care , and identify barriers during help - seeking . • We presented actionable design implications for mental health technologies , and outlined further directions to engage various levels of resources . 2 RELATED WORK We reviewed the literature concerning the models and practices of young adults’ mental health help - seeking , especially around resource use . 2 . 1 Mental health help - seeking process and behavioral models Mental health help - seeking refers to people’s behavior of actively obtaining assistance from various sources to cope with problems and experiences triggered by mental distress . The assistance includes , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework3 suggestions , information , and treatment that serve pragmatic purposes and also social and emotional support and understanding [ 39 ] . One of the earliest models focused on formal help - seeking in the medical system . Huxley [ 33 ] outlined pathways that a patient may need to navigate through to get care . The pathway consists of five layers . Potential patients entered the pathway from general practitioners , via whom they were referred to primary care , then secondary psychiatric care , and ended with admission to the hospital . The following studies identified other resources that act as referrals within [ 26 ] and outside [ 8 ] of the medical system , such as native or religious healers , nurses , psychiatric services , and police institutions . The model does not sufficiently consider external factors such as socio - economic status , cultural influences , or the role of informal support networks , which can significantly impact the care - seeking journey . Rickwood’s Stages of help - seeking framework [ 70 ] describes patients’ subjective experiences of the help - seeking process . The model delineates four key steps : ( 1 ) recognizing symptoms and realizing the need for assistance , ( 2 ) expressing symptoms and signaling the need for support , ( 3 ) identifying available and accessible sources of help , and ( 4 ) the final step contingent on the individual’s willingness to disclose difficulties to the chosen source . The stages are presented as static categories , potentially overlooking the dynamic nature of help - seeking over time . Seeking help for mental health is not a quick and simple decision ; rather , it is a complex and dynamic process dubbed with stigmatization and solitary feelings [ 40 ] . In the process , people constantly negotiate with themselves " if seeking help is necessary " and " when and how to seek help " . Biddle et al . [ 9 ] delineated this struggle through the Cycle of Avoidance ( COA ) model , de - picting the tensions involved in making sense of , accepting , and avoiding mental distress . They identified several key actions that postpone help - seeking , including normalizing symptoms , propos - ing alternative explanations , accommodating increasingly severe distress , pushing the threshold between “normal” and “real” distress , and delaying help - seeking . Other studies also pinpointed similar cognitive strategies such as utilizing self - resilience , denying the effects of professional help , and problematizing help - seeking [ 1 , 50 ] . While these behavioral models adeptly capture the intricacies of mental health help - seeking dynamics , they remain somewhat abstract and descriptive . To provide concrete implications that could enhance the effectiveness of mental health help - seeking , this study aimed to focus on resource utilization in help - seeking practices . 2 . 2 Resources use of young adults’ mental health help - seeking Studies have pointed out that resource use is a central practice that supports various needs in help - seeking [ 79 ] . One of the most used classifications of mental health resources comes from Rickwood and Thomas [ 71 ] ’s model , identifying four types of help : formal , semi - formal , informal , and self - help . Formal help - seeking involves structured professional assistance within established healthcare systems including professionals , medical treatment , and public institutions . Semi - formal avenues engage sources that offer some structure but may not be professionally trained , like teachers or school counselors . Informal help - seeking relies on personal relationships , involving friends and family . Informal sources play a significant role in mental health help - seeking , serving as crucial channels through which individuals seek assistance and support for their mental well - being [ 3 ] . Family and friends , in particular , often serve as the first point of contact for those facing mental health challenges [ 70 ] . Lastly , self - help signifies individual efforts , from reading self - help books to utilizing online resources . However , the four categories are not well defined in this model but are exemplified with instances . Moreover , the growing mental health technologies are not well presented in this framework . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 4 The HCI and CSCW community endeavor to innovate various technologies to support clinic treatment and self - care for mental health [ 68 ] . Our review mainly identified four types of mental health technologies : ( 1 ) Search engines and websites that aggregate relevant information about mental health ; ( 2 ) Self - management tools that facilitate self - learning and self - tracking , allowing individuals to document and contemplate their health behaviors [ 83 ] ; ( 3 ) Online communities that foster peer interactions and enhance social support ; ( 4 ) Communication and decision - supporting technologies in clinical settings that facilitate patient education [ 69 ] , video consultations [ 81 ] , and diagnosis and treatment . Andersen’s model [ 4 – 6 ] further identified three clusters of factors that affect health resource utilization . The first cluster is predisposing factors , such as sociodemographic variables ( e . g . , age and gender ) , and health - related beliefs and knowledge . These factors shape individuals’ attitudes and perceptions toward seeking healthcare . The second cluster is enabling factors , encompassing logistical elements that facilitate or hinder access to care , such as financial resources and social support . The cluster , need - related factors , including symptoms of psychological distress , drives the actual demand for healthcare services . The following studies had slightly different categories of factors , for example , Lu et al . [ 48 ] recognized biological ( e . g . , age , gender ) , clinical ( e . g . , symptom severity ) , behavioral ( e . g . , drug / alcohol use ) , and psychological characteristics ( e . g . , internal asset ) . However , such models approached mental health help - seeking at the population level , describing the factors in a static sense in separation from young adults’ real - world experiences of help - seeking . Our study conducted in - depth interview and delved into the lived experiences of young adults’ mental health help - seeking . 2 . 3 Ecosystem view of resource use practices of young adults’ help - seeking Some scholars used qualitative methods and explored how young adults use mental health tech - nologies in their everyday life [ 13 , 84 ] . However , these studies mostly examined mental health help seekers as “users” of a particular technology ( e . g . , an application or wearable device ) . Only a few studies viewed people facing mental health challenges as “persons” surrounded by the dynamic social , technical , economic , and cultural environments and explored their subjective experiences in their everyday lives . For example , Feuston and Piper [ 24 ] analyzed the narratives about living with mental illness on social media platforms and uncovered how social and technical aspects can marginalize such experiences . Some researchers have taken steps to integrate mental health technologies within young adults’ social ecosystems and support networks , co - designing technologies that cater to their daily routines [ 41 , 43 , 76 ] . However , based on a critical reflection on the previous research , Burgess et al . [ 11 ] pointed out that the prior studies predominantly focused on one specific platform and argued that future research should take the " technology ecosystem " view to research the experiences of individuals living with mental illness , understanding the entirety and intertwined relationships among different technologies . The concept of the " technology ecosystem " illuminated the intricate landscape of digital technol - ogy but overlooked resources beyond digital platforms , such as friends and professionals , along with social and cultural factors [ 59 ] . To comprehensively grasp young adults’ resource utilization practices in mental health help - seeking , we employed the Social Ecological Theory [ 77 ] to capture behaviors interacting with multilevel resources . This is a guiding framework prevalent in fields like community health promotion , contends that a holistic understanding necessitates examining multiple levels of analysis [ 51 ] . McLeroy et al . [ 52 ] identified five levels influencing human health behavior : individual characteristics , social relationships ( e . g . , family and friendships ) , organizational factors , and community characteristics . The societal level was added to the framework to encompass , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework5 physical , social , and political environments [ 51 ] . These five levels exert a profound influence on individuals’ health and well - being [ 73 , 80 ] . Thus , this study aimed to extend the " technology ecosystem " view [ 11 ] to a more holistic sociotechnical perspective . We aspired to obtain a comprehensive understanding of what resources they use in mental health help - seeking and how they navigate the ecosystem with diverse resources . 3 METHODS We adopted in - depth interviews to understand the lived experiences of young adults’ mental health help - seeking practices . 3 . 1 Recruitment and participants We disseminated recruitment messages on the listserv of a southern university in America as previous studies suggested that university students face high and multifaceted pressure from studying and job - seeking [ 32 ] . We also posted recruitment messages on the social media platform Reddit , as it reaches out to a broader young adult population with more varying backgrounds . Interested participants ages 18 - 25 were invited to finish a screening questionnaire where we asked for their demographic information , such as age , gender , education , marginalized identities ( e . g . , first - generation college students , low - income , LGBTQ + , race minority ) , mental illness diagnosis , help - seeking practices ( e . g . , previously used resources and technologies such as family , friends , social media , and apps ) , and an open - ended question about the most recent / impressive mental health help - seeking experience . We also include the PHQ - 4 [ 38 ] , a validated screening tool for depression and anxiety to get a rough estimate of their current mental health status . We selected participants based on their responses to the screening questions to maximize the sample diversity . As shown in Table 1 , 18 participants were interviewed ( 7 females , 9 males , and 2 trans / non - binary ; 6 White , 5 Black , 4 Asian , and 3 Hispanic ) . Half of the participants were still in university at the time of the interviews , 6 had graduated from colleges , and 3 had no college education . Thirteen participants had formal diagnoses of mental illness , mainly depression and anxiety . Their anxiety and depression status indicated by PHQ - 4 ranged from mild ( 3 - 5 ) , moderate ( 6 - 8 ) to severe ( 9 - 12 ) . 3 . 2 Interview Procedure The interviews averaged a duration of 1 hour and 20 minutes and each interviewee was compensated with a $ 30 Amazon gift card . The interviews took place virtually via Zoom from January to September 2023 . Before each interview , we introduced the scope of this study and answered any questions concerning the informed consent form . We also assured the participants that the interviews would be anonymous , confidential , and non - judgmental , encouraging them to be as open as they wanted . We began the interviews by asking participants’ current jobs , residential areas , and other back - ground information . Then , the interviewer asked participants to describe their current mental health status . Example questions included , “Could you tell me about your mental health concerns ? ” “When did you first notice that ? ” and “How did it evolve over time ? ” We utilized visual elicitation techniques for a richer exploration of their ( non - ) help - seeking journeys [ 15 ] . When participants started to dive into specific story - telling , we asked them to draw their experiences of when , where , and how they sought help . Participants were encouraged to take some time to recall their experiences and present their stories in any visualization format . Our participants drew their help - seeking experiences from different perspectives , shown in Fig 1 . The interviewer then asked follow - up questions based on the drawings to elicit details , for example , “What did you do to cope with [ a specific event ] in the drawing ? ” “Did you talk with any people ( e . g . , family , friends ) or use any technology ( e . g . , social media groups , mobile apps , hotlines ) ? ” and , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 6 Table 1 . Participants Information ID Age Sex Education Race Diagnosis PHQ4 Resources Used in Mental Health Help - seeking P01 20 F Some college Black depression 5 professional help , search engine , friend , family P02 24 M High school Black depression 8 social media , online communities , friends , professional help P03 20 F Some college Asian no 4 social media , search engine , friends , family , mobile apps P04 23 M Some college White Anxiety 12 Family , friends , professionals , online communities , services in the local community P05 22 M 8 through 11 years Black anxiety 12 family , friend , professional , social media , online communities , telehealth P06 22 F Some college Asian depression 8 telehealth , professional help P07 21 F Some college Hispanic Depression , Anxiety 4 Friends , professors , people with similar experiences P08 23 F College graduate Asian Depression 7 Family , friends , people with similar experiences , Social media , online mental health forums or communities , Search engines , Teletherapy services P09 24 M College graduate White 5 Family , friends , Reddit P10 24 M College graduate Asian no 4 Hotline , family P11 22 M Some college White Depression 10 Family , professionals , social media , search engine , teletherapy P12 20 F Some college White Depression 12 Family , professionals , people with similar experiences , social media , online communities , teletherapy , hotlines , search engines P13 22 M Some college White Depression 9 Family , friends , search engines , mobile applications P14 21 F College graduate Hispanic Depression 5 Professionals , online communities P15 25 Trans Some college Hispanic Depression , PTSD , anxiety , ADHD 11 Family , professionals , social media , search engine P16 24 Trans College graduate Black Depression 8 friends , professional , stranger P17 21 M High school Black no 6 Family , friends , professionals , social media , search engine , teletherapy , services in the local community P18 22 M College graduate White no 10 Family , friends , social media , mobile apps , services in local communities Notes : PTSD : Post - traumatic stress disorder ; ADHD : Attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder " Why did you decide to do that ? " In this process , the interviewer paid special attention to how they perceived and used different resources to seek help . The interviewer also encouraged participants to continually add contexts to the drawings as they narrated . Participants were instructed to focus the camera on the drawing to share with the interviewer during this process . After the interview , we asked participants to reflect on their experiences and evaluate their satisfaction with each mentioned resource using a five - point scale ( 1 - very unsatisfied ; 5 - very satisfied ) . We then invited them to share the most satisfying and unsatisfying experiences , the challenges they encountered during help - seeking , and the ideal help they wished to get . 3 . 3 Ethical concerns This study was approved by the University Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) . To protect the safety of our participants , in the informed consent form and at the beginning of interviews , we reminded the participants that they should feel free to take breaks during the interview and that they could exit the interview at any time . During the interview process , we kept sensitive to participants’ emotional changes when difficult experiences were disclosed and checked whether they would like to continue when negative emotions were observed [ 22 ] . After the interview , we provided a list of mental health resources to the participants for future use , which was considered helpful and appreciated by many participants . 3 . 4 Data Analysis All the interviews were conducted by the first author and were audio recorded and transcribed . The interviewer wrote debriefs immediately after each interview . We used iterative open coding and axial coding methods [ 18 ] to systematically analyze the transcripts . The analysis was assisted by using NVivo , a qualitative content analysis software . This iterative process continued until the twelfth interview , at which point the codes reached a stable state , forming the foundation of our initial open coding schema . The open coding schema includes codes about resource type ( e . g . , , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework7 Fig . 1 . Examples of Journey Maps Drawn by Participants . P02 and P07 presented their help - seeking timeline , P09 demonstrated his resources network , and P10 quantified his satisfaction with each resource using self - defined mathematic formulas . technologies , family , professionals ) , support type ( e . g . , informational support , distraction ) , and challenges ( e . g . , high - cost , hard to talk ) . The participants reported broad resources from which they sought help . We followed the Social Ecological Theory [ 77 ] and categorized these resources into four levels : technological , interpersonal , community , and societal levels , forming a Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework of resources as shown in Fig . 2 . The technological level emerged as a new category through our data analysis , while the other three levels were previously discussed in existing literature [ 74 , 77 , 78 ] . Fig . 2 . A Four - level Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework of Mental Health Help - seeking Resources Using this framework , we began axial coding to reorganize codes and generate themes and sub - themes related to participants’ practices and challenges in seeking help . The two authors , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 8 convened weekly meetings to review new interview debriefs , reflect on emerging themes in coding , compare codes with existing literature , and document these reflections in notes and memos . Through discussions , we purposely selected the next interviewees to further test and refine the framework . For instance , since societal resources were less frequently mentioned by earlier participants , we deliberately chose participants who utilized societal resources , focusing on how they defined , accessed , and perceived various societal services in comparison to resources at other levels . The initial open code " support type " evolved into the theme " support mechanisms " with three subthemes in axial coding . In addition , we systematically mapped resources used by participants harnessing the Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework , identifying two types of support system , various pathways , and barriers in help - seeking . 3 . 5 Limitations Our participants were young adults who were willing to talk about their mental health concerns and help - seeking processes . They might also have less self - stigma . Thus , we acknowledge that their help - seeking behaviors could not represent all young adults , particularly those who did not seek help or were unwilling to talk about their experiences . Future research can examine the non - help - seeking behaviors of young adults . 4 RQ1 : RESOURCE USE PRACTICES OF YOUNG ADULTS’ MENTAL HEALTH HELP - SEEKING We first described the Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework of resources for young adults’ mental health help - seeking consisting of four levels of resources and two types of support systems . Then , we illustrated the mechanisms of how the ecosystem of resources supports young adults and young adults’ pathways to care in the ecosystem . 4 . 1 A Socio - technical Ecosystem of Resources for Mental Health Help - seeking We mapped the resources participants used in mental health help - seeking . We labeled their satisfac - tion with each resource according to their answers to one interview question : “To what extent are you satisfied with [ a certain resource ] ? ” We included a resource in the participants’ support system only if they rated it as “satisfied” or “very satisfied” . Further , we clustered participants’ resource use patterns according to their support system structure as shown in Fig 3 . Seven participants had a single - level support system where they solely relied on a certain level of resources ( e . g . , technological level ) and eleven participants had a multiple - level support system . The technological level includes search engines , online forums , video - sharing platforms , and mobile apps . These resources were frequently mentioned by participants and most of the use experiences were satisfying , but it should be noted that these resources had relatively small effects on participants . The interpersonal level consists of participants’ interpersonal ties . Except for P01 , all other participants at least tried to seek help from family , friends , relatives , or partners , although six of them got neutral or unsatisfying feedback . The community level contains all resources provided by entities that participants are members of , such as pre - college education , universities , companies , and local neighborhoods . 11 / 18 participants tried community - level resources and 6 participants got various extent satisfying experiences . The societal level contains non - profit institutions and professional care including professional help from the medical system , the National Lifeline , and governmental institutions . Only 8 participants utilized these facilitates . 4 . 1 . 1 Single - resource support system . Seven participants relied on one level of resources because of previous failed attempts and low economic status . No participants solely relied on the societal level help . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework9 Fig . 3 . Participants’ Support Systems during Mental Health Help - seeking . We incorporated a resource in the participants’ support system only if they rated it as " satisfied " or " very satisfied " . As shown in Fig 3 , they more or less tried other resources but had unsatisfied or natural ex - periences . For example , P09 contacted the government institutions for unemployment subsidies and tried to find community activities in the new neighborhood , ending up with disappointment . His conversations with family were not very helpful and he ended up relying on technological resources such as browsing similar experiences on forums and playing video games . The other six participants attempted to expand their resources as well but failed to get the expected outcomes , resulting in the single - resource support system . Low economic status may also contribute to the single - resource use pattern . Five out of the seven participants came from low - income families so they could not afford professional help at the societal level . Some participants ( e . g . , P15 and P18 ) did not belong to a community ( e . g . , university , company ) and thus had no access to any community resources . 4 . 1 . 2 Multi - resource support system . Eleven participants had more than one level of resources to seek help from , which is more robust and stable . Our participants exhibited various patterns in resource combinations such as technological + interpersonal , interpersonal + community , and technological + interpersonal + societal . Only one participant ( P04 ) utilized all four levels of resources , and three participants ( P07 , P14 , P12 ) utilized three levels of resources in their help - seeking . The other seven participants mainly relied on two levels of resources . Having multiple resources had advantages such as offering backups when needed , getting dif - ferent support from different sources , and resisting external changes . For example , the strong interpersonal support encouraged P11 and P16 to seek professional help . P04 and P12 strategi - cally sought emotional support from online communities when their therapists and friends were unavailable . 4 . 2 Support Mechanisms of Socio - technical Ecosystem of Resources for Mental Health Help - seeking The socio - technical ecosystem supports young adults through three mechanisms , including care - giving , care - mediating , and care - outreaching . Most of the resources can help young adults through multiple support mechanisms . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 10 4 . 2 . 1 Care - giving Mechanism . Resources can directly offer young adults informational and emo - tional support , distraction , and flexibility of partial disclosure . Informational and emotional support is the most common and direct support mechanism . Participants directly sought answers related to symptoms , potential causes , and guidance on how to cope with mental distress . For example , the participant’s family and friends recommended mental health resources , including therapists and hotlines ( P13 , P18 ) , covered treatment costs ( P02 , P04 ) , and provided encouragement for ongoing treatment ( P12 , P14 ) . Distraction refers to resources that enable the participants to temporarily get away from everyday distress and mental health concerns . Technological resources , such as games and online videos , and interpersonal resources were frequently used by participants for this purpose . For example , P13 commented , “ People , laughing , banter , escapism . . . I think distraction is actually a very important way , at least to amuse ourselves and just to get rid of the stress from life . ” Partial disclosure is a mechanism that allows participants to freely choose how much to disclose to a certain resource . It permits a flexible way to seek help in their " comfort zone " . P14 expressed confidence that “ Obviously they [ my friends ] are gonna support me , ” although “ actually I don’t want to tell my mental distress . ” 4 . 2 . 2 Care - mediating Mechanism . Sometimes , a resource acts as a bridge and leads participants to another helpful resource . Direct mediating refers to a resource directly leading to another one . Technologies such as search engines could generate a direct impact on participants by showing them relevant information . Some participants followed the lead of online information to access professionals . For example , three participants ( P01 , P08 , and P13 ) mentioned using the Psychological Today website to look for therapists that fit their preferences on factors such as gender , education , location , and cost . Indirect mediating suggests that situations when mediating effects take place over time by gradually changing participants’ knowledge and understanding of resources . For instance , P07 de - cided to explore medication as a potential solution after repeatedly encountering recommendations from Google search results . Some participants developed interpersonal relationships within online groups . For instance , P02 formed connections with two online friends through Facebook groups and frequently shared recent experiences with them . 4 . 2 . 3 Care - outreaching Mechanism . Care - outreaching means that a resource actively reaches out to potential users to provide help , such as services that directly intervene when certain situations emerge . Awareness raising typically functions through advertising available resources and encouraging help - seeking . For example , P08 was attracted to an event about depression awareness by frequent email reminders from the university . She recalled , I think it was like halfway through Covid , I received consecutive emails day by day , saying to focus on your mental health . That was when I felt all the stressors were hitting on me all at once and I wondered why didn’t I have a break from school ? Let me , just , attend one of these Zoom Meetings , and see what they are about . Let me just check these resources out . It was during that time that I realized that I probably need to get some help because these are the symptoms . Active intervention refers to resources reach out to potential help - seekers and initiate help - seeking . For example , P16 , who locked herself at home for two months following her mother’s passing without realizing she might have depression , had friends who constantly checked on her and eventually took her to the hospital . She expressed gratitude for their intervention , stating , “ This was too much for me . They came in when I lost it during that time . They took me to the hospital , checked with the hospital , and showed that I really needed this [ professional help ] . ” , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework11 4 . 3 Pathways to Care in the Socio - technical Ecosystem To understand how participants interact with resources in the socio - technical ecosystem for mental health help - seeking , we depicted various pathways to care via the four levels of resources . 4 . 3 . 1 Technological level pathways . Fig 4 shows the pathways to care through technologies . Fig . 4 . Technology level pathways Participants used search engines and websites ( T1 - a , Fig . 4 ) to search for information about symptoms and treatment . On online communities ( T2 , Fig . 4 ) , participants read other people’s stories , commented on posts , and shared their own experiences . P05 and P18 considered " online friends " even better than their " real friends . " P12 explained , “ I will say this online group is safer because the online friends have seen their issues but , the majority of my physical friends don’t experience what I’m experiencing . ” Turning to online video platforms ( T3 ) was another frequent pathway and acts as a care - giving resource . Some participants watched videos for its distraction mechanism . For example , P03 inten - tionally immersed herself in TikTok videos to relax and P13 watched YouTube videos to escape from mental health worries . Other participants also used video platforms similar to search engines for informational support . 4 . 3 . 2 Interpersonal level pathway . Interpersonal relationships contain the most natural sources of help - blood and social relationships , typically family and friends . Figure 5 shows the pathways at this level . Fig . 5 . Interpersonal level pathways , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 12 Family / Friends - Self - Professional ( I1 ) is a reflection of care - outreaching mechanism at the in - terpersonal level . This pathway was mentioned by five participants . Family and friends play a crucial role in identifying early - stage symptoms due to their daily interactions with the individuals , especially when they were during their childhood . P07 and P16 were taken to psychiatrists by parents at elementary schools . Six participants openly shared their mental distress with interpersonal relationships ( I2 - a ) . I2 represented how family and friends directly mediated their help - seeking process ( I2 - b ) . P02’s family and P05’s friends provided financial support to cover their therapy expenses ; P10 and P13’s family accompanied them to contact professional help . As illustrated by Self - > Family / Friends ( I3 ) , interpersonal relationships could be a source of care - giving . Some participants found solace in the companionship of family and friends and used it as a substitute for professional help . For instance , P18 mentioned that “ she came with immediate effects . She encouraged me , talked to me , and we played games . ” 4 . 3 . 3 Community level pathway . Community mental health resources were primarily accessible within educational institutions , including schools and universities . In contrast , entities like residen - tial areas and commercial companies may lack investment in mental health services . For instance , P13 , a sports official , highlighted limited workplace - based mental health assistance , indicating disparities in stress management training . Fig 6 shows the pathways at this level . Fig . 6 . Community level pathways and Societal level pathways Some universities played essential roles in proactive care - outreaching to young adults ( C1 - a ) . They function by the awareness - raising mechanism , specifically , disseminating information and resources through diverse channels , including emails , social media platforms , and awareness events . P10 and P13 noted the pervasive presence of university hotline signs in hallways , offices , and dining halls . In C2 - b , community services had advantages in fulfilling the care - giving mechanism . Communi - ties aggregate multifaceted resources and a set of comprehensive policies around mental health accommodations , which are important incentives for participants to seek help from community services . Within university settings , community mental health support was effectively integrated with other accommodations ( C1 - b ) . P06 requested a reduced class load , P07 received extended tuition payment options , and P08 benefited from continued free therapy sessions post - graduation . They heavily relied on universities’ free resources ( e . g . , psychiatry visits and free therapy sessions ) . 4 . 3 . 4 Societal level pathway . No participants directly accessed professional help , or successfully used governmental institutions or non - governmental organizations to access professional help . The barriers in such pathways are discussed in Section 5 . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework13 Self - National Lifeline - Professionals ( S1 ) was mentioned by several participants as a channel to turn to in an emergency ( S1 - a , Fig 6 ) . P07 called this lifeline after she cut herself but her therapist was unavailable . She commented , “ I just wanted to talk to someone that would listen to me . . . I think I got what I needed out of it , like just talking to someone because it was able to calm me down quite a bit . ” In some occasions , calling the Lifeline can result in mandatory hospitalization ( S1 - b ) . P14 was afraid to use the Lifeline because her friend was placed in a hospital after calling . 4 . 3 . 5 Cross - level pathway . We identified two pathways that involve close collaborations across multiple levels of resources . Fig . 7 . Cross - level pathways Community - Parents - Self - Professionals ( M1 ) demonstrated teachers pivotal role in recognizing and engaging parents in addressing mental health symptoms during participants’ youth . For three participants , teachers identified signs of mental health issues and informed their parents , leading to professional intervention . In addition to notifying parents , teachers monitored participants’ recovery and facilitated timely information exchange with parents . Self - Community Hotlines - Community Coordinators - Professionals ( M2 ) illustrated the effec - tiveness of the community in responding to emergencies . P07 called the university crisis line to request accommodations . Upon learning about her self - harm tendencies , the staff dispatched a police officer and a doctor to her residence . They escorted her to a local hospital , where she was diagnosed with major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder and got medications , as she recounted , “ I stayed in the hospital for two days . . they diagnosed me with a major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder , and then that’s when they gave me a medication to start to treat both of those . ” 5 RQ2 : CHALLENGES OF YOUNG ADULTS’ MENTAL HEALTH HELP - SEEKING The Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework enabled a thorough analysis of pathways , facilitating the identification of specific barriers encountered by our participants at each resource level , and distinctive challenges young adults confront in establishing a robust support system . 5 . 1 Barriers to mental health help - seeking at each level We first summarized the barriers to seeking mental health help from resources at each level . 5 . 1 . 1 Technological level : Limited care - giving and care - mediating efficacy . Although widely used by our participants , technological - level resources seemed only to play an auxiliary role . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 14 Auxiliary role in care - giving . Participants commonly turned to technology as their initial source for seeking help , utilizing it as an extension of self - coping through activities like accessing online information and finding relatable experiences . Despite offering a sense of anonymity ( e . g . , learning knowledge without telling others ) , technology’s role remained primarily supplementary for most participants . Notably , four individuals who attempted to rely solely on technology for support ultimately shifted to other help - seeking levels . Additionally , some participants , such as P06 and P10 , explicitly expressed aversion to using technology for mental health challenges , because “ The search engines , these , online things are too general . They are helpful when you search for a road trip , but it’s not the mental health thing ” ( P10 ) . Three other participants rarely engaged with platforms like social media or online forums in general . Inadequate mediating effect to societal and community resources . Many participants tried to use technology as a mediator to find other levels of resources for help . However , many resources web pages provided proved to be inaccessible . For instance , P15 , unable to afford professional help , attempted to look for free therapies from the government and communities , only to find the process frustrating and challenging . She expressed , “ every time I’ve looked it up [ . . . ] it seemed inaccessible . Not every website is very user - friendly . You have to go digging and digging to find what you need to find . And when I’m frustrated and feeling like I need help , that’s the last thing I want to do . ” She speculated that these web pages might intentionally be designed to be inaccessible , potentially driven by profit motives , stating , “ Honestly , I’ve studied how Google search comes up . Results from Google are not mainly from your local clinics . It’s people that pay more money for their website to show up first . . . But they just look like businesses . ” This inaccessibility , coupled with underlying socioeconomic barriers , extinguished her hope of finding community - and societal - level resources . Emotional frustration in solitary technology use . While technology promises convenience and privacy , the experience of seeking support becomes a solitary journey , often leaving emerging problems unaddressed . A common issue is the overwhelming feeling of sifting through a vast amount of information . For instance , P15 , anticipating emotional support from Facebook Groups , expressed frustration : “ having to dig for it can be a little bit demoralizing . I just want instant gratification , but when your brain’s all cluttered , the last thing you really want is to have to fight for help . ” The struggle to find information not only adds emotional burden but also , as described by P08 , intensifies anxiety : “ I get more worried when I look for it because there’s just so much information out there . . . this information on Google might just be like for everybody . I get more anxious because I can’t find information that is tailored to my needs . ” The lack of personalization can be particularly detrimental to marginalized individuals , making it harder for them to find relatable experiences . For instance , P05 , encountering predominantly unrelated experiences about anxiety , felt marginalized and further neglected : “ I’m sorry , mine [ situation ] was going up for two or three weeks . Most of them are like coincidences . So I feel like I was tragic and traumatizing because I was being attacked and my friend was beaten to death . ” 5 . 1 . 2 Interpersonal level : Difficulties in self - disclosure . Navigating interpersonal communications in help - seeking poses a complex challenge for many participants . Lack of channels and skills of self - disclosure . Six participants expressed a desire to seek help from family and friends but faced challenges in effectively communicating their vulnerabilities . Initiating discussions about mental health , particularly in close relationships , proved to be a common obstacle . P13 commented , “ I mean just it’s hard to talk about it . . . I’m not good at talking to people about the hard stuff . ” Four participants perceived that disclosing their situations could burden their loved ones , hindering their willingness to open up . For example , P14 shared , “ I feel like when you start feeling [ suicidal ] , it’s scary because I didn’t want to tell my parents that I was feeling suicidal . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework15 Because once you tell someone that , it’s like it becomes really serious . It gets like , they’re like what’s wrong ? Like it’s too much . ” Lack of a mediator in complicated interpersonal dynamics . The absence of a mediator in intricate interpersonal dynamics discourages participants from seeking support . Many participants grapple with challenges in initiating open communication , particularly concerning emotional disclosure within intimate relationships , notably with parents . In the context of established family dynamics , P08 shared , “ I think it’s perhaps personality , or how I was raised . I’m not big on sharing my vulnerability in front of people . It’s like under a fake name . ” P07 , seeking appropriate grieving after her grandfather’s death , encountered reluctance or incapacity from her parents to discuss the topic with her . Specifically , P08 hoped she had a mediator , such as a relative familiar with the family dynamics , who could facilitate communication between her and her parents regarding the impact of their conflicts on her . 5 . 1 . 3 Community level : Risks of unprofessional and temporary help . Community - level resources are not part of the professional medical system and predominantly offer relatively short - time support . Limited professionalism and scope . Community - level mental health resources exhibit con - siderable variability in the support they offer . Among the resources mentioned by our participants , university services stand out , showcasing heterogeneous levels of professionalism in terms of the range of services , insurance plans , and policies . For example , P15’s university provides free and unlimited therapy sessions , while P07’s university imposes a three - session limit . Disparities also manifest in outreach efforts , with P05’s university demonstrating less proactive engagement compared to the proactive mental health awareness initiatives undertaken by P10’s university . Temporary services as transitional hubs . University mental health services often function as transitional hubs between students’ prior educational environments and their future professional endeavors . While some universities may have in - house professionals , their collaboration with the broader medical system is typically limited . This limitation can pose challenges to ensuring sustainable care for individuals transitioning from university mental health services to external institutions . P01 highlighted this difficulty , stating , It can be hard when you go from university to an external institution because you have to find one that matches your insurance . The first time , I called at least 10 or so people before I got the practitioner . They were like , ’We are not taking patients or we’re not taking certain types of patients . ’ The whole process can be lengthy and challenging . 5 . 1 . 4 Societal level : Limited accessibility . Only six participants successfully sought help from societal resources . Participants ( e . g . , P07 , P08 , P15 ) considered that the constrained opening hours of professional help contributed to low accessibility . Further , beyond service hours , seeking societal resources demands extensive preparation , requiring a significant investment of time and effort . Considerations such as in - network insurance , finding suitable time slots , and selecting therapists contribute to the challenges and strengthen the perception of inaccessibility . Participants expressed frustration with the difficulty of finding a compatible therapist . For instance , P01 discontinued therapy due to perceived misalignment , stating , “ She kept talking about sadness and stuff . And I tried to tell her , I’m not sad , I’m tired . I stopped seeing her because I felt like she wasn’t really listening to me but just reacting . ” 5 . 2 Challenges in finding a support system Beyond the barriers associated with seeking help from resources at a specific level , young adults encounter border challenges that complicate the help - seeking process . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 16 5 . 2 . 1 Socio - economic and cultural backgrounds . Individuals’ reliance on family and friends for support is significantly influenced by cultural background and family dynamics . Notably , par - ticipants facing low socio - economic status , such as homelessness or low income ( e . g . , P05 and P18 ) , lack community - level resources in their socio - technical ecosystems . Additionally , three His - panic participants ( P07 , P14 , P15 ) and two Asian participants ( P08 , P10 ) intentionally excluded interpersonal - level resources due to cultural stigmas associated with mental health conditions . 5 . 2 . 2 Resilience in help - seeking . In the face of mental health challenges , several participants exhibited remarkable resilience . For example , P03 framed mental health as a personal responsibility for long - term well - being , stating , “ I don’t seek out professionals purely because I know that I’m going to deal with this for the rest of my life . If I’m dependent on a professional to help me , then how am I going to thrive ? ” ( P03 ) P13 also relied on such resilience and developed a routine for managing suicidal thoughts . 5 . 2 . 3 Prior negative experiences . Whether or not to seek help for mental health concerns is not a static , simple , and one - time decision , it is dynamic and closely related to the perceived effectiveness of prior help - seeking experiences . For many participants , a lack of confidence in external assistance led them to cope independently or rely on previously satisfactory resources . Notably , five out of seven participants with a single - resource support system recounted unsatisfactory experiences and feelings of " rejection " when attempting to access other levels of resources . P08 expressed this sentiment , stating , “ I always wish things were different , but I can’t change anything . I feel like I was not supported . I was not helped . I was helpless , and no one was there to come for me . ” These negative encounters contribute to hesitancy and reluctance to explore alternative avenues for mental health support . 5 . 2 . 4 External changes in young adulthood . Young adulthood is a period of significant life transi - tions , such as entering universities , completing education , and relocating for work , introducing external factors that reshape young adults’ relationships with various levels of resources in the socio - technical ecosystem . These changes can exacerbate mental health concerns , leading to height - ened stress and anxiety . For instance , entering a new environment often means leaving behind existing support networks , as expressed by P17’s experience in a different high school , “ It was when the lack of communication came in . . . the doctor recommended some hotline numbers just in case my therapist was not around . but some people talk rudely they might not give you the maximum attention or treatment . ” Four participants , who were previously dependent on university resources , had to seek societal - level outpatient institutions after graduating . 6 DISCUSSION By investigating the lived experiences of young adults , we proposed a framework informed by the Social Ecological Theory . The socio - technical ecosystem framework of resources for mental health help - seeking consists of four levels of resources , two types of support systems , three mechanisms , and various pathways to care . We further pinpoint the barriers to seeking help at each level and the special challenges faced by young adults . We discussed the theoretical contributions and design implications for future action research to incorporate technologies into a collective effort to empower vulnerable populations and foster technologies for social good . 6 . 1 The Socio - Technical Ecosystem of Young Adults’ Help - Seeking Extending Burgess et al . [ 11 ] ’s efforts to investigate the ecosystem of mental health resources , we proposed the socio - technical ecosystem as a framework to systematically investigate young adults’ mental health help - seeking practices . Under the guidance of Social Ecological Theory [ 77 ] , we , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework17 specified the scope of societal - , community - , and interpersonal level resources for mental health help - seeking , and added the technological level to highlight the current practices and importance of digital technologies in mental health help - seeking [ 35 ] . This socio - technical ecosystem framework offers a comprehensive taxonomy to characterize resource use practices and provides future studies with a practical tool to analyze help - seeking experiences of young adults and other populations . In contrast to earlier models of mental health help - seeking , our four - level framework not only offers a hierarchy of resources but also indicates a preferred order for accessing these resources . While Rickwood and Thomas [ 71 ] categorized resources based on the formality and profession - alism of services , our study reveals that young adults , in their everyday experiences , prioritize the convenience and proximity of resources . In alignment with previous research [ 41 , 50 ] , we observed that young adults often turn to non - professional help initially , as these resources are more readily accessible . For instance , a majority of our participants initially sought information through technology , followed by sharing their concerns with family , friends , or university contacts before considering professional help at hospitals . Our framework conceptualizes and visualizes this practice by depicting their socio - technical ecosystem of resources . By intersecting four resource levels and three mechanisms , we have outlined potentially essential research topics in mental health help - seeking and discussed the implications of this framework below . 6 . 1 . 1 Technological level . We added the technological level in the framework which is less represented in Social Ecological Theory [ 77 ] and previous behavioral models of mental health help - seeking such as [ 9 , 71 ] . Design for technologies’ care - mediating and care - outreaching mechanisms . Designing self - management tools for mental well - being has been a focal point in prior research [ 64 ] . However , our participants expressed a desire for technology to connect them to resources at other levels beyond care - giving . We identified limitations in current technologies’ ability to direct participants to useful resources in Section 5 . We advocate for future research to explore the design of technologies that better support care - mediating and care - outreaching mechanisms , leveraging technology’s advantages in availability [ 62 ] and privacy [ 63 ] , and ultimately promoting the willingness to seek professional help . Such practices also align with the increasing attention on the ecological validity of health technologies , emphasizing the need for long - term deployment , tracking , and measures of behavioral changes [ 23 , 52 , 73 ] . For more specific design implications for mental health technologies , refer to Section 6 . 2 . Consider risks of technology as a solution to mental health . Digital health and mental health technologies have emerged as key research areas in HCI and CSCW , aiming to provide innovative technological solutions to health problems . However , findings from our study and prior studies [ 27 ] indicate that these tools are less utilized in the lived experiences of young adults . In our study , participants primarily turned to technologies for basic knowledge and emotional preparation before seeking further help from resources at other levels . Notably , three participants solely relied on technologies due to a lack of other available resources ( as illustrated in Figure 3 ) . The major goal of designing self - management tools has been to encourage self - coping with mental health , but there are risks associated with potentially hindering further help - seeking . Future studies should reflect on the design goals of such apps and consider how to balance self - help and help - seeking dynamics [ 61 ] . 6 . 1 . 2 Interpersonal level . The interpersonal level highlights the significance of peer and family support which aligns with the informal help category in Rickwood and Thomas [ 71 ] ’s model . Facilitate collaborative mental health help - seeking . Our findings elucidate how interpersonal - level resources provide support through mechanisms including care - giving , care - mediating , and , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 18 care - outreaching , delineating various pathways that elaborate on the sustained motivation fostered by supportive accountability [ 55 ] to seek help and , more importantly , professional treatment . Col - laborative mental health help - seeking , as we discovered , necessitates mental health literacy in interpersonal relationships . For example , P14 emphasized the growing capacity of her mother to assist her . To enhance caregivers’ mental health literacy [ 16 ] , there is an imperative need to develop educational programs focusing on self - disclosure and mental health - related conversations within intimate relationships . Support long - term interpersonal relationship building . Our findings emphasize that the quality of interpersonal relationships is a crucial prerequisite for fostering self - disclosure [ 14 ] , impacting not only the context of help - seeking but also the overall mental well - being of young adults [ 54 ] . Participants noted that family dynamics and cultural norms constrained daily con - versations and hindered the communication of negative emotions and open discussions about mental health experiences . Those who benefit from interpersonal help often engage in frequent and open communication , as exemplified by P06 and their families . Challenges in establishing and maintaining friendships and connections [ 49 ] are common for young adults , contributing to a sense of isolation and helplessness when grappling with mental health challenges [ ? ] . While current research predominantly focuses on help - seeking , future investigations should explore ways to enhance interpersonal relationships in the long term . 6 . 1 . 3 Community level . Community’s role in mental health help - seeking is less investigated by previous work in CSCW . Our framework acknowledges and underscores the pivotal role of community - level resources , particularly within educational environments like colleges and univer - sities . Emphasize University’s support for young adults’ help - seeking . Universities play a pivotal role in aggregating resources and facilitating young adults’ help - seeking . This study reveals that educational institutions , as major settings where young adults spend significant time , serve as crucial sources of support for mental health concerns [ 42 ] . A third of the participants in our study predominantly utilized university mental health resources , relying on them for various needs . The university emerges as a key player in raising mental health awareness , disseminating resource information , and offering accessible treatment options . Given that many mental health concerns originate from the university environment , positioning universities as major hubs and providing comprehensive financial and academic accommodations can support young adults more effectively . We advance future research to harness a community - centered approach to explore and implement designs for mental health support within educational and communal settings [ 45 ] . Aggregate and mediate resources in the Socio - technical Ecosystem . Previous research recognizes the community’s role as a resource hub that aggregates and bridges resources from technological , interpersonal , and societal levels . For example , [ 19 ] experimented with a community - level stepped care model to facilitate college students’ help - seeking . Gaps were identified in the transition from the community to societal - level resources , with only one participant ( P07 ) effectively introduced to hospital professionals , while others faced obstacles in this transformation . Future researchers are encouraged to explore community - level interventions , including the integration of technologies into care practices [ 10 ] . We also discovered the advantages of communities in care - outreaching , investigating how to actively reach out to young adults facing difficulties , particularly those lacking interpersonal support . Incorporating lightweight services such as short - message has proven to be a promising direction [ 72 ] . A significant challenge at the community level is the lack of adequate mental health resources . Strengthening the care - giving mechanism necessitates exploration of the impacts of policy interventions and infrastructure improvements . Initiatives , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework19 such as implementing workplace mental health guidelines and enhancing university mental health facilities should be considered by researchers to fortify the support system within communities . 6 . 1 . 4 Societal level . Past investigations into societal - level resources have predominantly focused on professional help within the medical system , aligning with the formal help category in Rickwood and Thomas [ 71 ] ’s conceptual model . Mitigate avoidance to seek professional help . Our framework positions the societal level on the outermost layer , aligning with participants’ natural order of help - seeking preferences [ 29 ] . The study revealed that 12 participants initially sought assistance from proximate resources in their daily lives , such as family and online information , before considering the societal level . This finding aligns with the pathway to psychiatric care model [ 33 ] , shedding light on the avoidance process using the lived experiences of young adults . Barriers such as the limited availability of professionals , high costs , and challenges in finding suitable therapists contribute to this reluctance . Improve emergency services . The National Crisis Line plays noticeable roles in care - giving and care - mediating . During emergencies when other levels of resources are inaccessible or unhelpful , the Crisis Line acts as the last line of defense [ 62 ] . The National Crisis Line serves as a crucial buffer for young adults facing emergencies , functioning as a significant channel for the care - mediating mechanism . It directs callers to professional help , and in certain cases , enforces hospitalization . However , this approach has dual effects ; for instance , one participant expressed fear of calling this number , highlighting concerns about the agency’s response . Raise public awareness . Efforts in care - outreaching at the societal level are escalating , especially with increased involvement in mental health awareness campaigns . Participants noted encountering relevant news and videos on social media platforms which raised their awareness [ 46 ] . Notably , besides the medical system , none of our participants accessed other resources at this level , such as non - profit and government programs , indicating a scarcity of such support . The fact that two participants failed to locate these societal services underscores the urgency of drawing attention from public institutions to address this gap . 6 . 2 Design implications for mental health technologies Successful adoption and use of technologies require a holistic understanding of mental health technologies in people’s social , cultural , and material environments [ 28 ] . We discussed how to augment the role of technologies via the three mechanisms in future design practices . 6 . 2 . 1 Design for technology - mediated care - giving . Emotional support is one of the most important goals of using online communities [ 53 ] . Foster connection through shared experiences . Peer support plays a crucial role in enhancing user engagement with mobile mental health apps [ 36 , 84 ] . The informational value derived from others’ narratives and shared experiences is more easily comprehended and accepted [ 47 , 66 ] . For instance , P15 expressed that reading about other people’s journeys helped her navigate her own path to combat depression . However , the current platforms do not fully cater to users’ personalization needs . Some participants have a stringent definition of " similar experiences , " seeking not only similarity but also a connection in life situations , such as socioeconomic status . For example , P05 , who suffered from depression after a traumatizing gunshot experience , couldn’t resonate with posts from wealthier individuals who had more resources and support , leading to a sense of exclusion . Research by Liang et al . [ 45 ] suggests that having a help provider with similar experiences of mental illness significantly facilitates mental health help - seeking . To address these nuances , designers can explore segmenting subgroups on online communities based on stressors , creating experience - based subgroups , and involving peers in the early design stages [ 25 ] . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 20 6 . 2 . 2 Design for technology - mediated care - mediating . The accessibility advantages of technologies hold promise in connecting and mediating various levels of resources . Technology - based services should establish connections back to family support , emphasizing intimate relationships that can play a semi - familial role [ 60 ] . Nudging technology - mediated self - disclosure at the interpersonal level is crucial , offering a pathway to connect users with support systems . Develop technology - mediated self - disclosure . The fear of disclosing mental distress hin - ders help - seeking and the establishment of support networks [ 17 ] . Three participants refrained from seeking help from interpersonal resources due to concerns about exposing vulnerability to them or considering mental distress " hard to talk about . " Recognizing the potential of Large Language Models ( LLMs ) to accurately detect human emotions [ 82 ] , a promising avenue for future exploration involves designing mediators like LLM - empowered Chatbots [ 34 ] to facilitate and encourage self - disclosure in intimate relationships . In professional settings , chatbots can potentially improve professional - patient communication and support self - disclosure to professionals such as therapists and psychiatrists . Koulouri et al . [ 37 ] found young adults are likely to accept chatbots , and professionals confirmed that chatbots can be an assistant to raise awareness and mindfulness , elicit self - disclosure , and eliminate negative emotions [ 44 ] . Innovate technologies for enhancing intimate relationships . The indirect mediating mech - anism underscores the importance of intimacy and trust building through prolonged engagement [ 75 ] . Research by Dalsgaard et al . [ 20 ] identifies self - disclosure , trust , and commitment as key elements in constructing strong - tie intimacy . While family and friends serve as a natural choice for individuals with strong interpersonal relationships , participants lacking intimacy and trust face challenges and have to win for understanding . Technologies play a crucial role in supporting the building of a robust support system both before and during the help - seeking process , cultivating strong social support to overcome resistance and encourage seeking professional help [ 28 ] . In particular , gaming has been identified as an effective means of fostering connection and providing an avenue for emotional self - disclosure [ 57 ] . Four male participants in our study leaned on gaming to stay connected with friends and exchange thoughts . Technologies can facilitate the creation of a safe and private communication channel [ 85 ] . 6 . 2 . 3 Design for technology - mediated care - outreaching . Currently , technologies play less important roles in care - outreaching . Reach out to young adults with low - technologies . Only two participants in our study attempted to use Mhealth apps . This aligns with prior findings indicating a limited uptake rate and efficacy of real - world deployment despite the increasing prevalence of self - management apps [ 12 ] . Gitlow et al . [ 27 ] distinguishes Mhealth technologies into high - tech and low - tech categories , with low technology encompassing simple , non - complex tools such as text messages and notifications . Users perceive low technologies as more acceptable , efficient , flexible , and easily integrated into daily life , facilitating help - seeking for mental distress [ 28 ] . Four participants expressed that emails , posters , and social media messages from the university effectively reminded and encouraged them to utilize university services . Additionally , three participants became aware of the National Crisis Line through top results on platforms like YouTube and Google . This highlights the significance of implementing similar nudges on other widely used platforms to enhance awareness and accessibility to essential resources . Notably , low technology , especially in urgent contexts like suicidal attempts , plays a crucial role by providing consistently available and timely responses [ 60 ] . It offers more accessible and equitable services , particularly benefiting low - resource populations [ 67 ] . Enhance proactive and long - term intervention tools in professional treatment . In our study , eight participants’ help - seeking was initiated by active intervention from others such as interpersonal and community resources . Technologies capable of monitoring and identifying , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework21 early signs of depression and anxiety can proactively engage young adults living independently , issuing warnings and prompting help - seeking when needed . Future studies should prioritize user involvement in the early stages of design [ 2 ] to ensure effective adoption [ 21 , 87 ] . Integrating cutting - edge technologies , such as asynchronous remote support [ 7 ] and multimodal communication [ 30 ] , holds the potential to enhance user engagement in professional treatment contexts . 7 CONCLUSION This study conducted 18 in - depth interviews exploring the lived experiences of mental health help - seeking . We proposed the Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework of mental health resources , grounded in data analysis and the Social Ecological Theory . This framework delineates a four - level resource ecosystem , details three mechanisms of resource support , classifies two types of support system , and outlines diverse pathways to care within this socio - technical ecosystem . Through the framework , we identified barriers at each level and overarching challenges in establishing a support system . In the discussion , we underscore the novel contributions of this framework compared to previous models , outline a structured research agenda , and offer implications for the future development of mental health technologies REFERENCES [ 1 ] Rebecca Abavi , Allison Branston , Robin Mason , and Janice Du Mont . 2020 . An Exploration of Sexual Assault Survivors’ Discourse Online on Help - Seeking . Violence and Victims 35 , 1 ( Feb . 2020 ) , 126 – 140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1891 / 0886 - 6708 . VV - D - 18 - 00148 [ 2 ] Felwah Alqahtani , Andrea Winn , and Rita Orji . 2021 . Co - Designing a Mobile App to Improve Mental Health and Well - Being : Focus Group Study . JMIR Formative Research 5 , 2 ( Feb . 2021 ) , e18172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 18172 Company : JMIR Formative Research Distributor : JMIR Formative Research Institution : JMIR Formative Research Label : JMIR Formative Research Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 3 ] Paul R . Amato and Ruth Bradshaw . 1985 . An exploratory study of people’s reasons for delaying or avoiding helpseeking . Australian Psychologist 20 , 1 ( 1985 ) , 21 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00050068508257557 _ eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1080 / 00050068508257557 . [ 4 ] R . Andersen . 1968 . A behavioral model of families’ use of health services . A behavioral model of families’ use of health services . 25 ( 1968 ) . https : / / www . cabdirect . org / cabdirect / abstract / 19702701913 Publisher : Chicago : Center for Health Administration Studies , 5720 S . Woodlawn Avenue , University of Chicago , Illinois 60637 , U . S . A . . [ 5 ] Ronald M . Andersen . 1995 . Revisiting the Behavioral Model and Access to Medical Care : Does it Matter ? Journal of Health and Social Behavior 36 , 1 ( March 1995 ) , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2137284 [ 6 ] Birgit Babitsch , Daniela Gohl , and Thomas von Lengerke . 2012 . Re - revisiting Andersen’s Behavioral Model of Health Services Use : a systematic review of studies from 1998 – 2011 . GMS Psycho - Social - Medicine 9 ( Oct . 2012 ) , Doc11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3205 / psm000089 [ 7 ] Arpita Bhattacharya , Ria Nagar , Jessica Jenness , Sean A . Munson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2021 . Designing Asynchronous Remote Support for Behavioral Activation in Teenagers With Depression : Formative Study . JMIR Formative Research 5 , 7 ( July 2021 ) , e20969 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 20969 Company : JMIR Formative Research Distributor : JMIR Formative Research Institution : JMIR Formative Research Label : JMIR Formative Research Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 8 ] Kamaldeep Bhui and Dinesh Bhugra . 2002 . Mental illness in Black and Asian ethnic minorities : pathways to care and outcomes . Advances in Psychiatric Treatment 8 , 1 ( Jan . 2002 ) , 26 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1192 / apt . 8 . 1 . 26 Publisher : Cambridge University Press . [ 9 ] Lucy Biddle , Jenny Donovan , Debbie Sharp , and David Gunnell . 2007 . Explaining non - help - seeking amongst young adults with mental distress : a dynamic interpretive model of illness behaviour : Illness behaviour among young adults with mental distress . Sociology of Health & Illness 29 , 7 ( Aug . 2007 ) , 983 – 1002 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9566 . 2007 . 01030 . x [ 10 ] Kelly Brown , Maree Toombs , Bushra Nasir , Steve Kisely , Geetha Ranmuthugala , Sharon L . Brennan - Olsen , Geoffrey C . Nicholson , Neeraj S . Gill , Noel S . Hayman , Srinivas Kondalsamy - Chennakesavan , and Leanne Hides . 2020 . How can mobile applications support suicide prevention gatekeepers in Australian Indigenous communities ? Social Science & Medicine ( 1982 ) 258 ( Aug . 2020 ) , 113015 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2020 . 113015 [ 11 ] Eleanor R . Burgess , Renwen Zhang , Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala , Jessica L . Feuston , Munmun De Choudhury , Mary Czerwinski , Adrian Aguilera , Stephen M . Schueller , and Madhu C . Reddy . 2021 . Technology ecosystems : rethinking , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 22 resources for mental health . Interactions 28 , 1 ( Jan . 2021 ) , 66 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3434564 [ 12 ] Lauren Burke , Mary John , and Paul Hanna . 2022 . A qualitative exploration of how young men in the UK perceive and experience informal help - seeking for mental health difficulties . Children and Youth Services Review 137 ( June 2022 ) , 106440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . childyouth . 2022 . 106440 [ 13 ] Nuij C , van Ballegooijen W , de Beurs D , de Winter RFP , Gilissen R , O’Connor RC , Smit JH , Kerkhof A , and Riper H . 2022 . The feasibility of using smartphone apps as treatment components for depressed suicidal outpatients . Frontiers in psychiatry 13 ( 2022 ) , 971046 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyt . 2022 . 971046 [ 14 ] Alison L . Calear , Sonia M . McCallum , Helen Christensen , Andrew J . Mackinnon , Alexandra Nicolopoulos , Jacqueline L . Brewer , Aliza Werner - Seidler , Alyssa R . Morse , Dominique Kazan , Louise M . Farrer , Laura Kampel , and Philip J . Batter - ham . 2022 . The Sources of Strength Australia project : A cluster randomised controlled trial of a peer - connectedness school - based program to promote help - seeking in adolescents . Journal of Affective Disorders 299 ( Feb . 2022 ) , 435 – 443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jad . 2021 . 12 . 043 [ 15 ] Annie T . Chen . 2018 . Timeline Drawing and the Online Scrapbook : Two Visual Elicitation Techniques for a Richer Exploration of Illness Journeys . International Journal of Qualitative Methods 17 , 1 ( Dec . 2018 ) , 1609406917753207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1609406917753207 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 16 ] Nicole Chovil and Constadina Panagiotopoulos . 2010 . Engaging families in research to determine health literacy needs related to the use of second - generation antipsychotics in children and adolescents . Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry = Journal De l’Academie Canadienne De Psychiatrie De L’enfant Et De L’adolescent 19 , 3 ( Aug . 2010 ) , 201 – 208 . [ 17 ] Kyungmi Chung , Hee Young Cho , Young Ran Kim , Kyungun Jhung , Hwa Seon Koo , and Jin Young Park . 2020 . Medical Help - Seeking Strategies for Perinatal Women With Obstetric and Mental Health Problems and Changes in Medical Decision Making Based on Online Health Information : Path Analysis . Journal of Medical Internet Research 22 , 3 ( March 2020 ) , e14095 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 14095 [ 18 ] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 2014 . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage publications . [ 19 ] Peter A . Cornish , Gillian Berry , Sherry Benton , Patricia Barros - Gomes , Dawn Johnson , Rebecca Ginsburg , Beth Whelan , Emily Fawcett , and Vera Romano . 2017 . Meeting the mental health needs of today’s college student : Reinventing services through Stepped Care 2 . 0 . Psychological Services 14 , 4 ( Nov . 2017 ) , 428 – 442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / ser0000158 [ 20 ] Thomas Dalsgaard , Mikael B . Skov , Malthe Stougaard , and Bo Thomassen . 2006 . Mediated intimacy in families : understanding the relation between children and parents . In Proceedings of the 2006 conference on Interaction design and children ( IDC ’06 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 145 – 152 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1139073 . 1139110 [ 21 ] Morena Danieli , Tommaso Ciulli , Seyed Mahed Mousavi , and Giuseppe Riccardi . 2021 . A Conversational Artificial Intelligence Agent for a Mental Health Care App : Evaluation Study of Its Participatory Design . JMIR Formative Research 5 , 12 ( Dec . 2021 ) , e30053 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 30053 Company : JMIR Formative Research Distributor : JMIR Formative Research Institution : JMIR Formative Research Label : JMIR Formative Research Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 22 ] Claire Burke Draucker , Donna S . Martsolf , and Candice Poole . 2009 . Developing Distress Protocols for Research on Sensitive Topics . Archives of Psychiatric Nursing 23 , 5 ( Oct . 2009 ) , 343 – 350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apnu . 2008 . 10 . 008 [ 23 ] Ahmed Fadhil , Yunlong Wang , and Harald Reiterer . 2019 . Assistive Conversational Agent for Health Coaching : A ValidationStudy . MethodsofInformationinMedicine 58 , 01 ( June2019 ) , 009 – 023 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1055 / s - 0039 - 1688757 [ 24 ] Jessica L . Feuston and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Everyday Experiences : Small Stories and Mental Illness on Instagram . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300495 [ 25 ] Mittmann G , Schmalwieser SS , Diendorfer T , Schrank B , and Boeckle M . 2022 . Peer Facilitators as Core Co - developers of an Online Peer Encouragement Network ( OPEN2chat ) for Austrian Adolescents . Frontiers in digital health 4 ( 2022 ) , 833006 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fdgth . 2022 . 833006 [ 26 ] R . Gater , De B . Almeida E . Sousa , G . Barrientos , J . Caraveo , C . R . Chandrashekar , M . Dhadphale , D . Goldberg , A . H . Al Kathiri , M . Mubbashar , K . Silhan , D . Thong , F . Torres - Gonzales , and N . Sartorius . 1991 . The pathways to psy - chiatric care : a cross - cultural study . Psychological Medicine 21 , 3 ( Aug . 1991 ) , 761 – 774 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S003329170002239X [ 27 ] Lynn Gitlow , Blaire Janney , Caitlyn Lemery , Julianne McDonald , Bethany McGinley , and Kristin Rabideau . 2019 . How college students diagnosed with anxiety disorders and / or depression use everyday technology . Disability and Rehabilitation : AssistiveTechnology 14 , 8 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 809 – 816 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17483107 . 2018 . 1499143 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17483107 . 2018 . 1499143 . [ 28 ] Christine E . Gould , Julia Loup , Eric Kuhn , Sherry A . Beaudreau , Flora Ma , Mary K . Goldstein , Julie Loebach Wetherell , Aimee Marie L . Zapata , Philip Choe , and Ruth O’Hara . 2020 . Technology use and preferences for mental health , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework23 self - management interventions among older veterans . International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 35 , 3 ( March 2020 ) , 321 – 330 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / gps . 5252 [ 29 ] L . Kris Gowen . 2013 . Online Mental Health Information Seeking in Young Adults with Mental Health Challenges . Journal of Technology in Human Services 31 , 2 ( April 2013 ) , 97 – 111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15228835 . 2013 . 765533 [ 30 ] Eccles H , Nannarone M , Lashewicz B , Attridge M , Marchand A , Aiken A , Ho K , and Wang J . 2021 . Barriers to the Use of Web - Based Mental Health Programs for Preventing Depression : Qualitative Study . JMIR formative research 5 , 7 ( July 2021 ) , e16949 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 16949 [ 31 ] Blake Anthony Hickey , Taryn Chalmers , Phillip Newton , Chin - Teng Lin , David Sibbritt , Craig S . McLachlan , Roderick Clifton - Bligh , John Morley , and Sara Lal . 2021 . Smart Devices and Wearable Technologies to Detect and Monitor Mental Health Conditions and Stress : A Systematic Review . Sensors 21 , 10 ( Jan . 2021 ) , 3461 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / s21103461 Number : 10 Publisher : Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute . [ 32 ] Justin Hunt and Daniel Eisenberg . 2010 . Mental Health Problems and Help - Seeking Behavior Among College Students . Journal of Adolescent Health 46 , 1 ( Jan . 2010 ) , 3 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jadohealth . 2009 . 08 . 008 [ 33 ] Peter Huxley . 1996 . Mental illness in the community : The Goldberg - Huxley model of the pathway to psychiatric care . Nordic Journal of Psychiatry 50 , sup37 ( Jan . 1996 ) , 47 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 08039489609099730 Publisher : Taylor & Francis _ eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 08039489609099730 . [ 34 ] Eunkyung Jo , Daniel A . Epstein , Hyunhoon Jung , and Young - Ho Kim . 2023 . Understanding the Benefits and Challenges of Deploying Conversational AI Leveraging Large Language Models for Public Health Intervention . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581503 [ 35 ] Jemimah A . Johnson , Prachi Sanghvi , and Seema Mehrotra . 2022 . Technology - Based Interventions to Improve Help - Seeking for Mental Health Concerns : A Systematic Review . Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine 44 , 4 ( July 2022 ) , 332 – 340 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 02537176211034578 Publisher : Sage Publications Inc . . [ 36 ] GenevaK . Jonathan , CynthiaA . Dopke , TaniaMichaels , ClairR . Martin , ChloeRyan , AlyssaMcBride , PamelaBabington , and Evan H . Goulding . 2021 . A Smartphone - Based Self - Management Intervention for Individuals with Bipolar Disorder ( LiveWell ) : Qualitative Study on User Experiences of the Behavior Change Process . JMIR mental health 8 , 11 ( Nov . 2021 ) , e32306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 32306 [ 37 ] Theodora Koulouri , Robert D . Macredie , and David Olakitan . 2022 . Chatbots to Support Young Adults’ Mental Health : An Exploratory Study of Acceptability . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems 12 , 2 ( June 2022 ) , 1 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3485874 [ 38 ] Kurt Kroenke , Robert L . Spitzer , Janet B . W . Williams , and Bernd Löwe . 2009 . An Ultra - Brief Screening Scale for Anxiety and Depression : The PHQ – 4 . Psychosomatics 50 , 6 ( Nov . 2009 ) , 613 – 621 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0033 - 3182 ( 09 ) 70864 - 3 [ 39 ] E Megan Lachmar , Andrea K Wittenborn , Katherine W Bogen , and Heather L McCauley . 2017 . # MyDepressionLook - sLike : Examining Public Discourse About Depression on Twitter . JMIR MENTAL HEALTH ( 2017 ) , 11 . [ 40 ] Daniel G . Lannin , David L . Vogel , Rachel E . Brenner , W . Todd Abraham , and Patrick J . Heath . 2016 . Does self - stigma reduce the probability of seeking mental health information ? Journal of Counseling Psychology 63 , 3 ( April 2016 ) , 351 – 358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / cou0000108 [ 41 ] Emily G . Lattie , Rachel Kornfield , Kathryn E . Ringland , Renwen Zhang , Nathan Winquist , and Madhu Reddy . 2020 . Designing Mental Health Technologies that Support the Social Ecosystem of College Students . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376362 [ 42 ] ThomasA . LawsandBrentonA . Fiedler . 2013 . StudentsSeekingHelpforMentalHealthProblems : DoAustralianUniver - sityWebsitesProvideClearPathways ? AustralianUniversities’Review 55 , 2 ( Jan . 2013 ) , 35 – 43 . https : / / ezproxy . lib . utexas . edu / login ? url = https : / / search . ebscohost . com / login . aspx ? direct = true & db = eric & AN = EJ1016854 & site = ehost - live Pub - lisher : Australian Universities’ Review . [ 43 ] Trinh Le , Hashini Senaratne , Michael McQuaid , and Garreth W . Tigwell . 2021 . Exploring a Multifaceted Framework to Support the Design of Mobile Apps for Self - Regulating Anxiety . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451645 [ 44 ] Yi - Chieh Lee , Naomi Yamashita , Yun Huang , and Wai Fu . 2020 . " I Hear You , I Feel You " : Encouraging Deep Self - disclosure through a Chatbot . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Honolulu HI USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376175 [ 45 ] Calvin A . Liang , Sean A . Munson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2021 . Embracing Four Tensions in Human - Computer Interaction Research with Marginalized People . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 28 , 2 ( April 2021 ) , 1 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3443686 [ 46 ] Jiaying Liu and Yan Zhang . 2023 . Modeling Health Video Consumption Behaviors on Social Media : Activities , Challenges , and Characteristics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2311 . 09040 arXiv : 2311 . 09040 [ cs ] . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 24 [ 47 ] Jiaying Liu , Yan Zhang , and Yeolib Kim . 2023 . Consumer Health Information Quality , Credibility , and Trust : An Analysis of Definitions , Measures , and Conceptual Dimensions . In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval . ACM , Austin TX USA , 197 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3576840 . 3578331 [ 48 ] Wenhua Lu , Abigail Todhunter - Reid , Mary Louise Mitsdarffer , Miguel Muñoz - Laboy , Anderson Sungmin Yoon , and Lei Xu . 2021 . Barriers and Facilitators for Mental Health Service Use Among Racial / Ethnic Minority Adolescents : A Systematic Review of Literature . Frontiers in Public Health 9 ( March 2021 ) , 641605 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpubh . 2021 . 641605 [ 49 ] Louise Lynch , Maggie Long , and Anne Moorhead . 2018 . Young Men , Help - Seeking , and Mental Health Services : Exploring Barriers and Solutions . American Journal of Men’s Health 12 , 1 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 138 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1557988315619469 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 50 ] Angel Martínez - Hernáez , Susan M . DiGiacomo , Natàlia Carceller - Maicas , Martín Correa - Urquiza , and María Antonia Martorell - Poveda . 2014 . Non - professional - help - seeking among young people with depression : a qualitative study . BMC Psychiatry 14 , 1 ( April 2014 ) , 124 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 244X - 14 - 124 [ 51 ] Donna Jo McCloskey , Tabia Henry Akintobi , Ann Bonham , Jennifer Cook , and Tamera Coyne - Beasley . 2011 . Principles of Community Engagement ( Second Edition ) . COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT ( 2011 ) . [ 52 ] Kenneth R . McLeroy , Daniel Bibeau , Allan Steckler , and Karen Glanz . 1988 . An Ecological Perspective on Health Pro - motion Programs . Health Education Quarterly 15 , 4 ( Dec . 1988 ) , 351 – 377 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 109019818801500401 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 53 ] Allison V . Metts , Meredith Sears , Jose Hamilton Vargas , Thiago Marafon , Diego Dotta Couto , and Andrea N . Niles . 2022 . Perceptions of Helpful and Unhelpful Responses to Disclosures of Suicidality in a Sample of Mobile App Users . Archives of Suicide Research : Official Journal of the International Academy for Suicide Research ( Dec . 2022 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13811118 . 2022 . 2152984 [ 54 ] Jonah Meyerhoff , Rachel Kornfield , David C . Mohr , and Madhu Reddy . 2022 . Meeting Young Adults’ Social Support Needs across the Health Behavior Change Journey : Implications for Digital Mental Health Tools . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW2 ( Nov . 2022 ) , 312 : 1 – 312 : 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555203 [ 55 ] David Mohr , Pim Cuijpers , and Kenneth Lehman . 2011 . Supportive Accountability : A Model for Providing Human Support to Enhance Adherence to eHealth Interventions . Journal of Medical Internet Research 13 , 1 ( March 2011 ) , e1602 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / jmir . 1602 Company : Journal of Medical Internet Research Distributor : Journal of Medical Internet Research Institution : Journal of Medical Internet Research Label : Journal of Medical Internet Research Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 56 ] David C . Mohr , Ken R . Weingardt , Madhu Reddy , and Stephen M . Schueller . 2017 . Three Problems With Current Digital Mental Health Research . . . and Three Things We Can Do About Them . Psychiatric Services 68 , 5 ( May 2017 ) , 427 – 429 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1176 / appi . ps . 201600541 Publisher : American Psychiatric Publishing . [ 57 ] Geoff Musick , Guo Freeman , and Nathan J . McNeese . 2021 . Gaming as Family Time : Digital Game Co - play in Modern Parent - Child Relationships . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CHI PLAY ( Oct . 2021 ) , 251 : 1 – 251 : 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3474678 [ 58 ] National Institute of Mental Health . 2023 . Mental Illness . https : / / www . nimh . nih . gov / health / statistics / mental - illness [ 59 ] Tom Ongwere , Andrew B . L . Berry , Clara Caldeira , Rosa I . Arriaga , Amid Ayobi , Eleanor R . Burgess , Kay Connelly , Patricia Franklin , Andrew D Miller , Aehong Min , and Nervo Verdezoto . 2022 . Challenges , Tensions , and Opportunities in Designing Ecosystems to Support the Management of Complex Health Needs . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3503714 [ 60 ] Jasper E . Palmier - Claus , Anne Rogers , John Ainsworth , Matt Machin , Christine Barrowclough , Louise Laverty , Emma Barkus , Shitij Kapur , Til Wykes , and Shôn W . Lewis . 2013 . Integrating mobile - phone based assessment for psychosis into people’s everyday lives and clinical care : a qualitative study . BMC psychiatry 13 ( Jan . 2013 ) , 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 244X - 13 - 34 [ 61 ] Sachin R Pendse , Daniel Nkemelu , Nicola J Bidwell , Sushrut Jadhav , Soumitra Pathare , Munmun De Choudhury , and Neha Kumar . 2022 . From Treatment to Healing : Envisioning a Decolonial Digital Mental Health . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501982 [ 62 ] Sachin R Pendse , Amit Sharma , Aditya Vashistha , Munmun De Choudhury , and Neha Kumar . 2021 . “Can I Not Be Suicidal on a Sunday ? ” : Understanding Technology - Mediated Pathways to Mental Health Support . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445410 [ 63 ] Justin Petelka , Lucy Van Kleunen , Liam Albright , Elizabeth Murnane , Stephen Voida , and Jaime Snyder . 2020 . Being ( In ) Visible : Privacy , Transparency , and Disclosure in the Self - Management of Bipolar Disorder . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . Understanding and Facilitating Mental Health Help - Seeking of Young Adults : A Socio - technical Ecosystem Framework25 York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376573 [ 64 ] MelissaD . Pinto , RonaldL . Hickman , JohnClochesy , andMarcBuchner . 2013 . Avatar - baseddepressionself - management technology : promising approach to improve depressive symptoms among young adults . . . Self - Management Resource Training for Mental Health ( eSMART - MH ) . Applied Nursing Research 26 , 1 ( Feb . 2013 ) , 45 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apnr . 2012 . 08 . 003 Place : Philadelphia , Pennsylvania Publisher : Elsevier B . V . . [ 65 ] Claudette Pretorius , Darragh McCashin , Naoise Kavanagh , and David Coyle . 2020 . Searching for Mental Health : A Mixed - Methods Study of Young People’s Online Help - seeking . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376328 [ 66 ] Li Q , Xue W , Gong W , Quan X , Li Q , Xiao L , Xu DR , Caine ED , and Poleshuck EL . 2021 . Experiences and perceptions of perinatal depression among new immigrant Chinese parents : a qualitative study . BMC health services research 21 , 1 ( July 2021 ) , 739 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12913 - 021 - 06752 - 2 [ 67 ] Ewert R . 2021 . " A country boy can survive : " Rural culture and male - targeted suicide prevention messaging . Social science & medicine ( 1982 ) 289 ( Nov . 2021 ) , 114439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2021 . 114439 [ 68 ] Allura L . Ralston , Arthur R . Andrews III , and Debra A . Hope . 2019 . Fulfilling the promise of mental health technology to reduce public health disparities : Review and research agenda . Clinical Psychology : Science and Practice 26 , 1 ( 2019 ) , e12277 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cpsp . 12277 _ eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1111 / cpsp . 12277 . [ 69 ] Christian Rauschenberg , Benjamin Boecking , Isabell Paetzold , Koen Schruers , Anita Schick , Thérèse van Amelsvoort , and Ulrich Reininghaus . 2021 . A Compassion - Focused Ecological Momentary Intervention for Enhancing Resilience in Help - Seeking Youth : Uncontrolled Pilot Study . JMIR mental health 8 , 8 ( Aug . 2021 ) , e25650 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 25650 [ 70 ] Debra Rickwood , Frank P . Deane , Coralie J . Wilson , and Joseph Ciarrochi . 2005 . Young people’s help - seeking for mental health problems . Australian e - Journal for the Advancement of Mental Health 4 , 3 ( Jan . 2005 ) , 218 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5172 / jamh . 4 . 3 . 218 [ 71 ] Debra Rickwood and Thomas . 2012 . Conceptual measurement framework for help - seeking for mental health problems . Psychology Research and Behavior Management ( Dec . 2012 ) , 173 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2147 / PRBM . S38707 [ 72 ] Frank Röhricht , Raguraman Padmanabhan , Paul Binfield , Deepa Mavji , and Sally Barlow . 2021 . Simple Mobile technology health management tool for people with severe mental illness : a randomised controlled feasibility trial . BMC Psychiatry 21 , 1 ( July 2021 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12888 - 021 - 03359 - z Publisher : BioMed Central . [ 73 ] James F . Sallis , Neville Owen , and Edwin B . Fisher . 2008 . Ecological models of health behavior . In Health behavior and health education : Theory , research , and practice , 4th ed . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , CA , US , 465 – 485 . [ 74 ] Martin EP Seligman . 1975 . On depression , development , and death . San Fracisco : Freeman ( 1975 ) . [ 75 ] Ji Youn Shin , Minjin Rheu , Jina Huh - Yoo , and Wei Peng . 2021 . Designing Technologies to Support Parent - Child Relationships : A Review of Current Findings and Suggestions for Future Directions . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW2 ( Oct . 2021 ) , 441 : 1 – 441 : 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479585 [ 76 ] Evropi Stefanidi , Johannes Schöning , Yvonne Rogers , and Jasmin Niess . 2023 . Children with ADHD and their Care Ecosystem : Designing Beyond Symptoms . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581216 [ 77 ] Daniel Stokols . 1996 . Translating Social Ecological Theory into Guidelines for Community Health Promotion . American Journal of Health Promotion 10 , 4 ( March 1996 ) , 282 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4278 / 0890 - 1171 - 10 . 4 . 282 Publisher : SAGE Publications Inc . [ 78 ] Beti Thompson and Susan Kinne . 1990 . Social change theory : Applications to community health . Health promotion at the community level 2 ( 1990 ) , 29 – 46 . [ 79 ] Tammy Toscos , Maria Carpenter , Michelle Drouin , Amelia Roebuck , Connie Kerrigan , and Michael Mirro . 2018 . College Students’ Experiences with , and Willingness to Use , Different Types of Telemental Health Resources : Do Gender , Depression / Anxiety , or Stress Levels Matter ? Telemedicine Journal and E - Health : The Official Journal of the American Telemedicine Association 24 , 12 ( Dec . 2018 ) , 998 – 1005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / tmj . 2017 . 0243 [ 80 ] Ciaran B . Trace , Yan Zhang , Siqi Yi , and Marian Yvette Williams - Brown . 2023 . Information practices around genetic testing for ovarian cancer patients . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 74 , 11 ( Nov . 2023 ) , 1265 – 1281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 24823 [ 81 ] Justus Tönnies , Lydia Oeljeklaus , Michel Wensing , Mechthild Hartmann , Hans - Christoph Friederich , and Markus W . Haun . 2021 . Health policy experts’ perspectives on implementing mental health specialist video consultations in routine primary care - a qualitative interview study . BMC health services research 21 , 1 ( July 2021 ) , 713 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12913 - 021 - 06676 - x [ 82 ] Yunlong Wang , Shuyuan Shen , and Brian Y Lim . 2023 . RePrompt : Automatic Prompt Editing to Refine AI - Generative Art Towards Precise Expressions . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 . 26 ACM , Hamburg Germany , 1 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581402 [ 83 ] David Wiljer , Jenny Shi , Brian Lo , Marcos Sanches , Elisa Hollenberg , Andrew Johnson , Alexxa Abi - Jaoudé , Gloria Chaim , Kristin Cleverley , Joanna Henderson , Wanrudee Isaranuwatchai , Andrea Levinson , Janine Robb , Howard W . Wong , and Aristotle Voineskos . 2020 . Effects of a Mobile and Web App ( Thought Spot ) on Mental Health Help - Seeking Among College and University Students : Randomized Controlled Trial . Journal of Medical Internet Research 22 , 10 ( Oct . 2020 ) , e20790 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 20790 [ 84 ] Howard W . Wong , Brian Lo , Jenny Shi , Elisa Hollenberg , Alexxa Abi - Jaoude , Andrew Johnson , Gloria Chaim , Kristin Cleverley , JoannaHenderson , AndreaLevinson , JanineRobb , AristotleVoineskos , andDavidWiljer . 2021 . Postsecondary Student Engagement With a Mental Health App and Online Platform ( Thought Spot ) : Qualitative Study Assessing Factors Related to User Experience . JMIR Mental Health 8 , 4 ( April 2021 ) , e23447 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2196 / 23447 Company : JMIR Mental Health Distributor : JMIR Mental Health Institution : JMIR Mental Health Label : JMIR Mental Health Publisher : JMIR Publications Inc . , Toronto , Canada . [ 85 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres and Shaowen Bardzell . 2011 . Technology - mediated parent - child intimacy : designing for ecuadorian families separated by migration . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2215 – 2220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979877 [ 86 ] Renwen Zhang , Jordan Eschler , and Madhu Reddy . 2018 . Online Support Groups for Depression in China : Culturally Shaped Interactions and Motivations . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 27 , 3 ( Dec . 2018 ) , 327 – 354 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 018 - 9322 - 4 [ 87 ] Yan Zhang , Jiaying Liu , and Shijie Song . 2023 . The design and evaluation of a nudge - based interface to facilitate consumers’ evaluation of online health information credibility . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 74 , 7 ( July 2023 ) , 828 – 845 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 24759 , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , Article . Publication date : January 2024 .