Molecular Modeling of Lipid Membrane Curvature Induction by a Peptide : More than Simply Shape Alexander J . Sodt * and Richard W . Pastor National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Rockville , Maryland ABSTRACT Molecular dynamics simulations of an amphipathic helix embedded in a lipid bilayer indicate that it will induce sub - stantial positive curvature ( e . g . , a tube of diameter 20 nm at 16 % surface coverage ) . The induction is twice that of a continuum model prediction that only considers the shape of the inclusion . The discrepancy is explained in terms of the additional presence of speciﬁc interactions described only by the molecular model . The conclusion that molecular shape alone is insufﬁcient to quan - titatively model curvature is supported by contrasting molecular and continuum models of lipids with large and small headgroups ( choline and ethanolamine , respectively ) , and of the removal of a lipid tail ( modeling a lyso - lipid ) . For the molecular model , curvature propensity is analyzed by computing the derivative of the free energy with respect to bending . The continuum model predicts that the inclusion will soften the bilayer near the headgroup region , an effect that may weaken curvature induction . The all - atom predictions are consistent with experimental observations of the degree of tubulation by amphipathic helices and vari - ation of the free energy of binding to liposomes . INTRODUCTION The quantitative extent to which biomolecules , interacting directly or indirectly with a lipid membrane , induce curva - ture in the membrane is still an open question ( 1 , 2 ) . The question is important because membrane remodeling pro - cesses like endocytosis ( 3 , 4 ) , exocytosis ( 5 ) , and tubulation ( 6 – 9 ) depend on cellular machinery interacting with the membrane to change curvature . This work addresses the speciﬁc case of an amphipathic helix embedded in a lipid bilayer near the headgroup surface , where studies show that they localize ( 10 – 12 ) . Amphipathic helices can act as curvature sensors and curvature inducers ( 13 ) , and their presence or absence may control tubulation versus vesiculation ( 14 ) . The contin - uum elastic modeling ( CEM ) of Campelo et al . ( 15 ) explains the observation that amphipathic helices induce positive curvature ( convex with headgroups on the exterior ) through a so - called hydrophobic insertion or wedge mechanism ; the helix displaces material near the surface , forcing curvature to relieve the stress . Such modeling relies on assumptions of local elastic properties that are difﬁcult to verify experi - mentally as well as neglect of the speciﬁc chemical interac - tions between the inclusion and lipids . Ideal modeling of curvature induction would feature atomic - level detail ( to be able to predict the effects of chem - ical differences between lipids and mixtures of lipids ) , explicitly curved structures ( directly modeling the desired curvature ) , and a rigorous statistical mechanical framework . This work combines methods that each meet two of the three criteria : 1 . The continuum model : Arbitrarily curved structures can be examined , the free energy is immediately available , yet the model lacks chemical detail . 2 . All - atom simulations : Chemical detail is included explic - itly , the rigorous free energy derivative with respect to curvature for planar structures can be computed , yet it is difﬁcult to apply to explicitly curved surfaces . Both models include shape effects . Agreement between the two models would point to shape , rather than strong speciﬁc chemical interactions , as the driving force for curvature sensitivity . A substantial difference ( as discussed at length , the all - atom prediction of curvature induction by an amphipathic helix in this work is twice as large as for the CEM ) would indicate that curvature - dependent interactions must be modeled explicitly . To highlight the ﬂexibility of the contin - uum model , the variation of leaﬂet stiffness of the CEM can be computed even for highly curved leaﬂets , and the struc - ture at the free energy minimum explicitly examined . Here - in , predictions from all - atom molecular simulations are compared with the CEM , foremost , to make a quantitative prediction of curvature induction , and second , to highlight potential deﬁciencies of both models given the consider - ations above . The connection between lipid chemistry and curvature has been investigated by x - ray experiments on the inverse hexagonal phase , leading to a number of important ﬁndings : Dioleoyl ( DO ) lipids with phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) headgroups ( DOPE ) , prefer highly negatively curved surfaces compared with DOPC ( DO tails with a phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) headgroup ) ( 16 ) . The PE headgroup is , in a sense , smaller than the PC headgroup due to the three added methyl groups of PC . Submitted December 3 , 2013 , and accepted for publication February 10 , 2014 . * Correspondence : alexsodt @ gmail . com Editor : Reinhard Lipowsky . (cid:1) 2014 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 14 / 05 / 1958 / 12 $ 2 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 02 . 037 1958 Biophysical Journal Volume 106 May 2014 1958 – 1969 PE would also have different hydration properties , and could interact more strongly with the glycerol and phosphate regions of neighboring lipids , interactions that would vary with curvature . Lyso - lipids , lipids with one fatty acid tail eliminated , induce positive curvature ( 17 ) . This effect has been described in terms of the shape of the lyso - lipid being altered by the tail being removed . Charged headgroups such as PA ( phosphatidic acid ) and PS ( phosphatidylserine ) are more difﬁcult to interpret , with the curvature apparently being strongly depen - dent on salt and pH conditions . DOPA ( dioleoylphosphatidic acid ) favors negative cur - vature with excess ions present ( 18 ) , while DOPS ( dioleoylphosphatidylserine ) does likewise at low pH ( 19 ) . Both lipids favor nearly ﬂat surfaces in con - ditions nearer pure water , presumably because of charge repulsion between headgroups . This mecha - nism of curvature sensitivity does not ﬁt in with a shape - based explanation . The preceding results all point to a complicated interplay of chemical elements determining curvature properties . It is reasonable to hypothesize that the curvature proper - ties of lipid leaﬂets with embedded amphipathic biomole - cules will be sensitive to the same chemical effects . This motivates the use of an all - atom force ﬁeld that can account for unanticipated curvature - dependent physical chemistry . All - atom membrane simulations can accurately predict the deformation energy of single bilayer leaﬂets ( 20 ) , including the change in the free energy of a leaﬂet to ﬁrst - order in the curvature ( i . e . , the derivative ) . For leaﬂets composed of lamellar - prone lipids , the derivative is small , indicating the single leaﬂet ( considered by itself ) is stable . As described below , when an amphipathic helix is added , the derivative undergoes a change—indicating that the leaﬂet would bend if the periodic boundary conditions did not directly prevent it . This is the basis for a quantitative prediction of curvature induction and does not rely on any local interpretation of elastic properties , nor does it neglect physico - chemical interactions if they are modeled accu - rately by the force ﬁeld . Two sequences ( themselves segments of larger curvature - sensitive proteins ) were selected for this study : residues 199 – 223 of ArfGAP1 ( 21 , 22 ) ( the amphipathic - lipid - pack - ing - sensor , called ALPS ) and residues 24 – 41 of DivIVA ( 23 ) . ArfGAP1 binds to highly positively curved liposomes , whereas DivIVA localizes to cell poles where the curvature is negative . Recent work has suggested that DivIVA may not bind to a membrane as an amphipathic helix , based predom - inantly on an aqueous crystal structure of the protein and on mutation experiments highlighting the importance of an un - related phenylalanine residue to membrane binding ( 24 ) . Amphipathic helices formed from these segments will be referred to by the names of the parent proteins , even in the case of DivIVA , where it is not clear that the sequence forms a membrane - binding a - helix . The induction results will be primarily discussed for the ArfGAP1 sequence , due to the strong evidence for the role of the amphipathic helix in curvature sensing . The next section , Theory , describes the method for computing curvature induction from the ﬁrst derivative of the bending free energy , and how this derivative can be further interpreted if the leaﬂet is softened or stiffened in addition to having its preferred curvature perturbed . The Results section then reports a molecular calculation of curvature induction . A CEM ( with parameters similar to those of Campelo et al . ( 15 ) ) is then developed , taking into account relevant experimental information . Given an inclusion with peptide density sampled from the all - atom simulation , the spontaneous curvature and bending modulus of the inclusion / membrane CEM were then computed at various inclusion heights and surface coverage . Even accounting for the CEM prediction of the modiﬁed bending modulus , the all - atom model was found to induce substan - tially more curvature than is expected from the CEM . This raises the question of whether speciﬁc interactions ( ac - counted for in the all - atom model ) are more important than shape . The section concludes with the results of a CEM analysis of the shape effect of DOPE versus DOPC , and of DOPC versus O - lyso - PC ( oleoyl - lyso - phosphatidyl - choline ) leaﬂets . The analysis of the shape effects of these pure lipid systems is used in the Discussion to explain the difference between the all - atom and CEM predictions of the helical inclusion . THEORY Derivative of the all - atom curvature free energy Curvature induction is quantiﬁed by solving for the change in the minimum free energy radius of a lipid tube ( cylinder ) . For a thorough description of the energetics and structure of a cylindrical lipid leaﬂet , see the literature on the inverse hexagonal phase ( 16 , 17 , 20 , 25 , 26 ) . To completely describe membrane tubulation , a bilayer should be considered , with the inner and outer leaﬂet curved in opposite directions ( relative to the leaﬂet normal ) . Here , the free energy of the leaﬂets is quantiﬁed independently , that is , the leaﬂets are uncoupled except that they are on the inner and outer sides of a tube of a particular radius . The remainder of the article refers to the single leaﬂet free energy under this approximation . The all - atom simulations in this work are of planar leaﬂets . As described below , information about curved lipid leaﬂets is obtained from planar simulations by computing the derivative of the free energy along a curved deformation coordinate . A second - order expansion of the free energy in the curva - ture R (cid:1) 1 ( R is the radius of curvature of the cylinder ) has Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1959 proved remarkably accurate for describing lipid membrane bending . The expansion is described by the curvature at the free energy minimum , R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid and a force constant k c , lipid , the bending modulus : F lipid (cid:1) R (cid:1) 1 (cid:3) ¼ k c ; lipid 2 (cid:4) R (cid:1) 1 (cid:1) R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid (cid:5) 2 ; ( 1 ) F lipid þ incl : (cid:1) R (cid:1) 1 (cid:3) ¼ k c ; lipid þ incl : 2 (cid:4) R (cid:1) 1 (cid:1) R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : (cid:5) 2 : ( 2 ) The bar in F means that the free energy is expressed per unit lipid area . This is the cylindrical form of the Helfrich , or Helfrich - Canham ( 27 , 28 ) , model of a lipid surface . Within the Helfrich picture , curvature induction by an amphipathic helix will be reﬂected in changing mechanical parameters R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : and k c , lipid þ incl . ( Eq . 2 ) . A model of curvature sensing is also implied by this model : all else being equal , an amphipathic helix would more readily bind if its preferred curvature matches the surface . If the sponta - neous curvatures were equal , there would be no curvature induction . Simulations of lipid bilayers are most conveniently per - formed with periodic boundary conditions , in which the bilayer is constrained outright to be planar ; neighboring periodic images are all located in a plane . Thus , bilayer properties are typically obtained for R (cid:1) 1 ¼ 0 ( a planar bilayer can be viewed as a patch on the limit of an inﬁnitely wide cylinder , thus R (cid:1) 1 ¼ 0 ) . The derivative of the free energy with respect to curvature is available as the ﬁrst moment of the bilayer lateral pressure proﬁle ( 29 , 30 ) : F 0 ð 0 Þ ¼ d F ð R (cid:1) 1 Þ d R (cid:1) 1 (cid:6)(cid:6) R (cid:1) 1 ¼ 0 ¼ (cid:1) Z N (cid:1) N z ½ p T ð z Þ (cid:1) p N ð z Þ(cid:3) d z ; ( 3 ) where p T ( Z ) and p N ( Z ) are the tangential and normal local pressures , respectively . For symmetric bilayers , F 0 ð 0 Þ is zero for the whole bilayer , with the top and bottom leaﬂets having opposite sign . To compute the F 0 ð 0 Þ for a single leaﬂet ( here , for example , the upper leaﬂet rather than the whole bilayer ) , the lower limit of the integral in Eq . 3 is changed to zero ( the middle of the bilayer ) . Although the lateral pres - sure proﬁle ( p T ( z ) – p N ( z ) ) is not unambiguously deﬁned ( 31 , 32 ) , the ﬁrst moment is well deﬁned , with some caveats ( 20 ) . The derivative of the free energy will be denoted as a to - tal derivative ( e . g . , F 0 ð 0 Þ is the ﬁrst derivative evaluated for a planar system ) , because curvature is the principal degree of freedom explored , and this does not raise any ambiguity . Recent work showed that values of F 0 ð 0 Þ , computed from the ﬁrst moment of the lateral pressure proﬁle of an all - atom CHARMM force - ﬁeld simulation , agree with experi - mental observations of the inverse hexagonal phase ( 20 ) , H II . Equation 2 can be solved for in terms of the derivative in Eq . 3 : R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : ¼ (cid:1) k (cid:1) 1 c ; lipid þ incl : F 0 lipid þ incl : ð 0 Þ ; ( 4 ) R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : z (cid:1) k (cid:1) 1 c ; lipid F 0 lipid þ incl : ð 0 Þ : ( 5 ) Equation 5 provides an estimate for the curvature induced by an isotropic deformation of a planar leaﬂet into a tube , assuming the bending modulus remains constant . The possi - bility that the bending modulus changes with the inclusion concentration is examined below using the continuum model , with which it is possible to explore the energetics of curvature to second - order and beyond . Generally , the continuum model bending modulus softens upon introduc - tion of the helix , indicating that Eq . 5 would underestimate the preferred curvature of the inclusion . In the future , explicitly curved all - atom simulations ( e . g . , of the inverse hexagonal phase ) may be used to compute changes in k c with an inclusion . Isotropic and wedge deformations The CEM used in this work is described in the Methods , and in greater detail in the Supporting Material . Brieﬂy , the lipid bilayer is modeled as a collection of connected ﬁnite volume elements . There is an energetic penalty to deforming these elements , determined by constants ( the elastic moduli ) that are parameterized by experimental information . A deformation modeling an embedded helix is created by forc - ing the volume elements to conform to boundary conditions that are shaped like the helix . This deformation energy can be evaluated as the system is forced to bend . The CEM model used by Campelo et al . ( 15 ) predicts that a cylindrical inclusion will induce curvature like a wedge or hinge , in which the surrounding leaﬂet is ﬂat and only bent near the inclusion . This explanation can be understood purely in terms of the shape of the inclusion , indeed the induced curvature is nearly equivalent to that of a triangular deformation . The same explanation has been given for why DOPE favors highly negatively curved surfaces ( 17 ) , whereas single - tailed lyso - lipids prefer highly positively curved surfaces ( 17 ) . It is not clear how relevant the wedge deformation is to an actual lipid tube for a number of reasons : 1 . Because the CEM is two - dimensional , the CEM ener - getics are only valid for the region of the tube within the angular cross - section of the helix and not within a bulk region of the tube , where a perfect cylinder is , by symmetry , the low energy state ( with ﬂuctuations around this geometry ) . 2 . The phase space volume of the helix ( nearly ) aligned with the tube is very small . The entropic free energetic contribution for the lipid tube axis to be aligned with the helical vector is f k B T log ( sin [ D q ] (cid:1) 1 ) , where D q is the angle between the axes . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 1960 Sodt and Pastor 3 . It is difﬁcult for a CEM to account for the curvature of the opposite leaﬂet , as they can slide over each other . A wedgelike shape , where all curvature is focused on one seam , is a very high energy state for the opposite leaﬂet . These effects , referred to as ‘‘external factors’’ below , are constraints on the system that favor isotropic curvature in - duction . The bending modulus of the membrane / inclusion system helps to differentiate the wedge and isotropic defor - mations . For the wedge deformation , the system is highly curved near the peptide and ﬂat elsewhere ( essentially , each region is locally optimal ) . For the isotropic deforma - tion the system is uniformly curved , so that each region is frustrated ( the force constant for this frustration is the bending modulus ) . If the bending modulus is softened considerably , the CEM wedge deformation would likely be an overestimate of the curvature induced , because the importance of the energetics of the CEM single - leaﬂet ener - getics relative to the external factors is weakened , favoring an isotropic deformation . Likewise , an increased bending modulus would favor the wedge deformation . Thus , the bending modulus of the region around the inclusion is crit - ically important to determine the details of tubulation . The change in the bending modulus also determines the ﬁnal isotropic curvature via Eq . 4 . If the bending modulus does not change signiﬁcantly , Eq . 5 can be used in conjunc - tion with a planar all - atom calculation to compute the ﬁnal ( isotropically ) tubulated membrane . Note that although Eq . 3 was derived by employing an isotropic deformation , the free energy derivative ( for planar systems ) is the same for the wedge and isotropic deformations . METHODS All - atom modeling Alpha - helical conformations of the ALPS domain of ArfGAP1 , and the amphipathic domain of DivIVA were constructed and inserted into DOPE bilayers ( 104 total lipids ) using the software CHARMM - GUI ( 33 ) . The C36 lipid force ﬁeld ( 34 ) was used , combined with the C22 protein force ﬁeld with the CMAP correction ( 35 ) . Both amphipathic sequences lack his - tidine residues , thus there is no obvious ambiguity regarding protonation state . The coordinates were then transformed into P2 1 boundary conditions using the procedure described in Dolan et al . ( 36 ) . Dynamics were executed using the leap - frog integration scheme , with a timestep of 1 fs . Bonds to hydrogen atoms were constrained by the SHAKE algorithm ( 37 ) . The tem - perature was controlled at 298 K using a Nose´ - Hoover thermostat , while zero surface tension and one atmosphere normal pressure were applied using the Langevin piston method with a 20 - ps damping frequency ( 38 ) . The particle - mesh Ewald algorithm was used for long - range electrostatics , using a 72 (cid:4) 72 (cid:4) 80 x , y , z grid . After 12 . 5 ns of equilibration , the pressure proﬁle was computed every 100 fs using the Harasima contour as described in Lindahl and Edholm ( 39 ) and Sonne et al . ( 40 ) , for a total simulation length of 96 ns for ArfGAP1 and 110 ns for DivIVA . Pressure proﬁles were collected with a set number of z bins . Because the average height of the simulations were different for the various simulations , the bin spacing was also different . To subtract the proﬁles , they were transferred to the same binning scheme by a spline interpolation . The same protocols were used to compute F 0 ð 0 Þ values for the pure bilayer simulations available for this study , except for these modiﬁcations : 72 total lipids were used , and the DOPE and DOPC values were computed at 303 K , whereas the O - lyso - PC value was simulated at 310 K . It is possible to estimate the difference in F 0 ð 0 Þ expected based on the temper - ature dependence of R 0 (cid:1) 1 and k c experimentally . For DOPE ( DOPC is very similar ) , R 0 (cid:1) 1 varies by (cid:1) 0 . 0012 nm (cid:1) 1 / (cid:5) C ( 41 ) , whereas ( for DOPC ) k c varies by (cid:1) 0 . 0312 kcal / mol / (cid:5) C ( 42 ) . These changes tend to cancel each other out , such that by adjusting F 0 ð 0 Þ ¼ k c R (cid:1) 1 0 from 303 to 298 K , the value only changes by 0 . 01 kcal / mol / nm . This is 10 times less than the noise of the simulations and would very slightly increase the magnitude of the predicted curvature induced . The simulation lengths were 100 ns . The lateral width ( w ( z ) ) of the all - atom a - helices was computed as fol - lows , leading to an estimate of the surface coverage : 1 . Three - dimensional Voronoi polyhedra for each peptide atom are computed ( an atom’s polyhedron consists of the volume that is closer to that atom than any other atom ) . 2 . The computation is then converted to a lateral area by computing the area of the intersection of the polyhedron and a plane of constant z . 3 . The total peptide area is then taken to be the maximum lateral area of the peptide times the length of the peptide . ( Although this may not corre - spond perfectly with experimental estimates of surface coverage , the all - atom and CEM model surface coverages are equivalent . ) Continuum modeling An undeformed lipid leaﬂet is represented by a rectangular grid of points , { x i , z i } , that correspond to the average position of lipid material . The third dimension , y , is not necessary because all deformations considered leave y invariant . Changing the positions of these lattice points represents a defor - mation of the bilayer that has a corresponding energetic penalty . The defor - mation is parameterized by a displacement ﬁeld u ( x , z ) that acts on the leaﬂet . For example , a lattice point at { x i , z i } is deformed to x 0 i ¼ x i þ u x ð x i ; z i Þ ; ( 6 ) z 0 i ¼ z i þ u z ð x i ; z i Þ ; ( 7 ) where u x is the x component of u . This grid is a discretization of a contin - uous representation that , when subject to a deformation , u ( x , z ) has free energy F : F ¼ Z L 0 d x Z h = 2 (cid:1) h = 2 d z (cid:7) 1 2 l iklm ð z Þ u ik ð x ; z Þ u lm ð x ; z Þ (cid:8) : ( 8 ) Here u ik ( x , z ) is the derivative of the i th Cartesian component of the k th component of u ( x , z ) . For example , a negative value of u xx ( x , z ) , corresponds to lateral compression , the cost of which is measured by l xxxx . Left and right boundary conditions are speciﬁed by a function that the material must match . On the left side of the leaﬂet ( here , { 0 , z } ) the deformation must obey u x ð 0 ; z Þ ¼ f x ð t Þ ; z þ u z ð 0 ; z Þ ¼ f z ð t Þ ; ( 9 ) for some t , where f ( t ) is the boundary condition function . The value of t pa - rameterizes the functional form of the boundary condition . Instead of allow - ing { u x , u z } to vary freely at the boundary , the parameter t is varied . This explicitly constrains the material to conform to the boundary condition . In this work as in Campelo et al . ( 15 ) , the left ( x ¼ 0 ) boundary condition function is half the lateral width proﬁle , w ( z ) , of the embedded a - helix Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1961 ( the other half of the system is represented by reﬂecting the x coordinate about x ¼ 0 ) . That is , u x ð 0 ; z Þ ¼ w ð t Þ ; z þ u z ð 0 ; z Þ ¼ t : ( 10 ) The proﬁle w ( z ) is shifted in z to approximate the helix at a particular depth . The right ( x ¼ L ) boundary condition is a straight line whose slope deter - mines the CEM curvature , L þ u x ð L ; z Þ ¼ x 0 þ k x t ; z þ u z ð 0 ; z Þ ¼ z 0 þ k z t ; ( 11 ) where the constants k x and k z determine the slope of the boundary condition line . ( At the bottom left in Fig . 2 is a depiction of the CEM with a descrip - tion of the boundary condition applied in the caption . ) Themechanical properties oftheleaﬂet are parameterizedbythevalues of l ijkl ( z ) thatarechosenbyrelatingthemtoexperimentalquantities . Bysymme - try , only a small set of l ijkl ( z ) are nonzero . Furthermore , the form of l ijkl ( z ) is simpliﬁed by using only three regions ( corresponding to regions of similar chemical identity ) for which l ijkl ( z ) is constant . In the Supporting Material the relations between l ijkl ( z ) and the area compressibility modulus , the bending modulus , and the position of the pivotal plane are given , as well as thevaluesfor l ( z ) usedinthiswork ( seeTableS1intheSupportingMaterial ) . Additional technical details of theCEM implementation are alsogiven in the Supporting Material , including a modiﬁcation of the deformation gradient strain that makes the free energy valid even for ﬁnite deformations . RESULTS Calculation of curvature induction from an all - atom model Single helices were added to DOPE bilayers , at a 1 : 104 peptide / lipid ratio . Although this ratio includes lipids in the lower leaﬂet , it is still the appropriate single - leaﬂet ratio , because special boundary conditions ( 36 ) ( P2 1 ) were applied that ﬂip neighboring periodic images . The end result is that the concept of a top and bottom leaﬂet is lost ; they are perfectly equivalent , and the pressure proﬁle used in Eq . 3 ( with a lower limit of zero ) is symmetrized so that p symm T ð z Þ ¼ 1 = 2 ½ p T ð z Þ þ p T ð(cid:1) z Þ(cid:3) : The importance of this method for situations with subtle balances of tension is discussed in the Supporting Material . DOPE was chosen because its curvature was characterized previously in Sodt and Pastor ( 20 ) . The quantity F 0 0 ; DOPE ð 0 Þ is 2 . 38 5 0 . 06 kcal / mol / nm ( all error estimates are mean 5 SE ) for planar DOPE ( here a positive value indicates that the energy will be reduced by becoming negatively curved , opposite to Ref . ( 20 ) , where the sign of curvature was not regarded ) . Upon addition of the amphipathic helix , the derivative becomes 1 . 82 5 0 . 08 for ArfGAP1 and 2 . 02 5 0 . 05 for DivIVA . Dividing these values by k c for the pure system ( 7 . 1 kcal / mol ) gives an approximate value for R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : . The surface coverage ( f incl . ) of these helices in the simulation was 5 . 5 % ( ArfGAP1 ) and 4 . 0 % ( DivIVA ) . Assuming an additive model of surface mechanical properties ( see , e . g . , Beck et al . ( 43 ) ) , the single - leaﬂet curvature induction is R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : ¼ f incl : R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : þ ð 1 : 0 (cid:1) f incl : Þ R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid : ( 12 ) From this equation , R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : ¼ 1 . 1 5 0 . 25 nm (cid:1) 1 for ArfGAP1 , and 0 . 91 5 0 . 27 nm (cid:1) 1 for DivIVA . These values indicate that if these amphipathic segments were embedded in a leaﬂet at sufﬁcient coverage , they could induce dramatic tubulation in a lamellar - prone lipid , e . g . , a 20 - nm - diameter tube at 16 % coverage as described in the Discussion . Continuum modeling predicts weaker curvature induction For the CEM , the amphipathic helix is modeled by a bound - ary condition matching the average density of the ArfGAP1 helix in the all - atom simulation , and the length of the CEM leaﬂet has been chosen to match the all - atom concentration . The CEM model must deform to match the boundary condi - tion , and this in turn induces a curvature change . The pre - dicted spontaneous curvature of the perturbed CEM is shown by the solid lines in Fig . 1 A . An illustration of the CEM perturbed by the inclusion is shown at the bottom left of Fig . 2 . The yellow area is the inclusion around which the CEM of the lipid must deform . Given the surface coverage , 5 . 5 % , R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : ¼ 0 . 53 nm (cid:1) 1 at the all - atom height of 1 . 86 nm . The prediction for the DivIVA ﬁt ( at an inclusion height of 2 . 1 nm , and with a slightly larger helical radius , 0 . 54 nm ) is also 0 . 53 nm (cid:1) 1 . In this region , the result depends very weakly on the inclu - sion height . The CEM predicts the curvature induction effect to be less than half that of the all - atom simulation for ArfGAP1 . To test robustness of the prediction , the heights of the regions of the CEM were varied up to 5 0 . 2 nm and the l - values were recalculated . Tuning the regions over this range could enhance induction by up to 15 % and lower it by as much as 50 % . Interpretation of pressure proﬁles The free energy derivative in the all - atom model is computed from the ﬁrst moment of the pressure proﬁle . It is natural then to try to use the proﬁle to interpret the molec - ular origins of the change in the derivative . The difﬁculty is that , whereas the energy of the continuum model is deﬁned pointwise and so the proﬁle can be interpreted pointwise , the interactions of the all - atom model span nanometers , compli - cating interpretation . Because the CEM is well deﬁned , it will be used as a qualitative guide for interpreting the all - atom proﬁle . For a thorough discussion of the pressure proﬁle , its mo - lecular origins , and some possible implications , see Ollila and Vattulainen ( 44 ) . What follows is concerned with the change in the proﬁle due to a speciﬁc inclusion . The all - atom DOPE and ArfGAP1 - DOPE proﬁles are shown in Fig . 3 . The large negative pressure peak near Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 1962 Sodt and Pastor 1 . 8 nm , corresponding roughly to the polar / apolar interface of the amphiphile , indicates a large positive surface tension . A pressure of negative (cid:1) 650 bar corresponds to 66 dyne / cm / nm , and considering the width of the peak is ~ 0 . 5 nm , the total tension amounts to a signiﬁcant fraction of a water alkane interface , ~ 50 dyne / cm . When the amphipathic helix is inserted , the negative peak drops substantially in magni - tude . However , it is not clear whether this is due to new in - teractions , removal of old interactions , or simply averaging out interactions as the helix moves up and down in the leaﬂet . The difference between the two proﬁles ( ArfGAP1 minus DOPE ) is shown in the upper right of Fig . 2 . The pressure proﬁle of the CEM ( Fig . 2 , bottom right ) was computed A B C FIGURE 1 CEM and all - atom curvature predictions compared . Data are from the CEM unless explicitly noted . ( A ) Spontaneous curvature of the inclusion ( R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : in the text ) predicted by the CEM by allowing the model to fully relax as a wedge ( solid line ) or extrapolated from a planar system using the CEM pressure proﬁle ( dashed line ) . The all - atom values are shown along with estimates of the mean 5 SE . ( B ) ( Left axis ) Variations in the bending modulus . ( Right axis ) Free energy derivative at zero curvature ( F 0 ð 0 Þ ) calculated from either the pressure proﬁle of a pseudo - planar conﬁguration or analytically , as for the wedge deformation . ( C ) Illustration of how the system bending modulus ( k c , lipid þ incl . , on the left axis ) , and spontaneous curvature ( R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : on the right axis ) vary with surface coverage . The variation in k c , lipid þ incl . has been computed for the CEM , whereas for the all - atom calculations it is assumed to be constant . The CEM thus indicates that the all - atom simulation may underestimate the curvature induced by up to 10 % . The CEM has no stochastic error ; sensitivity to model parameters is discussed in the text . FIGURE 2 A comparison of the local lateral pressure induced by a peptide inclusion in an all - atom model and a CEM . ( Top left ) Snapshot from the all - atom simulation , showing the lipids and peptide ( water and hydrogens are simulated but not shown ) . ( Yellow ) Peptide carbon atoms ; ( green ) lipid carbon atoms . The other atoms are ( blue ) nitrogen ; ( purple ) phosphorus ; ( red ) oxygen . ( Bottom left ) Depiction of the CEM with the ﬁnite elements of the model colored by lateral stress . ( Yellow ) CEM inclusion . The inclusion is modeled as a Gaussian function that has been ﬁt to the average all - atom peptide density . Due to symme - try , only half of the CEM model shown has been computed explicitly ; the complete system was generated by reﬂecting the x coordinate about x ¼ 0 . The coloring of the continuum model at bot - tom left is from (cid:1) 150 to 150 bar . At right are the lateral pressure proﬁle differences ( with inclusion minus the pure state ) for both the all - atom ( top ) and continuum ( bottom ) models . The ﬁrst moment of the proﬁles is proportional to the derivative of the free energy with respect to bending . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1963 for a planar system with an additional constraint : the height of a point ( at the inclusion height ) on the right edge of the system was ﬁxed . Otherwise , the system would adopt a slight S - shape to relieve stress near the inclusion . Fig . 1 B shows the curvature free energy derivative calculated from the pressure proﬁle , and from the unconstrained CEM . The derivative is weakened slightly by the constraint . To the left of the proﬁles in Fig . 2 are illustrations of the molec - ular model ( top ) and CEM ( bottom ) . The pressure plots ( and the illustration of the CEM ) are colored by the amount of lateral pressure : regions that have been deformed to be squat are colored red , and those that have been made skinny and tall are colored blue . The CEM pressure proﬁle displays three regions of stress induced by the inclusion . The tail region , ~ 0 – 1 . 3 nm ( CEM , (cid:1) 7 ; all - atom , (cid:1) 32 bar ) , displays an induction of negative pressure , where space is created into which lipid tails expand . The headgroup region , ~ 1 . 3 – 2 . 0 nm ( CEM , 16 ; all - atom , 63 bar ) , experiences positive pressure , where the inclusion is present . The region above the head - groups , > 2 . 0 nm ( CEM , (cid:1) 9 , molecular ; (cid:1) 4 bar ) experi - ences slight negative pressure . In accord with the averages over the regions , the value of the change in F 0 ð 0 Þ computed from Eq . 3 is three times bigger for the all - atom simulation than for the CEM , although some of the change in F 0 ð 0 Þ is due to the displaced DOPE and its large R (cid:1) 1 0 ; DOPE ( see Eq . 12 ) . Relative to the wild swings ( 300 bar ) in the all - atom pressure proﬁle , the changes in the CEM model are quite modest ( up to 30 bar ) . The CEM indicates the form of the local shape - effect , which is generally followed by the averaged regions of the proﬁle . Strong interactions ( e . g . , hydrogen bonding and headgroup electrostatics ) are suggested by the magnitude of the all - atom proﬁle differ - ence , but the ambiguity of assigning a local pressure to a long - ranged interaction must be included as a caveat . The value of F 0 ð 0 Þ from all - atom or CEM simulations used to obtain quantitative predictions of curvature induc - tion does not require any of the above interpretation , nor does the ambiguity of how exactly to deﬁne p T ( z ) carry over into ambiguity in F 0 ð 0 Þ . Variation of continuum model bending modulus with inclusion height The CEM bending modulus is calculated by computing the energy at a series of ﬁxed curvature values , then ﬁtting the energy to second - order in the curvature . Shown in Fig . 1 B is the bending modulus of the CEM membrane / inclusion system , computed at various inclusion heights . The surface coverage is 5 . 5 % , chosen to match the molecular simulation of ArfGAP1 . At this surface coverage , the bending modulus varies from 5 . 5 to 7 kcal / mol . Fig . 1 C shows how the bending modulus and system spontaneous curvature vary with surface coverage . An approximately linear relationship is expected by the wedge mechanism , and this is observed . The slope of the bending modulus line ( whether the system softens or stiffens ) is different at two important heights : 1 . 8 nm ( weak softening ) , near the height of ArfGAP1 from the all atom model , and 2 . 1 nm ( softening ) , corresponding to the height of the all - atom DivIVA amphipathic helix . At an inclusion height of 1 . 8 nm , k c , lipid þ incl . softens to 6 . 1 kcal / mol at 30 % coverage . The change is more dramatic at a height of 2 . 3 nm , softening to 3 . 7 kcal / mol at 30 % coverage . The location of the dips in the bending modulus is correlated with the changing mechanical parameters ( l ( r ) ) . Both steep reductions in the bending modulus appear ~ 0 . 2 nm above the boundary between elastic regions . The magnitude of the softening does depend on the parameters of the CEM . For example , when parameters were developed for a monolayer with a thickness of 3 nm , the bending modulus stiffened to 8 kcal / mol at an inclusion height of 1 . 8 nm . Nevertheless , the same qualitative trend was observed : softening with the inclusion in the region of the headgroups that is reduced as the inclusion descends . Note that this is the change in the bending modulus due only to the details of wedge bending in the CEM , not due to higher - order elastic moduli ( none of which are modeled here ) . Continuum modeling is consistent with lyso - lipid curvature The all - atom pressure proﬁle difference between DOPC and O - lyso - PC ( DOPC minus O - lyso - PC ) is shown in the upper - left portion of Fig . 4 . A ﬁgure showing an illustration of the deformation is provided in the Fig . S1 of the Support - ing Material . A large positive pressure difference in the tail region of the proﬁle shows where the pair of DOPC tails are compressed relative to single - tailed O - lyso - PC . A corre - sponding negative peak in the phosphatidylcholine region FIGURE 3 The lateral pressure proﬁle ( tangential minus normal ) of pure DOPE and DOPE with ArfGAP1 at 5 . 5 % surface coverage . Error bars are indicated at 0 . 18 - nm intervals , and vary smoothly between these intervals . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 1964 Sodt and Pastor indicates where the headgroups have been displaced later - ally ( because both bilayers were simulated at zero tension , the difference between them must integrate to zero ) . For the CEM , the inclusion shape is chosen to match the sn - 2 chain density from an all - atom DOPC simulation . Although the proﬁle difference for the CEM ( shown at top right of Fig . 4 ) is not a precise match to the all - atom simu - lation ( e . g . , the peak maximum of the all - atom simulation is ~ 800 bar , whereas for the CEM it is only ~ 250 ) , the values of F 0 ð 0 Þ are in reasonable agreement . The value of F 0 ð 0 Þ for O - lyso - PC from simulation is (cid:1) 2 . 10 5 0 . 09 kcal / mol / nm (cid:1) 1 , whereas for DOPC the value is 0 . 74 5 0 . 04 . The all - atom simulation value for the difference of F 0 ð 0 Þ between DOPC and O - lyso - PC ( from the values above ) is 2 . 84 kcal / mol , which compares with the experimental value of 2 . 60 inferred from Fuller and Rand ( 17 ) , assuming a 7 . 1 kcal / mol bending modulus for O - lyso - PC . Analysis of the CEM indicates that the difference is 3 . 61 kcal / mol / nm ( 40 % larger ) . Two caveats are clear : 1 . This is likely to be an overestimate of the true curvature difference , because this does not allow the lipid struc - ture to relax under the deformation ( in particular , interdigitation ) . 2 . The value does vary somewhat with the choice of the cut - off regions . Perturbing the heights of the cutoff ranges changes F 0 ð 0 Þ from a minimum of 3 . 0 to a maximum of 4 . 0 kcal / mol / nm . Nevertheless , the CEM provides a reasonable model of a dramatic shape difference between two lipids . The spontaneous curvature predicted by the continuum model for DOPE is too small The all - atom pressure proﬁle difference between DOPC and DOPE is shown in the lower - left portion of Fig . 4 . A ﬁgure showing an illustration of the deformation is provided in Fig . S2 . The dominant features are a pair of large positive peaks near the choline group , and a large negative peak directly below . For the CEM , the inclusion shape is chosen to match the volume difference between choline and ethanolamine head - groups . The proﬁle used ( Fig . 4 , bottom right ) is computed by applying a small ( 0 . 01 - nm amplitude Gaussian ) deforma - tion and extrapolating F 0 ð 0 Þ to match the 0 . 1 - nm 3 volume change from adding three CH 3 groups . Shown in the bottom right , the CEM model of the same difference is qualitatively similar , but the value of F 0 ð 0 Þ computed from the ﬁrst moment is substantially reduced . Both from simulation ( i . e . , the proﬁle above ) and experi - ment , the difference in F 0 ð 0 Þ between DOPC and DOPE is FIGURE 4 A comparison of the local lateral pressure induced by a model of lyso - PC to DOPC tail deformation in all - atom and continuum models ( top ) and PE to PC headgroups ( bottom ) . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1965 expected to be (cid:1) 1 . 4 ( 20 ) to (cid:1) 1 . 9 ( 17 ) kcal / mol / nm . The CEM yields (cid:1) 0 . 69 kcal / mol / nm , too small by a factor of 2 – 3 . The parameter does depend on the value of the leaﬂet thickness : varying the modeled thickness of the leaﬂet ( while still matching the area compressibility , bending modulus , and pivotal plane ) from 2 . 5 to 2 . 2 nm increases the derivative up to a maximum of (cid:1) 1 . 00 kcal / mol / nm ( for a 2 . 2 - nm - thick leaﬂet that is clearly too thin ) . Varying the heights of the regions does not have as strong an effect on the value . Even with parameters chosen to maximize agreement with experiment , the value is too small . Note that this two - dimensional description of shape could be improved by mechanical modeling in three dimensions , possibly with headgroup positions sampled from an all - atom distribution . DISCUSSION Both the CEM and all - atom model offer quantitative predic - tions of curvature induction . The all - atom model has two primary quantitative advantages : 1 . The parameters of the model have been determined either by ab initio quantum mechanics or by comparisons with experimental quantities not directly related to defor - mation energies ( such as solvation free energies ) . 2 . And perhaps most importantly , the model has the ability to describe speciﬁc interactions of the embedded a - helix with the membrane , such as hydrogen bonding . Given a value of R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : , it is possible to predict the surface coverage necessary to induce tubulation or vesiculation . For example , a lipid tube has inner radius R i and outer radius R o ¼ R i þ 2 z ns . The energy is proportional to the area at the neutral surface , equal to A i and A o for the inner and outer leaﬂets , respectively . The Helfrich energy is F ð R i Þ ¼ k c 2 (cid:7) A i R (cid:1) 2 i þ A o (cid:4) R (cid:1) 1 o (cid:1) f R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl (cid:5) 2 (cid:8) ( 13 ) for a lipid with zero spontaneous curvature ( assuming k c does not change substantially with inclusion coverage ) . The ratio of the outer to the inner surface area is R i þ 2 z ns / R i . At 16 % surface coverage and with z ns equal to 1 . 5 nm , the tube outer diameter will be 20 nm . Softening of the leaﬂet by the inclu - sion would reduce the curvature induction effect . Tubes of this diameter are consistent with observations of tubula - tion by a - synuclein , which possesses amphipathic a - helical repeats . A value of R (cid:1) 1 0 ; incl : of 1 . 1 nm (cid:1) 1 is also consistent with the variation of the dissociation constant for amphi - pathic helices binding to curved liposomes seen in Hatzakis et al . ( 45 ) . Comparing the variation of the free energy implied by the dissociation constant to the Helfrich bending energy ( with a bending modulus of 7 kcal / mol ) yields values of R (cid:1) 1 0 ; lipid þ incl : from 0 . 7 to 1 nm (cid:1) 1 for the 17 - residue amphi - pathic helices studied in that work . There is a substantial difference in the curvature induc - tion predicted by the all - atom and continuum models . The most direct comparison between the two models is along the isotropic coordinate , the coordinate available from the pressure proﬁle of the planar systems . In this case , the CEM predicts the spontaneous curvature of the inclusion to be 0 . 5 nm (cid:1) 1 , whereas the all - atom prediction is 1 . 1 nm (cid:1) 1 . The all - atom prediction makes the assumption that the bending modulus is unchanged with the inclusion present , whereas for the CEM no such approximation is necessary . The CEM predicts that k c , lipid þ incl . is reduced slightly , an effect that increases the curvature induced by 0 . 042 nm (cid:1) 1 . Along with the uncertainty of how k c , lipid þ incl . might vary , sensitivity of the prediction to improvements in the force ﬁeld ( polarizability , a more accurate water model ) , and how the induction varies with lipid composi - tion , will be important to check in the future . The observation that the CEM predicts too small a curva - ture induction is supported by the observation that the CEM also predicts too small a curvature change between crude shape models of PE and PC headgroups . The discrepancy is similar for the two calculations : a factor of 2 . 2 for helix curvature induction , and a factor of 2 – 3 for the headgroup curvature induction . Meanwhile , the CEM does give a reasonable prediction of the curvature difference between a double - and single - tailed lipid . This is perhaps not surpris - ing , because the CEM does not consider any of the speciﬁc forces relevant to modeling headgroup - headgroup interac - tions . The importance of hydration effects has been noted in the literature for some time ( 46 – 49 ) , and hydrogen bonding has been implicated in amphipathic helix curvature induction explicitly ( 50 ) . These data support the idea that direct modeling of peptide and lipid chemistry is necessary to quantitatively predict fundamental mechanical effects , including curvature induction by biomolecules . Curvature induction may depend on the hydrogen - bonding capability of ethanolamine , or the peptide itself . Performing similar simulations on lipids with other headgroups ( phosphatidyl - choline , phosphatidic acid , etc . ) will help describe this effect . The all - atom model has the advantage that it can make predictions of a protein interacting peripherally with lipid headgroups ; a recent observation of tubulation of neutral lipids by nonhelical a - synuclein ( 51 ) is difﬁcult to explain with the wedge model . As a corollary , the continuum calculations of the DOPC / O - lyso - PC and DOPC / DOPE curvature differences demon - strate that lipid shape is sometimes less important than lipid chemistry : 1 . The CEM provides a working deﬁnition of the ambig - uous concept of shape . It is whatever can be captured by a mechanical model without modifying parameters . 2 . The CEM predicts only one - half to one - third of the all - atom and experimental curvature differences , indicating that hydration forces and direct hydrogen bonding are Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 1966 Sodt and Pastor as important as shape , assuming the effects can be described separately . As a simple mechanistic hypothesis , consider that phos - phate - ethanolamine hydrogen bonding would be maximized at high negative curvature , where neighboring phosphate and glycerol groups are curving up from the surface normal to enable hydrogen bonding with the ethanolamine . The methylated choline headgroup of DOPC would not have this energetic factor . Fig . 5 plots the number of hydrogen bonds ( per lipid ) between a DOPE lipid and its neighbors for both planar and curved lipids ( the inverse hexagonal phase , from simulations reported in Sodt and Pastor ( 20 ) ) . A hydrogen bond was recorded with hydrogens and oxygens within 2 . 2 A˚ . The number of hydrogen bonds per lipid increases substantially as DOPE becomes negatively curved . The experimental deformation energy of DOPE , per lipid , is ~ 1 / 3 kT from planar to the curvature minimum . From Fig . 5 , bending DOPE from planar to its curvature minimum increases the number of interlipid hydrogen bonds by one - third of a bond per lipid . Hydrogen - bonding strengths span several kT ( 52 ) . If the relative hydrogen - bonding strength between ethanolamine lipid groups is stronger than those between lipids and water by a single kT , this effect could account for the shifting of the curvature free energy minimum from nearly planar ( DOPC ) to highly curved ( DOPE ) . Naturally there are likely many more sub - tleties in how the water network around a lipid headgroup changes with curvature . Although this analysis is not quan - titative evidence that hydrogen bonding is decisive in DOPE curvature energetics , it does establish a correlation between curvature and hydrogen bonding . The addition of the CEM to all - atom modeling adds sig - niﬁcant value ; qualitative insight can be gained by exploring arbitrarily curved surfaces with the CEM , whereas for the all - atom model , simulating curved systems is very computa - tionally demanding . The CEM indicates that the leaﬂet may be softened near the inclusion . This can be used for curva - ture prediction for a model of a whole - bilayer ( rather than single leaﬂet ) . That is , the local bending modulus of the inclusion can be used to measure the local deformation energy . The energetics of multiple inclusions and arbitrary geometries ( rather than the wedge geometry ) can then be characterized . Perhaps counterintuitively , softening of the leaﬂet by the wedge mechanism leads to predictions of larger curvature induction through Eq . 5 , yet would lead to smaller values of curvature if the surface actually bends isotropically , because the preferred curvature of a locally soft patch is less important energetically . The softening of the leaﬂet reported here for the CEM should be viewed as a qualitative guide to how weakening of curvature could be interpreted ; quantitatively , softening depends on the region boundary deﬁnitions of the CEM . The CEM can test the validity of Eq . 5 by applying the same assumptions as in the all - atom model and checking against the relaxed solution ( a wedge deformation ) . If the constant - stiffness bending assumption is made for the CEM , the prediction of curvature induction is still reason - ably accurate ( 68 % of the induced curvature at worst , but typically 80 – 90 % of the effect is recovered ) . As justiﬁed by the CEM , the prediction of curvature induction with an isotropic deformation is a reasonable lower bound on curva - ture induction , because the leaﬂet can deform more easily than predicted if it is allowed to do so arbitrarily . This anal - ysis is difﬁcult to perform for the all - atom model . The bending modulus is difﬁcult to extract even for pure lipid systems ; to compute it with an inclusion and see that it does not vary with curvature would be even more difﬁcult . The CEM also has the advantage that the energy is a local property of the system ( i . e . , can be evaluated unambigu - ously at any point in space ) . This readily translates into spatial resolution of the lateral pressure , as shown in the bot - tom - left of Fig . 2 . The same is not true of the all - atom model . Energy terms in the all - atom model potential can extend over many nanometers . Thus there cannot be an un - ambiguous deﬁnition of the local deformation energy . The pressure proﬁles in the top right of Fig . 2 , and at left in Fig . 4 , which in theory are a lateral average of a local pres - sure , are not uniquely deﬁned . A path ( the Harasima contour ( 40 , 53 ) ) has been chosen to distribute the pressure contribu - tion along the vector between two force sites . The ﬁrst moment of the proﬁle , which is used to calculate F 0 ð 0 Þ , does not depend on the contour ( some assumptions must be made , discussed in Sodt and Pastor ( 20 ) ) . CONCLUSIONS The derivative of the free energy necessary to bend a planar all - atom system into a cylinder was used to predict the cur - vature induction effect of an amphipathic helix in a DOPE FIGURE 5 The number of hydrogen bonds between neighboring DOPE lipids ( ethanolamine hydrogens ) . The planar point is from a planar bilayer calculation , whereas the points at ﬁnite curvature are simulated in the inverse hexagonal phase . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1967 leaﬂet . The result was compared with the prediction of a CEM on the same system ; the CEM was found to predict less than half the magnitude of curvature induction as the all - atom model . The CEM was also used to investigate the difference between two different mechanisms of how leaf - lets tubulate around an inclusion : The ﬁrst mechanism , computed with the all - atom and CEMs , simply maps the system onto a cylinder ( isotropic tubulation ) . The second mechanism allows the system to fully relax around the in - clusion , with ﬂat segments of the leaﬂet bent around the in - clusion like a hinge . The curvature predictions of the two mechanisms are similar , supporting the all - atom induction prediction . The difference between ArfGAP1 and DivIVA was not statistically signiﬁcant for all - atom models , nor were the shapes or insertion depths of the two helices different enough to affect the CEM meaningfully . This indicates that there is no sequence - speciﬁc effect from DivIVA that would induce negative curvature , and supports alternate mechanisms of negative curvature sensing . The disagreement between the all - atom and CEMs was explained by the all - atom model incorporating peptide and lipid chemistry explicitly . To support this , it was shown that the CEM does not predict a large enough difference between DOPC and DOPE ( where DOPE is inclined to be highly negatively curved ) . This observation is relevant because an a - helix is located near diverse lipid chemistry ( glycerol , phosphate , and choline / ethanolamine groups ) . The result also calls into question the use of the term ‘‘lipid shape’’ to describe curvature effects that depend on the lipid headgroup . The conclusions of this article can be veriﬁed further by molecular simulations of the inverse hexagonal phase . Sim - ulations of this phase allow for properties to be computed at high curvature ; wedgelike behavior around an inclusion could be observed , and the curvature free energy minimum could be directly computed . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Supplemental Theory , with Continuum Modeling Methods , P2 1 Boundary Conditions , 22 equations , one table , two ﬁgures , and References ( 54 – 62 ) are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 14 ) 00284 - 7 . The authors thank William Klug for helpful comments , and Andrew Beaven for assistance with the pure lipid simulations . This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health , National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute ( NHLBI ) , and utilized the high - performance computational capabilities at the National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ( NHLBI LoBoS cluster ) . REFERENCES 1 . Farsad , K . , and P . De Camilli . 2003 . Mechanisms of membrane defor - mation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 372 – 381 . 2 . Cui , H . , E . Lyman , and G . A . Voth . 2011 . Mechanism of membrane cur - vature sensing by amphipathic helix containing proteins . Biophys . J . 100 : 1271 – 1279 . 3 . Farsad , K . , N . Ringstad , . , P . De Camilli . 2001 . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interac - tions . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 193 – 200 . 4 . Ford , M . G . J . , I . G . Mills , . , H . T . McMahon . 2002 . Curvature of cla - thrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature . 419 : 361 – 366 . 5 . Sutton , R . B . , D . Fasshauer , . , A . T . Brunger . 1998 . Crystal structure of a SNARE complex involved in synaptic exocytosis at 2 . 4 A˚ resolu - tion . Nature . 395 : 347 – 353 . 6 . Varkey , J . , J . M . Isas , . , R . Langen . 2010 . Membrane curvature induc - tion and tubulation are common features of synucleins and apolipopro - teins . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 32486 – 32493 . 7 . Peter , B . J . , H . M . Kent , . , H . T . McMahon . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science . 303 : 495 – 499 . 8 . Frost , A . , R . Perera , . , V . M . Unger . 2008 . Structural basis of mem - brane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell . 132 : 807 – 817 . 9 . Arkhipov , A . , Y . Yin , and K . Schulten . 2008 . Four - scale description of membrane sculpting by BAR domains . Biophys . J . 95 : 2806 – 2821 . 10 . Braun , A . R . , E . Sevcsik , . , J . N . Sachs . 2012 . a - Synuclein induces both positive mean curvature and negative Gaussian curvature in mem - branes . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 134 : 2613 – 2620 . 11 . Pfefferkorn , C . M . , F . Heinrich , . , J . C . Lee . 2012 . Depth of a - synu - clein in a bilayer determined by ﬂuorescence , neutron reﬂectometry , and computation . Biophys . J . 102 : 613 – 621 . 12 . Gonza´lez - Rubio , P . , R . Gautier , . , P . F . Fuchs . 2011 . Amphipathic - lipid - packing - sensor interactions with lipids assessed by atomistic molecular dynamics . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1808 : 2119 – 2127 . 13 . Drin , G . , and B . Antonny . 2010 . Amphipathic helices and membrane curvature . FEBS Lett . 584 : 1840 – 1847 . 14 . Boucrot , E . , A . Pick , . , M . M . Kozlov . 2012 . Membrane ﬁssion is pro - moted by insertion of amphipathic helices and is restricted by crescent BAR domains . Cell . 149 : 124 – 136 . 15 . Campelo , F . , H . T . McMahon , and M . M . Kozlov . 2008 . The hydropho - bic insertion mechanism of membrane curvature generation by pro - teins . Biophys . J . 95 : 2325 – 2339 . 16 . Rand , R . P . , N . L . Fuller , . , V . A . Parsegian . 1990 . Membrane curva - ture , lipid segregation , and structural transitions for phospholipids under dual - solvent stress . Biochemistry . 29 : 76 – 87 . 17 . Fuller , N . , and R . P . Rand . 2001 . The inﬂuence of lysolipids on the spontaneous curvature and bending elasticity of phospholipid mem - branes . Biophys . J . 81 : 243 – 254 . 18 . Kooijman , E . E . , V . Chupin , . , P . R . Rand . 2005 . Spontaneous curva - ture of phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid . Biochemistry . 44 : 2097 – 2102 . 19 . Fuller , N . , C . R . Benatti , and R . P . Rand . 2003 . Curvature and bending constants for phosphatidylserine - containing membranes . Biophys . J . 85 : 1667 – 1674 . 20 . Sodt , A . J . , and R . W . Pastor . 2013 . Bending free energy from simula - tion : correspondence of planar and inverse hexagonal lipid phases . Biophys . J . 104 : 2202 – 2211 . 21 . Bigay , J . , P . Gounon , . , B . Antonny . 2003 . Lipid packing sensed by ArfGAP1 couples COPI coat disassembly to membrane bilayer curvature . Nature . 426 : 563 – 566 . 22 . Vanni , S . , L . Vamparys , . , B . Antonny . 2013 . Amphipathic lipid pack - ing sensor motifs : probing bilayer defects with hydrophobic residues . Biophys . J . 104 : 575 – 584 . 23 . Lenarcic , R . , S . Halbedel , . , L . W . Hamoen . 2009 . Localization of DivIVA by targeting to negatively curved membranes . EMBO J . 28 : 2272 – 2282 . 24 . Oliva , M . A . , S . Halbedel , . , J . Lo¨we . 2010 . Features critical for membrane binding revealed by DivIVA crystal structure . EMBO J . 29 : 1988 – 2001 . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 1968 Sodt and Pastor 25 . Gruner , S . M . , V . A . Parsegian , and R . P . Rand . 1986 . Directly measured deformation energy of phospholipid H II hexagonal phases . Faraday Discuss . Chem . Soc . 81 : 29 – 37 . 26 . Chen , Z . , and R . P . Rand . 1998 . Comparative study of the effects of several n - alkanes on phospholipid hexagonal phases . Biophys . J . 74 : 944 – 952 . 27 . Helfrich , W . 1973 . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z . Naturforsch . C . 28 : 693 – 703 . 28 . Canham , P . B . 1970 . The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red blood cell . J . Theor . Biol . 26 : 61 – 81 . 29 . Goetz , R . , and R . Lipowsky . 1998 . Computer simulations of bilayer membranes : self - assembly and interfacial tension . J . Chem . Phys . 108 : 7397 – 7409 . 30 . Szleifer , I . , D . Kramer , . , S . A . Safran . 1990 . Molecular theory of cur - vature elasticity in surfactant ﬁlms . J . Chem . Phys . 92 : 6800 – 6817 . 31 . Schoﬁeld , P . , and J . R . Henderson . 1982 . Statistical mechanics of inho - mogeneous ﬂuids . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . A Math . Phys . Sci . 379 : 231 – 246 . 32 . Sodt , A . J . , and R . W . Pastor . 2012 . The tension of a curved surface from simulation . J . Chem . Phys . 137 : 234101 . 33 . Jo , S . , T . Kim , . , W . Im . 2008 . CHARMM - GUI : a web - based graph - ical user interface for CHARMM . J . Comput . Chem . 29 : 1859 – 1865 . 34 . Klauda , J . B . , R . M . Venable , . , R . W . Pastor . 2010 . Update of the CHARMM all - atom additive force ﬁeld for lipids : validation on six lipid types . J . Phys . Chem . B . 114 : 7830 – 7843 . 35 . MacKerell , Jr . , A . D . , M . Feig , and C . L . Brooks , 3rd . 2004 . Extending the treatment of backbone energetics in protein force ﬁelds : limitations of gas - phase quantum mechanics in reproducing protein conforma - tional distributions in molecular dynamics simulations . J . Comput . Chem . 25 : 1400 – 1415 . 36 . Dolan , E . A . , R . M . Venable , . , B . R . Brooks . 2002 . Simulations of membranes and other interfacial systems using P2 1 and P c periodic boundary conditions . Biophys . J . 82 : 2317 – 2325 . 37 . Andersen , H . C . 1983 . RATTLE : a ‘‘velocity’’ version of the SHAKE algorithm for molecular dynamics calculations . J . Comput . Phys . 52 : 24 – 34 . 38 . Feller , S . E . , Y . Zhang , . , B . R . Brooks . 1995 . Constant pressure molecular dynamics simulation : the Langevin piston method . J . Chem . Phys . 103 : 4613 – 4621 . 39 . Lindahl , E . , and O . Edholm . 2000 . Spatial and energetic - entropic decomposition of surface tension in lipid bilayers from molecular dynamics simulations . J . Chem . Phys . 113 : 3882 – 3893 . 40 . Sonne , J . , F . Y . Hansen , and G . H . Peters . 2005 . Methodological prob - lems in pressure proﬁle calculations for lipid bilayers . J . Chem . Phys . 122 : 124903 . 41 . Gruner , S . M . , M . W . Tate , . , P . R . Cullis . 1988 . X - ray diffraction study of the polymorphic behavior of n - methylated dioleoylphosphati - dylethanolamine . Biochemistry . 27 : 2853 – 2866 . 42 . Pan , J . , S . Tristram - Nagle , . , J . F . Nagle . 2008 . Temperature depen - dence of structure , bending rigidity , and bilayer interactions of dio - leoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biophys . J . 94 : 117 – 124 . 43 . Beck , A . , A . D . Tsamaloukas , . , H . Heerklotz . 2008 . Additive action of two or more solutes on lipid membranes . Langmuir . 24 : 8833 – 8840 . 44 . Ollila , O . H . S . , and I . Vattulainen . 2010 . Chapt . 2 , lateral pressure proﬁles in lipid membranes : dependence on molecular composition . In Molecular Simulations and Biomembranes . M . S . P . Sansom and P . C . Biggin , editors . Royal Society of Chemistry , London , UK , pp . 27 – 56 . 45 . Hatzakis , N . S . , V . K . Bhatia , . , D . Stamou . 2009 . How curved mem - branes recruit amphipathic helices and protein anchoring motifs . Nat . Chem . Biol . 5 : 835 – 841 . 46 . Nagle , J . F . 1976 . Theory of lipid monolayer and bilayer phase transi - tions : effect of headgroup interactions . J . Membr . Biol . 27 : 233 – 250 . 47 . Petrache , H . I . , S . Tristram - Nagle , . , J . F . Nagle . 2004 . Structure and ﬂuctuations of charged phosphatidylserine bilayers in the absence of salt . Biophys . J . 86 : 1574 – 1586 . 48 . White , S . H . , and G . I . King . 1985 . Molecular packing and area compressibility of lipid bilayers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 82 : 6532 – 6536 . 49 . Papahadjopoulos , D . , and N . Miller . 1967 . Phospholipid model membranes . I . Structural characteristics of hydrated liquid crystals . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 135 : 624 – 638 . 50 . Jensen , M . B . , V . K . Bhatia , . , D . Stamou . 2011 . Membrane curvature sensing by amphipathic helices : a single liposome study using a - synu - clein and annexin B12 . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 42603 – 42614 . 51 . Jiang , Z . , M . de Messieres , and J . C . Lee . 2013 . Membrane remodeling by a - synuclein and effects on amyloid formation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 135 : 15970 – 15973 . 52 . Freindorf , M . , E . Kraka , and D . Cremer . 2012 . A comprehensive anal - ysis of hydrogen bond interactions based on local vibrational modes . Int . J . Quantum Chem . 112 : 3174 – 3187 . 53 . Harasima , A . 1958 . Molecular theory of surface tension . Adv . Chem . Phys . 1 : 203 – 237 . 54 . Landau , L . D . , and E . M . Lifshitz . 1970 . Theory of Elasticity . Perga - mon , Elmsford , NY . 55 . Evans , E . , and D . Needham . 1987 . Physical properties of surfactant bilayer membranes : thermal transitions , elasticity , rigidity , cohesion , and colloidal interactions . J . Phys . Chem . 91 : 4219 – 4228 . 56 . Goetz , R . , G . Gompper , and R . Lipowsky . 1999 . Mobility and elasticity of self - assembled membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 : 221 – 224 . 57 . Rawicz , W . , K . C . Olbrich , . , E . Evans . 2000 . Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 79 : 328 – 339 . 58 . Kozlov , M . M . , and M . Winterhalter . 1991 . Elastic moduli for strongly curved monolayers . Position of the neutral surface . J . Phys . II . Fr . 1 : 1077 – 1084 . 59 . Leikin , S . , M . M . Kozlov , . , R . P . Rand . 1996 . Measured effects of diacylglycerol on structural and elastic properties of phospholipid membranes . Biophys . J . 71 : 2623 – 2632 . 60 . Marsh , D . 2011 . Pivotal surfaces in inverse hexagonal and cubic phases of phospholipids and glycolipids . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 164 : 177 – 183 . 61 . May , S . , Y . Kozlovsky , . , M . M . Kozlov . 2004 . Tilt modulus of a lipid monolayer . Eur . Phys . J . E Soft Matter . 14 : 299 – 308 . 62 . Watson , M . C . , E . G . Brandt , . , F . L . H . Brown . 2012 . Determining biomembrane bending rigidities from simulations of modest size . Phys . Rev . Lett . 109 : 028102 . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 9 ) 1958 – 1969 Molecular Modeling of Curvature Induction 1969