Editorial : Gender Bias in Publishing : Double - Blind Reviewing as a Solution ? Many studies , commentaries , blogs , etc . point at a gender bias in favor of males for award and acceptance of both grants and publications , respectively ( e . g . , Wenneras and Wold , 1997 ; Larivière et al . , 2013 and Barres , 2006 ) . Ac - cording to biaswatchneuro’s calculations for the registration at the 2017 Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting , the female / male faculty ratio was 39 % , and the ratio for trainees was 49 % . This difference suggests the existence of gender bias in neuroscience . Of course , there is a time lag between being a trainee and becoming a faculty member , but parity has existed for decades at the trainee level ( 50 % of PhDs in Neuroscience have been earned by women in the US since 1990 ) . Yet , this does not translate at the faculty level . I believe that this issue needs to be solved at the faculty recruitment stage . As a society journal , there is not much that we can really do , except continue to alert the commu - nity to this issue . However , scientific journals may take actions to help mitigate gender bias at the publication . If we consider the present 39 % female / male ratio for faculty positions , un - biased representation means that there should be 39 % females as corresponding / senior authors . Biaswatchneuro released their latest numbers for January to March 2018 for the Journal of Neuroscience , Neuron , Nature Neuroscience , and eNeuro . All journals are below the anticipated 39 % , although the two non - profit society jour - nals , Journal of Neuroscience and eNeuro , are doing better than the other two . Recent studies demonstrate a persistent underrepresentation of female authors in scientific journals ( Lariviere et al , 2013 ; Bendels et al , 2018 ; Pezzoni et al , 2016 ) . Among neuroscience journals , the proportion of fe - male authors is negatively correlated with impact factor ( Shen et al , 2018 ) . These numbers provide facts , although it is difficult to interpret them . Where is the bias coming from ? Many interpretations have been proposed , such as in - stances when female PIs may be more cautious , only sub - mitting papers when they feel the story is really complete , and bias coming from the journal . As a journal , we can act on the last parameter . In most neuroscience journals , when papers are sub - mitted , they are assigned to a reviewing editor , who then assigns them to reviewers . Is there a gender bias at that stage ? The literature on gender bias shows that both men and women exhibit bias against female scientists ( Ray - mond , 2013 ) . This could be , behind the results posted by biaswatchneuro regarding neuroscience publications . But critical numbers are missing , those at submission . If a journal is successfully avoiding the effects of gender bias during the peer - review process , then the female / male ratio at publication must be the same as the ratio at submission . If not , it means that a bias has been intro - duced during the reviewing process . We thus conducted a survey at eNeuro for all papers submitted / published since January 2015 . The female / male ratio at submission is 30 % . . . and the ratio at acceptance is 30 % ! The journal eNeuro is publishing neuroscience papers in which the gender ratio of the submitting authors matches the gender distribution of published authors . It will be interesting to share and col - late numbers with the other Neuroscience journals . Regarding first authors , the ratios are similar : 45 % at submission and acceptance , close to the aforementioned 49 % at the trainee level . I do not know why eNeuro does not receive 39 % of submissions from female last authors , and I hope that this will change soon . I can attempt to interpret why we have a balance be - tween submission and acceptance that avoids gender bias . At eNeuro , we use a double - blind review system . That is to say , any information that explicitly identifies the authors is removed at the submission stage . Of course , the system cannot be perfect ( e . g . , authors have pre - sented their unpublished results at conferences ) , and it is not supposed to be perfect . It removes unconscious bias whenever possible ( a win - win situation ) . Hence , in most instances , the reviewers do not know who the authors are , so their decision cannot be unconsciously biased by gen - der . Reviewers are forced to assess the science itself , without relying upon author gender , reputation , institution , or country of origin , etc . The only scientist who knows the gender of the authors is the reviewing editor . The board of reviewing editors at eNeuro is composed of roughly equal numbers of female and male scientists , reflecting the composition of the neuroscience workforce at the trainee level and representing an aspiration for a scientific work - force able to draw upon the creativity and intellectual effort of all scientists , regardless of gender . It is important to remember that the final decision of the reviewing editor is based on consensus reached during a consultation session with the reviewers who remained blind to the authors’ identity throughout the whole process . My personal interpretation is that the double - blind re - view process minimizes gender bias during the evaluation of the paper . It avoids adding an additional layer of bias to the dissemination of research findings . Consequently , most , if not all , journals should adopt it . Editorial May / June 2018 , 5 ( 3 ) e0225 - 18 . 2018 1 – 2 It is possible that the double - blind review system solves , at the evaluation level , another important bias , that of early career versus established investigators , another area of potential disparity that eNeuro is keen to address . Christophe Bernard Editor - in - Chief DOI : 10 . 1523 / ENEURO . 0225 - 18 . 2018 References Barres BA ( 2006 ) Does gender matter ? Nature 442 : 133 – 136 . CrossRef Bendels MHK , Müller R , Brueggmann D , Groneberg DA ( 2018 ) Gen - der disparities in high - quality research revealed by Nature Index journals . PLoS One 13 : e0189136 . CrossRef Larivière V , Ni C , Gingras Y , Cronin B , Sugimoto CR ( 2013 ) Global gender disparities in science . Nature 504 : 211 – 213 . Cross - RefMeyer M , Cimpian A , Leslie S - J ( 2015 ) Women are underrepresented in fields where success is believed to require brilliance . Front Psychol 6 : 235 . CrossRef Pezzoni M , Mairesse J , Stephan P , Lane J ( 2016 ) Gender and the publication output of graduate students : A case study . PLoS One 11 : e0145146 . CrossRef Raymond J ( 2013 ) Most of us are biased . Science ( 80 ) 495 : 33 – 34 . CrossRef Shen YA , Webster JM , Shoda Y , Fine I ( 2018 ) Persistent Underrep - resentation of Women’s Science in High Profile Journals . bioRxiv 275362 . CrossRef Wenneras C , Wold A ( 1997 ) Nepotism and sexism in peer - review . Nature CrossRef Editorial 2 of 2 May / June 2018 , 5 ( 3 ) e0225 - 18 . 2018 eNeuro . org