Publication and related biases : a review Song F , Eastwood A J , Gilbody S , Duley L , Sutton A J Record Status This is a bibliographic record of a published health technology assessment from a member of INAHTA . No evaluation of the quality of this assessment has been made for the HTA database . Citation Song F , Eastwood A J , Gilbody S , Duley L , Sutton A J . Publication and related biases : a review . Health Technology Assessment 2000 ; 4 ( 10 ) : 1 - 115 Authors ' objectives This review aims to identify systematically and appraise studies that have examined methodological issues and provide empirical evidence about publication bias and other dissemination - related biases , including biases due to the time , type and language of publication , multiple publication , selective citation of references , database index bias , and biased media attention . The review seeks to answer the following questions : - What empirical evidence is available on the existence and consequences of publication and related biases ? - What are the causes and risk factors of publication and related biases ? - What methods have been developed and how useful are these methods for preventing , detecting and correcting publication and related biases ? Authors ' conclusions Although the extent , direction and impact of publication and related biases are uncertain and may vary greatly depending on circumstances , it seems reasonable to conclude that studies with significant or favourable results are more widely disseminated than those with non - significant or unfavourable results . The potential problem of publication and related biases should be taken into consideration in the field of health technology assessment . All funded or approved studies should be prospectively registered . The risk of publication bias should be assessed in all systematic reviews . Project page URL http : / / www . hta . ac . uk / 1051 Indexing Status Subject indexing assigned by CRD MeSH Publication Bias ; Research ; Review Literature Language Published English Country of organisation England Address for correspondence NETSCC , Health Technology Assessment , Alpha House , University of Southampton Science Park , Southampton , SO16 7NS UK Tel : + 44 23 8059 5586 Email : hta @ hta . ac . uk AccessionNumber 32000000850 Date bibliographic record published Health Technology Assessment ( HTA ) database Copyright © 2009 Queen ' s Printer and Controller of HMSO Page : 1 / 2 04 / 08 / 2000 Date abstract record published 04 / 08 / 2000 Powered by TCPDF ( www . tcpdf . org ) Health Technology Assessment ( HTA ) database Copyright © 2009 Queen ' s Printer and Controller of HMSO Page : 2 / 2