Journal of Educational Psychology 1989 , Vol . 81 , N T o . 2 , 240 - 246 Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . O022 - O663 / 89 / SOO . 75 Systematic Thinking Fostered by Illustrations in Scientific Text Richard E . Mayer University of California , Santa Barbara In 2 experiments , students who lacked prior knowledge about car mechanics read a passage about vehicle braking systems that either contained labeled illustrations of the systems , illustrations without labels , labels without illustrations , or no labeled illustrations . Students who received passages that contained labeled illustrations of braking systems recalled more explanative than nonexplanative information as compared to control groups , and performed better on problem solving transfer but not on verbatim recognition as compared to control groups . Results support a model of meaningful learning in which illustrations can help readers to focus their attention on explanative information in text and to reorganize the information into useful mental models . What can be done to improve the understandability of expository text ? In particular , how can we design text so that readers will be able to use the information creatively to solve problems ? To answer these questions , my colleagues and I have been engaged in a series of studies investigating the effects of advanced organizers ( Mayer , 1975a , 1976 , 1978 , 1979 , 1980 , 1983 ; Mayer & Bromage , 1980 ) , signaling ( Lo - man & Mayer , 1983 ; Mayer , Dyck , & Cook , 1984 ) , and adjunct questions ( Mayer , 1975b ; Sagerman & Mayer , 1987 ) . This work has been based on the idea that different instruc - tional manipulations may have effects on different aspects of cognitive processing in different learners . In particular , assim - ilation theory—the idea that learning involves integrating new information with existing knowledge—suggests three primary functions of cognitive processes : to guide selective attention towards certain information in the text , to foster the building of internal connections among ideas from the text , and to foster building external connections between ideas in the text and the learner ' s existing knowledge ( Mayer , 1982 , 1984 , 1985 , 1987 ) . The present study opens a new line of attack by investigating the role of illustrations as potential vehicles for helping students understand expository text . Models for Understanding Understanding some kinds of expository text involves building a mental model of the system described in the text ( de Kleer & Brown , 1981 , 1983 ; Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ; Hegarty & Just , in press ; Hegarty , Just , & Morrison , 1988 ; Kieras & Boviar , 1986 ) . The upper portion of Table 1 presents a portion of a text on vehicle braking systems taken from the World Book Encyclopedia ( 1987 ) . In order to build a useful mental model of the system , a reader must attend to the relevant information as indicated by the italicized text in Table 1 , build internal connections as indicated in the middle portion of Table 1 , and build external connections as indi - cated in the lower portion of Table 1 , Pauline Dillenbeck served as a laboratory helper on this project . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Richard E . Mayer , Department of Psychology , University of Califor - nia , Santa Barbara , California 93106 . Illustrations may help readers build useful mental models ( Bayman & Mayer , 1988 ; Mayer , 1987 ) . For example , Figure 1 presents an illustration corresponding to the text presented in Table 1 . As can be seen , the illustration helps focus atten - tion on the relevant information such as the state of the piston in the master cylinder and provides a context for building internal connections such as moving the piston will push fluid forward . Evaluation of what is learned involves more than examining how much is remembered on a comprehension test . First , if illustrations are successful in helping the reader to focus on explanative information in the text , then readers given illus - trations should tend to recall more explanative than nonex - planative information as compared with readers not given illustrations . Second , if illustrations are successful in helping readers build connections , then readers given illustrations should perform better on transfer but not on verbatim rec - ognition as compared to readers not given illustrations . Trans - fer for the brakes test involves systematic thinking —building and using a mental model of the system to make predictions . Conditions for Meaningful Learning The research literature on text illustrations appears to be inconsistent and inconclusive ( Szlichcinski , 1979 ; Wright , 1977 , 1982 ) . One problem with reviewing research on text illustrations is that many studies do not use appropriate research methods or consistently address theoretical issues ( Levin , Anglin , & Carney , 1987 ) . Figure 2 shows four criteria for research on meaningful instructional methods in general , and on illustrations in particular . Potential Meaningfulness of the Material First , the to - be - learned material must be potentially mean - ingful ; that is , it must be possible to construct a coherent mental model from the material . If the material is not poten - tially meaningful , then any attempts to help students to understand it will not succeed . It follows that the selection of text materials is a crucial step in any program aimed at producing meaningful learning . Unfortunately , teachers 240 ILLUSTRATIONS IN TEXT 241 Table 1 Portion of Brakes Text and Examples of Internal and External Connections Portion of brakes passage { with explanative information italicized ) Hydraulic Brakes use various fluids instead of levers or cables . Jn automobiles , the brake fluid is in chambers called cylinders . Metal tubes connect the master cylinder with wheel cylinders located near the wheels . When the driver steps on the car ' s brake pedal , a piston moves forward inside the master cylinder . The piston forces brake fluid out of the master cylinder and through the tubes to the wheel cylinders . In the wheel cylinders , the increase in fluid pressure makes a set of smaller pistons move . These smaller pistons activate either drum brakes or disk brakes , the two types of hydraulic brakes . Most automobiles have drum brakes on the rear wheels and disk brakes on the front wheels . Drum Brakes consist of a cast - iron drum and a pair of semicircular brake shoes . The drum is bolted to the center of the wheel on the inside . The drum rotates with the wheel , but the shoes do not . The shoes are lined with asbestos or some other material that can with - stand heat generated by friction . When the brake shoes press against the drum , both the drum and the wheel stop or slow down . Some internal connections • First , you step on the brake pedal . • Second , the piston moves forward in master cylinder . • Third , the brake fluid is forced through tube towards wheels . • Fourth , the smaller pistons move forward in wheel cylinder . • Fifth , the brake pads press in against disk . • Sixth , the rotating wheel slows or stops . Some External Connections • A piston in a cylinder is like a syringe . • A brake tube is like a garden hose . • Automobile disk brakes are like caliper brakes on bicycles . Note . Adapted from World Book Encyclopedia , Volume 2 ( p . 571 ) , 1988 , Chicago : World Book , Inc . Copyright 1988 by World Book , Inc . Adapted by permission . would have to look long and hard through some textbooks to find potentially meaningful material . To simplify matters , I have focused on explanative text — that is , text that explains—and in particular on explanations of how systems work . A system is simply a collection of parts that interact with one another in consistent ways ( Simon , 1969 ) . In analyzing common text structures used in science textbooks , Cook and Mayer ( 1983 , 1988 ) noted thai systems are generally presented in the form of a sequence . In a sequence text structure , a series of state changes are listed , generally in chronological order , with the first change enabling the second change , the second change enabling the third change , and so on . The present study uses a sequence passage on vehicle braking systems , a portion of which is reproduced in Table I . Novice Status of the Learner Second , the learners who have the most to gain from meaningful methods are those who would not spontaneously engage in meaningful learning processes . For example , a novice learner does not already possess or readily generate a mental model of the system . In analyzing individual differ - ences in the effectiveness of instructional methods , Snow and Lohman ( 1984 ) have found that meaningful methods of instruction are most useful for less skilled or less knowledge - able learners . In the present study I focused on students who reported having never repaired a car . Effectiveness of the Instructional Manipulation Third , the instructional manipulation must effectively di - rect the reader ' s attention to the explanative information and help the reader to build connections . The systematic illustra - tion shown in Figure 1 is intended to accomplish these goals : II emphasizes the main elements in the system and shows how a change in the status of one element affects changes in the status of other elements . Appropriateness of Test Fourth , the evaluation must focus on measuring meaning - ful learning outcomes as evidenced by systematic thinking . In particular , systematic thinking for the brakes passage involves being able to creatively use the information in the passage to answer transfer questions , such as " How can you improve the effectiveness of car brakes ? " In summary , in the present study all four criteria for mean - ingful instructional method research are met : ( a ) A potentially meaningful passage on brakes is presented ( b ) to students who lack appropriate prior knowledge , and ( c ) the inclusion of a systematic illustration of the underlying model ( d ) is expected to lead to systematic thinking as evidenced by superior prob - lem solving transfer . HYDRAULIC DRUM BRAKES Tube Wheel Cylinder Smaller Pistons Brake Drum Brake Shoe When the driver steps on the car ' s brake pedal . . . A piston moves forward inside the master cylinder ( not shown ) . The piston forces brake fluid out of the master cylinder and through the tubes to the wheel cylinders . In the wheel cylinders , the increase in fluid pressure makes a set of smaller pistons move . When the brake shoes press against the drum both the drum and the wheel stop or slow down . Figure I . Illustration of hydraulic braking system . ( Adapted from World Book Encyclopedia , Volume 2 [ p . 571 ] , 1988 , Chicago : World Book , Inc . Copyright 1988 by World Book , Inc . Adapted by permis - sion . ) 242 RICHARD E . MAYER ( 4 ) Does test evaluate systematic thinking ? X NO ( non - explanative text ) ( highly skilled learner ) non - systematic illustrations ) ( unsensitive test ) Positive Evidence No Evidence that Illustrations that Illustrations Enhance Systematic Enhance Systematic Thinking Thinking Figure 2 . Four criteria for research on meaningful instructional methods . Experiment 1 In Experiment 1 , unknowledgeable students read a text about braking systems that contained labeled illustrations or no illustrations , and then took recall , transfer , and recognition tests . Method Subjects and design . The subjects were 34 female college students who rated their knowledge of car mechanics and repair as " very little " and who reported that they had never performed any automobile repairs . Half of the subjects served in the illustrations group and half served in the no - illustrations group . Materials . The materials consisted of two versions of a text on brakes , a subject questionnaire , and three posttests , each typed on 8 . 5 - in . X 11 - in . ( 21 . 6 - cm X 27 . 9 - cm ) sheets of paper . The text was taken from the World Book Encyclopedia " s ( 1987 ) entry for " brakes " ; it contained 750 words that could be broken down into 95 idea units . The text included an explanation of how braking systems operate , including mechanical braking systems ( such as on bicycles ) , hydraulic braking systems ( such as on automobiles ) , and air braking systems ( such as on trains and trucks ) . The no - illustrations version contained only the text ; the illustrations versions included tabled illustrations for mechanical , hydraulic , and air braking systems . For each system , one illustration showed the key parts and another showed the changes in the status of each part when the brakes were on . Labels in the illustrations used the same wording as in the text for describing parts and actions in the systems . Illustrations appeared on the same page and below their corresponding paragraphs . A portion of the text is shown in the upper portion of Table 1 and an example illustration is shown in Figure 1 . The subject questionnaire solicited information concerning the students ' experience with automobile mechanics and repair . For example , students were asked to use a 5 - point scale ranging from very little to very much for the item , " Please put a check mark indicating your knowledge of car mechanics and repair . " In another item students were asked , " Please put a check mark next to the things you have done . " The list included having a driver ' s license , putting air into a tire , changing a tire , changing oil , changing spark plugs , and replacing brake shoes . The recall posttest asked students to " write down all you can remember from the passage you have just read " and to " pretend that you are writing an encyclopedia for beginnners . " The transfer posttest consisted of five questions , each on a separate sheet : ( a ) " Why do brakes get hot ? " ( b ) " What could be done to make brakes more reliable , that is , to make sure they would not fail ? " ( c ) " What could be done to make brakes more effective , that is , to reduce the distance needed to bring a car to a stop ? " ( d ) " Suppose you press on the brake pedal in your car but the brakes don ' t work . What could have gone wrong ? " ( e ) " What happens when you pump the brakes ( i . e . , press the pedal and release the pedal repeatedly and rapidly ) ? " The verbatim recognition posttest consisted of eight pairs of sen - tences ; for each pair , one of the sentences had occurred verbatim in the text whereas the other was a reworded version that retained the original meaning . For example , one item on the verbatim recognition posttest was " Each car on train has its own tank of compressed air . On trains , each car has its own tank of compressed air . " The instruc - tions at the top of the sheet asked the student to " place a check mark next to the sentence that is exactly ( word - for - word ) identical to a sentence in the passage you read . " Procedure . Subjects were randomly assigned to treatment group . First , subjects filled out the subject questionnaire . Second , subjects were given the appropriate text to read for 5 min : Subjects in the illustrations group received both text and labeled illustrations , whereas subjects in the no - illustrations group received text without illustrations . Third , subjects were allowed 8 min to take the recall test . Fourth , subjects were allowed 10 min to take the transfer test ; under the experimenter ' s instructions subjects spent 2 min on each item and were not allowed to go back to previous items . Fifth , subjects were allowed 2 min to complete the verbatim recognition posttest . Results and Discussion Scoring . For scoring purposes , the text was broken down into 95 idea units using a procedure described elsewhere ( Mayer , 1985 ) . Each idea unit conveyed one main idea such as a description of a single state , event , or fact . Thirty - five of the idea units ( explanative information ) described actions within the braking system that were causally related to one another , such as " When the driver steps on the car ' s brake pedal / a piston moves forward inside the master cylinder . / The piston forces brake fluid / out of the master cylinder / and through the tubes / to the wheel cylinder . / In the wheel cylinder , the increase in fluid pressure / makes a set of smaller pistons move . " The remaining 60 idea units ( nonexplanative information ) did not systematically describe how the systems operate . For each subject a tally was made of how many explanative ( out of 35 ) and how many nonexplanative idea units ( out of 60 ) were recalled . ILLUSTRATIONS IN TEXT 243 For each student , a transfer score was determined by tally - ing the number of correct answers produced on each transfer item ( out of a total possible of 15 ) . For the first question , possible elements in a correct answer included the following ideas : friction , pressure or rubbing or pressing , a stationary object ( such as a brake shoe ) , and a rotating object ( such as a rim or disk ) . Typical unacceptable answers lacked detail , such as saying brakes get hot because the driver rides the brakes . For the second question , some possible correct answers in - cluded adding a second or back - up system , using thicker shoes or tougher tubes or stronger cables , and developing more heat - resistant pads or shoes or a cooling system . Typical unacceptable answers involved vague statements about the need for maintenance , such as saying that the brakes should be checked regularly . For the third question , possible correct answers included reducing the time for the brake fluid to move by injecting fluid into the tubes or using faster moving fluid , increasing the sensitivity of the shoe by using a larger shoe or extra shoe or more responsive material in the shoe , and decreasing the space between the shoe and pad . Typical unacceptable answers included pressing the pedal faster or driving more slowly . For the fourth question , some possible correct answers included lack of fluid or lack of fluid pressure , worn or loose pads or pads that do not reach the shoe , a worn or loose shoe or shoes that fall off , jammed piston or holes in piston , a hole in the fluid tube or a break in the cable line , and water or moisture between pads and shoe that reduce friction . A typical unacceptable answer was that the brakes were broken or not working properly . For the fifth question , some possible correct answers included increase in friction , reduction in the build up of heat , and pressure of pad on shoe at more than one place . A typical unacceptable answer was that pumping brakes would result in flooding the engine . Each student ' s score on the recognition test was determined by counting the number of correct answers ( out of a total possible of eight ) . Illustrations improved recall of explanative but not other information . The first prediction is that systematic illustra - tions will help direct the reader ' s attention towards explana - tive information and away from other information in the text . The left panel of Figure 3 shows the proportion of explanative and nonexplanative idea units recalled by the illustrations and no - illustrations groups . As can be seen , the no - illustra - tions group recalled explanative and nonexplanative infor - Recall • Illustrations • No illustrations ExplanativeRecall Problem - Verbatim Solving Recognition Transfer Figure 3 . Proportion correct on recall , transfer , and recognition tests for two groups : Experiment I . mation at the same level—approximately 20 % —whereas the illustrations group recalled almost twice as much of the ex - planative information relative to the nonexplanative infor - mation . An analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) conducted on the recall data revealed that the Group x Type interaction pre - sented in the left panel of Figure 3 is significant , F { l t 32 ) = 4 . 513 , MS e - . 011 , p < . 02 . A supplemental t test conducted on the explanative data revealed that the illustrations group recalled marginally more explanative information than did the no - illustrations group , ( ( 32 ) = 1 . 95 , p < . 06 . Illustrations improved transfer but not verbatim recogni - tion . A second prediction is that systematic illustrations would help students to build coherent mental models of braking systems . Furthermore , these models should help stu - dents answer transfer questions that require " running one ' s model " ; however , the models should not help in verbatim retention of factual material from the text because the student may reorganize and paraphrase the material to fit with the models . The right panels of Figure 3 show the proportion of creative answers on the transfer posttest and the proportion of correct responses on the recognition posttest for each group . As predicted , the illustrations group generated significantly more creative answers to transfer questions than did the no - illustrations group , t { 32 ) - 3 . 05 , p < . 01 , but the groups did not differ on recognition , t ( 32 ) < \ , ns . Experiment 2 The results of Experiment 1 encourage the idea that labeled illustrations of systems can help the reader focus attention on explanative information and organize the information into a coherent representation of the system . A possible confound in Experiment 1 , however , is that the illustrations included labels that restated the key explanative information from the text ; therefore , it is unclear whether the effects of labeled illustrations should be attributed to the labels , the graphics , or both together . Experiment 2 solved this problem by includ - ing a group that received the text with labeled illustrations added ( identical to the illustrations group in Experiment 1 ) along with two new control groups , a group that received the text with only the graphics but not the labels from the illus - trations added ( illustrations - without - labels group ) and a group that received the text with only the labels but not the graphics from the illustrations added ( labels - without - illustrations group ) . As in Experiment 1 , all students were unknowledge - able about automobile mechanics and all took recall , transfer , and recognition tests . Method Subjects and design . The subjects were 44 female college students who lacked experience and knowledge in automobile mechanics . Fifteen subjects served in the illustrations group , 15 served in the illustrations - without - labels group , and 14 served in the labels - without - illustrations group . Materials . The brakes text for the illustrations group , the subject questionnaire , recall posttest , transfer posttest , and retention posttest were identifcal to those used in Experiment 1 . The brakes text for the illustrations - without - labels group was identical to the text for the illustrations group except that all words and pointer lines were deleted 244 RICHARD E . MAYER from the illustrations . The brakes text for the labels - without - illustra - tions group was identical to the text for the illustrations group except all that graphics and pointer lines were deleted from the illustrations , leaving only the words used in the illustrations . Procedure . The procedure was identical to that used in Experi - ment I except that subjects received either the illustrations text , the illustrations - without - Iabels text , or the labels - without - illustrations text ; and subjects were given 10 min to recall the text and 2 . 5 rain per transfer question . Scoring was identical to Experiment 1 . Results and Discussion Labeled illustrations improved recall of explanative but not other information . The left panel of Figure 4 shows the proportion of explanative and nonexpianative idea units re - called by each treatment group . If labeled illustrations serve to help the reader focus attention on explanative information , the illustrations group should recall more explanative than nonexpianative information as compared with the control groups . Consistent with this prediction and the results of Experiment 1 , the illustrations group recalled substantially more explanative than nonexpianative information whereas the two control groups did not . An ANOVA conducted on the recall data revealed a significant interaction between treat - ment group and type of recall that is consistent with this observation , F { 2 , 41 ) = 5 . 913 , MS C = . 005 , p < . 01 . A separate ANOVA conducted on the explantive recall data only revealed that the groups differed significantly in their recall of explan - ative information , ftl , 41 ) = 7 . 654 , MS e = . 008 , p < . 001 , and supplemental Newman - Keuls tests ( using a . 05 signifi - cance level ) revealed that the illustrations group recalled more explanative information than either of the control groups and that the labels - without - illustrations group recalled more ex - planative information than the illustrations - without - Iabels group . Labeled illustrations improved transfer but not verbatim retention . The right panel of Figure 4 shows the proportion of creative answers on the transfer posttest and the proportion of correct responses on the verbatim recognition posttest for each group . If labeled illustrations help readers to organize information into a coherent representation of the system , the illustrations group should perform better than the control groups on problem solving transfer but not on verbatim retention . Consistent with these predictions and the results of IllustrationsIllustrationswithout labels 0 Labelswithout illustrations Question Answering . 61 . 52 . 23 ExplanativeRecall Problem - SolvingTransfer VerbatimRecognition Figure 4 . Proportion correct on recall , transfer , and recognition tests for three groups : Experiment 2 . Experiment 1 , the illustrations group performed more than 50 % better than the control groups on creative problem solving but not on verbatim recognition . An ANOVA con - ducted on the problem - solving transfer data revealed that the groups differed significantly , F ( 2 , 41 ) = 14 . 097 , MS C = . 019 , p < . 001 , and supplemental Newman - Keuls tests revealed that the illustrations group performed significantly ( at p < . 05 ) better than each of the other groups . An ANOVA con - ducted on the verbatim retention data revealed no significant differences among the groups , F ( 2 , 41 ) < 1 , MS e = . 011 , ns . Conclusion The results are consistent with the idea that illustrations can affect the cognitive processing of the reader . In particular , the labeled illustrations used in these studies seem to have helped our students guide selective attention and build inter - nal connections . The effects of labeled illustrations on guiding attention is indicated by the illustrations group recalling more explanative than nonexpianative information relative to the control groups in both Experiments 1 and 2 . The effects of labeled illustrations on building connections is indicated by the illustration group outperforming the control groups on problem - solving transfer but not verbatim retention in both Experiments 1 and 2 , The results of Experiment 2 help to clarify that the effects of labeled illustrations depend both on the graphics and the labels . Providing only pictures ( without corresponding labels ) or only labels ( without corresponding pictures ) did not allow students to build useful mental models of the system as indicated by problem solving transfer , whereas students given labeled illustrations performed much better . Not surprisingly , providing labels that repeated explanative information from the text helped students recall that information better than if no labels were presented ; however , without a coherent dia - gram that integrated the information , students performed relatively poorly on problem - solving transfer . These results help to clarify further Larkin and Simon ' s ( 1987 , p . 65 ) analysis of " why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth a thousand words . " The present results instantiate the general criteria for suc - cessful instructional methods for meaningful learning de - scribed in the introduction . The criteria involve the type of text , the type of learner , the type of instructional method , and the type of performance evaluation . Explanative Text The first prerequisite for meaningful learning is that the to - be - learned material is potentially meaningful . Expository text can vary from purely descriptive passages whose purpose is to present a series of facts to explanative passages whose purpose is to present a model of some system . The present study used an explanative passage , that is , a passage that provided expla - nations . In particular , the passage explained how braking systems work , including mechanical , disk , drum , and air brakes . The explanation involved a prose structure that we have called " sequence " ( Cook & Mayer , 1988 ) , in which a ILLUSTRATIONS IN TEXT 245 change in one part of a system causes a change in a connected part , which causes a change in the next connected part , and so on . In summary , the brakes passage used in Experiments 1 and 2 met the first criterion of potential meaningfulness . Less Knowledgeable Learners The second prerequisite is that the students would not normally engage in meaningful learning . Students can vary from those with strong learning skills and high prior knowl - edge to those with low prior knowledge and weak learning skills . The present study involved students who reported being unknowledgeable about automobile mechanics and who had never performed any automobile repairs such as changing oil , spark plugs , or brake shoes . The rationale for focusing on less knowledgeable learners is that they are less likely than high - knowledge students to spontaneously engage in meaningful learning when presented with a passage involving automobile mechanics . In summary , the students in Experiments 1 and 2 met the second criterion of low knowledgeabiliy . Systematic Illustrations The third prerequisite is that the instructional manipula - tion—in this case , illustrations used in the text—evokes mean - ingful learning . Illustrations in text can range from irrelevant photographs to systematic illustrations of the relations among changes in system parts . The present study used systematic illustrations of the status of braking system before and after the brake pedal is engaged , showing the relation between a change in one part of the system and a corresponding change in the next part . The rationale for focusing on systematic illustrations is that they help readers focus attention on the explanative information and to organize that information into a coherent representation of the system . In summary , the instructional manipulation met the third criterion of evoking meaningful learning . Transfer Appropriate Testing Finally , the fourth prerequisite is that the performance tests measure meaningful learning . Tests can range from retention of facts to creative problem solving transfer . The present study used tests for remembering explanative information ( to eval - uate whether students focused their attention ) and for crea - tively solving transfer problems ( to evaluate whether students built logical connections ) . In summary , the testing procedure met the fourth criterion of evaluating meaningful learning . These results suggest some changes in the kinds of research questions we should ask about meaningful methods of instruc - tion . Instead of asking " Do illustrations improve learning ? " a more productive question is " Which kinds of illustrations affect which cognitive processes as measured by which de - pendent measures for which students reading which types of text ? " The present results suggest that systematic illustrations can help unknowledgeable readers to focus attention on ex - planative information in text and build connections . Fi - nally , these results extend some of the classic work on the role of pictures in learning of low - level paired - associates ( Lums - daine , 1963 ; Wittrock , 1986 ) to the learning of higher level material . References Bayman , P . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1988 ) . Using conceptual models to teach BASIC computer programming . Journal of Educational Psy - chology , 80 , 291 - 298 . Cook , L . K . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1983 ) . Reading strategies for meaningful learning from prose . In M . Pressley & J . Levin ( Eds . ) , Cognitive strategy research ( pp . 87 - 131 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Cook , L . K . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1988 ) . Teaching readers about the structure of scientific text . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 448 - 456 . de Kleer , J . , & Brown , J . S . ( 1981 ) . Mental models of physical mechanisms and their acquisition . In J . R . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Cog - nitive skills and their acquisition ( pp . 285 - 310 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum . de Kleer , J . , & Brown , J . S . ( 1983 ) . Assumptions and ambiguities in mechanistic mental models . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 155 - 190 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 - 129 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum . Hegarty , M . , & Just , M . A . ( in press ) . Understanding machines from text and diagrams . In H . Handl & J . Levin ( Eds . ) , Knowledge acquisition from text and pictures . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Hegarty , M . , Just , M . A . , & Morrison , I . R . ( 1988 ) . Mental models of mechanical systems : Individual differences in qualitative and quantitative reasoning . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 191 - 236 . Kieras , D . E . , & Boviar , S . ( 1986 ) . The role of a mental model in learning to operate a device . Cognitive Science , 8 , 255 - 273 . Larkin , J . H . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1987 ) . Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth a thousand words . Cognitive Science , 11 , 65 - 99 . Levin , J . R . , Anglin , G . J . , & Carney , R . N . ( 1987 ) . On empirically validating functions of pictures in prose . In D . M . Willows & H . A . Houghton ( Eds . ) , The psychology of illustration ( Vol . 1 , ( pp 51 - 85 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Loman , N . L . , & Mayer , R . E . ( 1983 ) . Signaling techniques that increase the understandability of expository prose . Journal of Ed - ucational Psychology , 75 , 402 - 412 . Lumsdaine , A . ( 1963 ) . Instruments and media of instruction . In N . L . Gage ( Ed . ) , Handbook of research on teaching ( pp . 583 - 682 ) . Chicago , IL : Rand - McNally . Mayer , R . E . ( 1975a ) . Different problem solving competencies estab - lished in learning computer programming with and without mean - ingful models . Journal of Educational Psychology , 67 , 725 - 734 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1975b ) . Forward transfer of different reading strategies evoked by test - like events in mathematics text . Journal of Educa - tional Psychology , 67 , 165 - 169 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1976 ) . Some conditions of meaningful learning for computer programming : Advance organizers and subject control of frame sequencing . Journal of Educational Psychology , 68 , 143 - 150 , Mayer R . E . ( 1978 ) . Advance organizers that compensate for the organization of text . Journal of Educational Psychology , 70 , 880 - 886 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1979 ) . Can advance organizers influence meaningful learning ? Review of Educational Research , 49 , 371 - 383 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1980 ) . Elaboration techniques that increase the mean - ingfulness of technical texts : An experimental test of the learning strategies hypothesis . Journal of Educational Psychology , 72 , 110 - 784 . 246 RICHARD E . MAYER Mayer , R . E . ( 1982 ) . Instructional variables in text processing . In A . Hammer & W . Kintsch ( Eds . ) , Discourse processing ( pp . 445 ^ 461 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Mayer , R . E . ( 1983 ) . Can you repeat that ? Qualitative effects of repetition and advance organizers on learning from science prose . Journal of Educational Psychology , 75 , 40 - 49 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1984 ) . Aids to prose comprehension . Educational Psychologist , 19 , 30 - 42 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1985 ) . Structural analysis of science prose : Can we increase problem solving performance ? In J . Black & B . Britton ( Eds . ) , Understanding expository prose ( pp . 65 - 87 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Mayer , R . E . ( 1987 ) . Instructional variables that influence cognitive processing during reading . In B . K . Britton & S . Glynn ( Eds . ) , Executive control process in reading ( pp . 201 - 216 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Mayer , R . E . , & Brotnage , B . ( 1980 ) . Different recall protocols for technical text due to advance organizers . Journal of Educational Psychology , 72 , 209 - 225 . Mayer , R . E . , Dyck , J . , & Cook , L . K . ( 1984 ) . Techniques that help readers build mental models from science text : Definitions training and signaling . Journal of Educational Psychology , 76 , 1089 - 1105 . Sagerman , N . & Mayer , R . E . ( 1987 ) . Forward transfer of different reading strategies evoked by adjunct questions in science text . Journal of Educational Psychology , 79 , 189 - 191 . Simon , H . A . ( 1969 ) . The sciences of the artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Snow , R . E . , & Lohman , D . F . ( 1984 ) . Toward a theory of cognitive aptitude for learning from instruction . Journal of Educational Psychology , 76 , 347 - 376 . Szlichcinski , K . P . ( 1979 ) . Diagrams and illustrations as aids to problem solving . Instructional Sciences , 8 , 253 - 274 . Wittrock , M . C . ( 1986 ) . Students ' thought processes . In M . C . Wit - trock ( Ed . ) , Handbook of research on teaching ( 3rd ed ) . ( pp . 297 - 314 ) . New York : Macmillan . World Book Encyclopedia ( 1987 ) . Chicago : World Book Encyclope - dia . Wright , P . ( 1977 ) . Presenting technical information : A survey of research findings . Instructional Science , 6 , 93 - 134 . Wright , P . ( 1982 ) . A user - oriented approach to the design of tables and flowcharts . In D . H . Jonassen ( Ed . ) , The technology of text . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Educational Technology Publications . Received July 25 , 1988 Revision received October 20 , 1988 Accepted November 15 , 1988 • Low Publication Prices for APA Members and Affiliates Keeping You Up - to - Date : All APA members ( Fellows ; Members ; and Associates , and Student Affiliates ) receive—as part of their annual dues - subscriptions to the American Psychologist and the APA Monitor . High School Teacher and Foreign Affiliates receive subscriptions to the APA Monitor and they can subscribe to the American Psychologist at a significantly reduced rate . In addition , all members and affiliates are eligible for savings of up to 50 % on other APA journals , as well as significant discounts on subscriptions from cooperating societies and publishers ( e . g . , the British Psychological Society , the American Sociological Association , and Human Sciences Press ) . Essential Resources : APA members and affiliates receive special rates for purchases of APA books , including the Publication Manual of the APA , the Master Lectures , and APA ' 8 Guide to Research Support . Other Benefits of Membership : Membership in APA also provides eligibility for low - cost insurance plans covering life ; medical and income protection ; hospital indemnity ; accident and travel ; Keogh retirement ; office overhead ; and student / school , professional , and liability . For more information , write to American Psychological Association , Membership Services , 1200 Seventeenth Street NW , Washington , DC 20036 , USA .