Quantitative Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics During Adhesion - Mediated Growth Cone Guidance Aih Cheun Lee , 1 Daniel M . Suter 1 , 2 1 Department of Biological Sciences , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 2 Bindley Bioscience Center , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 Received 30 April 2008 ; revised 3 June 2008 ; accepted 9 June 2008 ABSTRACT : During adhesion - mediated neuronal growth cone guidance microtubules undergo major rearrangements . However , it is unknown whether microtubules extend to adhesion sites because of changes in plus - end polymerization and / or translocation dynamics , because of changes in actin – microtubule interactions , or because they follow the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Here , we used ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy to directly quantify microtubule and actin dynamics in Aplysia growth cones as they turn towards beads coated with the cell adhesion molecule apCAM . During the initial phase of adhesion formation , dynamic microtubules in the peripheral domain prefer - entially explore apCAM - beads prior to changes in growth cone morphology and retrograde actin ﬂow . Interestingly , these early microtubules have unchanged polymerization rates but spend less time in retrograde translocation due to uncoupling from actin ﬂow . Fur - thermore , microtubules exploring the adhesion site spend less time in depolymerization . During the later phase of traction force generation , the central domain advances and more microtubules in the peripheral do - main extend because of attenuation of actin ﬂow and clearance of F - actin structures . Microtubules in the transition zone and central domain , however , translo - cate towards the adhesion site in concert with actin arcs and bundles , respectively . We conclude that adhesion molecules guide neuronal growth cones and underlying microtubule rearrangements largely by differentially regulating microtubule – actin coupling and actin move - ments according to growth cone region and not by con - trolling plus - end polymerization rates . ' 2008 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Develop Neurobiol 00 : 000 – 000 , 2008 Keywords : microtubule dynamics ; actin dynamics ; growth cone guidance ; cell adhesion ; ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy INTRODUCTION Neuronal growth cones are highly specialized signal - ing devices at the tip of axons , integrating extracellu - lar guidance information and transducing it into directional movement towards target cells . The two major cytoskeletal components that drive this direc - tional locomotion are microtubules and actin ﬁla - ments ( Dent and Gertler , 2003 ; Gordon - Weeks , 2004 ; Kalil and Dent , 2005 ) . It is well established that the actin cytoskeleton is critical for growth cone motility , while microtubules are essential for axonal elonga - tion ( Yamada et al . , 1970 ; Letourneau and Ressler , 1984 ; Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ) . In addition , both microtubule and actin dynamics are required for growth cone guidance ( Bentley and Toroian - Ray - mond , 1986 ; Sabry et al . , 1991 ; Chien et al . , 1993 ; Tanaka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ; Challacombe et al . , 1997 ; Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ) . Growth cone steering in vivo and Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article . Correspondence to : D . M . Suter ( dsuter @ purdue . edu ) . Contract grant sponsor : NIH ; contract grant number : R01 NS049233 . Contract grant sponsor : Bindley Bioscience Center , Purdue Uni - versity . ' 2008 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Published online 00 Month 2008 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI 10 . 1002 / dneu . 20662 1 in vitro involves major rearrangements of both micro - tubules and actin ﬁlaments ( Sabry et al . , 1991 ; Lin and Forscher , 1993 ; O’Connor and Bentley , 1993 ; Tanaka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Tanaka and Sabry , 1995 ; Suter et al . , 1998 ; Dent and Gertler , 2003 ; Zhou and Cohan , 2004 ) . Dynamic microtubules explore the growth cone pe - ripheral ( P ) domain , where they interact with F - actin bundles ( Tanaka and Kirschner , 1991 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Zhou et al . , 2002 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ) . The steady state distribution of these dynamic microtubules is largely determined by plus - end polymerization and retrograde translocation . Although not required for microtubule exploration of the P domain , ﬁlopodial actin bundles guide the poly - merization of microtubules , while removing them at the same time from the periphery by coupling to retro - grade actin ﬂow ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Burnette et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , actin – microtubule interactions are critical for growth cone guidance and directed axonal outgrowth ( Challacombe et al . , 1996 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Zhou et al . , 2002 ; Gordon - Weeks , 2004 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ; Zhou and Cohan , 2004 ) . Despite this wealth of information on the role of the growth cone cytoskele - ton , surprisingly little is known about which aspects of actin and microtubule polymerization and transloca - tion dynamics are affected during growth cone turning induced by speciﬁc guidance cues . The Aplysia cell adhesion molecule ( apCAM ) mediates growth cone steering involving leading edge protrusion and central ( C ) domain advance accompanied by attenuation of retrograde F - actin ﬂow , traction force generation and microtubule extension to adhesion sites ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . These ﬁndings provided evidence for a mecha - nism of substrate – cytoskeletal coupling controlling not only growth cone movements ( Mitchison and Kirsch - ner , 1988 ; Jay , 2000 ; Suter and Forscher , 2000 ) but cell migration in general ( Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Jurado et al . , 2005 ; Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ; Giannone et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , two molecular motors , myosin II and dynein , have recently been implicated in laminin - mediated growth cone guidance and remodeling ( Turney and Bridgman , 2005 ; Myers et al . , 2006 ; Grabham et al . , 2007 ) . How - ever , it is unclear whether microtubule polymerization or translocation dynamics actually change during ad - hesion - mediated growth cone turning , whether micro - tubule – actin interactions are altered or whether micro - tubules simply follow the actin reorganization . To address these basic questions we combined microtubule / actin ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy ( FSM ) ( Waterman - Storer et al . , 1998 ) with the restrained bead interaction ( RBI ) assay , which utilizes apCAM - coated beads to induce adhesion - mediated growth cone steering ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . The combina - tion of these two techniques enabled us to directly quantify both actin and microtubule dynamics during apCAM - mediated adhesion formation and traction force generation . Our results show that microtubules explore the adhesion site before morphological changes occur and that these early microtubules extend due to uncoupling from retrograde actin ﬂow and not due to changes in plus - end polymerization dynamics . During the second phase of growth cone guidance when trac - tion force builds up , the bulk of microtubules reorient largely due to changes of the actin organization . METHODS Aplysia Bag Cell Neuronal Culture Aplysia bag cell neurons were dissected and cultured on poly - L - lysine - coated coverslips as previously described ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Suter et al . , 1998 ) . Cultured cells were kept in L15 medium ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with artiﬁcial seawater ( ASW ) overnight in a 14 8 C incuba - tor . All procedures were performed in accordance with institutional guidelines . FSM of Microtubule and F - Actin Dynamics We performed multimode Differential Interference Contrast ( DIC ) / microtubule / actin FSM as recently described ( Waterman - Storer et al . , 1998 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . 1 mg / mL rhodamine - labeled tubulin ( Cytoskeleton ) and 20 l M Alexa 488 - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) were prepared in injection buffer ( 100 m M PIPES pH 7 . 0 , 1 m M MgCl 2 , 1 m M EGTA ) and clariﬁed at 10 , 000 g for 30 min at 4 8 C before microinjection into the cell bodies of Aplysia bag cell neurons after one day in culture , using an NP - 2 micromani - pulator and Femtojet microinjection system ( Eppendorf ) . Cells were allowed to recover for at least 1 h before L15 - ASW was exchanged with imaging medium ( ASW supple - mented with 2 mg / mL BSA , 1 mg / mL L - carnosine , and 25 m M vitamin E ; all chemicals from Sigma - Aldrich or Calbio - chem ) . Triple channel DIC / microtubule / actin time - lapse sequences were taken at 10 s intervals , using an Eclipse TE2000E ( Nikon ) microscope equipped with a 60 3 1 . 4 NA oil objective and an EMCCD camera ( Cascade II , Photomet - rics ) controlled with MetaMorph 7 . 0 software ( Molecular Devices ) . Fluorescent epi - illumination was provided by an X - cite 120 metal halide lamp ( EXFO Photonic Solutions ) and appropriate single band pass ﬁlter sets ( Chroma ) . RBI Assay RBI assays were performed as previously reported ( Suter et al . , 1998 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ) . About 5 l m - diameter Ni - 2 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology NTA silica beads ( Micromod ) were coated with recombi - nant 6His - tagged apCAM puriﬁed from baculovirus - infected Sf9 cells ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) . apCAM - coated beads were prepared as a 1 : 5000 dilution from 1 % stocks in imag - ing medium . Cells were perfused with imaging medium throughout the experiment . We used a 3D - hydraulic micro - manipulator ( Narishige ) to move individual beads with a microneedle onto the center quadrants Q2 or Q3 of the growth cone P domain and prevent them from retrograde movement . Because of the regional difference in microtu - bule distribution ( Fig . 1 ) , beads were consistently placed on the center quadrants to assess microtubule and actin dynam - ics . Triple channel time - lapse recording was performed before and immediately after bead placement until the C domain boundary reached the bead site , as determined by DIC imaging . Image Processing and Analysis of Cytoskeletal Dynamics MetaMorph 7 . 0 software ( Molecular Devices ) was used for image processing , quantitative analysis of microtubule and actin dynamics and making of movies and montages . To enhance speckles , microtubule and actin images were proc - essed with spatial ﬁlters in the following sequence : ( 1 ) Low pass 4 3 4 ; ( 2 ) Laplace 2 edge enhancement ; ( 3 ) Low pass 3 3 3 . For measuring microtubule density past 75 % line , 10 min time - lapse stacks ( 60 images ) were processed , binarized , and summed per segment . The C domain - bead axis was deﬁned as the 5 l m wide corridor between the bead position and the C domain boundary . Using individual microtubule montages , polymerization , and depolymeriza - tion rates were measured as the length change between the ﬁrst speckle at the plus - end and an internal microtubule ﬁ - duciary mark over time , while translocation was deﬁned by position changes of an internal speckle ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . For analysis of microtubule polymerization and translocation dynamics , we only selected clearly identiﬁa - ble single microtubules in the P domain . Rates were deter - mined on a time - weighted basis . Retrograde F - actin ﬂow rates were assessed by kymograph analysis of actin speck - les . One tailed paired t - tests were performed to identify sig - niﬁcant changes in dynamics parameters between side vs . center , on - vs . off - axis , and pre - bead vs . latency microtu - bules . Photoshop CS3 ( Adobe ) and Canvas 8 ( Deneba ) were used for image processing and ﬁnal ﬁgure assembly . RESULTS Dynamic Microtubules Preferentially Explore the Growth Cone Periphery on the Side Before analyzing microtubule dynamics during adhe - sion - mediated growth cone guidance , we ﬁrst won - dered whether there are regional differences in micro - tubule dynamics along the periphery in steady state Aplysia growth cones on poly - lysine substrates ( Fig . 1 ) . Such information is critical for the proper analysis and interpretation of changes in microtubule behavior during growth cone responses to more speciﬁc adhe - sion substrates , such as apCAM . In agreement with our previous study ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) , we found that in steady state growth cones dynamic microtubules explore the distal P domain 67 % more frequently in the side than in the center segments [ Fig . 1 ( B , D ) ; Movie 1 ] . Since microtubules are often associated with retrogradely moving ﬁlopodial actin bundles in the P domain ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) , a slower actin ﬂow in the side sections would result in less \ clearing " of microtubules from the growth cone pe - riphery . However , here we did not measure any sig - niﬁcant differences in actin ﬂow rates along the growth cone periphery [ Fig . 1 ( C , E ) ; average actin ﬂow rate 4 . 7 6 0 . 2 l m / min ] and therefore propose that the increased density of microtubules in distal side areas is not due to a similar decrease in retro - grade F - actin ﬂow rates . Next , we analyzed microtubule plus - end polymer - ization and translocation dynamics in side versus cen - ter quadrants by FSM [ Fig . 1 ( F – I ) ] . Polymerization rates were not signiﬁcantly different between side ( 7 . 8 6 0 . 4 l m / min ) and center region microtubules ( 8 . 4 6 0 . 4 l m / min ) , and similar observations were made for depolymerization rates [ Fig . 1 ( F ) ] . In addi - tion , forward ( 4 . 5 6 0 . 4 / 4 . 2 6 0 . 3 l m / min ) and retro - grade ( 4 . 7 6 0 . 2 / 5 . 2 6 0 . 2 l m / min ) translocation rates did not differ between microtubules in side ver - sus center regions , respectively [ Fig . 1 ( G ) ] . Retro - grade translocation rates of microtubules were similar to retrograde actin ﬂow rates . This is suggestive of actin - microtubule coupling , which occurs 65 % of time between microtubules and actin bundles in the growth cone periphery ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) . Fur - thermore , the percentage of time microtubules spent in polymerization or depolymerization had no re - gional variations [ Fig . 1 ( H ) ] . The only signiﬁcant difference between side and center microtubules were the fractions of time spent in retrograde translocation and pauses [ Fig . 1 ( I ) ] . Center microtubules spent 71 % 6 3 % of the observed time in retrograde translocation compared with 46 % 6 3 % for side microtubules . Conversely , center microtubules spent less time ( 18 % 6 2 % ) in translo - cation pauses than side microtubules ( 40 % 6 3 % ) . Thus , dynamic exploratory microtubules were more abundant in distal side regions because they spent less time spent in retrograde translocation , most likely due to uncoupling from actin ﬂow . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 3 Developmental Neurobiology Microtubules Explore Adhesion Sites During the Latency Phase Next we analyzed microtubule dynamics during ad - hesion - mediated growth cone steering . In the RBI assay , microbeads coated with ligands for apCAM are positioned onto the distal P domain of growth cones to mimic cellular adhesive substrates ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . The retrograde movement of beads coupled via apCAM to the underlying actin ﬂow is prevented by a microneedle , resulting in a stereotypic growth cone response towards the bead that can be subdivided into two major phases : ( 1 ) The \ latency " phase begins with bead placement and involves adhe - Figure 1 4 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology sion formation and signaling but very little morpho - logical changes . ( 2 ) The following \ traction " phase [ previously named \ interaction " phase ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) ] is characterized by major structural , cytoskele - tal and biophysical changes . These changes include C domain extension towards the bead and protrusive growth of the leading edge in front of the bead . Actin ﬂow is signiﬁcantly attenuated along the C domain - bead axis and microtubules extend towards the adhe - sion site , while tension builds up between the C do - main and the bead substrate [ Fig . 2 ( A – D ) ; Movie 2 ] ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) . These morphological and cytos - keletal rearrangements faithfully recapitulate the events occurring during growth cone encounters with favorable cellular substrates ( Lin and Forscher , 1993 ) and correspond to the stages in axon formation ( Gold - berg and Burmeister , 1986 ; Dent and Gertler , 2003 ) . During the latency period we previously observed F - actin accumulation and Src activation around the bead adhesion site , both depend on dynamic microtu - bules ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) . Since microtubules strengthen apCAM - actin coupling by Src activation , we speculated that dynamic microtubules could pref - erentially explore the adhesion site during the latency phase . Indeed , here we show by live cell imaging that microtubule density in the distal P domain along the C domain - bead axis ( on - axis ) but not in neighboring areas ( off - axis ) increased up to nine - fold throughout the latency period , whereas overall growth cone mor - phology remained stable [ Fig . 2 ( D , E ) ; Movie 3 ] . Thus , preferential microtubule extension to the adhe - sion site occurred clearly before the C domain ( char - acterized by large organelles ) moved towards the bead . Microtubule density then further doubled between the late latency and the traction period [ Fig . 2 ( E ) ] . Since microtubule distribution in the P domain is affected by the actin cytoskeleton ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Burnette et al . , 2007 ) , we analyzed whether changes in F - actin dynamics or content could explain the preferential microtubule exploration of the apCAM adhesion site during the latency phase . Consistent with our measurements of F - actin ﬂow rates , using marker beads ( Suter et al . , 1998 ) , actin FSM revealed that during the complete latency period retrograde F - actin ﬂow along the C domain - bead axis ( 5 . 1 6 0 . 3 l m / min in late latency ) was not different from either the period before bead placement ( 4 . 9 6 0 . 3 l m / min ) or off - axis areas ( 5 . 1 6 0 . 3 l m / min ) [ Fig . 2 ( F , G ) ] . In addition , we did not observe any decrease in F - actin content between the C domain boundary and the bead area during the latency period . During the traction phase however , we observed an 80 % attenuation of retrograde ﬂow as well as a decrease in F - actin content speciﬁcally along the C domain - bead axis [ dark area below line 5 and white arrows in Fig . 2 ( G ) ] . Furthermore , montages of on - axis F - actin dynamics revealed brief periods of for - ward movements of actin structures at the end of the traction phase [ arrows in Fig . 2 ( G ) ] . Upon bead release , ﬂow rates were increased when compared with pre - bead control rates [ Fig . 2 ( G ) , line 6 : 12 . 7 l m / min ] , indicating that the beads were under strong tension during the traction phase . In summary , micro - tubules along the C domain - bead axis preferentially explored apCAM adhesion sites during the early phase of apCAM - cytoskeletal coupling even though F - actin ﬂow continued at similar rate . Figure 1 Regional differences in microtubule translocation dynamics in steady state growth cones . ( A ) DIC image of a live Aplysia growth cone , including P domain , transition ( T ) zone , and C domain . Scale bar : 20 l m . ( B ) Microtubules ( MT ) labeled by rhodamine - tubulin explore the P domain more in side than center segments . P domains were divided into 20 segments . Dashed line marks 75 % of the distance from C domain boundary to the leading edge . ( C ) F - actin structures including ﬁlopodial bundles visualized with Alexa 488 - phalloidin . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of microtu - bule exploration in distal segments : average values 6 SEM of the sum of binarized microtubule signal beyond the 75 % line ( n ¼ 16 growth cones ) . ( E ) Retrograde actin ﬂow rate was similar in all segments ( mean values 6 SEM ; n ¼ 10 ) . ( F – I ) Microtubule polymerization and translocation dy - namics in side quadrants ( n ¼ 36 microtubules ) and center quadrants ( n ¼ 34 microtubules ) . Data was averaged per growth cone and then mean values were determined from n ¼ 16 growth cones . ( F ) Whisker plots of microtubule polymerization and depolymerization rates . The top and lower ends of the boxes are the upper and lower quartiles ; the middle line is the median value . Whiskers are minimum and maximum values . Means 6 SEM are dots with error bars ; mean values ( l m / min ) are above x - axis . Paired t - test ( side vs . center ) : p ¼ 0 . 15 ( polymerization rate ) , p ¼ 0 . 45 ( depoly - merization rate ) . ( G ) Whisker plots of forward ( p ¼ 0 . 24 ) and retrograde ( p ¼ 0 . 01 ) translocation rates . ( H ) Percentage of time spent in polymerization , polymerization pauses , or depolymerization ( Mean values 6 SEM ; p > 0 . 05 ) . ( I ) Percentage of time spent in forward , translocation pauses , or retrograde translocation . * p < 0 . 005 . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 5 Developmental Neurobiology Exploratory Microtubules Spend Less Time Coupled to Actin Flow and in Depolymerization To determine the mechanisms by which microtu - bules explore the adhesion site during the latency pe - riod , we analyzed and comparedplus - end polymer - ization and translocation dynamics of individual microtubules located on and off the C domain - bead axis before ( \ pre - bead " ) and right after bead place - ment ( \ latency " ) on the same growth cones . Before Figure 2 6 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology bead placement on - axis microtubules were often observed in polymerization phase , while undergoing retrograde translocation [ Fig . 3 ( A ) ] . During the la - tency phase , however , these on - axis microtubules spent less time in depolymerization and retrograde translocation [ Fig . 3 ( B ) ] . Quantiﬁcation of plus - end polymerization and translocation dynamics in 10 growth cones is presented in Figure 4 . During the la - tency period , polymerization ( 6 . 9 6 0 . 6 l m / min ) and depolymerization rates ( 9 . 2 6 1 . 1 l m / min ) of on - axis microtubules did not differ signiﬁcantly from control values measured in the same region before bead placement ( 7 . 7 6 0 . 4 and 10 . 4 6 1 . 3 l m / min , respec - tively ) or from off - axis control microtubules [ Fig . 4 ( B ) ] . Retrograde and forward translocation rates of microtubules exploring the adhesion site during the latency period also remained similar to pre - bead con - trol values as well as to rates of off - axis microtubules before and after bead placement on the same growth cones [ Fig . 4 ( C ) ] . Notably , these exploratory microtubules spent sig - niﬁcantly less time in retrograde translocation during the latency period when compared with pre - bead con - trol microtubules ( 53 % 6 7 . 5 % vs . 74 % 6 2 . 1 % ) , while spending more time in translocation pauses [ 31 % 6 3 . 2 % vs . 16 % 6 1 . 8 % ; Fig . 4 ( E ) ] . In addi - tion , these on - axis microtubules also spent less time in depolymerization during the latency period than before bead placement ( 7 % 6 1 . 2 % vs . 18 % 6 3 . 0 % ) , but more time in polymerization pauses [ 41 % 6 4 . 0 % vs . 31 % 6 4 . 4 % ; Fig . 4 ( D ) ] . Neither polymerization nor translocation dynamics of off - axis microtubules were affected during any phase of the apCAM - mediated growth cone guidance . Thus , microtubules preferentially explore apCAM adhe - sion sites during the latency phase through two mechanisms : ( 1 ) because they undergo less retro - grade translocation due to partial uncoupling from actin ﬂow and ( 2 ) because they spend less time in depolymerization . Microtubule Extension During the Traction Phase in Response to F - Actin Rearrangements We next investigated the mechanism of bulk microtu - bule extension towards the adhesion site during the traction phase of apCAM - mediated growth cone guidance . We have previously shown that apCAM - actin coupling results in an acute reduction of retro - grade actin ﬂow at the onset of the traction phase ( Suter et al . , 1998 ; Suter and Forscher , 2001 ) . Here , we conﬁrmed these ﬂow effects , using actin FSM [ Figs . 2 ( G ) and 5 ( A ) upper panel , orange and pink speckles ] . During the traction phase , retrograde actin ﬂow rates between the bead and the C domain were reduced by 80 % compared with before bead place - ment ( n ¼ 7 ) . In addition , we observed a gradual clearance of actin bundles from the on - axis corridor during the traction period when compared with the la - tency or pre - bead period [ Fig . 2 ( G ) , dark area below white arrows ; Fig . 5 ( A ) ] . Finally , the transition ( T ) zone , in which actin bundles are severed and disas - sembled , moved forward during the traction period [ indicated by red line in Fig . 5 ( A ) ] . F - actin ﬂow attenuation and bundle clearance in the P domain were accompanied by bulk extension of microtubules towards the bead [ Fig . 5 ( A ) lower panel , red microtu - bules ] , while exploratory microtubules from the la - tency phase persisted around the bead [ Fig . 5 ( A ) , blue and green microtubules ] . Observation of time - lapse movies indicated that the polymerization dy - namics of these on - axis microtubules during the trac - tion period did not signiﬁcantly differ from the pre - Figure 2 Preferential microtubule exploration of apCAM sites during latency period . ( A ) DIC image of growth cone directly after placement of apCAM - bead ( time ¼ 0 min ) restrained with a micropipette . ( B ) Microtubule FSM image of ( A ) . Dashed circle represents bead position ; box marks region used for time - lapse montage in ( D ) . ( C ) Actin FSM image of ( A ) . On - axis and off - axis boxes were used for time - lapse montage in ( G ) . ( D ) DIC and microtubule time - lapse montages of on - axis corridor marked in ( B ) before bead placement , during latency and traction period . Indi - vidual microtubules explored the adhesion site during the latency period . ( E ) Microtubule intensity past the 75 % boundary in the P domain increased on - axis ( one bead diameter ) during the latency period and remained constant off - axis ( up to two bead diameters next to the bead ; mean values 6 SEM ; n ¼ 10 growth cones ) . ( F ) Retrograde actin ﬂow rates remained similar in the latency period , but decreased signiﬁcantly on - axis during the traction period ( mean values 6 SEM ; n ¼ 7 growth cones ) . Latency period was equally divided into early , mid and late latency . ( G ) Montages of F - actin bundles in on - axis and off - axis boxes indicated in ( C ) . line 1 : 5 . 1 l m / min ; line 2 : 4 . 9 l m / min ; line 3 : 5 . 1 l m / min ; line 4 : 4 . 8 l m / min ; line 5 : 1 . 6 l m / min ; line 6 : 12 . 7 l m / min ; line 1 0 – 7 0 : 4 . 9 – 6 . 1 l m / min . Scale bars : 20 l m ( A ) , 10 l m ( D ) . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 7 Developmental Neurobiology bead or latency period , while most microtubules were either in translocation pauses or still in retrograde translocation , and very little forward translocation was observed [ Movies 2 and 4 ; Fig . 5 ( A ) lower panel ] . In addition , microtubules in the T zone and C do - main were re - oriented in concert with adjacent actin structures towards the apCAM - bead [ Fig . 5 ( B ) ; Movie 4 ] . These structures include the transverse actin arcs in the T zone as well as actin bundles in the C domain , both of which undergo Rho - dependent ac - tomyosin - contractility ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Zhang et al . , 2003 ) . Arcs are oriented perpendicular to the Figure 3 Microtubule and actin dynamics before and after bead placement . Montages of individ - ual microtubules ( top ) and actin bundles ( bottom ) in the on - axis region before bead placement ( A ) and during the latency phase ( B ) . The growth cone leading edge is facing the top edge . For translo - cation analysis , an internal reference speckle was followed ( green line : forward ; yellow : transloca - tion pause ; magenta : retrograde ) . Internal actin speckles used for line tracing are shown in orange . Polymerization events were determined by the addition / disappearance of microtubule plus end speckles , and polymerization rates measured based on the distance between the tip and internal ref - erence speckle per time interval . Microtubules are color - shaded based on polymerization event ( green : polymerization ; yellow : polymerization pause ; magenta : depolymerization ) . Arrows indi - cate direction of retrograde ﬂow . Time - lapse interval : 10 s . Vertical distance indicated on the right . ( A ) Example of an on - axis microtubule before bead placement undergoing plus - end polymerization and retrograde translocation ( magenta lines ) followed by depolymerization . ( B ) Example of an on - axis microtubule during the latency period spending more time in translocation pause ( yellow lines ) . 8 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology ﬁlopodial actin bundles ( Movie 4 , orange and yellow arrowhead ; Fig . 6 ) , while central actin bundles are oriented parallel to the axis of growth ( Movie 4 , red and pink arrowhead ) and appear to be formed from T zone arcs ( Zhang et al . , 2003 ) . The kymographs in Figure 5 ( B ) show concomitant movements of actin speckles on arcs and C domain bundles together with microtubule speckles towards the C domain and the apCAM - bead . These movements were conﬁrmed by tracking centroid positions of adjacent actin and microtubule speckles [ Fig . 5 ( C ) ] . During the traction period the decrease of P domain actin structures behind the bead resulted in reorientation of actin arcs towards the adhesion site where they appeared to be immobilized . Because they are under actomyosin - based tension , actin arcs narrowed the C domain and focused the microtubules towards the bead site ( Movie 4 ) . Bulk microtubules and actin bundles in the C domain both translocated forward towards the apCAM - bead at an average rate of 2 . 69 6 0 . 05 l m / min ( n ¼ 6 ) , which is similar to the rate of forward movement of the C domain boundary and leading edge ( 2 . 74 6 0 . 56 l m / min , n ¼ 14 ) . In summary , during the traction period , P domain microtubules advanced towards the adhesion site because of actin ﬂow attenuation and actin clearance , while T zone and C domain microtubules translocated forward most likely through association with arcs and central actin bundles , respectively . DISCUSSION There is accumulating evidence that actin – microtu - bule interactions are critical for a number of cellular processes , including cell migration , growth cone pathﬁnding , cell division , and cortical ﬂow ( Rodri - guez et al . , 2003 ) . In neuronal growth cones , actin – Figure 4 Quantiﬁcation of microtubule polymerization and translocation dynamics during the la - tency period . ( A ) Schematic of P domain areas from which microtubules were selected for analysis : Side quadrants before ( pre - bead off - axis ) and after bead placement ( latency off - axis ) ; C domain - bead axis before ( pre - bead on - axis ) and after bead placement ( latency on - axis ) . Only clearly quan - tiﬁable microtubules were analyzed in 10 growth cones ( 42 microtubules on - axis , 33 microtubules off - axis ) . ( B ) Polymerization rates do not change during the latency period ( paired t - test for pre - bead versus latency : p > 0 . 05 ) . Data are shown as whisker plots . ( C ) Forward and retrograde trans - location rates as whisker plots ( p > 0 . 05 ) . ( D ) During the latency phase , on - axis microtubules spent less time in depolymerization and conversely more time in pause when compared with on - axis microtubules before bead placement . ( E ) Exploratory on - axis microtubules spent less time in retro - grade translocation and conversely more time in translocation pause during the latency period than prior to bead placement . Mean values 6 SEM are shown in ( D ) and ( E ) ; * p < 0 . 05 . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 9 Developmental Neurobiology microtubule interactions regulate microtubule distri - bution under steady state condition and are important for growth cone steering and directed axonal out - growth ( Challacombe et al . , 1996 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ; Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Schaefer et al . , 2002 ; Zhou et al . , 2002 ; Gordon - Weeks , 2004 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ; Zhou and Cohan , 2004 ) . However , these previ - ous studies have largely relied on immunocytochemi - cal data and cytoskeletal drug treatments but not quantitative live cell imaging . Thus , it has remained unknown ( 1 ) whether microtubule polymerization or translocation dynamics change during growth cone steering , ( 2 ) whether actin – microtubule coupling changes , or ( 3 ) whether microtubules simply follow actin rearrangements . A detailed knowledge of which aspect of cytoskeletal dynamics is affected in growth Figure 5 Microtubules and F - actin rearrange in concert during the traction period . ( A ) Time - lapse montage of actin ( upper panel ) and microtubule dynamics ( lower panel ) in the C domain - bead axis during the late latency and traction period . Dashed line : growth cone leading edge ; circle : apCAM bead position . Actin speckles colored in pink and orange show that retrograde ﬂow contin - ued during late latency and abruptly stopped at the onset of traction phase . Red line : forward shift of the T zone . Blue and green microtubules explored the bead since the late latency period , while red microtubules extended to the bead during the traction period . White line : translocation pauses of blue microtubule . Scale bar : 5 l m . ( B ) DIC image of a different growth cone , when the C do - main reached the bead . Line Scans 1 and 2 through the T zone were used for actin and microtubule kymographs on the right ( green : actin , red : microtubules ; see also Movie 4 ) . Green box demarks area used for tracking the speckle positions shown in ( C ) . All scale bars : 10 l m . ( C ) Tracking of three pairs of adjacent actin and microtubule speckles from boxed area in ( B ) in the traction period . Arrows indicate direction of speckle movements . 10 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology cone turning is essential to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms and guide the search for cytoskeletal effector proteins downstream of guid - ance receptors . To our knowledge the present study represents the ﬁrst quantitative analysis of microtu - bules dynamics during adhesion - mediated cytoskele - tal rearrangements involved in growth cone steering . Here , we have demonstrated by quantitative microtu - bule / actin FSM that microtubule extension in adhe - sion - mediated attractive growth cone guidance is largely regulated at the level of actin – microtubule coupling and less by controlling microtubule plus - end polymerization dynamics . While our ﬁndings , as well as others , indicate that guidance cues primarily affect the actin cytoskeleton and actin – microtubule interactions ( Dent and Gertler , 2003 ; Zhou and Cohan , 2004 ) , certain cues , such as NGF and slit , may also signal directly to microtubule plus - end binding proteins , such as APC and orbit / MAST / CLASP , respectively , and affect microtubule dynam - ics independently of the actin cytoskeleton ( Lee et al . , 2004 ; Zhou et al . , 2004 ) . Microtubule Dynamics in Steady State Growth Cones Consistent with our previous report ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) , we found that steady state growth cones on poly - lysine substrates have a higher density of ex - Figure 6 Model : Mechanisms of microtubule extension during adhesion - mediated growth cone guidance . Upper panel shows top view of growth cone in steady state , latency , and traction period of adhesion - mediated growth cone guidance . Lower panel shows corresponding cross - sections of the plasma membrane / cytoskeleton interface marked by the box in the top view . In steady state growth cones on poly - lysine , apCAM is not coupled to actin ( 1 ) , which moves at constant retro - grade ﬂow ( 2 ) . Microtubule tip positions are determined by a balance of plus - end polymerization and retrograde transport through actin ﬂow coupling via putative linker protein ( s ) ( blue ) ( 3 ) . During the latency period , apCAM - actin coupling forces are weak ( 1 ) and therefore do not result in ﬂow attenuation ( 2 ) . Putative signals derived from the adhesion site might uncouple microtubules from F - actin by changing the afﬁnity of linker protein ( s ) to at least one of the cytoskeletal components ( 3 ) , resulting in higher microtubule exploration of the adhesion site . Note that the additional possi - ble mechanisms discussed , such as increased microtubule stability and capture at adhesion site , are not depicted in this schematic . During the traction period , strong apCAM - actin coupling ( 1 ) stops retrograde ﬂow along the C domain - bead axis ( 2 ) . Microtubules persisting at the bead since the la - tency phase are joined by new microtubules invading the corridor due to actin ﬂow attenuation and F - actin clearance ( 3 ) . T zone and C domain microtubules translocate towards the bead , potentially by coupling to arcs and central actin bundles . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 11 Developmental Neurobiology ploratory microtubules in the side versus center regions ( Fig . 1 ) . The present ﬁnding of constant actin ﬂow rates along the growth cone periphery is in slight contrast with our previous study , where we reported a 15 % decrease in actin ﬂow in the side versus center regions ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) . Because of the larger sample size in the present study , we believe that the current ﬁnding is more accurate . In addition , a rela - tively small decrease of 15 % in actin ﬂow could not solely explain the 67 % increase in microtubule den - sity on the side . Thus , other mechanisms must cause the region - speciﬁc microtubule exploration of the dis - tal P domain . We found that microtubules in the side segments spend signiﬁcantly less time in retrograde translocation than microtubules in the center seg - ments . Since retrograde microtubule translocation is largely caused by coupling to retrogradely moving actin bundles ( Schaefer et al . , 2002 ) , we conclude that microtubules on the growth cone sides have a lower level of actin coupling than center region microtubules . Such differences in actin coupling could be because of potential alterations in amounts or afﬁnities of actin - microtubule linker proteins between side and center regions . Although putative linker molecules , such as microtubule associated and motor proteins have been proposed , clearly more work is needed to establish the role of these candidate proteins in neuronal growth cones ( Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . What could be the functional signiﬁcance of these regional differences in microtubule distribution ? Since evidence suggests that microtubules have a sig - naling role in growth cone steering ( Buck and Zheng , 2002 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ) , we speculate that the higher density of microtubules in the side regions could increase the sensing potential of the growth cone for guidance cues that are presented more \ off - path " with respect to the direction of growth . At least in the case of the large Aplysia growth cone with a wide and not very dynamic P domain , the probability of adhesion receptor binding and activation on the side could be lower than in the center region , while the growth cone is moving straight ahead in cell culture . Because of the Aplysia growth cone geometry , adhe - sion molecules presented in the path of growth cone movement will engage a higher number of receptors in the center part of the P domain when compared with adhesion molecules presented at similar den - sities on the side . The growth cone might compensate the lower probability of encountering molecular cues on the side with an increased microtubule density , which in turn could increase the probability of turning responses . Whether such a mechanism plays a role for growth cone guidance in vivo , where growth cones tend to be smaller , more dynamic and exposed to multiple cues , is unknown . Microtubule Dynamics During Adhesion - Mediated Growth Cone Guidance Interestingly , we also found evidence that uncoupling from retrograde actin ﬂow is a major cause for the gradual increase in microtubule density at adhesion sites during the latency period of apCAM - mediated growth cone guidance . This ﬁnding might be in con - trast with our previous observations of low microtu - bule density at the bead based on tubulin immunocyto - chemistry of growth cones ﬁxed during the latency pe - riod ( Suter et al . , 2004 ) . Immunocytochemistry only provides a snapshot in time , while microtubule FSM allows monitoring the behavior of microtubules during the complete sequence of apCAM - induced growth cone responses . Thus , immunocytochemistry likely underestimates actual microtubule dynamics . In addi - tion , quantiﬁcation of microtubule density was per - formed differently in the two studies : Previously , we determined the average number of microtubules at the bead site and did not directly compare these values with microtubule density at same location before bead placement or off - axis . Here , we determined microtu - bule density by summation of binarized microtubule intensities in more growth cones over 10 min and directly compared these values with microtubule den - sities before bead placement and off - axis . Thus , we believe that the present study describes the microtubule behavior during the latency period more accurately . A reﬁned substrate - cytoskeletal model ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Jay , 2000 ; Suter and Forscher , 2000 ) explaining the underlying cytoskeletal changes involved in adhesion - mediated growth cone guidance is depicted in Figure 6 . Similarly to our present ﬁnd - ings , previous studies reported early microtubule rearrangements before growth cones turn away from a repelling substrate border ( Tanaka and Kirschner , 1995 ; Williamson et al . , 1996 ; Challacombe et al . , 1997 ) . We hypothesize that a signal originating from the adhesion site traveling retrogradely with actin ﬂow may reduce the coupling state of putative actin - microtubule linker protein ( s ) , such as MAP2 , tau , or Short Stop ( Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) . Our data also support two other potential mechanisms leading to increased microtubule density at adhesion sites dur - ing the early phase of adhesion - mediated growth cone rearrangements . ( 1 ) One mechanism could involve stabilization by plus - end tracking proteins , since microtubules also spent less time in depolymer - 12 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology ization during the latency period ( Gordon - Weeks , 2004 ; Kalil and Dent , 2005 ; Koester et al . , 2007 ) . Conventionally , measures of microtubule stability are usually the classic parameters catastrophe and rescue frequencies , which are the frequencies of polymeriza - tion / depolymerization transition events ( Walker et al . , 1988 ) . In this study we have not used these pa - rameters to describe microtubule stability , because microtubules in the growth cone periphery frequently collapse into the crowded C domain , after which it is difﬁcult to determine whether the same microtubules underwent rescue or not , resulting in an underesti - mate of rescue events ( Tanaka and Kirschner , 1991 ) . Instead we used the straightforward measurement of \ percentage time spent " in a given polymerization behavior category , which is partially reﬂective of ca - tastrophe and rescue frequencies . ( 2 ) The second al - ternative mechanism could be explained by the cap - ture of microtubules at the adhesion site , as shown previously for non - neuronal cells ( Kaverina et al . , 1998 ; Gundersen , 2002 ) , since we observed an increase in translocation pause of exploratory micro - tubules during the latency period . What is the purpose of attracting early microtu - bules towards the newly formed adhesion site ? Src tyrosine kinase activation at the bead site is essential for strong apCAM - actin coupling and depends on microtubule dynamics ( Suter and Forscher , 2001 ; Suter et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , a bidirectional signal might initiate cytoskeletal reorganization in apCAM - induced growth cone steering . Upon apCAM - cluster - ing near the leading edge , signals could travel with retrograde actin ﬂow to promote microtubule exten - sion via partial actin – microtubule uncoupling and microtubule stabilization ( Fig . 6 ) . These early micro - tubules could then deliver signaling molecules , such as Src activators to strengthen apCAM - actin cou - pling . As a consequence , actin ﬂow is attenuated and actin bundles disappear , allowing bulk microtubule extension to the adhesion site . Similar P domain inva - sion by microtubules occurred when such actin changes were induced globally either by application of the myosin II inhibitor blebbistatin or the actin po - lymerization inhibitor cytochalasin B ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Burnette et al . , 2007 ) . The concerted movement of T zone and C domain microtubules and adjacent actin structures suggests that microtubules are translocated towards the adhe - sion site by coupling to reorienting actin arcs and central actin bundles , respectively . The T zone actin arcs and C domain actin bundles are likely the cytos - keletal structures that maintain the tension built up during adhesion - mediated neurite growth and guid - ance ( Lamoureux et al . , 1989 ; Suter et al . , 1998 ) . However , we can not precisely determine whether the coupling level between microtubules and F - actin changes during the phase of traction force generation because of the high density of these cytoskeletal structures in the C domain . Alternatively , the micro - tubule motor dynein could be involved , as proposed in laminin - stimulated growth cone turning and out - growth ( Myers et al . , 2006 ; Grabham et al . , 2007 ) . Finally , we can not formally exclude the possibility that microtubule – microtubule interactions also con - tribute to microtubule reorientation in the T zone and C domain during the traction phase . In summary , dynamic microtubules in the P do - main of growth cones advance to apCAM adhesion sites earlier than previously anticipated . Interestingly , these microtubules do so by uncoupling from actin , while bulk microtubule extension later occurs due to actin rearrangements involved in growth cone guid - ance . Since actin – microtubule interactions play a role in cell migration in general ( Waterman - Storer and Salmon , 1997 ; Salmon et al . , 2002 ; Rodriguez et al . , 2003 ) , it will be interesting to investigate whether similar changes in actin – microtubule coupling occur when ﬁbroblast - like cells migrate on different adhe - sion substrates . These mechanistic ﬁndings will facil - itate the search for the regulatory molecules in charge , such as actin – microtubule linker protein ( s ) , which is an exciting goal for future studies . The authors thank Dr . Gil Lee and Xiong Ying for assis - tance with development of additional growth cone turning assays not employed in the present study . We are grateful to Dr . Peter Hollenbeck , Dr . Donald Ready , and Dr . Chris Staiger as well as members of the Suter Lab for valuable comments on the article . We also thank Dr . Laurie Iten for help with compression of movie ﬁles . REFERENCES Bentley D , Toroian - Raymond A . 1986 . Disoriented path - ﬁnding by pioneer neurone growth cones deprived of ﬁlopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature 323 : 712 – 715 . Buck KB , Zheng JQ . 2002 . Growth cone turning induced by direct local modiﬁcation of microtubule dynamics . J Neurosci 22 : 9358 – 9367 . Burnette DT , Schaefer AW , Ji L , Danuser G , Forscher P . 2007 . Filopodial actin bundles are not necessary for microtubule advance into the peripheral domain of Aplysia neuronal growth cones . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1360 – 1369 . Challacombe JF , Snow DM , Letourneau PC . 1996 . Actin ﬁlament bundles are required for microtubule reorienta - tion during growth cone turning to avoid an inhibitory guidance cue . J Cell Sci 109 ( Part 8 ) : 2031 – 2040 . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 13 Developmental Neurobiology Challacombe JF , Snow DM , Letourneau PC . 1997 . Dynamic microtubule ends are required for growth cone turning to avoid an inhibitory guidance cue . J Neurosci 17 : 3085 – 3095 . Chien CB , Rosenthal DE , Harris WA , Holt CE . 1993 . Navi - gational errors made by growth cones without ﬁlopodia in the embryonic Xenopus brain . Neuron 11 : 237 – 251 . Dent EW , Gertler FB . 2003 . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 40 : 209 – 227 . Dent EW , Kalil K . 2001 . Axon branching requires interac - tions between dynamic microtubules and actin ﬁlaments . J Neurosci 21 : 9757 – 9769 . Forscher P , Smith SJ . 1988 . Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin ﬁlaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J Cell Biol 107 : 1505 – 1516 . Giannone G , Dubin - Thaler BJ , Rossier O , Cai Y , Chaga O , Jiang G , Beaver W , Dobereiner HG , Freund Y , Borisy G , Sheetz MP . 2007 . Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 128 : 561 – 575 . Goldberg DJ , Burmeister DW . 1986 . Stages in axon forma - tion : Observations of growth of Aplysia axons in culture using video - enhanced contrast - differential interference contrast microscopy . J Cell Biol 103 : 1921 – 1931 . Gordon - Weeks PR . 2004 . Microtubules and growth cone function . J Neurobiol 58 : 70 – 83 . Grabham PW , Seale GE , Bennecib M , Goldberg DJ , Vallee RB . 2007 . Cytoplasmic dynein and LIS1 are required for microtubule advance during growth cone remodeling and fast axonal outgrowth . J Neurosci 27 : 5823 – 5834 . Gundersen GG . 2002 . Evolutionary conservation of micro - tubule - capture mechanisms . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 296 – 304 . Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM . 2006 . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 : 1361 – 1374 . Jay DG . 2000 . The clutch hypothesis revisited : Ascribing the roles of actin - associated proteins in ﬁlopodial protru - sion in the nerve growth cone . J Neurobiol 44 : 114 – 125 . Jurado C , Haserick JR , Lee J . 2005 . Slipping or gripping ? Fluorescent speckle microscopy in ﬁsh keratocytes reveals two different mechanisms for generating a retro - grade ﬂow of actin . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 507 – 518 . Kalil K , Dent EW . 2005 . Touch and go : Guidance cues sig - nal to the growth cone cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Neuro - biol 15 : 521 – 526 . Kaverina I , Rottner K , Small JV . 1998 . Targeting , capture , and stabilization of microtubules at early focal adhesions . J Cell Biol 142 : 181 – 190 . Koester MP , Muller O , Pollerberg GE . 2007 . Adenomatous polyposis coli is differentially distributed in growth cones and modulates their steering . J Neurosci 27 : 12590 – 12600 . Lamoureux P , Buxbaum RE , Heidemann SR . 1989 . Direct evidence that growth cones pull . Nature 340 : 159 – 162 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . 1996 . Cell migration : A physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 – 369 . Lee H , Engel U , Rusch J , Scherrer S , Sheard K , Van Vactor D . 2004 . The microtubule plus end tracking protein Orbit / MAST / CLASP acts downstream of the tyrosine ki - nase Abl in mediating axon guidance . Neuron 42 : 913 – 926 . Letourneau PC , Ressler AH . 1984 . Inhibition of neurite ini - tiation and growth by taxol . J Cell Biol 98 : 1355 – 1362 . Lin CH , Forscher P . 1993 . Cytoskeletal remodeling during growth cone - target interactions . J Cell Biol 121 : 1369 – 1383 . Marsh L , Letourneau PC . 1984 . Growth of neurites without ﬁlopodial or lamellipodial activity in the presence of cy - tochalasin B . J Cell Biol 99 : 2041 – 2047 . Mitchison T , Kirschner M . 1988 . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron 1 : 761 – 772 . Myers KA , Tint I , Nadar CV , He Y , Black MM , Baas PW . 2006 . Antagonistic forces generated by cytoplasmic dynein and myosin - II during growth cone turning and axonal retraction . Trafﬁc 7 : 1333 – 1351 . O’Connor TP , Bentley D . 1993 . Accumulation of actin in subsets of pioneer growth cone ﬁlopodia in response to neural and epithelial guidance cues in situ . J Cell Biol 123 : 935 – 948 . Rodriguez OC , Schaefer AW , Mandato CA , Forscher P , Bement WM , Waterman - Storer CM . 2003 . Conserved microtubule - actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 599 – 609 . Sabry JH , O’Connor TP , Evans L , Toroian - Raymond A , Kirschner M , Bentley D . 1991 . Microtubule behavior during guidance of pioneer neuron growth cones in situ . J Cell Biol 115 : 381 – 395 . Salmon WC , Adams MC , Waterman - Storer CM . 2002 . Dual - wavelength ﬂuorescent speckle microscopy reveals coupling of microtubule and actin movements in migrat - ing cells . J Cell Biol 158 : 31 – 37 . Schaefer AW , Kabir N , Forscher P . 2002 . Filopodia and actin arcs guide the assembly and transport of two popu - lations of microtubules with unique dynamic parameters in neuronal growth cones . J Cell Biol 158 : 139 – 152 . Suter DM , Errante LD , Belotserkovsky V , Forscher P . 1998 . The Ig superfamily cell adhesion molecule , apCAM , mediates growth cone steering by substrate - cytoskeletal coupling . J Cell Biol 141 : 227 – 240 . Suter DM , Forscher P . 2000 . Substrate - cytoskeletal cou - pling as a mechanism for the regulation of growth cone motility and guidance . J Neurobiol 44 : 97 – 113 . Suter DM , Forscher P . 2001 . Transmission of growth cone traction force through apCAM - cytoskeletal linkages is regulated by Src family tyrosine kinase activity . J Cell Biol 155 : 427 – 438 . Suter DM , Schaefer AW , Forscher P . 2004 . Microtubule dynamics are necessary for SRC family kinase - depend - ent growth cone steering . Curr Biol 14 : 1194 – 1199 . Tanaka E , Kirschner MW . 1995 . The role of microtubules in growth cone turning at substrate boundaries . J Cell Biol 128 : 127 – 137 . Tanaka E , Sabry J . 1995 . Making the connection : Cytoske - letal rearrangements during growth cone guidance . Cell 83 : 171 – 176 . 14 Lee and Suter Developmental Neurobiology Tanaka EM , Kirschner MW . 1991 . Microtubule behavior in the growth cones of living neurons during axon elonga - tion . J Cell Biol 115 : 345 – 363 . Turney SG , Bridgman PC . 2005 . Laminin stimulates and guides axonal outgrowth via growth cone myosin II ac - tivity . Nat Neurosci 8 : 717 – 719 . Walker RA , O’Brien ET , Pryer NK , Soboeiro MF , Voter WA , Erickson HP , Salmon ED . 1988 . Dynamic instabil - ity of individual microtubules analyzed by video light microscopy : Rate constants and transition frequencies . J Cell Biol 107 : 1437 – 1448 . Waterman - Storer CM , Desai A , Bulinski JC , Salmon ED . 1998 . Fluorescent speckle microscopy , a method to visu - alize the dynamics of protein assemblies in living cells . Curr Biol 8 : 1227 – 1230 . Waterman - Storer CM , Salmon ED . 1997 . Actomyosin - based retrograde ﬂow of microtubules in the lamella of migrating epithelial cells inﬂuences microtubule dynamic instability and turnover and is associated with microtu - bule breakage and treadmilling . J Cell Biol 139 : 417 – 434 . Williamson T , Gordon - Weeks PR , Schachner M , Taylor J . 1996 . Microtubule reorganization is obligatory for growth cone turning . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 15221 – 15226 . Yamada KM , Spooner BS , Wessells NK . 1970 . Axon growth : Roles of microﬁlaments and microtubules . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 66 : 1206 – 1212 . Zhang XF , Schaefer AW , Burnette DT , Schoonderwoert VT , Forscher P . 2003 . Rho - dependent contractile responses in the neuronal growth cone are independent of classical pe - ripheral retrograde actin ﬂow . Neuron 40 : 931 – 944 . Zhou FQ , Cohan CS . 2004 . How actin ﬁlaments and micro - tubules steer growth cones to their targets . J Neurobiol 58 : 84 – 91 . Zhou FQ , Waterman - Storer CM , Cohan CS . 2002 . Focal loss of actin bundles causes microtubule redistribution and growth cone turning . J Cell Biol 157 : 839 – 849 . Zhou FQ , Zhou J , Dedhar S , Wu YH , Snider WD . 2004 . NGF - induced axon growth is mediated by localized inac - tivation of GSK - 3 b and functions of the microtubule plus end binding protein APC . Neuron 42 : 897 – 912 . Microtubule Dynamics in Growth Cone Guidance 15 Developmental Neurobiology