Chromosoma ( 1998 ) 107 : 479 – 485 (cid:23) Springer - Verlag 1998 Simultaneous inhibition of contractile ring and central spindle formation in mammalian cells treated with cytochalasin B Daniela Cimini 1 , Daniela Fioravanti 1 , Caterina Tanzarella 2 , Francesca Degrassi 1 1 Dipartimento Genetica e Biologia Molecolare , Universit(cid:224) “La Sapienza” , Via degli Apuli 4 , I - 00185 , Roma , Italy 2 Dipartimento Biologia , Universit(cid:224) “Roma Tre” , Rome , Italy Received : 7 August 1998 / Accepted : 13 September 1998 Edited by : W . C . Earnshaw and W . Hennig Correspondence to : F . Degrassi e - mail : degrassi @ axcasp . caspur . it Abstract . In this work we have used the inhibitor of F - actin polymerisation cytochalasin B ( Cyt B ) to test the hypothesis that the contractile ring and the central spindle are mutually interdependent structures in mammalian mi - totic cells . Double fluorescence staining of a - tubulin and F - actin was employed to analyse anaphase and telophase figures from asynchronously growing cultures and pro - metaphase - synchronised cells . Testing for the presence of the central spindle and contractile ring in human pri - mary fibroblasts , human hepatoma cells and Chinese hamster cells after Cyt B treatment showed that both structures were simultaneously absent in over 60 % of treated anaphases and 80 % of telophases . Experiments on resumption of cytokinesis in cleavage - arrested cells further showed that Cyt B - treated human fibroblasts pro - ceeded to cleavage within minutes after removal of the drug from the medium , concomitant with the re - forma - tion of both cellular structures in cleaving cells . These da - ta suggest that the presence of a correctly assembled con - tractile ring is essential for the formation and persistence of the central spindle during ana - telophase and provide further support for the idea of a strong co - operative inter - action between these two structures during cytokinesis . Introduction Cytokinesis represents the final step of mitosis and is temporally coordinated with the segregation of replicated chromosomes to the spindle poles and the re - formation of the nuclear membrane once chromosome migration has occurred . Division of cytoplasm is usually achieved by the functioning of the actomyosin - based contractile ring , which provides the forces necessary for cell cleav - age ( Satterwhite and Pollard 1992 ; Fishkind and Wang 1995 ) . Several crucial aspects of cell cleavage are not fully understood as yet , including the determination of the po - sition of the cleavage plane , the mechanism of assembly of the contractile ring and the coordination of the onset of cytokinesis with the completion of nuclear division . Sev - eral studies involving micromanipulation of fertilised echinoderm eggs have stressed the importance of spindle poles and astral microtubules in determining the cleavage plane ( Rappaport 1961 ; Salmon and Wolniak 1990 ; Rappaport 1991 ) . However , recent observations suggest that this mechanism may not be universal and , rather , highlight a role of the microtubule central spindle as the cleavage - determining structure . Indeed , perturbations of the organisation of the central spindle by microtubule - interacting drugs ( Fishkind et al . 1996 ) , or disruption of the cortex / midzone interaction by microneedle applica - tion ( Cao and Wang 1996 ) , severely inhibit both cortical movement and the corresponding alignment of F - actin fi - laments along the spindle axis . In addition , analysis of multipolar mitosis in cultured mammalian cells indicates that the cleavage activity largely correlates with the dis - tribution of midzone microtubule bundles ( Wheatley and Wang 1996 ; Eckley et al . 1997 ) . All these results converge to suggest that microtubule and actomyosin sys - tems may interact in the spindle midzone , providing a mechanism for spatial and temporal coordination of nu - clear and cytoplasmic division . In order to assess whether the central spindle and the contractile ring act as interdependent structures during mitosis , we have analysed the effect of cytochalasin B ( Cyt B ) on both contractile ring assembly and central spindle formation in cultured mammalian cells . Cyt B is a well - known inhibitor of cytokinesis , which inhibits con - tractile ring formation in most cell types , giving rise to bi - nucleate cells ( Carter 1967 ; Lin et al . 1982 ; Antoccia et al . 1993 ; Degrassi et al . 1993 ) . At present , little is known about the effects of this inhibitor of actin polymerisation on central spindle formation in mitosis or meiosis . Recent studies with Drosophila spermatocytes demonstrated that the central spindle is absent in ana - telophases of Cyt B - treated testes and suggested co - operation of both cellular 480 structures during cytokinesis ( Giansanti et al . 1998 ) . In earlier work with mammalian PtK2 cells , Cyt B treatment was reported to inhibit formation of the central spindle ( Aubin et al . 1981 ) , whereas Martineau et al . ( 1995 ) showed that a post - mitotic central spindle was maintained in dihydrocytochalasin B - treated HeLa cells . To investigate further the effects of Cyt B on the cen - tral spindle , we carried out experiments combining immu - nofluorescence visualisation of a - tubulin using a specific antibody , and F - actin staining by rhodamine - phalloidin . Fluorescence staining was performed on anaphases and telophases from human primary fibroblasts , and human hepatoma and Chinese hamster cultures that had been briefly exposed to Cyt B . In addition , we monitored ana - phase and telophase figures in human fibroblast cultures that had been synchronised in prometaphase in the pres - ence of the spindle inhibitor nocodazole , and subsequently released in nocodazole - free medium with or without Cyt B . These experiments enabled us accurately to test for the presence of both the contractile ring and the central spindle in a substantially synchronous population of ana - telophase cells . Finally , the ability of cleavage - arrested telophases to perform cytokinesis and re - form the actin ring and the central spindle upon removal of Cyt B from the medium was also tested . Together , the results obtained are consistent with the idea that the central spindle and the contractile ring are mutually interdependent structures , both essential for the completion of cytokinesis . Materials and methods Cell cultures and treatments . Human lung diploid fibroblasts ( MRC - 5 cells , obtained from the American Type Culture Collec - tion ) , human hepatoma ( Hep G2 ) and Chinese hamster ( CHO - K1 ) cells were maintained in minimum essential medium , RPMI 1640 and Ham F - 10 media , respectively , which were supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and antibiotics . Confluent cultures were tryp - sinised and cells were seeded on 22(cid:148)22 mm coverslips in 35 mm Petri dishes and incubated at 37(cid:30)C . Staining of a - tubulin and F - actin was performed on MRC - 5 , Hep G2 and CHO - K1 cells cultured with or without 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B for 30 min . Higher concentrations of the drug were not tested , since previous work on MRC - 5 cells had dem - onstrated that no further increase in the frequency of binucleate cells was obtained with concentrations of Cyt B above 3 (cid:31)g / ml ( Degrassi et al . 1993 ) . Immunofluorescence staining was also performed on synchronised MRC - 5 cells . In these experiments , cells were arrested in mitosis by culturing them for 16 h in the presence of 35 ng / ml nocodazole . Cultures were then washed twice in medium and cells were fixed after 30 min or 1 h of recovery in fresh medium or , al - ternatively , after 30 min of recovery in fresh medium followed by a further 30 min in the presence of 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B . Portions of the cul - tures were released from the Cyt B treatment by washing twice with fresh medium ; cells were then fixed after 5 , 10 or 15 min . Fluorescence staining of a - tubulin and F - actin . Cells fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde were permeabilised with 0 . 1 % Triton - X 100 and in - cubated for 1 h at 37(cid:30)C with mouse monoclonal anti - a - tubulin an - tibody ( Amersham ) . Thereafter , cells were incubated for 1 h at 37(cid:30)C with fluorescein isothiocyanate - conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( Vector Laboratories ) and then with rhodamine - conjugated phalloi - din ( Molecular Probes ) for 45 min at 37(cid:30)C to detect F - actin . Phal - loidin specifically binds to polymerised F - actin but not to monomer - ic G - actin ( Wieland 1977 ) . Finally , slides were counterstained with 4’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole and mounted in antifade solution ( Vector Laboratories ) . On each slide , ana - telophase cells were visu - alised using ultraviolet excitation and central spindle and contractile ring structures were analysed under blue - violet and green illumina - tion . Cells were classified as anaphases or telophases on the basis of the appearance of the chromosomes . Cells with V - shaped chromo - somes were considered anaphases , whereas cells with chromosomes released from tension were taken as telophases . Photographic imag - es of fluorescence staining were recorded with a cooled CCD cam - era ( Photometrics ) and processed using Abobe Photoshop 3 . 0 soft - ware on an IBM computer . Results In order to assess whether inhibition of F - actin polymeri - sation by Cyt B treatment affected the formation of the central spindle in mammalian cells , human fibroblast cells were exposed to Cyt B for 30 min and double - stained using an anti - a - tubulin antibody and rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin to visualise both the contractile ring and the central spindle in anaphase and telophase cells . In late anaphases , phalloidin staining decorated the cortex of the dividing cell and illuminated the equa - torially located F - actin cleavage furrow ( Fig . 1a ) . At this stage , the central spindle appeared as a prominent struc - ture , as detected by anti - tubulin immunostaining , show - ing bundles of microtubules along the longitudinal axis ( Fig . 1a ) . In Cyt B - treated cells , the cleavage furrow did not form in the vast majority of the cells and no or - ganised F - actin ring was present . In these cells a weak ac - cumulation of actin aggregates was observed at the equa - torial region ( Fig . 1b – d ) . In a minor fraction of Cyt B - treated cells the central spindle could be detected ( Fig . 1b ) , whereas in the great majority of cases no cen - tral spindle was observed ( Fig . 1c , d ) . Quantitative data on the analysis of tubulin and actin staining following Cyt B treatment are reported in Fig . 2 and Table 1 . Figure 2 shows that both the central spindle and the contractile ring were observed in over half of the population of un - treated anaphases , whereas about one - third of the scored anaphases showed no evidence of either structure . This can be explained by the fact that both early and late ana - phases were included in the scoring , while both structures become visible only in late anaphase . After the brief Cyt B treatment , the fraction of cells in which neither the cen - tral spindle nor the contractile ring were observed greatly increased ( Fig . 2 , upper panel ) , representing over 60 % of the total cell population . In telophase , when all untreated cells showed both central spindle or midbody and con - tractile ring , neither structure was present in most Cyt B - treated cells ( Fig . 2 , lower panel ) . To extend the find - ings obtained in human fibroblasts , the presence of cen - tral spindle and contractile ring was also analysed in other mammalian cell lines . Similar to the situation in primary cells , Cyt B also affected central spindle assembly in two established cell lines , human hepatoma ( Hep G2 ) and Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO - K1 ) cells . In both of these cell lines , more than 80 % of anaphases and telophases showed no evidence of either the central spindle or the contractile ring after 30 min drug treatment ( Table 1 ) . In order to analyse well - defined stages of mitosis more accurately , MRC - 5 cells were synchronised in prometa - 481 Fig . 1a – e . Contractile ring and central spindle behaviour in human fibroblasts . Actin was visualised by rhodamine - phalloidin ( red ) and tubulin by anti - a - tubulin immunostaining using a fluorescein iso - thiocyanate ( FITC ) - conjugated secondary antibody ( green ) . DNA was stained by 4’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( light blue ) . a Late anaphase in control cells ; the actin cell cortex and contractile ring are visualised in red and the prominent bundles of interdigiting mi - crotubules in the equatorial region are pseudocoloured in green . b , c Anaphases and d telophase following treatment with cytochalasin B ( Cyt B ) ; treated cells show no evidence of a cleavage furrow and display only a weak accumulation of nonfilamentous actin in the equatorial region ( b – d ) . The central spindle is seen in b only . e Ear - ly G1 cells observed 5 min after Cyt B removal from culture medi - um . Cells show interphase nuclei , but are still connected by a cyto - plasmic bridge reacting positively to the actin and tubulin staining . Bar in d represents 10 (cid:31)m 482 phase in the presence of the spindle inhibitor nocodazole and subsequently released in fresh medium for 1 h , or re - leased for 30 min in fresh medium followed by a further 30 min in Cyt B - containing medium . Analysis of the rel - ative frequencies of meta - , ana - and telophase cells showed that 1 h after nocodazole removal from the medi - um most cells were in telophase , both in cultures released in drug - free medium and in Cyt B post - treated cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Furthermore , results reported in Fig . 3 indicate that cells recorded as telophases after 1 h release were mostly in metaphase at the time of Cyt B addition ( 30 min ) , since a clear shift in the ratio of metaphase to telophase was observed between the two fixation times . Fluorescence staining showed that almost all anaphase and telophase cells observed after 1 h recovery from Fig . 2 . Contractile ring and central spindle following Cyt B treat - ment in MRC - 5 cells . Actin was visualised by rhodamine - phalloidin and tubulin by anti - a - tubulin immunostaining using an FITC - conju - gated secondary antibody . Histograms represent the frequencies of anaphases ( upper panel ) or telophases ( lower panel ) showing cen - tral spindle and contractile ring ( type 1 ) , central spindle and no con - tractile ring ( type 2 ) or neither central spindle nor contractile ring ( type 3 ) . Cells were treated for 30 min with 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B ( black dotted bars ) or remained untreated ( white striped bars ) Table 1 . Effect of a short Cyt B treatment on central spindle and contractile ring pres - ence in anaphases and telophases from dif - ferent mammalian cell lines Central spindle Contractile ring Anaphases Telophases + – – Total + – – Total MRC - 5 cells Control 69 6 36 111 111 0 0 111 30 min Cyt B 2 23 49 74 9 10 36 55 NOC + 1 h recovery 37 1 3 41 165 2 0 167 NOC + 30 min rec . 0 20 54 74 7 11 146 164 + 30 min Cyt B Hep G2 cells Control 14 23 17 54 22 0 0 22 30 min Cyt B 0 14 11 25 0 5 32 37 CHO - K1 cells Control 15 0 0 15 50 0 0 50 30 min Cyt B 0 22 12 34 1 5 22 28 MRC - 5 cells were treated with 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B for 30 min or treated with Cyt B during the recovery from a nocodazole ( NOC ) arrest ( see Materials and methods ) . Hep G2 or CHO - K1 cells were treated for 30 min with 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B . The central spindle was detected by anti - a - tubulin immunostaining and the contractile ring by rhodamine - phalloidin staining Fig . 3 . Mitotic progression during recovery from NOC - induced mi - totic arrest in MRC - 5 cells , as evaluated by the frequencies of pro - metaphases and metaphases ( white striped histograms ) , anaphases ( black dotted histograms ) and telophases ( white dotted histograms ) observed on Giemsa - stained slides . Cells were treated with 35 ng / ml NOC for 16 h ( 0 time ) and then released for 30 min or 1 h in fresh medium . Portions of the cells were released for 30 min in fresh me - dium and then exposed to 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B for a further 30 min 483 the nocodazole block exhibited both central spindle and contractile ring ( Fig . 4 ) , since a prevalence of late ana - phases and telophases was observed following this proto - col . Consistent with the results presented in Fig . 2 , the contractile ring and central spindle failed to assembly in 73 % and 89 % of anaphases and telophases , respectively , in cultures exposed to Cyt B during the recovery from the nocodazole block ( Fig . 4 ) . Furthermore , it is noteworthy that in a minor fraction of cells from Cyt B - treated cul - tures the contractile ring was absent , while the central Fig . 4 . Contractile ring and central spindle during recovery from NOC - induced mitotic arrest in the presence or absence of Cyt B in MRC - 5 cells . Actin was visualised by rhodamine - phalloidin and tubulin by anti - a - tubulin immunostaining using an FITC - conju - gated secondary antibody . Histograms represent the frequencies of anaphases ( upper panel ) or telophases ( lower panel ) showing cen - tral spindle and contractile ring ( type 1 ) , central spindle and no con - tractile ring ( type 2 ) or neither central spindle nor contractile ring ( type 3 ) . Cells were treated with 35 ng / ml NOC for 16 h and then released for 1 h in fresh medium ( white striped bars ) or were re - leased for 30 min in fresh medium and then exposed to 3 (cid:31)g / ml Cyt B for a further 30 min ( black dotted bars ) Fig . 5 . Progression of cytokinesis in MRC - 5 cells upon removal of Cyt B . MRC - 5 cells were released from a 16 h NOC arrest , grown in fresh medium for 30 min and exposed for further 30 min to Cyt B to prevent cytokinesis . At the end of this time , cultures were released in Cyt B - free medium , fixed after the indicated recovery times and immunostained . Histograms represent the frequencies of ana - telo - phases , binucleate cells ( BN cells ) and cells showing reformed inter - phase nuclei while interconnected by a cytoplasmic thread ( early G1 cells ) among 1 , 000 scored cells Table 2 . Analysis of midbody and contrac - tile ring in cleavage - arrested human fibro - blast cells proceeding to cytokinesis after removal of Cyt B from the medium MidbodyContractile ring Telophases Early G1 cells with residual midbody Total + – – 30 min Cyt B 0 7 80 0 87 30 min Cyt B + 5 min medium 28 0 0 25 53 30 min Cyt B + 10 min medium 6 0 0 37 43 30 min Cyt B + 15 min medium 5 0 0 47 52 MRC - 5 cells were released from a 16 h NOC arrest , grown in complete medium for 30 min and exposed for further 30 min to Cyt B to prevent cytokinesis . At the end of this time , cultures were released in fresh medium , fixed at the indicated recovery times and fluores - cence stained using anti - tubulin antibody and phalloidin spindle was still present during anaphase ( Fig . 4 , upper panel , type 2 ) , whereas the frequency of this type of cells was negligible among telophases ( Fig . 4 , lower panel , type 2 ) . Finally , the ability of cleavage - arrested cells to resume cytokinesis upon removal of the Cyt B block was as - sayed . MRC - 5 cells were released from nocodazole arrest for 30 min and exposed for a further 30 min to Cyt B to obtain telophase cells devoid of a cleavage furrow . The medium was then changed and cultures were fixed at very short time intervals . Cells in the process of cleavage ap - peared within minutes from the removal of Cyt B from the culture medium and completed cytokinesis in 10 – 15 min , as judged by the appearance of cells that could be classified as interphase by the morphology of the re - formed nuclei , i . e . early G1 cells , yet were still connected by an elongated cytoplasmic thread ( Fig . 5 ) . An example of early G1 cells stained for a - tubulin and actin is pre - sented in Fig . 1e . At later times , the frequency of these early G1 cells was much higher than that of telophase cells , indicating that cytokinesis had been resumed in most cleavage - arrested telophase cells ( Fig . 5 ) . Further - more , no further increase in the frequency of binucleate cells was observed when Cyt B was removed from the medium ( Fig . 5 ) . Immunofluorescence analysis showed that 5 min after drug removal , all telophase cells already 484 possessed a constricted cleavage furrow with a clear con - centration of F - actin filaments and exhibited an equatori - ally compacted central spindle , i . e . a midbody . Among early G1 cells , cytoplasmic bridges reacted positively to the tubulin antibody and were stained by phalloidin in a central region , suggesting that these structures represent the remnants of the cleavage furrow and midbody in cells that synchronously completed cytokinesis ( Fig . 1 , Table 2 ) . Discussion In this work , we have used the inhibitor of F - actin poly - merisation Cyt B to investigate the influence of contrac - tile ring formation on central spindle assembly in cultured mammalian cells and the role of these cellular structures in cytokinesis . By means of fluorescence staining of a - tu - bulin and F - actin , we have found that the formation of the contractile ring is abolished by Cyt B treatment in several cell lines , as previously reported in PtK2 cells ( Aubin et al . 1981 ) . Interestingly , our experiments show that the central spindle was also absent in the vast majority of ana - telophases from Cyt B - treated cultures . Recent observations indicate that signals from the cen - tral spindle may be required for the assembly of a func - tional cleavage furrow in cultured mammalian cells , so that when central spindle assembly is perturbed by chem - ical treatment , cortical actin filaments do not organise correctly ( Fishkind et al . 1996 ) . Our data suggest that a relationship exists between the structures since , when cleavage furrow assembly is inhibited by Cyt B , the cen - tral spindle is not detectable in ana - telophase cells . Fur - thermore , our data suggest that the presence of a correctly assembled contractile ring is essential for the persistence of the central spindle through telophase , since a minor fraction of Cyt B - treated anaphases showed a central spindle in the absence of a formed contractile ring while such cells were very rare among telophases . The idea of a co - operative interaction between the central spindle and the contractile ring is emerging from recent studies on several systems , including Drosophila and cultured mam - malian cells . Failure of cytokinesis has been observed in mutants of Drosophila that are defective in several kine - sin - like proteins that localise to the central spindle during anaphase , such as KLP3A ( Williams et al . 1995 ) and KLP38B ( Ohkura et al . 1997 ) , as well as in mammalian cells overexpressing a kinase - inactive midbody - associat - ed protein ( Terada et al . 1998 ) . Other proteins have also been shown to localise to the equatorial position of the mitotic spindle during anaphase , including inner centro - mere proteins ( INCENPs ) that dissociate from the centro - mere at the onset of anaphase and are necessary for com - pletion of cytokinesis ( Eckley et al . 1997 ; Mackay et al . 1998 ) , CENP - E ( Brown et al . 1994 ; Cooke et al . 1997 ) and TD - 60 , a protein that has been suggested to “bridge” the central spindle to the cell cortex ( Margolis and Andre - assen 1993 ; Martineau et al . 1995 ) . In line with the idea of cross - talk between both structures is the recent report that mutants of Drosophila defective for profilin , an ac - tin - binding protein , do not form the actomyosin contrac - tile ring and are also devoid of a central spindle in meiotic ana - telophases and that both structures are simultaneous - ly absent in KPL3A and diaphanous mutants ( Giansanti et al . 1998 ) . All these results converge to support the idea that actin - binding or passenger proteins may be responsi - ble for the stimulation of cortical activities at the onset of cytokinesis through chemical signalling or by mediating the physical interaction between the two structures . The present findings that chemically induced inhibition of contractile ring assembly interferes with the formation and persistence of the central spindle suggest that the pres - ence of a contractile ring may stabilise the central spindle . The interdependence and co - operation of the two cellular structures during cytokinesis is further stressed by our ex - periments of resumption of cytokinesis after Cyt B remov - al from the culture medium . Both contractile ring and cen - tral spindle reform in cleaving cells within minutes after drug removal , and persist until the early G1 stage of inter - phase . These results demonstrate that Cyt B - induced dis - assembly of the contractile ring is quickly reversed and suggest that signals from F - actin microfilaments may act to promote de novo formation of the central spindle when Cyt B is removed . Due to the high dynamic instability of microtubules ( Mitchison and Kirschner 1984 ) and micro - tubule - based structures during mitosis , a stabilisation of interdigiting microtubules , which rapidly form and disas - semble at the equatorial region , may also account for our results . As a whole , our data suggest that the intimate as - sociation of the two structures during mitosis is essential for the completion of cytokinesis . This association can be expected to be mediated by the physical interaction of F - actin filaments with microtubules , since detailed mi - croscopic analyses have shown that in adherent mamma - lian cells the actin ring is composed of a complex three - di - mensional network of filaments with a set of cortex - asso - ciated filaments that traverse the cytoplasm ( Fishkind and Wang 1993 ) . Actin - binding proteins , quickly repositioned at the contractile ring after Cyt B removal , may also be in - volved in this association . Our observation that both the contractile ring and the central spindle are absent in Cyt B - treated cells from both human primary and tumour - derived cell lines , as well as established Chinese hamster cells indicates that this Cyt B effect is widespread among cultured mammalian cells . A similar effect was previously shown to occur in Cyt B - treated spermatocytes from Drosophila testes ( Giansanti et al . 1998 ) . At odds with our results is the report that di - hydrocytochalsin B treatment stimulated the retention of a post - mitotic central spindle in uncleaved binucleate He - La cells , as visualised by a - tubulin staining ( Martineau et al . 1995 ) . In addition to a - tubulin , TD - 60 antigen , CENP - E and mammalian kinesin - like protein - 1 were localised to the equatorial region of late anaphases in treated HeLa cells ( Brown et al . 1994 ; Martineau et al . 1995 ) . Further investigations are needed to clarify the reasons underly - ing this difference between HeLa and other mammalian cell lines . It may also be of interest to investigate whether proteins that have been suggested to mediate the contrac - tile ring / central spindle interaction are correctly posi - tioned at the equatorial region in cell lines in which the central spindle is absent after Cyt B treatment . 485 Acknowledgements . We would like to thank M . G . Giansanti , S . Bonaccorsi and M . Gatti for the gift of rhodamine - phalloidin and for helpful discussions on this work and P . Lavia for the critical reading of the manuscript . G . Augusti Tocco is also acknowledged for providing Hep G2 cells . D . C . is a doctoral fellow of the Diparti - mento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare , Universit(cid:224) “La Sap - ienza” , Rome . References Antoccia A , Tanzarella C , Modesti D , Degrassi F ( 1993 ) Cytokine - sis - block micronucleus assay with kinetochore detection in col - chicine - treated human fibroblasts . Mutat Res 287 : 93 – 99 Aubin JE , Osborn M , Weber K ( 1981 ) Inhibition of cytokinesis and altered contractile ring morphology induced by cytochalasins in synchronised PtK2 cells . Exp Cell Res 136 : 63 – 79 Brown KD , Coulson RMR , Yen TJ , Cleveland DW ( 1994 ) Cyclin - like accumulation and loss of the putative kinetochore motor CENP - E results from coupling continuous synthesis with specif - ic degradation at the end of mitosis . J Cell Biol 125 : 1303 – 1312 Cao L , Wang Y ( 1996 ) Signals from the spindle midzone are re - quired for the stimulation of cytokinesis in cultured epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 7 : 225 – 232 Carter SB ( 1967 ) Effects of cytochalasins on mammalian cells . Na - ture 213 : 261 – 264 Cooke CA , Schaar B , Yen TJ , Earnshaw WC ( 1997 ) Localisation of CENP - E in the fibrous corona and outer plate of mammalian ki - netochore from prometaphase through anaphase . Chromosoma 106 : 446 – 455 Degrassi F , Tanzarella C , Antoccia A , Pisano C , Battistoni A ( 1993 ) Analysis of micronuclei and microtubule arrangement to identi - fy aneuploidy - inducing agents in cultured mammalian cells . In : Vig BK ( ed ) Chromosome segregation and aneuploidy . Spring - er , Berlin Heidelberg New York , pp 309 – 319 Eckley DM , Ainsztein AM , Mackay AM , Goldberg IG , Earnshaw WC ( 1997 ) Chromosomal proteins and cytokinesis : patterns of cleavage furrow formation and inner centromere protein posi - tioning in mitotic heterokaryons and mid - anaphase cells . J Cell Biol 136 : 1169 – 1183 Fishkind DJ , Wang Y ( 1993 ) Orientation and three - dimensional or - ganization of actin filaments in dividing cultured cells . J Cell Biol 123 : 837 – 848 Fishkind DJ , Wang Y ( 1995 ) New horizons for cytokinesis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 7 : 23 – 31 Fishkind DJ , Silverman JD , Wang Y ( 1996 ) Function of spindle mi - crotubules in directing cortical movement and actin filament or - ganization in dividing cultured cells . J Cell Sci 109 : 2041 – 2051 Giansanti MG , Bonaccorsi S , Williams B , Williams EV , Santo - lamazza C , Goldberg ML , Gatti M ( 1998 ) Cooperative interac - tions between the central spindle and the contractile ring during Drosophila cytokinesis . Genes Dev 12 : 396 – 410 Lin S , Wilkins JA , Cribbs DH , Grumet M , Lin DC ( 1982 ) Proteins and complexes that affect actin - filament assembly and interac - tions . Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 46 : 625 – 632 Mackay AM , Ainsztein AM , Eckley DM , Earnshaw WC ( 1998 ) A dominant mutant of inner centromere protein ( INCENP ) , a chro - mosomal protein , disrupts prometaphase congression and cyto - kinesis . J Cell Biol 140 : 991 – 1002 Margolis RL , Andreassen PR ( 1993 ) The telophase disc : its possible role in mammalian cell cleavage . BioEssay 15 : 201 – 207 Martineau ST , Andreassen PR , Margolis RL ( 1995 ) Delay of HeLa cell cleavage into interphase using dihydrocytochalasin B : re - tention of a postmitotic spindle and telophase disc correlates with synchronous cleavage recovery . J Cell Biol 131 : 191 – 205 Mitchison T , Kirschner M ( 1984 ) Dynamic instability of microtu - bule growth . Nature 359 : 599 – 604 Ohkura H , T(cid:246)r(cid:246)k T , Tick G , Hoheisel J , Kiss I , Glover DM ( 1997 ) Mutation of a gene for a Drosophila kinesin - like protein , Klp38B , leads to failure of cytokinesis . J Cell Sci 110 : 945 – 954 Rappaport R ( 1961 ) Experiments concerning the cleavage stimulus in sand dollar eggs . J Exp Zool 148 : 81 – 89 Rappaport R ( 1991 ) Cytokinesis . In : Kinne KH ( ed ) Oogenesis , spermatogenesis and reproduction . Comparative physiology , vol 10 . Karger , Basel , pp 1 – 36 Salmon ED , Wolniak SM ( 1990 ) Role of microtubules in stimulat - ing cytokinesis in animal cells . Ann NY Acad Sci 582 : 88 – 98 Satterwhite LL , Pollard TD ( 1992 ) Cytokinesis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 4 : 43 – 52 Terada Y , Tatsuka M , Suzuki F , Yasuda Y , Fujita S , Otsu M ( 1998 ) AIM - 1 : a mammalian midbody - associated protein required for cytokinesis . EMBO J 17 : 667 – 676 Wheatley SP , Wang Y ( 1996 ) Midzone microtubule bundles are continuously required for cytokinesis in cultured epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 135 : 981 – 989 Wieland T ( 1977 ) Modification of actins by phallotoxins . Naturwis - senschaften 64 : 303 – 309 Williams BC , Riedy MF , Williams EV , Gatti M , Goldberg ML ( 1995 ) The Drosophila kinesin - like protein KLP3A is a mid - body component required for central spindle assembly and ini - tiation of cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 129 : 709 – 723