Proc . NatL Acad . Sci . USA Vol . 80 , pp . 4569 - 4571 , July 1983 Psychology Discovery , invention , and development : Human creative thinking * HERBERT A . SIMON Department of Psychology , Carnegie - Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213 Contributed by Herbert A . Simon , August 24 , 1982 The subject of this paper is a singularly appropriate one for this journal . We are all experts on the topic of scientific discovery , invention , and development . Members are elected to the Na - tional Academy of Sciences because they have been adjudged to have done some creative thinking that led to one or more significant discoveries , inventions , or applications of scientific ideas . But the fact that a person sometimes does creative things does not mean that he understands the creative process . To imagine that a scientist can give a full scientific account of his own thought processes is no more reasonable than putting a Geiger counter on the podium at an American Physical Society meeting and expecting it to deliver a lecture on the theory of radiation . In building a theory of scientific discovery or invention , a sci - entist ' s behaviors are the data - the phenomena we seek to ex - plain - not the direct source of theory . Much of what goes on when we are thinking is inaccessible to our conscious awareness . We use such terms as " judge - ment , " intuition , " and " creative insight " to name and label those phenomena that occur without awareness . But labels are not explanations ; contrary to the view of Moliere ' s physician , opium ' s sleep - inducing power is not explained by attributing to it a dormitive property . Many scientists and philosophers have doubted whether a scientific explanation of discovery is possible or whether there is even something describable as a method of discovery . Ein - stein himself is quoted as saying , " There is no logical path lead - ing to [ scientific ] laws . They can only be reached by intuition , based upon something like an intellectual love [ Einfuehlung ] of the objects of experience . " If Einstein meant by " logical path " a deductive route to discovery , he was surely right . If he meant to say that there is not method in the madness of discovery , we might question - and investigate empirically - whether his pes - simism was justified . The fact that many books and articles have been written on the subjects of invention , discovery , and creativity , suggests that we believe that at least some significant aspects of these processes are amenable to investigation and description . Until recent times , most of our knowledge about them has derived from the experience and observations of thoughtful practition - ers . In this case , the Geiger counter does indeed have some - thing to say about the theory of radiation . But creative pro - cesses are also now the objects of direct scientific investigation . In the past dozen years , some psychologists have sought to build and test theories about the processes , both conscious and un - conscious , that go on in the human brain when discovery and invention are taking place . Here , I am going to say a little about this psychological research , but mainly , I am going to consider what we know about these matters from the information that is available to us more directly in our practice of science and engineering . Processes of scientific discovery and application . In particular , the development of products from basic discoveries takes place in a complex social and economic environment , in which both motivations and definitions of the problem differ very much from those in the environments where basic discoveries typically occur . On the other side , I am going to emphasize the communalities of process - and to argue , in fact , that while discovery and development usually address dif - ferent substantive problems , the psychological processes of problem solution are quite similar . Let me begin by defining creativity in a pragmatic way . From time to time , human beings arrive at ideas that are judged by their fellows to be both novel and valuable . The values dis - cerned in these new ideas may be intellectual , esthetic , prac - tical , or what not . It does not matter . A psychological theory of creativity ( or discovery or invention ) would account for the pro - cesses that are involved in bringing about such novel and val - uable products . Of course , we should not beg the question : whether creativity is a unitary thing or whether quite different processes are involved in creative production in different do - mains is itself an empirical question , to be decided on the basis of evidence . I will not try to survey the whole literature on creativity . It draws partly on historical , biographical , and autobiographical accounts of discovery , on systematic surveys of creative ( and uncreative ) persons , on a limited number of laboratory studies aimed at eliciting creative behavior or comparing creative with noncreative styles of problem solving , and a number of recent attempts to simulate creative behavior with computer pro - grams . At the phenomenological level , the level of observable events , there is great consistency among all the findings of this research , whatever its methods . I can sum up these findings in a few generalizations . What chiefly distinguishes creative thinking from more mundane forms are ( i ) willingness to accept vaguely defined problem statements and gradually to structure them , ( ii ) con - tinuing preoccupation with problems over considerable periods of time , and ( iii ) extensive background knowledge in relevant and potentially relevant areas . Not all of these conditions - tol - erance of ambiguity , persistence , and knowledge - are satisfied in all cases of discovery , but their presence has been observed and commented on too many times to suppose that their as - sociation with success in discovery is accidental . None of these conditions is very surprising ; they all have a strong motivational component , and they satisfy our sense of justice - the virtues of patience , persistence , and diligence are likely to be re - warded , even though there may be , as in gold mining , a large chance element in who wins the reward . The virtues only allow you to buy a ticket in the lottery , and some tickets , as in all lot - teries , pay off and some do not . Insight - based on recognition However , something seems to be left out of this picture . It seems Much can be said about the differences in process at the two ends of the continuum from basic discoveries to development * Presented at the annual meeting of the National Academy of Sciences , Apr . 26 , 1982 , Washington , D . C . 4569 Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 ( 1983 ) to deny the more romantic view of discovery that speaks of " insight " and " intuition " and the " creative moment . " In an opinion he once wrote , Justice Learned Hand introduced into our patent law the requirement that evidence of a " flash of ge - nius " was required to make an invention patentable - thereby leaving a generation of patent attorneys with the desperate problem of making such flashes visible . There seems to be no doubt , however , that the final step of discovery is often a sudden event and sometimes an unexpected and surprising one to the inventor , who can give little account of the process that arrived at it . Often , the final step was pre - ceded by a period of " incubation " during which the discoverer was ostensibly preoccupied with other matters . Such events must also receive an explanation in a theory of creativity . They seem somewhat less inscrutable when we reflect that ( i ) conscious awareness is not an invariable property of mental processes and ( ii ) the theory is to account for the entire process and not simply the final step . In particular , it is typical of the act of recognition in humans that , when we recognize a familiar pattern ( a human face or a beetle that is familiar from our scientific studies ) , we are unable to report reliably what cues in the stimulus were essential or instrumental to the recognition . It is notorious , for example , that the characteristics recorded in taxonomic keys ( many determinable only under the microscope ) are not at all the characteristics that an experienced taxonomist uses for im - mediate ( and often quite reliable ) recognition of species with which he is highly familiar . Knowledge and persistence The ability to achieve sudden insights into situations by recog - nizing familiar features in them depends on having stored a great deal of knowledge - knowledge about the familiar patterns that can be recognized and knowledge of the cues for recognition . We know a good deal today , from research on creativity in a few disciplines , about the amount of knowledge that a world - class expert must have , and about the length of time it takes to ac - quire it . With respect to amount of knowledge , careful study of the ability of chess grand masters to recognize familiar configura - tions of chess pieces leads to the estimate that they have at least 50 , 000 familiar " friends " - patterns that they will note and rec - ognize immediately in a position on a chess board . That number seems not unreasonable when we recall that it is of the same order of magnitude as the word recognition vocabulary of a col - lege graduate for words in his native language . With respect to the time required for a world class expert to acquire the recognition capability and other knowledge he re - quires , studies of biographical data in the domains of chess playing , musical composition , and painting arrive at a rather consistent minimum estimate of 10 years . That is , even the most talented persons do not reach world - class performance in their fields until they have devoted about 10 years ( or more ) of rather single - minded attention to becoming expert . ( The time may be somewhat , but not a great deal , less for athletes ) . The 10 - year figure holds for child prodigies ( Bobbie Fischer , Mozart , Pi - casso ) as well as for persons who begin the ascent to expertness later . Knowledge and persistence do seem , indeed , to be pre - requisites to high - level performance . Weak methods To construct an adequate theory of discovery , one must attend to the conditions under which novelty is likely to emerge . Prob - lems that call for creativity are precisely problems from do - mains that have not already been well worked over and in which sophisticated , systematic algorithms for solution do not exist . In such ill - structured problem domains , problem - solving methods cannot be closely attuned to the characteristics of the problem environment - such tuning requires a great deal to be known about that environment . If we are given a linear algebraic equa - tion in one variable to solve , we simply apply a well - worn and overlearned algorithm to solve it . Ingenuity is required only when such an algorithm is not known to us . Hence , we may predict that persons tackling problems whose solution will have marks of novelty and require creativity will use very general methods that do not rely on specific knowl - edge about the problem domain . Such methods , on the other hand , are likely to be highly inefficient ; all that commends them is that no better ones are available . Research using computer programming languages to design problem solvers has uncovered a number of such methods , which are nowadays usually called " weak methods . " An example of a weak method is generate - and - test , which consists simply in de - vising possible solutions and then testing each one to see whether it satisfies the solution conditions of the problem - essentially trial - and - error search . A somewhat more powerful weak method , which requires for its application only a little more knowledge about the problem domain , is means - ends analysis . In this method , a present situation is compared with a goal situation and one or more differences between them are detected . When a difference is noted , it may ( by recognition ) call forth from memory an operator that is relevant to reducing differences of this kind . The operator is then applied , a new situation is cre - ated , and the whole cycle is repeated as often as desired . Most weak methods require larger or smaller amounts of search before problem solutions are found , but the search need not be blind trial - and - error - in fact , usually cannot be , for the search spaces are generally far too vast to allow unselective trial and error to be effective . Weak methods generally incorporate Polya ' s idea of " heuristics " - rules of thumb that allow search generators to be highly selective , instead of searching the en - tire space . A computer simulation of discovery There is now a considerable body of evidence that problem solving of a kind that would be regarded as creative if exhibited by human beings can be produced by computer programs that use weak methods to search very selectively in unfamiliar prob - lem domains and that are able , with the help of such methods , to detect interesting laws in data and to invent new interesting concepts . Now I must qualify that last statement a little bit . These programs have been tested mainly not by setting them out to search for genuinely new knowledge , previously beyond human ken , but by setting them the problem of rediscovering important scientific laws and concepts , starting from essentially the same situations that the original human discoverers did . They are like the young Gauss , you might say , who was ( rightly ) judged creative by his teacher when , at a tender age , he re - discovered the formula for the sum of the first N integers . One of these programs , which I should like to describe briefly , has rediscovered Kepler ' s third law , Ohm ' s law , Black ' s law of heat , Snell ' s law of refraction , the Gay - Lussac law of gaseous chemical reactions , some aspects of Dalton ' s law of chemical reactions , and some others . In the course of doing these things , it reinvented the concepts of inertial mass , specific heat , re - fractive index , atomic weight , and molecular weight ( distin - guishing between the latter two ) . It also rediscovered conser - vation laws for momentum and heat . The program whose exploits I have listed is called BACON , after Sir Francis Bacon , for it is a data - driven inductive ma - 4570 Psychology : Simon Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 ( 1983 ) 4571 chine . Its inputs are numerical and nominal data , it is capable of performing factorial experiments on these data , varying one independent variable at a time , but it is provided with no the - oretical knowledge about the phenomena . The historical re - discovery tests we have posed to it were derived primarily from situations where the original discovery was , as far as we know , primarily data driven , and where little relevant theory existed before the discovery . The initial versions of BACON were pro - duced by Patrick W . Langley as a doctoral project , and its ex - tensions are joint products of Langley , Gary Bradshaw , and myself . BACON carries out relatively little search - it certainly does not rely on brute - force trial - and - error exploration of the data . On the other hand , its methods are relatively few and simple , based on a handful of heuristics . What is interesting and re - markable about it is that discoveries ( rediscoveries ) of such magnitude could be produced by such a simple mechanism . Let me give a very brief sketch of BACON ' s heuristics . First , the program tests for correlations among pairs of variables . When a substantial correlation is discovered ( other variables being held constant ) , BACON tests the product or ratio of the variables ( as appropriate ) for invariance . The product or ratio , whether in - variant or not , is introduced as a new variable . Thus , for ex - ample , BACON reaches Kepler ' s third law by examining PID , P / D2 , and P2 / J3 . It engages in little extraneous search and finds the correct function in a few seconds . Another rule of thumb used by BACON is to try first laws that are symmetric in appropriate ways . When examining ca - lorimetric data , it discovers that the law depends on the prod - uct of the temperature , mass , and specific heat of one of the substances involved . It then hypothesizes directly that the final law will involve the product of the same properties of the other substance . A third rule of thumb is to pay attention to numbers that are simple multiples of each other . This heuristic leads BA - CON to the chemical laws of simple combinations and to atomic and molecular weight . When BACON finds that there is an in - variant relation between properties of two different objects , it postulates a new property belonging to each object to account for the relational invariant . With this heuristic , it invents the concepts of inertial mass ( from experiments involving mutual accelerations ) , specific heat ( from the calorimetric experi - ments ) , and refractive index . BACON is very far from a comprehensive theory of scientific discovery . In its present form , it cannot relate one level of phe - nomena to another ( e . g . , derive the laws of thermodynamics from the kinetics of gasses ) , cannot use theory to derive pos - sible laws , does not invent observational instruments , and does not choose data for examination ( although it has fair capacities for ignoring irrelevant data without much wasted motion ) . It has only a modest capacity for dealing with noisy data . Even with these limitations , what BACON demonstrates is that scientific discoveries of sorts that have been highly re - garded can be made with the use of a small armatorium of heu - ristics and weak methods . The processes it uses are not dif - ferent from the processes that have been shown , in the psychological laboratory , to account for other , more mundane , human problem - solving performances . It should increase our optimism that scientific discovery can be understood as a nat - ural phenomenon and that it follows laws already made familiar by other research in cognitive psychology . It is not a domain of strange , esoteric , human phenomena . Scientists need not fear for their membership in the human species . Other computer discovery programs BACON is not the sole swallow that makes this particular sci - entific summer . There are other programs that cast light on the discovery process by simulating it that I can only name . One is the AM program of Douglas Lenat that , given a set of basic concepts in set theory , went on to reinvent the integers , the concept of prime number , and the operations on the integers . It conjectured ( but did not prove ) the fundamental theorem of arithmetic and Goldbach ' s conjecture . Another is the MOL - GEN program , of Stefik and Friedland , which is capable of de - signing simple experiments in molecular genetics . Through these and other modeling efforts , we are learning a good deal , today about the problem - solving processes that underlie scientific creativity , and we are discovering that these processes rely ba - sically on weak methods and heuristic search . Conclusion All of this evidence bears mainly on the discovery process in basic research . I have said nothing about the development and application end of the spectrum . I would hypothesize that the major shift , as we move toward this latter end , is in the for - mulation of the criteria that define problem solutions . From a central concern with understanding phenomena in depth and a strategy of abstracting from all but the centrally relevant vari - ables , we move to a concern for the whole technical and social context in which a principle is to be applied , including unan - ticipated consequences and side effects , as well as questions of efficacy and economy . Many of the difficulties in communi - cation among the groups at different points along the research and development continuum are associated with these issues of problem formulation . I doubt whether they imply any differ - ences in the basic psychological processes that are required for problem solution . 1 . Hayes , J . R . ( 1978 ) Cognitive Psychology ( Dorsey , Homewood , IL ) , pp . 215 - 244 : This presents a brief general survey of psychologi - cal research on creativity . 2 . Simon , H . A . ( 1977 ) Models of Discovery ( D . Reidel , Dordrecht , Netherlands ) , Sect . 5 , pp . 265 - 338 : This presents an elaboration of the theory set forth here and contains numerous references to the literature . 3 . Simon , H . A . ( 1981 ) The Sciences of the Artificial ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) , 2nd Ed . , pp . 101 - 123 : This discusses the knowledge of experts and its acquisition and cites relevant ref - erences . Psychology : Simon