All about that BASE : Modeling Biometric Authentication Systems and their Evaluations to enable a more efﬁcient Exchange of Research Results Eric Klieme Hasso Plattner Institute University of Potsdam , Germany eric . klieme @ hpi . de Christoph Meinel Hasso Plattner Institute University of Potsdam , Germany christoph . meinel @ hpi . de Abstract If a researcher wants to contribute in the ﬁeld of bio - metric authentication systems ( BAS ) , much manual work is required to gather the current state - of - research ( SoR ) for a speciﬁc type of BAS . Due to loosely structured scientiﬁc papers as result reports , all relevant details need to be ex - tracted , aggregated and collected individually . Once the SoR is determined , an exchange with other researchers is hardly possible due to a missing exchange format and they usually have to start from scratch repeating the same in - efﬁcient procedure often targeting the same papers . This work presents a domain model for b iometric a uthentication s ystems and their e valuations , BASE , as a solution . It mod - els and interconnects biometric characteristics , the target architecture , evaluation scenarios , and evaluation criteria grants to represent the most common parts of a BAS . For evaluation , we map 12 BAS approaches from related work into BASE and determine mainly low mapping efforts . In this context , we ﬁrst identiﬁed diverse subsets of BASE be - ing inferable from the analyzed papers . Secondly , most re - searchers still target rather broad evaluation categories like security or usability instead speciﬁc criteria within these categories where the latter would simplify the basic assess - ment of a BAS . Overall , we consider BASE a promising step to improve the efﬁciency in SoR determination . 1 . Introduction To protect access to web services or operating systems , users need to remember personal identiﬁcation numbers or passwords . Once leaked , guessed or cracked , attackers can easily gain access , especially if passwords are reused [ 19 ] . To improve security , research continuously proposes new knowledge - , possession - , or biometric - based authentication systems where the latter encompass physiological , behav - ioral , and soft biometrics . Due to ongoing advances in sam - pling , processing , and matching technologies , the number of proposed biometric authentication systems ( BAS ) by re - searchers is high and growing signiﬁcantly each year . Whenever a researcher wants to contribute in this do - main , the current state - of - research ( SoR ) requires determi - nation . This determination takes a high manual effort , be - cause the scientiﬁc papers that report evaluations of new BAS approaches do not follow a ﬁxed structure and there exists no standardized machine - readable representation for that to the best of our knowledge . As a result , distinct re - searchers manually query literature sources ( e . g . , Google Scholar , IEEE Express ) for these papers , ﬁlter , extract , and eventually aggregate the relevant information ( e . g , match - ing technologies , result metrics ) according to their individ - ual goals . Due to the missing standardization , there is no possibility to share these aggregation results in an easy con - sumable way and other researchers have to start this overall process again if they want to contribute in a similar group of BAS , for instance . We consider that missing represen - tation as strongly needed to increase the efﬁciency in the SoR determination process . Speciﬁcally , it enables the im - plementation of tools to , for instance , report and exchange any evaluation results and BAS speciﬁcs in an easier way . 1 . 1 . Contribution This paper presents BASE , a formalization of B iometric A uthentication S ystems and their E valuations to propose a representation as mentioned above . Speciﬁcally , we make the following contributions : 1 . We elaborate on the requirements for BASE based on the results of reviewing an extensive set of BAS sur - veys in section 3 . 2 . We model b iometric a uthentication s ystems and their e valuations to deﬁne the BASE domain model and identify the relevant interconnections . As the major parts , we determine the sampled biometric charac - teristics , the target architecture , evaluation scenarios , and e valuation criteria grants ( section 4 ) . 2023 I EEE I n t e r n a ti on a l J o i n t C o n f e r e n ce on B i o m e t r i c s ( I J CB ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 3726 - 6 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I J CB 57857 . 2023 . 10448589 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . 3 . We evaluate the coverage of BASE by mapping 12 BAS approaches from related work and depict that different subsets of BASE are inferable from the reports with mainly low effort in section 5 . We furthermore present challenges as other researchers target mostly evalu - ation categories instead of criteria and rarely cover implementation - based evaluations . Starting with a related work analysis in the next section , we conclude this report in section 6 and show future steps ( section 7 ) . 2 . Related Work To the best of our knowledge and own research ex - perience ( e . g . , [ 22 , 37 , 36 ] ) , characteristics of proposed biometric authentication systems and their evaluations are exclusively presented in the many individual papers and summarized in loosely structured surveys . Each sur - vey typically targets a subset of BAS characteristics and extracts , aggregates , and compares the different related works with a distinct point - of - view , e . g . , features calcu - lated in the pre - processing steps ( e . g . , [ 40 ] ) , security met - rics used ( e . g . , [ 11 ] ) , or datasets used and participant met - rics ( e . g . , [ 29 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 12 ] ) . And although biometric authenti - cation systems are researched for a long time , and biometric systems are core components , we could not ﬁnd any infor - mation on a ( central ) repository , or collection of evaluated biometric systems that could be easily queried and ﬁltered . Nevertheless , there exist works on formalization , standard - ization , and on capability reporting of the embedded ma - chine learning systems . 2 . 1 . Formalization and Standardization Schatten et al . give a formal description of primar - ily physiological biometric systems using an UML model in [ 33 ] . In this model , relations between the purpose ( iden - tiﬁcation , veriﬁcation , or classiﬁcation ) , the different steps like pre - processing or recognition , and biometrics’ charac - teristics are modeled without any information on the evalu - ations done . In terms of standardization , the ISO / IEC pub - lished several standards and technical reports ( TR ) refer - ring to biometric authentication . They cover general ar - eas like vocabulary ( 2382 - 37 ) , implementational , and ar - chitectural topics such as a generic ( embedded ) BioAPI Framework ( 19784 , 29164 ) , biometric data formats and their interchange ( 19785 , 19794 ) , presentation attack detec - tion ( 30107 ) , and authentication contexts ( 24761 ) . Further - more , they created TRs as guidance for accessible systems ( 29194 ) , biometric enrollment ( 29196 ) , and for biometrics on mobile devices ( 30125 ) . One very relevant document is the standard 19795 about ’Biometric Performance Test - ing and Reporting’ as it speciﬁes performance metrics for biometric systems , requirements for test methods and the recording of data , and provides a framework to develop and describe test protocols . In this context , the standard helps to establish a general biometric system , including its subsys - tems ( e . g . , data capture , signal processing ) and functions ( e . g . , enrollment , veriﬁcation ) 1 . An important predeces - sor for the several ISO standards presented is BEAT , a EU funded project for biometrics evaluation and testing [ 24 ] . Its ﬁnal deliveries 2 provided important input on , e . g . , met - rics , attacks and evaluation scenarios . 2 . 2 . Reporting Machine Learning Systems Since the embedded machine learning architectures are a major part of biometric authentication systems , any progress of documenting these systems is of high impor - tance for this work . We speciﬁcally identiﬁed two current well - received 3 items that propose a Model Card for Model Reporting [ 26 ] ( 2019 ) and Datasheets for Datasets [ 16 ] ( 2021 ) that cover both the embedded machine learning sys - tem and possible datasets used for the design and evaluation of the systems . Model Cards were presented by Mitchell et al . as a summarizing one to two page sheet accompanying any released machine learning model . This sheet is com - posed of nine sections including , for example , basic infor - mation , intended use , metrics ( e . g . , performance measures , decision thresholds , or variation approaches ) , evaluation data ( e . g . , datasets , motivation , or preprocessing ) , training data if possible , or quantitative analysis [ 26 ] . Gebru et al . present Datasheets for Datasets as a question - based work - ﬂow on the creation motivation for the dataset , composition ( e . g . , how many instances , what data per instances ) , col - lection process ( e . g . , persons involved , timeframe ) , prepro - cessing / cleaning / labeling , uses , distribution , and mainte - nance [ 16 ] . Apart from these rather documentation - oriented ideas many deployment - and implementation - oriented ap - proaches in terms of pipelines or model exchange platforms were proposed over the last years , e . g . shown by Idowu , Strober , and Berger [ 17 ] or summarized here 4 . To the best of our understanding , their focus is the reduction of imple - mentation , replication , or extension effort by the means of exchanging technical artefacts , rather than a domain spe - ciﬁc overview on BAS proposals , their individual evalua - tions , or results to determine the SoR . 2 . 3 . Summary To summarize , related work proposes valuable methods to report diverse aspects of BAS in a loosely structured text format , e . g . to shortly summarize their machine learn - ing systems or datasets . In addition , the ISO / IEC created 1 https : / / www . iso . org / committee / 313770 / x / catalogue / 2 https : / / www . idiap . ch / webarchives / sites / beat - eu . org / project . html 3 With respect to the citations on Google scholar that were 1278 for [ 26 ] and 1492 for [ 16 ] on the day of submission ( 07 / 28 / 23 ) 4 https : / / landscape . lfai . foundation / Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . many standards and TRs on evaluation scenarios , metrics , or API design . With this work , we propose a formalized do - main model integrating all relevant characteristics of BAS and their evaluations to enable valued - adding services ( e . g . , tools for exchange , central repository for proposed BAS ) for an easier SoR process . 3 . Methodology and BASE Requirements As mentioned above , the current way to grasp the SoR for a speciﬁc type of BAS is reading speciﬁc papers or sum - marizing surveys and aggregating the included information . To decide requirements which information BASE should capture , we did an extensive literature 5 review of survey papers in the ﬁeld of BAS , covering behavioral ( e . g . , [ 11 , 3 , 29 , 10 , 4 , 25 ] , physiological ( e . g . , [ 10 , 4 , 25 , 9 ] ) , and soft biometrics ( e . g . , [ 15 , 1 , 28 , 32 , 8 ] ) . For each survey we extracted the dimensions used for comparison and did a frequency analysis on the most relevant topics . Finally , we identiﬁed the following three areas to be covered : • General characteristics : Biometric characteristics sampled , the targeted devices for deployment and the protection goals . • Details of built biometric systems : What features were extracted and which approaches were followed for sig - nal processing , matching , decision , or fusion . • Evaluation scenarios executed : Firstly , what criteria for sound BAS were targeted for what reason , e . g . , to prove high usability , or protection against speciﬁc at - tacks . Secondly , details on the calculated metrics , their goal and speciﬁcs of the datasets used . 4 . BASE , A domain model for Biometric Authentication Systems and Evaluations Referring to our requirements stated above , we propose the B iometric A uthentication S ystems and their E valuations domain model , BASE . Speciﬁcally , let BASE denote the set of all available BASE represented by their biometric charac - teristics ( BC ) , target architecture ( TA ) , evaluation ( E ) , eval - uation criteria grants ( ECG ) , and their reference ( Ref ) . BASE ⊆ BC × TA × ES × ECG × Ref ( 1 ) In the following sections , we will present our model in de - tail starting with the reference ( Ref ) affecting many other parts of BASE , too . 5 Based on searching IEEE Explore , ACM Digital Library and Google Scholar using terms { survey , review , physiological , behavioral , soft } 4 . 1 . Reference Some artifacts modeled within BASE need further de - tails regarding a reference that was used to infer the re - spective artifact’s features . For a individually modelled base ∈ BASE or a modeled dataset ( see section 4 . 4 ) a reference Ref is mandatory to provide transparency where the speciﬁc attributes were extracted from . For other parts of BASE such as processing steps or evaluation criteria , R is optional and should be modeled in edge cases . For ex - ample , if one BAS uses a speciﬁc processing step another researcher proposed . As a reference could include several sub - references , Ref describes a set of speciﬁc references Ref S ( e . g . , the title of the accompanying research paper , model card , or datasheet ) of a certain reference type Ref T ( at the moment of writing : paper title , url ) : Ref ⊆ Ref S × Ref T ( 2 ) 4 . 2 . Biometric Characteristics We consider the biometric characteristics BC to contain an arbitrary number of hard biometrics , BC H , and / or soft biometrics , BC H , to cover any arbitrary fusion scenario . BC = BC H ∪ BC S ( 3 ) 4 . 2 . 1 Hard biometrics Hard biometrics , BC H are either physiological , BC P , or behavioral biometrics , BC B . Any physiological charac - teristic is veriﬁed continuously , BC P C or once , BC P O , while any behavioral characteristic is either routine - based , BC B R , or non - routine - based , BC B NR : BC H = BC P ∪ BC B BC P = BC P C ∪ BC P O , BC B = BC B NR ∪ BC B R ( 4 ) Non - Routine - Based Behavioral Characteristics Non - routine - based behavioral biometric characteristics , BC B NR , are the subset of human behaviors where the actual user activities ’ speciﬁcs should later be sampled and processed . Any of these characteristics are either part of the set of non - routine - based continuous characteristics , BC B NRC , or non - routine - based occasional characteristics , BC B NRO : BC NR = BC B NRC ∪ BC B NRO ( 5 ) Continuous characteristics are determined by a continuous user activity , A C and the respective recurring atomar ac - tion , AA R , that is executed during that activity : A C = { walking , . . . } , AA R = { taking a step , . . . } BC B NRC ⊆ A C × AA R ( 6 ) Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Occasional characteristics occur once in a while and are identiﬁed by the occasional user activity , A O , its pre - condition , A O Pre , and post - condition , A O Post BC B NRO ⊆ A O Pre × A O × A O Post ( 7 ) For example , pulling a smartphone out of a pocket [ ] would be the occasional user activity A O deﬁned by the pre - condition ’phone in pocket’ and the post - condition ’phone in front of body’ ( e . g . , [ 23 ] ) . Routine - Based Behavioral Characteristics In contrast , routine - based characteristics , BC B R , focus on the fea - tures inferred from the repetition of different user activities A REP ( e . g . , putting a call , receiving a call ) , which subsets R A deﬁne a routine R ( e . g . , call routine ) : BC B R ⊆ R A × R ( 8 ) 4 . 2 . 2 Soft Biometrics Soft biometrics , BC S , are either inferred from physiologi - cal , BC S P , or behavioral biometric characteristics , BC S B . They are deﬁned by the respective soft biometric trait BC S T ( e . g . , age , gender , ethnicity , or body marks ) and the hard biometric characteristic , BC P or BC B , it was inferred from : BC S = BC S P ∪ BC S B BC S P ⊆ BC S T × BC P , BC S B ⊆ BC S T × BC B ( 9 ) As stated by Dantcheva , Ella , and Ross , the soft biomet - ric characteristic age could be inferred from the behavioral biometric characteristic gait , while gender as another soft characteristic could be inferred from the physiological bio - metric characteristic face geometry , for instance [ 8 ] . 4 . 3 . Target Architecture The target architecture connects research - oriented eval - uations to the intended real - world equivalent and helps or - ganizations evaluating an architectural ﬁt on the one hand and is required to model implementation - based evaluations on the other hand ( see section 4 . 4 . 2 ) . Overall , we deﬁne the target architecture TA by the resources protected R P and the speciﬁc device categories DC TA where the biometric systems of a BAS are deployed : TA ⊆ PR × DC TA ( 10 ) Device Categories According to ISO 19795 [ 18 ] , which we consider reference architecture due to its maturity , a biometric system includes the components for data captur - ing DC , data storage DS , signal processing SP , matching Figure 1 . Components of a Biometric System according to ISO Standard 19795 [ 18 ] with template creation explicitly mentioned . M , decision D , and the template creation TC is the distin - guished ﬁnal part of signal processing SP ( see ﬁg . 1 ) . De - pending on an individual BAS , these components could be deployed on different types of devices as some approaches need enormous computational power ( e . g . , deep learning ) or include multiple sampling locations ( e . g . , [ 35 ] ) . Thus , to deﬁne a speciﬁc target architecture , DC TA , at least one category for every component must be given : DC TA ⊆ DC DC × DC DS × . . . × DC D DC DC ⊆ DC , DC DS ⊆ DC , . . . , DC D ⊆ DC DC DC (cid:54) = ∅ , DC DS (cid:54) = ∅ , . . . , DC D (cid:54) = ∅ ( 11 ) Any device category DC is further deﬁned by its name D N ( e . g . , Smartphone , Notebook ) and a set of sensors S DC that a device of that category typically has . 6 Any sensor S DC is of a speciﬁc type S T ( e . g . , accelerometer , Location API ) , and samples in a continuous or non - continuous style S S in different dimensions S D ( e . g . , X , Y , Z , longitude ) : DC ⊆ D N × S DC , S DC ⊆ S T × S S × P ( S D ) ( 12 ) To sample gait , a three - dimensional ( X , Y , Z ) continuous accelerometer can be used while we would consider the GPS API as a non - continuous sensor to sample the location routine , for example . Protected Resources In addition to the deployment loca - tions , any BAS protects a speciﬁc ( set of ) resource ( s ) , PR . Res = { OS , App , Door Access , . . . } , PR ⊆ Res ( 13 ) 6 We are aware that not every device of a category has the same set of sensors . For instance , not every smartphone has a barometer and not every smartwatch has a pulse sensor . Nevertheless , we decided on these relations for an efﬁcient modeling approach since the actual dimensions used for the speciﬁc biometric systems are only a subset of all dimensions available ( see section 4 . 4 . 1 ) Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . 4 . 4 . Evaluation Scenarios To provide information on any ﬁnished evaluation for an individual BAS , we consider BAS to have an arbitrary amount of evaluation scenarios , ES , that target respective evaluation criteria . Depending on the type of evaluation , every scenario needs speciﬁcation as either an experiment - or implementation - based scenario , ES exp or ES impl . ES = ES exp ∪ ES impl ( 14 ) 4 . 4 . 1 Experiment - Based Evaluation Scenarios Experiment - based evaluations include evaluations where the built biometric system ( s ) determine the ﬁnal results . For example , any evaluation regarding adequate security or us - ability performance expressed with a low Equal Error Rate ( EER ) is dependent on the biometric system and its speciﬁc signal processing or matching technology only . To simulate later real - world data capturing , data gathered in experiments is used as input . Because of that , experiment - based evalu - ation scenarios are identiﬁed by the used dataset ( s ) , DS , biometric system ( s ) , BS , and the evaluation result ( s ) , ER : ES exp ⊆ P ( DS ) × P ( BS ) × P ( ER ) ( 15 ) Datasets Most experimental evaluation scenarios use data gathered in experiments with natural persons . As datasets are sometimes also published for other researchers 7 and may be further annotated , e . g . , with datasheets as described in section 2 , we characterize any dataset DS by the sam - pled biometrics SB , information on the participants of the experiments P , and its reference , Ref ( see section 4 . 1 ) : DS ⊆ P ( SB ) × P ( P ) × Ref ( 16 ) Sampled Biometrics , SB : Within experiments , a BAS biometric characteristics BC are sampled using sampling devices SD . In this context , the diversity of biometrics and sampling contexts , SC , is essential to model . If a non - routine - based behavioral characteristic is sampled , ad - ditional non - routine - based behavioral characteristics SB S can be named as support characteristics : SB ⊆ SB M × P ( SD ) × P ( SC ) × SB S SB M ⊆ BC x , SB S ⊆ BC NR ( 17 ) For instance , typing a message or reading a message could be support characteristics that contribute to deﬁning what users were doing while their gait was sampled by a smart - phone accelerometer or the face geometry was sampled us - ing the front - facing camera . With that data , modelers can specify the sampling situation in a more detailed way . 7 e . g . , on kaggle . com Sample Devices , SD : To measure features of a biomet - ric characteristic , any device D is determined by the indi - vidual device’s model name D Mod ( e . g . , iPad , Pixel 3 ) , its manufacturer D Man ( e . g . , Apple , Google ) and the device category DC ( see above ) it belongs to , to later easily access information of the devices such as processor , RAM , or sen - sor speciﬁcs . According to the modeled target architecture , only sample devices within the individual device categories given for data capturing , DC DC can be modeled . D ⊆ D Man × D Mod × DC SD = { ( d Man , d Mod , dc ) | dc ∈ DC DC } ( 18 ) Sampling Contexts : To further narrow down the spe - ciﬁc data collection scenario , we suggest to extend the sam - pled biometric by arbitrary constraints we refer to as sam - pling contexts SC . That way , yet - hard - to - classify informa - tion can be modelled , e . g . , about the location of the sam - pling device , the supervision level of the study , or the over - all environment in terms of lightning . We consider the sam - pling contexts as tags that later help to ﬁlter any BASE SC = { outside , supervised , . . . } ( 19 ) Participant Information : A major challenge while de - veloping BAS is accessibility . Any behavior , soft biomet - ric but also physiological characteristics may be subject to change over time , not usable while someone is injured or just not possible to use for people with limitations , e . g . if people are not able to walk , see , or speak . To assess how representative a participant set is , we require to model age P A , gender P G , and any information related to accessibil - ity P L ( e . g . , glasses , leg prosthesis , broken arm ) for each participant , if available : P ⊆ P A × P G × P L , P A = { x | x ∈ Q , x ≤ 120 } ( 20 ) Biometric Systems As mentioned in section 4 . 3 , we re - fer to by ISO standard 19795 [ 18 ] ( see ﬁg . 1 ) for parts of biometric systems . To model the biometric systems BS , data capturing components C DC , data storage T DS tech - nologies used , signal processing components C SP , match - ing technologies T M , and decision components C D are re - quired . Please note that for biometric systems we do not regard template creation as a distinguished part but instead consider the matching technology T M synonymous to tem - plate creation as the overall phase ( enrolment vs . identiﬁ - cation / veriﬁcation ) decides for what purpose the respective technology ( e . g . , SVM ) is used ( see ﬁg . 1 ) . While at least of technology used for data storage ( T DS ) and matching ( T M ) should just be named during modeling ( e . g . , Secure Enclave , SVM ) , C DC , C SP , and C D require more details : Data Capturing C DC : Modeling data capturing is strongly coupled to the device categories DC DC modeled Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . within the target architecture as they deﬁne the possible in - put dimensions . Thus , we model data capturing T DC com - ponents as a subset of the respective device category sen - sors’ dimensions S D . In this way , sensor fusion can be modeled if capturing is deployed on devices of the category smartphone and notebook , for instance . C DC ⊆ S D , C DC (cid:54) = ∅ ( 21 ) Signal Processing C SP : Signal Processing is a crucial part of most experimental evaluations and the many possi - ble ways to pre - process data before template creation are the reason for a large group of the existing approaches . Within BASE , we follow the work by Wagner et al . [ 38 ] and require every signal processing step SP to have a type SP T and thus being a transformer , ﬁlter , or feature step and name the used processing mechanism Proc . The cat - egorization stems from the assumption that any collected data is sampled in chunks or windows 8 using a speciﬁc win - dowing technique ( e . g . , sliding window , step detection in case of gait ) that needs to be modeled ﬁrst . While a trans - former changes the number of samples in a window to pro - cess ( e . g . , interpolation ) , a ﬁlter keeps the number ( e . g . , savitzky - golay ) of samples in a window . A feature step re - duces the number to one ( e . g . , minimum , average ) and is usually the last step before template creation or matching . In the context of BASE , we consider the signal processing components to be identiﬁed by the list of transforming or ﬁltering steps and a list of features F . If this list is empty , no processing step of the type feature is included in the biomet - ric system . In total , at least one processing step is required to model . C SP ⊆ SP × P ( F ) SP ⊆ SP T × Proc , C SP (cid:54) = ∅ ( 22 ) Decision C D : In the end , all systems that include de - cision making components have to indicate their decision technology ( e . g . , majority voting ) and their decision mode D M , i . e . whether the overall system is running in identiﬁ - cation or veriﬁcation mode : C D ⊆ T D × D M , C D (cid:54) = ∅ ( 23 ) Fusion Modes : Apart from no fusion , BASE supports feature , score , and decision fusion , as proposed in [ 4 ] . For modeling , we group the components into the set of compo - nents that prepare template creation , C PTC , and the com - ponents that prepare decision , C PD : C PTC ⊆ P ( C DC ) × P ( C SP ) C PD ⊆ P ( C DS ) × P ( T M ) ( 24 ) 8 The number of windows is one in case all data collected is processed at once , e . g . , if the front camera is used for iris features or a ﬁngerprint is read . With these groups we determine biometric systems with no fusion , BS NF and biometric systems that apply feature fu - sion , BS FF . To allow score fusion we furthermore deﬁne components that prepare score fusion , C PSF : BS NF ⊆ C PTC × C PD × C D , # C PTC = 1 BS FF ⊆ C PTC × C PD × C D , # C PTC > 1 C PSF ⊆ C PTC × C PD ( 25 ) Finally , biometric systems with score fusion , BS SCF , and systems that prepare ( BS PDF ) and fuse decisions ( BS DF ) are modeled : BS SCF ⊆ C PSF × C D BS PDF = BS NF ∪ BS FF ∪ BS SCF BS DF ⊆ BS PDF × C D ( 26 ) Finally , all of the different biometric systems described be - fore deﬁne the overall set of biometric systems BS avail - able for any evaluation . BS = BS NF ∪ BS FF ∪ BS SCF ∪ BS DCF ( 27 ) Evaluation Results For each evaluation result ER , the biometric systems used to get these results and the individ - ual results R themselves are required . Each result refers to a speciﬁc result metric RM and its value V : ER = P ( BS ) × P ( R ) , R ⊆ RM × V , V ∈ Q ( 28 ) Apart from the metric M ( e . g . , EER ) and its unit U ( e . g . , % ) , we thus require a result metric RM to deﬁne the experiment - related evaluation criteria it expresses EC E : RM ⊆ M × U × EC E ( 29 ) Evaluation Criteria For evaluation criteria in the con - text of BASE , we integrated concepts of the well - established UDS framework proposed by Bonneau et al . [ 6 ] propos - ing criteria for sound authentication systems ( AS ) , their categorization and rules whenever these criteria apply to a certain AS . Since we propose a distinction between implementation - and experiment - based evaluation scenar - ios as mentioned above , we extend Bonneau’s approach and hence consider any criteria Crit to be of a type EC T ( ex - periment or implementation ) , belong to a category EC C ( usability , security , or deployability ) , express its name EC N ( e . g . , Infrequent - Errors , Easy - To - Learn ) , and the rules EC R deﬁning for what reason R O a speciﬁc level L ( offered , quasi - offered , not offered , or not decided yet ) can be assigned : Crit ⊆ EC C × EC N × P ( EC R ) EC R ⊆ L × R O ( 30 ) Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Finally , the resulting subsets , EC E and EC I , form the set of all evaluation criteria EC : EC E = { ( ec t , crit ) | ec t = exp ∧ crit ∈ Crit } EC I = { ( ec t , crit ) | ec t = imp ∧ crit ∈ Crit } EC = EC E ∪ EC I ( 31 ) 4 . 4 . 2 Implementation - Based Evaluation Scenarios Implementation - based evaluation scenarios encompass all evaluations based on speciﬁc software , protocols , or the de - ﬁned target architecture rather than speciﬁc biometric sys - tem components . In terms of typical attack vectors on bio - metric systems described in [ 31 ] , using HTTPS could be one solution , for example . Thus , for any implementation - based evaluation of a BAS , details should be modeled re - ﬂecting the targeted implementation - based evaluation cri - teria EC I , the individual implementation details I , and the affected device categories D A based on the categories that form the BASE ’s individual target architecture : ES impl = EC I × P ( D A ) × P ( I ) D A = DC DC ∩ DC SP . . . ∩ DC D ( 32 ) As implementation - based evaluations can be quite complex , we propose a textual description of the implementation de - tails I for now , e . g . , ”Use of exponential back - off algo - rithm” if Resilient - To - Unthrottled - Guessing is targeted . 4 . 5 . Evaluation Criteria Grant Especially in experiment - based evaluations , many differ - ent experiments need consideration to rate a criterion like Infrequent - Errors . If diverse evaluations with , e . g . , differ - ent participant groups , experiment time frames , or sampling contexts all result in an equally low EER , this criterion can be rated as offered , while high and low EERs would result in a not - offered rating or only one experiment in not de - cided yet , as more evaluations are required for a ﬁnal de - cision , for example . Because of that , modeling any eval - uation criterion grant ECG with a granting level L ( see section 4 . 4 . 1 ) requires at least one modeled experiment - or implementation - based evaluation scenario verifying that particular level ( e . g . , low EER for an offered Infrequent - Errors ) : ECG = L × P ( ES ) ( 33 ) 5 . Evaluation To evaluate BASE , we transformed a diverse group of BAS proposals from related work into BASE to determine ( 1 ) the applicability of BASE and ( 2 ) our mapping effort as shown in table 1 . We selected the proposals from the survey papers reviewed for the requirements determination in sec - tion 3 and covered physiological , behavioral , and soft bio - metric BAS . Furthermore , we decided to group some parts of BASE , i . e . all details of biometric characteristics and de - vice categories of the target architecture to ﬁt this work’s spacial limitations . 5 . 1 . BASE Applicability To rate coverage , we distinguished whether the individ - ual parts of BASE were highly inferable ( ) , partly inferable ( ) , and not inferable at all ( ) from the respective papers we selected as shown in table 1 . Whenever we mapped in - formation from the reports into BASE , different criteria for mapping success was given to decide on either of the levels . For some parts , there is a clear deﬁnition and ﬁnite map - ping space of target elements to choose from , i . e . biomet - ric characteristics , device categories , result metrics , dataset details , or biometric systems components . In contrast , sam - pling contexts as newly proposed by BASE refers to an open set with no constraints . As a result , we always rated them as partly inferable . Based on our mapping results in table 1 we underline the following ﬁndings : • All reports included clear deﬁnitions of the biomet - ric system components except the data storage com - ponent . Similarly , only one approach partly reported an implementation - based evaluation . Overall , we con - sider the proof - of - concept character of most targeted works as the major reason while data storage or i mplementation - based evaluations are speciﬁcally rel - evant for real - world deployment . • None of the reports explicitly mentioned speciﬁc eval - uation criteria . Instead , Most mentioned the general category of usability or security and rarely deployabil - ity goals such as low power consumption ( e . g . , [ 13 ] ) , for instance . Thus , evaluation criteria grants as pro - posed by BASE were never mentioned explicitly , ei - ther . As one reason , we assume that the research do - mains mostly focuses on completely new approaches instead of extending a speciﬁc approach continuously with new evaluations where a clear overview on of - fered and not - ( yet ) - offered criteria is needed . • Although the gender , age , and accessibility - related in - formation of experiment participants are quite impor - tant speciﬁcally for biometrics , many of the mapped reports only contain the number of participants mak - ing it more difﬁcult to rate the signiﬁcance of the used dataset . • Despite the fact that we only mapped a limited subset of related work to BASE we identiﬁed different types of papers . While some papers targeted most aspects of complete biometric authentication systems with a Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . R e s u lt R e po r t C a t e go r y B i o m e t r i c s P r o t ec t e d R e s ou r ce s D ev i ce C a t e go r i e s Sa m p l e D ev i ce s # P a r ti c i pan t s P a r ti c i pan t s ag e P a r ti c i pan t s g e nd e r P a r t . a cce ss i b ilit y Sa m p li ng C on t ex t s Suppo r t B e ha v i o r S i gna l P r o ce ss i ng F e a t u r e s D a t a S t o r ag e M a t c h i ng D ec i s i on R e s u lt M e t r i c s E v a l C r it ( ex p ) E v a l C r it ( i m p ) O ff e r i ng R u l e s C r it e r i a G r an t s G r an t L eve l M app i ng E ff o r t [ 13 ] B L [ 14 ] B L [ 5 ] B L [ 34 ] B H [ 35 ] B L [ 2 ] S L [ 27 ] S , P L [ 20 ] S , P L [ 21 ] P L [ 39 ] P L [ 7 ] P L [ 30 ] P L Table 1 . Coverage of BASE within 12 BAS proposals from related work , i . e . 6 physiological BAS ( P ) , 5 behavioral BAS ( B ) , and 3 soft BAS ( S ) . We distinguished the coverage into highly inferable ( ) , partly inferable ( ) , not inferable ( ) ) clear real - world application , some primarily focused on the included biometric systems without information on protected resources or a later target architecture . 5 . 2 . Transformation effort To evaluate mapping effort E M , we rated either low ( L ) or high ( H ) effort . Low effort maps to a report structure sim - ilar to BASE ( e . g . , distinct sections on features or identiﬁca - tion methods [ 13 ] , or dynamic and static evaluation scenar - ios [ 5 ] ) whereas high effort maps to a distinct report struc - ture where information needed aggregation from sections such as [ 34 ] . Overall , most of the reports followed a struc - ture similar to BASE allowing to map information section by section . One further ﬁnding refers to the effort to ex - tract the separate evaluation scenarios as we observed that most reports extensively present the scenario with the best results and use graphs to further show range - based results , e . g . , possible EERs depending on a certain threshold . From these graphs it is not clear which other evaluation scenarios might be important . 6 . Conclusion This work presented BASE , a domain model of biomet - ric authentication systems and their evaluations to pro - pose a standardized representation enabling a more efﬁ - cient exchange of research results . BASE is composed out of the sampled biometric characteristics , a target architec - ture for later deployment , and carried out experiment - and implementation - based evaluation scenarios of an individ - ual BAS . These scenarios target distinguished evaluation criteria and include dataset , biometric system and imple - mentation details . Lastly , BASE deﬁnes evaluation crite - ria grants to represent the maturity of a BAS in terms of evaluation criteria that are ( not ) offered because of carried - out evaluations . Our evaluation nominates BASE as a can - didate to exchange BAS speciﬁcs and evaluation results , since we mapped existing research papers mainly with low effort to BASE and observed that most papers cover only subsets of BASE . While implementation - related results such as data storage technologies for biometric systems or implementation - based evaluations may not ( yet ) be impor - tant for research results and rarely covered due to proof - of - concept focus of research papers , we explicitly consider the integration of evaluation criteria ( grants ) as an important feature to push the evolution of the most promising BAS . 7 . Future Work As the next step , the usability of BASE needs evaluation by actively approaching other BAS researchers to let them map their research results to BASE . Currently , we can only assess BASE by applying it to existing research papers but not from the perspective of an original not - yet - involved au - thor ( team ) . In this context , it would be interesting to see possible differences in the inference of evaluation scenar - ios or sampling contexts , or what scope a BASE representa - tion would have compared to a common conference paper , for example . To provide a convenient modeling experience , we consider the implementation of a decent transformation or modeling tooling as mandatory for that purpose and an important condition for the next evaluations . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . References [ 1 ] A . Abdelwhab and S . Viriri . A Survey on Soft Biometrics for Human Identiﬁcation . In J . Yang , D . S . Park , S . Yoon , Y . Chen , and C . Zhang , editors , Machine Learning and Bio - metrics . InTech , Aug . 2018 . 3 [ 2 ] H . Ailisto , M . Lindholm , S . - M . M¨akel¨a , and E . Vildjiounaite . Unobtrusive user identiﬁcation with light biometrics . In Pro - ceedings of the third Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction , pages 327 – 330 , Tampere Finland , Oct . 2004 . ACM . 8 [ 3 ] S . Alotaibi , S . Furnell , and N . Clarke . Transparent authenti - cation systems for mobile device security : A review . In In - ternet Technology and Secured Transactions ( ICITST ) , 2015 10th International Conference for , pages 406 – 413 . IEEE , 2015 . 2 , 3 [ 4 ] J . Blasco , T . M . Chen , J . Tapiador , and P . Peris - Lopez . A Survey of Wearable Biometric Recognition Systems . ACM Computing Surveys , 49 ( 3 ) : 1 – 35 , Sept . 2016 . 3 , 6 [ 5 ] C . Bo , L . Zhang , and X . - Y . Li . SilentSense : Silent User Identiﬁcation via Dynamics of Touch and Movement Behav - ioral Biometrics . arXiv : 1309 . 0073 [ cs ] , Aug . 2013 . arXiv : 1309 . 0073 . 8 [ 6 ] J . Bonneau , C . Herley , P . C . v . Oorschot , and F . Stajano . The Quest to Replace Passwords : A Framework for Comparative Evaluation of Web Authentication Schemes . pages 553 – 567 . IEEE , May 2012 . 6 [ 7 ] M . D . Bugdol and A . W . Mitas . Multimodal biometric sys - tem combining ECG and sound signals . Pattern Recognition Letters , 38 : 107 – 112 , Mar . 2014 . 8 [ 8 ] A . Dantcheva , P . Elia , and A . Ross . What Else Does Your Biometric Data Reveal ? A Survey on Soft Biometrics . IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , 11 ( 3 ) : 441 – 467 , Mar . 2016 . 3 , 4 [ 9 ] S . Dargan and M . Kumar . A comprehensive survey on the biometric recognition systems based on physiological and behavioral modalities . Expert Systems with Applications , 143 : 113114 , Apr . 2020 . 3 [ 10 ] L . M . Dinca and G . P . Hancke . The Fall of One , the Rise of Many : A Survey on Multi - Biometric Fusion Methods . IEEE Access , 5 : 6247 – 6289 , 2017 . 3 [ 11 ] S . Eberz , K . B . Rasmussen , V . Lenders , and I . Martinovic . Evaluating Behavioral Biometrics for Continuous Authenti - cation : Challenges and Metrics . pages 386 – 399 . ACM Press , 2017 . 2 , 3 [ 12 ] T . Eglitis , R . Guest , and F . Deravi . Data behind mobile be - havioural biometrics – a survey . IET Biometrics , 9 ( 6 ) : 224 – 237 , Nov . 2020 . 2 [ 13 ] T . Feng , J . Yang , Z . Yan , E . M . Tapia , and W . Shi . TIPS : context - aware implicit user identiﬁcation using touch screen in uncontrolled environments . In Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications - HotMobile ’14 , pages 1 – 6 , Santa Barbara , California , 2014 . ACM Press . 7 , 8 [ 14 ] M . Frank , R . Biedert , E . Ma , I . Martinovic , and D . Song . Touchalytics : On the Applicability of Touchscreen Input as a Behavioral Biometric for Continuous Authentication . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1207 . 6231 , 2012 . 8 [ 15 ] R . Garg , A . Arora , S . Singh , and S . Saraswat . Biometric Au - thentication using Soft Biometric Traits . In 2018 Fifth Inter - national Conference on Parallel , Distributed and Grid Com - puting ( PDGC ) , pages 259 – 264 , Dec . 2018 . ISSN : 2573 - 3079 . 3 [ 16 ] T . Gebru , J . Morgenstern , B . Vecchione , J . W . Vaughan , H . Wallach , H . D . Iii , and K . Crawford . Datasheets for datasets . Communications of the ACM , 64 ( 12 ) : 86 – 92 , Dec . 2021 . 2 [ 17 ] S . Idowu , D . Str¨uber , and T . Berger . Asset Management in Machine Learning : State - of - research and State - of - practice . ACM Computing Surveys , page 3543847 , June 2022 . 2 [ 18 ] Information technology — Biometric performance testing and reporting — Part 1 : Principles and framework . Standard , International Organization for Standardization , Geneva , CH , Jan . 2006 . 4 , 5 [ 19 ] D . Jaeger , H . Graupner , A . Sapegin , F . Cheng , and C . Meinel . Gathering and Analyzing Identity Leaks for Security Aware - ness , pages 102 – 115 . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 2015 . 1 [ 20 ] A . K . Jain , S . C . Dass , and K . Nandakumar . Soft Biomet - ric Traits for Personal Recognition Systems . In T . Kanade , J . Kittler , J . M . Kleinberg , F . Mattern , J . C . Mitchell , M . Naor , O . Nierstrasz , C . Pandu Rangan , B . Steffen , M . Su - dan , D . Terzopoulos , D . Tygar , M . Y . Vardi , G . Weikum , D . Zhang , and A . K . Jain , editors , Biometric Authentication , volume 3072 , pages 731 – 738 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 2004 . Series Title : Lecture Notes in Computer Science . 8 [ 21 ] V . Kanhangad , A . Kumar , and D . Zhang . Contactless and Pose Invariant Biometric Identiﬁcation Using Hand Surface . IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 20 ( 5 ) : 1415 – 1424 , May 2011 . 8 [ 22 ] E . Klieme , C . Tietz , and C . Meinel . Beware of SMOMBIES : veriﬁcation of users based on activities while walking . In 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust , Security And Privacy In Computing And Communications / 12th IEEE In - ternational Conference On Big Data Science And Engineer - ing , TrustCom / BigDataSE 2018 , New York , NY , USA , August 1 - 3 , 2018 , pages 651 – 660 . IEEE , 2018 . 2 [ 23 ] W . - H . Lee , X . Liu , Y . Shen , H . Jin , and R . B . Lee . Secure Pick Up : Implicit Authentication When You Start Using the Smartphone . In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM on Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies - SACMAT ’17 Abstracts , pages 67 – 78 , Indianapolis , Indiana , USA , 2017 . ACM Press . 4 [ 24 ] S . Marcel . BEAT – biometrics evaluation and testing . Bio - metric Technology Today , 2013 ( 1 ) : 5 – 7 , Jan . 2013 . 2 [ 25 ] W . Meng , D . S . Wong , S . Furnell , and J . Zhou . Surveying the Development of Biometric User Authentication on Mo - bile Phones . IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 17 ( 3 ) : 1268 – 1293 , 2015 . 3 [ 26 ] M . Mitchell , S . Wu , A . Zaldivar , P . Barnes , L . Vasserman , B . Hutchinson , E . Spitzer , I . D . Raji , and T . Gebru . Model Cards for Model Reporting . In Proceedings of the Confer - ence on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency , pages 220 – 229 , Atlanta GA USA , Jan . 2019 . ACM . 2 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 27 ] K . Niinuma , U . Park , and A . K . Jain . Soft Biometric Traits for Continuous User Authentication . IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , 5 ( 4 ) : 771 – 780 , Dec . 2010 . Conference Name : IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security . 8 [ 28 ] M . S . Nixon , P . L . Correia , K . Nasrollahi , T . B . Moeslund , A . Hadid , and M . Tistarelli . On soft biometrics . Pattern Recognition Letters , 68 : 218 – 230 , Dec . 2015 . 3 [ 29 ] V . M . Patel , R . Chellappa , D . Chandra , and B . Barbello . Continuous User Authentication on Mobile Devices : Recent progress and remaining challenges . IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 33 ( 4 ) : 49 – 61 , July 2016 . 2 , 3 [ 30 ] K . B . Rasmussen , M . Roeschlin , I . Martinovic , and G . Tsudik . Authentication using pulse - response biomet - rics . In 21st Annual Network and Distributed System Se - curity Symposium , NDSS 2014 , San Diego , California , USA , February 23 - 26 , 2014 . The Internet Society , 2014 . 8 [ 31 ] N . K . Ratha , J . H . Connell , and R . M . Bolle . An Analysis of Minutiae Matching Strength . In G . Goos , J . Hartmanis , J . van Leeuwen , J . Bigun , and F . Smeraldi , editors , Audio - and Video - Based Biometric Person Authentication , volume 2091 , pages 223 – 228 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 2001 . 7 [ 32 ] D . Reid , S . Samangooei , C . Chen , M . Nixon , and A . Ross . Soft Biometrics for Surveillance : An Overview . In Hand - book of Statistics , volume 31 , pages 327 – 352 . Elsevier , 2013 . 3 [ 33 ] M . Schatten , M . Baˇca , and B . Golenja . Modeling biometric systems in uml . In 18TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE INFORMATION AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS . Faculty of Organization and Informatics , 2007 . 2 [ 34 ] E . Shi , Y . Niu , M . Jakobsson , and R . Chow . Implicit authen - tication through learning user behavior . Information Secu - rity , pages 99 – 113 , 2011 . 8 [ 35 ] D . M . Shila and K . Srivastava . CASTRA : Seamless and Unobtrusive Authentication of Users to Diverse Mobile Ser - vices . IEEE Internet of Things Journal , pages 1 – 1 , 2018 . 4 , 8 [ 36 ] C . Tietz , E . Klieme , L . Behrendt , P . B¨oning , L . Marschke , and C . Meinel . Veriﬁcation of keyboard acoustics authenti - cation on laptops and smartphones using webrtc . In 3rd Cy - ber Security in Networking Conference , CSNet 2019 , Quito , Ecuador , October 23 - 25 , 2019 , pages 130 – 137 . IEEE , 2019 . 2 [ 37 ] C . Tietz , E . Klieme , R . Brabender , T . Lasarow , L . Rambold , and C . Meinel . Under pressure : Pushing down on me - touch sensitive door handle to identify users at room entry . In P . Samarati , S . D . C . di Vimercati , M . S . Obaidat , and J . Ben - Othman , editors , Proceedings of the 17th International Joint Conference on e - Business and Telecommunications , ICETE 2020 - Volume 2 : SECRYPT , Lieusaint , Paris , France , July 8 - 10 , 2020 , pages 565 – 571 . ScitePress , 2020 . 2 [ 38 ] J . Wagner , F . Lingenfelser , T . Baur , I . Damian , F . Kistler , and E . Andr ´ e . The social signal interpretation ( ssi ) framework : Multimodal signal processing and recognition in real - time . In Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , MM ’13 , pages 831 – 834 , New York , NY , USA , 2013 . ACM . 6 [ 39 ] N . Wang , Q . Li , A . A . A . El - Latif , X . Yan , and X . Niu . A Novel Hybrid Multibiometrics Based on the Fusion of Dual Iris , Visible and Thermal Face Images . In 2013 International Symposium on Biometrics and Security Technologies , pages 217 – 223 , Chengdu , Sichuan , China , July 2013 . IEEE . 8 [ 40 ] R . V . Yampolskiy and V . Govindaraju . Behavioural biomet - rics : a survey and classiﬁcation . International Journal of Biometrics , 1 ( 1 ) : 81 – 113 , 2008 . 2 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .