HUMAN NATURE REVIEW ISSN 1476 - 1084 http : / / human - nature . com / Book Review The Essential Child : Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought by Susan A . Gelman . Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2003 . Reviewed by Maria Trochatos What do we mean when we say of a particular group of people – political correctness aside – that ‘they’re tight with money’ or ‘they’re not very smart’ ? In describing people this way , we seem to be implying that the named property is a deep , fixed and enduring characteristic of their makeup . Or , when we say that ‘tigers have stripes’ , we seem to be suggesting that to count as a tiger a creature must have stripes – this is part of what a tiger is . These sorts of claims , Susan Gelman suggests , are essentialist . We make ( and believe ) such claims all the time . Essentialist claims say something about the very nature or identity of things . In The Essential Child , Gelman offers data that may explain why such es - sentialist thinking is so pervasive in our understanding of the world and the things in it . She focuses on a fascinating phenomenon called psychological essentialism ( PE ) . PE applies to our everyday or intuitive thinking about the world , rather than our ‘formal’ or scientific theories of the world ( although essentialism is wide - spread in science [ e . g . ‘the essence of water is H 2 O’ ) . Gelman claims that PE is a pervasive reasoning bias – ‘a habit of the mind’ ( p . 290 ) – that affects human categorisation in various domains and contexts . The Essential Child begins with a general Introduction ( Chapter 1 ) , fol - lowed by three main sections . In Part I , ‘The Phenomena’ ( Chapters 2 - 7 ) , Gel - man presents the evidence for PE . Part II , ‘Mechanisms of Acquisition’ ( Chapters 7 - 9 ) , explores the processes that possibly give rise to PE . In Part III , ‘Implica - tions and Speculations’ ( Chapters 10 - 11 ) , Gelman discusses the implications of her view for theories of concepts and cognitive development , and explores the scope of PE in our understanding of the world . The Introduction is particularly helpful , laying out the groundwork for what follows . Here , Gelman introduces PE , and specifies exactly what she means by it – basically the view that people believe that certain categories have an un - Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 38 Human Nature Review 4 ( 2004 ) 38 - 43 derlying nature that governs the observable characteristics of their members . These categories – natural kinds – are discovered rather than invented , natural rather than artificial , and they seem to ‘carve nature at its joints’ ( e . g . ‘girl’ , ‘dog’ , ‘tree’ , ‘gold’ ) . Not all categories are natural kinds ( compare ‘tiger’ , which is a natural kind , and ‘striped things’ , which is not ) . Members of each natural kind share some unobservable property , substance or quality – the essence – that causes them to look and behave the way they do . People also believe that words reflect the structure of the world , mapping directly onto natural kind categories . PE is a different phenomenon from philosophical or metaphysical essen - tialism . It is an epistemological view about people’s beliefs about the world and the things in it , rather than a ( metaphysical ) view about the actual or real work - ings of things in the world . As Gelman goes on to show , these two positions sometimes converge , but more often they don’t . Gelman stresses this point often : the claim that people essentialise is not the same as claiming that essentialism is true . Much of Gelman’s evidence comes from developmental psychology ( al - though she does also discuss studies carried out on adults ) . She claims , rightly , that ‘children provide a strong test for psychological essentialism’ ( p . 4 ) . Many psychologists , most notably Jean Piaget , suggest that children’s concepts ( below six or seven years of age ) are perceptually driven and atheoretical . Gelman claims that the exact opposite is the case ; children’s concepts look beyond the perceptually obvious , and they privilege unobservable properties . PE is a perva - sive and robust phenomenon . Gelman’s approach is not to focus on what is in a child’s category ( as other theorists have done ) , but to test how the category functions . While it is dif - ficult to find direct evidence for PE ( since essences are unobservable ) it is possi - ble to explore a number of related phenomena that point to essences ( or essence - like constructs ) . In Chapter 2 , Gelman provides evidence that children’s concepts are richly structured , and that their category - based inductive inferences are essentialist . This is reflected in their reasoning about unobservable properties , and ‘an appre - ciation that appearances can be deceiving when it comes to category membership’ ( p . 26 ) . Children will make inferences from one category member to another whenever the properties or functions concerned are internal or unobservable . They will group together creatures according to natural kind membership rather than perceptual similarity , based on these non - obvious properties . For example , they will categorise a tropical fish with a shark , but not with a dolphin ( which is perceptually similar to a shark ) , if they believe that the fish and the shark share some hidden property . In Chapter 3 , Gelman discusses the importance of unobservable or non - obvious properties in children’s categories . By four or five years of age , children recognise that category membership ( or identity ) based on internal properties is Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 39 Human Nature Review 4 ( 2004 ) 38 - 43 stable despite radical outward transformation . ‘A lion in a tiger costume is still a lion’ ( p . 63 ) . Similarly , children as young as five years of age recognise that bio - logical transformation ( e . g . metamorphosis , growth ) does not change a creature’s identity . However , if a creature’s ‘insides’ ( the hidden properties ) are removed , category identity and category - typical functions are lost . Children’s categories incorporate beliefs about innateness . Nature / nurture conflicts and ‘innate potential’ are discussed in Chapter 4 . These are explored via ‘switched - at - birth’ or adoption scenarios . Will a kangaroo raised by goats have a pouch ? Will it be good at hopping or climbing ? Will an apple seed planted into a flowerpot grow into an apple tree or a flower ? In these studies , and from as early as four years of age , nature clearly wins out over nurture ( p . 91 ) . Similar nativist beliefs emerge in studies of race and gender . Children’s concepts incorporate beliefs about causality ; the role of causa - tion in children’s categories is discussed in Chapter 5 . Children believe that the ‘insides’ of living natural kinds are causally responsible for their ‘outsides’ , for their appearance and behaviour . They believe that these causally meaningful properties are more central to category identity , and that they maintain the dis - creteness of natural kind boundaries . In Chapter 6 , Gelman defends her account of PE from alternative interpretations of the data presented in the previous chap - ters . It might be suggested that children simply learn essentialism from the way their parents speak about or describe things , or from books and other media . Chapter 7 focuses on parental speech to children . Here Gelman presents evidence showing that parents do not explicitly talk about essences to their children . The ‘language children [ hear is ] sketchy , incomplete , and…incapable of teaching children essentialism’ ( p . 164 ) . Where ‘insides’ are mentioned , it is in relation to artefacts ( e . g . batteries ) rather than living kinds . Parents do talk about kinds and emphasise categories ( e . g . they group individuals under a kind , and discuss ge - neric categories ) . However , they do not make any further comments about non - obvious properties being responsible for observable similarities . Yet children have ‘a rich set of beliefs about insides , teleology , and animal origins’ ( p . 175 ) . They seem to make these further assumptions on their own . Chapter 8 focuses , in considerable detail , on the relationship between lan - guage and essentialism . Language is not essential for forming categories ( e . g . pre - linguistic infants can form categories ) . Language is not the source of essen - tialism , but it is related to essentialism . Gelman points out two functions of lan - guage – conveying membership of a kind , via naming , and expressing the scope of a proposition , via generic noun phrases – which are relevant to PE . However , these capacities only indirectly inform essentialism . Gelman claims that it is chil - dren’s beliefs about the category being named that gives particular words their power ( p . 235 ) . Language is one cue ( among many ) that contributes to children’s essentialising . Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 40 Human Nature Review 4 ( 2004 ) 38 - 43 In Chapter 9 , Gelman offers a developmental account that incorporates PE . Her view is that PE is a component of a framework theory that informs these childhood competences . Children are naïve theorists – that is , their categorisa - tions are theory - based . The opposing view is that their abilities result from ‘dumb attentional mechanisms’ ( p . 248 - 249 ) : children construct complex concepts from basic perceptual , verbal and other input ( i . e . they are similarity - based ) . However , the most compelling evidence for the theory view is that children rarely attend to perceptual features alone , they often ignore perceptual evidence , and they form categories that include unobservable , theoretical properties such as ontology , cau - sation , function and intention . PE is not a ‘historical accident’ arising from Western philosophy , culture or politics . Children essentialise , but they don’t know anything about philosophy or science . Nor is PE a consequence of naming . According to Gelman , PE seems to result from the convergence of several psychological capacities such as the ap - pearance / reality distinction , induction from property clusters , causal determinism , and tracking identity over time . It applies mostly to natural kinds ( plant and ani - mal living kinds , and substance kinds ) , and to social kinds , but not to artefacts . This account of PE also rejects a number of alternative views – for example , that all concepts , or only biological concepts , are essentialised . PE is embedded in ‘folk theories’ , theories that embody our commonsense understanding about dif - ferent domains ( e . g . biology , psychology ) . It is an early - emerging bias ; it is in - nate , not taught . PE appears to be a domain - general ( global ) predisposition , but domain - specific in application . In Chapter 10 , Gelman considers whether we need to posit PE over and above the component phenomena ( she answers ‘yes’ ) . She also speculates about how PE can inform our understanding of the nature of concepts . The role of PE in children’s categorisations ‘overturns assumptions about what is simple or basic and what is complex . Abstract is not always hard , and concrete is not always the starting point’ ( p . 292 ) . She also discusses how PE is related to developmental change , what implications individual variation poses to PE , and what would be required to disconfirm PE . Chapter 11 poses the question of why people essentialise . A number of re - lated phenomena are discussed ( e . g . contagion , contamination , fetishes ) . Here , Gelman provides evidence that humans can’t not essentialise – we are innately prone to this powerful cognitive predisposition . ( But this is not to deny the role of external input such as language . ) While PE assists us in some ways ( such as al - lowing us to make reasonably good predictions about the world much of the time ) , it does not always converge with the actual structure of reality , and often misleads us . I have to admit straight up that I agree with Gelman’s interpretation of the data . However , it seems to me that Gelman is cautious about granting too much power to PE . In response to the question ‘is essentialism in the world , the mind , Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 41 Human Nature Review 4 ( 2004 ) 38 - 43 language , or culture ? ’ ( p . 323 ) Gelman claims that all of these have an influence ( although PE ‘could not emerge without powerful cognitive predispositions’ ( p . 323 ) ) . A strongly nativist interpretation would paint a very deterministic picture of our world , a world where we really don’t have an influence on what happens , and where we are at the mercy of our biological makeup . Not many people would feel comfortable with such a view . But , if anything , my own view would be much stronger than Gelman’s . I would venture that cognitive biases such as PE have a much greater influence on our beliefs about the world than we suppose . Gelman clearly distinguishes between PE as an intuitive cognitive bias or predisposition , and metaphysical or scientific essentialism . In the past , however , the distinction between these two views was not quite so clear . Before our mod - ern scientific and technological age , many theories were based on an intuitive un - derstanding of the world . Philosophers such as Aristotle and Locke offered essen - tialist explanations of a number of phenomena , including species . It was not until Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection that these essentialist accounts were shown to be inaccurate . Of course , scientific enquiry has to originate somewhere , and intuition is a good a place as any . But our intuitive theories , while acting as a starting point for scientific enquiry , often seem to constrain or limit that enquiry – and perhaps not only in the past . In the domain of folk physics , for example , commonsense rea - soning about the motion of objects seems to rely heavily on a naïve impetus the - ory , similar to the medieval impetus theory ( this is the idea that physically setting objects in motion will imbue them with an internal force – impetus – that will maintain their motion ) . Even students who have completed physics courses ap - peal to impetus theory . Further , information presented in the classroom may be reinterpreted so that it complies with the impetus theory . ‘ [ Many ] students emerge from physics courses with their impetus theories largely intact . ’ 1 Perhaps this sort of constraint occurs in the accounts of species presented by Aristotle and Locke : their ‘scientific’ theories were limited by their intuitive theories of the biological domain . Their intuitive theories , and consequently their ‘scientific’ theories , misrepresent reality . But , is it possible that any of our mod - ern sciences might follow this same pattern ? If innate biases such as PE have a stronger influence than Gelman suggests , I think this is a real possibility . 2 How - ever , this remains a question for future enquiry . 3 But this disagreement with Gelman about the strength of PE is only a mi - nor one . While some of the evidence that Gelman presents is speculative , it is nevertheless convincing . We do seem to be habitual classifiers ( we do classify things into natural kinds ) , and we do search for the ‘true nature’ ( essence ) of things in order to better understand them . PE also seems to offer a reasonable ex - planation for many phenomena in our world ( consider stereotyping , or ethnic or racial discrimination ) . The Essential Child is a captivating read . Gelman’s writing is extremely Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 42 Human Nature Review 4 ( 2004 ) 38 - 43 Human Nature Review , Volume 4 , 2004 , 43 clear , making her work accessible to anyone not familiar with the subject matter . Her presentation of the material is well structured and systematic . Some of the studies described are quite complicated ( especially those exploring the relation - ship of essentialism and language ) , but to her credit Gelman makes a point of summarising the studies and re - stating their relevance to her overall arguments about PE . I would highly recommend The Essential Child to anyone interested in the working of the human mind . At the very least , it will make you think about how you think about the world . Maria Trochatos , Postgraduate , Department of Philosophy , Macquarie University , North Ryde , NSW 2109 , Australia . Email : Maria . Trochatos @ scmp . mq . edu . au . Notes 1 . McCloskey , M . ( 1983 ) , ‘Naïve Theories of Motion’ , Mental Models , D . Gent - ner & A . L . Stevens ( eds . ) , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . , p . 318 . 2 . This position is consistent with the view , espoused by researchers such as Al - ison Gopnik , which describes babies and toddlers as ‘scientists in the crib’ . See A . Gopnik , A . Meltzoff & P . Kuhl , How Babies Think : The Science of Childhood , Weidenfeld and Nicolson , 1999 . 3 . Some of this work is already underway . See P . Carruthers , S . Stich & M . Sie - gal , The Cognitive Basis of Science , Cambridge University Press , 2002 .