Analytic geometry David Pierce June  ,  corrected January  ,  ,  :  Noon Mathematics Department Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University Istanbul dpierce @ msgsu . edu . tr http : / / mat . msgsu . edu . tr / ~ dpierce / Contents Introduction   . The problem   . Failures of rigor   .  . Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Number theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . A standard of rigor   .  . Proportion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Ratios of circles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . Why rigor   . A book from the s   .  . Equality and identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Geometry ﬁrst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . The ordered group of directed segments . . . . . . .   .  . Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Coordinatization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Multiplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . Abscissas and ordinates   .  . The parabola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . The hyperbola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . The ellipse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    Contents  . The geometry of the conic sections   .  . Diameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Duplication of the cube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Quadratrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Locus problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . A book from the s   . Geometry to algebra   . Algebra to geometry  A . Ordered ﬁelds and valued ﬁelds  Bibliography  List of Figures  .  . An isosceles triangle in a vector space . . . . . . . .   .  . An isosceles triangle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . An isosceles triangle in a coordinate plane . . . . . .   .  . Euclid’s Proposition I .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Congruence of directed segments . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Axial triangle and base of a cone . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . A conic section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Axial triangle and base of a cone . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Proposition I .  of Apollonius . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Proposition I .  of Apollonius . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Menaechmus’s ﬁnding of two mean proportionals . .   .  . The quadratrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Multiplication of lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Euclid’s Proposition I .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Multiplication of lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .  . Associativity of multiplication of lengths . . . . . . .   Introduction The writing of this report  was originally provoked , both by frus - tration with the lack of rigor in analytic geometry texts , and by a belief that this problem can be remedied by attention to mathe - maticians like Euclid and Descartes , who are the original sources of our collective understanding of geometry . Analytic geometry arose with the importing of algebraic notions and notations into geome - try . Descartes , at least , justiﬁed the algebra geometrically . Now it is possible to go the other way , using algebra to justify geometry . Textbook writers of recent times do not make it clear which way they are going . This makes it impossible for a student of analytic geometry to get a correct sense of what a proof is . If it be said that analytic geometry is not concerned with proof , I would respond that in this case the subject pushes the student back to a time before Euclid , but armed with many more unexamined presuppositions . Students today  suppose that every line segment has a length , which is a positive real number of units , and conversely every positive real number is the length of some line segment . The latter supposition is quite astounding , since the positive real num - bers compose an uncountable set . Euclidean geometry can in fact be done in a countable space , as David Hilbert pointed out . I made notes on some of these matters . The notes grew into this report as I found more and more things that were worth saying . There are many avenues to explore . Some notes here are just indi -  I call this document a report simply because I have used for it the LTEX document class called “report” ( strictly the koma - script class corresponding to this ) .  And if it is true for the students , must it not also be so for their teachers ?  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  cations of what can be investigated further , either in mathematics itself or in the existing literature about it . Meanwhile , the contents of the numbered chapters of this report might be summarized as follows .  . The logical foundations of analytic geometry as it is often taught are unclear . Analytic geometry can be built up either from “synthetic” geometry or from an ordered ﬁeld . When the chosen foundations are unclear , proof becomes meaningless . This is illustrated by the example of “proving analytically” that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal .  . Rigor is not an absolute notion , but must be deﬁned in terms of the audience being addressed . As modern examples of failures in rigor , I consider the failure to distinguish between • the two kinds of completeness possessed by the ordered ﬁeld of real numbers ; • induction and well ordering as properties of the natural numbers .  . Ancient mathematicians like Euclid and Archimedes still set the standard for rigor • in the theory of proportion , which ultimately made pos - sible Dedekind’s rigorous deﬁnition of the real numbers ; • in the justiﬁcation of inﬁnitesimal methods , as for exam - ple in the proof that circles are to one another as the squares on their diameters .  . Why are the Ancients rigorous ? I don’t know . But we our - selves still expect rigor from our students , if only because we expect them to be able to justify their answers to the problems that we assign to them . If we don’t expect this , we ought to .  . There is an old analytic geometry textbook that I learned something from as a child , but that I now ﬁnd mathemati - cally sloppy or extravagant , for not laying out clearly • its geometrical assumptions and • and its “analytic” assumption of a one - to - one correspon -  Introduction dence between the positive real numbers and the abstrac - tions called lengths . It would be better not to encourage the fantasy of a universal ruler that can measure every line segment . This should be , not an assumption , but a theorem , which can be established by means of the concept of congruence and the comparability of any two line segments .  . Because the text considered in the previous chapter uses the technical terms “abscissa” and “ordinate” without explaining their origin , I provide an explanation of their origins in the conic sections as studied by Apollonius .  . a ) How Apollonius himself works out his theorems remains mysterious . For example , Descartes’s methods do not seem to illuminate the theorem of Apollonius that every straight line that is parallel to the axis of a parabola is a diameter of the parabola ( in the sense of bisecting each chord that is parallel to the tangent of the parabola at the vertex of the diameter ) . b ) The conic sections may have been discovered by Menaech - mus for the sake of his solution to the problem of dupli - cating the cube . The solution can be found , if curves exist with certain properties . Such curves turn out to exist , in a geometric sense : they are sections of cones . c ) Both the ancient geometer Pappus and the modern ge - ometer Descartes are leery of curves like the quadratrix , for not having a geometric deﬁnition . d ) Descartes is able to give a geometric description of a curve given analytically by a cubic equation . Pappus was math - ematically equipped to understand cubic equations and indeed equations of any degree . So Descartes did make progress with a kind of problem that made sense to the Ancients .  . I look at an analytic geometry textbook that I once taught January  ,  ,  :  Noon  from . It is more sophisticated than the textbook from my childhood considered in Chapter  . This makes its failures of rigor more dangerous for the student . The book is nomi - nally founded on the “Fundamental Principle of Analytic Ge - ometry , ” elsewhere called the “Cantor – Dedekind Axiom” : an inﬁnite straight line is , after choice of a neutral point and a direction , an ordered group isomorphic to the ordered group of real numbers . This principle or axiom is neither suﬃcient nor necessary for doing analytic geometry : • it is true in an arbitrary Riemannian manifold with no closed geodesics , • analytic geometry can be done over a countable ordered ﬁeld .  . I give Hilbert’s axioms for geometry and note the essential point for analytic geometry : when an inﬁnite straight line is conceived as an ordered additive group , then this group can be made into an ordered ﬁeld by a geometrically meaningful def - inition of multiplication . Descartes , Hilbert , and Hartshorne work this out , though Descartes omits details and assumes that the ordered ﬁeld will be Archimedean . I work out a deﬁnition of multiplication solely on the basis of Book I of Euclid’s Ele - ments . Thus does algebra receive a geometrical justiﬁcation .  . In the other direction , I review how the algebra of certain ordered ﬁelds can be used to obtain a Euclidean plane . A . The example of completeness from Chapter  is worked out at a more elementary level in the appendix . My scope here is the whole history of mathematics . Obviously I cannot give this a thorough treatment . I am not prepared to try to do this . To come to some understanding of a mathematician , one must read him or her ; but I think one must read , both with a sense of what it means to do mathematics , and with an awareness that this sense may well diﬀer from that of the mathematician whom one is reading . This awareness requires experience , in addition to the  Introduction mere will to have it . I have been fortunate to read old mathematics , both as a student and as a teacher , in classrooms where everybody is working through this mathematics and presenting it to the class . For the last three years , I have been seeing how new undergraduate mathematics stu - dents respond to Book I of Euclid’s Elements . I continue to be surprised by what the students have to say . Mostly what I learn from the students themselves is how strange the notion of proof can be to some of them . This impresses on me how amazing it is that the Elements was produced in the ﬁrst place . I am reminded that what Euclid even means by a proof may be quite diﬀerent from what we mean today . But the students alone may not be able to impress on me some things . Some students are given to writing down assertions whose correctness has not been established . Then they write down more assertions , and they end up with something that is supposed to be a proof , although it has the appearance of a sequence or array or jumble of statements whose logical interconnections are unclear .  Euclid does not write this way , except in one small respect . He begins each of his propositions with a bare assertion . He does not preface this enunciation or protasis ( πρότασις ) with the word “theorem” or “problem , ” as we might today ( and as I shall do in this report ) . Euclid does not have the typographical means that Heiberg uses , in his own edition [  ] of Euclid ,  to distinguish the protasis from the rest of the proposition . No , the protasis just sits there , not even preceded by the “I say that” ( λέγω ὅτι ) that may be seen further down in the proof . For me to notice this , naïve students were apparently not enough , but I had also to read Fowler’s Mathematics of Plato’s  Unfortunately some established mathematicians use the same style in their own lectures .  Bracketed numbers refer to the bibliography . Some books there , like Heiberg’s , I possess only as electronic ﬁles , obtained from somewhere on the web . Heiberg uses increases the letter - spacing for Euclid’s protases . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Academy [  ,  .  ( e ) , pp .  –  ] .  . The problem Textbooks of analytic geometry do not make their logical founda - tions clear . Of course I can speak only of the books that I have been able to consult : these are from the last century or so . Descartes’s original presentation [  ] in the th century is clear enough . In an abstract sense , Descartes may be no more rigorous than his suc - cessors . He does get credit for actually inventing his subject and for introducing the notation we use today : minuscule letters for lengths , with letters from the beginning of the alphabet used for known lengths , and letters from the end for unknown lengths . As for his mathematics itself , Descartes explicitly bases it on an ancient tradition that culminates , in the th century of the Common Era , with Pappus of Alexandria . More recent analytic geometry books start in the middle of things , but they do not make it clear what those things are . I think this is a problem . The chief aim of these notes is to identify this problem and its solution . How can analytic geometry be presented rigorously ? Rigor is not a ﬁxed standard , but depends on the audience . Still , it puts some requirements on any work of mathematics , as I shall discuss in Chap - ter  . In my own university mathematics department in Istanbul , students of analytic geometry have had a semester of calculus , and a semester of synthetic geometry from its own original source , namely Book I of Euclid’s Elements [  ,  ] . Such students are the audience that I especially have in mind in my considerations of rigor . But I would suggest that any students of analytic geometry ought to come to the subject similarly prepared , at least on the geometric side . Plane analytic geometry can be seen as the study of the Euclidean  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  plane with the aid of a sort of rectangular grid that can be laid over the plane as desired . Alternatively , the subject can be seen as a discovery of geometric properties in the set of ordered pairs of real numbers . I propose to call these two approaches the geometric and the algebraic , respectively . Either approach can be made rigorous . But a course ought to be clear which approach is being taken . Probably most courses of analytic geometry take the geometric approach , relying on students to know something of synthetic geom - etry already . Then the so - called Distance Formula can be justiﬁed by appeal to the Pythagorean Theorem . However , even in such a course , students might be asked to use algebraic methods to prove , for example , the following , which is actually Proposition I .  of the Elements .  Theorem  . The base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal . To prove this , perhaps students would be expected to come up with something like the following . Proof  . Suppose the vertices of a triangle are a , b , and c , and the angles at b and c are β and γ respectively , as in Figure  .  . Then β and γ are given by the equations ( a − b ) · ( c − b ) = | a − b | · | c − b | · cos β , ( a − c ) · ( b − c ) = | a − c | · | b − c | · cos γ . We assume the triangle is isosceles , and in particular | a − b | = | a − c | .  I had a memory that this problem was assigned in an analytic geometry course that I once taught with two senior colleagues . However , I cannot ﬁnd the problem in my ﬁles . I do ﬁnd similar problems , such as (  ) to prove that the line segment bisecting two sides of triangle is parallel to the third side and is half its length , or (  ) to prove that , in an isosceles triangle , the median drawn to the third side is just its perpendicular bisector . In each case , the student is explicitly required to use analytic methods .   . The problem b β c γ a Figure  .  . An isosceles triangle in a vector space Then we compute ( a − c ) · ( b − c ) = ( a − c ) · ( b − a + a − c ) = ( a − c ) · ( b − a ) + ( a − c ) · ( a − c ) = ( a − c ) · ( b − a ) + ( a − b ) · ( a − b ) = ( c − a ) · ( a − b ) + ( a − b ) · ( a − b ) = ( c − b ) · ( a − b ) , and so cos β = cos γ . If one has the Law of Cosines , then the argument is simpler : Proof  . Suppose the vertices of a triangle are a , b , and c , and the angles at b and c are β and γ respectively , again as in Figure  .  . By the Law of Cosines , | a − c | 2 = | a − b | 2 + | c − b | 2 − 2 · | a − b | · | c − b | · cos β , cos β = | c − b | 2 · | a − b | , and similarly cos γ = | b − c | 2 · | a − c | . If | a − b | = | a − c | , then cos β = cos γ , so β = γ . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  In this last argument though , the vector notation is a needless complication . We can streamline things as follows . Proof  . In a triangle ABC , let the sides opposite A , B , and C have lengths a , b , and c respectively , and let the angles at B and C be β and γ respectively , as in Figure  .  . If b = c , then B β C γ A c b a Figure  .  . An isosceles triangle b 2 = c 2 + a 2 − 2 ca cos β , cos β = a 2 c = a 2 b = cos γ . Possibly this is not considered analytic geometry though , since coordinates are not used , even implicitly . We can use coordinates explicitly , laying down our grid conveniently : Proof  . Suppose a triangle has vertices ( 0 , a ) , ( b , 0 ) , and ( c , 0 ) , as in Figure  .  . We assume a 2 + b 2 = a 2 + c 2 , and so b = − c . In this case the cosines of the angles at ( b , 0 ) and ( c , 0 ) must be the same , namely | b | / p a 2 + b 2 ; and so the angles themselves are equal . In any case , as a proof of what is actually Euclid’s Proposition I .  , this whole exercise is logically worthless , assuming we have taken the geometric approach to analytic geometry . By this approach , we shall have had to show how to erect perpendiculars to given straight   . The problem b c a Figure  .  . An isosceles triangle in a coordinate plane lines , as in Euclid’s Proposition I .  , whose proof relies ultimately on I .  . One could perhaps develop analytic geometry on Euclidean principles without proving Euclid’s I .  explicitly as an independent proposition . For , the equality of angles that it establishes can be proved and reproved as needed by the method attributed to Pappus by Proclus [  , pp .  –  ] : Proof  . In triangle ABC , if AB = AC , then the triangle is congru - ent to its mirror image ACB by means of Euclid’s Proposition I .  , the Side - Angle - Side theorem ; in particular , ∠ ABC = ∠ ACB . Thus one can see clearly that Theorem  is true , without needing to resort to any of the analytic methods of the ﬁrst four proofs .  . Failures of rigor The root meaning of the word “rigor” is stiﬀness . Rigor in a piece of mathematics is what makes it able to stand up to questioning . Rigor in mathematics education requires helping students to see what kind of questioning might be done . An education in mathematics will take the student through several passes over the same subjects . With each pass , the student’s under - standing should deepen .  At an early stage , the student need not and cannot be told all of the questions that might be raised at a later stage . But if the mathematics of an early course resembles diﬀerent mathematics of a later course , then the two instances of mathemat - ics ought to be equally rigorous . Otherwise the older student might assume , wrongly , that the mathematics of the earlier course could in fact stand up to the same scrutiny that the mathematics of the later course stands up to . Concepts in an earlier course must not be presented in such a way that they will be misunderstood in a later course . I have extracted the foregoing rule from the examples that I am going to work out in this chapter . By the standard of rigor that I propose , students of calculus need not master the epsilon - delta def - inition of limit . If the students later take an analysis course , then they will ﬁll in the logical gaps from the calculus course . The stu - dents are not going to think that everything was already proved in  It might be counted as a defect in my own education that I did not have undergraduate courses in algebra and topology before taking graduate ver - sions of these courses . Graduate analysis was for me a continuation of my high school course , an “honors” course that had been quite rigorous , being based on Spivak’s Calculus [  ] and ( in small part ) Apostol’s Mathematical Analysis [  ] .    . Failures of rigor calculus class , so that epsilons and deltas are a needless complica - tion . They may think there is no reason to prove everything , but that is another matter . If students of calculus never study analysis , but become engineers perhaps , or teachers of school mathematics , I suppose they are not likely to have false beliefs about what theo - rems can be proved in mathematics ; they just will not have a highly developed notion of proof . By introducing and using the epsilon - delta deﬁnition of limit at the very beginning of calculus , the teacher might actually violate the requirements of rigor , if he or she instills the false notion that there is no rigorous alternative deﬁnition of limits . How many calculus teachers , ignorant of Abraham Robinson’s so - called “nonstandard” analysis [  ] , will try to give their students some notion of epsilons and deltas , out of a misguided conception of rigor , when the intu - itive approach by means of inﬁnitesimals can be given full logical justiﬁcation ? On the other hand , in mathematical circles , I have encountered disbelief that the real numbers constitute the unique complete or - dered ﬁeld . Since every valued ﬁeld has a completion , and every ordering of a ﬁeld gives rise to a valuation , it is possible to suppose wrongly that every ordered ﬁeld as such has a completion . This confusion might be due to a lack of rigor in education , somewhere along the way .  I spell out the relevant distinctions , both in the next section and , in more detail , in Appendix A ( page  ) .  .  . Analysis The real numbers can be deﬁned from the rational numbers either as Dedekind cuts or as equivalence - classes of Cauchy sequences . The former deﬁnition yields R as the completion of Q as an ordered set .  Here arises the usefulness of Spivak’s ﬁnal chapter , “Uniqueness of the real numbers” [  , ch .  ] . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  It so happens that the ﬁeld structure of Q extends to R . This is because Q is Archimedean as an ordered ﬁeld . Applied to a non - Archimedean ordered ﬁeld , the Dedekind construction still yields a complete ordered set , but not an ordered ﬁeld . Applied to an arbitrary subﬁeld of R , the construction yields ( a ﬁeld isomorphic to ) R . Thus R is unique ( up to isomorphism ) as a complete ordered ﬁeld . ( Again , formal deﬁnitions of terms can be found in , or at least inferred from , Appendix A . ) By the alternative construction , R is S / I , where S is the ring of Cauchy sequences of Q , and I is the maximal ideal comprising the sequences that converge to 0 . If we replace Q with a possibly - non - Archimedean ordered ﬁeld K , we can still deﬁne the absolute - value function | · | on K by | x | = max ( x , − x ) . The Cauchy - sequence construction of R from Q can be applied to K , yielding an ordered ﬁeld b K in which every Cauchy sequence con - verges . But if K is non - Archimedean , then b K is not isomorphic to R . Alternatively , if K is non - Archimedean , we may observe that the ring of ﬁnite elements of K is a valuation ring O of K , and the maximal ideal M O of O consists of the inﬁnitesimal elements of K . Then the quotient K × / O × is ordered by the rule a O × < b O × ⇐⇒ a b ∈ M O . Writing Γ O for K × / O × , and letting 0 be less than every element of Γ O , we deﬁne the map | · | O from K to { 0 } ∪ Γ O as being the quotient map on K × , and being 0 at 0 . This map is a valuation of K . In the construction of b K , we may let the role of | · | be played by | · | O ; but the result is the same , because , in a word , the maps | · | and | · | O induce the same uniformity on K .   . Failures of rigor It may be that a ﬁeld K has a valuation ring O without having an ordering . We still obtain a completion b K as before . In the common examples , the value group Γ O embeds in the group R + of positive real numbers ; thus Γ O is Archimedean .  However , the valuation | · | O may be called more precisely a non - Archimedean valuation , to distinguish it from the absolute value function on R , which is an Archimedean valuation . Then the ﬁeld C is also complete with respect to an Archimedean valuation ; by Ostrowski’s Theorem , R and C are the only ﬁelds complete in this sense . If we assume that | · | and | · | O take values in R , then the functions ( x , y ) 7→ | x − y | and ( x , y ) 7→ | x − y | O are metrics on the ﬁeld K of deﬁnition : that is , they are functions d from K × K to [ 0 , ∞ ) such that d ( x , y ) = 0 ⇐⇒ x = y , d ( x , y ) = d ( y , x ) , d ( x , z ) 6 d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) . Then ( K , d ) is a metric space . In case d is ( x , y ) 7→ | x − y | O , then ( K , d ) is an ultrametric space because also d ( x , z ) 6 max ( d ( x , y ) , d ( y , z ) ) . In any case , a topology on K is induced , and more than that , a uniformity . Formally , this uniformity can be understood as having a base consisting of the reﬂexive symmetric binary relations D ε on K given by x D ε y ⇐⇒ d ( x , y ) < ε , where ε ∈ R + . The uniformity itself then comprises each binary relation on K that includes one of the D ε . For each a in K , the  It is then common as well to map { 0 } ∪ R + injectively onto R ∪ { ∞ } by taking logarithms with respect to a number between 0 and 1 , so that the sense of the ordering is reversed . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  sets D ε ( a ) ( that is , the sets { x ∈ K : a D ε x } ) compose a base of neighborhoods of a in a topology on K ; this is because D ε ∩ D ε ′ = D min ( ε , ε ′ ) , and also , for each ε in R + , there is δ in R + ( namely ε / 2 ) such that ∃ z ( x D δ z & z D δ y ) = ⇒ x D ε y . A set with a uniformity is a uniform space ; and the notion of a Cauchy sequence makes sense for any uniform space . If K is a non - Archimedean ordered ﬁeld , then the absolute - value function on K fails to induce a metric on K , simply because its range does not embed in [ 0 , ∞ ) . However , a uniformity is induced , as before ; a uniformity is induced by | · | O as well ; but the uniformities are the same . The coﬁnality of a linearly ordered set is the least cardinality of an unbounded subset . For an arbitrary valued ﬁeld ( K , O ) , the coﬁ - nality of Γ O may be uncountable . We can deﬁne Cauchy sequences of K of arbitrary cardinal length κ ; but they are all eventually con - stant unless the coﬁnality of κ is the coﬁnality of Γ O . We can still obtain b K from K as a valued ﬁeld of equivalence - classes of Cauchy sequences whose length is the coﬁnality of Γ O , whatever this may be . Why are value groups of uncountable coﬁnality not commonly considered , while most value groups not only have countable coﬁ - nality , but are Archimedean ? I suppose it is ultimately one wants to be able to use the completeness , not only of a valued ﬁeld , but of an ordered ﬁeld ; and then there is only one option , R .  .  . Number theory In an elementary course , the student may learn a theorem according to which certain conditions on certain structures are logically equiv - alent . But the theorem may use assumptions that are not spelled   . Failures of rigor out . This is a failure of rigor . In later courses , the student learns logical equivalences whose assumptions are spelled out . The student may then assume that the earlier theorem is like the later ones . It may not be , and failure to appreciate this may cause the student to overlook some lovely pieces of mathematics . The word student here may encompass all of us . The supposed theorem that I have in mind is that , in number theory , the principles of induction and well ordering are equivalent .  Proofs of two implications may be oﬀered to back up this claim , though one of the proofs may be left as an exercise . The proofs will be of the standard form . They will look like other proofs . And yet , strictly speaking , they will make no logical sense , because : • Induction is a property of algebraic structures in a signature with a constant , such as 1 , and a singulary function symbol such as ′ ( “prime” ) for the operation of adding 1 . • Well ordering is a property of ordered structures . When well ordering is used to prove induction , a set A is taken that contains 1 and is closed under adding 1 , and it is shown that the complement of A cannot have a least element . For , the least element cannot be 1 , and if the least element of the complement is n + 1 , then n ∈ A , so n + 1 ∈ A , contradicting n + 1 / ∈ A . It is assumed here that n < n + 1 . The correct conclusion is not that the complement of A is empty , but that if it is not , then its least element is not 1 and is not obtained by adding 1 to anything . Thus what is proved is the following . Theorem  . Suppose ( S , 1 , < ) is a well - ordered set with least ele - ment 1 and with no greatest element , so that S is also equipped with the operation ′ given by n ′ = min { x : n < x } .  “Either principle may be considered as a basic assumption about the natural numbers . ” This is Spivak [  , ch .  , p .  ] , whose book I use as an example because it is otherwise so admirable . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  If ( ∗ ) ∀ x ∃ y ( x = 1 ∨ y ′ = x ) , then ( S , 1 , ′ ) admits induction . The condition ( ∗ ) is not redundant . Every ordinal number in von Neumann’s deﬁnition is a well - ordered set ,  and every limit ordinal is closed under the operation ′ , but only the least limit ordinal , which is { 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . } or ω , admits induction in the sense we are discussing .  The next limit ordinal , which is ω ∪ { ω , ω + 1 , ω + 2 , . . . } or ω + ω , does not admit induction ; neither do any of the rest , for the same reason : they are not ω , but they properly include it . Being well - ordered is equivalent to admitting transﬁnite induction , but that is something else . Under the assumption n < n + 1 , ordinary induction does imply well ordering . That is , we have the following . Theorem  . Suppose ( S , 1 , ′ , < ) admits induction , is linearly or - dered , and satisﬁes ( † ) ∀ x x < x ′ . Then ( S , < ) is well ordered . The theorem is correct , but the following argument is inadequate . Standard proof . If a subset A of S has no least element , we can let B be the set of all n in S such that no element of { x : x < n } belongs  An ordinal in von Neumann’s deﬁnition is a set , rather than the isomorphism - class of well - ordered sets that it was understood to be earlier . Von Neumann’s original paper from  is [  ] . One can read it , but one must allow for some diﬀerences in notation from what is customary now . This is one diﬃculty of relying on special notation to express mathematics : it may not last as long as ordinary language .  The least element of ω is usually denoted not by 1 but by 0 , because it is the empty set .   . Failures of rigor to A . We have 1 ∈ B , since no element of the empty set belongs to A . If n ∈ B , then n / ∈ A , since otherwise it would be the least element of A ; so n ′ ∈ B . By induction , B contains everything in S , and so A contains nothing . We have tacitly used : Lemma  . Under the conditions of the theorem , ∀ x 1 6 x . This is easily proved by induction : Proof . Trivially 1 6 1 . Moreover , if 1 6 x , then 1 < x ′ , since x < x ′ ( and orderings are by deﬁnition transitive ) . But the standard proof of Theorem  also uses { x : x < n ′ } = { x : x < n } ∪ { n } , that is , x < n ′ ⇔ x 6 n . The reverse implication is immediate from ( † ) ; the forward is the following . Lemma  . Under the conditions of the theorem , ( ‡ ) ∀ x ∀ y ( x < y ′ ⇒ x 6 y ) . This is not so easy to establish , although there are a couple of ways to do it . The ﬁrst method assumes we have established the standard properties of the set N of natural numbers , including ( ‡ ) , perhaps by using the full complement of Peano Axioms as in Landau [  ] . Proof  . By recursion , we deﬁne a homomorphism h from ( N , 1 , ′ ) to ( S , 1 , ′ ) . Then : January  ,  ,  :  Noon  • h is surjective , by induction in S , because 1 = h ( 1 ) , and if a = h ( k ) , then a ′ = h ( k ) ′ = h ( k ′ ) . • h is injective , since it is order - preserving , by induction in N . Indeed , in N , ∀ x 1 6 < x . Moreover , if for some m , ( § ) ∀ x (cid:0) x < m ⇒ h ( x ) < h ( m ) (cid:1) , and k < m ′ , then k 6 m by ( ‡ ) as being true in N , so h ( k ) 6 h ( m ) by the inductive hypothesis ( § ) , and hence h ( k ) < h ( m ) ′ = h ( m ′ ) by the hypothesis ( † ) of Theorem  . Thus , in N , ∀ x ∀ y ( x < y ⇒ h ( x ) < h ( y ) ) . Therefore h is an isomorphism . Since ( N , < ) has the desired property ( ‡ ) , so does ( S , < ) . The foregoing proof can serve by itself as a proof of Theorem  : since N is well ordered , so must S be . An alternative , direct proof of Lemma  is as follows ; I do not know a simpler argument . Proof  . We name two formulas , ϕ ( x , y ) : x < y ⇒ x ′ 6 y , ψ ( x , y ) : x < y ′ ⇒ x 6 y . Since < is a linear ordering , we have ( ¶ ) ϕ ( x , y ) ⇔ ψ ( y , x ) . ( Here and elsewhere , outer universal quantiﬁers are suppressed . ) We want to prove ψ ( x , y ) . We ﬁrst prove directly , as a lemma , ( k ) ϕ ( x , y ) & ψ ( x , y ) ⇒ ϕ ( x , y ′ ) .   . Failures of rigor Suppose ϕ ( a , b ) & ψ ( a , b ) & a < b ′ for some a and b in S . Then we have a 6 b , a = b ∨ a < b , a ′ = b ′ ∨ a ′ 6 b , a ′ 6 b ′ . [ by ψ ( a , b ) ] [ by ϕ ( a , b ) ] This gives us ( k ) . We shall use this to establish by induction ( ∗∗ ) ϕ ( x , y ) & ψ ( x , y ) . As the base of the induction , ﬁrst we prove ( †† ) ϕ ( x , 1 ) & ψ ( x , 1 ) . By Lemma  , we have ϕ ( x , 1 ) , so by ( ¶ ) we have ψ ( 1 , x ) and in particular ψ ( 1 , 1 ) . Using ψ ( 1 , x ) and putting ( 1 , x ) for ( x , y ) in ( k ) gives us ϕ ( 1 , x ) ⇒ ϕ ( 1 , x ′ ) , ψ ( x , 1 ) ⇒ ψ ( x ′ , 1 ) . Then by induction we have ψ ( x , 1 ) , hence ( †† ) . Now suppose we have , for some a in S , ϕ ( x , a ) & ψ ( x , a ) . By ( k ) we get ϕ ( x , a ′ ) . We establish ψ ( x , a ′ ) by induction : From ( †† ) we have ϕ ( a ′ , 1 ) , hence ψ ( 1 , a ′ ) . Suppose ψ ( b , a ′ ) . Then ϕ ( a ′ , b ) . But from ϕ ( b , a ′ ) we have ψ ( a ′ , b ) . Hence by ( k ) we have ϕ ( a ′ , b ′ ) , that is , ψ ( b ′ , a ′ ) . Thus ϕ ( x , a ′ ) & ψ ( x , a ′ ) . By induction then , we have ( ∗∗ ) . From this we extract ψ ( x , y ) , as desired . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  In Theorem  , the condition ( † ) is not redundant . It is false that a structure that admits induction must have a linear ordering so that ( † ) is satisﬁed . It is true that all counterexamples to this claim are ﬁnite .  It may seem that there is no practical need to use induction in a ﬁnite structure , since the members can be checked individually for their satisfaction of some property . However , this checking may need to be done for every member of every ﬁnite set in an inﬁnite family . Such is the case for Fermat’s Theorem , as I have discussed elsewhere : Indeed , in the Disquisitiones Arithmeticae of  [  , ¶  ] , which is apparently the origin of our notion of modular arithmetic , Gauss reports that Euler’s ﬁrst proof of Fermat’s Theorem was as follows . Let p be a prime modulus . Trivially 1 p ≡ 1 ( with respect to p or indeed any modulus ) . If a p ≡ a ( modulo p ) for some a , then , since ( a + 1 ) p ≡ a p + 1 , we conclude ( a + 1 ) p ≡ a + 1 . This can be understood as a perfectly valid proof by induction in the ring with p elements that we denote by Z / p Z : we have then proved a p = a for all a in this ring . [  ] In analysis one learns some form of the following , possibly associ - ated with the names of Heine and Borel . Theorem  . The following are equivalent conditions on an interval I of R :  . I is closed and bounded .  . All continuous functions from I to R are uniformly continuous . Such a theorem is pedagogically useful , both for clarifying the order of quantiﬁcation in the deﬁnitions of continuity and uniform continuity , and for highlighting ( or at least setting the stage for ) the notion of compactness . A theorem about the equivalence of induction and well ordering serves no such useful purpose . If it is loaded up with enough conditions so that it is actually correct , as  Henkin investigates them in [  ] .   . Failures of rigor in Theorems  and  above , then there is only one structure ( up to isomorphism ) that meets the equivalent conditions , and this is just the usual structure of the natural numbers . If however the extra conditions are left out , as being a distraction to the immature student , then that student may later be insensitive to the properties of structures like ω + ω or Z / p Z . Thus the assertion that induction and well ordering are equivalent is nonrigorous in the worst sense : Not only does its proof require hidden assumptions , but the hiding of those assumptions can lead to real mathematical ignorance .  . A standard of rigor The highest standard of rigor might be the formal proof , veriﬁable by computer . But this is not a standard that most mathematicians aspire to . Normally one tries to write proofs that can be checked and appreciated by other human beings . In this case , ancient Greek mathematicians such as Euclid and Archimedes set an unsurpassed standard . How can I say this ? Two sections of Morris Kline’s Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times [  ] are called “The Merits and Defects of the Elements ” ( ch .  , §  , p .  ) and “The Defects in Euclid” ( ch .  , §  , p .  ) . One of the supposed defects is , “he uses dozens of assumptions that he never states and undoubtedly did not recognize . ” I have made this criticism of modern textbook writers in the previous chapters , and I shall do so again in later chapters . However , it is not really a criticism unless the critic can show that bad eﬀects follow from ignorance of the unrecognized assumptions . I shall address these assumptions in Euclid a bit later in this chapter . Meanwhile , I think the most serious defect mentioned by Kline is the vagueness and pointlessness of certain deﬁnitions in Euclid . However , some if not all of the worst oﬀenders were probably added to the Elements after Euclid was through with it .  Euclid himself did not need these deﬁnitions . In any case , I am not aware that poor deﬁnitions make any proofs in Euclid confusing . Used to prove the Side - Angle - Side Theorem ( Proposition I .  ) for triangle congruence , Euclid’s method of superposition is considered a defect . However , if you do not want to use this method , then you can just make the theorem an axiom , as Hilbert does in The  See in particular Russo’s ‘First Few Deﬁnitions in the Elements ’ [  ,  .  ] .    . A standard of rigor Foundations of Geometry [  ] . ( Hilbert’s axioms are spelled out in Chapter  below . ) I myself do not object to Euclid’s proof by superposition . If two line segments are given as equal , what else can this mean but that one of them can be superimposed on the other ? Otherwise equality would seem to be a meaningless notion . Likewise for angles . Euclid assumes that two line segments or two angles in a diagram can be given as equal . Hilbert assumes not only this , but something stronger : a given line segment can be copied to any other location , and likewise for an angle . Euclid proves these possibilities , as his Propositions I .  and  . In his ﬁrst proposition of all , where he constructs an equilateral triangle on a given line segment , Euclid uses two circles , each cen - tered at one endpoint of the segment and passing through the other endpoint as in Figure  .  . The two circles intersect at a point that Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Figure  .  . Euclid’s Proposition I .  is the apex of the desired triangle . But why should the circles in - tersect ? It is considered a defect that Euclid does not answer this question . Hilbert avoids this question by not mentioning circles in his axioms . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Hilbert’s axioms can be used to show that desired points on circles do exist . It is not a defect of rigor that Euclid does things diﬀerently . The original meaning of geometry in Greek is surveying . Herodotus [  , II .  ] traces the subject to ancient Egypt , where the amount of land lost to the annual ﬂooding of the Nile had to be measured . The last two propositions of Book I of Euclid are the Pythagorean Theorem and its converse ; but perhaps the climax of Book I comes two propositions earlier , with number  . Here it is shown that , for a plot of land having any number of straight sides , an equal rectangular plot of land with one given side can be found . The whole point of Book I is to work out rigorously what can be done with tools such as a surveyor or perhaps a carpenter might have : (  ) a tool for drawing and extending straight lines ; (  ) a tool for marking out points that are equidistant from a ﬁxed point ; and (  ) a set square , not for drawing right angles , but for justifying the postulate that all right angles are equal to one another . In the th century , it is shown that the same work can be accom - plished with even less . This possibly reveals a defect of Euclid , but I do not think it is a defect of rigor . There is however a danger in reading Euclid today . The danger lies in a hidden assumption ; but it is an assumption that we make , not Euclid . We assume that , with his postulates , he is doing the same sort of thing that Hilbert is doing with his axioms . He is not . Hilbert has to deal with the possibility of non - Euclidean geometry . Hilbert can contemplate models that satisfy some of his axioms , but violate others . For Euclid , there is just one model : this world . If mathematicians never encountered structures , other than the natural numbers , that were well ordered or admitted induction , then there might be nothing wrong with saying that induction and well ordering are equivalent . But then again , even to speak of equivalence is to suggest the possibility of diﬀerent structures that satisfy the conditions in question . This is not a possibility that Euclid has to   . A standard of rigor consider . If Euclid is not doing what modern mathematicians are doing , what is the point of reading him ? I respond that he is obviously doing something that we can recognize as mathematics . If he is just studying the world , so are mathematicians today ; it is just a world that we have made more complicated . I suggested in Chapter  ( page  ) that students are supposed to come to an analytic geometry class with some notion of synthetic geometry . As I observed in the Introduction ( page  ) and shall observe again in Chapter  ( pages  and  ) , students are also supposed to have the notion that every line segment has a length , which is a so - called real number . This is a notion that has been added to the world .  .  . Proportion Nonetheless , the roots of this notion can be found in the Elements , in the theory of ratio and proportion , beginning in Book V .  According to this theory , magnitudes A , B , C , and D are in proportion , so that the ratio of A to B is the same as the ratio of C to D , if for all natural numbers k and m , kA > mB ⇔ kC > mD . In this case we may write A : B : : C : D , though Euclid uses no such notation . What is expressed by this notation is not the equality , but the identity , of two ratios . Equality  According to a scholium to Book V , “Some say that the book is the discovery of Eudoxus , the pupil of Plato” [  , p .  ] . The so - called Euclidean Algorithm as used in Proposition X .  of the Elements may be a remnant of another theory of proportion . Apparently this possibility was ﬁrst recognized in  [  , pp .  –  ] . The idea is developed in [  ] . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  is a possible property of two nonidentical magnitudes . Magnitudes are geometrical things , ratios are not . Euclid never draws a ratio or assigns a letter to it .  In any case , in the deﬁnition , it is assumed that A and B have a ratio in the ﬁrst place , in the sense that some multiple of either of them exceeds the other ; and likewise for C and D . In this case , the pair (cid:16)n m k : kA > mB o , n m k : kA 6 mB o(cid:17) is a cut of positive rational numbers in the sense of Dedekind [  , p .  ] . Dedekind traces his deﬁnition of irrational numbers to the idea that an irrational number is deﬁned by the speciﬁcation of all rational numbers that are less and all those that are greater than the num - ber to be deﬁned . . . That an irrational number is to be considered as fully deﬁned by the speciﬁcation just described , this convic - tion certainly long before the time of Bertrand was the common property of all mathematicians who concerned themselves with the irrational . . . [ I ] f . . . one regards the irrational number as the ratio of  I am aware of one possible counterexample to this claim . The last proposition ( number  ) in Book VII is to ﬁnd the number that is the least of those that will have given parts . The meaning of this is revealed in the proof , which begins : “Let the given parts be Α , Β , and Γ . Then it is required to ﬁnd the number that is the least of those that will have the parts Α , Β , and Γ . So let ∆ , Ε , and Ζ be numbers homonymous with the parts Α , Β , and Γ , and let the least number Η measured by ∆ , Ε , and Ζ be taken . ” Thus Η is the least common multiple of ∆ , Ε , and Ζ , which can be found by Proposition VII .  . Also , if for example ∆ is the number n , then Α is an n th , considered abstractly : it is not given as an n th part of anything in particular . Then Α might be considered as the ratio of 1 to n . Possibly VII .  was added later to Euclid’s original text , although Heath’s note [  , p .  ] on the proposition suggests no such possibility . If indeed VII .  is a later addition , then so , probably , are the two previous propositions , on which it relies : they are that if n | r , then r has an n th part , and conversely . But Fowler mentions Propositions  and  , seemingly being as typical or as especially illustrative examples of propositions from Book VII [  , p .  ] .   . A standard of rigor two measurable quantities , then is this manner of determining it al - ready set forth in the clearest possible way in the celebrated deﬁni - tion which Euclid gives of the equality of two ratios . [  , pp .  –  ] In saying this , Dedekind intends to distinguish his account of the completeness or continuity of the real number line from other ac - counts . Dedekind does not deﬁne an irrational number as a ratio of two “measurable quantities” : the deﬁnition of cuts as above does not require the use of magnitudes such as A and B . Dedekind observes moreover that Euclid’s geometrical constructions do not require con - tinuity of lines . “If any one should say , ” writes Dedekind , that we cannot conceive of space as anything else than continuous , I should venture to doubt it and to call attention to the fact that a far advanced , reﬁned scientiﬁc training is demanded in order to perceive clearly the essence of continuity and to comprehend that besides rational quantitative relations , also irrational , and besides algebraic , also transcendental quantitative relations are conceivable . [  , pp .  ] Modern geometry textbooks ( as in Chapter  below ) assume con - tinuity in this sense , but without providing the “reﬁned scientiﬁc training” required to understand what it means . Euclid does pro - vide something of this training , starting in Book V of the Elements ; before this , he makes no use of continuity in Dedekind’s sense . Euclid has educated mathematicians for centuries . He shows the world what it means to prove things . One need not read all of the Elements today . But Book I lays out the basics of geometry in a beautiful way . If you want students to learn what a proof is , I think you can do no better then tell them , “A proof is something like what you see in Book I of the Elements . ” I have heard of textbook writers who , informed of errors , decide to leave them in their books anyway , to keep the readers attentive . The perceived ﬂaws in Euclid can be considered this way . The Elements must not be treated as a holy book . If it causes the student to think how things might be done better , this is good . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  The Elements is not a holy book ; it is one of the supreme achieve - ments of the human intellect . It is worth reading for this reason , just as , say , Homer’s Iliad is worth reading .  .  . Ratios of circles The rigor of Euclid’s Elements is astonishing . Students in school today learn formulas , like A = π r 2 for the area of a circle . This formula encodes the following . Theorem  ( Proposition XII .  of Euclid ) . Circles are to one an - other as the squares on the diameters . One might take this to be an obvious corollary of : Theorem  ( Proposition XII .  of Euclid ) . Similar polygons in - scribed in circles are to one another as the squares on the diam - eters . And yet Euclid himself gives an elaborate proof of XII .  by what is today called the Method of Exhaustion : Euclid’s proof of Theorem  , in modern notation . Suppose a circle C 1 with diameter d 1 is to a circle C 2 with diameter d 2 in a lesser ratio than d 12 is to d 22 . Then d 12 is to d 22 as C 1 is to some fourth proportional R that is smaller than C 2 . More symbolically , C 1 : C 2 < d 1 2 : d 2 2 , d 12 : d 22 : : C 1 : R , R < C 2 . By inscribing in C 2 a square , then an octagon , then a 16 - gon , and so forth , eventually ( by Euclid’s Proposition X .  ) we obtain a 2 n - gon   . A standard of rigor that is greater than R . The 2 n - gon inscribed in C 1 has ( by Theo - rem  , that is , Euclid’s XII .  ) the same ratio to the one inscribed in C 2 as d 12 has to d 22 . Then d 12 : d 22 < C 1 : R , which contradicts the proportion above . Such is Euclid’s proof , in modern symbolism . Euclid himself does not refer to a 2 n - gon as such . His diagram must ﬁx a value for 2 n , and the value ﬁxed is 8 . I do not know if anybody would consider this a lack of rigor , as if rigor is achieved by symbolism . I wonder how often modern symbolism is used to give only the appearance of rigor . ( See Chapter  below . ) A more serious problem with Euclid’s proof is the assumption of the existence of the fourth proportional R . Kline does not men - tion this as a defect in the sections of his book cited above ; he does mention the assumption elsewhere ( on page his  ) , but not criti - cally . Heath mentions the assumption in his own notes [  , v .  , p .  ] , though he does not supply the following way to avoid the assumption . Second proof of Theorem  . We assume that if two unequal magni - tudes have a ratio in the sense of Book V of the Elements , then their diﬀerence has a ratio with either one of them . This is the postulate of Archimedes [  , p .  ] : among unequal [ magnitudes ] , the greater exceeds the smaller by such [ a diﬀerence ] that is capable , added itself to itself , of exceeding everything set forth ( of those which are in a ratio to one another ) . In the notation above , since C 1 : C 2 < d 12 : d 22 , there are some natural numbers m and k such that mC 1 < kC 2 , md 12 > kd 22 . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Let r be a natural number such that r ( kC 2 − mC 1 ) > C 2 . Then rmC 1 < ( rk − 1 ) C 2 , rmd 12 > rkd 22 . Assuming 2 n − 1 > rk , let P 1 be the 2 n - gon inscribed in C 1 , and P 2 in C 2 . Then C 2 − P 2 < 1 2 n − 1 C 2 6 1 rk C 2 , rmP 1 < rmC 1 < ( rk − 1 ) C 2 < rkP 2 . But also P 1 : P 2 : : d 12 : d 22 , so that rmP 1 > rkP 2 , which is absurd . Does this second proof of Theorem  supply a defect in Euclid’s proof ? In his note , Heath quotes Simson to the eﬀect that assuming the mere existence of a fourth proportional does no harm , even if the fourth proportional cannot be constructed . I see no reason why Euclid could not have been aware of the possibility of avoiding this assumption , although he decided not to bother his readers with the details .  . Why rigor As used by Euclid and Archimedes , the Method of Exhaustion serves no practical purpose . Archimedes has an intuitive method [  ] for ﬁnding equations of areas and volumes . He uses this method to discover that (  ) a section of a parabola is a third again as large as the triangle with the same base and height ; (  ) if a cylinder is inscribed in a prism with square base , then the part of the cylinder cut oﬀ by a plane through a side of the top of the prism and the center of the base of the cylinder is a sixth of the prism ; and (  ) the intersection of two cylinders is two thirds of the cube in which this intersection is inscribed . However , Archimedes does not believe that his method provides a rigorous proof of his equations . He supplies proofs after the equa - tions themselves have been discovered . Why does he do this ? After all , he believes Democritus should be credited for discovering that the pyramid is the third part of the prism with the same base and height , even though it was Eudoxus who later actually gave a proof . ( The theorem is a corollary to Proposition XII .  of Euclid’s Ele - ments . ) Although Heath translated Euclid faithfully into English , appar - ently he thought the rigor of Archimedes was too much for modern mathematicians to handle ; so he paraphrased Archimedes with mod - ern symbolism [  ] . This symbolism is a way to avoid keeping too many ideas in one’s head at once . When one wants to use a theorem for some practical purpose , then this labor - saving feature of symbol - ism is perhaps desirable . But if the whole point of a theorem is to  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  see and appreciate something , then perhaps symbolism gets in the way of this . I do not think Archimedes really explains his compulsion for math - ematical rigor . Being the originator of the “merciless telegram style” that Landau [  , p . xi ] for example writes in ,  Euclid does not ex - plain anything at all in the Elements ; he just does the mathematics . I suppose the rigor of this mathematics , at least regarding propor - tions , is to be explained as a remnant of the discovery of incommen - surable magnitudes . This discovery necessitates such a theory of proportion as is attributed to Eudoxus of Cnidus and is presented in Book V of the Elements . In any case , given a theory of proportion , if Euclid is going to assert Proposition XII .  , he is duty - bound to prove it in accordance with the theory at hand . Modern mathematicians are likewise duty - bound to respect cur - rent standards of rigor . As was suggested in Chapter  , this does not mean that a textbook has to prove everything from ﬁrst principles ; but at least some idea ought to be given of what those ﬁrst principles are . This standard is set by Euclid and respected by Archimedes . It is not so much respected by modern textbooks of analytic geometry . In Chapters  and  , I shall look at a couple of examples of these . It may be said that the purpose of an analytic geometry text is to teach the student how to do certain things : how to solve certain problems , as detailed in the ﬁrst quotation in Chapter  ( page  ) . The purpose is not to teach proof . However , as suggested in Chapter  ( page  ) , Book I of the Elements is also concerned with doing things , with the help of such tools as a surveyor or carpenter might use . What makes the Elements mathematics is that it justiﬁes the methods it gives for doing things . It provides proofs .  Fowler [  , p .  , n .  ] refers to Landau as the “premier exponent” of “a more recent German style of setting out mathematics , generally called ‘Satz - Beweis’ style , that has some aﬃnities with protasis - style , ” that is , Euclid’s style .   . Why rigor I suppose that , when a student of mathematics is given a problem , even a numerical problem , she or he is expected to be able to come up with a solution , and not just an answer . A solution is a proof that the answer is correct . It tells why the answer is correct . Thus it gives the reader the means to solve other problems . An analytic geometry text ought to prove that its methods are correct . At least it ought to give some indication of how the proofs might be supplied .  . A book from the s  .  . Equality and identity For Euclid , equality is not identity . This was noted on page  in Chapter  . It is true in ordinary language as well . According to the  Declaration of Independence of the United States of America , all men are created equal .  It does not follow that all men are the same man . Nonetheless , students reading Euclid may not immediately see the diﬀerence between Propositions I .  and  , which are , respectively , Parallelograms that are on the same ( αὐτός ) base and in the same parallels are equal to one another ; Parallelograms that are on equal ( ἴσος ) bases and in the same par - allels are equal to one another . Equality here is what we also call congruence ; and indeed the fourth of the Common Notions in Heiberg’s edition of Euclid can be trans - lated as , Things that are congruent ( ἐφαρμόζω ) to one another are equal to one another .  The distinction between identity and congruence may help to clarify analytic geometry .  I would read “man” as meaning human being , although I do not know that Thomas Jeﬀerson meant this .  Heath has “coincide with” in place of “are congruent to . ”    . A book from the s  .  . Geometry ﬁrst I consider now analytic geometry as presented in an old textbook , which I possess , only because my mother used it in college : Nelson , Folley , and Borgman’s  volume Analytic Geometry [  ] . The Preface ( pp . iii - iv ) opens with this paragraph : This text has been prepared for use in an undergraduate course in analytic geometry which is planned as preparation for the calculus rather than as a study of geometry . In order that it may be of maximum value to the future student of the calculus , the basic sciences , and engineering , considerable attention is given to two important problems of analytic geometry . They are ( a ) given the equation of a locus , to draw the curve , or describe it geomet - rically ; ( b ) given the geometric description of a locus , to ﬁnd its equation , that is , to translate a verbal description of a locus into a mathematical equation . These “two important problems” are why I was interested in this book at the age of  : I wanted to understand the curves that could be encoded in equations . The third paragraph of the Preface is as follows : Inasmuch as the student’s ability to use analytic geometry as a tool depends largely on his understanding of the coordinate system , particular attention has been given to producing as thorough a grasp as possible . He must appreciate , for example , that the point ( a , b ) is not necessarily located in the ﬁrst quadrant , and that the equation of a curve may be made to take a simple form if the coordinate axes are placed with forethought . . . By referring to judicious placement of axes , the authors reveal their working hypothesis that there is already a geometric plane , before any coordinatization . It is not clear what students are expected to know about this plane . January  ,  ,  :  Noon   .  . The ordered group of directed segments The book proper begins on page  as follows :  . Directed Line Segments . If A , B , and C ( Fig .  ) are three points which are taken in that order on an inﬁnite straight line , then in conformity with the principles of plane geometry we may write (  ) AB + BC = AC . For the purposes of analytic geometry it is convenient to have equation (  ) valid regardless of the order of the points A , B , and C on the inﬁnite line . The conventional way of accomplishing this ✲ A B C Fig .  is to select a positive direction on the line and then deﬁne the symbol AB to mean the number of linear units between A and B , or the negative of that number , according as we associate with the segment AB the positive or the negative direction . With this understanding the segment AB is called a directed line segment . In any given problem such a segment possesses an intrinsic sign decided in advance through the arbitrary selection of a positive direction for the inﬁnite line of which the segment is a part . . .  Thus it is assumed that the student knows what a “number of linear units” means . I suppose the student has been trained to believe that (  ) every line segment has a length and (  ) this length is a number of some unit . But probably the student has no idea of how numbers in the original sense—natural numbers—can be used to create all of the numbers that might be needed to designate geometrical lengths .  This quotation has almost exactly the same visual appearance as in the original text . The line breaks are the same . The ﬁgure should be placed after “The conventional way of accomplishing this . ”   . A book from the s The student can express lengths as rational numbers of a unit by means of a ruler ; but Nelson & al . will have the students consider lengths that are irrational and even transcendental . Instead of length , we can take congruence as the fundamental notion . Without deﬁning length itself , we can say that congruent line segments have the same length . Somebody who knows about equivalence relations can then deﬁne a length itself as a congruence class of segments ;  but this need not be made explicit . Alternatively , we can ﬁx a unit line segment in the manner of Descartes in the Geometry [  ] . Then , by using the deﬁnition of proportion found in Book V of Euclid’s Elements and discussed in Chapter  above , we can deﬁne the length of an arbitrary line seg - ment as the ratio of this segment to the unit segment . This gives us lengths rigorously as positive real numbers , if we use Dedekind’s deﬁnition of the latter . As Dedekind observed though , and as we repeated ( page  ) , there is no need to assume that every positive real number is the length of some segment . These details need not be rehearsed with the student . But neither is it necessary to introduce lengths at all in order to justify equation (  ) , namely AB + BC = AC . It need only be said that an expression like AB no longer represents merely a line segment , but a directed line segment . Then BA is the negative of AB , and we can write BA = − AB , AB = − BA , AB + BA = 0 , (  ) as indeed Nelson & al . do later in their §  , on page  .  .  . Notation In its entirety , their §  is as follows :  This would seem to be the idea behind motivic integration as described in the expository article [  ] . January  ,  ,  :  Noon   . Length , Distance . The length of a directed line segment is the number of linear units which it contains . The symbol | AB | will be used to designate the length of the segment AB , or the distance between the points A and B . Occasionally the symbol AB will be used to represent the line segment as a geometric entity , but if a numerical measure is implied then it stands for the directed segment AB or the directed distance from A to B . Two directed segments of the same line , or of parallel lines , are equal if they have equal lengths and the same intrinsic signs . Again we see the unexamined assumption that the reader knows what a “number of linear units” means . It would be more rigorous to say that | AB | is the congruence - class of the segment AB ; but I think there is an even better alternative . In the second paragraph of the quotation , Nelson & al . suggest that the expression AB will usually stand , not for a segment , but for a directed segment . Then it can always so stand , and the expression | AB | can stand for the undirected segment , so that | BA | stands for the same thing . The last paragraph of the quotation can be understood as corresponding to Common Notion  of Euclid quoted above : equality of directed line segments is just congruence of undirected segments that is es - tablished by translation only , without rotation or reﬂection . Then an equation like ( ∗ ) BC = DE means , as in Figure  .  , either • BCED is a parallelogram , or • there is a directed segment FG such that BCFG and DEFG are both parallelograms .   . A book from the s B C D E B C G F D E H Figure  .  . Congruence of directed segments Given BC = DE , we can use Euclid’s Common Notion  ( “If equals be added to equals , the wholes are equal” )  to conclude AB + BC = AB + DE ; then , by applying Common Notion  ( “Equals to the same are also equal to one another” ) to this and (  ) , we obtain ( † ) AC = AB + DE . Thus sums of directed segments can be deﬁned ; we need not even re - quire them to be segments of the same straight line , though we may . More precisely , congruence of sums of directed segments can be de - ﬁned so that every sum of two directed segments is congruent to a single directed segment . Governed by the relations given by (  ) and (  ) , the congruence classes of directed segments of a given inﬁnite straight line compose an abelian group . Although nothing is said in the text of Nelson & al . about the commutativity or associativity of addition of segments , these properties might be understood to fol - low from the “principles of plane geometry” mentioned as justifying equation (  ) in the earlier quotation .  Actually we use a special case : If the same be added to equals , the wholes are equal . Equality is implicitly a reﬂexive relation in the sense that a thing is equal to itself . The proof of Euclid’s Proposition I .  quoted above uses this special case : in the right - hand part of Figure  .  , we have BD = BC + CD = CD + DE = CE , so BDG = CEF ( as triangles ) , and hence BCFG = BDG − CDH + GFH = CEF − CDH + GFH = DEFG . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Equation (  ) could be understood to hold for arbitrary directed segments of a plane , so that congruence classes of these would com - pose an abelian group . Evidently Nelson & al . do not wish to con - sider this group , and that is ﬁne . There is also no need to talk to students about congruence classes and groups . All that need be established is that there is an “algebra” of directed segments that resembles the algebra of numbers studied in school . There is also nothing wrong with confusing directed segments with their congruence classes . According to the derivation of ( † ) , the sum of arbitrary directed segments of a straight line can be equal to a directed segment ; we may just say the sum is a directed segment . This is like saying that the integers compose a group of order n , provided equality is understood to be congruence modulo n . This example is from Mazur , who observes [  , p .  ] : Few mathematical concepts enter our repertoire in a manner other than ambiguously a single object and at the same time an equiva - lence class of objects . If a positive direction is ﬁxed for the straight line containing A and B , then AB itself is understood as positive , if B is further than A in the positive direction ; otherwise AB is negative . Thus the abelian group of directed segments of a given straight line becomes an or - dered group . Where Nelson & al . say | AB | means the length of the segment AB , or the distance between A and B , we can understand it to be simply the greater of AB and − AB , in the usual sense of “absolute value . ” What do we mean by “directed segment” in the ﬁrst place ? We could say formally that , as an undirected segment , AB is just the set ℓ of points between A and B inclusive . Then , as a directed segment , AB could be understood formally as the ordered pair ( ℓ , A ) . There is an alternative . Our notation distinguishes the fraction 1 / 2 from the ordered pair ( 1 , 2 ) of numbers , so that we can have 1 / 2 = 2 / 4 , although ( 1 , 2 ) 6 = ( 2 , 4 ) . Likewise , since the expression   . A book from the s BC is distinct from ( B , C ) , we can understand BC to denote the equivalence class consisting of the pairs ( D , E ) such that the equa - tion ( ∗ ) holds as deﬁned above . Then | BC | will be the union of the equivalence classes denoted by BC and CB ( assuming all segments are segments of the same inﬁnite straight line ) . According to the last - quoted passage of Nelson & al . , an expression like AB can have any of three meanings . It can mean ( i ) the segment bounded by A and B , ( ii ) the directed segment from A to B , or ( iii ) the directed distance from A to B . We can understand the “directed distance” in ( iii ) to be the appropri - ate equivalence class of ( A , B ) just mentioned . I propose to take this equivalence class as the oﬃcial meaning of AB . Writing the equiv - alence class as AB allows us to infer that one representative of this class is indeed the directed segment from A to B indicated in ( ii ) . Similarly , indicating an arbitary rational number x as a / b allows us to infer that the multiple bx is the integer a . The rational number x has no unique numerator and denominator ; but nonetheless we speak of the numerator a and denominator b of a / b . Likewise we can speak of the initial point A and terminal point B of AB , even if , strictly , AB is only an equivalence class . Finally , | AB | can be understood formally as the union of the two equivalence classes AB and BA . One representative of this class is the segment indicated in ( i ) . In fact Nelson & al . will give yet another possible meaning to the expression AB , a meaning that will be used without comment in a quotation given below : AB can mean ( iv ) the inﬁnite straight line containing A and B . Meanwhile , let us note how the text actually uses expressions like AB and | AB | . Here are some examples from the ﬁrst set of exercises , on page  :  . For Fig .  [ omitted ] verify that AC + CB + BA = 0 . Show also that | AC | − | CB | + | BA | = 0 . January  ,  ,  :  Noon   . In Fig .  [ omitted ] let M be the mid - point of the segment AB . Verify that 1 2 ( OA + OB ) = OM and that 1 2 | OA − OB | = | AM | . The equation AC + CB + BA = 0 holds by two applications of (  ) , regardless of the relative positions of the points . If the second equation is going to be true , then A must lie between B and C , so that | AC | + | BA | = | AC + BA | = | BA + AC | = | BC | = | CB | . Here it does not matter whether AB is a particular directed segment or an equivalence class . In later exercises , it does matter : In Problems  –  , the consecutive points A , B , C , D , E , F , G are spaced one inch apart on an inﬁnite line which is positively directed from A to B .  . Verify that BD + GA = BA + GD .  . Verify that DB + GA = DA + GB .  . Verify that BG + FC = BC + FG = 2 DE .  . Verify that 1 2 ( EA + EG ) = ED . Of the ﬁve equations here , the ﬁrst three can be understood as equa - tions of directed segments , as in ( ii ) ; the remaining two must be un - derstood as equations of directed distances , as in ( iii ) , or of directed equivalence classes of segments . For example , BD + GA = BD + ( GD + DB + BA ) = BD + GD − BD + BA = GD + BA = BA + GD , regardless of the relative positions of the points ; but BC + FG = 2 DE only because it is given that BC = DE = FG . The preamble to the problems here refers not just to abstract units , but to inches , which have no mathematical deﬁnition . The reference might as well have been to some particular segment , even AB itself . In another problem , the authors display their assumption that numbers of units can be irrational and even transcendental :   . A book from the s  . On a coordinate axis where the unit of measure is one inch , plot the points whose coordinates are 2 , − 5 3 , π , 3 − √ 5 , and 3 √− 16 , respectively . There is no properly geometric reason to introduce transcendental or even nonquadratic lengths . However , as noted in the quotation from the preface , the book is for students of the calculus . The book has a chapter called “Graphs of Single - Valued Transcendental Functions” .  .  . Coordinatization Meanwhile , a coordinatization of a straight line is considered in §  of Chapter  .  . Coordinates on a Straight Line . The locations of points on a given inﬁnite straight line may be described with the help of directed segments . However , preliminary agreements must be made with regard to ( a ) a point of reference or origin , ( b ) a unit of length , ( c ) a positive direction on the inﬁnite straight line . Then the location of any point on the line may be given by a single number , or coordinate , which is deﬁned as the directed distance from the origin to the point . . . On the line of Fig .  suppose that the points P 1 , P 2 have the coordinates x 1 , x 2 respectively . Then P 1 P 2 = P 1 O + OP 2 = OP 2 − OP 1 = x 2 − x 1 . That is , on any straight line , the directed distance from one point to another is equal to the coordinate of the terminal point minus the coordinate of the initial point . ✲ P 1 O P 2 x 1 0 x 2 Points ✲ Coordinates ✲ Fig .  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  This all makes sense without reference to units or numbers . When an origin O is chosen on the straight line , and points P 1 and P 2 of the line are labelled as x 1 and x 2 , this means x 1 and x 2 are abbreviations for OP 1 and OP 2 , so that the given equations hold . Next , the plane is considered :  . Rectangular Coordinates . The coordinate system of the preceding article may be generalized so as to enable us to de - X Y O b P x y First Quadrant SecondQuadrant ThirdQuadrant FourthQuadrant Fig .  scribe the location of a point in a the plane . Through any point O ( Fig .  ) select two mutually perpendicular directed inﬁnite straight lines OX and OY , thus dividing the plane into four parts called quadrants , which are numbered as shown in the ﬁgure . The point O is the origin and the directed lines are called the x - axis and the y - axis , respectively . A unit of measure is selected for each axis . Unless the contrary is stated , the units selected will be the same for both axes . The directed distance from OY to any point P in the plane is the x - coordinate , or abscissa , of P ; the directed distance from   . A book from the s OX to the point is its y - coordinate , or ordinate . Together , the abscissa and ordinate of a point are called its rectangular coordi - nates . When a letter is necessary to represent the abscissa , x is most frequently used ; y is used to represent the ordinate . . . . . . Consequently , we may represent a point by its coordinates placed in parentheses ( the abscissa always ﬁrst ) , and refer to this symbol as the point itself . For example , we may refer to the point P 1 of [ the omitted ﬁgure ] as the point ( 3 , 5 ) . Sometimes it is con - venient to use both designations ; we then write P 1 ( 3 , 5 ) . . . When a coordinate of a point is an irrational number , a decimal approx - imation is used in plotting the point . . . Here OX and OY are not segments , but inﬁnite straight lines . Nel - son & al . evidently do not want to give a name such as R to the set of all numbers under consideration . Hence they cannot say that they identify the geometrical plane with R × R ; they can say only that they identify individual points with pairs of numbers . This is ﬁne , except that again it leaves unexamined the assumption that lengths are numbers of units . How many generations of students have had to learn the words abscissa and ordinate without being given their etymological mean - ings ?  Nelson & al . do not discuss them , even in their chapter on conic sections , although the terms are the Latin translations of Greek words used by Apollonius of Perga in the Conics [  ] . I consider their original meaning in Chapter  below . Meanwhile , I just have to wonder whether an analytic geometry textbook cannot be more enticing than that of Nelson & al . If the purpose of the subject is to solve problems , why not present some of the actual problems that the subject was invented to solve ? A possible example is the duplication of the cube , discussed at the end  One complaint I have about my own education is that I was expected to learn technical terms without their etymologies . In a literature class , learning zeugma would have been easier , if only we had recognized that the Greek word was cognate with the Latin - derived join and the Anglo - Saxon yoke . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  of Chapter  . Such an example requires the use of multiplication .  .  . Multiplication In the text of Nelson & al . , multiplication ﬁrst appears in §  of Chapter  , in the derivation of the distance formula . Two points P 1 ( x 1 , y 1 ) and P 2 ( x 2 , y 2 ) are given , orthogonal projections onto the coordinate axes are taken , and ultimately the point Q is found whose coordinates are ( x 2 , y 1 ) , although this is not said . What we are told is that , Since the angle P 1 QP 2 is a right angle , it follows that ( P 1 P 2 ) 2 = ( P 1 Q ) 2 + ( QP 2 ) 2 = ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 . If d be the unsigned distance between P 1 and P 2 , we have , by extracting square roots , d = p ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 . In words , this formula states that the distance between two points equals the positive square root of the sum of the squares of the diﬀerences in the coordinates of the points . There is no reference to the Pythagorean Theorem or any other theorem . Expressions like ( P 1 P 2 ) 2 are not deﬁned . Presumably , since the text has explained an expression like P 1 P 2 as a number of linear units , ( P 1 P 2 ) 2 is supposed to be a number of “square” units , the number being the product of the original number with itself . But ( P 1 P 2 ) 2 can be understood alternatively as the equivalence class of squares whose sides make up the equivalence class P 1 P 2 . In this case , the quotation implicitly invokes Euclid’s Proposition I .  . For Euclid , A number ( ἀριθμός ) is a multitude ( πλῆθος ) composed of units ( μονάς , μονάδ - ) .   . A book from the s This is the deﬁnition in Book VII of the Elements . In this sense , numbers by themselves are elliptical : “four” can only mean four things , or four of something . Today , a number of units has two separable parts : the number , and the unit . The number can be mul - tiplied by other numbers , without regard to any associated units . This is true for Euclid as well , but only because his numbers are our positive integers ( usually with the exception of one : one thing is not a multitude ) . But for us today , and in particular for Nelson & al . , a number is a so - called real number , although the reality of these numbers would appear not to have been well established until the work of Dedekind ( mentioned in §  .  , page  ; described more fully in §  .  , page  ) .  . Abscissas and ordinates In the ﬁrst of the eight books  of the Conics [  ] , Apollonius derives properties of the conic sections that can be used to write their equa - tions in rectangular or oblique coordinates . I review these properties here , because (  ) they have intrinsic interest , (  ) they are the reason why Apollonius gave to the three conic sections the names that they now have , and (  ) the vocabulary of Apollonius is a source for many of our technical terms , including “abscissa” and “ordinate . ” Apollonius did not create his terms : they are just ordinary words , used to refer to mathematical objects . When we do not translate Apollonius , but simply transliterate his words , or use their Latin translations , then we put some distance between ourselves and the mathematics . When I ﬁrst learned that a conic section had a latus rectum , I had a sense that there was a whole theory of conic sections that was not being revealed , although its existence was hinted at by this peculiar Latin term . If we called the latus rectum by its English name of “upright side , ” it might be easier for the student to ask , “What is an upright side ? ” In turn , textbook writers might feel more obliged to explain what it is . In any case , I am going to give an explanation here . English does borrow foreign words freely : this is a characteristic of the language . A large lexicon is not a bad thing . A choice from among two or more synonyms can help establish the register of a piece of speech .  If distinctions between near - synonyms are carefully  The ﬁrst four books survive in Greek , the next three in Arabic translation ; the last book is lost .  In the s , the Washington Post described the book called Color Me Beau - tiful as oﬀering “the color - wheel approach to female pulchritude . ” The New    . Abscissas and ordinates maintained , then subtlety of expression is possible . “Circle” and “cycle” are Latin and Greek words for the same thing , but the Greek word is used more abstractly in English , and it would be bizarre to refer to a ﬁnite group of prime order as being circular rather than cyclic . However , mathematics can be done in any language . Greek does mathematics without a specialized vocabulary . It is worthwhile to consider what this is like . For Apollonius , a cone ( ὁ κῶνος “pine - cone” ) is a solid ﬁgure de - termined by (  ) a base ( ἡ βάσις ) , which is a circle , and (  ) a vertex ( ἡ κορυφή “summit” ) , which is a point that is not in the plane of the base . The surface of the cone contains all of the straight lines drawn from the vertex to the circumference of the base . A conic surface ( ἡ κωνικὴ ἐπιφάνεια  ) consists of such straight lines , not bounded by the base or the vertex , but extended indeﬁnitely in both directions . The straight line drawn from the vertex of a cone to the center of the base is the axis ( ὁ ἄξων “axle” ) of the cone . If the axis is perpendicular to the base , then the cone is right ( ὀρθός ) ; otherwise it is scalene ( σκαληνός “uneven” ) . Apollonius considers both kinds of cones indiﬀerently . A plane containing the axis intersects the cone in a triangle . Sup - pose a cone with vertex A has axial triangle ABC . Then the base BC of this triangle is a diameter of the base of the cone . Let an arbitrary chord  DE of the base of the cone cut the base BC of the York Times just said the book provided “beauty tips for women . ” ( I draw the quotations from memory ; they were in the newspapers’ lists of bestsellers for the week , for many weeks . ) The register of the Post was mocking ; the Times , neutral .  The word ἐπιφάνεια means originally “appearance” and is the source of the English “epiphany . ”  Although it is the source of the English “cord” and “chord” [  ] , Apollonius does not use the word ἡ χορδή , although he proves in Proposition I .  that the straight line joining any two points of a conic section is a chord , in the sense that it falls within the section . The Greek χορδή means gut , hence January  ,  ,  :  Noon  axial triangle at right angles at a point F , as in Figure  .  . In the A B C F G B C D E F Figure  .  . Axial triangle and base of a cone axial triangle , let the straight line FG be drawn from the base to the side AC . This straight line FG may , but need not , be parallel to the side BA . It is not at right angles to DE , unless the plane of the axial triangle is at right angles to the plane of the base of the cone . In any case , the two straight lines FG and DE , meeting at F , are not in a straight line with one another , and so they determine a plane . This plane cuts the surface of the cone in such a curve DGE as is shown in Figure  .  . Apollonius refers to such a curve ﬁrst ( in Proposition I .  ) as a section ( ἡ τομή ) in the surface of the cone , and later ( I .  ) as a section of a cone . All of the chords of this section that are parallel to DE are bisected by the straight line GF . Therefore Apollonius calls this straight line a diameter ( ἡ διάμετρος [ γραμμή ] ) of the section .  The parallel chords bisected by the diameter are said to be drawn anything made with gut , be it a lyre - string or a sausage [  ] .  The associated verb is διαμετρέ - ω “measure through” ; this is the verb used in Homer’s Iliad [  , III .  ] ) for what Hector and Odysseus do in preparing a space for the dual of Paris and Menelaus . ( The reference is in [  ] . )   . Abscissas and ordinates D E F G Figure  .  . A conic section to the diameter in an orderly way . The Greek adverb here is τε - ταγμένως [  ] , from the verb τάσσω , which has meanings like “to draw up in order of battle” [  ] . A Greek noun derived from this verb is τάξις , which is found in English technical terms like “taxonomy” and “syntax” [  ] . The Latin adverb corresponding to the Greek τεταγμένως is ordinate from the verb ordino . From the Greek ex - pression for “the straight line drawn in an orderly way , ” Apollonius will elide the middle part , leaving “the in - an - orderly - way . ”  This term will refer to half of a chord bisected by a diameter . Similar elision in the Latin leaves us with the word ordinate for this half - chord [  ] . Descartes refers to ordinates as [ lignes ] qui s’appliquent par ordre [ au ] diametre [  , p .  ] . The point G at which the diameter GF cuts the conic section DGE is called a vertex ( κορυφής as before ) . The segment of the diameter between the vertex and an ordinate has come to be called  Heath [  , p . clxi ] translates τεταγμένως as “ordinate - wise” ; Taliaferro [  , p .  ] , as “ordinatewise . ” But this usage strikes me as anachronistic . The term “ordinatewise” seems to mean “in the manner of an ordinate” ; but ordinates are just what we are trying to deﬁne when we translate τεταγμένως . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  in English an abscissa ; but this just the Latin translation of Apol - lonius’s Greek for being cut oﬀ ( ἀπολαμβανομένη “taken”  ) . Apollonius will show that every point of a conic section is the vertex for some unique diameter . If the ordinates corresponding to a particular diameter are at right angles to it , then the diameter will be an axis of the section . Meanwhile , in describing the relation between the ordinates and the abscissas of conic section , there are three cases to consider .  .  . The parabola Suppose the diameter of a conic section is parallel to a side of the corresponding axial triangle . For example , suppose in Figure  .  that FG is parallel to BA . The square on the ordinate DF is equal to the rectangle whose sides are BF and FC ( by Euclid’s Proposition III .  ) . More brieﬂy , DF 2 = BF · FC . But BF is independent of the choice of the point D on the conic section . That is , for any such choice ( aside from the vertex of the section ) , a plane containing the chosen point and parallel to the base of the cone cuts the cone in another circle , and the axial triangle cuts this circle along a diameter , and the plane of the section cuts this diameter at right angles into two pieces , one of which is equal to BF . The square on DF thus varies as FC , which varies as FG . That is , the square on an ordinate varies as the abscissa ( Apollonius I .  ) . Hence there is a straight line GH such that DF 2 = FG · GH , and GH is independent of the choice of D . This straight line GH can be conceived as being drawn at right angles to the plane of the conic section DGE . Apollonius calls GH  I note the usage of the Greek participle in [  , I .  , p .  ] . Its general usage for what we translate as abscissa is conﬁrmed in [  ] , although the general sense of the verb is not of cutting , but of taking .   . Abscissas and ordinates the upright side ( ὀρθία [ πλευρά ] ) , and Descartes accordingly calls it le costé droit [  , p .  ] . Apollonius calls the conic section itself a parabola ( ἡ παραβολή ) , that is , an application , presumably because the rectangle bounded by the abscissa and the upright side is the result of applying ( παραβάλλω ) the square on the ordinate to the upright side . Such an application is made for example in Proposition I .  of Euclid’s Elements , where a parallelogram equal to a given triangle is applied to a given straight line . ( This proposition is a lemma for Proposition  , mentioned in Chapter  above as the climax of Book I of the Elements . ) The Latin term for upright side is latus rectum . This term is also used in English . In the Oxford English Dictionary [  ] , the earliest quotation illustrating the use of the term is from a mathe - matical dictionary published in  . Evidently the quotation refers to Apollonius and gives his meaning : App . Conic Sections  In a Parabola the Rectangle of the Diam - eter , and Latus Rectum , is equal to the rectangle of the Segments of the double Ordinate . I assume the “segments of the double ordinate” are the two halves of a chord , so that each of them is what we are calling an ordinate , and the rectangle contained by them is equal to the square on one of them . The textbook by Nelson & al . considered in Chapter  above de - ﬁnes the parabola in terms of a focus and directrix . The possibility of deﬁning all of the conic sections in this way is demonstrated by Pappus [  , p .  ] and was presumably known to Apollonius .  According to Nelson & al . ,  Each conic section can be understood as the locus of a point whose distance from a given point has a given ratio to its distance from a given straight line . As Heath [  , pp . xxxvi – xl ] explains , Pappus proves this theorem because Euclid did not supply a proof in his treatise on surface loci . ( This treatise itself is lost to us . ) Euclid must have omitted the proof because it was already well known ; and Euclid predates Apollonius . Kline [  , p .  ] summarizes all of this by saying that the focus - directrix property “was known to Euclid January  ,  ,  :  Noon  The chord of the parabola which contains the focus and is perpen - dicular to the axis is called the latus rectum . Its length is of value in estimating the amount of “spread” of the parabola . The ﬁrst sentence here deﬁnes the latus rectum so that it is four times the length of Apollonius’s . The second sentence correctly describes the signiﬁcance of the latus rectum . However , the juxtaposition of the two sentences may mislead somebody who knows just a little Latin . The Latin adjective latus , - a , - um does mean “broad , wide ; spacious , extensive” [  ] : it is the root of the English noun “latitude . ” However , this Latin adjective latus is unrelated to the noun latus , - eris “side ; ﬂank” [  ] , which is found in English in the adjective “lateral” ; and this noun is what is used in the phrase latus rectum .  and is stated and proved by Pappus . ” Later ( on his page  ) Kline gives the precise reference to Pappus : it is Proposition  [ in Hultsch’s numbering ] of Book VII . “As noted in the preceding chapter” he says , “Euclid probably knew it . ”  In latus rectum , the adjective rectus , - a , - um “straight , upright” is given the neuter form , because the noun latus is neuter . The plural of latus rectum is latera recta . The neuter plural of the adjective latus would be lata . The dictionary writes the adjective as l¯atus , with a long “a” ; but the “a” in the noun is unmarked and therefore short . As far as I can tell , the adjective is to be distinguished from another Latin adjective with the same spelling ( and the same long “a” ) , but with the meaning of “carried , borne” , used for the past participle of the verb fero , ferre , tul¯ı , l¯atum . This past participle appears in English in words like “translate , ” while fer - appears in “transfer . ” The American Heritage Dictionary [  ] traces l¯atus “broad” to an Indo - European root stel - and gives “latitude” and “dilate” as English derivatives ; l¯atus “carried” comes from an Indo - European root tel - and is found in English words like “translate” and “relate , ” but also “dilatory . ” Thus “dilatory” is not to be considered as a derivative of “dilate . ” A French etymological dictionary [  ] implicitly conﬁrms this under the adjacent entries dilater and dilatoire . The older Skeat [  ] does give “dilatory” as a derivative of “dilate . ” However , under “latitude , ” Skeat traces l¯atus “broad” to the Old Latin stl¯atus , while under “tolerate” he traces l¯atum “borne” to tl¯atum . In his introduction , Skeat says he has collated his dictionary “with the New English Dictionary [ as the Oxford English Dictionary was originally called ] from A to H ( excepting a small portion of G ) . ” In fact the OED distinguishes two English verbs “dilate , ”   . Abscissas and ordinates Denoting abscissa by x , and ordinate by y , and latus rectum by ℓ , we have for the parabola the modern equation ( ∗ ) y 2 = ℓx .  .  . The hyperbola The second possibility for a conic section is that the diameter meets the other side of the axial triangle when this side is extended beyond the vertex of the cone . In Figure  .  , the diameter FG , crossing one A B C F G K H L M B C D E F Figure  .  . Axial triangle and base of a cone side of the axial triangle ABC at G , crosses the other side , extended , at K . Again DF 2 = BF · FC ; but the latter product now varies as KF · FG . The upright side GH can now be deﬁned so that BF · FC : KF · FG : : GH : GK . one for each of the Latin adjectives l¯atus . But the dictionary notes , “The sense ‘prolong’ comes so near ‘enlarge’ , ‘expand’ , or ‘set forth at length’ . . . that the two verbs were probably not thought of as distinct words . ” January  ,  ,  :  Noon  We draw KH and extend to L so that FL is parallel to GH , and we extend GH to M so that LM is parallel to FG . Then FL · FG : KF · FG : : FL : KF : : GH : GK : : BF · FC : KF · FG , and so FL · FG = BF · FC . Thus DF 2 = FG · FL . Apollonius calls the conic section here an hyperbola ( ἡ ὑπερβολή ) , that is , an exceeding , because the square on the ordinate is equal to a rectangle whose one side is the abscissa , and whose other side is ap - plied to the upright side ; but this rectangle exceeds ( ὑπερβάλλω ) the rectangle contained by the abscissa and the upright side by another rectangle . This last rectangle is similar to the rectangle contained by the upright side and GK . Apollonius calls GK the transverse side ( ἡ πλαγία πλευρά ) of the hyperbola . Denoting it by a , and the other segments as before , we have the modern equation ( † ) y 2 = ℓx + ℓ ax 2 .  .  . The ellipse The last possibility is that the diameter meets the other side of the axial triangle when this side is extended below the base . All of the computations will be as for the hyperbola , except that now , if it is considered as a directed segment as in Chapter  , the transverse side is negative , and so the modern equation is ( ‡ ) y 2 = ℓx − ℓ ax 2 .   . Abscissas and ordinates In this case Apollonius calls the conic section an ellipse ( ἡ ἔλλειψις ) , that is , a falling short , because again the square on the ordinate is equal to a rectangle whose one side is the abscissa , and whose other side is applied to the upright side ; but this rectangle now falls short ( ἐλλείπω ) of the rectangle contained by the abscissa and the upright side by another rectangle . Again this last rectangle is similar to the rectangle contained by the upright and transverse sides . Thus the terms “abscissa” and “ordinate” are ultimately transla - tions of Greek words that merely describe certain line segments that can be used to describe points on conic sections . For Apollonius , they are not required to be at right angles to one another . Descartes generalizes the use of the terms slightly . In one example [  , p .  ] , he considers a curve derived from a given conic section in such a way that , if a point of the conic section is given by an equation of the form y 2 = . . . x . . . , then a point on the new curve is given by y 2 = . . . x ′ . . . , where xx ′ is constant . But Descartes just describes the new curve in words : toutes les lignes droites appliquées par ordre a son diametre estant esgales a celles d’une section conique , les segmens de ce diametre , qui sont entre le sommet & ces lignes , ont mesme proportion a une certaine ligne donnée , que cete ligne donnée a aux segmens du diametre de la section conique , auquels les pareilles lignes sont appliquées par ordre .   “All of the straight lines drawn in an orderly way to its diameter being equal to those of a conic section , the segments of this diameter that are between the vertex and these lines have the same ratio to a given line that this given line has to the segments of the diameter of the conic section to which the parallel lines are drawn in an orderly way . ” January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Thus it appears that , for Descartes , there is still no notion that an arbitrary point might have two coordinates , called abscissa and ordinate respectively ; at any rate , he is not interested in inculcating such a notion in his readers .  . The geometry of the conic sections  .  . Diameters For an hyperbola or ellipse , the center ( κέντρον ) is the midpoint of the transverse side . In Book I of the Conics , Apollonius shows that the diameters of (  ) an ellipse are the straight lines through its center , (  ) an hyperbola are the straight lines through its center that ac - tually cut the hyperbola ,  (  ) a parabola are the straight lines that are parallel to the axis . Moreover , with respect to a new diameter , the relation between or - dinates and abscissas is as before , except that the upright and trans - verse sides may be diﬀerent . I do not know of an eﬃcient way to prove these theorems by Cartesian methods . Descartes opens his Geometry by saying , All problems in geometry can easily be reduced to such terms that one need only know the lengths of certain straight lines in order to solve them . However , Apollonius proves his theorems about diameters by means of areas . Areas can be reduced to products of straight lines , but the reduction in the present context seems not to be particularly easy . For example , to shift the diameter of a parabola , Apollonius will use the following . Lemma  ( Proposition I .  of Apollonius ) . In Figure  .  , it is  If the hyperbola is considered together with its conjugate hyperbola , then all straight lines through the center are diameters , except the asymptotes .  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  A B G D E Z H J Figure  .  . Proposition I .  of Apollonius assumed that (  ) the parabola GDB has diameter AB , (  ) AG is tangent to the parabola at G , (  ) GJ is an ordinate , and (  ) GJBH is a parallelogram . Moreover (  ) the point D is chosen at random on the parabola , and (  ) triangle EDZ is drawn similar to AGJ . It follows that the triangle EDZ is equal to the parallelogram HZ . Proof . The proof relies on knowing ( from I .  ) that AB = BJ . Therefore AGJ = HJ . Thus the claim follows when D is just the point G . In general we have EDZ : HJ : : EDZ : AGJ [ Euclid V .  ] : : DZ 2 : GJ 2 [ Euclid VI .  ] : : BZ : BJ [ Apollonius I .  ] : : HZ : HJ , [ Euclid VI .  ] and so EDZ = HZ by Euclid V .  . The relative positions of D and G on the parabola are irrelevant to the argument . Then the diameter of a parabola can be shifted by the following .   . The geometry of the conic sections Theorem  ( Proposition I .  of Apollonius ) . In Figure  .  , it is M B G D Z N K L R M B G D Z N K L P R X E Figure  .  . Proposition I .  of Apollonius assumed that (  ) KDB is a parabola , (  ) its diameter is MBG , (  ) GD is tangent to the parabola , and (  ) through D , parallel to BG , straight line ZDN is drawn . Moreover (  ) the point K is chosen at random on the parabola , (  ) through K , parallel to GD , the straight line KL is drawn , and (  ) BR is drawn parallel to GD . It follows that  KL 2 : BR 2 : : DL : DR . Proof . Let ordinate DX be drawn , and let BZ be drawn parallel to it . Then GB = BX [ Apollonius I .  ] = ZD , [ Euclid I .  ] and so ( by Euclid I .  &  ) △ EGB = △ EZD .  Apollonius also ﬁnds the upright side corresponding to the new diameter DN : it is H such that ED : DZ : : H : 2 GD . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Let ordinate KNM be drawn . Adding to either side of the last equation the pentagon DEBMN , we have the trapezoid DGMN equal to the parallelogram ZM ( that is , ZBMN ) . Let KL be extended to P . By the lemma above , the parallelogram ZM is equal to the triangle KPM . Thus DGMN = KPM . Subtracting the trapezoid LPMN gives KLN = LG . We have also BRZ = RG ( as by adding the trapezoid DEBR to the equal triangles EZD and EGB ) . Therefore KL 2 : BR 2 : : KLN : BRZ : : LG : RG : : LD : RD . The proof given above works when K is to the left of D . The argument can be adapted to the other case . Then , as a corollary , we have that DN bisects all chords parallel to DG . In fact Apollonius proves this independently , in Proposition I .  . Again , I do not see how the foregoing arguments can be improved by expressing all of the areas involved in terms of lengths . Rule Four in Descartes’s Rules for the Direction of the Mind [  ] is , “We need a method if we are to investigate the truth of things . ” Descartes elaborates : . . . So useful is this method that without it the pursuit of learn - ing would , I think , be more harmful than proﬁtable . Hence I can readily believe that the great minds of the past were to some ex - tent aware of it , guided to it even by nature alone . . . This is our   . The geometry of the conic sections experience in the simplest of sciences , arithmetic and geometry : we are well aware that the geometers of antiquity employed a sort of analysis which they went on to apply to the solution of every problem , though they begrudged revealing it to posterity . At the present time a sort of arithmetic called “algebra” is ﬂourishing , and this is achieving for numbers what the ancients did for ﬁg - ures . . . But if one attends closely to my meaning , one will readily see that ordinary mathematics is far from my mind here , that it is quite another discipline I am expounding , and that these illustra - tions are more its outer garments than its inner parts . . . Indeed , one can even see some traces of this true mathematics , I think , in Pappus and Diophantus who , though not of that earliest an - tiquity , lived many centuries before our time . But I have come to think that these writers themselves , with a kind of pernicious cunning , later suppressed this mathematics as , notoriously , many inventors are known to have done where their own discoveries are concerned . . . In the present age some very gifted men have tried to revive this method , for the method seems to me to be none other than the art which goes by the outlandish name of “algebra”—or at least it would be if algebra were divested of the multiplicity of numbers and imprehensible ﬁgures which overwhelm it and instead possessed that abundance of clarity and simplicity which I believe true mathematics ought to have . Descartes does not mention Apollonius among the ancient mathe - maticians , and I do not believe that in his Geometry he has managed to recover the method whereby Apollonius proves all of his theorems .  .  . Duplication of the cube On the other hand , Descartes may have recovered one method used by ancient mathematicians , because perhaps some of these mathe - maticians did solve problems by considering equations of polynomial functions of lengths only . An example is Menaechmus , “a pupil of Eudoxus and a contemporary of Plato” [  , p . xix ] . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Apollonius did not discover the conic sections ; Menaechmus is thought to have done this , if only because his is the oldest name associated with the conic sections . According to the commentary by Eutocius  on Archimedes , Menaechmus had two methods for ﬁnding two mean proportionals to two given straight lines ; each of these methods uses conic sections . One of the methods is illustrated by Figure  .  ; apparently Menaechmus’s own diagram was just like this Θ Κ ∆ Ζ Η Figure  .  . Menaechmus’s ﬁnding of two mean proportionals [  , p .  ] . Given the lengths Α and Ε , we want to ﬁnd Β and Γ so that Α : Β : : Β : Γ : : Γ : Ε , or equivalently Β 2 = Α · Γ , Β · Γ = Α · Ε . ( ∗ ) In the special case where Α is twice Ε , we shall have that the cube with side Γ is double the cube with side Ε . In any case , we shall have ( ∗ ) as desired if  Eutocius ﬂourished around  c . e . , and his commentary was revised by Isidore of Miletus [  , p .  ] , who along with Anthemius of Tralles was a master - builder of Justinian’s Hagia Sophia [  ] .   . The geometry of the conic sections (  ) Β is an ordinate , and Γ the corresponding abscissa , of the parabola with upright side Α whose axis is ∆Η in the diagram ; (  ) Β and Γ are the coordinates of a point on the hyperbola whose asymptotes are ∆Κ and ∆Η in the diagram and which also passes through the point with coordinates Α and Ε . Thus , if Θ is the intersection of the parabola and hyperbola , we can let Β be ΖΘ and let Γ be ∆Ζ . We have used the property proved by Apollonius in his Proposi - tion II .  , that the rectangle bounded by the straight lines drawn from a point on an hyperbola to the asymptotes has constant area . Heath has an idea of how Menaechmus proved this [  , xxv – xxviii ] . In any case , by the report of Eutocius , Menaechmus’s other method of ﬁnding two mean proportionals was to use two parabolas with orthogonal axes . I referred to Β and Γ as coordinates , but this is an anachronism . According to one historian [  , pp .  –  ] , Since this material has a strong resemblance to the use of coor - dinates , as illustrated above , it has sometimes been maintained that Menaechmus had analytic geometry . Such a judgment is war - ranted only in part , for certainly Menaechmus was unaware that any equation in two unknown quantities determines a curve . In fact , the general concept of an equation in unknown quantities was alien to Greek thought . It was shortcomings in algebraic no - tations that , more than anything else , operated against the Greek achievement of a full - ﬂedged coordinate geometry .  Boyer evidently considers analytic geometry as the study of the graphs of arbitrary equations ; but this would seem to be within  In fact what Boyer refers to as “this material” is the properties of the conic sections given by equations ( ∗ ) , ( † ) and ( ‡ ) in the previous chapter . Boyer will presently give the method of cube - duplication using two parabolas , and then say , “It is probable that Menaechmus knew that the duplication could be achieved also by the use of a rectangular hyperbola and a parabola . ” It is not clear why he says “It is probable that , ” unless he questions the authority of Eutocius . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  the purview of calculus rather than geometry . The book of Nelson & al . discussed in Chapter  does have chapters on graphs of single - valued algebraic functions , single - valued transcendental functions , and multiple - valued functions , as well as on parametric equations ; but this ﬁts the explicit purpose of the text as a preparation for calculus .  .  . Quadratrix Did Descartes have a “full - ﬂedged analytic geometry” in the sense of Boyer ? In the Geometry [  , pp .  –  ] , Descartes rejects the study of curves like the quadratrix , which today can be deﬁned by the equation tan (cid:16) π 2 · y (cid:17) = y x , or more elaborately by the pair of equations θ y = π 2 , tan θ = y x , the variables being as in Figure  .  . Descartes does not write down x y θ A B G D H Figure  .  . The quadratrix   . The geometry of the conic sections an equation for the quadratrix ; but an equation is not needed for proving theorems about this curve . Pappus [  , pp .  –  ] deﬁnes the quadratrix as being traced in a square by the intersection of two straight lines , one horizontal and moving from the top edge BG to the bottom edge AD , the other swinging about the lower left corner A from the left edge AB to the bottom edge AD . If there is a point H where the quadratrix meets the lower edge of the square , then BD : AB : : AB : AH , where BD is the circular arc centered at A . Then a straight line equal to this arc can be found , and so the circle can be squared . This is why the curve is called the quadratrix ( τετραγωνίζουσα ) . Pappus demonstrates this property , while pointing out that we have no way to construct the quadratrix without knowing where the point H is in the ﬁrst place .  Today we have a notation for its position : if D is one unit away from A , then the length of AH is what we call 2 / π . However , this notation does not give us the location of H any better than Pappus’s description of the quadratrix does . Is “the general concept of an equation in unknown quantities” something that is “alien to Greek thought” ? Perhaps it is alien to our own thought . According to Boyer as quoted above , “any equation in two unknown quantities determines a curve . ” But this would seem to be an exaggeration , unless an arbitrary subset S of the plane R × R is to be considered a curve . For , if χ S is the characteristic function of S , then S is the solution - set of the equation χ S ( x , y ) = 1 . Probably Boyer does not have in mind equations with parameters like S , but equations whose only parameters are real numbers , and  Pappus attributes this criticism to one Sporus , about whom we apparently have no source but Pappus himself [  , p .  , n .  ] . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  in particular equations that are expressed by means of polynomial , trigonometric , logarithmic , and exponential functions . If Menaechmus neglects to study all such functions , it is not for lack of adequate algebraic notation , but lack of interest . He solves the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals to two given line seg - ments . If a numerical approximation is wanted , this can be found , as close as desired ; therefore , by the continuity of the real line es - tablished by Dedekind , an exact solution exists . But Menaechmus wants a geometric solution , and he ﬁnds one , evidently by using the kind of mathematics that we refer to today as analytic geom - etry . Indeed , Heath suspects that Menaechmus ﬁrst came up with the equations ( ∗ ) and then discovered that curves deﬁned by these equations could be obtained as conic sections [  , p . xxi ] . Figure  .  could appear at the beginning of any analytic geometry text , as an illustration of what the subject is about .  .  . Locus problems Pappus [  , pp .  –  ] reports three kinds of geometry problem : plane , as being solved by means straight lines and circles only , which lie in a plane ; solid , as requiring also the use of conic sections , which in particular are sections of a solid ﬁgure , the cone ; and linear , as involving more complicated lines , that is , curves , such as the quadra - trix . Perhaps justly , Descartes criticizes this analysis as simplistic . He shows that curves given by polynomial equations have a heirarchy determined by the degrees of the polynomials . This hierarchy could have been meaningful for Pappus , since lower - degree curves can be used to construct higher - degree curves by methods more precise than the construction of the quadratrix . One solid problem described by Pappus [  , pp .  –  ] is the four - line locus problem : ﬁnd the locus of points such that the rectangle whose dimensions are the distances to two given straight lines bears   . The geometry of the conic sections a given ratio to the rectangle whose dimensions are the distances to two more given straight lines . According to Pappus , theorems of Apollonius were needed to solve this problem ; but it is not clear whether Pappus thinks Apollonius actually did work out a full solu - tion . By the last three propositions , namely  –  , of Book III of the Conics of Apollonius , it is implied that the conic sections are three - line loci , that is , solutions to the four - line locus problem when two of the lines are identical . Taliaferro [  , pp .  –  ] works out the details and derives the theorem that the conic sections are four - line loci . Descartes works out a full solution to the four - line locus problem . He also solves a particular ﬁve - line locus problem , namely , given four equally spaced parallel straight lines and a ﬁfth straight line perpendicular to them , to ﬁnd the locus of points , the product of whose distances to three of the parallel lines is equal to the product of three other distances : (  ) to the remaining parallel , (  ) to the ﬁfth line , and (  ) between adjacent parallels . Descartes expresses the problem with the equation ( 2 a − y ) ( a − y ) ( y + a ) = axy , and he ﬁnds the solution as the curve , each of whose points is the intersection of a certain parabola and straight line . The parabola slides , and the straight line passes through a ﬁxed point and a point that moves with the parabola . Thus Descartes would seem to have made progress along an an - cient line of research , rather than just heading oﬀ in a diﬀerent direction . As Descartes observes , Pappus [  , pp .  -  ] could for - mulate the 2 n - line locus problem for arbitrary n . If n > 3 , the ratio of the product of n segments with the product of n segments can be understood as the ratio compounded of the respective ratios of segment to segment . That is , given 2 n segments A 1 , . . . , A n , B 1 , . . . , B n , we can understand the ratio of the product of the A k to the January  ,  ,  :  Noon  product of the B k as the ratio of A 1 to C n , where A 1 : C 1 : : A 1 : B 1 , C 1 : C 2 : : A 2 : B 2 , C 2 : C 3 : : A 3 : B 3 , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , C n − 1 : C n : : A n : B n . Descartes expresses the solution of the 2 n - line locus problem as an n th - degree polynomial equation in x and y , where y is the distance from the point to one of the given straight lines , and x is the distance from a given point on that line to the foot of the perpendicular from the point of the locus . In fact Descartes does not use the perpendicular as such , but a straight line drawn at an arbitrarily given angle to the given line . For , the original 2 n - line problem literally involves not distances to the given lines , but lengths of straight lines drawn at given angles to the given lines . For the methods of Descartes , the distinction is trivial . For Apollonius , the distinction would seem not to be trivial . The question remains : If Descartes can express the solution of a locus problem in terms that would make sense to Apollonius or Pappus , would the ancient mathematician accept Descartes’s proof , a proof that involves algebraic manipulations of symbols ?  . A book from the s In  in Ankara , with two senior colleagues , I taught a ﬁrst - year , ﬁrst - semester undergraduate analytic geometry course from a locally published text that was undated , but had apparently been produced in  [  ] . The preface of that text begins : This book is meant as a basic text book for a course in Analytic Geometry . Throughout the book , the connections and interrelations be - tween algebra and geometry are emphasized . the notions of Lin - ear Algebra are introduced and applied simultaneously with more traditional topics of Analytic Geometry . Some of the notions of Linear Algebra are used without mentioning them explicitly . The preface continues with brief descriptions of the eight chap - ters and two appendices , and it concludes with acknowledgements . Chapter  of the text , “Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geome - try” , has ﬁve sections :  . Set Theory  . Relations  . Functions  . Families of Sets  . Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry Thus the book appears more sophisticated than the  book dis - cussed in Chapter  . Possibly this shows the inﬂuence of the inter - vening New Math in the US , if the text draws on American sources ; but here I am only speculating . The author’s acknowledgements in - clude no written sources , and the book has no bibliography . The introduction to Chapter  reads :  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Analytic Geometry is a branch of mathematics which studies ge - ometry through the use of algebra . It was Rene Descartes (  –  ) who introduced the subject for the ﬁrst time . Analytic geometry is based on the observation that there is a one - to - one correspondence between the points of a straight line and the real numbers ( see §  ) . This fact is used to introduce coordinate sys - tems in the plane or in three space , so that a geometric object can be viewed as a set of pairs of real numbers or as a set of triples of real numbers . In this chapter , we list notations , review set theoretic notions and give the fundamental principle of analytic geometry . The reference to Descartes is too vague to be meaningful . Descartes does not observe , but he tacitly assumes , that there is a one - to - one correspondence between lengths and positive numbers . He assumes too that numbers can be multiplied by one another ; but in case there is any question about this assumption , he proves that this multiplication is induced by a geometrically meaningful notion . His proof is discussed below in Chapter  . As spelled out on pages  and  of the book under review , the Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry is that for every straight line ℓ there is a function P from R to ℓ such that : a ) P ( 0 ) 6 = P ( 1 ) ; b ) for every positive integer n , the points P ( ± n ) are n times as far away from P ( 0 ) as P ( 1 ) is , and are on the same and opposite sides of P ( 0 ) respectively ; c ) similarly for the points P ( ± k ) and P ( k / n ) , when k is also a positive integer ; d ) if x < y , then the direction from P ( x ) to P ( y ) is the same as from P ( 0 ) to P ( 1 ) . It follows that any choice of distinct points P ( 0 ) and P ( 1 ) uniquely determines such a function P .   . A book from the s In a more rudimentary form , this Fundamental Principle is called the Cantor – Dedekind Axiom on Wikipedia .  I would analyze this Principle or Axiom into two parts :  . For a point O on a straight line , for one of the two sides of O , the line has the structure of an ordered ( abelian ) group in which the chosen point is the neutral element and the positive elements are on the chosen side of O . If A and B are arbitrary points on the line , then A + B is that point C such that the segments OB and AC are congruent and C is on the same side of A that B is of O .  . If a particular point U of the line is chosen on the chosen side of O , then there is an isomorphism P from the ordered group of real numbers to the ordered group of the line in which P ( 1 ) = U . The ﬁrst part here deﬁnes addition of points compatibly with the addition of segments deﬁned in the text of Nelson & al . discussed in Chapter  above . The second part establishes continuity of straight lines in the sense of Dedekind discussed in Chapter  above . In fact this two - part formulation of the Fundamental Principle is strictly stronger than what the text gives . By the text version , the map P is not a group homomorphism ; only its restriction to Q is a group homomorphism . As noted in Chapter  above , by Dedekind’s construction , R is initially obtained from Q as a linear order alone ; it must be proved to have ﬁeld - operations extending those of Q . By the second part of the two - part formulation of the Fundamental Principle , addition on R is geometrically meaningful . This is left out of the Principle as formulated in the text under review . As Dedekind observes , and as was repeated in Chapter  above , continuity is not necessary for doing geometry . Thus the so - called  Article of that name accessed October  ,  . It says “the phrase Cantor – Dedekind axiom has been used to describe the thesis that the real numbers are order - isomorphic to the linear continuum of geometry . ” No preservation of algebraic structure is discussed . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Fundamental Principle is not necessary . It is not even suﬃcient for doing geometry ; for it provides no clue about what happens away from a given straight line . The Principle holds for every Riemannian manifold with no closed geodesics . In such a manifold , a chosen point on a geodesic and a chosen direction along the geodesic determine the structure of an ordered group on the geodesic , and this ordered group is isomorphic with R as an ordered group . The bijection from R to the geodesic induces a multiplication on the geodesic ; but this multiplication is not generally of signiﬁcance within the manifold . It is of signiﬁcance in a Euclidean manifold , where we have an equation between the product of two lengths and the area of a rectangle whose dimensions are those lengths . This equation is fundamental to analytic geometry ; but the so - called Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry does not give it to us . The ﬁrst theorem in the book under review is that the usual for - mula for the distance between two points is correct . The proof appeals to the Pythagorean Theorem without further explanation . This is a failure of rigor . Proposition I .  of Euclid’s Elements gives us the Pythagorean Theorem as an equation of certain linear com - binations of areas . To do analytic geometry , we need to be able to understand this as an equation of certain polynomial functions of lengths . If all lengths are commensurable , this is easy . Since not all lengths are commensurable , more work is needed , which will be discussed in the next chapter . The second theorem in the book under review is that every straight line is deﬁned by a linear equation as follows .  . A vertical straight line is deﬁned by an equation x = a .  . A horizontal straight line is deﬁned by an equation y = b .  . If the line is inclined , then any two points of the line give the same slope for the line , and so the line is deﬁned by an equation y = m ( x − x 1 ) + y 1 . This last conclusion is justiﬁed by similarity of triangles . The pos - sibility of distinguishing straight lines as vertical , horizontal , or   . A book from the s oblique is asserted without explanation . The meaning of straightness is not discussed . Each of the equations that have been found for a line can be put into the form Ax + By + C = 0 .  The third theorem of the text is the converse . If one of A and B is not 0 ,  then the equation Ax + By + C = 0 deﬁnes (  ) the vertical line deﬁned by x = − C / A , if B = 0 ; (  ) the straight line through ( 0 , − C / B ) having slope − A / B , if B 6 = 0 . This assumes that a point and a slope determine a line . It seems to me that these ﬁrst three theorems are founded on notions from high - school mathematics , but add no rigor to these notions . It would be more honest to say something like , As we know from high school , straight lines are just graphs of equations of the form Ax + By + C = 0 , where at least one of A and B is not 0 . . . To write this out as formal numbered theorems , with proofs labelled as “Proof” and ended with boxes —this is a failure of rigor , unless the axioms that the proofs rely on are made explicit .  We have already seen that the Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry is an insuﬃcient axiomatic foundation . I argued in Chapter  above that Euclid’s Proposition I .  , “Side - Angle - Side , ” is reasonably treated as a theorem , rather than a pos - tulate , even though it relies on no postulates . But Euclid is not  According to the text , the equations x = a , y = b , and y = m ( x − x 1 ) + y 1 are called deﬁning equations of the corresponding lines , and an equation of the form Ax + By + C = 0 is called a linear equation . The second theorem is given as , “The deﬁning equation of any straight line is a linear equation . ” Taken literally , this is trivial .  This condition is omitted from the text .  In the book under review , the ﬁrst three theorems get the numbers  .  .  ,  .  .  , and  .  .  . The ﬁrst and third have proofs ended with boxes . The second is preceded by two pages of discussion and diagrams , followed by “We have thus proved” . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  working within a formal system . He has no such notion . Today we have the notion , and a textbook of mathematics ought to give at least a nod to the reader who is familiar with the notion . Descartes is more rigorous than the book considered here , even though he does not write out any theorems as such . It is clear that his logical basis is Euclidean geometry as used by the ancient Greek mathematicians .  . Geometry to algebra To consider the matter of rigor in more detail , I propose to compare the so - called Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry in the previous chapter with the axioms of David Hilbert [  ] . The latter are given in ﬁve groups . For plane geometry , the axioms can be paraphrased as follows . I . Connection .  –  . Two distinct points lie on a unique straight line .   . A line contains at least two points . II . Order .  –  . The points of a straight line are densely linearly ordered without extrema .  ( Pasch’s Axiom ) . A straight line intersecting one side of a triangle intersects one of the other two sides or meets their common vertex . III . Parallels ( Euclid’s Axiom ) .  Hilbert writes this axiom as two : I ,  . Two distinct points A and B always completely determine a straight line a . We write AB = a or BA = a . I ,  . Any two distinct points of a straight line completely determine that line ; that is , if AB = a and AC = a , where B 6 = C , then is also BC = a . Evidently Hilbert understands equality as identity . The ﬁrst axiom appears to be that there is a function assigning to every ( unordered ) pair of points A and B a straight line , called indiﬀerently AB or BA , that contains them . The ﬁrst part of the second axiom appears to be that if AB contains a point C that is distinct from both A and B , then AB = BC . The second part of the second axiom , given as a rephrasing of this , would appear to be strictly weaker , since the assumption AB = AC is stronger than the assumption that C lies on AB . For example , perhaps the straight line AB is intended in Euclid’s sense , as the line segment bounded by A and B . In that case , if AB = AC , then B = C .  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  Through a given point , exactly one parallel to a given straight line can be drawn . IV . Congruence .  . Every segment can be uniquely laid oﬀ upon a given side of a given point of a given straight line .  –  . Congruence of segments is transitive and additive .  . Every angle can be uniquely laid oﬀ upon a given side of a given ray .   . Congruence of angles is transitive .  . “Side - Angle - Side” ( Euclid’s Proposition I .  ) . V . Continuity ( Archimedean Axiom ) . Some multiple of one segment exceeds another . Hilbert gives an additional Axiom of Completeness , that no larger system satisﬁes the axioms . In the two - part formulation of the Fundamental Principle of An - alytic Geometry given in Chapter  previous , the ﬁrst part is equiv - alent to Hilbert’s Order and Congruence Axioms , as restricted to a single straight line . Granted that Hilbert’s axioms allow the construction of an or - dered ﬁeld K as discussed below , Pasch’s axiom ensures that “space” has at most two dimensions . The Completeness Axiom then ensures that space has exactly two dimensions . Then the Completeness and Continuity Axioms together ensure that the ordered ﬁeld K is R . Indeed , these two axioms , in the presence of the others , are equiv - alent to the second part of the Fundamental Principle of Analytic Geometry . Hilbert shows that the Axiom of Parallels and the “Side - Angle - Side” axiom respectively are independent from all of the other ax - ioms .  In particular then , the Fundamental Principle of Algebraic Geometry is not suﬃcient for doing geometry . We have already cited  Hilbert ( or his translator ) says “half - ray” .  Strictly , Hilbert leaves the Completeness Axiom out of his arguments ; but leaving it in would not aﬀect his independence proofs .   . Geometry to algebra Dedekind to the eﬀect that continuity is not necessary for doing ge - ometry . What is needed for doing analytic geometry is something that Descartes observes . Suppose K is an ordered ﬁeld , and ℓ is a straight line with a distinguished direction and point , so that ℓ becomes an ordered group . Suppose also P is an isomorphism of ordered groups from K to ℓ . To do analytic geometry , we must be able to obtain P ( x · y ) from P ( x ) and P ( y ) in a geometrically meaningful way . In this case , we have grounded algebra in geometry and so made algebra rigorous . This is Descartes’s insight . Having picked a unit length , Descartes deﬁnes a multiplication of lengths by means of the theory of proportion—presumably the theory of Book V of the Elements . In particular , Descartes implicitly uses Euclid’s Proposition VI .  , that a straight line parallel to the base of a triangle divides the sides proportionally . If one side is divided into parts of lengths 1 and a , then the other side is divided into parts of lengths b and ab for some b , as in Figure  .  ; and a and 1 a b ab Figure  .  . Multiplication of lengths b can be chosen in advance . As developed in Euclid , the theory of proportion uses the Archi - medean Axiom . Hilbert shows how to avoid using this Axiom , but the arguments are somewhat complicated . Hartshorne [  ] has a more streamlined approach , using properties of circles in Book III January  ,  ,  :  Noon  of the Elements . In fact , Euclid’s Book I alone provides a suﬃcient basis for deﬁning multiplication . It was suggested in Chapter  above that Proposition  is the climax of that book . It was observed in Chapter  that Proposition  is a lemma for this proposition . This lemma in turn relies heavily on Proposition  : In any parallelogram the complements of parallelograms about the diameter are equal to one another . In particular , in rectangle ΑΒΓ∆ in Figure  .  , the diagonal ΑΓ is Ε Β Θ ∆ Α Γ Η Ζ Κ Figure  .  . Euclid’s Proposition I .  taken , and rectangles ΕΘ and ΗΖ are drawn sharing this diagonal . Then the complementary rectangles ΒΚ and Κ∆ are equal to one another , because they are the same linear combinations of triangles that are respectively equal to one another : ΒΚ = ΑΒΓ − ΑΕΚ − ΚΗΓ = Α∆Γ − ΑΘΚ − ΚΖΓ = ∆Κ . Now we can deﬁne the product of two lengths a and b as in Figure  .  , so that ab is the width of a rectangle of unit height that is equal to a rectangle of dimensions a and b . Given the theorem ( easily proved ) that all rectangles of the same dimensions are equal , multiplication is   . Geometry to algebra 1 a b ab Figure  .  . Multiplication of lengths automatically commutative . Easily too , it distributes over addition , and there are multiplicative inverses . Associativity takes a little more work . In Figure  .  , by deﬁnition of ab , cb , and a ( cb ) , we have 1 a b ab c cb a ( cb ) A B C D E F G H K Figure  .  . Associativity of multiplication of lengths ( ∗ )    A + B = E + F + H + K , C = G , A = D + E + G + H . Also a ( cb ) = c ( ab ) if and only if C + D + E = K . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  From ( ∗ ) we compute D + C + B = F + K . We ﬁnish by noting that , by Euclid’s Proposition I .  , B = E + F . Thus we can establish , by geometric means alone , that lengths are the positive elements of an ordered ﬁeld . This is what makes analytic geometry possible . Descartes apparently does not recognize any need to establish commutativity , distributivity , and associativity of multiplication . Still he should be credited with the observation that a geometric deﬁnition of multiplication of lengths is what is needed for the ap - plication of algebra to geometry . It is a shame that textbooks should cite Descartes as the creator of analytic geometry when his funda - mental insight is forgotten .  . Algebra to geometry One can work the other way . One can start with an ordered ﬁeld K , and one can interpret the product K × K as a Euclidean plane . Hilbert sketches the argument in order to prove that his axioms for such a plane are consistent [  , §  , pp .  -  ] . In fact an arbitrary ordered ﬁeld is not suﬃcient . To provide a model for Hilbert’s axioms , K must also be Pythagorean , that is , closed under the operation x 7→ p 1 + x 2 . This allows hypotenuses of right triangles to have lengths in the ﬁeld . For Euclid’s postulates , K must be Euclidean , that is , closed un - der taking square roots of all positive elements . Indeed , Descartes deﬁnes square roots geometrically so that √ a is , in eﬀect , the ordi - nate corresponding to the abscissa 1 in a circle of diameter 1 + a . Hilbert shows [  , §  , pp .  -  ] that the Euclidean condition is strictly stronger than the Pythagorean condition .  The Pythagorean closure of Q contains the conjugates of all of its elements . But the conjugate of a positive element need not be positive . For example , √ 2 − 1 is positive , but its conjugate −√ 2 − 1 is not . Thus √ 2 − 1 has no square root in the Pythagorean closure of Q . It is perhaps odd that Hilbert should feel the need to prove his axioms consistent . One might consider them as self - evidently con - sistent . Hilbert bases his consistency argument on the existence of a Pythagorean ordered ﬁeld . One might argue that we believe such ﬁelds exist only because of geometric demonstrations like Descartes’s as discussed in Chapter  previous . On the other hand , we can obtain the ordered ﬁeld Q without  Hilbert does not use this terminology .  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  geometry , and Dedekind shows how to do the same for R . The student may know something about R from calculus class . Then the student also knows about the product R × R from calculus , but mainly as the setting for graphs of functions . With this background , how can the student recover Euclidean geometry ? By means of the structure of R as an ordered ﬁeld , we can give R × R the structure of an inner product space :  . R × R has the abelian group structure induced from R itself .  . By the standard multiplication , R acts on R × R as a ﬁeld , that is , R embeds in the ( unital associative ) ring of endomorphisms of R × R as an abelian group . Thus R × R is a vector space over R .  . The function ( x , y ) 7→ x · y from R × R to R given by x · y = x 0 y 0 + x 1 y 1 is a real inner product function , that is , a positive - deﬁnite , symmetric , bilinear function .  . Hence there is a norm function x 7→ | x | given by | x | = √ x · x . We declare that the distance between two points a and b in R × R is | b − a | . We must check that distance has the geometrical prop - erties that we expect . The most basic of these properties are found in the deﬁnition of a metric . Easily , the distance function is sym - metric . Also , the distance between distinct points is positive , while the distance between identical points is zero . We can establish the Triangle Inequality by means of the Cauchy – Schwartz Inequality . To this end , we ﬁrst deﬁne two elements a and b of R × R to be parallel , writing a k b , if the equation x a + y b = 000   . Algebra to geometry has a nonzero solution . Given arbitrary a and b in R × R , where a 6 = 000 , we have the identity X i < 2 ( a i x + b i ) 2 = | a | 2 x 2 + 2 ( a · b ) x + | b | 2 . If a k b , there is exactly one zero to this quadratic polynomial , and so the discriminant is zero . Otherwise there are no zeros , so the discriminant is negative . Therefore we have the Cauchy – Schwartz Inequality | a · b | 6 | a | · | b | , with equality if and only if a k b . Hence ( ∗ )   | a + b | 2 = ( a + b ) · ( a + b ) = | a | 2 + 2 a · b + | b | 2 6 | a | 2 + 2 | a | · | b | + | b | 2 = ( | a | + | b | ) 2 , with equality if and only if a k b and a · b > 0 . This condition is that a and b are in the same direction . We obtain the Triangle Inequality | a + b | 6 | a | + | b | , with equality if and only if a and b are in the same direction . We can now deﬁne the line segment with distinct endpoints a and b to be the set of points x such that | b − a | = | b − x | + | x − a | . This is just the set of x such that b − x and x − a are in the same direction . We may say in this case that x is between a and b . We should note that this deﬁnition is symmetric in a and b . The segment can be denoted indiﬀerently by ab or ba . The distance January  ,  ,  :  Noon  between a and b is the length of this segment . Two segments are equal if they have the same length . The ( straight ) line containing distinct points a and b consists of those x such that x − a k b − a . The points a and b determine this line . Any two distinct points of the line determine it . The circle with center a passing through b consists of all x such that | x − a | = | b − a | . The radius of this circle is | b − a | . It appears we now have Euclid’s ﬁrst three postulates . But now is when the accusation that Euclid uses hidden assumptions becomes meaningful . In the present context , we do not automatically have equilateral triangles by Euclid’s Proposition I .  . In the proof as described through Figure  .  ( in Chapter  ) above , one must check that the two circles do indeed intersect . Here one would use that R contains √ 3 . For Proposition I .  , we need the notion of angle . We can deﬁne it as the union of two line segments that share a common endpoint , provided that the the other endpoints are not collinear with the common endpoint . The union of the segments ab and ac can be denoted indiﬀerently by bac or cab . If we have the cosine function cos from the interval ( 0 , π ) to ( − 1 , 1 ) , along with its inverse arccos , deﬁned analytically by power series , we can deﬁne the measure of the angle bac as arccos ( c − a ) · ( b − a ) | c − a | · | b − a | . Then two angles are equal if they have the same measure . If d and e are distinct from a , and b − a and d − a are in the same direction , and likewise for c − a and e − a , then angles bac and dae are equal .   . Algebra to geometry Our earlier computations now give us the Law of Cosines : If a , b , and c are three noncollinear points , so that they are vertices of a triangle , and if the measure of angle bac is θ , then by ( ∗ ) we have | b − c | 2 = | b − a | 2 + | a − c | 2 − 2 | b − a | · | a − c | · cos θ . Hence the lengths of the sides ab and ac and the measure of the angle they include determine the length of the opposite side bc . Conversely , the lengths of all three sides determine the measure of each angle . So we have Euclid’s I .  and also I .  ( “Side - Side - Side” ) . We have relied on the cosine function and its inverse , although , being deﬁned by power series , they are not algebraic : their use here assumes that our ordered ﬁeld is not arbitrary , but is indeed R . However , we need not actually ﬁnd measures of angles . Two angles are equal if and only if their cosines are equal ; and these cosines are deﬁned algebraically from the sides of the angles . Hilbert seems to allude to a diﬀerent approach , apparently the approach pioneered by Felix Klein [  , p .  ] . We can just declare any two subsets of R × R to be congruent if one can be carried to the other by a translation x 7→ x + a followed by a rotation ( x , y ) 7→ ( x cos θ − y sin θ , x sin θ + y cos θ ) or a reﬂection ( x , y ) 7→ ( x cos θ + y sin θ , x sin θ − y cos θ ) . Then two line segments will be equal if and only if they are congru - ent . The same will go for angles , provided we deﬁne these as unions of rays rather than segments . A . Ordered ﬁelds and valued ﬁelds Here are reviewed the two ways that R is complete . There is more detail than in the account in Chapter  starting on page  . The aim now is to give the reader the means to recover everything from a familiarity with calculus . We are going to make use of the following examples : • the ring Z of integers , which is also an additive ordered group ; • the ﬁeld C of complex numbers and , for each prime number p , the ﬁeld F p of integers modulo p ; • the ordered ﬁelds R of real numbers and Q of rational numbers ; • for an arbitrary ﬁeld K , – the ring K [ X ] of polynomials in the variable X with co - eﬃcients from K , and – the ﬁeld K ( X ) of rational functions in X over K , each such function being a quotient of elements of K [ X ] . For completeness , I review the deﬁnitions of the algebraic terms just used . A group is a set equipped with an associative binary opera - tion that has an identity and a corresponding operation of inversion . The binary operation is usually written as multiplication or addi - tion ; then the whole group , written out explicitly , is ( G , × , 1 , − 1 ) or ( G , + , 0 , − ) . In multiplicative notation , the equations x ( yz ) = ( xy ) z , 1 · x = x , x − 1 · x = 1 are identities in a group . Even though the multiplication need not be commutative , one proves x · 1 = x and x · x − 1 = 1 . One proves also that the identity is unique and the inverse of each element is unique . Thus the group is determined by the multiplication . If the multiplication is commutative , so that xy = yx , then the group   A . Ordered ﬁelds and valued ﬁelds is normally called Abelian ; but our multiplications will always be commutative , and we shall use “group” to mean Abelian group . If G is an ( Abelian ) group with subgroup H , then every a in G determines a coset H , namely { ah : h ∈ H } , which is denoted by aH . The set of all such cosets is denoted by G / H and is a group in the obvious way . For example , if n is a positive integer , we let ( n ) be the subgroup { nx : x ∈ Z } of Z ; then the quotient Z / ( n ) is the group of integers modulo n . A ﬁeld is structure ( K , + , × , 0 , 1 , − ) such that • ( K , + , 0 , − ) is a group ( that is , Abelian group ) , • there is an operation − 1 on K r { 0 } that makes the structure ( K r { 0 } , × , 1 , − 1 ) a group , • multiplication distributes over addition , so that x · ( y + z ) = x · y + x · z . Considered as a ﬁeld , Z / ( p ) is F p . For present purposes , a ring is a substructure of a ﬁeld . Thus every ring R contains 0 and 1 and is closed under + , − , and × ; but R r { 0 } need not be closed under − 1 . A linear ordering of a set A is a relation < on A that is irreﬂex - ive , transitive , and connected : x 6 < y , x < y & y < z = ⇒ x < z , x 6 < y & x 6 = y = ⇒ y < x . An ordered group is a group with a linear ordering that is invariant under translation . This means , if the group is written additively , x < y = ⇒ x + z = y + z . Then the elements x such that x > 0 are positive . Another way to say that an additive group is ordered is that the set of positive ele - ments is closed under addition . An ordered ﬁeld is a ﬁeld K whose January  ,  ,  :  Noon  additive group is so ordered that its positive elements constitute an ordered group K + with respect to multiplication . Every ordered ﬁeld may be assumed to include Q . This is not true for ﬁelds in general , since for example each ﬁeld F p , being ﬁ - nite , cannot include Q . Moreover , some ﬁelds , like C , that do include Q cannot be ordered . The ﬁeld Q ( X ) can be ordered by letting the positive elements be those f such that lim x →∞ f ( x ) > 0 , equiva - lently , the values of f are all positive on some interval ( r , ∞ ) . Every ordered ﬁeld has the absolute - value operation | · | , given by | x | = max { x , − x } . An element of an ordered ﬁeld that is greater in absolute value than every element of Q is called inﬁnite . Non - inﬁnite elements are ﬁnite . The element 0 and the reciprocals of inﬁnite elements are inﬁnitesimal . An ordered ﬁeld with no inﬁnite elements is Archimedean ; with inﬁnite elements , non - Archimedean .  Thus R is Archimedean , but the ﬁeld Q ( X ) , ordered as above , is non - Archimedean , with X being inﬁnite , and X − 1 being a positive in - ﬁnitesimal . If O is a sub - ring of an arbitrary ﬁeld K , and the reciprocal of every element of K r O belongs to O , then O is called a valuation ring of K , and K or more precisely ( K , O ) is a valued ﬁeld . For example , the ﬁnite elements of an ordered ﬁeld constitute a valuation ring of the ﬁeld . Thus every ordered ﬁeld “is” a valued ﬁeld . Using the ordering above , let us denote the ring of ﬁnite elements of Q ( X ) by O ∞ . Then O ∞ = n f ∈ Q ( X ) : (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12) lim x →∞ f ( x ) (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12) < ∞ o . This equation still gives us a valuation ring if we replace ∞ with an  See page  for Archimedes’s axiom .  A . Ordered ﬁelds and valued ﬁelds element a of Q , obtaining O a = n f ∈ Q ( X ) : (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) lim x → a f ( x ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) < ∞ o . If a ∈ Q , then O a arises from the ordering of Q ( X ) according to which the positive elements are those that , as functions , are positive on some interval ( a , a + δ ) . The valuation rings O ∞ and O a of Q ( X ) that we have deﬁned can be deﬁned without use of the ordering of Q . Indeed , we can replace Q with an arbitrary ﬁeld K . We extend the ﬁeld operations on K partially to K ∪ { ∞ } by deﬁning a 6 = ∞ = ⇒ a ± ∞ = ∞ & a ∞ = 0 , a 6 = 0 = ⇒ a · ∞ = ∞ & a 0 = ∞ . We leave ∞ ± ∞ , ∞ / ∞ , 0 · ∞ , and 0 / 0 undeﬁned . However , for every f in K ( X ) and every a in K ∪ { ∞ } , there is a well - deﬁned element f ( a ) of K ∪ { ∞ } , and so we can deﬁne O a = { f ∈ K ( X ) : f ( a ) 6 = ∞ } . This is a valuation ring of K ( X ) , regardless of whether K has an ordering . A unit of a ring R is a nonzero element whose reciprocal also belongs to R . Then the units of R compose a multiplicative group , denoted by R × . For example , Z × = { 1 , − 1 } , but if K is a ﬁeld , then K × = K r { 0 } . An additive subgroup I of R is an ideal of R if every product of an element of I by an element of R is in I , but I is not all of R . In this case R / I is also a well - deﬁned ring . Let ( K , O ) be a valued ﬁeld . One shows that O r O × is an ideal of O . Then it must be a maximal ideal of O and indeed the only maximal ideal of O ;  let us denote it by M O . The multiplicative  Therefore O is called a local ring ; but not every local ring is a valuation ring . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  quotient K × / O × becomes an ordered group by the rule whereby the “negative” elements—the elements less than 1 —are just those cosets a O × such that a ∈ M O . We deﬁne | x | O = ( x O × , if x ∈ K × , 0 , if x = 0 , with 0 being understood as the least element of { 0 } ∪ ( K × / O × ) . Then the function | · | O is a valuation of K , and O can be recovered from this as { x ∈ K : | x | O 6 1 } . The absolute - value function on an Archimedean ordered ﬁeld may be called an Archimedean valuation , and then a valuation in the earlier sense is called a non - Archimedean valuation . Any ﬁeld equipped with a valuation , be it Archimedean or not , can be called a valued ﬁeld . However , we shall see an important ambiguity in this terminology . From Q , we can obtain the ﬁeld R of real numbers in ( at least ) two ways :  . Let ω be the set { 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . } of natural numbers . ( See also page  . ) We deﬁne a Cauchy sequence in Q as usual in calculus : it is a sequence ( a n : n ∈ ω ) of rational numbers such that for every positive rational number ε , there is a natural number k such that , for all natural numbers m and n , k 6 m 6 n = ⇒ | a m − a n | < ε . The Cauchy sequences in Q compose a ring S , and the sequences that converge to 0 compose a maximal ideal M of S . We deﬁne R as the quotient S / M . This is an ordered ﬁeld , and its every Cauchy sequence of converges , and so it is said to be complete as a valued ﬁeld . Also Q embeds densely in R as the set of cosets of constant sequences ; so R is a completion of Q .  . Alternatively , instead of Cauchy sequences , we start with the notion of a Dedekind cut of Q , namely a pair ( A , B ) , where  A . Ordered ﬁelds and valued ﬁelds a ) A and B are nonempty disjoint subsets of Q , b ) every rational number belongs to one of A and B , c ) every number in A is less than every number in B , d ) A contains no greatest number . ( See also page  . ) It will be simpler to think of the set A by itself as the cut , since B can be recovered from A as Q r A . We deﬁne R as the set of cuts of Q . Each rational number a can be identiﬁed with the cut ( in the second sense ) comprising the rational numbers that are less than a . Then R is ordered by inclusion , and every subset of R with an upper bound has a supremum , namely the union of the elements of the subset ; so R is said to be complete as a linearly ordered set . Moreover , addition and multiplication on R can be deﬁned in a natural way . Then these operations are continuous by the usual deﬁnition from calculus , and so the usual properties follow , making R a complete ordered ﬁeld . The two methods of completing Q yield isomorphic results , but should still be distinguished , for the following reasons . Dedekind’s construction can be applied to an arbitrary linearly ordered set . In particular , it can be applied to an arbitrary or - dered ﬁeld . when the ordering is Archimedean , then the resulting completion is also a ﬁeld , isomorphic to R ; but if the ordering is non - Archimedean , then the completion is not a ﬁeld or even an additive group . The Cauchy - sequence construction can also be applied to an arbi - trary ordered ﬁeld , but now it always yields an ordered ﬁeld whose Cauchy sequences converge . If the original ordering is Archimedean , again the result is a ﬁeld isomorphic to R . But suppose we start with Q ( X ) , with the non - Archimedean ordering described above , where f > 0 means lim x →∞ f ( x ) > 0 . Cauchy sequences of Q are not Cauchy sequences of Q ( X ) unless they are eventually constant , since no positive rational number is less than the positive inﬁnites - imal X − 1 . However , for every sequence ( a n : n ∈ ω ) of rational January  ,  ,  :  Noon  numbers , the sequence ( a 0 + a 1 X − 1 + · · · + a n X − n : n ∈ ω ) of polynomials is a Cauchy sequence of Q ( X ) . The quotient of the ring of these sequences by the ideal of sequences that converge to 0 is the ﬁeld Q ( ( X − 1 ) ) , consisting of power series a 0 X m + a 1 X m − 1 + a 2 X m − 2 + · · · , where the coeﬃcients a k are in Q , and m ranges over Z . In the construction of Q ( ( X − 1 ) ) , the role of the absolute - value function | · | could have been played by the valuation | · | O ∞ , with no eﬀect on the result . The same is true for an arbitrary non - Archi - medean ordered ﬁeld ; whether we complete it by using | · | or | · | O ∞ makes no diﬀerence . Using | · | O ∞ relies not on its origin in an ordering , but only on its being a valuation . Thus we can obtain a completion of an arbitrary valued ﬁeld ( K , O ) . For the commonly seen valued ﬁelds ( K , O ) , the value group K × / O × embeds in R + and is therefore Archimedean , even though the valuation | · | O itself is called non - Archimedean . But non - Archi - medean value groups are possible . What is “worse , ” possibly there is no sequence ( ε k : k ∈ ω } of values in K × / O × that converges to 0 . In this case , every Cauchy sequence of K is eventually constant , and in particular it converges . We may then wish to consider sequences ( a α : α < κ ) , where κ is the least of the inﬁnite cardinals λ such that some sequences of length λ in the value group do converge to 0 . The point for now is that the notion of completeness for ordered ﬁelds is ambiguous . Dedekind himself describes his construction as achieving the continuity of R as an ordered ﬁeld [  ] ; this is echoed in the term “continuum . ” Then R is unique as a continuous ordered ﬁeld or continuum , but not as a complete valued ﬁeld . Bibliography [  ] Apollonius of Perga . Apollonius of Perga : Treatise on Conic Sections . University Press , Cambridge , UK ,  . Edited by T . L . Heath in modern notation , with introductions including an essay on the earlier history of the subject . [  ] Apollonius of Perga . Apollonii Pergaei qvae Graece exstant cvm commentariis antiqvis , volume I . Teubner ,  . Edidit et Latine interpretatvs est I . L . Heiberg . [  ] Apollonius of Perga . Conics . Books I – III . Green Lion Press , Santa Fe , NM , revised edition ,  . Translated and with a note and an appendix by R . Catesby Taliaferro , With a preface by Dana Densmore and William H . Donahue , an introduction by Harvey Flaumenhaft , and diagrams by Donahue , Edited by Densmore . [  ] Tom M . Apostol . Mathematical analysis . Addison - Wesley Pub - lishing Co . , Reading , Mass . - London - Don Mills , Ont . , second edition ,  . [  ] Archimedes . The two books On the sphere and the cylinder , volume I of The works of Archimedes . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ,  . Translated into English , together with Eutocius’ commentaries , with commentary , and critical edition of the diagrams , by Reviel Netz . [  ] Carl B . Boyer . A History of Mathematics . John Wiley & Sons , New York ,  .  January  ,  ,  :  Noon  [  ] Richard Dedekind . Essays on the theory of numbers . I : Con - tinuity and irrational numbers . II : The nature and meaning of numbers . authorized translation by Wooster Woodruﬀ Beman . Dover Publications Inc . , New York ,  . [  ] René Descartes . The Geometry of René Descartes . Dover Pub - lications , Inc . , New York ,  . Translated from the French and Latin by David Eugene Smith and Marcia L . Latham , with a facsimile of the ﬁrst edition of  . [  ] René Descartes . The Philosophical Writings of Descartes , vol - ume I . Cambridge University Press ,  . translated by John Cottingham , Robert Stoothoﬀ , and Dugald Murdoch . [  ] Jean Dubois , Henri Mitterand , and Albert Dauzat . Diction - naire d’Étymologie . Larousse , Paris ,  . First edition  . [  ] Euclid . Euclidis Elementa , volume I of Euclidis Opera Omnia . Teubner ,  . Edidit et Latine interpretatvs est I . L . Heiberg . [  ] Euclid . The thirteen books of Euclid’s Elements translated from the text of Heiberg . Vol . I : Introduction and Books I , II . Vol . II : Books III – IX . Vol . III : Books X – XIII and Appendix . Dover Publications Inc . , New York ,  . Translated with introduc - tion and commentary by Thomas L . Heath , nd ed . [  ] Euclid . The Bones . Green Lion Press , Santa Fe , NM ,  . A handy where - to - ﬁnd - it pocket reference companion to Euclid’s Elements . [  ] Euclid . Euclid’s Elements . Green Lion Press , Santa Fe , NM ,  . All thirteen books complete in one volume . The Thomas L . Heath translation , edited by Dana Densmore . [  ] David Fowler . The mathematics of Plato’s academy . Clarendon Press , Oxford , second edition ,  . A new reconstruction .  Bibliography [  ] Carl Friedrich Gauss . Disquisitiones Arithmeticae . Springer - Verlag , New York ,  . Translated into English by Arthur A . Clarke , revised by William C . Waterhouse . [  ] Thomas C . Hales . What is motivic measure ? Bull . Amer . Math . Soc . ( N . S . ) ,  (  ) :  –  ,  . [  ] Robin Hartshorne . Geometry : Euclid and beyond . Undergrad - uate Texts in Mathematics . Springer - Verlag , New York ,  . [  ] T . L . Heath . The Works of Archimedes : Edited in Modern Nota - tion With Introductory Chapters . University Press , Cambridge , UK ,  . [  ] Thomas Heath . A history of Greek mathematics . Vol . II . Dover Publications Inc . , New York ,  . From Aristarchus to Dio - phantus , Corrected reprint of the  original . [  ] Thomas L . Heath , editor . The Method of Archimedes Re - cently Discovered by Heiberg : A supplement to The Works of Archimedes  . University Press , Cambridge , UK ,  . [  ] Leon Henkin . On mathematical induction . Amer . Math . Monthly ,  :  –  ,  . [  ] Herodotus . The Persian Wars , Books I – II , volume  of Loeb Classical Library . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mas - sachusetts and London , England ,  . Translation by A . D . Godley ; ﬁrst published  ; revised ,  . [  ] David Hilbert . The foundations of geometry . Authorized trans - lation by E . J . Townsend . Reprint edition . The Open Court Publishing Co . , La Salle , Ill . ,  . Project Gutenberg edition released December  ,  ( www . gutenberg . net ) . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  [  ] T . F . Hoad , editor . The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology . Oxford University Press , Oxford and New York ,  . Reissued in new covers ,  . [  ] Homer . The Iliad . Loeb Classical Library . Harvard University Press and William Heinemann Ltd , Cambridge , Massachusetts , and London ,  . with an English translation by A . T . Murray . [  ] H . I . Karakaş . Analytic Geometry . M ⊕ V [ Matematik Vakfı ] , [ Ankara ] , n . d . [  ] . [  ] Morris Kline . Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times . Oxford University Press , New York ,  . [  ] Edmund Landau . Foundations of Analysis . The Arithmetic of Whole , Rational , Irrational and Complex Numbers . Chelsea Publishing Company , New York , N . Y . , third edition ,  . Translated by F . Steinhardt ; ﬁrst edition  ; ﬁrst German publication ,  . [  ] Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott . A Greek - English Lex - icon . Clarendon Press , Oxford ,  . revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones , with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie and with the cooperation of many scholars . With a revised supplement . [  ] Barry Mazur . When is one thing equal to some other thing ? In Proof and other dilemmas , MAA Spectrum , pages  –  . Math . Assoc . America , Washington , DC ,  . [  ] William Morris , editor . The Grolier International Dictionary . Grolier Inc . , Danbury , Connecticut ,  . two volumes ; appears to be the American Heritage Dictionary in a diﬀerent cover . [  ] James Morwood , editor . The Pocket Oxford Latin Dictionary . Oxford University Press ,  . First edition published  by Routledge & Kegan Paul .  Bibliography [  ] Murray et al . , editors . The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press ,  . [  ] Alfred L . Nelson , Karl W . Folley , and William M . Borgman . Analytic Geometry . The Ronald Press Company , New York ,  . [  ] Pappus . Pappus Alexandrini Collectionis Quae Supersunt , vol - ume II . Weidmann , Berlin ,  . E libris manu scriptis edidit , Latina interpretatione et commentariis instruxit Frid - ericus Hultsch . [  ] David Pierce . Induction and recursion . The De Morgan Journal ,  (  ) :  –  ,  . http : / / education . lms . ac . uk / 2012 / 04 / david - pierce - induction - and - recursion / . [  ] Proclus . Procli Diadochi in primum Euclidis Elementorum li - brum commentarii . Bibliotheca scriptorum Graecorum et Ro - manorum Teubneriana . In aedibus B . G . Teubneri ,  . Ex recognitione Godofredi Friedlein . [  ] Procopius . On Buildings , volume  of Loeb Classical Library . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , and Lon - don , England , revised edition ,  . with an English translation by H . B . Dewing . [  ] Abraham Robinson . Non - standard analysis . Princeton Land - marks in Mathematics . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ ,  . Reprint of the second (  ) edition , With a foreword by Wilhelmus A . J . Luxemburg . [  ] Lucio Russo . The forgotten revolution . Springer - Verlag , Berlin ,  . How science was born in  BC and why it had to be reborn , translated from the  Italian original by Silvio Levy . January  ,  ,  :  Noon  [  ] R . W . Sharpe . Diﬀerential geometry , volume  of Gradu - ate Texts in Mathematics . Springer - Verlag , New York ,  . Cartan’s generalization of Klein’s Erlangen program , With a foreword by S . S . Chern . [  ] Walter W . Skeat . A Concise Etymological Dictionary of the English Language . Perigee Books , New York ,  . First edition  ; original date of this edition not given . [  ] Michael Spivak . Calculus . nd ed . Berkeley , California : Publish or Perish , Inc . XIII ,  pp . ,  . [  ] Ivor Thomas , editor . Selections illustrating the history of Greek mathematics . Vol . I . From Thales to Euclid , volume  of Loeb Classical Library . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass . ,  . With an English translation by the editor . [  ] Ivor Thomas , editor . Selections illustrating the history of Greek mathematics . Vol . II . From Aristarchus to Pappus , volume  of Loeb Classical Library . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass ,  . With an English translation by the editor . [  ] John von Neumann . On the introduction of transﬁnite numbers . In Jean van Heijenoort , editor , From Frege to Gödel : A source book in mathematical logic ,  –  , pages  –  . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ,  . First published  .