Dedre Gentner University of Washington Children ' s Performance on a Spatial Analogies Task GENTNER , DEDRE . Children ' s Performance on a Spatial Analogies Task . CHILD DEVELOPMENT , 1977 , 48 , 1034 - 1039 . Young children performed as well as or better than adults on tasks requiring use of spatial analogies . The tasks involved body - parts analogies , such as , " If this [ pictured ] mountain had a knee , where would it be ? " The entities referred to were physical objects familiar to young children , and this question format clearly called for analogical responding . Thus , sources of confusion were minimized . In a pilot study , it was shown that preschool children could ' apply such body - parts analogies to pictures as consistently as adults . The mappings were then made more difficult by varying the orientation of the pictured objects or by adding misleading pictorial details to the pictured objects . Adults performed somewhat less consistently than pre - schoolers and first graders when misleading details were present ; there were no age differences when orientation was varied . These results suggest that analogical ability is present at a very early age . The development of metaphorical and analogical ability is not well understood . On the one hand , very young children produce many seemingly metaphorical utterances ( Bloom 1973 ; Carlson & Anisfeld 1969 ; Chukovsky 1968 ) . An example is a 15 - month - old girl who used " moon " to refer not only to the real moon but also to such di - verse objects as a half - grapefruit and a hang - nail ( Bowerman 1976 ) . Recent work by Thom - son and Chapman ( Note 1 ) indicates that not all early overextensions are errors in stored word meanings , opening the possibility that at least some of them are metaphorical . On the other hand , experimental research on metaphor suggests that metaphorical ability is acquired late in development , after the ac - quisition of basic language skills ( Asch & Ner - love 1960 ; Inhelder & Piaget 1958 ; Jacobson 1960 ; Kogan , Note 2 ; Winner , Note 3 ; Winner & Rosenstiel , Note 4 ) . The plan of this paper is , first , to discuss some problems with the previous research ; second , to propose an al - ternative approach based on an analysis of the mapping process underlying metaphor and analogy ; and third , to describe a study based on this approach . Studies of metaphorical development typically have utilized rather complex tasks ; children are asked to produce or select a metaphor appropriate to a given context , or to explain a metaphor presented by the experi - menter . Performance on these tasks increases over the age range of roughly 6 years to adolescence . However , factors other than metaphorical ability contribute to this trend . The first of these factors is prelearning of familiar metaphors . Many of the metaphors used in these studies occur frequently enough to allow prelearning of their metaphorical in - terpretations . For example , the term " sweet " as applied to a person can be understood by simple retrieval of the prelearned meaning of " sweet " as applied to people rather than being metaphorically interpreted from knowledge of the term " sweet " as applied to flavors . When familiar metaphors are used in an experiment , older children may perform better than younger children because of greater vocabulary experience and not be - cause of greater metaphorical or analogical ability . A second factor is the child ' s concep - tual knowledge , or lack of knowledge , of the domain from which the metaphor is taken and I thank Albert Stevens , who collaborated in developing the model and the experimental paradigm , Andrew Meltzoff and Donald Norman for their helpful continents on earlier drafts of this paper , and Cheryl Roald for her help in devising stimuli and in testing subjects . I also thank the staff and teachers of the University of Washington Preschool , Temple Day Care Center , and Decatur Elementary School , Seattle , for their cooperation . Requests for reprints should be ad - dressed to Dedre Gentner , Bolt Baranek and Newman , Inc . , 50 Moulton Street , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02138 . [ Child Development , 1977 , 48 , 1034 - 1039 . © 1977 by the Society for Research in Child Development , Inc . All rights reserved . ] of the domain in which it ample , young child ? " en may turally agreed - upon syste traits and emotional states in order to apply sue " hard / soft " or " sweet / bittel inappropriate use of sue ] stem not from lack of metal from lack of the conceptual sary to correctly apply that A third factor that mu ; the child ' s understanding c use metaphor . Young chilc tion like " Can a person b , more likely than older child their literal knowledge of being called into question , erally even if they are capat responding . Thus , font sponses may stem from m the task . Finally , much of on metaphor has requires ments in order to convert sponses into some classific : as " metaphorical / literal / the priate / inappropriate . " Thi may be necessary for cert : it opens the possibility of bias . To study metaphor sep factors , we must begin witl eration of the nature of mete Verbrugge ( Note 5 ) has al and analogy into three pa : vehicle to which the topic the ground , or shared rese topic and vehicle . He ha that the ground - the set monalities - plays an impoi ory for metaphors and anal Note 5 ; Verbrugge & Mc The work presented hei similar but more detailed ai and analogies are mapping tic region ( the domain of ( the range of application ) , certain semantic relationsh exist in the range . These ships are the equivalent ground : they constitute t tween the two entities beir analysis of the ground into relationships will be useful jective criterion for metaph As an illustration , cc metaphor used by Verbrug , DEVELOPMENT m tasks requiring If this [ pictured ] it objects familiar sponding . Thus , of children could ) pings were then Iding misleadin g istently than pre . o age differences present at a very developmentcomplex tasks ; ce or select a , n context , or to by the experi - tasks increases hly 6 years to ors other than • to this trend . prelearning of the metaphors fluently enough ietaphorical in - • term " sweet " understood by ned meaning of - le rather than ~ rpreted from t " as applied to Hors are used in • may perform en because of : e and not be - d or analogical child ' s concep - ) wledge , of the hor is taken and the experimental n earlier drafts of jects . I also thank Care Center , and nts should be ad - treet , Cambridge , ) pment , Inc . All rights o f the , Liomain in which it is applied . For ex - ample , young , childrien may not know the cul - turally agreed - upon systems of personality traits . and emotional states that must be used in order to apply such metaphors as " hard / soft " or " sweet / bitter " to people . Their inappropriate use of such metaphors may stem not from lack of metaphorical ability but from lack of the conceptual knowledge neces - sary to correctly apply that ability . A third factor that must be controlled is the child ' s understanding of the invitation to use metaphor . Young children given a ques - tion like " Can a person be sweet ? " may be more likely than older children to assume that heir literal knowledge of word meaning is being called into question , and to respond lit - erally even if they are capable of metaphorical responding . Thus , nonmetaphorical re - sponses may stem from misinterpretation of the task . Finally , much of the previous work on metaphor has required subjective judg - ments in order to convert the subject ' s re - sponses into some classificatory scheme such as metaphorical / literal / thematic " or " appro - priate / inappropriate . " This subjective step may be necessary for certain questions , but it opens the possibility of an adult - centered bias . To study metaphor separately from other factors , we must begin with a careful consid - eration of the nature of metaphorical thinking . Verbrugge ( Note 5 ) has analyzed metaphor and analogy into three parts : the topic , the vehicle to which the topic is compared , and the ground , or shared resemblance between topic and vehicle . He has found evidence that the ground - the set of implicit com - monalities - plays an important role in mem - ory for metaphors and analogies ( Verbrugge , Note 5 ; Verbrugge & McCarrell , Note 6 ) . The work presented here is based on a similar but more detailed analysis : metaphors and analogies are mappings from one seman - tic region ( the domain of origin ) to another ( the range of application ) , which convey that certain semantic relationships in the domain exist in the range . These semantic relation - ships are the equivalent of Verbrugge ' s ground : they constitute the similarity be - tween the two entities being compared . This analysis of the ground into a set of semantic relationships will be useful in devising an ob - jective criterion for metaphoric performance . As an illustration , consider a sample metaphor used by Verbrugge ( Note 5 ) : " Tree Dedre Gentner 1035 trunks are straws for thirsty leaves and branches . " In Verbrugg _ e ' s analysis , the topic is " tree trunks , " the vehicle is " straws , " and the ground is " are tubes which conduct water to where it ' s needed " ( Verbrugge , Note 5 , p . 2 ) . In the more detailed analysis proposed here , the metaphor is seen as a mapping . from the domain of a person drinking a beverage through a straw to the range of a tree . The drinker is mapped onto the leaves and branches , the straw onto the trunk , and the beverage in its container onto water in the ground . Certain conceptual relationships are preserved in the mapping : as the drinker wants the beverage , the leaves want ( are thirsty for ) water ; as the straw conveys the beverage , the trunk conveys the water ; as the beverage nourishes the drinker , the water nourishes the leaves . According to this analysis , a single metaphorical utterance can simultaneously convey several different similarities between the domain and the range . In fact , to be con - sidered interesting , a metaphor or analogy must convey several ideas ( Ortony 1975 ) . Generally , the more concepts an analogy or metaphor maps from domain onto range , the better it is thought to be , provided the map - ping is internally consistent , that is , provided that the relations mapped from the domain can be applied in the range without contradic - tion . This formulation implies that the number of concepts mapped and the rela - tional consistency of the mapping are impor - tant in all such comparisons , whether metaphorical or analogical . The distinction between analogy and metaphor is one of func - tion : comparisons used to serve an artistic or literary purpose are called metaphors , while comparisons used as explanatory devices are called analogies . Therefore , novelty and con - notative appropriateness enter into judgments of goodness of metaphors , while analogies are more likely to be evaluated only on the number and consistency of the component mappings . It has been shown that the ability to choose novel or appropriate metaphorical mappings increases with age ( Winner , Rosen - stiel , & Gardner 1976 ; Kogan , Note 2 ) . The pre - sent work focuses instead on an ability com - mon to both analogical and metaphorical pro - cessing : the ability to preserve semantic rela - tions during analogical mappings . A class of spatial analogies was chosen such that all three aspects - the domain , the range , and the rel - 1036 C 41d ' Development evant relational system - were familiar to pre - school children . The question then was whether children would be able to map con - sistently , given these familiar materials . Children ' and adults were asked to map from the domain , a human body , to the range , a concrete object . For example , a child was shown a picture of a mountain and asked , " If the mountain had a knee , where would it be ? " The child responded by pointing to some point on the picture . After several different body parts had been mapped onto mountains , the child ' s responses were combined and a measure of consistency was computed . The set of body parts is connected by a set of tran - sitive vertical relations : the head is above the shoulders , the shoulders above the stomach , and so on . These relations should be pre - served in a good analogy . Thus , the number of vertical reversals in the range ( the mountain ) was the measure of performance ; the lower the number of reversals , the better the per - formance . In the preliminary experiment , 4 - year - olds and adults performed equally well in a task in which body parts and face parts were mapped onto mountains or trees . This lack of age differences could not be entirely dismissed as a ceiling effect , for both groups performed significantly better when mapping all body parts onto one picture than when mapping each body part onto a separate pic - ture , and there was no interaction between age and mode of mapping . It thus appeared that 4 - year - olds possessed the ability to per - form simple mappings . In the present experiment , two mapping tasks were designed to be more difficult than simple body - parts mappings . In the first task , the orientation of the range picture was var - ied . Body parts were mapped onto trees which were right - side up , upside - down , or horizontal . Correct performance required that subjects map the terms consistently with re - spect to the vertical axis of the tree , and not the axis of the picture . The task required the equivalent of a mental rotation to align the up - down axis of body terms with the down - up or right - left axis of the tree . In the second task , misleading local details were added to the range pictures . The task was to map two face parts - eyes and mouth - onto mountains which had feature - like crags in the following configurations : eyes above mouth , eyes on the same level as mouth , or eyes below mouth . Correct performance required that the eyes be placed above the mouth , regardless of the configuration of features in the picture . The subject had to ignore the local details in order to preserve the abstract set of spatial relations . Method Subjects The subjects were 10 preschool children , aged 4 - 4 to 5 - 2 ; 10 first - grade children , aged 6 - 7 to 7 - 1 ; and 10 college sophomores en - rolled in psychology classes at the University of Washington . Initially , 14 preschoolers , 10 first graders , and 16 sophomores were tested . Two adults and two preschool children who failed to interpret the orientation task cor - rectly were omitted . An additional four adults and two preschoolers were randomly elimi - nated to reduce the number of subjects to 10 in each age group , for ease of analysis . TaskOrientation task . - Subjects were re - quired to map the six body parts - head , shoulders , arms , stomach , knees , and feet - onto trees in either upright , horizontal , or upside - down orientation with respect to the subject . Two modes of mapping were used : the connected mode , in which all six body - part terms were mapped onto one picture , and the discrete mode , in which the six terms were mapped one at a time onto separate pic - tures . The design was age ( three levels ) x ori - entation ( three levels ) x mode of mapping ( two levels ) . Local - features task . - Subjects were required to map two face parts - eyes and mouth - onto mountains drawn with eyelike details either above , below , or on a level with a mouthlike detail . Only the discrete mode of mapping was used . For each configuration , subjects performed two mappings , one of the eyes and one of the mouth . These two map - pings were compared to yield a single mea - sure of the relative vertical positions of eyes and mouth . The design was age ( three levels ) x configuration ( three levels ) . Stimulus Material There were 37 pictures : seven trees in each of three orientations , used in the orienta - tion task ; two mountains in each of three fea - ture configurations , used in the local - features task ; and 10 filler pictures of animals . Order of presentation was randomized . Sample stimuli are shown in figure 1 . iat the eyes he Irdless of th e Picture . The letails in Ord ( , r atial relations . ~ hool children , children , aged ) phomores en - the University reschoolers , 10 es were tested . 1 children who ation task cor - onal four adults andomly elimi - f subjects to 10 analysis . jects were re - y parts - head , : pees , and feet t , horizontal , or I respect to the ) ing were used : ch all six body - one picture , and h the six terms rito separate pic - ree levels ) X ori - ode of mapping - Subjects were parts - eyes and , vn with eyelike ) r on a level with discrete mode of : h configuration , pings , one of the These two map - Id a single mea - positions of eyes age ( three levels ) ; ) . s : seven trees in ; ed in the orienta - each of three fea - the local - features animals . Order of d . Sample stimuli FIG . 1 . - Sample stimuli . The top pictures were used in the orientation task ; the bottom pictures were , Ised in the local - features task . ProcedureThe question put to the subjects was , " If this [ range object ] had a [ domain part ] , where would it be ? " Children were tested individu - ally . They were questioned orally and re - sponded by pointing to the picture . The ex - perimenter marked the picture at the place ( s ) indicated by the child . Adults were tested in groups of about six . Their pictures were pre - sented in booklets , with the part to be mapped printed in the corner of each picture . Adults marked their own pictures . ScoringFor each pictured object , the vertical dis - tance between the base of the object and the point ( s ) marked was measured with a ruler and recorded as a portion of the overall height of the object . ( When more than one point was marked for a given response , e . g . , for eyes or shoulders , the mean height of the points was used . ) Then all the heights of a given mapping ( e . g . , body onto tree ) were compared to yield the number of vertical reversals in the map - ping . In connected mode , all heights came from one picture ; in discrete mode , heights were compared across several pictures . A ver - tical reversal was defined as a reversal in the proportionate heights of two ( body or face ) parts between the domain ( the human body or face ) and the range ( tree , mountain , etc . ) . For example , the ordering " nose , mouth , eyes , chin " contains two reversals : eyes / mouth and eyes / nose . Interjudge agreement on number of re - versals was close to perfect ; only one dis - agreement was found when a sample of 100 responses were independently scored by a second judge . Results Orientation Task Table 1 shows the mean number of rever - sals across age . All groups performed well ; the mean number of reversals ranged from 0 . 6 to 0 . 9 reversals per mapping across age groups . There were no significant effects of age , ac - cording to a mixed - design analysis of vari - ance . The effects of mode of mapping were significant across age , F ( 1 , 27 ) = 29 . 1 , p < . 01 ; both adults and children performed better in connected mode than in discrete mode . The interaction between age and mode of map - ping was nonsignificant . Thus , the non - significance of age as a main effect cannot be dismissed as a ceiling effect ; at least in discrete mode , any age differences present had the opportunity to display themselves . The only significant interaction was that of age by orientation , F ( 4 , 54 ) = 2 . 7 , p < . 05 . This inter - action apparently reflects the fact that , while TABLE 1 MEAN NUMBERS OF REVERSALS IN ORIENTATION TASK , BY AGE ORIENTATION AGE GROUP Preschool First Grade Adult Upright : Connected . . . 1 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 3 Discrete 1 . 5 0 . 6 1 . 0 Upside down : Connected . . . 0 . 3 0 . 3 0 . 4 Discrete 1 . 3 0 . 7 1 . 6 Horizontal : Connected . . . 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 9 Discrete 0 . 8 1 . 5 1 . 1 Mean 0 . 87 0 . 60 0 . 88 1038 Child Development both groups of children made fewer reversals than adults in the two nonvertical orienta - tions , preschoolers made larger numbers of reversal errors than adults in the standard up - right orientation . Local - Features Task Table 2 shows the mean number of errors . in each of the three local - features conditions , by age . A mixed - measures analysis of variance revealed significant effects of age , F ( 2 , 27 ) = 5 . 7 , p < . 01 . A post hoc Scheffe test for differ - ences between specific means revealed that the adult group produced significantly more ties and reversals than the two groups of chil - dren , whose scores did not differ significantly from each other . Adults made most errors when eyelike and mouthlike details were on the same level , reflected in part in a significant interaction between age and local details , F ( 4 , 54 ) = 3 . 3 , p < . 05 . Adults appeared to be more influenced than children by the local features in the range pictures . This possibility was investi - gated by comparing subjects ' use of all details present in the pictures - not only the eyelike and mouthlike features which were manipu - lated , but also the less prominent crags which were present for verisimilitude . The age dif - ferences in propensity to point to details were quite strong . All adults used details in most or all of their mappings , whereas seven out of the 10 preschoolers and five out of 10 first graders never used any details . Out of the 60 individual mappings performed by each age group , 59 of the adult mappings involved use of one or more details , as compared with 17 for first graders and seven for preschoolers . Discussion This task avoids the methodological difficulties described earlier : differential familiarity with the conceptual domains , dif - TABLE 2 MEAN NUMBERS OF REVERSALS IN LOCAL - FEATURES TASK , BY AGE AGE GROUP LOCAL CONFIGURATION Preschool First Grade Adult ferential prelearning of items , and differential interpretation of the task . The conceptual do - mains of body parts and of common physical objects are familiar even to preschool chil - dren ; the mappings are not conventional metaphors that older children might have learned in advance ; and the phrasing of the question makes it clear that the child is to use an analogical interpretation . Finally , there is an objective criterion for level of perfor - mance . Under these conditions , children per - formed extremely well . In the orientation task , there were no significant age differences between preschoolers , first graders , and adults . In the local - features task , which did show significant age effects , children per - formed better than adults . It is tempting to describe the adult performance in the lan - guage often used to describe similar findings concerning children , claiming that adults showed an inability to preserve an abstract set of conceptual relations in the face of conflicting concrete details . Alternatively , one might conclude that the adults had inter - preted the task in a more complex manner than the children , or that they were attempt - ing a more artistic solution to the mapping problem , or that they strove for a more precise comparison between domain and range . The relatively poor performance of adults in this task may be an indication of the importance of factors other than simple consistency in the later development of analogical and metaphorical processing . Nevertheless , the consistency with which young children per - formed these tasks is surprising . These results indicate that basic analogi - cal ability is well developed in preschool children . This is not to say that there are no differences between adults and children in ability to use figurative language . The ap - proach taken here emphasizes consistency of analogical application , bypassing the more creative aspects of metaphorical language . Nevertheless , these results weaken the posi - tion that young children lack metaphorical ability , and are compatible with the hypothesis that such ability is present at the outset of language use . Since no children ofan intermediate age were tested , these results are also compatible with the position that metaphorical development is curvilinear , with very young children and adults showing l . igh€ r nE i . , nc a ; F ? l , _ a hi1clr in the in - termecllate age rangy c ( Gardner 197 - 1 : Gardner , Kircher , A ' inner , & 1 ' erkios 19i7 5 5i . Reference Notes 1 . 2 . 3 . Thomson , J . , & Cl " Daddy " ( revisited ) : olds ' overextended prehension . Paper p Annual Stanford C1 Forum , Stanford , Cal Kogan , N . Metaphoric velopmental and indi Paper presented at tl for Research in Chil April 1975 . Winner , E . Can p metaphoric figures ? " And Pharoah ' s heart sensitivity to figurat , presented at the mee search in Child De , 1975 . 4 ` , - Winner , E . , & Rosei ment of metaphoric sented in part at the Research in Child D 1975 . 5 . Verbrugge , R . R . TI ogy . Paper present Midwestern Psyc Chicago , May 1 - 3 , 1 6 . Verbrugge , R . R . , & inference in the co Paper presented at western Psycholog May 12 , 1973 . References Asch , S . E . , & Nerlov , Eyes above mouth . . . 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 4 Eyes same level as mouth 0 . 1 0 0 . 7 Eyes below mouth . . . 0 . 2 0 0 . 4 ifferential ' ptual do - ' physical hoof chit - ventional ight have ing of the d is to use y , there is ) f perfor - lren per - rientationifferenceslers , and which did dren per - mpting to i the lan - ir findings pat adults bstract set face of avely , one iad inter - x manner attempt - mapping re precise ange . The Its in this ortance of icy in the ical and eless . the dren per - c analogi - preschool ire are no iildren in . The ap - istency of the more language . the posi - taphorical with the ent at the dren of an se results ition that rvilinear , s showing in the in - Gardner , Reference Notes Thomson , J . , & Chapman , R . S . Who is " Daddy " ( revisited ) : the status of two - year - olds ' overextended words in use and com - prehension . Paper presented at the Seventh Annual Stanford Child Language Research Forum , Stanford , Calif . , April 1975 . Kogan , N . Metaphoric thinking in children : de - velopmental and individual - difference aspects . Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Denver , April 1975 . Winner , E . Can pre - adolescents produce metaphoric figures ? In H . Gardner ( Chair ) , " And Pharoah ' s heart hardened . . . " : children ' s sensitivity to figurative language . Symposium presented at the meeting of the Society for Re - search in Child Development , Denver , April 1975 . - Winner , E . , & Rosenstiel , A . K . The develop - ment of metaphoric understanding . Paper pre - sented in part at the meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Denver , April 1975 . Verbrugge , R . R . The comprehension of anal - ogy . Paper presented at the meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Chicago , May 1 - 3 , 1975 . 6 . Verbrugge , R . R . , & McCarrell , N . S . The role of inference in the comprehension of metaphor . Paper presented at the meeting of the Mid - western Psychological Association , Chicago , May 12 , 1973 . 5 . References Asch , S . E . , & Nerlove , H . The development of Dedre Gentner 1039 double function terms in children : an explora - tory investigation . In B . Kaplan & S . Wapner ( Eds . ) , Perspectives in psychological theory . New York : International Universities Press , 1960 . Bloom , L . One word at a time : the use of single word utterances before syntax . The Hague : Mouton , 1973 . Bowerman , M . Semantic factors in the acquisition of rules for word use and sentence construction . In D . Morehead & A . Morehead ( Eds . ) , Di - rections in normal and deficient child lan - guage . Baltimore : University Park Press , 1976 . Carlson , P . , & Anisfeld , M . Some observations on the linguistic competence of a two - year - old child . Child Development , 1969 , 40 , 565 - 575 . Chukovsky , K . [ From two to five ] ( M . Morton , trans . ) . Berkeley : University of California Press , 1968 . LGardner , H . Metaphors and modalities : how chil - dren project polar adjectives onto diverse do - mains . Child Development , 1974 , 45 , 84 - 91 . 1 . Gardner , H . ; Kircher , M . ; Winner , E . ; & Perkins , D . Children ' s metaphoric productions and prefer - ences . Journal of Child Language , 1975 , 2 , 1 - 17 . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . The growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence . New York : Basic , 1958 . Jacobson , R . Linguistics and poetics . In T . Sebeok ( Ed . ) , Style in language . Cambridge , Mass . : M . I . T . Press , 1960 . Ortony , A . Why metaphors are necessary and not just nice . Educational Theory , 1975 , 25 , 45 - 53 . Winner , E . ; Rosenstiel , A . K . ; & Gardner , H . The development of metaphoric understanding . Developmental Psychology , 1976 . 2 , 289 - 297 .