City , University of London Institutional Repository Citation : Maiden , N . ORCID : 0000 - 0001 - 6233 - 8320 , Brock , G . , Zachos , K . ORCID : 0000 - 0003 - 1977 - 7090 and Brown , A . ( 2018 ) . Making the News : Digital Creativity Support for Journalists . In : CHI ' 18 Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ( 475 . ) . New York , USA : ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 This is the accepted version of the paper . This version of the publication may differ from the final published version . Permanent repository link : http : / / openaccess . city . ac . uk / 19351 / Link to published version : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174049 . Copyright and reuse : City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City , University of London available to a wider audience . Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author ( s ) and / or copyright holders . URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and linked to . City Research Online : http : / / openaccess . city . ac . uk / publications @ city . ac . uk City Research Online Making the News : Digital Creativity Support for Journalists Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , Amanda Brown , George Brock City , University of London 106 Bunhill Row , London EC1Y 8TZ UK N . A . M . Maiden @ city . ac . uk Lars Nyre , Aleksander Nygård Tonheim University of Bergen , P . O . Box 7800 5020 Bergen Norway , Lars . Nyre @ uib . no Dimitris Apostolou Institute Communica - tion and Computer Systems , 15780 Zo - grafou , Greece DApost @ mail . ntua . gr Jeremy Evans Explaain Ltd Urban Innovation Centre , 1 Sekforde Street , London EC1R0BE UK jeremy @ explaain . com ABSTRACT This paper reports the design and first evaluations of new digital support for journalists to discover and examine crea - tive angles on news stories under development . The support integrated creative news search algorithms , interactive crea - tive sparks and reusable concept cards into one daily work tool of journalists . The first evaluations of INJECT by jour - nalists in their places of work to write published news sto - ries revealed that the journalists generated new angles on existing stories rather than new stories , changed their writ - ing behaviour , and reported evidence that INJECT use had the potential to increase the objectivity and the boldness of journalism methods used . Author Keywords Creativity support ; journalism ; Google Docs Add - on ACM Classification Keywords D . 5 . 2 [ User Interfaces ] : User - centered design , voice I / O General Terms Design , human factors INTRODUCTION Journalism involves the search for [ 3 ] and critical analysis of information [ 21 ] to create news stories and reports . How journalists discover and select sources of this information is important , both to avoid bias and to be credible and trusted . However , discovering and examining information sources takes time – time that journalists increasingly lack as news and media organizations are squeezed by reducing circula - tions , revenues and staff numbers [ 29 ] . As a consequence , many journalists use subsets of available and familiar in - formation sources to create stories in the limited time avail - able . However , this behaviour that can reduce the number and diversity of angles used to report news , as well as weaken the role the journalism in democracies [ 3 ] because citizens lack enough information to hold the powerful to account . Journalism is one of the creative industries . Most journalists exhibit professional - level creativity because their news sto - ries generate income and provide a living [ 14 ] . However , support for journalist creative thinking is limited . Most con - tent management systems and search engines only have keyword search functions to discover information sources [ 18 ] , and require journalists already to know and describe the creative angles to investigate . Interactive creativity sup - port tools exist for different creative industries ( e . g . [ 1 , 13 ) ] , but newsrooms lack the digital support to discover possible creative angles on news stories , i . e . stories that are novel and have value to their organisations , their readers and their democracies [ 3 ] . This paper reports new digital creativity support for use by journalists . The tool , called INJECT , integrated natural lan - guage processing , creativity search algorithms and interac - tive creative sparks . To support use by journalists , INJECT was implemented as an Add - on sidebar for the Google Docs text editor often used by journalists , so that its creativ - ity support was visible next to the story being written . The support had the potential to both relieve journalists of a demanding process that is difficult to do well under time pressure , as well as to expand possibilities open to journal - ists . The next 3 sections summarize the creativity challeng - es that newsrooms face , report digital creativity support generated in different creative industries , and define crea - tivity in newsroom journalism . The paper then describes INJECT’s interactive creativity support and software archi - tecture , and how the creativity support was designed within the Add - on sidebar’s constraints . It then reports results from first evaluations of the effect of INJECT use on how journalists discovered news stories . It ends with threats to the validity of the early evaluation results , limitations and conclusions , and how INJECT might be deployed more effectively in newsrooms . RELATED WORK Surprisingly few studies to inform the design of new digital support for journalists have been reported . Exceptions were the design implications for future tools to discover local news information sources reported in [ 9 ] , and the Maater system that corrected news misinformation using high - ranking crowd - sourced entries [ 16 ] . To workaround the lack of digital tools to support creativity , some journalists have adopted general - purpose ones such as import . io and www . social - searcher . com that keyword - search multiple social media channels but not news information sources , and present comparative results . However , these tools were neither tailored to support journalist tasks nor provided ex - plicit support for discovering creative angles on stories . Other digital journalism tools have implemented artificial intelligence techniques . For example , the Alchemy API was developed to support journalists to make sense of unstruc - tured natural language data and generate human insights using text analysis and visualization mechanisms . Likewise the NewsReader tool implemented text analysis and artifi - cial intelligence mechanisms to build structured event in - dexes of large volumes of financial and economic data for decision making from news content [ 23 ] . However , none of these tools had capabilities to search information sources to discover possible creative angles on future stories , or to support human creative thinking to examine these angles . Unlike in journalism , digital creativity support has been implemented for professionals in other creative industries such as the performing arts , music , and film and television [ 1 , 13 ] . Examples of the digital support include StoryCrate , a collaborative editing tool developed to drive users’ crea - tive workflows within a location - based television produc - tion environment [ 4 ] and Trigger Shift , which appropriated information technologies into performance art in theatre [ 25 ] . More recent studies have revealed the need to inte - grate this digital creativity support into daily work practic - es . Not only does this avoid imposing additional cognitive load on professionals , but it also supports pain - free experi - mentation [ 10 ] . It can also deliver simultaneous productivi - ty and creativity benefits to these professionals [ 17 ] . TODAY’S CRISIS IN JOURNALISM The digitalization of the production , distribution and con - sumption of news has led many news businesses to become uncompetitive [ 6 ] . The result has been a decade - long crisis in journalism . Even though this crisis has required news businesses to operate more competitively [ 24 ] , many work practices have remained unchanged , due in part to the con - servative attitudes of journalists [ 7 ] . Newsrooms have not adopted many new digital tools , even though the need to discover and examine information from multiple sources had been recognized widely ( e . g . [ 30 ] ) . That said , case studies reveal that journalists are still moti - vated by opportunities to develop new skills , including new creative skills [ 19 ] . Indeed , investigative and visual journal - ism demand new forms of creative search and association . Computational exploration in journalism increasingly in - volves creative thinking at the intersection of journalism and data technology . This creative thinking transcends geo - graphical , disciplinary and linguistic boundaries [ 11 ] . Mul - ti - skilled journalists have more control over their work and are more creative [ 33 ] , although the high demands of daily production mean that many have struggled to develop these creative capabilities to their full potential . Amabile identified that people who are not expert in crea - tivity work need task motivation , domain - specific skills and creativity skills to produce creative outcomes [ 2 ] . Whilst most journalists are motivated and have journalism skills , most journalists also lack the creativity skills that are need - ed [ 19 ] . Therefore , inspired and informed by the challenge to design new digital tools for journalists that exploit oppor - tunities to support their development and use of creative thinking skills , a new interdisciplinary collaboration be - tween journalists and computer scientists formed . The new collaboration developed digital creativity support for newsroom journalists to : R1 ) discover angles on news stories that are more creative than at present , from more information sources , in order to be more credible and trust - ed ; R2 ) discover new angles more productively than at pre - sent , to be creative with less resources in order to enable their newsrooms to operate more competitively [ 24 ] ; R3 ) use the creativity support in their everyday work tools , to encourage more journalists to adopt it , and ; R4 ) learn good creative practices of more experienced journalists , because journalists seek new creative thinking skills [ 19 ] . The focus was on support for rather than automation of the work of journalists – journalists using the digital support were still expected to browse news information , discover angles on stories and write stories with these angles . This paper re - ports the research to achieve requirements R1 , R2 and R3 , and first evaluations of the new digital creativity support by journalists to investigate 2 research questions . REFRAMING JOURNALISM AS LITTLE - C CREATIVITY To design the digital support needed by journalists , the col - laboration developed a definition of creativity that was spe - cialized to newsroom journalism . Although many journal - ists engage in professional - level creativity [ 14 ] , much of their daily work writing news stories can be characterized as little - c creativity – daily activities not perceived to be creative [ 14 ] , and undertaken by people who are not expert with creativity skills . Therefore , building on established definitions that creativity produces outcomes that are novel and appropriate to the task [ 27 ] , little - c creativity in news - room journalism was defined as activities to write news stories that are novel to the journalist and appropriate for publication . Furthermore , to distinguish these activities from straightforward news reporting , the journalist uses his or her creativity skills to generate the knowledge incorpo - rated into the news stories and / or use in the activities to write the news stories , to render the stories novel . This con - trasts with traditional news reporting , in which the journal - ist acts primarily as a stenographer who reports facts as accurately as possible , and does not introduce new knowledge that s / he generates . For example , a journalist on a local newspaper who reports important facts from a town hall meeting that might be new to the journalist , such as a planning decision , is not engaged in little - c creativity because no creativity skills are used and no new knowledge is generated . In contrast , if the journalist uses creativity skills to generate new knowledge about , for example , a connection between this decision and the busi - ness interests of a politician , and this new angle is appropri - ate for publication , then the journalist exhibits little - c crea - tivity in newsroom journalism . Likewise , if the journalist interviews the politician to acquire more information based on the knowledge generated , then s / he is also exhibiting little - c creativity in newsroom journalism . However , as newsrooms lack the resources [ 6 ] to train jour - nalists to acquire creativity skills using traditional methods , a new digital tool was investigated to support newsroom journalists to use simple creativity skills interactively to discover creative angles on news stories more productively using their everyday work tools . INJECT’S DIGITAL CREATIVITY SUPPORT INJECT is a new digital support tool for individual journal - ists to discover and examine creative angles on news stories under development . It was built to support human - centred creative cognition [ 15 ] , in which idea generation about new angles took place concurrently with information search . INJECT searched news information with creative strategies that codified the expertise of experienced journalists . It supported idea generation by presenting the retrieved news information and interactive sparks that codified creativity heuristics . The presented news information and sparks were designed to encourage individual journalists to use and learn simple creativity skills . INJECT was made available to an individual journalist as a single sidebar , so that the journalist could start news information searches and gener - ate ideas about new angles next to a new story being writ - ten . As such , INJECT did not automate most of the journal - ist’s work . The journalist still needed to understand and select between recommendations to discover angles , as well as examine , interpret , style and present [ 26 ] new articles . INJECT’s User - Centred Design The interaction design of INJECT [ 18 ] involved journalists at all stages . After semi - structured interviews with journal - ism experts to discover the digital tools that journalists cur - rently use , a decision was made to implement INJECT with Google Docs . Many journalists use Google Docs instead of bespoke news content management systems for early story development because of its familiarity , flexibility and high - er number of useful features . To kick - start the user - centred design , different paper - based then digital wireframes of the sidebar were developed and presented to professional jour - nalists . Over the next 8 months , new releases of the work - ing INJECT software were tested for their usability and effectiveness , first with journalism students who had no direct relationship to the authors [ 18 ] , then with profession - al journalists working in UK magazines , regional Norwe - gian newspapers and networks of freelance journalists in the Netherlands . INJECT’s Sidebar : A Google Docs Add - on To support journalists to undertake the pain - free explora - tion of information and ideas that was associated with crea - tive thinking [ 10 ] , INJECT’s digital creativity support was integrated into the Google Docs editor . Google supported a research sidebar of the editor window called the Google Docs Add - on that allowed a user to start searches and browse results [ 31 ] . The team decided to deliver INJECT’s creativity support through this Add - on , referred to simply as the sidebar in this paper . The sidebar was the pre - defined Google Docs component that appeared to the right of the editor . However , the side - bar had a fixed width ( 300px ) and poor performance with server - side libraries . Therefore , design challenges included embedding usable and effective creativity support that called different server - side services into the sidebar . To meet the challenges , INJECT was implemented with : ( A ) features to generate candidate search terms directly from text already written in the larger editor window ; ( B ) small icons with mouse hover - box descriptions , to control the sidebar ; ( C ) mouse hover - boxes to present additional in - formation quickly in context ; ( D ) overlays to present more information in the sidebar space , and ; ( E ) server - side ser - vices that preloaded news information to overcome the sidebar’s performance limitations . The designs and imple - mentations of these 5 features were improved incrementally during the journalist - led prototyping , for example by merg - ing control icons and reducing the number of required in - teractions , so that , for example , the journalist received crea - tivity support in as little as 2 clicks . Figure 1 shows the final design of the INJECT sidebar . The left side shows the launch setup and 4 functional areas . The first area was the news topic space – a journalist could enter terms or import them directly from the text editor to de - scribe topics of the current news story . The second area was the strategy space – a journalist could invoke different crea - tive search strategies using the described topics . The third , which occupied over 80 % of the sidebar , was the infor - mation space . A journalist could scroll , mouse hover - over and click retrieved news information and creative sparks to discover and generate new ideas for news angles . The fourth space , fixed at the bottom of the sidebar , was the control space . The journalist could access different tabs to manage tool settings , collaborate with online communities and follow a tutorial . An example of this tutorial is shown on the right side of Figure 1 . A small number of INJECT features were also implemented in a separate dialog com - ponent that would appear over the editor window . However , due to the limited functionality of that component , most features were implemented in the sidebar , so that journalists could simultaneously use it and write new articles . INJECT’s Creativity Support Imagine a fictional journalist who used the INJECT Google Docs sidebar to discover and examine creative angles for a story related to the 2017 Italian migration crisis . At any time s / he could highlight text written in the editor – in this example : Europe’s annual summer migration crisis impacts one country more than any other – Italy – then click the insert button on the sidebar . INJECT parsed the highlighted text to extract stemmed nouns , verbs and proper names as candidate topics . The journalist could then edit these nouns , verbs and proper nouns before instructing INJECT to dis - cover possible creative angles using topics such as migra - tion , summer , crisis and Italy , shown in the news topic space at the top of the sidebar in Figure 2 . 1 2 3 4 Figure 1 . The INJECT sidebar’s 4 functional areas and an example of the tutorial support available to journalists Figure 2 . The INJECT sidebar on the right side of the Docs editor , showing creativity support with the people strategy The journalist could then instruct INJECT to discover pos - sible creative angles using 6 pre - defined types of angle by clicking icons in the strategy space . Each of the icons in - voked a different creative strategy that searched news in - formation sources associated with a different type of crea - tive angle : A . Quantifiable : discover and examine quantified infor - mation associated with the news story ; B . People : discover and examine information about people associated with the news story ; C . Causal : discover and examine information about events associated with the background of the news story ; D . Quirky : discover and examine comical information as - sociated with the news story ; E . Ramifications : discover and examine information asso - ciated with future consequences of the news story ; F . Data visualizations : discover and examine data sets and visualizations associated with the news story . Each of these 6 strategies codified the expertise that experi - enced journalists had reported to discover creative angles on news stories . To uncover and describe candidate strate - gies , semi - structured interviews with experienced journal - ists and digital experts in journalism had been held . The candidate strategies were then validated with other experi - enced journalists , and extended and refined [ 18 ] . Each strategy operationalized the elicited journalism expertise so that INJECT users could exploit it to discover possible creative angles on news stories . So for example , if the fictional journalist clicked the people icon , INJECT used the selected terms to search and retrieve news information sources , extract the names of individuals from these source and present the extracted people’s names in the sidebar , with basic information about the individual and the original news item . Figure 2 also depicts the side - bar’s information space , in which one individual , Pope Francis , is presented above the information source in which he is named . The journalist could scroll the sidebar to search the information about Pope Francis and generate new ideas for story angles from it . Other individuals pre - sented for this search were politicians Lulzim Basha and Vince Cable and philanthropist George Soros . Then , to ex - amine a selected individual , the journalist clicked the indi - vidual’s name , and INJECT opened the dialog window with a photograph and description of the person extracted from Wikipedia sources , to stimulate more idea generation about new angles . If needed , the journalist could also request more people using the refresh button . If the journalist clicked the causal icon , INJECT searched for and retrieved explainer - style , long - read news articles . It would present each article’s title , source and first line in the sidebar . Figure 3 depicts 2 examples of this sidebar , with an Independent newspaper article on an Amnesty International report on EU naval operations on the left side . Again , the journalist could scroll the sidebar to search presented in - formation , generate new ideas for story angle from it , and request more information by clicking the refresh button . If s / he then clicked the article title , INJECT would open the article in the dialog window . This window then enabled the journalist to search each article with further keywords and view the original article online – features designed to sup - port idea generation – and to quick - reference the article and paste highlighted text from it into the Google Docs editor – features to support more productive work . Figure 3 . The INJECT sidebar showing support using the causal strategy , with mouse hover - over creative sparks gener - ated for news entities ( on left ) and stories ( on right ) Clicking on ramifications would have triggered INJECT to use the topic terms to provide similar support based on arti - cles that describe possible future implications . Moreover , for each news article in the sidebar , INJECT also presented a set of entities that were extracted automatically from the article , in colored rectangles – green for people , red for events , brown for places and blue for organizations . These entities summarized each article’s content . When the journalist positioned the mouse over each rectangle , INJECT presented a pop - up creative spark generated for that entity that codified creativity heuristics specialized to the journalism task . The creative sparks were designed to encourage the journalism to use and learn simple creativity skills . The left side of Figure 3 shows one example of these sparks : Explore recent data that is available about Syria , and build on interesting patterns in it . Other sparks in this sidebar included : Explore the future implications for Italy and how might its people be impacted , and Explore the characteristics of human rights that enhance the emotional impact . Creative sparks were also displayed if the journalist placed the cursor over an article title or individual name in the sidebar , see the right side of Figure 3 . The mouse hover - over feature enabled the journalist to explore multiple piec - es of creative advice generated from retrieved news infor - mation quickly , consistent with design advice in [ 10 ] . Furthermore , if the journalist clicked any colored rectangle , the sidebar displayed an interactive concept card containing a text description of the entity . The journalist could learn from and incorporate the description into his / her article . The journalist could also edit the card’s content to maintain a more personalized set of concept descriptions with which to write future articles more productively . Figure 4 shows the sidebar when the journalist clicked on the Open Europe entity . The concept card was presented in the sidebar , over the original greyed - out news content that the journalist could return to with one click . Figure 4 . An INJECT concept card with the sidebar On the other hand , if the journalist clicked quirky , INJECT searched for and retrieved political cartoons with matching names and captions , and presented each retrieved cartoon as a thumbnail image and caption and creative spark . Clicking a cartoon thumbnail opened it in the dialog window to sup - port further idea generation , as shown in Figure 5 . If the journalist had clicked data visualizations , INJECT would provide similar support using data and information visuali - zations extracted from retrieved news sources . Figure 5 . Use of INJECT’s quirky strategy , showing digital cartoons in the sidebar and dialog window In this example , our fictional journalist might have used the retrieved news information and creative sparks to generate a news story about the moral and legal conflicts between the roles played by the Papal State and Italian Republic . The story might also include the complexities arising from the intervention of non - governmental organizations in the Med - iterranean Sea . INJECT’s Architecture To deliver the described interactive digital creativity sup - port , the INJECT tool had 3 architecture layers : − A user interaction layer that enabled different interfaces , such as the sidebar plug - in for Google Docs ; − A data layer of 1 . 6 million tagged news published news stories discovered using RSS feeds from 150 news sources . The sources were selected by INJECT’s jour - nalist team to represent political perspectives and reduce the risk of echo chambers , and a database of over 40 , 000 political cartoons . INJECT also accessed infor - mation from Wikipedia but did not search it , so it was not part of the data layer ; − An application layer of software services that supported journalists to generate news stories more creatively and productively : ( i ) the creative search service manipulated topic descriptions from the editor to generate queries then implemented the different creative search strate - gies ; ( ii ) the news extraction service collected and in - dexed information from the 150 news sources prior to creative search ; ( iii ) the creative sparks service generat - ed creative sparks that were tailored to entities extracted from news information ; ( iv ) the concept card service that allowed individual journalists to edit and maintain personalised sets of concept cards , and ; ( v ) the persis - tence service that provided search session storage and retrieval capabilities . The news extraction and creative sparks services pre - generated news information content for the sidebar , to reduce the impact of the Add - on’s performance constraints . The news extraction service collected and indexed news information using public RSS feeds to the 150 news sources and tailored machine learning and natural language pro - cessing algorithms . It uploaded this information from the feeds every 30 minutes and stored it in a PostgreSQL data - base as metadata , with raw article data text as strings and a URL link to the source . It removed non - news content such as navigation links and adverts . It detected and extracted the people , location organization and event entities . It applied advanced natural language parsing to determine noun and verb phrases . And it uploaded each processed news article into an external Elasticsearch Cluster . At run - time , in response to a journalist entering topic terms and clicking one of the creative angle icons , the creative search service retrieved relevant news information , in two stages : 1 . It automatically disambiguated each topic term by dis - covering its correct sense according to the online lexi - con at WordNet using context knowledge from other terms in the query ( e . g . that migration is a group of peo - ple migrating together in some given time period rather than a periodic passage of groups of animals from one region to another for feeding or breeding ) [ 20 , 28 ] . It then expanded each term with other terms that have sim - ilar meanings ( e . g . the term migration with the above sense is synonymous with terms such as relocation and exodus ) and included these terms in the query . The ser - vice returned an unordered set of news articles or digital cartoons that achieved a threshold match score with the expanded search terms ; 2 . It filtered retrieved news articles and information using the strategy associated with the clicked icon . For exam - ple , for people , the service extracted from articles the name of each individual with a Wikipedia entry . For c ausal , it filtered to retain matched articles with more than 500 words and a minimum threshold of keywords indicative of causal articles – terms such as cause , im - pact and studies – from sources such as the Economist and the New York Times . And for quantifiable , it filtered to retain articles with a minimum threshold of quantity , measure and value keywords , for example Sterling , population and actual numbers . The creative sparks service generated the pop - up sparks for each retrieved article and entity extracted from each article . An individual creative spark associated 1 extracted entity or news article to 1 creative instruction . The sets of instruc - tions had been manually generated from websites and blogs that teach journalists to uncover new angles on stories . One set of instructions was generated for each of the 4 types of entity that were extracted – people , events , places and or - ganizations . Examples included : Unpick what the relevance of [ Place ] , as opposed to somewhere else , might have on the story and ; Explore the history and background of [ Or - ganization ] to obtain a new perspective on your story . A total of 34 creative instructions were implemented . One set of instructions was also generated for news articles re - trieved with each of the 6 creative strategies – people , causal , quirky , quantifiable , ramifications and data visuali - zations , and a total of 41 such instructions were implement - ed . Examples included : Use data types reported in this sto - ry , to generate a new angle , and : Make your angle more similar to the causal angle in this story . When invoked , the service used a randomizing function to attribute one instruc - tion string to one entity string of the same type , then con - catenated the strings to generate the spark . So , for the ex - tracted organization Open Europe from Figure 4 , INJECT might have presented a spark such as : Explore the history and background of Open Europe to obtain a new perspec - tive on your story . To retrieve and manage the concept cards , INJECT incor - porated Explaain , a service that organized news information in forms other than in articles [ 8 ] . Each concept card nor - mally stored one small chunk of news - related information , often similar to the length of a tweet . Phrases in each card were linked to other cards , similar to hyperlinks . INJECT also implemented other features that were request - ed by journalists during the prototyping to : - Discover news information and provide creative guid - ance in the languages that journalists work in , for exam - ple in Dutch and Norwegian as well as English ; - Discover information from newspaper archive sources , for example the digital archives of participating regional Norwegian newspapers . Although the design of INJECT had involved journalists , there had been no testing of the tool in newsrooms to ex - plore its impact on journalist work . The next section reports first evaluations of the impact of INJECT on journalist’s work using an established journalism framework . EVALUATING INJECT IN NEWSROOMS A version of INJECT that implemented the people , causal , quantitative and quirky strategies and all features reported in previous sections was used by 5 journalists to develop published news stories . Data collected after this use was analyzed to answer the following 2 research questions : RQ1 : Did each journalist use INJECT to discover new and useful angles on news stories ? RQ2 : Did each journalist change how s / he developed news stories as a result of using INJECT ? Evaluation Methods The INJECT version was evaluated by 5 journalists . Three of the journalists worked for 3 different regional Norwegian newspapers from the INJECT consortium and were selected by their editors . The 3 journalists were : an all - round jour - nalist responsible for content in the online version of the newspaper , with 4 years of journalism experience ; a photo - journalist who produced video reports , with 2 years experi - ence , and ; a news journalist who decided the content of all newspaper versions , with 13 years experience . One of the 3 journalists had limited involvement in the earlier co - design of INJECT . The other 2 journalists who evaluated INJECT worked at the same UK newspaper that specialized in digi - tal journalism , and were previously unconnected to the pro - ject . One was an editor with 3 years experience , and other a senior reporter with 2 years of experience . Other journalists also used INJECT , but the lack of time and resources in newsrooms that INJECT sought to alleviate also reduced the opportunities to provide evaluation feedback . Each journalist agreed to use INJECT in his / her work and to be interviewed afterwards about this use . No other incen - tives were offered . After agreeing to participate , each jour - nalist received an email with instructions to download and use the INJECT sidebar . Each was also sent links to an INJECT help website and was able to ask questions to the research team , to become familiar and competent with the tool’s features . The 3 Norwegian reporters used a Norwe - gian - language version of INJECT that also searched local newspaper archives , a screenshot of which is shown in Fig - ure 6 . All other INJECT capabilities were the same . When each journalist was familiar with the tool , his or her indi - vidual evaluation began . Two methods were used to collect data , depending on the amount of time that each journalist was able to commit to the evaluation . Figure 6 . INJECT’s creativity support , in Norwegian The first method was simpler and used with the 3 Norwe - gian journalists . One semi - structured interview with each journalist was held in Norwegian after up to 4 weeks of INJECT use . The interviews asked how the journalist per - ceived and used the tool , and its advantages and disad - vantages for discovering new news angles . The second method was more complex and used with the 2 journalists able to commit more time . It collected two types of data from each journalist over iterations of tool use : ( 1 ) the news stories developed with INJECT’s support , and ; ( 2 ) responses to structured interview questions . The researcher prepared for each interview with each journalist by first reading the news stories and adapting the questions , which were derived from Shapiro’s assessment framework for the practice of journalism [ 26 ] . The framework defined 5 facul - ties of good journalism : discovery , examination , interpreta - tion , style and presentation . INJECT was intended to sup - port the discovery and examination faculties . Discovering was the faculty of deciding what to say , and uncovering the news angle from information sources . Examining was the faculty of testing facts from information sources for their verifiability and coherence . The interview questions were derived from quality - related attributes associated with these 2 faculties . To elicit evidence about discovering , the inter - viewer asked questions about INJECT’s influence to : ( a ) select the stance to investigate the topic ; ( b ) overcome jour - nalist topic biases and interests , in order to achieve prag - matic objectivity ; ( c ) ensure social importance , to leave society in a better place than before with more socially im - portant stories , and ; ( d ) be ambitious in the methods used by the journalist [ 26 ] . To elicit evidence about examining , the interviewer asked questions about : ( e ) use of rigorous efforts to ensure accuracy , and how INJECT use might have increased rigor and accuracy , and ; ( f ) being undaunted in the research to shed new light on complex subjects [ 26 ] . First Evaluation Results The one - off semi - structured interviews with the 3 journal - ists at the 3 Norwegian newspapers revealed that INJECT was used to support the development of 5 published news stories – 3 by 1 journalist and 1 each by the other 2 . All 3 journalists used INJECT to develop stories that were as - signed to them after editorial meetings . All also reported minor usability problems , such as unclear meaning of the sidebar’s 6 creative search icons , and the unnecessary clicks needed to change INJECT’s creative search from strict to relaxed . However , none of these problems impeded the journalist’s use of INJECT . All 3 journalists reported that INJECT use supported them to discover new news angles , at the time that stories needed to be written , and to include more background information in their stories using the quantifiable strategy . INJECT use was reported to be more effective for discovering new an - gles on longer feature stories that required evidence , num - bers and facts , rather than on shorter news stories that re - ported facts . This decision to use INJECT for occasional feature stories explained the low number of articles that were written with INJECT’s support . In addition the 3 jour - nalists also reported that INJECT use supported the discov - ery of information from their own newspaper archives – information that each already should have remembered . And all 3 reported that writing stories more effectively with angles that were generated by themselves , which INJECT supported them to do , rather than with automatically gener - ated angles that the tool recommended to them . The new ideas and angles on the news stories were discov - ered by all 3 journalists using INJECT quickly , often in less than 3 minutes for each story . The journalists then switched to other tools , such as Google search , to retrieve more de - tailed information with which to complete the story . No direct disadvantages of INJECT use were reported , but the journalists expressed reservations about some of its de - sign . The journalists requested more explanation of the cre - ative search service algorithms and news information that they retrieved . None claimed to use the creative sparks , and 1 journalist asked for the sparks to be presented in different forms , to standout from other information in the sidebar . One journalist also asked for digital reminders of other es - tablished journalism angles , such as to think about the eco - nomic angle on a story . Other reported new requirements were integration into the newspaper’s content management systems , and a critical mass of 4 - 5 journalists who would use INJECT regularly in each newsroom , to maintain en - thusiasm for and training and support to use the tool . To summarize , the semi - structured interviews revealed that journalists did use INJECT to discover new angles on news features before these features were written , often quickly , before using other digital tools to complete the stories . A critical mass of journalists using INJECT in newsrooms was requested to support ongoing use of the tool . However , the interviews revealed little about how the individual jour - nalists changed their behaviour as a result of using INJECT . Second Evaluation Results A total of 4 interviews took place . The editor and senior reported that 4 published news stories were written with support from INJECT , and other stories had been prepared with use of the tool . The senior reporter claimed that the permanent presence of INJECT’s sidebar changed how she wrote the news stories . This presence led her to use its fea - tures after writing each paragraph rather than the end of the story – a change that she believed decreased the chances of omissions from stories . She also reported that she perceived INJECT’s strategies as alternative forms of journalism’s 5 Ws ( who , what , where , when and why ) that constituted a formula for developing a complete news story on a subject , and that INJECT’s quirky and ramifications strategies ex - tended this formula in new directions . The editor reported using the creative search icons from left - to - right on the sidebar , in order to structure her exploration of new angles with INJECT . The timing of INJECT use impacted on its effectiveness . At first , the editor and senior reporter used INJECT only after having developed the structure and some of the text of their stories , equivalent to the senior reporter’s use of Google search , and both were disappointed by the wide range of the articles presented by INJECT . Later in the evaluation peri - od , both used INJECT earlier : the editor used it during the research stage of a new article on copyright law , to investi - gate different topics entered into the sidebar . She reported that the information was still “ vague . . gave me articles that were not quite what she was looking for ” , although while this information did not change the overall direction of the article , it did guide her to incorporate new voices into it . The senior reporter used INJECT to research of a new story about news fact - checking , and made use of its quantifiable and causal strategies to explore new angles . In both interviews , the editor reported that INJECT use led her to discover articles that informed her stories from be - yond her usual news sources . Examples of these new news sources were Wired magazine , Guardian newspaper , blogs , digital cartoons and other newspapers about the topic but from 4 - 5 months earlier . INJECT’s use appeared to over - come some of her biases arising from sources used . In par - ticular she reported that news information retrieved with the people strategy led her to introduce new voices from alter - native sources into the article about copyright law . She also reported that one creative spark – think about the opponents of [ Person ] , and how the story evolves from their perspec - tive – directed her research in that direction and to generate new content to the article . On reflection , the senior reporter claimed that INJECT’s less directed searches had the poten - tial to develop new stories with greater social importance , saying : “ it is a very good tool for inspiration ” . To this end she used the people strategy to develop one story from the perspective of people who were impacted by fake news , rather than from the data sources that she usually used . She highlighted the potential of the ramifications strategy to encourage her to explore more about the consequences of events , rather than just report the events themselves . The senior reporter stated that INJECT had the potential to increase the boldness of her journalism methods by recom - mending new angles on her own already - implemented sto - ries . These new angles guided her to re - purpose and publish new versions of these stories , which was a new direction for her journalism . The editor reported that INJECT also had the potential to increase the boldness of her journalism , in part due to the authority that she attributed to news stories retrieved by the INJECT tool compared with her searches of social media sources . She also claimed that the creative sparks had the potential to increase the social importance of her stories , because some of the sparks led her to generate new ideas about other socially relevant organizations . INJECT’s creative search strategies were reported to have changed the behaviour of both journalists , albeit less direct - ly than had been designed for . For example , the existence of the people and quirky strategies made the editor more aware of these types of angle : “ it made me search a bit on the in - dividual and the quirky side . Cos I think that I wouldn’t have thought to look for cartoons . . ” . And the senior reporter claimed that the presence of INJECT’s quantifiable and ramifications strategies reminded her to think more about the accuracy and the future implications of her stories , both with and without INJECT . The editor reported that , on reflection , she understood better INJECT’s purpose and potential benefits to her work . These benefits included greater support for writing feature stories , use of creative sparks to direct her to think of more people , and to be more ambitious in both her stories and investiga - tive methods . About the creative sparks , the editor said : “ some of them are very , very specific , and some are a bit more broad , so in that sense it could potentially give you a bit of a push . So if you are writing a story and you’re not sure on the angle , and if you should include this or this per - son in it , then if you go to the prompts , then some of them might resonate , so yes . . ” . Neither journalist reported strong evidence that INJECT supported examining news information that was retrieved , but the senior reporter said that her use of the quantifiable strategy did provide her with some data and evidence that supported the examining faculty . However , the editor stated that INJECT was not an effective tool for fact checking . CONCLUSION , DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK This paper reports the design and first evaluations of new digital support for journalists to discover creative angles on news stories . The digital support integrated natural lan - guage processing , creative search and interactive recom - mendation technologies . It codified the expertise of experi - enced journalists to retrieve news information and direct idea generation , consistent with human - centred creative cognition [ 15 ] . The support was delivered to journalists as a visible sidebar of a text editor . Data was collected from 5 journalists to answer 2 research questions : RQ1 : All of the journalists discovered new and useful an - gles on stories written with INJECT’s support , often quickly , however many of these angles extended ex - isting storylines rather than developed new ones ; RQ2 : Some changed how they developed news stories as a result of using INJECT , and the presence and struc - ture of the INJECT sidebar in the editor window im - pacted on the behaviour of at least some of the jour - nalists . As such , journalist use of INJECT was effective , but not to the degree that the tool was designed to support . Journalist use of INJECT also provided more effective support for writing feature stories rather than news stories , although this finding might have been influenced by INJECT’s data layer , which was only composed of past news rather than current social media information . However , writing feature stories will still require journalists to exhibit more creative thinking than during the evaluations , by applying more cre - ativity skills when using INJECT than was reported . Results revealed that use of INJECT offered more support to journalists when discovering rather than examining [ 26 ] . It appeared to contribute to journalists being more ambi - tious and to overcome biases by retrieving topic infor - mation from alternative news sources and discovering new stances from which to investigate news topics . However , this support for discovering also led journalists to compare INJECT , sometimes unfavorably , to Google search , a com - parison reinforced by some of the journalists using Google search after INJECT to seek more information on new an - gles . At least some of the journalists might have expected INJECT to discover the information that was needed , rather than just to offer creative support with this information , as INJECT was designed to do . Although subsequent versions of INJECT now embed Google search to support journal - ists , to help to distinguish between discovering a new angle with INJECT capabilities and retrieving more information afterwards , journalists will still need to apply more creativi - ty skills to exploit INJECT’s capabilities effectively . The reported uses of INJECT did not appear to deliver and / or encourage sufficient use of these skills . Results also revealed that use of INJECT supported some of the journalists to recognize known news information at the time that news stories are being written . Indeed , different news organizations have identified the potential of INJECT to unlock their own news archives for creative use , to en - hance productivity as well as creativity , but only if INJECT can support journalists to recognize [ 5 ] related news quick - ly when writing stories . New recommendation features will be needed to support such recognition . Of course , many threats to the validity of these first evalua - tion results exist . Although more journalists used INJECT , only 5 provided structured feedback for the evaluation , and their verbal reports were not triangulated with INJECT us - age log data . The journalists worked for regional and spe - cialist newspapers rather than other types , and did not use INJECT support for most of their news stories . The regional newspapers were members of the project consortium and their journalist’s responses might have biased , due to pres - sure from management and / or loyalty . And there has been no systematic evaluation of the creativity , i . e . novelty and value of the news stories generated with INJECT’s support . Therefore , the results need to be interpreted cautiously , and more systematic evaluations of INJECT with larger num - bers of journalists for longer periods will be needed to draw firmer conclusions about the tool’s effectiveness . Journalists will need to demonstrate more creativity skills to exploit INJECT effectively . Some of the journalists in the evaluation expressed a preference to write stories based on ideas generated themselves rather than ones recommended by INJECT – a preference can be interpreted as motivation to be more creative and to develop and apply creativity skills . However , development of the skills remains a chal - lenge in newsrooms with conservative attitudes [ 7 ] , espe - cially in the face of new fears over automation that INJECT itself might exacerbate . For example , the tool could be ex - tended to collect data about the dates and times that readers access stories generated with different INJECT angles , to automate the writing of stories with different angles to be read at different times . Therefore , although future versions of INJECT will include more directed creativity support , digital tools alone will not provide the missing creativity skills . One alternative to explore with newsrooms is upfront journalist training in creativity techniques that align with INJECT’s capabilities . One example of these techniques is SCAMPER [ 22 ] , which guides problem solvers to examine solutions from different perspectives such as combining , eliminating and reversing , and is a simplified form of INJECT’s creative sparks . Another example is Hall of Fame [ 22 ] , a technique that guides problem solvers to ex - amine solutions from the perspective of different well - known people – who could be iconic journalists . We hope to report on the use of these techniques and INJECT togeth - er in the near future . Another possible way to develop and apply creativity skills is to develop a critical mass of journalists using INJECT in each newsroom , as some of the journalists in the evalua - tions reported . It is long established that during idea genera - tion and evaluation activities , cooperation can lead to more creative ideas and better solutions ( e . g . [ 32 ] ) , and coopera - tion between 4 - 5 journalists has the potential to support the development and use of different creativity skills . When journalists used INJECT also appeared to influence the ef - fectiveness of the tool . Therefore , to encourage earlier use of INJECT and the new creativity skills of journalists , we will seek to embed this use into newsroom workflows , for example for short periods after editorial meetings and prior to writing news stories . Another emerging challenge was to design complex interac - tions that inputted to and received outputs from sophisticat - ed algorithms that produced unpredictable outcomes . Arti - ficial intelligence has been framed as a new design material that required interactions that were transparent , opaque and offer shared control [ 12 ] , and journalists both in the evalua - tions and elsewhere requested transparent creative search algorithms to explain the retrieved news information . How - ever , INJECT’s designers also believed that these algo - rithms still needed to be opaque , in order to retrieve infor - mation that was surprising and hence creative to users . Therefore , future work will refine INJECT’s interactions to offer different degrees of support related to the user’s famil - iarity with the tool , for example to offer greater transparen - cy and shared control to less experienced users , and to in - crease the opaqueness for more experienced ones . Other new INJECT features have already been implement - ed . These features include more news and new social media information sources added to the data layer , contextualized explanations of information retrieved by INJECT , new uses of the creative sparks , and new versions of INJECT for the InCopy TinyMCE text editors . Future uses of these new INJECT versions by critical numbers of journalists in news - rooms will enable the research team to investigate broader research questions about changing journalism practices . For example , future versions of INJECT will invoke fact - checkers to detect possible fake news information . Howev - er , if journalists do develop and use new creativity skills with INJECT , the resulting creative thinking might also increase their reflexivity with which to detect fake news sources . More broadly , use of new digital tools such as INJECT have the potential to increase conflicts in news - rooms [ 7 ] , with journalists who resist the adoption of these new tools , and with managers who impose the new tools in order to increase newsroom creativity and productivity . Moreover , as newsroom resources reduce further , uses of more intelligent tools such as INJECT risk substituting ra - ther than supplementing key journalism tasks such as face - to - face interviewing . Therefore , the use of new digital tools to increase journalist creativity cannot be separated from wider socio - political challenges that newsrooms face . The rollout of INJECT in new newsrooms will be a vehicle to investigate emerging challenges and trade - offs that will we anticipate will arise . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The research reported in this paper is supported by the EU - funded H2020 723328 INJECT innovation action . REFERENCES 1 . Sara F . Alaou , Thecia Schlphorst , Shannon Cuykendall , Kris - tin Carlson , Karen Studd and Karen Bradley . 2015 . Strategies for Embodied Design : The Value and Challenges of Observing Movement . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Crea - tivity and Cognition ( C & C’15 ) , 121 - 130 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757238 2 . Teresa M . Amabile and Michael G . Pratt . 2016 . The Dynamic Componential Model of Creativity and Innovation in Organi - zations : Making Progress , Making Meaning . Research in Or - ganizational Behavior 36 : 157 – 183 . 3 . What is Journalism ? Retrieved December 28 , 2017 from https : / / www . americanpressinstitute . org / journalism - essentials / what - is - journalism / 4 . Tom Bartindale , Elizabeth Valentine , Maxine Glancy , David Kirk , Peter Wright and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Facilitating TV Production Using StoryCrate . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’13 ) , 193 - 202 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466628 5 . Alan Baddeley . 1982 . Your Memory : A User ' s Guide . Multi - media Publications . 6 . Andrew Currah . 2009 . What’s Happening To Our News ? Reu - ters Institute for the Study of Journalism , Oxford . 7 . Brian Ekdale , Jane B Singer , Melissa Tully and Shawn Harm - sen . 2015 . Making Change : Diffusion of Technological , Rela - tional , and Cultural Innovation in the Newsroom . Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 92 , 4 : 938 - 958 . 8 . Bring your articles to life . Retrieved December 28 , 2017 from http : / / explaain . com 9 . Andrew Garbett , Rob Comber , Paul Egglestone , Maxine Glancy and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . Finding " real people " : trust and diversity in the interface between professional and citizen journalists , In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 14 ) , 3015 - 3024 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557114 10 . Sharon L . Greene . 2002 . Characteristics of Applications that Support Creativity . Communications of the ACM 45 , 10 : 100 - 104 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 570907 . 570941 11 . Astrid Gynnild . 2014 . Journalism innovation leads to innova - tion journalism : The impact of computational exploration on changing mindsets . Journalism 15 , 6 : 713 – 730 . 12 . Lars Holmquist . 2017 . Intelligence on Tap : Artificial Intelli - gence as a New Design Material . ACM Interactions 24 , 4 , 29 - 33 . 13 . Michaela Honauer and Eva Hornecker . 2015 . Challenges for Creating and Staging Interactive Costumes for the Theatre Stage . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’15 ) , 13 - 22 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757242 14 . James C . Kaufman , and Ronald A . Beghetto . 2009 . Beyond Big and Little : The Four c - model of Creativity . Review of General Psychology 13 , 1 . 15 . Andruid Kerne , Eunyee Koh , Steven M . Smith , Andrew Webb and Blake Dworaczyk . 2008 . combinFormation : Mixed - Initiative Composition of Image and Text Surrogates Promotes Information Discovery . ACM Transactions on Information Systems 27 , 1 : 1 - 45 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1416950 . 1416955 16 . Raymond Liaw , Ari Zilnik , Mark Baldwin and Stephanie But - ler S . 2013 . Maater : crowdsourcing to improve online journal - ism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 13 ) , 2549 - 2554 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468828 17 . Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , James Lockerbie , Sergio Levis , Kasia Camargo , Shaun Hoddy and Gianluca Allemandi . 2017 . Evaluating Digital Creativity Support To Improve Health - and - Safety in a Manufacturing Plant . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems ( CHI ' 17 ) , 7005 - 7014 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025712 18 . Neil Maiden , Konstantinos Zachos , James Lockerbie , George Brock and Christopher Traver . 2016 . Developing and Evaluat - ing Digital Creativity Support in Google Docs for Journalists . In Proceedings of the 30 th International British Human Com - puter Interaction Conference ( HCI’16 ) , Article No . 23 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / HCI2016 . 23 19 . Nando Malmelin and Sari Virta . 2016 . Managing creativity in change : Motivations and constraints of creative work in a me - dia organization . Journalism Practice 10 , 6 : https : / / 1041 - 1054 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2015 . 1074864 . 20 . Diana McCarthy , Rob Koeling , Julie Weeds and John Carroll . 2004 . Using Automatically Acquired Predominant Senses for Word Sense Disambiguation , In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Senseval - 3 Workshop . Association of Computational Linguis - tics . 21 . Brian McNair . 1998 . The Sociology of Journalism . London : Arnold . 22 . Michael Michalko . 2006 . Thinkertoys : A Handbook of Crea - tive - Thinking Techniques . Random House Inc . , New York 23 . Anne - Lyse Minard , Manuela Speranza , Eneko Agirre , Itziar Aldabe , Marieke van Erp , Bernando Magnini , German Rigau and Ruben Urizar . 2015 . SemEval - 2015 Task 4 : Timeline : cross - document event ordering . In Proceedings of the 9th In - ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , 778 - 786 . 24 . Sharing Liberally . Retrieved December 28 , 2017 , from http : / / bostonreview . net / BR35 . 4 / morozov . php 25 . Tom Schofield , John Vines , Tom Higham , Ed Carter , Memo Atken and Amy Golding . 2013 . Trigger Shift : Participatory Design of an Augmented Theatrical Performance with Young People . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C’13 ) , 203 - 212 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466640 26 . Ivor Shapiro . 2010 . Evaluating Journalism . Journalism Prac - tice 4 , 2 : 143 , 163 . 27 . Robert J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . 1999 . Handbook of Creativity . New York , Cambridge University Press . 28 . Mark Stevenson and Yorick Wilks . 2001 . The Interaction of Knowledge Sources in Word Sense Disambiguation . Compu - tational Linguistics , 27 , 3 : 321 - 349 . 29 . Helle Sjøvaag . 2014 . Homogenisation or Differentiation ? The Effects of Consolidation in the Regional Newspaper Market . Journalism Studies 15 , 5 : 511 - 521 . 30 . Bregtje Van Der Haak , Michael Parks and Manuel Castells . 2012 . The Future of Journalism : Networked Journalism . Inter - national Journalism of Communication 6 : 2923 - 2938 . 31 . Google Docs introduces new sidebar research tool . Retrieved December 28 , 2017 from https : / / thenextweb . com / apps / 2012 / 05 / 15 / useful - google - docs - introduces - new - sidebar - research - tool 32 . Andrew Warr and Eamon O ʼ Neill , 2005 . Understanding de - sign as a social creative process . In Proceedings of the ACM Creativity and Cognition Conference ( C & C’05 ) , 118 - 127 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056224 . 1056242 33 . Tamara Witschge and Gunnar Nygren . 2009 . Journalism : a profession under pressure ? Journal of Media Business Studies 6 , 1 : 37 - 59 .