Time - Lapse Confocal Reﬂection Microscopy of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and Extracellular Matrix Assembly In Vitro A . O . Brightman 1 B . P . Rajwa 2 J . E . Sturgis 3 M . E . McCallister 1 J . P . Robinson 1 , 3 S . L . Voytik - Harbin 1 , 3 1 Department of BiomedicalEngineering , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA 2 Department of Biophysics , Institute of Molecular Biology , Jagiellonian University , Krakow , Poland 3 Department of Basic Medical Sciences , School of Veterinary Medicine , Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA Received 24 August 1999 ; accepted 3 April 2000 Abstract : The development of the next generation of biomaterials for restoration of tissues and organs ( i . e . , tissue engineering ) requires a better understanding of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and its interaction with cells . Extracellular matrix is a macromolecular assembly of natural biopolymers including collagens , glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) , proteoglycans ( PGs ) , and glyco - proteins . Interestingly , several ECM components have the ability to form three - dimensional ( 3D ) , supramolecular matrices ( scaffolds ) in vitro by a process of self - directed polymerization , “self - assembly” . It has been shown previously that 3D matrices with distinct architectural and biological properties can be formed from either puriﬁed type I collagen or a complex mixture of interstitial ECM components derived from intestinal submucosa . Unfortunately , many of the imaging and analysis techniques available to study these matrices either are unable to provide insight into 3D preparations or demand efforts that are often prohibitory to observations of living , dynamic systems . This is the ﬁrst report on the use of reﬂection imaging at rapid time intervals combined with laser - scanning confocal microscopy for analysis of structural properties and kinetics of collagen and ECM assembly in 3D . We compared time - lapse confocal reﬂection microscopy ( TL - CRM ) with a well - established spectrophotometric method for determining the self - assembly properties of both puriﬁed type I collagen and soluble interstitial ECM . While both TL - CRM and spectrophotometric techniques provided insight into the kinetics of the polymerization process , only TL - CRM allowed Correspondence to : S . L . Voytik - Harbin ; email : voytik @ ecn . purdue . edu Biopolymers , Vol . 54 , 222 – 234 ( 2000 ) © 2000 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . 222 qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the structural parameters ( e . g . , ﬁbril diameter ) and 3D organization ( e . g . , ﬁbril density ) of component ﬁbrils over time . Matrices formed from the complex mixture of soluble interstitial ECM components showed an increased rate of assembly , decreased opacity , decreased ﬁbril diameter , and increased ﬁbril density compared to that of puriﬁed type I collagen . These results suggested that the PG / GAG components of soluble interstitial ECM were affecting the polymerization of the component collagens . Therefore , the effects of puriﬁed and complex mixtures of PG / GAG components on the assembly properties of type I collagen and interstitial ECM were evaluated . The data conﬁrmed that the presence of PG / GAG components altered the kinetics and the 3D ﬁbril morphology of assembled matrices . In summary , TL - CRM was demonstrated to be a new and useful technique for analysis of the 3D assembly properties of collagen and other natural biopolymers which requires no specimen ﬁxation and / or staining . © 2000 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Biopoly 54 : 222 – 234 , 2000 Keywords : extracellular matrix ; collagen gel ; self - assembly ; confocal microscopy ; time lapse ; reﬂection ; imaging ; three - dimensional ; ﬁbrillogenesis ; submucosa INTRODUCTION Synthetic and biologically derived polymers play a crucial role in the design and engineering of new therapeutic and diagnostic devices for medical appli - cations such as tissue restoration and replacement ( i . e . , tissue engineering ) . Synthetic polymers have been obvious candidates for such applications because their chemical and physical properties can be con - trolled . However , these materials often lack the ability to signal ( orchestrate ) fundamental cellular processes including adhesion , migration , differentiation , and proliferation . With hopes of increased biocompatibil - ity and elicitation of a desirable cellular response , biomaterials have been fashioned also from tissues and biologically derived molecules ( e . g . , collagen and glycosaminoglycans ) . In fact , many of the molecules that compose the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) of tis - sues exhibit the ability to polymerize and form com - plex , three - dimensional ( 3D ) supramolecular assem - blies in vitro , a process known as “self - assembly” . Although cells are known to play an important role in guiding this assembly process in vivo , it is apparent that much of the information that determines the proper structure of these matrices is contained within the macromolecules that form these structures . We are interested in these self - assembly properties and the fundamental interactions between macromolecules of the ECM , including collagens , proteoglycans ( PGs ) , and glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) . Such information will be vital to the synthesis from natural biopolymers of new biomaterials ( e . g . , gels and matrices ) with deﬁned architecture , mechanical properties , and bio - logical signaling capacity . To date , information on the self - assembly mecha - nisms of ECM molecules has been obtained using spectrophotometry , 1 , 2 electron microscopy ( EM ) , 3 – 5 and dark - ﬁeld microscopy 6 , 7 techniques . For example , spectrophotometric measurements of collagen ﬁbril formation ( ﬁbrillogenesis ) by turbidity provide time course or kinetic details , but yield no direct informa - tion about the structural nature of the assembling components . Structural aspects of assembled matrices under steady - state or ﬁxed conditions can be observed using EM ; however , extensive specimen preparation and processing are necessary due to vacuum operation of the instrumentation and often result in structural artifacts . 8 – 10 Although dark - ﬁeld microscopy has been used to view growth of individual collagen ﬁbrils over time in vitro , this technique is limited in its capacity to image 3D architecture . Indeed , such tech - niques have been instrumental in elucidating the structural organization and binding interactions of individual collagen , PG , and GAG components of the ECM . However , these techniques have been limited to noncomplex systems and provide only two - dimen - sional ( 2D ) structural or kinetic information . With time - lapse confocal reﬂection microscopy ( TL - CRM ) , changes in ﬁbril and matrix structure can be monitored in 3D over time , allowing more direct studies of collagen ﬁbrillogenesis and the molecules that affect this process . Reﬂection , or the back - scattering of light , is an intrinsic optical property of many biopolymers , in - cluding collagen . When combined with confocal mi - croscopy , reﬂection images taken at sequential focal planes along the z axis can be reconstructed three - dimensionally for visualization and / or analytical pur - poses . No chemical processing , physical sectioning , or staining of the specimen is required . The genera - tion of high - resolution images using this technique requires only that a specimen possess either high reﬂectance ( albedo ) or substantial changes in index of refraction at its boundaries . 11 For example , this tech - nique was applied by Semler and co - workers to visu - alize and quantitate the microtopography of porous TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 223 biomaterials prepared from synthetic polymers . 12 Likewise , we and others have applied confocal reﬂec - tion microscopy for surface and volume visualization of 3D matrices prepared from natural biopolymers such as collagen . 8 , 13 Reﬂected light from an assem - bled collagen matrix also has been collected simulta - neously with ﬂuorescence from cells stained with vital ﬂuorochromes in a time - lapse mode to monitor the dynamic process of cell migration through a 3D col - lagen matrix . 8 Herein , we provide the ﬁrst account of CRM in a time - lapse mode for studying , in three or four dimensions , collagen ﬁbril formation and ECM assembly in vitro . With TL - CRM , both kinetic and 3D structural information can be collected simultaneously as ECM components polymerize from a soluble phase to form an insoluble ﬁbrous matrix or gel . An elucidation of the component molecules of ECM and how they interact in 3D to form connective tissue scaffolds with tissue - speciﬁc structure and function is just in its infancy . Many of our studies have focused on an intact interstitial ECM derived from porcine small intestine which consists of a dense network of cross - linked collagen bundles richly en - dowed with GAG and PG molecules . 9 , 14 , 15 Compo - nent molecules of this intact ECM can be solubilized and used to reconstitute a 3D interstitial ECM in vitro . In vitro studies show that the reconstituted interstitial ECM has distinct structural and biological properties compared to reconstituted matrices formed from pu - riﬁed type I collagen alone . 9 These observations led to the hypothesis that PG / GAG components present in the interstitial ECM are contributing to the unique structural and functional properties demonstrated by the reconstituted matrix . In this study we applied TL - CRM to determine and compare the 3D architec - ture and assembly properties of reconstituted matrices prepared with either puriﬁed type I collagen or inter - stitial ECM components . The usefulness of TL - CRM was further explored by investigating the effect of puriﬁed and complex mixtures of PG and GAG com - ponents on the assembly process of these matrices . Parallel studies were conducted using the traditional spectrophotometric - based turbidity assay and the in - sights provided by this technique and TL - CRM are compared and discussed . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of 3D Reconstituted Matrices Puriﬁed type I collagen from bovine dermis ( Vitrogen ) was obtained as a sterile solution in 0 . 012 N HCl from Collagen Corporation , Fremont , CA . Puriﬁed preparations of the GAG , heparin , and the PG , decorin , were obtained from Elkins - Simm , Inc . , and Sigma Chemical Co . , respectively . Reconstituted interstitial ECM was prepared from porcine small intestinal submucosa ( SIS ) as described previously . 9 In brief , SIS was powdered under liquid nitrogen and the powder stirred into 0 . 5 M acetic acid ( 5 % w / v ) containing 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) pepsin for 72 h at 4°C . The suspension was centrifuged at 12 , 000 xg for 20 min at 4°C to remove undissolved tissue particulate and dialyzed extensively against 0 . 01 M acetic acid . To prepare a solution of solubi - lized interstitial ECM devoid of PG and GAG components , the powdered intestinal submucosa was ﬁrst extracted with 4 M guanidine in 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 2 for 24 h at 4°C to remove endogenous PGs and GAGs . The tissue pellet was recovered by centrifugation , reextracted , rinsed with acetic acid , and solubilized as above . Water - soluble PGs and GAGs were recovered from the extract supernatant by di - alysis and lyophilized . To polymerize ( reconstitute ) the soluble collagen or interstitial ECM components into a 3D matrix , each solution was diluted and brought to physiologic pH and ionic concentration by the addition of 10 3 phos - phate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and appropriate concentrated HCl and NaOH solutions . Neutralized solutions were kept at 4°C prior to the initiation of polymerization , which was induced by raising the temperature to 30 – 37°C . Complete matrix assembly occurred within 10 – 60 min depending upon the solution composition and polymerization conditions . Confocal Reﬂection Microscopy Unstained 3D matrices of type I collagen or mixtures of interstitial ECM components were polymerized in a Lab - Tek chambered coverglass ( Nalge Nunc Int . ) and imaged using a BioRad MRC1024 confocal microscope via a 60 3 , 1 . 4 NA oil immersion lens . Optical settings were estab - lished and optimized on reconstituted matrices after poly - merization was complete . An aliquot of a soluble collagen or interstitial ECM preparation was then placed onto the heated ( 37°C ) stage of the microscope , and ﬁbrillogenesis and ﬁbril assembly imaged . Samples were illuminated with 488 nm laser light and the reﬂected light detected with a photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) using a blue reﬂection ﬁlter . For the BioRad MRC1024 confocal microscope , instrument setup involved a beamsplitter placed in position D1 and a dichroic ﬁlter that reﬂects 488 nm light into PMT2 in position D2 ( Figure 1 ) . Optical ﬁlters may be added in positions W1 and W3 for the simultaneous collection of ﬂuorescence information in PMT1 and PMT3 , respectively . A z step of 0 . 2 m m was used to optically section the samples . Because the resolution of the z plane is less than that of the x – y plane , the sampling along the z axis may be different from that of the x – y . 2D ( e . g . , x – y ) or 3D ( e . g . , x – y – z ) sections demonstrating ﬁbrillogenesis and assembly events were recorded at step intervals ranging from 1 to 5 s for up to 1 h . Minimum time intervals required for image collection were dependent on the section size , resolution , and scanning mode . For standardization of scanning depth , 224 Brightman et al . the scanhead was adjusted to a distance in the range of 20 – 50 m m from the upper surface of the coverglass . Nonuniform background caused by interference and re - ﬂection from the optical pathway was removed from the images using standard rank leveling procedures on each x – y section . Rank leveling consisted of applying a multiple number of erosions followed by a gaussian ﬁlter to each section to create a background approximation . This back - ground approximation was then subtracted from the original section to enhance the signal - to - noise ratio . Three - dimen - sional images of the matrices were either compiled into a single view projection using Laser Sharp ( BioRad , Hemel Hempstead , UK ) image - processing software or compiled into a 3D projection using Voxel - View reconstruction soft - ware ( Vital Images ) . Rank leveling can also be performed on 3D images prior to reconstruction into 3D views to improve image quality . To perform rank leveling in 2D , we used public domain Unix image - processing toolsets : “img - star” by Steve Winder and “pbmplus” by Jef Poskanzer . A “tcsh” script was used to automate the image - processing tasks . Time - lapse image ﬁles were assembled into SGI movie format ( sgimv ) or MPEG movie format using dmconvert , a standard converter for digital media , a part of Irix 6 . 2 operating system on a Silicon Graphics Indigo2 workstation . Because MPEG movie formatting involves lossy compression , this format was used for presentation purposes only . Spectrophotometric ( Turbidity ) Analysis Polymerization or ﬁbrillogenesis was monitored in a Lambda 3B UV - VIS spectrophotometer ( Perkin - Elmer ) equipped with a temperature - controlled , 6 - position holder . Absorbance measurements at 405 nm were recorded at 30 s intervals for up to 120 min . Determination of Total Protein The total protein content of type I collagen and interstitial ECM solutions was determined using bicinchoninic acid ( BCA ) reagent ( Pierce ) . Appropriate dilutions of collagen and interstitial ECM were prepared in 0 . 01 M acetic acid or PBS and assayed in triplicate according to methods de - scribed previously . 16 Reactions were heated to 60°C for 30 min and absorbance at 562 nm determined . Bovine serum albumin ( 40 – 1000 m g / mL ) was used to prepare a standard curve . Determination of Total Collagen The collagen content of type I collagen and interstitial ECM solutions was estimated using the Sirius Red assay . 17 Ap - propriate dilutions of collagen and interstitial ECM were prepared and assayed in triplicate . Samples were added to Direct Red 80 dye ( 50 m M ) in 0 . 5 M acetic acid , shaken for 30 min , and centrifuged at 12 , 000 3 g for 15 min . Sample pellets were washed in 0 . 5 M acetic acid and resuspended in 0 . 1 N NaOH . The absorbance at 540 nm was then deter - mined . Puriﬁed type I collagen was used to prepare a standard curve in the range of 40 – 1000 m g / mL . Determination of Total Glycosaminoglycan / Proteoglycan Content The PG / GAG content of type I collagen and interstitial ECM solutions was determined using the alcian blue assay as previously described . 18 Samples were assayed in tripli - cate . Porcine - derived heparin ( Elkin - Simms , Inc . ) was used to prepare a standard curve in the range of 1 – 20 heparin units / mL . Quantitative Analysis of TL - CRM At present , high - throughput computer algorithms are being developed to facilitate the quantitation of ﬁbril assembly kinetics as well as structural properties , including ﬁbril diameter , ﬁbril density , ﬁbril curvature , and ﬁbril orienta - tion . As a ﬁrst approach to obtain kinetic information from TL - CRM data , average pixel values were calculated for each 2D image of a time - lapse series and plotted against time . FIGURE 1 Confocal microscope demonstrating ﬁlter ( D , W , and F ) and photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) positions . TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 225 For ﬁbril diameter determinations , a total of 40 ﬁbrils were randomly selected ( 10 ﬁbers per quadrant ) from a z series of images representing an assembled matrix . Using Voxel - View reconstruction software , a threshold was deter - mined for the z series and the images binarized . Five lines were then drawn perpendicular to the long axis of each ﬁbril using the trace feature of the software . The average number of white pixels traversed by the ﬁve lines ( representing the ﬁber diameter ) was determined and converted into nanome - ters based upon pixel dimensions . An analysis of variance was conducted on the ﬁbril diameter values obtained for the matrices using the SAS Statistical Software package ( SAS Institute Inc . , Cary , NC ) . The Student Newman Keuls method for multiple comparisons ( p , 0 . 05 ) was then applied . RESULTS Three - dimensional reconstituted matrices were formed either from puriﬁed type I collagen or from partially puriﬁed interstitial ECM components of small intestinal submucosa and compared using time - lapse confocal reﬂection imaging and a spectrophoto - metric - based turbidity assay . Taken together , these techniques demonstrated disparity between the two matrices with regard to their 3D structural and assem - bly properties . The architectural differences observed with TL - CRM ( Figure 2 ) were as dramatic as seen previously using scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) , conﬁrming the dependence of matrix structure on composition . 9 More speciﬁcally , when observed using TL - CRM , the ﬁbrils of type I collagen exhibited a larger diameter and greater degree of curvature compared to those of interstitial ECM matrix . Quan - titative analysis of the assembled matrices showed that ﬁber diameters within type I collagen matrices ( 508 6 117 nm ) were signiﬁcantly greater ( p , 0 . 05 ) than those within interstitial ECM ( 459 6 117 nm ; Figure 3 ) . An increase in ﬁbril density with increasing colla - gen concentration was suggested by the increase in spectrophotometric - based optical density ( OD ) mea - surements observed for both matrices ( Figure 4 ) . In both cases , the dependence of ﬁbril density on colla - gen concentration was compared and conﬁrmed visu - ally in 3D by TL - CRM . However , despite the lower net change in turbidity measurements at 405 nm , the ﬁbrils of the interstitial ECM appeared more densely packed compared to those of the puriﬁed collagen matrix when analyzed by TL - CRM . The lag phase of ﬁbrillogenesis was much shorter and the polymerization rate was increased for the interstitial ECM when compared with that of puriﬁed FIGURE 2 Confocal reﬂection images demonstrate the architectural differences between matrices prepared from type I collagen ( A , B ) and a complex mixture of interstitial ECM components ( C , D ) . Self - assembly of the matrices was conducted at collagen concentrations of 0 . 5 mg / mL ( A , C ) and 1 . 5 mg / mL ( B , D ) . Bar 5 5 m m . 226 Brightman et al . type I collagen . This was evident in results obtained from both the turbidity assay and the time - lapse im - aging ( Video 1 and Video 2 ; website : http : / / www . cyto . purdue . edu / biopolymer / videos . htm ) . Computer - aided 3D reconstruction of CRM im - ages allowed visualization of component ﬁbrils as well as their spatial distribution ( Figure 5 ) . The range of ﬁbril diameters quantitated from CRM was 300 – 800 nm for the type I collagen matrices . This range of ﬁbril diameters is similar to those reported by Friedl using CRM to image assembled collagen matrices . 8 For matrices prepared using air - drying and standard critical point drying techniques and visualized using SEM , average ﬁbril diameters were signiﬁcantly di - FIGURE 3 Fibril diameter distribution for matrices prepared from type I collagen and a complex mixture of ECM components . The mean diameter of component ﬁbrils of type I collagen matrices was signiﬁcantly greater than that observed for interstitial ECM ( p , 0 . 05 ) . FIGURE 4 Spectrophotometric turbidity measurements of ﬁbrillogenesis and matrix assembly of type I collagen and interstitial ECM at collagen concentrations ranging from 0 . 13 to 1 . 8 mg / mL . TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 227 minished and architectural discrepancies noted . 8 , 9 Only when analyzed by cryo - stage SEM , in which the specimen is viewed in a quick - frozen hydrated state , were the ﬁbril diameters similar to those observed with TL - CRM . 9 To evaluate the effects of GAG and / or PG mole - cules on the assembly differences observed between type I collagen and interstitial ECM , both TL - CRM and the turbidity assay were used to determine the effect of adding heparin , a common GAG of ECM , and decorin , a small proteoglycan of ECM , on matrix assembly and architecture of type I collagen . Collagen ﬁbrils formed in the presence of increasing concen - trations of heparin showed a progressive increase in diameter and decrease in density as detected by TL - CRM ( Figure 6 ) . Based upon quantitative analysis of CRM , no difference was observed in type I collagen ﬁbril diameters upon addition of low levels of heparin ( 0 . 5 U / mL ) . Alternatively , type I collagen ﬁbrils formed in the presence of higher levels of heparin , 6 U / mL , showed a signiﬁcant ( p , 0 . 05 ) increase in diameter from 508 6 117 to 594 6 124 nm ( Figure 7 ) . Kinetic analyses obtained from spectrophotometric data showed that the addition of heparin to type I collagen resulted in a decrease in lag time , increase in polymerization rate , and increase in optical density ( plateau phase ; Figure 8 ) . These effects of heparin on collagen assembly were closely matched with the data from the TL - CRM kinetic analysis ( Figure 9 ) . Inter - estingly , the increase in optical density measurements and average pixel values observed with increasing heparin concentration did not correlate with ﬁbril density as determined with TL - CRM . A decrease in vibrational motion during polymer - ization as well as a decrease in ﬁbril curvature after polymerization was complete were evident from the analyses by TL - CRM and suggested that collagen matrices formed in the presence of heparin consisted of more rigid ﬁbrils ( Video 3 , website : http : / / www . cyto . purdue . edu / biopolymer / videos . htm ) . These ob - servations were not detectable with the spectrophoto - metric - based assay . Also evident in TL - CRM , but not the turbidity assay , were the increased number of nucleation sites for ﬁbril initiation and increased ﬁbril bundling induced by heparin . Analysis of the effect of a proteoglycan on assem - bly properties was achieved by addition of a small proteoglycan , decorin , to the puriﬁed collagen solu - tion . A comparison of two ratios of collagen to decorin in the turbidity assay demonstrated that only at the lower ratio ( 20 : 1 , higher decorin concentration ) was the previously reported effect of decreased rate of collagen ﬁbril assembly observed ( Figure 10 ) . This is consistent with the proposed role of decorin in regu - lating the ordered assembly of ﬁbrils . 19 – 22 Analysis of the effects of decorin by TL - CRM demonstrated that FIGURE 5 Representative 3D reconstructed image of an assembled matrix prepared from a complex mixture of interstitial ECM components . FIGURE 6 Confocal reﬂection images of type I collagen matrices at a collagen concentration of 1 . 0 mg / ml formed in the presence of heparin at 0 U / mL ( A ) , 0 . 5 U / mL ( B ) , and 6 U / mL ( C ) . Bar 5 5 m m . 228 Brightman et al . in contrast to the effects of heparin , the addition of the small proteoglycan decorin at either concentration , did not signiﬁcantly alter the size or shape of the ﬁbrils in the completely assembled matrix ( Figure 11 ) . To further understand the effects of PG and GAG components on interstitial ECM assembly and archi - tecture , endogenous PG and GAG were removed from the starting tissue ( intestinal submucosa ) by extraction with 4 M guanidine prior to preparation of the solubi - lized interstitial ECM ( ECM 2 ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction of TL - CRM images revealed that re - constituted interstitial ECM prepared from tissue in which the PG / GAG components were still present ( ECM 1 ) contained ﬁbrils that were increased in den - sity , but decreased in diameter and length , compared to those of matrices in which the PG / GAG compo - FIGURE 7 Fibril diameter distribution for type I collagen matrices prepared in the presence of heparin at 0 , 0 . 5 , and 6 U / mL . Type I collagen ﬁbers formed in the presence of 6 U / mL heparin showed a signiﬁcant increase in ﬁber diameter ( p , 0 . 05 ) . FIGURE 8 Spectrophotometric turbidity measurements of ﬁbrillogenesis and matrix assembly of type I collagen at a collagen concentration of 1 . 0 mg / mL in the presence of heparin at concentrations ranging from 0 to 18 U / mL . FIGURE 9 Average pixel value of TL - CRM images plot - ted against time to demonstrate the polymerization kinetics of type I collagen alone and in the presence of 6 U / mL heparin . TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 229 nents were removed from the starting material ( Figure 12 ) . In fact , interstitial ECM polymerized in absence of the PG / GAG components appeared similar to ma - trices prepared with type I collagen alone . The in - creased change in OD exhibited by ECM 2 in the turbidity assay again was not predictive of the ﬁbril density observed by TL - CRM . Comparison of the kinetic parameters for ECM 2 and ECM 1 by TL - CRM and the turbidity assay showed only subtle differences in the initiation and rates of ﬁbrillogenesis ( Figure 13A ) . Upon addition of increasing concentrations of extracted PG / GAG com - ponents to the ECM 2 solution , a progressive increase in the lag time ( nucleation ) and a decrease in rate of ﬁbrillogenesis were observed ( Figure 13B ) . However , in these experiments , the addition of extracted PG / GAG components back to ECM 2 did not result in a complete restoration of turbidity or structural proper - ties observed with ECM 1 . These ﬁndings suggest that other ECM components that regulate ﬁbrillogen - esis and assembly may have been lost during the extraction and dialysis process . DISCUSSION The assembly , disassembly , and reassembly of colla - gen - based extracellular matrices are dynamic pro - cesses that occur in vivo during morphogenesis , growth , and repair . 23 The capacity of ECM molecules to self - assemble in vitro has been the root of basic science investigations regarding ECM ( tissue ) struc - ture and function and is now receiving increased interest for tissue engineering and medical device applications . Collagen is a major constituent of ECM in vivo and perhaps the most important molecule in stabilization of tissue structure . Collagen ﬁbrils ag - gregate to form ﬁbers or ﬁber bundles which in turn are organized into tissue - speciﬁc architecture such as ropes ( tendons and ligaments ) or interwoven meshes ( dermis ) . Several factors contribute to the regulation of collagen ﬁbril organization 23 both in vivo and in vitro , including ( 1 ) primary structural determinants in the collagen molecule , ( 2 ) molar ratios and spatial distributions of molecular types of collagen within a FIGURE 10 Spectrophotometric turbidity measurements of ﬁbrillogenesis and matrix assembly of 1 . 0 mg / mL colla - gen alone , } ; 1 . 0 mg / mL collagen and 12 . 5 m g / mL decorin , n ; 0 . 5 mg / mL collagen alone , (cid:140) ; and 0 . 5 mg / mL collagen and 25 m g / decorin , F . FIGURE 11 Confocal reﬂection images of type I collagen matrices formed in the presence of decorin . Collagen solu - tions at 1 . 0 mg / mL ( A ) or 0 . 5 mg / mL ( C ) were polymerized alone or in the presence of decorin at 12 . 5 m g / mL ( B ) or 25 m g / mL ( D ) , representing decorin : collagen rations of 1 : 80 and 1 : 20 , respectively . 230 Brightman et al . ﬁbril , ( 3 ) molar ratios and spatial distributions of noncollagenous macromolecules associated with the ﬁbril , ( 4 ) rates and extent of processing of N - terminal and C - terminal non - triple - helix sequences ; and ( 5 ) assembly conditions . Unfortunately , assembly algo - rithms that partition and position these molecules in 3D space resulting in the formation of functional connective tissues or scaffolds have yet to be deﬁned . The present study focuses on analyzing the composi - tional aspects of ECM assembly and presents a new imaging method , TL - CRM , for analysis of the mac - romolecular interactions of collagen and other natural biopolymers as they assemble into complex 3D ma - trices . Complex 3D collagen - based matrices , which are commonly used as cell culture substrates and are amena - ble to tissue engineering applications , must have spe - ciﬁc compositional and structural properties that sup - port tissue - speciﬁc cell attachment , proliferation , mi - gration , and differentiation . Previously , we found that FIGURE 12 Confocal reﬂection images of interstitial ECM at collagen concentration of 0 . 5 mg / ml in the presence ( A ) or absence ( B ) of PG / GAG components . Bar 5 5 m m . FIGURE 13 Spectrophotometric turbidity measurements of ﬁbrillogenesis and matrix assembly of interstitial ECM in the presence and absence of PG / GAG components . Assembly of interstitial ECM prepared from intestinal submucosa before ( ECM 1 ) and after ( ECM 2 ) extraction of PG / GAG components ( A ) . Assembly of ECM 2 at a collagen concentration of 1 . 0 mg / mL in the presence of extracted PG / GAG components at concentrations ranging from 0 to 1 . 6 HU / mL ( B ) . TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 231 speciﬁc cell types responded differently when grown in vitro on matrices formed from interstitial ECM vs puriﬁed type I collagen . 9 Upon evaluation of these two matrices using routine SEM analysis , consider - able disparity in the structure of individual ﬁbrils as well as in their organization was identiﬁed . However , because these matrices possess a signiﬁcant water content , structural artifacts introduced during speci - men processing , such as shrinkage due to critical point drying , were a concern . Confocal reﬂection mi - croscopy provides a method for studying the architec - ture of biopolymer matrices in a hydrated state with - out the requirement for extensive specimen manipu - lation . Unlike conventional microscopy techniques , CRM also provides microstructural information in 3D rather than 2D . We now report a ﬁrst application of CRM in a time - lapse mode for the evaluation of the kinetic and structural properties of ECM - based biopolymers as they assemble from a soluble to a gel phase . Results obtained with TL - CRM showed that type I collagen and interstitial ECM matrices differed with respect to their 3D ﬁbril morphology and organization as well as their kinetic parameters of assembly ( e . g . , length of lag phase and rate of polymerization ) . More speciﬁcally , when compared at the same collagen concentration , interstitial ECM showed an increased rate of assembly , decreased time of nucleation ( lag phase ) , increased density , and decreased diameter of ﬁbrils . Compositional analysis of the reconstituted interstitial ECM matrix shows that it contained at least three different collagens . Collagen types I and III were predominant , with lesser quantities of type V ( S . L . Voytik - Harbin , unpublished ) . Although the full portfolio of GAGs , PGs , and glycoproteins present in this reconstituted matrix have not been deﬁned , sev - eral members of these macromolecular families have been identiﬁed in the starting material , intestinal sub - mucosa . Five types of GAGs , including heparin sul - fate , hyaluronic acid , chondroitin sulfate A , derman - tan sulfate , and heparin , have been identiﬁed in intes - tinal submucosa . 14 Preliminary evidence also suggest that intestinal submucosa contains the PGs decorin and heparan sulfate proteoglycan as well as the gly - coprotein ﬁbronectin . 24 The presence of multiple types of collagen , PGs , and GAGs in the reconstituted interstitial ECM and the studies indicating their ef - fects on collagen assembly suggested that these com - ponents might be responsible for the differences in matrix architecture and assembly from that of type I collagen alone . PGs and GAGs are important structural and sig - naling components of connective tissue ECM and are known to inﬂuence ﬁbrillogenesis and matrix archi - tecture . 25 Early studies of developing tendon used histochemical stains in EM to correlate ﬁbril diame - ters and periodicities in the tissue with PG and GAG content . 26 Of GAG molecules , heparin is the best characterized regarding its interactions with collagen and its effects on matrix assembly . 27 – 32 This is likely due to the dramatic effects observed when heparin is combined with type I collagen and to the fact that , with the exception of hyaluronic acid , the other GAG molecules are usually present as component elements of proteoglycan molecules . TL - CRM demonstrated a dose - dependent increase in the rate of collagen ﬁbril - logenesis with heparin addition . Collagen ﬁbrils formed in the presence of heparin were increased in diameter and decreased in density . These ﬁndings are consistent with previous studies using transmission and scanning EM , whereby heparin was found to induce a dose - dependent increase in ﬁbril size of self - assembled type I collagen matrices , giving rise to a more porous but less cohesive matrix . 31 This effect appeared to be unique to heparin in comparison with several other GAG components of the ECM . 30 Interactions between the PG decorin and type I col - lagen have been shown also to inﬂuence the kinetics of collagen ﬁbrillogenesis as well as the diameter of and the distance between ﬁbrils both in vitro 19 – 21 , 33 – 35 and in vivo . 22 , 26 In the present study , the addition of decorin to type I collagen at a ratio of 1 : 20 was found to increase the lag phase or nucleation time by TL - CRM and the routinely used turbidity assay . These results are consis - tent with previous studies in which the effect of decorin on the kinetics of type I collagen ﬁbrillogenesis was studied by turbidity assay alone . 19 , 20 Unfortunately , the turbidity assay provides no information on the nature or orientation of the collagen ﬁbril . Separate studies involv - ing negative staining and SEM suggested that decorin from bovine tendon yielded collagen ﬁbrils that were structurally decreased in diameter . 35 More recently , Kuc and Scott found decorin to increase diameters of ﬁbrils formed . 33 With TL - CRM , no difference in matrix archi - tecture due to the addition of decorin to type I collagen at ratios of 1 : 20 and 1 : 80 was observed . The discrepancy in these results might be attributed to artifacts due to specimen processing for structural observations , varia - tion in GAG chain ( e . g . , degree of glycosylation ) , 34 tissue origin of decorin , 19 , 33 and differences in assembly conditions ( e . g . , buffer ) . 36 , 37 For these studies , the application of both TL - CRM and the routine spectrophotometric - based turbidity as - say allowed determination of consistency and corre - lation between results as well as the identiﬁcation of new information provided by TL - CRM . In studies where concentration , but not composition , of mole - cules was evaluated , increases in optical density mea - 232 Brightman et al . surements of turbidity or average pixel values of TL - CRM images consistently and accurately corre - lated with increased ﬁbril density as measured by TL - CRM . However , neither optical density measure - ments nor average pixel values were reliable in pre - dicting or comparing ﬁbril density of matrices differ - ing in composition . This discrepancy is likely due to the fact that light scattering ( reﬂection ) properties of collagen ﬁbrils can be altered biochemically and / or biophysically with the composition and structure of the ﬁbril . This observation is strong evidence warrant - ing complete analysis , kinetic as well as 3D structural , of matrices for fuller understanding of their unique architectural properties . At this time , only TL - CRM has the capability for such complete analysis without deleterious specimen manipulation . The simultaneous collection of structural and kinetic information offered by TL - CRM allows quantitation of speciﬁc ﬁbril properties ( e . g . , ﬁbril diameter ) and provides additional insight into the mechanisms of self - assembly including the deter - mination of number of nucleation sites and the occurrence of ﬁbril bundling . As with ﬂuorescence - based imaging , TL - CRM is a very sensitive tech - nique—it beneﬁts from the fact that although some very small reﬂecting particles or ﬁbrils cannot be resolved ( according to the Rayleigh criterion ) , they still can be detected and visualized . Based upon the Rayleigh criterion , the calculated resolution for our CRM system was 212 nm . Interestingly , the x – y resolution of a microscope operating in reﬂected light mode is not improved by the confocal iris , but the contrast transfer characteristics for ﬁne detail is much better than in the case of a nonconfocal microscope . 38 In these studies , optimized ﬁbril con - trast scanning distances ranged from 20 to 50 m m from the coverslip . Depth intensity of the ﬁbril contrast was diminished at deeper focus levels , indicating substantial scattering and refraction of the laser intensity . Although offering resolution that is signiﬁcantly less than that of SEM ( 2 – 8 nm ) , CRM readily provided 3D spatial information and did not require extensive processing techniques ( e . g . , physical sectioning and staining ) . High - throughput computer algorithms for quantitation of various ﬁbril and matrix parameters , including di - ameter , length , degree of curvature , and orientation within the matrix , are currently under development . The authors wish to thank Monica Shively and Steve Kelley for their excellent technical assistance with the confocal microscope and image analysis . REFERENCES 1 . Comper , W . D . ; Veis , A . Biopolymers 1977 , 16 , 2133 – 2142 . 2 . Comper , W . D . ; Veis , A . Biopolymers 1977 , 16 , 2113 – 2131 . 3 . Kadler , K . E . ; Holmes , D . F . ; Trotter , J . A . ; Chapman , J . A . Biochem J 1996 , 316 , 1 – 11 . 4 . Holmes , D . F . ; Watson , R . B . ; Kadler , K . E . Biochem Soc Trans 1991 , 19 , 808 – 811 . 5 . Miyahara , M . ; Hayashi , K . ; Berger , J . ; Tanzawa , K . ; Njieha , F . K . ; Trelstad , R . L . ; Prockop , D . J . J Biol Chem 1984 , 259 , 9891 – 9898 . 6 . Miyahara , M . ; Njieha , F . K . ; Prockop , D . J . J Biol Chem 1982 , 257 , 8442 – 8448 . 7 . McBride , D . J . , Jr . ; Kadler , K . E . ; Hojima , Y . ; Prockop , D . J . Matrix 1992 , 12 , 256 – 263 . 8 . Friedl , P . ; Maaser , K . ; Klein , C . E . ; Niggemann , B . ; Krohne , G . ; Zanker , K . S . Cancer Res 1997 , 57 , 2061 – 2070 . 9 . Voytik - Harbin , S . L . ; Brightman , A . O . ; Waisner , B . Z . ; Robinson , J . P . ; Lamar , C . H . Tiss Eng 1998 , 4 , 157 – 174 . 10 . Allen , T . D . ; Schor , S . L . ; Schor , A . M . Scan Electron Microsc 1984 , Pt 1 , 375 – 390 . 11 . Keith , C . H . ; Bird , G . J . ; Farmer , M . A . Biotechniques 1998 , 25 , 858 – 866 . 12 . Semler , E . J . ; Tjia , J . S . ; Moghe , P . V . Biotechnol Prog 1997 , 13 , 630 – 634 . 13 . Gunzer , M . ; Kampgen , E . ; Brocker , E . B . ; Zanker , K . S . ; Friedl , P . Adv Exp Med Biol 1997 , 417 , 97 – 103 . 14 . Hodde , J . P . ; Badylak , S . F . ; Brightman , A . O . ; Voytik - Harbin , S . L . Tiss Eng 1996 , 2 , 209 – 217 . 15 . Voytik - Harbin , S . L . ; Brightman , A . O . ; Kraine , M . R . ; Waisner , B . ; Badylak , S . F . J Cell Biochem 1997 , 67 , 478 – 491 . 16 . Wiechelman , K . J . ; Braun , R . D . ; Fitzpatrick , J . D . Anal Biochem 1988 , 175 , 231 – 237 . 17 . Marotta , M . ; Martino , G . Anal Biochem 1985 , 150 , 86 – 90 . 18 . Bjornsson , S . Anal Biochem 1993 , 210 , 282 – 291 . 19 . Vogel , K . G . ; Paulsson , M . ; Heinegard , D . Biochem J 1984 , 223 , 587 – 597 . 20 . Schonherr , E . ; Hausser , H . ; Beavan , L . ; Kresse , H . J Biol Chem 1995 , 270 , 8877 – 8883 . 21 . Weber , I . T . ; Harrison , R . W . ; Iozzo , R . V . J Biol Chem 1996 , 271 , 31767 – 31770 . 22 . Danielson , K . G . ; Baribault , H . ; Holmes , D . F . ; Gra - ham , H . ; Kadler , K . E . ; Iozzo , R . V . J Cell Biol 1997 , 136 , 729 – 743 . 23 . Birk , D . E . ; Linsenmayer , T . F . In Extracellular Matrix Assembly and Structure , Yurchenco , P . D . , Birk , D . E . , Mecham , R . P . , Eds . , Academic Press : San Diego , 1994 ; pp . 91 – 128 . 24 . McPherson , T . B . ; Badylak , S . F . Tiss Eng 1998 , 4 , 75 – 83 . 25 . Iozzo , R . V . Annu Rev Biochem 1998 , 67 , 609 – 652 . TL - CRM of Collagen Fibrillogenesis and ECM Assembly 233 26 . Scott , J . E . ; Orford , C . R . ; Hughes , E . W . Biochem J 1981 , 195 , 573 – 581 . 27 . Wood , G . C . Biochem J 1960 , 75 , 605 – 612 . 28 . Mathews , M . B . ; Decker , L . Biochem J 1968 , 109 , 517 – 526 . 29 . Obrink , B . Eur J Biochem 1973 , 33 , 387 – 400 . 30 . McPherson , J . M . ; Sawamura , S . J . ; Condell , R . A . ; Rhee , W . ; Wallace , D . G . Coll Relat Res 1988 , 8 , 65 – 82 . 31 . Guidry , C . ; Grinnell , F . J Cell Biol 1987 , 104 , 1097 – 1103 . 32 . Keech , M . K . J Biophys Biochem Cytol 1961 , 9 , 193 – 209 . 33 . Kuc , I . M . ; Scott , P . G . Connect Tissue Res 1997 , 36 , 287 – 296 . 34 . Sini , P . ; Denti , A . ; Tira , M . E . ; Balduini , C . Glycocon - jugate J 1997 , 14 , 871 – 874 . 35 . Vogel , K . G . ; Trotter , J . A . Coll Relat Res 1987 , 7 , 105 – 114 . 36 . Pogany , G . ; Hernandez , D . J . ; Vogel , K . G . Arch Bio - chem Biophys 1994 , 313 , 102 – 111 . 37 . Williams , B . R . ; Gelman , R . A . ; Poppke , D . C . ; Piez , K . A . J Biol Chem 1978 , 253 , 6578 – 6585 . 38 . Oldenbourg , R . ; Terada , H . ; Tiberio , R . ; Inoue , S . J Microsc 1993 , 172 , 31 – 39 . 234 Brightman et al .