Sridhar Kota Associate Professor , Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics The University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 e - mail : kota @ engin . umich . edu Kannan Sethuraman Assistant Professor , School of Business Administration The University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 Raymond Miller Research Assistant , Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics The University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 e - mail : ramill @ engin . umich . edu A Metric for Evaluating Design Commonality in Product Families Many companies develop a market strategy built around a family of products . These companies regularly add new product variations to the family in order to meet changing market needs or to attract a broader customer base . Although the core functionality remains essentially unchanged across the products within a family , new functions , feature combinations and technologies are incorporated into each new product . If allowed to grow unchecked , these component variations , commonly referred to as ‘‘complexity’’ , can result in a loss of productivity or quality . The challenge lies in an effective management of product variations in the design studio and on the manufacturing ﬂoor . The key is to minimize non - value added variations across models within a product family without lim - iting customer choices . In this paper we discuss the factors that contribute to product complexity in general , and present an objective measure , called the Product Line Com - monality Index , to capture the level of component commonality in a product family . Through our Walkman case study , we present a simple yet powerful method of bench - marking product families 1 . This method gauges the family’s ability to share parts effec - tively ( modularity ) and to reduce the total number of parts ( multi - functionality ) . @ S1050 - 0472 ~ 00 ! 02704 - 5 # Introduction and Motivation In today’s competitive market environment , companies can no longer achieve success through the mass production of a limited number of products . Companies competing in every segment of consumer goods and services are pursuing aggressive product ex - pansion strategies—in particular , line extensions @ 1 # . The U . S . automobile industry nicely captures this phenomenon of ever in - creasing product variety @ 2 , 3 # . Carmakers using a platform ap - proach design the essential features of a family of cars at the same time , instead of one model at a time . Our experience suggests that in many instances , although the system functionality remains es - sentially the same , the individual components share minimal de - sign and assembly features . The beneﬁts of standardization are widely known and most companies do standardize stock compo - nents such as fasteners . However , many companies are not yet standardizing their product - speciﬁc core components and thus fail to reap signiﬁcant beneﬁts in quality and cost . We believe that by standardizing the functional features , regardless of size variations , and by developing a concurrent reconﬁgurable tooling design , much of the non - value added complexity could be minimized . The ﬁrst step is to identify a set of functional building blocks across the family of products in a manner that clearly identiﬁes a core design . The strategy for compiling a core set of design building blocks is to analyze the existing designs , understanding the pack - aging constraints , material and manufacturing constraints and er - gonomic constraints . Then seek common functional design fea - tures based on conﬁguration similarities ~ geometric shapes and feature layout ! , kinematic similarities ~ joint types and motion ! , actuation and sensing similarities , etc . In this paper we analyze the factors that contribute to product complexity in general and suggest robust design / manufacturing strategies that can help minimize non value - added variation across models within a product family without limiting customer choices . We then propose an objective measure to capture the level of part commonality in a product family . Related Research The need for product variety in the market place has increased substantially over the past decade . As such , considerable research attention has been paid to the costs and beneﬁts of offering high product variety @ 1 , 5 # . The impact of design decisions that are made during the product development phase on a ﬁrm’s ability to offer high product variety has also attracted much research inter - est @ 6 , 7 # . Previous research @ 8 # observe that the unit costs for multi - item lines can be 25 % to 45 % higher than the theoretical cost of pro - ducing only the most popular item in the line . Two concepts that can potentially beneﬁt companies in economically providing the variety desired by the market are modularity and commonality . Pine @ 9 # emphasizes that the best method to achieve mass cus - tomization ~ that is , to minimize costs while maximizing individual customization ! is through creating modular components that can be conﬁgured into a wide variety of end products or services . In their discussion of modular design , Ulrich and Tung @ 10 # recom - mend the use of common design modules and packages . This would help companies to achieve faster completion of design projects and reduce costs . Companies such as Toyota and Sony have successfully been applying the principles of modularity to help keep their design and build complexity to a minimum @ 11 # . Standardizing components is expected to save development costs , tooling costs , administrative expenses and development time . Ulrich @ 7 # presents an excellent analysis of the potential linkages between the architecture of a product and product vari - ety . He also notes that sometimes , in an effort to standardize , ﬁrms will use a component with excess capability for a particular application . For example , a standard power supply may provide slightly more power than is strictly necessary in a particular ap - plication . However , a ﬁrm may choose to adopt the standard com - ponent even though the unit cost is higher than that of a compo - nent more closely matched to the application . To exploit the beneﬁts of commonality while generating highly differentiated end products , many ﬁrms are moving towards a family approach to product development . Many researchers @ 12 – 19 # have examined the beneﬁts of component commonality interms of reduced component inventory and improved service levels . 2 1 Many researchers in the past , including Sanderson and Uzumeri @ 4 # , have used the term ‘‘product family’’ to refer to a set of related products that are characterized by a high level of similarity in their functionality and in the potential to share components , subassemblies , and production processes . Contributed by the Design Theory and methodology Committee for publication in the Journal of Mechanical Design . Manuscript received Jun . 1998 . Associate Tech - nical Editor : J . Cagan . 2 Vakharia et al . @ 20 # provide a detailed overview of the existing literature on parts commonality . Copyright © 2000 by ASME Journal of Mechanical Design DECEMBER 2000 , Vol . 122 (cid:213) 403 Methodology Product Differentiating Components—Deﬁnition . In a given product family , each product will have a unique set of func - tions to appeal to the targeted market segments . The set of func - tions may include certain unique functions and / or a unique com - bination of functions that are different from those offered by its siblings . However , there will be certain ‘‘basic functions’’ that all products within a product family share ~ these are the very func - tions that justify grouping the products as a ‘‘family’’ ! . All physi - cal components and sub - assemblies that serve the basic functions which are common to two or more products within a family are expected to have the same physical characteristics . On the other hand , physical components and sub - assemblies that contribute to a product differentiating function may be different in their physical character when compared to their counterparts in other siblings . In fact , ‘‘counterparts’’ do not even exist if the function in question is new and unique to that particular product within the family of products . Such components are termed product differentiating . Factors Inﬂuencing the Proliferation of Non - Product Differ - entiating Components . We believe that non - value added de - sign variations arise primarily due to one or more of the following reasons : • Geometric variations to accommodate packaging constraints that are speciﬁc to a given model . • Introduction of different technologies across models . • Idiosyncrasies of different product teams . Of the three listed above , the ﬁrst two can be somewhat justi - ﬁed , although to a lesser extent than is usually claimed . The third reason cannot be justiﬁed at all and therefore every effort should be made to eliminate the non - value adding design variations aris - ing due to product development team idiosyncrasies . Other pres - sures on designers , such as evershortening product development lead times , may inﬂuence a design to stray from the optimal . While efforts should still be made , amidst these pressures , 3 to eliminate non - value added variation , such pressures are admit - tedly a fact of today’s competitive product development environment . Design Methodology for Component Standardization . What seems to be lacking in this struggle to gain control of prod - uct proliferation is a methodology to design a family of products . Even more fundamentally , a way to measure commonality across models is required to capture the extent to which a company is eliminating non - value - adding proliferation . Such a metric would also aid in benchmarking a ﬁrm’s initiative towards this goal with the best in the industry . Before we present our model for objective evaluation of commonality , we propose a methodology for standardization . The ﬁrst step towards standardization is to develop a complete function diagram . A function diagram captures the various func - tions that a system has to perform . A function just describes ‘‘ what to accomplish ’’ without any reference to ‘‘ how to accom - plish ’’ the task . Naturally , functions of a system can be classiﬁed as primary and auxiliary ~ secondary and tertiary ! functions . Each function can be divided into various sub - functions and so on , hierarchically , until a physical component is identiﬁed with each sub - function . In other words , a network of functions required to fulﬁll a given task would serve as a skeletal design , representing all that needs to be accomplished . We can also think of a product on the level of its features , which directly map to a set of func - tions . For instance , if we consider a Walkman radio / cassette player , one can readily identify some of the primary features as i ! Play , ii ! Stop , iii ! Fast - Forward , iv ! Eject , v ! AM Radio , and vi ! FM Radio . While most Walkmans share the same primary fea - tures , some may have additional product differentiating features . These features may be related to the primary features , such as Auto - Reverse ; or unrelated , such as a clock . Table 1 summarizes various features offered on some of the Sony Walkmans . Figure 1 illustrates the function diagram for a typical walkman that we examined . Figure 2 shows the parts inside the Sony product fam - ily that we studied . A designer developing a new product family ~ or adding a new product to an existing family ! must ﬁrst begin with a detailed function diagram of each model in the product family . The func - tional conﬁguration of a new product must be developed from the needs identiﬁed through market research . When all functions are described at the same high level of abstraction , it provides a com - mon ground for comparing alternate designs @ 21 – 23 # . It is then the responsibility of the product development teams to identify physical embodiments for each function . If adding a new product to an existing family , the team must not reinvent these embodi - ments , but should pull from the existing designs . Only in the case of new functions , distinct from all pre - existing functions , should new parts be designed . Additionally , these parts must be devel - 3 In fact , modular principles that tend to decrease non - value added variety ~ such as the reuse of common design modules ! , have become an enabler of reduced product development cycles . Fig . 1 Function diagram of non - product differentiating func - tions of a walman cassette player Table 1 Features across various models of Sony Walkman 404 (cid:213) Vol . 122 , DECEMBER 2000 Transactions of the ASME oped to conform to the framework of existing functional and physical conﬁgurations . While this procedure may seem to stiﬂe creativity on the level of component design , creativity is now required to integrate dif - ferentiating components with common architecture . It is not ben - eﬁcial to simply be creative in generating new design concepts . New designs must occur with minimum changes to the existing conﬁguration . More importantly , if some component or subassem - bly does not help in differentiating a product then it requires no reinventing . A design already exists for this component within the same product family . As we have stated above , one of the vital performance mea - sures of the product development effort is resource productivity . This can be deﬁned as the level of resources that are required to take the project from concept to market . In order to increase re - source productivity , it is imperative that ﬁrms conserve their ef - forts by seeking ingenious ways to share designs of non - differentiating features across models . When designing a new family , the product development team should study each function across the entire product family . The goal is to standardize as many components as possible for those functions that are common to the entire family . The design team should evaluate each function in terms of : 1 ‘‘How’’ the function is implemented , namely the working principle , 2 The number of components required to perform the function , and , 3 The different types of components that are used in each de - sign • Geometry ~ size and shape variations ! • Material differences across models • Manufacturing processes by which the parts are going to be made • Fastening and joining methods ~ type and number of fasten - ers , methods such as soldering , welding and adhesives etc . ! • Mechanisms • Actuation methods ~ electro - mechanical , pneumatic , and hy - draulic etc . ! • Sensors ~ Type of sensors : optical , pressure etc . ! 4 Vendor base 5 Number and type of secondary operations required . Cost of Complexity . The use of standard components typi - cally helps in lowering the complexity , cost and lead - time of product development . From the product design and development point of view , any variation in design leads to increased cost due to an increase in quality assurance testing , uncertainties associated with development , a lack of economies of scale , etc . However , not all design variations are treated equally by the manufacturer . De - pending on the production capabilities of the manufacturer , cer - tain types of product variation lead to a greater increase in costs than the others . Therefore , when we speak of the cost of product design complexity , we must do so in the context of a manufactur - ing facility . For instance , let us consider two different parts be - longing to the same product family , produced on the same pro - duction line but differing in one of the size dimensions . If the manufacturing method used were stamping , a change - over would involve only a simple indexing of the right size tool in real time to accommodate the different part sizes . Whereas , if the parts were injection molded , the same change in dimension from one part to another may require changing dies . This would be a much more time - consuming task when compared to automatically indexing a stamping tool . This serves to illustrate that it is difﬁcult to map variations in product features to increases in manufacturing cost in the absence of information about the capabilities of the manufacturing facility and the process by which the parts are manufactured . Some of the major factors which inﬂuence the ease or difﬁculty with which a certain product design change can be handled in a given manufacturing facility are : • Material handling system , • Level of reconﬁgurability of tooling • Part size - dunnage and space requirements • Level of automation • Universal grippers • Worker training and skill levels • Equipment maintenance schedules • Compatibility of newer operations with existing operations etc . In fact , the product must be designed in concert with the capabilities / limitations of the selected manufacturing process . Therefore in order to reap maximum beneﬁts from a manufac - turing system , we stress the importance of the following attributes being common across all products within a family : • Manufacturing methods • Part locators and reference surfaces • Manufacturing and assembly related features • Fastening and joining schemes • General spatial orientation of the product features Deﬁnition of Complete Commonality Across Models . As - pects that differentiate members of a product family may include a set of components and / or characteristics that inﬂuence the per - Fig . 2 Four of many members of the Sony Walkman family of products demonstrating 87 % part commonality in non - product differentiating functions . FX - 221 costs about twice as much as EX - 122 in retail market . (cid:132) See Tables 1 and 2 (cid:133) Journal of Mechanical Design DECEMBER 2000 , Vol . 122 (cid:213) 405 formance . They may also include augmenting features , safety fea - tures , aesthetic appeal , and reliability as reﬂected in the warranty information . Conformance quality is the traditional deﬁnition of quality such as the one given by Taguchi : Every product delivers the target performance each time the product is used , under all intended operating conditions , and throughout its intended life with no harmful side effects . Firms should strive to standardize all component characteristics that neither help in differentiating a product nor inﬂuence the conformance quality of a product . The component characteristics that we consider here are its geometry , size , manufacturing method , and fastening and joining methods . In other words , we say that complete commonality across products within a product family is achieved if all component characteristics that are 1 ! non - product differentiating , and 2 ! non - inﬂuencers of conformance quality , have been standardized . Product Line Commonality Index (cid:132) PCI (cid:133) . As we strive to compare different manufacturers on their efforts towards stan - dardizing components across models , we would like to have an objective measure to capture the existing differences in product design strategies . One simple metric would be the percentage of components that are common across a product family . However , such a metric would over - look the degree of differentiation in a product family , penalizing those families that have a broader fea - ture mix . The degree to which products in a family are differen - tiated is a marketing strategy decision , and thus beyond the scope of our metric . Rather , we seek a metric that only penalizes those differences that should ideally be common , given the product mix . In developing this measure of commonality , we considered the following factors : • The number of different types of components that can be ideally standardized across models ~ i . e . , those that are non - product differentiating and non - inﬂuencers of conformance quality ! , • Geometric features of components in terms of their sizes and shapes , • Materials used across these components , • Manufacturing processes that were used for their production , and , • Part assembly and fastening schemes that were used . We deﬁne Product Line Commonality Index ~ PCI ! as follows : PCI 5 ( i 5 1 P CCI i 2 ( i 5 1 P MinCCI i ( i 5 1 P MaxCCI i 2 ( i 5 1 P MinCCI i 3 100 ( 1 ) where , CCI i 5 Component Commonality Index for component i 5 n i 3 f 1i 3 f 2i 3 f 3i MaxCCI i 5 Maximum possible Component Commonality Index for component i 5 N MinCCI i 5 Minimum possible Component Commonality Index for component i 5 n i 3 1 n i 3 1 n i 3 1 n i 5 1 n i 2 P 5 Total number of non - differentiating components that can potentially be standardized across models N 5 Number of products in the product family n i 5 Number of products in the product family that have com - ponent i f 1i 5 Size and shape factor for component i f 2i 5 Materials and manufacturing processes factor for compo - nent i f 3i 5 Assembly and fastening schemes factor for component i Substituting the values of CCI i , MaxCCI i and MinCCI i in the expression for PCI , we obtain the following formula for product line commonality index : PCI 5 ( i 5 1 P n i 3 f 1 i 3 f 2 i 3 f 3 i 2 ( i 5 1 P 1 n i 2 ~ P 3 N ! 2 ( i 5 1 P 1 n i 2 3 100 ( 2 ) The three factors f 1i , f 2i , and f 3i are assumed to be independent of one another and the PCI score is expressed as a percentage and takes values between 0 and 100 . A PCI score of 0 indicates that none of the non - differentiating parts are shared across models , or if they are shared , their sizes / shapes , materials / manufacturing pro - cesses , and assembly processes are all different . A perfect score of 100 would indicate that all the non - differentiating parts are shared across models and that they are of identical size and shape , made using the same material and manufacturing process , and the fas - tening methods used are identical . When computing the PCI , the ﬁrst step is to sort through all of the components and determine which are non - product differenti - ating . These are the only components considered for the PCI . Tables 2 , 3 , and 4 show calculations of the PCI for three Walkman product families . Each row in these tables represents one compo - nent , i , that is non - product differentiating , and may be shared across different members of the family . A component is termed , ‘‘shared’’ if it is present in more than one model , and it performs the same core function . Such a component is not necessarily iden - tical from model to model . It can potentially vary in size , shape , material , or fastening method , as described below . For each component i , we determine the component common - ality index ~ CCI ! . This measure captures two important pieces of information : 1 The extent to which the family shares architecture for the functions represented by component i , and 2 The extent to which the size , shape , materials , manufacturing process and assembly methods are shared across the product family . When n i 5 N , the function that maps to component i is accom - plished using the same architecture in all models . However , if n i , N , this implies that the function ~ that component i maps to ! is performed with a different set of components in at least one model , and thus the architecture is different . In order to capture the size , material and assembly variations of the component across models , we have introduced the three factors f 1i , f 2i , and f 3i . The size factor , f 1i , is computed as the ratio of the greatest number of models that share component i with identical size and shape to the greatest possible number of models that could have shared the component i with identical size and shape ~ namely , n i ! . Ideally , if in all models that share component i , the component is identical in size and shape , then the size factor f 1i would equal 1 . On the other hand , if no two models in the family have this component identi - cal in size and shape , then the size factor f 1i would take its lowest value ~ namely , 1 / n i ! . The other two factors , f 2i and f 3i , are deter - mined in a similar manner . When calculating the PCI , in order to gain values between 0 and 100 we subtract the minimum possible value of the CCI and normalize by the maximum possible value of the CCI . The mini - mum value occurs when each of the size / shape , materials , and assembly factors take on their lowest value . In this case , CCI i 5 n i 3 1 / n i 3 1 / n i 3 1 / n i 5 1 / n i2 . The maximum value occurs when f 1i , f 2i , and f 3i have a value of 1 , and the component is present in 406 (cid:213) Vol . 122 , DECEMBER 2000 Transactions of the ASME each of the family members ( n i 5 N ) . In this case , CCI i 5 N . Tables 2 , 3 , and 4 show tabulated calculations of the PCI for each of three Walkman product families . The closer the PCI index is to 100 , the better are the ﬁrm’s efforts towards a value optimizing design . In the case of Sony’s family of Walkmans ~ not including Sports models ! , the PCI was determined to be 87 . 0 ~ see Table 2 ! , for the RCA family of prod - ucts , it was determined to be 38 . 4 ~ see Table 3 ! , and for Radio Shack , it was 43 . 5 ~ see Table 4 ! . To give the PCI an intuitive appeal , we can think of it as the percentage of non - product differ - entiating components that are identical . We can say that Sony achieves 87 % commonality in non - product differentiating compo - nents , while Radio Shack and RCA achieve roughly 40 % com - monality for non - product differentiating components . If we weigh this information together with the total number of components in the product family , we can begin to assess the relative impact that a change in the PCI value would have in terms of manufacturing and development costs . We make no assumption or precondition that the PCI be applied only to families with uniform architecture . The core function which comes from the function diagram describe ‘‘what to ac - complish’’ without reference to ‘‘how to accomplish . ’’ Thus , the core function is independent of architecture . If the architecture of each member of the family were the same , then n i ~ in the 3rd column of the PCI Table ! would always be equal to N . This analysis of product line commonality using the PCI cap - tures the differences in component level commonality observed in the same product family across three different manufacturers . The differences in the level of commonality of components across these product families should account for some very signiﬁcant differences in the product development costs and quality of these products . In the case of Sony , sharing as many as 87 % of the non - product differentiating components between the low - end ~ $ 27 ! and the high - end ~ $ 90 ! models should ensure not only higher quality across products , but also enable them to lower their overall development costs . Validation . The objective of the PCI is to provide a percent common of non - differentiating components . It is tempting to do away with PCI , a seemingly complex metric , and employ a straight forward measure of percent of components that are com - mon across a product line . The difﬁculty with such oversimpliﬁ - cation lies in deﬁning what is ‘‘common’’ ? Is a component ‘‘com - mon’’ if it is present in two of the ﬁve family members ? Or does it have to be present in all ﬁve ? An added level of complexity in Table 2 PCI table for Sony Walkman family (cid:132) including FX - 101 , EX - 122 , FX - 221 , FX - 321 (cid:133) Journal of Mechanical Design DECEMBER 2000 , Vol . 122 (cid:213) 407 the metric is required to ‘‘scale’’ the level of commonality , depending on how many members of the family share the component . The PCI table groups information that is more valuable than simple quoting of a percentage . This accounts for the inclusion of the factors f 1 , f 2 , and f 3 . In the most straight forward approach , two parts would be considered common if they had identical size , geometry , and material . Otherwise , they would be uncommon . However , by splitting up the ‘‘common - ness’’ of parts into three categories , it gives more information to the user . A glance at the PCI table will not only tell the user that , for example , their PCI ranks low in comparison to a competitor’s , but also that they can target improvement activity on a speciﬁc aspect such as fastening and assembly scheme , or architecture . Benchmarking Through Normalized Product Line Com - monality Index . In order to benchmark one company’s efforts towards an increased sharing of components across products within a product family with the efforts of another company , we need to consider both the product line commonality index ~ PCI ! and also the total number of components that are present in each of the products under consideration . It is important to remember that it is difﬁcult to identify a generic strategy that can adequately address the tradeoffs between commonality and the total number of parts . The issues are complex and necessarily speciﬁc to the particular product and manufacturing system . However , the nor - malized PCI presented here can give an indication as to how well a particular ﬁrm’s strategy is working when compared to compet - ing ﬁrms . Generally , a modular design tends to have more components than a multi - functional design performing the same overall func - tion . The modular design will also tend to be more suited for sharing parts across products . On the other hand , a product family designed on the basis of multi - functional design principles will tend to have fewer common parts across models that are less suited for sharing . An optimum balance exists between the func - tional content that each part should have and the level of com - monality that should exist across products within a product fam - ily . The ultimate goal of any product development team is not only to maximize the level of shared parts across models but also to effectively control the number of parts per product . Fewer parts per product results in fewer part management related transactions and thereby minimizes the level of complexity faced on the shop ﬂoor . This is the rationale for normalizing the PCI index for the number of parts that are used in each of the models . Table 3 PCI table for RCA Walkman family (cid:132) including RP - 1800 , RP - 1810 , RP - 1820 , RP - 1875 , RP - 1880 (cid:133) 408 (cid:213) Vol . 122 , DECEMBER 2000 Transactions of the ASME In Table 5 we show the PCI values , the number of parts under consideration , and the normalized value of PCI . The normalized value of PCI is computed as follows : For each company under consideration , Normalized PCI for company j 5 5 PCI j Max ~ PCI ! 3 Min ~ Numparts ! Numparts j 3 100 ( 3 ) where , PCI j 5 Product line commonality index for the company j Max ~ PCI ! 5 Maximum PCI value across all companies under consideration Numparts j 5 Number of parts for the product family of com - pany j Min ~ Numparts ! 5 Minimum number of parts that are present across all companies under consideration From the above expression , we can see that a company would have a high value for the normalized PCI if it has a high PCI and a low number of parts . Table 5 shows values for the normalized PCI for Sony , RCA , and Radio Shack . Like the PCI , the normalized PCI is expressed as a percentage and will take on values up to 100 . We can say that a high value of the normalized PCI means that the ﬁrm is doing well in its efforts towards standardization and reduction of part numbers . Sony has done the best across the three companies under consideration for the speciﬁc set of products that we had studied . Radio Shack had the worst score for the normalized PCI and it shows that they not only had more part numbers than their counterparts , but also did a poor job in standardizing these parts across models . There is an intuitive feel to the normalized PCI value as well . For both the PCI and the number of parts Radio Shack performs about twice as ‘‘poorly’’ as the best company , among those under consideration . This compounds and gives a normalized PCI value of roughly 25 percent . These results are speciﬁc to the product families under investigation and does not reﬂect the overall effectiveness of these ﬁrms . Closure In this paper , we have analyzed the factors that contribute to product complexity in general , and developed an objective mea - sure to capture the level to which ﬁrms successfully share non - product differentiating parts across products in a given product family . The PCI measure provides designers with a method by which they can benchmark their performance with the best in the industry and it also highlights potential opportunities for improve - ment in design efﬁciencies . Acknowledgments This study was supported by Ford Motor Company , Dearborn , Michigan under the University Grants Program ~ 1997 ! . The au - thors would like to thank undergraduate seniors , Ms . Michelle Lornz and Ms . Tara Greene , for their research assistance in diss - section of several walkmans and preparation of PCI tables . References @ 1 # MacDufﬁe , J . P . , Sethuraman , K . , and Fisher , M . L . , 1996 , ‘‘Product Variety and Manufacturing Performance : Evidence from the International Automotive Assembly Plant Study , ’’ Manage . Sci . @ 2 # Clark , K . , and Fujimoto , T . , 1991 , Product Development Performance : Strat - egy , Organization and Management in the World Auto Industry , Harvard Busi - ness School Press , Boston . @ 3 # Womack , J . P . , Jones D . , and Roos , D . , 1990 , ‘‘The Machine that Changed the World , ’’ Rawson Associates , New York . @ 4 # Sanderzon , S . W . , and Uzumeri , V . , 1997 , ‘‘Managing Product Families , ’’ Irwin . @ 5 # Kekre , S . , and Srinivasan , K . , 1990 , ‘‘Broader product Line : A Necessity to Achieve Success ? , ’’ Manage . Sci . , 36 , No . 10 , pp . 1216 – 1231 . @ 6 # Whitney , D . E . , 1993 , ‘‘Nippendenso Co . Ltd : A Case study of Strategic Product Design , ’’ Res . Eng . Des . , 5 , pp . 1 – 20 . @ 7 # Ulrich , K . , 1995 , ‘‘The Role of Product Architecture in the Manufacturing Firm , ’’ Res . Policy , 24 , pp . 419 – 440 . @ 8 # Sethuraman , K . , 1994 , ‘‘The Impact of Product Variety on Manufacturing Performance : An Empirical Investigation of the World Automobile Industry , ’’ Table 4 PCI table for Radio Shack Walkman family (cid:132) including 14 - 1202 , 14 - 1216 , 14 - 1218 , 14 - 1227 (cid:133) Table 5 Comparison of product line strategies for Sony , RCA , and Radio Shack Journal of Mechanical Design DECEMBER 2000 , Vol . 122 (cid:213) 409 Ph . D . thesis , Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania . @ 9 # Pine , J . , 1992 , Mass Customization : The New Frontier in Business Competi - tion , Harvard Business School Press . @ 10 # Ulrich , K . , and Tung , K . , 1991 , ‘‘Fundamental of Product Modularity , ’’ ASME Winter Annual Meeting Symposium on Issues in Design / Manufacturing Integration , Atlanta . @ 11 # Brooke , L . , Nov . , 1994 , ‘‘Coping with Complexity , ’’ Automotive Industries . @ 12 # Baker , K . R . , Magazine , M . J . , and Nuttle , H . L . W . , 1986 , ‘‘The Effect of Commonality on Safety Stock in a Simple Inventory Model , ’’ Manage . Sci . , 31 , pp . 982 – 988 . @ 13 # Gerchak , Y . , Magazine , M . J . , and Gamble , A . B . , 1988 , ‘‘Component Com - monality with Service Level Requirements , ’’ Mandge . Sci . , 34 , pp . 753 – 760 . @ 14 # Dertouzos , L . M . , Lester , R . , and Solow , R . , 1989 , Made in America : Regain - ing the Productive Edge , The MIT Press , Cambridge . @ 15 # Farrell , J . , and Saloner , G . , 1985 , ‘‘Standardization , Compatibility , and Inno - vation , ’’ Rand J . Econ . , 16 , No . 1 , pp . 70 – 83 . @ 16 # Farrell , J . , and Saloner , G . , 1986 , ‘‘Installed Base and Compatibility : In , Prod - uct Preannouncements , and predation , ’’ Am . Econ . Rev . , 76 , No . 5 , pp . 940 – 955 . @ 17 # Fonte , W . G . , 1994 , ‘‘A deproliferation Methodology for the Automotive In - dustry , ’’ Masters of Science Thesis , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Leaders for Manufacturing Program . @ 18 # Gupta , S . , and Krishnan , V . K . , 1997 , ‘‘A Product Family - Based Assembly Sequence Design Methodology for the Economic Attainment of Product Va - riety , ’’ Working Paper University of Texas , Austin . @ 19 # Lee , H . , and Billington , C . , September , 1992 , ‘‘Designing Products and Pro - cesses for Postponement , ’’ presented at the conference on Design Manage - ment , Anderson Graduate School of Management , UCLA . @ 20 # Vakharia , Asoo , Parmenter , David , and Sanchez , Susan , 1996 , ‘‘The Operating Impact of Parts Commonality , ’’ Journal of Operations Management , 14 , No - vember . @ 21 # Iyengar , G . , Lee , C - L , and Kota , S . , 1994 , ‘‘Towards an Objective Evaluation of Alternate Designs , ’’ ASME J . Mech . Des . , 116 , pp . 487 – 492 . @ 22 # Kota , S . , and Chiou , S . J . , 1992 , ‘‘Conceptual Design of Mechanisms Based on Computational Synthesis and Simulation of Kinematic Building Blocks , ’’ J . Res . Eng . Des . No . 4 , pp . 75 – 87 . @ 23 # Kota , S . , and Lee , C . L . , 1993 , ‘‘A General Framework for Conﬁguration Design Part 1 : Methodology , Part 2 : Application to Hydraulic Systems Syn - thesis , ’’ J . Eng . Des . , 4 , No . 4 , pp . 277 – 303 . 410 (cid:213) Vol . 122 , DECEMBER 2000 Transactions of the ASME