Clathrin - independent Pinocytosis Is Induced in Cells Overexpressing a Temperature - sensitive Mutant of Dynamin Hanna Damke , * Takeshi Baba , * Alexander M . van der Bliek , * and Sandra L . Schmid * * Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 ; and * Department of Biological Chemistry , University of California , Los Angeles , California 90024 Abstract . A stable HeLa cell line expressing a dynamin mutant , dyn ts , exhibits a temperature - sensitive defect in endocytic clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Dyn ts car - ries a point mutation , G273D , corresponding to the Drosophila shibire tsl allele . The ts - defect in receptor - mediated endocytosis shows a rapid onset ( < 5 min ) and is readily reversible . At the nonpermissive temper - ature ( 38°C ) HRP uptake is only partially inhibited . Moreover , when cells are held at the nonpermissive temperature , fluid phase uptake fully recovers to wild - type levels within 30 min , while receptor - mediated en - docytosis remains inhibited . The residual HRP uptake early after shift to the nonpermissive temperature and the induced HRP uptake that occurs after recovery are insensitive to cytosol acidification under conditions that potently inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis of Tfn . Together , these results suggest that a dynamin - and clathrin - independent mechanism contributes to the to - tal constitutive pinocytosis in HeLa cells and that dyn ts cells rapidly and completely compensate for the loss of clathrin - dependent endocytosis by inducing an alter - nate endocytic pathway . YNAMIN is a 100 - kD GTPase originally isolated as a nucleotide - dependent microtubule binding pro - tein ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) . Dynamin func - tion in vivo has been studied using transiently ( Herskovits et al . , 1993 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) and stably ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) transfected cells overexpressing dominant in - terfering , GTPase - defective mutants . Receptor - mediated endocytosis is potently and specifically inhibited in stably transformed cells with inducible expression of a dynamin mutant ( designated K44A and previously referred to as elel ) defective in GTP binding ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Phe - notypic characterization of these cells established that dy - namin function is required for the formation of constricted coated pits at the plasma membrane . Importantly , no other vesicular trafficking events , including protein trans - port through the exocytic pathway , receptor recycling through the endosomal pathway or clathrin - coated vesi - cle - mediated sorting of lysosomal hydrolases were af - fected ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Consistent with this specificity of function and even when overexpressed > 20 - fold , mem - brane - associated dynamin is exclusively localized to clath - tin - coated pits on the plasma membrane ( Damke et al . , Address correspondence to Sandra L . Schmid , Department of Cell Biol - ogy , The Scripps Research Institute , 10666 N . Torrey Pines Rd . , La Jolla , CA 92037 . Tel . : ( 619 ) 554 - 2311 . Fax : ( 619 ) 554 - 6253 . E - mail : slschmid @ scripps . edu . Dr . Baba ' s current address is Department of Anatomy , Yamanashi Medical University , Yamanashi 409 - 38 , Japan . This is manuscript number 9220 - CB from The Scripps Research Insti - tute . 1994 ) . These membrane binding sites are apparently satu - rable since in cells overexpressing dynamin , much of the excess is present in the cytosolic pool . These studies established the specificity of dynamin function in vivo . However , prolonged incubation times ( 24 - 48 h ) were required to allow sufficient accumulation of mutant dynamin to functionally overwhelm endogenous dynamin . Therefore , we were unable to establish that dy - namin was directly required for coated vesicle budding in mammalian cells . Genetic evidence for a direct role of dy - namin in endocytosis comes from phenotypic analysis of the temperature - sensitive ( ts ) shibire mutant of Dro - sophila . The shibire gene encodes a protein that is 70 % identical to mammalian dynamin ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 1991 ) . Within a minute af - ter shifting shibire ts flies to the nonpermissive tempera - ture , endocytosis is blocked and coated pits accumulate at the plasma membrane in all tissues examined ( Poodry and Edgar , 1979 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983a ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ; Tsuruhara et al . , 1990 ) . While only one isoform of dynamin has been detected in Drosophila , at least three isoforms of dynamin , each ~ 70 % identical to shibire and > 70 % identical to each other have been detected in mam - mals . Dynamin - 1 , the originally identified protein , is ex - clusively expressed in neuronal cells ( Nakata et al . , 1991 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) . Dynamin - 2 is a ubiquitously expressed isoform ( Cook et al . , 1994 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) that has also been localized to en - docytic clathrin - coated pits ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) and ap - pears to be functionally equivalent to dynamin - 1 . Dy - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 95 / 10 / 69 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , Number 1 . October 1995 69 - 80 69 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 namin - 3 is a testes specific isoform of unknown function ( Nakata et al . , 1993 ) . Whether these other dynamin iso - forms are functionally distinct from the single shibire gene product is not known . Fluid phase pinocytosis is blocked in shibire cells ( Ko - saka and Ikeda , 1983a ; Tsuruhara et al . , 1990 ) suggesting that the shibire protein is required for all pinocytic events . While only coated invaginations are seen to accumulate in nonneuronal tissues ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983a ) , both coated and noncoated invaginations accumulate on presynaptic membranes at the nonpermissive temperature ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983b ) . In contrast , fluid phase endocytosis proceeds normally in mammalian cells overexpressing dy - namin - 1 mutants ( Herskovits et al . , 1993 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) , indicating the existence of a dynamin - independent and most likely clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . While it is clear that fluid phase pinocytosis can occur in mammalian cells under conditions that inhibit clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) , the existence and function of a constitutive clathrin - independent en - docytic pathway remains controversial ( Hansen et al . , 1991 ; Watts and Marsh , 1992 ) . For example , we ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) and others ( Watts and Marsh , 1992 ; Cupers et al . , 1994 ) have argued that clathrin - independent mecha - nisms of pinocytosis can be induced in response to per - turbations in clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Thus , the existence of a constitutive clathrin - independent pinocytic mechanism and the potential role of mammalian dynamin in this process remain unresolved . To address these issues , a point mutation ( G273D ) was introduced into human dynamin - 1 to generate a mutant , designated dyn t ~ , that is homologous to the shibird sl pro - tein . Stable HeLa cell transformants expressing dyn ts in a tetracycline - responsive manner were established . Here we show that these dyn ts cells , like their shibire counterparts , exhibit a rapid , reversible and temperature - sensitive block in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Furthermore , we show that a dynamin - independent pinocytic process , accounting for ~ 30 % of constitutive fluid phase uptake , continues af - ter the temperature shift and that this pathway is induced within 30 min to fully restore fluid phase uptake to wild - type levels . The fluid phase pinocytosis that occurs at both early and late times after shift to the nonpermissive tem - perature is insensitive to cytosol acidification , a condition that selectively perturbs clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ; Cupers et al . , 1994 ) . These results suggest that a clathrin and dynamin - independent pinocytic pathway is induced in dyn t ~ cells to rapidly compensate for the loss of the clathrin - dependent contribution to bulk en - docytosis . Materials and Methods Reagents The monoclonal anti - hemagglulinin antibody , 12CA5 , was provided by I . A . Wilson ( The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . Mouse mono - clonal anti - dynamin antibodies , hudy - 1 and hudy - 3 , were prepared against recombinant human dynamin - 1 as described ( Warnock et al . , 1995 ) . Pri - mary monoclonal antibodies were purified by affinity chromatography on protein G - Sepharose ( Pierce Chemicals , Rockford , IL ) . Texas Red - conju - gated secondary antibody , Texas Red - conjugated transferrin and rhodamine phalloidin were purchased from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Human diferric transferrin ( Tfn ) 1 was from Boehringer - Mannheim ( In - dianapolis , IN ) . Tfn was biotinylated as previously described ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . Cytochalasin D , pronase and [ 4 - ( 2 - aminoethyl ) - benzenesulfo - nylfluoride , HCI ] ( AEBSF ) were from Calbiochem Novabiochem ( La Jolla , CA ) . 5 - [ N , N - Hexamethylene ] - amiloride and reagent - grade chemi - cals were obtained from Sigma Chem . Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) or Boehringer Mannheim unless otherwise specified . Preparation of cDNA Constructs A temperature - sensitive mutant of human dynamin , designated dyn ts , was generated by site - directed mutagenesis of the glycine at position 273 to as - partic acid corresponding to the known point mutation in the shibire is1 al - lele ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . Dyn ts was introduced into the pTMl - dyn wt constructs using two different PCRs with Pfu polymerase ( Stratagene Inc . , La Jolla , CA ) as previously described ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) . The cDNA was then modified by adding a linker fragment to the 5 ~ end of the coding sequence for fusion to the sequence , MEYDVP - DYAH , containing an hemagglutinin ( HA ) epitope , as described in Damke et al . , 1994 . Subsequently the verified cDNA for the dyn t ~ mutant was subcloned from the modified vaccinia expression constructs pTM1 - HA - dyn ts into the tetracycline - inducible expression plasmid pUHD10 - 3 as described ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Generation of Stably Transformed Mutant Cell Lines The stable HeLa cell line tTA - HeLa , expressing the chimeric tetracycline regulatable transcription activator was kindly provided by H . Bujard ( ZMBH , Heidelberg , FRG ) _ Cells were maintained in DME supple - mented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS , 100 U / ml each of penicillin and strepto - mycin and 400 o , g / ml active G418 ( Geneticin ; GIBCO BRL , Gaithers - burg , MD ) . The construct pUHD10 - 3 encoding HA - tagged dynamin ts was used for the generation of stably transformed tTA - HeLa cells with tightly regulated expression of dynamin as described in Damke et al . ( 1995 ) . Cell Culture Conditions for tTA HeLa Cells Stably Transformed with the Dynamin cDNA Cells were cultured at 37°C in DME , 10 % FBS , 100 U / ml each of penicil - lin and streptomycin , 400 i ~ g / ml G418 ( selects for transactivator ) , 1 - 2 I ~ g / ml tetracycline ( suppresses dynamin expression ) , and 200 ng / ml puromy - cin to select for positive clones . Puromycin resistant clones were screened for their ability to express dynamin 48 h after induction in the absence of tetracycline at 37°C by SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis . For phenotypic analysis , subconfluent cultures were detached with trypsin / EDTA and ~ 1 . 2 × 106 cells were plated on 100 - mm culture dishes in the presence ( uninduced ) or absence ( induced ) of tetracycline and incu - bated at the permissive temperature of 32°C at least 72 h before use . At this point the cells were < ~ 65 % confluent . As dynamin expression and pheuotype were highly dependent on the confluency of the cells it is im - portant to use the cells at subconfluent density for biochemical and mor - phological analysis . This is also recommended for permanent culture of uninduced cells growing at 37°C . Inducible expression is also dependent on the passage number , and cells were therefore used at low passage num - ber and routinely replaced by freshly thawed cells . Western Blot Analysis Cells were washed twice with PBS and detached with PBS , 5 mM EDTA . Cell pellets were immediately lysed in 1× Laemmli sample buffer and ly - sates were analyzed by SDS PAGE on 7 . 5 % gels and electroblotted to BA - S 83 nitrocellulose ( Schleicher & Schuell , Inc . , Keene , NH ) by stan - dard methods ( Burnette , 1981 ) . Nonspecific protein binding was blocked with 2 % nonfat dry milk powder in Tris - buffered saline containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 . The blots were incubated with the primary anti - dynamin anti - body hudy - 3 at 0 . 1 p . g / ml , followed by detection with an alkaline phos - phatase - conjugated secondary goat anti - mouse antibody ( Pierce Chem . Co . , Rockford , IL ) and developed with an alkaline phosphatase color de - velopment kit ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : BSST , biotinylated - transferrin ; wt , wild - type ; tet , tetracycline ; Tfn , transferrin ; Tfn - R , transferrin - receptor ; HA , hemagglutinin ; ts , temperature - sensitive . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 70 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 Internalization Assays Internalization assays using biotinylated - transferrin ( BSST ) were per - formed as previously described ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) . Cells induced at the permissive temperature were detached with PBS , 5 raM EDTA at RT for 5 rain , briefly rinsed , and resuspended in PBS containing i mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaC12 , and 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 . The cell suspensions were then preshifted for various times at 30 or 38°C in waterbaths in which tem - perature was carefully adjusted using a digital thermometer . After the preshift , ceils were rapidly cooled on ice and the ligand was added as a concentrated solution to a final concentration of 8 p . g / ml BSST . The cell suspensions were then split into 50 - 1xl aliquots ( corresponding to 2 × 105 cells ) for continuous internalization of BSST at 30 or 38°C for various times . Endocytosis was stopped by returning the samples to ice . Internal - ization of ligand was quantified after processing the samples for measur - ing avidin inaccessibility or MesNa resistance according to Carter et al . ( 1993 ) . Fluid Phase Uptake Cells were grown on 35 - mm plates for 72 h at 32°C ( dyn K44A cells for 48 h at 37°C ) in the absence of tetracycline , washed twice with PBS and incu - bated with 4 mg / ml HRP in DME / 20 mM Hepes , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 , for various times . The uptake was terminated by aspirating the medium and by six subsequent washes with PBS , 1 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 7 . 4 , for 5 min at 4°C ( Marsh et al . , 1987 ) . After two additional rinses with PBS at 4°C the cells were detached with 0 . 1 % pronase in PBS , pH 7 . 4 , which also removed any HRP unspecifically bound to the cell sur - face . The cell suspensions were pelleted through a sucrose cushion ( 0 . 5 M in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) for 5 min at 1 , 000 g in a microfuge at 4°C . The cells were solubilized in PBS , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , and aliquots were assayed for en - zyme activity using o - phenylenediamine as a substrate or for protein con - centration using the Micro - BCA assay ( Pierce Chem . Co . ) . Cytosol Acidification For acidification of the cytosol , wild - type or mutant cells grown at the per - missive temperature were rinsed two times with DME - H ( DME contain - ing 2 mM L - glutamine and 20 mM Hepes , without bicarbonate ) , incubated for 30 min in DME - H , 0 . 2 % BSA , rinsed two times in DME - H , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 5 . 0 and then incubated in 10 mM acetic acid in DME - H , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 5 . 0 . To prepare DME - H pH 5 . 0 , 1 M acetic acid , pH 5 . 0 ( ad - justed with NaOH ) was diluted 1 : 100 into DME - H ( adjusted to pH 5 . 0 with HCl ) as described ( Hansen et al . , 1993 ) . Controls were incubated in DME - H , 0 . 2 % BSA , pH 5 . 0 or pH 7 . 4 . Depending on the time of preshift at the nonpermissive temperature all solutions were prewarmed to 30 or 38°C . Then the medium was aspirated and the cells were incubated for up to 60 min in DME - H , 0 . 2 % BSA containing HRP ( 4 mg / ml ) and supple - mented with 5 mM glucose at 30 or 38°C . Subsequently cells were pro - cessed as described above . For transferrin internalization cells in suspen - sion were incubated under identical conditions in the presence of 8 txg / ml BSST as ligand . Indirect Immunofluorescence Dynamin wild - type and dyn t ~ mutant tTA HeLa cells were grown in the absence of tetracycline on glass coverslips for 72 h at 32°C to ~ 60 % con - fluency . The cells were incubated with TexasRed - conjugated transferrin ( 50 p . g / ml ) in serum free medium ( DME , 20 mM Hepes , 0 . 2 % BSA ) at 30 or 38°C for 10 min . Then the cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , for 30 min at room temperature , perme - abilized with 0 . 05 % saponin in PBS for 10 min , and then blocked in 1 % BSA , 5 % normal goat serum , 0 . 01 % saponin , 0 . 02 % sodium azide in PBS for 60 min . The cells were incubated with anti - HA mAb 12CA5 ( 2 p ~ g / ml ) for 30 min , washed in PBS and incubated with BODIPY FL - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG antibody ( Molecular Probes , Inc . , Eugene , OR ) for 30 min . The coverslips were washed and mounted in Aqua - Poly / Mount ( Polyscience , Warrington , PA ) , viewed under a fluorescent microscope ( Axiophoto ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thorawood , NY ) , and photographed with Kodak T - Max 400 films . Electron Microscopy Cells were grown on glass coverslips as described above and incubated in serum free medium containing HRP ( 4 mg / ml ) at 30 or 38°C for 10 min . These cells were then washed , fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 1 M phos - phate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , for 30 min , and incubated with 0 . 02 % diaminoben - dizine , 0 . 005 % HzO 2 ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . The ceils were then fixed with 2 % OsO4 for 30 min and embedded in Epon . Alternatively , cells were in - cubated for 15 min at 38°C before fixation in glutaraldehyde and OsO4 ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . The ultrathin sections were observed under an elec - tron microscope ( model CM10 ; Phillips Sci . , Mahwah , NJ ) at 80 kV . Quantitation of coated pit accumulation was performed by photographing individual cell profiles at low magnification ( 3 , 000x ) to measure surface length and then counting the number of coated pits at high magnification ( 15 , 000x ) . At least ten cell profiles were counted for each condition . Results A Human Homologue to the shibire tsl Mutation in Dynamin To gain further insight into dynamin ' s function in mamma - lian cells and to provide genetic evidence that it plays a di - rect role in coated vesicle budding , we generated a point mutation in human dynamin homologous to the Drosoph - ila shibire ~ 1 allele . The shibire gene product is 70 % identi - cal to human dynamin and single point mutations respon - sible for the temperature - sensitive phenotype have been identified ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . The most potent allele , ts 1 , has a glycine to aspartic acid mutation to - wards the COOH - terminal end of the ~ 300 - amino acid GTPase domain . This residue is conserved in human dy - namin and the corresponding G273D mutation , desig - nated dyn ts , was made by site - directed mutagenesis . The cDNA encoding dyn tS with an NH2 - terminal HA - epitope tag was inserted into a tetracycline ( tet ) - responsive ex - pression vector ( pUHD10 - 3 ) and used to transform tTA - HeLa cells expressing a tet - regulatable chimeric transcrip - tion activator ( Gossen and Bujard , 1992 ; Damke et al . , 1995 ) . Clonal cell lines showing tight regulation of dy - namin expression by tetracycline were selected and ampli - fied , as previously described ( Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) . Western blot analysis ( Fig . 1 ) shows the tet - regulatable ex - pression of dynamin constructs in these stably transformed tTA - HeLa cells . In the presence of tetracycline the expres - sion of neuronal dynamin is not detectable with the dy - namin - 1 specific monoclonal antibody , hudy - 3 . In the ab - sence of tetracycline , dynamin expression was induced to > 20 - fold over endogenous dynamin - 2 ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Equal expression levels were obtained in cells ex - pressing either wt or mutant dynamin and when cells were incubated for either 48 h at 37°C or for 72 h at 32°C . HeLa Cells Expressing Dynamin ts Show a Temperature - sensitive Defect in Receptor - mediated Endocytosis Initial attempts to detect an endocytosis defect in tran - siently transfected cells expressing dyn ts using the vaccinia - Figure 1 . Western blot analysis with the anti - dynamin - 1 mAb , hudy - 3 , demonstrates the tight control of tetracycline - regulatable expression of wild - type and ts - dynamin . The levels of protein ac - cumulation were equivalent when cells were induced for 72 h at 32°C or for 48 h at 37°C . Lysates of equal numbers of cells were processed as described in Materials and Methods . Damke et aL A Dynamin ts Mutant Potently Inhibits RME 71 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 virus transfection system ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) were unsuccessful ( A . M . van der Blick , T . E . Redelmeier , and S . L . Schmid , unpublished data ) . Similarly , when tetracy - cline was removed to induce dyn TM expression at 37°C , en - docytosis was unaffected ( data not shown ) even though expression levels of recombinant dynamin were as high as for other mutants ( Fig . 1 ) . We reasoned that , since the mu - tation was predicted to be temperature - sensitive for func - tion , it might be necessary to synthesize the mutant pro - tein at the permissive temperature to generate a correctly folded and otherwise functional protein . Several tempera - tures were tested and we found that the optimum temper - ature for cell growth and induction of functional dyn t ~ was 32°C . As can be seen in Fig . 1 , 72 h after induction at 32°C dyn ts accumulated in HeLa cells to high levels . When as - sayed at 30°C ( the experimentally determined permissive temperature ) , endocytosis of transferrin ( Tfn ) in these cells was found to occur with the same rates and efficien - cies as in cells expressing wt dynamin ( Fig . 2 A ) . In con - , °° t 120 " 80 " 40 A 30°C 0 0 2 . 5 5 7 . 5 10 ¢ - , . , O J ~ i 2 e , - o E g B 38°C 160 120 ~ / ~ 8 0 ~ 40 0 2 . 5 5 7 . 5 10 Time ( min ) Figure 2 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin is inhib - ited in the dyn TM mutant after shift to the nonpermissive tempera - ture . After 72 h of induction in the absence of tetracycline at 32°C , the internalization of biotinylated transferrin was followed in cells expressing either wild - type dynamin ( O ) or the G273D , dynamin ts mutant ( & ) . Endocytosis was measured either at the permissive temperature of 30°C ( A ) or at the nonpermissive tem - perature of 38°C ( B ) after a 15 min preshift to 38°C . The amount of internalized BSST was determined by avidin inaccessibility as described in Materials and Methods . Results shown are the aver - age ± SD on five experiments . trast , when measured 15 min after shifting the cells to 38°C ( the experimentally determined nonpermissive tempera - ture ) Tfn - internalization was severely inhibited in dyn ts cells as compared to dyn wt cells ( Fig . 2 B ) . The extent of in - hibition of the initial rate of Tfn uptake at the nonper - missive temperature in dyn ts cells ( 81 - - + 11 % , n = 5 ) was similar to that previously reported ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) in cells expressing the dominant - interfering mutant , dyn K44A ( 82 _ _ _ 8 % , n = 10 ) . Previous studies established that over - expression of wt dynamin had no effect on either the rate or extent of endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Consistent with the shibire phenotype , ceils expressing dyn ts showed a rapid onset of the temperature - sensitive defect . The data in Fig . 3 A show that even without a pre - shift to the nonpermissive temperature , the amount of Tfn internalized after 10 min at 38°C was inhibited by ~ 45 % . In fact , inhibition was apparent even at the earliest time ( 2 . 5 min ) of Tfn internalization at 38°C ( not shown ) . Maxi - mal inhibition was obtained by 10 - 15 min after shift to the A 100 - 3ooc _ in 80 - . E 6o - - - 40 - 7o I . " I t • " ~ 20 0 0 0 2 . 5 5 10 15 30 12h B lOO Time of preshift at 38°C ( mln ) ~ _ ~ 8o - - 11111 • / 111 / . . . . . / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / , H . , " ~ C / / / / / / / / / / ~ f1111 y / i ~ Y / l , 4 / 11 / i II / 1t / # 111 T : = 20 ~ , ¢ ' 111 / / / / i / r - ~ / 11 / ~ y / Ix o y / / / I(cid:127) / / / o o 1 o 20 3o Time of return to 30°C ( min ) Figure 3 . Kinetics for the onset of inhibition of endocytosis after temperature shift and of the recovery after return to the permis - sive temperature . ( A ) Cells expressing the dyn ts mutant were pre - incubated for the indicated times at 38°C , BSST was added and its internalization was followed for 10 min at either 30°C ( open bar ) or 38°C ( striped bar ) ; n = 3 . ( B ) Dyn t ~ cells were preshifted for 15 rain at 38°C and then returned to 30°C for the indicated times . BSST was added and its internalization was followed for 10 rain at either 38°C ( open bar ) or 30°C ( striped bar ) ; n = 2 . The re - sults are expressed as the percentage of BSST endocytosis in dyn * t cells assayed in parallel . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 72 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 nonpermissive temperature and inhibition persisted even when cells were maintained for 12 h at 38°C ( Fig . 3 A ) . These results suggest a direct role for mammalian dy - namin in endocytic coated vesicle formation . The temperature - sensitive inhibition of Tfn - internaliza - tion was reversible . Tfn internalization ( Fig . 3 B ) began to recover immediately after return to the permissive tem - perature and by 20 min , Tfn - internalization in dyn ts mu - tants recovered to ~ 75 % of wt cells assayed under identi - cal conditions . The complementary immunofluorescence experiment in Fig . 4 shows that Texas Red - conjugated Tfn was efficiently internalized into cells expressing dyn wt dur - ing a 10 - min incubation and accumulated in the recycling endosomal compartment at both permissive and nonper - missive temperatures ( Fig . 4 , a ' and c ' , respectively ) . Simi - larly , internalization of Tfn at 30°C was normal in dyn t ~ cells ( compare b ' with a ' ) . In contrast , intracellular accu - mulation of Tfn was severely reduced when the dyn t ~ cells were incubated at 38°C ( compare Fig . 4 , d ' to c ' ) . How - ever , the ts - defect in endocytosis was rapidly reversed by returning the cells to 30°C for 10 min before addition of Tfn and further incubation at 30°C ( Fig . 4 e ' ) . The immunofluorescence pattern for dyn wt and dyn t ~ at the permissive and nonpermissive temperatures is also shown in Fig . 4 ( a - e ) . As previously described ( van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) , most of the overex - pressed dynamin was cytosolic , suggesting that the mem - brane association of dynamin is saturable . Strikingly , at the nonpermissive temperature the dyn t ~ mutant formed large aggregates in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 4 d ) . These aggre - gates were reminiscent of those previously seen in cells ex - pressing a 272 - amino acid NH2 - terminal deletion mutant of dynamin lacking the GTPase domain ( Herskovits et al . , 1993 ) . Aggregation was apparently reversible as the dy - namin aggregates dispersed within 30 min after returning cells to the permissive temperature ( Fig . 4 e ) . The most striking morphological phenotype of dyn K44A cells examined at longer times after induction was that cells became flat and spread radially ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . This was associated with rearrangements of the actin cy - toskeleton from radial stress fibers to the cell periphery . Our earlier arguments that this was an indirect conse - quence of the block in endocytosis were confirmed using the dyn ts cells since no such alterations were detected even after several hours at the nonpermissive temperature ( not shown ) . Ultrastructural analysis of dyn ts cells was per - formed using thin section electron microscopy . The amor - phous structures of the dynamin aggregates formed after 15 min at the nonpermissive temperature are visible in Fig . 5 A . Preembedding and immunogold labeling confirmed that these large aggregates were heavily stained with the dynamin specific antibody , hudy - 1 ( not shown , but see Fig . 4 d ) . Curved coated pits accumulated at the cell surface of dyn t ~ cells ( see for example , Fig . 5 B ) . Quantitation of the number of cell surface coated pits was performed as de - scribed in Materials and Methods and revealed an approx - imately fourfold increase in the number of endocytic coated pits in dyn ts cells held at the 38°C for 15 min ( 89 coated pits / mm cell surface ; 982 ~ m counted ) as compared to dyn wt cells at 38°C ( 21 coated pits / mm cell surface ; 516 Ixm counted ) . This accumulation was even greater than that observed at the surface of dyn ka4A mutant cells ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) and probably reflects the finding that the long membrane invaginations , often with coated ends , seen in dyn Kn4A cells did not accumulate at early times in the dyn t ~ cells ( Fig . 5 A ) . The Formation of Constricted Coated Pits Is Blocked in dyn ts Cells We have previously shown that expression of the dyn K44A mutant defective in GTP binding and hydrolysis blocked endocytic coated vesicle formation at a stage after coated pit assembly and invagination but preceding the formation of constricted coated pits ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Coated vesicle formation was blocked at a similar stage in dyn ts cells . The sequestration of receptor - bound ligands , bio - tinylated via cleavable disulfide bonds , into constricted coated pits can be distinguished biochemically from their subsequent internalization into sealed coated vesicles ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ; Carter et al . , 1993 ) . Ligands se - questered into constricted coated pits become inaccessible to avidin , but remain accessible to the small membrane im - permeant reducing agent , MesNa ( [ 3 - mercaptoethane sul - fonic acid ) . The data in Fig . 6 show that sequestration and internalization are equally inhibited in dyn ts cells indicat - ing that the block in endocytosis precedes the formation of constricted coated pits . These results are consistent with the phenotype of shibire flies in which coated pits accumu - lating at the cell surface of nonneuronal cells remain ac - cessible to large probes such as wheat germ agglutinin - conjugated HRP ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983a ) . Together , these results establish that the human dyn TM mutant is functionally homologous to Drosophila shibire t ~ l . Using this mutation , we have generated the first mamma - lian cell line with a rapid and reversible temperature - sensi - tive defect in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Fluid Phase Endocytosis Is Only Partially Inhibited in dyn ts Cells We previously showed that nonselective pinocytosis of the fluid phase marker , HRP , continued in dyn K44A cells at the same rates as in dyn wt cells ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Since clathrin - dependent endocytosis was severely inhibited we argued that a clathrin - independent pathway of pinocytosis may have been induced to compensate for the loss of the clathrin - dependent contribution to bulk pinocytosis . The rapid and selective temperature - sensitive inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis in the dyn ts cells has al - lowed us to confirm this hypothesis . The data in Fig . 7 A show that at the permissive temperature fluid phase en - docytosis of HRP occurs with equal efficiency in dyn wt and dyn ts cells . In contrast to results obtained with the dyn K44A cells , fluid phase endocytosis of HRP at the nonpermissive temperature was reduced by ~ 50 % in dyn ts cells compared to dyn wt cells ( Fig . 7 B ) . However , while Tfn - internaliza - tion in dyn ts cells was potently inhibited at the nonpermis - sive temperature , substantial fluid phase uptake continued . Importantly , at later times of incubation at the nonper - missive temperature , although clathrin - dependent Tfn en - docytosis remained blocked , fluid phase endocytosis of HRP fully recovers . The data in Fig . 8 show that after a brief lag but within 30 min , fluid phase uptake recovers to wt levels . In fact , at 60 and 120 min after shift to the non - Damke et al . A Dynamin ts Mutant Potently Inhibits RME 73 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 Figure 4 . The immunofluorescence pattern for overexpressed dyn wt ( a and c ) and dyn ts ( b , d , and e ) detected with anti - HA antibody 12CA5 followed by a BODIPY FL - conjugated secondary antibody and for internalized Texas Red - conjugated transferrin ( a ' - e 3 . Cells were incubated at the permissive temperature ( a and b ; 30°C ) or the nonpermissive temperature ( c and d ; 38°C ) for 10 min with Texas Red - Tfn . Alternately , cells were preincubated at 38°C for 10 min , returned to 30°C for 30 min and then incubated with Texas Red - Tfn for 10 min at 30°C ( e ) . At the nonpermissive temperature dynamin forms large aggregates in the cytosol ( d ) and cells do not internalize Tfn ( d ' ) . These aggregates were dispersed within 30 min when the cells are re - turned to the permissive temperature ( e ) and the ability of cells to internalize transferrin was restored ( e ' ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 74 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 Figure 5 . A and B show unla - beled thin - section electron micro - graphs of dyn ts cells that had been incubated at 38°C for 15 min . Large aggregates that form in dyn t ~ cells are dearly visible ( A , arrowheads ) . Also seen are nu - merous coated pits that accumu - late on the plasma membrane at the nonpermissive temperature , shown at higher magnification in B ( arrow ) . ( C - F ) Electron micro - graphs showing ultrathin sections of the early endocytic compart - ments in wild - type ( C ) and dyn ~ mutant ( D - F ) cells . 72 h after in - duction at 32°C the cells were ei - ther incubated at 30 ° ( D ) , at 38°C for 10 min ( C and E ) or at 38°C for 2 h ( F ) . The media was re - placed with serum free medium containing HRP ( 4 mg / ml ) and the cells were further incubated at the same temperatures for 10 min . The tTA HeLa cells were washed and fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 for 30 min and incubated with 0 . 02 % diaminobenzidine with 0 . 005 % H202 . After fixation with 2 % OsO4 for 30 min samples were embedded in Epon as de - scribed . Bar : ( A and C - F ) 500 nm ; ( B ) 100 nm . permissive temperature we observed a small but reproduc - ible overcompensation to as much as 20 % higher than wt levels . After 12 h of incubation at the nonpermissive tem - perature the rate of fluid phase endocytosis has been re - stored to wt levels . At this time point , Tfn internalization was still potently inhibited ( see Fig . 3 A ) . This result was consistent with dyn K44A cells that showed wt levels of fluid phase endocytosis 48 h after induction of dynamin expres - sion ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . These results suggest that a con - stitutive clathrin - independent pathway for pinocytosis oc - curs in tTA - HeLa cells and confirm our earlier suggestion that this pathway is up - regulated in compensation for the loss of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . A Clathrin - independent Mechanism for Pinocytosis in dyn ts Cells Several possible mechanisms of clathrin - independent pi - nocytosis have been described ( reviewed by van Deurs et al . , 1989 ; Watts and Marsh , 1992 ) . These can be pharmaco - logically distinguished from clathrin - dependent endoeyto - sis , which is selectively inhibited by K + - depletion , cytosol acidification or hypertonicity ( Larkin et al . , 1983 ; Daukas and Zigmond , 1985 ; Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) . Cytosol acidifi - cation , one of the best characterized of these treatments , causes the accumulation of adherant coated pits at the plasma membrane ( Heuser , 1989 ; Hansen et al . , 1993 ) and effectively inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis while bulk endocytic processes continue ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) . Likewise , with dyn wt cells , cytosol acidification severely ( > 85 % ) reduced receptor - mediated endocytosis of Tfn ( Fig . 9 A ) while fluid phase endocytosis of HRP was only partially ( ~ 50 % ) inhibited ( Fig . 9 B ) . The acid - resistant component of HRP endocytosis corresponded quantita - tively to the residual HRP uptake that occurred in dyn ts cells at early times after shift to the nonpermissive temper - ature ( Fig . 9 B , compare dyn wt [ open bars ] with dyn ts 15 min [ striped bars ] ) . Furthermore , the residual HRP uptake in dyn ts cells was insensitive to cytosol acidification , consis - tent with the notion that it occurred via a clathrin - inde - pendent mechanism . Importantly , the residual Tfn uptake in dyn TM cells was also resistant to cytosol acidification ( Fig . 9 A ) , suggesting that it occurred through bulk pinocytic mechanisms and further strengthening our argument for a potent block in clathrin - dependent endocytosis in dyn ts cells . Damke et al . A Dynamin t ` Mutant Potently Inhibits RME 75 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 0 0 Time ( min ) 2 . 5 5 7 . 5 10 • , • , • J . , • , • i 10 20 30 40 50 60 Figure 6 . Expression of the dyn ts mutant blocks BSST intemal - ization preceding its sequestration into constricted coated pits . Cells expressing either wild - type ( 0 , © ) or the dyn ts mutant ( & , / X ) were harvested 72 h after induction at 32°C , preshifted for 10 min at 38°C , and incubated with BSST for the indicated times at 38°C . The extent of Tfn internalization was assessed by avidin in - accessibility ( Q , & ) or MesNa - resistance ( © , A ) in four indepen - dent experiments as described in Materials and Methods . After a prolonged ( 120 min ) incubation at the nonper - missive temperature fluid phase uptake in the dyn tS cells had returned to near normal levels . This induced pinocytic pathway was now resistant to the effects of cytosol acidifi - cation ( Fig . 9 , compare dyn t ~ 120 min , [ open and striped bars ] ) . Again , Tfn uptake at this time point remained se - verely inhibited . Cells expressing the constitutively defec - tive dyn Ka4A mutant provide an additional control for long - term incubations in the absence of functional dy - namin . As for the dyn ts cells , both the residual Tfn uptake and the induced HRP uptake in these cells were resistant to the inhibitory effects of cytosol acidification ( Fig . 9 , A and B ) . To rule out effects on endosomal trafficking that might lead to reduced accumulation of HRP ( Cupers et al . , 1994 ) , the data in Fig . 9 were derived from an early time point after HRP uptake ( 15 min ) before the inflec - tion in the initial rate of uptake occurred ( see Fig . 7 ) . In addition , to ensure that cytosol acidification effects were related to internalization and not recycling , the rates of el - flux ( regurgitation ) of HRP in the dyn t ~ mutant cells were measured directly and found to be unaffected ( not shown ) . This is consistent with our previous finding that Tfn recy - cling was unaffected in dyn Ka4A cells . These results confirm that the compensation in bulk endocytosis was mediated by an acid - resistant pinocytic process mechanistically dis - tinct from clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The effect of other pharmacological treatments on the clathrin - independent pathway induced in dyn t ~ cells were examined to further characterize this pathway . Specifically we examined the effects of cytochalasin D , which has been shown to selectively inhibit endocytosis at the apical mem - brane of polarized epithelial cells ( Gottlieb et al . , 1993 ) and to inhibit the internalization of caveolae - associated proteins in some ceils ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) and hexameth - ylamiloride , which has been shown to selectively inhibit £ t ~ C Q , " r - 6 0 1 5 . 0 4 . 0 " 3 . 0 " 2 . 0 " 1 . 0 " 0 . 0 0 A 30°C , - - 120 " C 100 " m ~ 80 ~ • = 60 " O , n = 40 " E " ~ 20 " 6 . o I . B 38°C 5 . 0 " 4 . 0 " 3 . 0 " 2 . 0 " 1 . 0 - 00 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Time ( mln ) Figure 7 . Fluid phase uptake in dyn ts cells is partially inhibited af - ter shift to the nonpermissive temperature . Cells expressing dyn * t ( O ) and dyn ts ( A ) were incubated with 4 mg / ml HRP for up to 60 min at 30°C ( A ) . In B the cells were preshifted to 38°C for 15 min and then incubated for the indicated times with HRP at 38°C . To ensure low backgrounds , cells were returned to ice and thor - oughly washed before extracellular HRP was removed by diges - tion with 0 . 1 % pronase for 10 min at 4°C . Cells were then pel - leted through a sucrose cushion and lysed . Intracellular HRP was photometrically quantified after enzymatic reaction with o - phe - nylenediamine . The data of n = 3 ( + SD ) experiments are ex - pressed relative to cell protein . macropinocytosis ( West et al . , 1989 ; Hewlett et al . , 1994 ) . Neither the residual HRP uptake at early times after shift to the nonpermissive temperature nor the induced uptake occurring after prolonged incubations were affected by these treatments ( data not shown ) . Since there was significant residual fluid phase uptake in dyn ts cells , HRP was used as a probe to compare the ultra - structure of the early endocytic pathway at permissive and nonpermissive temperatures . 10 min after incubating wild - type cells at 38°C with HRP , most of the electron - dense DAB reaction product could be detected in large hetero - geneously shaped endosomal vesicles ( 100 - 600 - nm diam ) and thin tubules ( Fig . 5 C ) . A similar distribution of inter - nalized HRP was seen in dyn ts cells when incubated at the permissive temperature of 30°C ( Fig . 5 D ) . In contrast , when the dyn tS cells were incubated at 38°C for 10 min , HRP labeling was predominantly detected in a small ( < 70 - nm diam ) and more homogeneous population of vesicles The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 13 l , 1995 76 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 , 50 t , , , . ~ 1 2 5 7 & 1001 . - = " ° 75 a . N 50 I1 ~ e - 25 0 15 30 60 120 12h Time ( min ) Z 120 ' ~ - , ~ 100 o ' ~ m ~ , N " O 80 ' EN ~ 80 . . _ . E ¢ _ - ' , 1 ~ 40 o ~ 2o , 0 Figure 8 . Recovery of fluid phase endocytosis in dyn ts cells after shift to the nonpermissive temperature . Dyn wt and dyn ts cells were grown on 35 - mm dishes for 72 h at 32°C in the absence of tetracycline . After incubation at the nonpermissive temperature for the indicated times , fluid phase uptake of HRP ( 4 mg / ml ) was followed for 15 rain at 38°C . Cells were rapidly cooled by re - peated washes on ice and samples were processed as described in Materials and Methods ( n = 3 ) . ( Fig . 5 E ) . Together with the acid - resistant properties of HRP uptake in the dyn ts cells , these results were most con - sistent with a role for the noncoated vesicles described by Sandvig , van Deurs , and colleagues ( Hansen et al . , 1993 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 1994 ) in compensating for the loss of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Interestingly , larger endosomal structures were not readily detectable after HRP uptake in dyn ts cells at early times after shift to the nonpermissive temperature ( Fig . 5 C ) . However , after prolonged incubation ( 120 min ) at the nonpermissive temperature , when the bulk rate of endocy - tosis had recovered to wt levels , large endosomal compart - ments could again be labeled after a 10 - min incubation with HRP ( Fig . 5 F ) . These data strongly suggest that the early endosomal compartment rapidly contracts ( within 10 min ) and later expands in response to the magnitude of in - coming endocytic membrane . Although quantitative mor - phometric analyses will be necessary to confirm this hy - pothesis , similar observations have been made in studies on shibire ( Kessell et al . , 1989 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ) . A Discussion We have generated a mammalian cell line with a specific and molecularly defined temperature - sensitive defect in receptor - mediated endocytosis . These cells overexpress a human dynamin mutant ( G273D ) that is homologous to the shibire tsl allele in Drosophila . In many ways , the phe - notype of these cells resembles that of shibire flies . Recep - tor - mediated endocytosis occurs at wild - type rates at the permissive temperature of 30°C but is severely inhibited at the nonpermissive temperature of 38°C . The ts phenotype shows rapid onset and is reversible upon return to the per - missive temperature . Invaginated , but not constricted , coated pits accumulate on the cytoplasmic surface of the / / / , / / / dyn ~ dyn ts dyn ts dyn K44A 15 mln 120 rnin B 120 " = ~ , loo - , : : : , ff ~ J ; 4 < " o " ~ 1 / / , / / / / ~ We " 22 ~ , : . 2 ~ 6o I N , / / / " / / / 0 dyn wt dyn ts dyn Is dyn K44A 15 min 120 min Figure 9 . Effect of cytosol acidification on Tfn ( A ) and HRP ( B ) internalization in induced dyn wt , dyn ts , and dyn Ka4A cells . The dyn ts cells were preshifted to 38°C for either 15 min or 2 h as indi - cated . Cells were treated with 10 mM acetic acid , pH 5 . 0 ( open bars ) or left untreated ( striped bars ) during the last 15 min ( i . e . , during the preshift ) before internalization assays were per - formed . For details see Materials and Methods . Shown are the averaged results from two independent experiments performed in duplicate . plasma membranes . Like the previously characterized HeLa cell line expressing the dyn Kg4A mutant defective in GTP binding and hydrolysis , the dyn ts ceils exhibit a spe - cific defect in endocytic clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Dynamin Functions as an Oligomer in Coated Vesicle Budding Previous genetic analysis of shibire heterozygotes had sug - gested that the shibire gene product acts as a multimeric protein ( Kim and Wu , 1990 ) . Our finding , that purified dy - namin exists as a tetramer that spontaneously self - assem - bles in vitro into rings and helical stacks of rings ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) , confirms this hypothesis . The dynamin rings formed in vitro are identical in dimension to " col - lars " originally observed around the necks of the mem - brane invaginations that accumulated at nerve terminals in shibire flies incubated at the nonpermissive temperature ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983b ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ) . More recently , when permeabilized synaptic terminals isolated from rat brain were incubated with GTP ' yS , the nonhydro - lyzable analogue of GTP , bands of dynamin were ob - Damke et al . A Dynamin t ~ Mutant Potently Inhibits RME 77 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 served encircling the elongated necks of coated pits that accumulated ( Takei et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , in both shibire ts and GTP ~ / S - treated nerve termini , dynamin apparently ac - cumulates in ring structures at the necks of invaginated coated pits clearly segregated from the clathrin lattice at their base . This distribution contrasts with the immunolo - calization of the dyn Ka4A mutant that is uniformly distrib - uted throughout the clathrin lattices of flat and curved coated pits ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . These results suggested a model ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) in which dynamin , in its unoccupied or GDP - bound form , is first recruited to and uniformly distributed on flat or curved clathrin lat - tices . Subsequent GTP - GDP exchange would result in a conformational change that alters dynamin - dynamin inter - actions or interactions between dynamin and some , as yet unidentified , targeting and / or assembly molecule . GTP - bound dynamin is redistributed to the necks of invagi - nated pits and assembles into collars , resulting in the for - mation of constricted coated pits . Since the dyn K44A has re - duced affinity for GTP , this step is blocked ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Conversely , in the presence of a nonhydrolyzable analogue of GTP , these structures become exaggerated ( Takei et al . , 1995 ) . We have proposed that GTP hydroly - sis would result in a second concerted conformation change of the dynamin collars to drive vesicle budding ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . A Model for the Defect in dyn ts Cells How might the dyn ts phenotype be explained in the con - text of this working model for dynamin function ? First , our model predicts that dynamin functions as a large homo - oligomer involving the concerted action of multiple dynamin polypeptides ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . This would explain how expression of the dyn ts mutant in the presence of endogenous wild - type dynamin gives a ts - phe - notype . At the levels of overexpression achieved ( > 20 - fold ) each functional oligomer would contain very few wt dynamin polypeptides , thus the dyn ts phenotype would be dominant . Interestingly , when synthesized at 37°C the dyn ts pheno - type is silent and there is no apparent interference with the function of wt - dynamin . This suggests that dyn ts is mis - folded under these conditions so that it cannot interact with endogenous dynamin . An important consequence of this observation is that during long - term incubation at 38°C , newly synthesized dyn t ~ would be nonfunctional and the mutant hetero - oligomers would be gradually replaced with wt dynamin homo - oligomers . This could explain why phenotypes seen at longer incubation times with the dyn K4zA mutant , such as alterations in the actin cytoskele - ton , are not observed in dyn ts cells . The mutation that generates the ts phenotype ( G273D ) exchanges a flexible glycine residue for a less flexible as - partic acid residue at the boundary between the GTPase domain and the COOH - terminal two - thirds of dynamin . When overexpressed in HeLa cells , the dyn t ~ mutant , like the dyn K44A mutant , blocks the formation of constricted coated pits , suggesting that it is also defective in GTP binding . In contrast , collared and , according to our model , constricted coated pits accumulate at the nerve termini of Drosophila expressing the analogous mutant ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983b ) , suggesting that the shibird sl gene product might be defective in GTP hydrolysis . However , the con - served GTP binding elements in dynamin are unchanged by this mutation so that neither GTP binding nor hydroly - sis are likely to be affected by the dyn ts mutation . Instead , we speculate that the COOH - terminal two - thirds of dy - namin is uncoupled from the NH2 - terminal GTPase do - main by this mutation . Interestingly , the aggregate formed by dyn ts at the nonpermissive temperature are similar to those formed by a mutant dynamin lacking the entire GT - Pase domain ( Herskovits et al . , 1993 ) . Large - scale expres - sion of recombinant dyn ts mutant is being performed to di - rectly test this hypothesis . The suggestion that the dyn ts mutant is defective in transmitting conformational information from its NH2 - ter - minal GTPase domain to its COOH - terminal domains would reconcile the apparent phenotypic differences be - tween dyn ts HeLa cells and shibire neurons . Such a defect would block both the conversion of dynamin - GDP to dy - namin - GTP ( preventing the formation of constricted coated pits , as in the dyn K44A mutant ) , and the conversion of dy - namin - GTP to dynamin - GDP ( leading to the accumula - tion of collars , as seen in GTP ~ / S treated neurons ) . The phenotype observed would depend on the stage in its GTP cycle predominantly occupied by dynamin before the tem - perature shift . Interestingly , as in HeLa cells , collared pits were not observed in non - neuronal tissues of shibire flies ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983a ) . Therefore it is possible that in neurons , dynamin might be specifically held at a late stage , in its GTP - bound form , to facilitate rapid endocytosis after depolarization . The selective regulation of neuronal dy - namin - 1 by phosphorylation / dephosphorylation ( Robin - son et al . , 1993 ) might be involved in triggering dynamin function for rapid synaptic vesicle recycling ( Morris and Schmid , 1995 ) . Dynamin and Clathrin - independent Pinocytosis Apparently unlike the shibire phenotype , fluid phase en - docytosis continues at the nonpermissive temperature in HeLa cells expressing the dyn ts mutant . At early times af - ter shift to the nonpermissive temperature , fluid phase en - docytosis is partially inhibited reflecting the contribution of clathrin - mediated endocytosis to overall pinocytosis in HeLa cells . Strikingly , after prolonged incubation at the nonpermissive temperature fluid phase uptake increases to fully compensate for the loss of clathrin - dependent en - docytosis . Studies on fluid phase uptake in shibire flies have been limited to early times after shift to the nonper - missive temperature . Therefore it is possible that a com - pensatory pathway would also be induced in shibire cells after prolonged incubation . It is also possible that the rela - tive contributions of clathrin - dependent and clathrin - inde - pendent pinocytosis varies between cell types as it does in different organisms . Clathrin deficient yeast , for example , show only a partial reduction in endocytosis ( Payne et al . , 1988 ) whereas fluid phase uptake is inhibited by ~ 80 % in clathrin - deficient Dictyostelium ( Ruscetti et al . , 1994 ) . The rapid block in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in dyn ts cells has revealed the existence of a constitutive clathrin - independent mechanism for endocytosis in HeLa cells . A number of studies have established that fluid The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 78 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 phase pinocytosis can continue under conditions where re - ceptor - mediated uptake is severely inhibited ( Daukas and Zigmond , 1985 ; Moya et al . , 1985 ; Sandvig et al . , 1987 ) . Morphological studies have identified smooth endocytic vesicles as mediators of these clathrin - independent en - docytic events ( Huet et al . , 1980 ; Hansen et al . , 1991 ) . However , these studies have largely relied on the use of treatments with poorly understood mechanisms of inhibi - tion of clathrin - dependent endocytosis , namely K + - deple - tion , cytosol acidification and hypertonicity . These treat - ments have variable effects on different cell types and are not always selective ( reviewed by van Deurs et al . , 1989 ) . Others have argued that the rate of clathrin - dependent en - docytosis can account for total fluid phase uptake ( Marsh and Helenius , 1980 ; Griffiths et al . , 1989 ; Pelchen - Mat - thews et al . , 1991 ) and that clathrin - independent pathways might only be induced in response to the nonphysiological conditions required to inhibit clathrin - dependent endocy - tosis ( Watts and Marsh , 1992 ; Cupers et al . , 1994 ) . As a re - sult the significance and even the existence of a constitu - tive clathrin - independent pathway for endocytosis has been questioned ( Watts and Marsh , 1992 ) . The results presented here provide strong evidence for a constitutive clathrin and dynamin - independent pathway for pinocytosis in HeLa cells and further suggest that this pathway can be up - regulated to compensate for the loss of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . In dyn wt cells , Tin uptake is severely inhibited by cytosol acidification while HRP uptake is partially inhibited . Importantly , the residual up - take of both Tin and HRP that occurs in dyn ts cells early after shift to the nonpermissive temperature and the in - duced uptake of HRP that occurs at later times after shift to the nonpermissive temperature are resistant to cytosol acidification . Thus the pinocytosis that occurs in dyn TM cells can be mechanistically distinguished from clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis . Induction of bulk - phase endocytosis to fully compensate for inhibition of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis was recently observed in rat fetal fibroblasts after K + - depletion or incubation in hypertonic media ( Cupers et al . , 1994 ) . Based on our results , the 30 - min incubations re - quired for these inhibitory effects would suffice for induc - tion of an alternate pinocytic pathway . Interestingly , yeast cells expressing a temperature - sensi - tive defect in a clathrin - mediated pathway also induce a compensatory clathrin - independent pathway when main - tained at the nonpermissive temperature . At early times after shift to the nonpermissive temperature , chc - tsl yeast cells carrying a temperature - sensitive clathrin mutant show a strong defect in sorting of vacuolar enzymes . How - ever , the chc - tsl cells regain the ability to efficiently sort vacuolar enzymes when maintained at the nonpermissive temperature for 3 h ( Seeger and Payne , 1992 ) . The nature of this compensatory pathway for efficient vacuolar en - zyme sorting in yeast is also unknown . After prolonged incubation at the nonpermissive tem - perature HRP uptake increases approximately twofold re - covering to wt levels . In contrast , the residual Tin uptake is not apparently increased . Some of this residual Tin up - take may occur due to an incomplete block in coated vesi - cle formation . Alternatively , it is possible that Tfn - R are not freely mobile in the membrane , perhaps trapped in coated pits , and are therefore not a reliable bulk mem - brane marker . By geometric considerations , we would ex - pect that Tin - uptake would be increased less significantly than HRP uptake . HRP uptake would increase propor - tionally to volume , whereas Tin uptake would increase proportionally to surface area . Further studies will be needed to resolve the mechanism ( s ) of pinocytosis in cells expressing mutant dynamin . The data presented here , together with our previous characterization of dyn K44A cells and the specific localiza - tion of endogenous and overexpressed dynamin molecules to clathrin coated pits on the plasma membrane ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) , suggest that overexpression of these dynamin mutants potently and selectively inhibits clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis . In addition to providing a valuable new tool for the functional and mechanistic analysis of clathrin - independent pinocytic pathways , the properties of these cells make them ideal for addressing a variety of important issues in cell biology . These include , how specific receptor - ligand complexes or pathogens enter cells , whether a pro - tein is transiently expressed on the cell surface en route to another intracellular location and the role of receptor - mediated endocytosis in such processes as cell adhesion , cell motility and signal transduction . We thank our colleagues in the Schmid lab for helpful discussions and for comments on the manuscript . Dr . C . - M . Chang assisted in electron mi - croscopy . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM42445 to S . L . Schmid and a Muscular Dystrophy Association grant to A . M . van der Blick . S . L . Schmid is an Established Investigator of the American Heart Association . H . Damke was supported by fellowships from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Muscular Dystrophy Association . Received for publication 9 June 1995 and in revised form 19 July 1995 . References Burnette , W . N . 1981 . Western blotting : electrophoretic transfer of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gels to unmodified nitrocellu - lose and radiographic detection with antibody and radioiodinated protein A . Anal . Biochem . 112 : 195 - 203 . Carter , L . L . , T . E . Redelmeier , L . A . Woollenweber , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in clathrin - coated vesicle - medi - ated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 37 - 45 . Chen , M . S . , R . A . Obar , C . C . Schroeder , T . W . Austin , C . A . Poodry , S . C . Wadsworth , and R . B . Vallee . 1991 . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by Shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 351 : 583 - 586 . Cook , T . A . , R . Urrutia , and M . A . McNiven . 1994 . Identification of dynamin 2 , an isoform ubiquitously expressed in rat tissues . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 644 - 648 . Cupers , P . , A . Veithen , A . Kiss , P . Baudhin , and P . J . Courtoy . 1994 . Clathrin polymerization is not required for bulk - phase endocytosis in rat fetal fibro - blasts . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 725 - 735 . Damke , H . , T . Baba , D . E . Warnock , and S . L . Schmid . 1994 . Induction of mu - tant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 915 - 934 . Damke , H . , M . Gossen , S . Freundlieb , H . Bujard , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Tightly regulated and inducible expression of a dominant interfering dy - namin mutant in stably transformed HeLa cells . Methods Enzymol . 257 : 20 % 220 . Daukas , G . , and S . H . Zigmond . 1985 . Inhibition of receptor mediated but not fluid phase endocytosis in polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1673 - 1679 . Gossen , M . , and H . Bujard . 1992 . Tight control of gene expression in mamma - lian cells by tetracycline - responsive promoters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 5547 - 5551 . Gottlieb , T . A . , I . E . Ivanov , M . Adesnik , and D . D . Sabatini . 1993 . Actin mi - crofilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical not the basolat - eral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 695 - 710 . Griffiths , G . , R . Back , and M . Marsh . 1989 . A quantitative analysis of the en - docyfic pathway in baby hamster kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2703 - 2720 . Hansen , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . van Deurs . 1991 . The preendosomal compart - Damke et al . A Dynamin ' ~ Mutant Potently Inhibits RME 79 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995 ment comprises distinct coated and noncoated endocytic populations . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 731 - 741 . Hansen , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . van Deurs . 1993 . Clathrin and HA2 adaptors : effects of potassium depletion , hypertonic medium , and cytosol acidification . Z Cell Biol . 121 : 61 - 72 . Herskovits , J . S . , C . C . Burgess , R . A . Obar , and R . B . Vallee . 1993 . Effects of mutant rat dynamin on endocytosis . J . Cell BioL 122 : 565 - 578 . Heuser , J . 1989 . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphol - ogy . Z Cell Biol . 108 : 401 . 411 . Hewlett , L . J . , A . R . Prescott , and C . Watts . 1994 . The coated pit and macropi - nocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations . J . Cell BioL 124 : 689 - 703 . Hinshaw , J . E . , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Dynamin self - assembles into rings sug - gesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature ( Lond . ) . 374 : 190 - 192 . Huet , C . , J . F . Ash , and S . J . Singer . 1980 . The antibody - induced clustering and endocytosis of HLA antigens on cultured human fibroblasts . Cell , 21 : 429 - 438 . Kessell , I . , B . D . Hoist , and T . F . Roth . 1989 . Membrane intermediates in en - docytosis are labile , as shown in a temperature - sensitive mutant . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 4968 - 4972 . Kim . Y . - T . , and C . - F . Wu . 1990 . Allelic interactions at the shibire locus of Drosophila : effects on behaviour . J . Neurogenet . 7 : 1 - 14 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1990 . Transformational process of the endosomal compartment in nephrocytes of Drosophila melanogaster Cell Tissue Res . 262 : 233 - 244 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983a . Reversible blockage of membrane retrieval and endocytosis in the garland cell of the temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster , shibire ~ 1 . , L Cell Biol . 97 : 499 - 507 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983b . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J . NeurobioL 14 : 207 - 225 . Larkin , J . M . , M . S . Brown , J . L . Goldstein , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1983 . De - pletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis in fibroblasts . Cell 33 : 273 - 285 . Marsh , M . , and A . Helenius . 1980 . Adsorptive endocytosis of semliki forest vi - rus . Z Mol , Biol , 142 : 439 . 454 . Marsh , M . , S . L . Schmid , H . Kern , E . Harms , P . Male , I . Mellman , and A . Hele - nius . 1987 . Rapid analytical and preparative isolation of functional endo - somes by free flow electrophoresis . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 875 - 886 . Morris , S . A . , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Synaptic vesicle recycling : the Ferrari of endocytosis ? Curr . Biol . 5 : 113 - 115 . Moya , M . , A . Dautry - Varsat , B . Goud , D . Louvard , and P . Bouquet . 1985 . Inhi - bition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of diph - theria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 548 - 559 . Nakata , T . , A . Iwamoto , Y . Noda , R . Takemura , H . Yoshikura , and N . Hi - rokawa . 1991 . Predominant and developmentally regulated expression of dy - namin in neurons . Neuron . 7 : 461 . 469 . Nakata , T . , R . Takemura , and N . Hirokawa . 1993 . A novel member of the dy - namin family of GTP - binding proteins is expressed specifically in the testis . J . Cell Sci . 105 : 1 - 5 . Parton , R . G . , B . Joggerst , and K . Simons . 1994 . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1199 - 1215 . Payne , G . S . , D . Baker , E . van Tuinen , and R . Schekman . 1988 . Protein trans - port to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis by clathrin heavy chain - deficient yeast , Z Cell Biol . 106 : 1453 - 1461 . Pelchen - Matthews , A . , J . E . Armes , G . Griffiths , and M . Marsh . 1991 . Differen - tial endocytosis of CD4 in lymphocytic and non - lymphocytic cells . J . Exp . Med . 173 : 575 - 587 . Poodry , C . A . , and L . Edgar . 1979 . Reversible alterations in the neuromuscular junctions of drosophila melanogaster bearing a temperature - sensitive muta - tion , shibire . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 520 - 527 . Robinson , P . J . , J . - M . , Sontag , J . - P . Liu , E . M . Fykse , C . Slaughter , H . McMa - hon , and T . C . S0dhof . 1993 . Dynamin GTPase regulated by protein kinase C phosphorylation in nerve terminals . Nature ( Lond . ) . 365 : 163 - 166 . Ruscetti , T . , J . A . Cardelli , M . L . Niswonger , and T . J . O ' Halloran . 1994 . Clath - tin heavy chain functions in sorting and secretion of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 343 - 352 . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1994 . Endocytosis and intracellular sorting of ri - cin and Shiga toxin . FEBS Lett . 346 : 99 - 102 . Sandvig , K . , S . Olsnes , O . W . Petersen , and B . van Deurs . 1987 . Acidification of the cytosol inhibits endocytosis from coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 679 - 689 . Schmid , S . L . , and E . Smythe . 1991 . Stage - specific assays for coated pit forma - tion and coated vesicle budding in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 869 - 880 . Seeger , M . , and G . S . Payne . 1992 . A role for clathrin in the sorting of vacuolar proteins in the Golgi complex of yeast . EMBO J . 11 : 2811 - 2818 . Shpetner , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1989 . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell . 59 : 421 . 432 . Smythe , E . , T . E . Redelmeier , and S . L . Schmid . 1992 . Receptor - mediated en - docytosis in semi - intact cells . Method Enzymol . 219 : 223 - 234 . Sontag , J . - M . , E . M . Fykse , Y . Ushkaryov , J . - P . Liu , P . J . Robinson , and T . C . Siidhof . 1994 . Differential expression and regulation of multiple dynamins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 4547 . 4554 . Takei , K . , P . McPherson , S . L . Schmid , and P . De Camilli . 1995 . Tubular mem - brane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP ~ , S in nerve terminals . Nature ( Lond . ) . 374 : 186 - 190 . Tsurnhara , T . , J . H . Koenig , and K . Ikeda . 1990 . Synchronized endocytosis studied in the oocyte of a temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila mela - nogaster . Cell Tissue Res . 259 : 19 % 207 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and E . M . Meyerowitz . 1991 . Dynamin - like protein en - coded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 351 : 411 - 414 . van der Bliek , A . M . , T . E . Redelmeier , H . Damke , E . J . Tisdale , E . M . Mey - erowitz , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Mutations in human dynamin block an in - termediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 553 - 563 . van Deurs , B . , O . W . Petersen , S . Olsnes , and K . Sandvig . 1989 . The ways of en - docytosis . Int . Rev . Cytol . 117 : 131 - 177 . Warnock , D . E . , L . J . Terlecky , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Dynamin GTPase is stimulated by crosslinking through the C - terminal proline - rich domain . EMBO J . 14 : 1322 - 1328 . Watts . C . , and M . Marsh . 1992 . Endocytosis : what goes in and how ? J . Cell Sci . 103 : 1 - 8 . West , M . A . , M . S . Bretscher , and C . Watts . 1989 . Distinct endocytotic path - ways in EGF stimulated human carcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2731 - 2739 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 131 , 1995 80 on F eb r ua r y 23 , 2013 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published October 1 , 1995