Social Networks for Police and Residents in India : Exploring Online Communication for Crime Prevention Niharika Sachdeva , Ponnurangam Kumaraguru Cybersecurity Education and Research Center ( CERC ) , IIIT - Delhi { niharikas , pk } @ iiitd . ac . in ABSTRACT Safety is a concern for most urban communities ; residents inter - act in multiple ways with the police to address their safety con - cerns . Positive interactions with police help residents to feel safe . In developing countries , residents have started to use Online So - cial Networks ( OSN ) such as Facebook to share concerns and seek solutions . In this study , we investigate whether residents’ post on OSN contain actionable information that police can use to address safety concerns and how residents use OSN to communicate with police . For this , we analyze residents’ posts and comments on the Facebook page of Bangalore City Police , India , over a period of one month . Our results show that residents post information ( in - cluding location ) about various crimes such as neighborhood issues ( drunkards , illegal construction ) , ﬁnancial frauds , property crime , and thefts . In addition to crime , Facebook page gives information on residents’ satisfaction and police performance . Majority of res - idents use police Facebook page to appreciate the good work of police . Police response to residents’ post vary from ignore , ac - knowledge , reply , and follow - up . We ﬁnd that police respond to most residents’ post and help residents to reach the authority who can help solve the issue . Police adopt a formal communication style to interact with residents . We ﬁnd that in addition to actionable in - formation , OSN can help understand fear of crime among residents and develop mutual accountability between police and residents . Keywords Community safety ; Police accountability ; Actionable information ; Online social networks ; Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 3 [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Group and Organization Interfaces— Collaborative computing , Computer - supported cooperative work 1 . INTRODUCTION Police ofﬁcers interact with residents in multiple ways to address the day - to - day safety and crime issues . These interactions include Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . dg . o 2015 , May 27 - 30 , 2015 , Phoenix , AZ , USA c (cid:13) 2015 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3600 - 0 / 15 / 05 $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757401 . 2757420 responding to residents’ calls , creating awareness and resolving residents’ queries . Police are often considered to be the most rep - resentative and perpetual government service . Positive experiences ( e . g . addressing the complaints ) can help generate feeling of safety among the people ; whereas a negative experience ( e . g . , misconduct by police ) leads to sense of insecurity among residents [ 28 ] . Neg - ative encounters isolate residents and result in crime going uniden - tiﬁed and unreported . However , resident’s experiences are often not shared with police , considering their image of “coercive arm of the state” [ 7 ] . In lack of the information about resident’s ex - perience with police and crime incidences , there is a little oppor - tunity for police to change the crime landscape , explain their ac - tions , and involve residents in crime prevention activities . For po - lice , understanding the community perceptions are helpful to know the effectiveness of safety measures and improve the organization’s plan to address crime [ 17 ] . Police explore effective communication strategy to obtain timely information from residents and understand their concerns [ 6 , 7 , 10 , 18 ] . OSN such as Twitter and Facebook have become part of com - munity interaction strategies with their increasing popularity [ 12 ] . Police departments in developed nations are using OSN to iden - tify crime with the help of residents and understand safety con - cerns of the residents . Research in developed countries shows that OSN plays a crucial role in community policing for improving pub - lic relation and encourages diversity of content ( i . e . photos , text , videos ) [ 7 , 12 , 19 ] . Most of this experience about how police can use of OSN for trust building and online communication is de - rived from OSN use during crisis events , such as hurricane and ﬁres . Police in developing countries such as India have also turned to OSN for improving interaction with residents and understand - ing residents’ concern . However , it is unclear if the knowledge of OSN use in event - driven safety campaigns ( that last for speciﬁc time period ) in developed countries can be helpful for police in de - veloping countries to strategize policing through OSN . Unlike de - veloped world , police organizations in developing countries have a lack of police personnel and limited exposure to technology ; these limitations make it difﬁcult to adopt OSN theories from the devel - oped world to developing world . Our study focuses to understand a ) what actionable information ( i . e . necessary information to deal with the situation at hand ) is available on OSN for police and b ) how residents use OSN to express fear of being victimized , polic - ing needs , and police performance in developing countries such as India . We study Facebook as it is considerably popular and most used OSN in comparison to other social networks in India [ 23 ] . In this study , we analyze 255 posts and 1 , 600 comments from resi - dents on Facebook page of Bangalore City Police ( BCP ) in India . Bangalore City Police was stabilized in 1963 and is responsi - ble for the overall policing in the Bangalore city . Bangalore police Figure 1 : Bangalore City Police’s Facebook page with 100 , 672 likes . https : / / www . facebook . com / blrcitypolice . department supports 107 Police Stations [ 2 ] . BCP established its Facebook Page in 2011 to encourage community participation in crime prevention , maintenance of law and order , and trafﬁc man - agement ( See Figure 1 ) . BCP Facebook page has more than 100 , 000 likes and is actively used to engage with residents . A trained team of six people manages the page on OSN [ 25 ] . This team is responsible for collaborating with the residents and responding to the resident’s posts for resolving issues . Bangalore city is an ideal place to study community crime response as the city has developed the most prominent policing program on OSN in last few years [ 2 ] . 1 . 1 Research Objective In this work , we explore whether OSN can support police to get actionable information about crime and residents’ opinion about policing activities in urban cities of India . We identify following supporting aspects to examine our research goal – a ) analysing if residents use the police Facebook page to report a crime and ex - press concerns , b ) identifying the different kind of crimes reported through Facebook Page , and c ) analysing if residents’ post contain enough information for the police to take action . We also analyze whether the complaints made through Facebook page are answered by the police and to what extent . This information helps to assess if OSN like Facebook is becoming a passive repository of complaints . To answer the above - mentioned questions , ﬁrst we provide an overview of Victimization theory and modern organization’s com - munication need . These theories provide an relevant theoretical background to illustrate the characteristics that affect the adoption and use of OSN . Next , we provide our analysis showing use of OSN by residents to express policing needs and fear of crime . 1 . 2 Our Contributions This research builds upon prior knowledge of OSN use by gov - ernment organizations ( for active collaboration ) , community crime prevention theory ( Victimization Theory ) and organizational com - munication theory [ 17 , 22 , 29 ] . Our results show that : • Residents’ use OSN to post information about various crimes such as neighborhood issues , ﬁnancial frauds , property crime , and thefts . Also , these posts contain residents’ reported spa - tial ( location ) and temporal ( time ) details of the crime . In addition to this , Facebook page provides information about resident’s satisfaction with policing arrangements . Majority of residents use police Facebook page to appreciate the good work of police . • Police respond to posts that contain particular complaint and suggestion from residents . Police response to resident’s post vary from reply , ignore , acknowledge to follow - up . Neigh - borhood safety issues get most follow - up posts . • OSN page helps police to connect victims with the concerned authorities who can address victim’s issues and improves ac - countability among residents and police for keeping city safe , in developing nations . Our work makes following contributions : it develops an under - standing of how OSN can be used in urban cities of developing countries like India to build community policing and accountability for policing . Our work focuses on understanding technology like OSN for addressing fear of crime and community policing . Our contributions illustrate that in developing countries , OSN can sup - port policing through community crime prevention theory called Victimization theory [ 17 ] . Using the ﬁndings of our study , police can evaluate the sense of safety among residents and police perfor - mance in urban cities of developing countries . 2 . RELATED WORK OSN contributes to the improved tradition of participation , re - sponsiveness , and openness to different government organizations [ 22 , 32 ] . It provides a mechanism to develop personal relationships with residents by disseminating information about performance and government agency’s actions followed by inputs from citizens on these actions . Developing personal relationships can increase the trust residents place on the government agencies [ 16 ] . Research shows that unlike other organizations , police departments repre - sent the most omnipresent and ubiquitous body of a society . The competing demands of residents lead to greater expectations that government agencies like police must be “leaner” and “do more with less” than other organizations [ 15 ] . Research in developed countries shows that OSN extends two in - herent beneﬁts for police : a ) it can support primary policing roles such as crime investigations and prevention , and b ) it can offer a swift , direct platform of communication with the public [ 11 ] . Po - lice in developed countries have rigorously used OSN as a direct platform for public communication during critical events such as crisis . Many studies have shown how OSN played a useful role to provide critical real - time information and reduce the spread of mis - information in developed countries [ 21 , 24 , 27 , 31 ] . Researchers also found that residents used OSN for general coordination during a crisis , categorized public response , and showed the existence of different communities on OSN during crises [ 9 , 13 ] . Despite its various advantages , OSN can be intimidating for police organiza - tion as it leaves them off - guard to continuous citizen scrutiny and comments . Also , using OSN information offenders can perform organized crimes and genrate support for themselves [ 11 ] . Studies ( conducted in developed countries ) show that police or - ganizations need effective communication strategy to obtain timely information from residents and understand their concerns [ 6 , 10 , 18 ] . Most of the literature that focuses on technological solutions for police , propose systems for individual needs of the police de - partment . These needs include management of law enforcement content and use of video surveillance [ 5 , 30 , 16 ] . These studies ig - nore residents’ perspective on the technologies for handling crime . Researchers who focused on residents as users proposed solutions for personal safety , wearable devices to reduce fear , and report un - safe areas [ 4 , 26 ] . Such research efforts exploit the principle of providing information to individuals to manage law and order is - sues . Few studies explore technology for community interaction and collaboration to prevent crime [ 11 , 18 ] In developing countries , most research focus on proposing sys - tems for individual needs of the police department and residents [ 4 ] . However , technologies like OSN that can focus on community ac - tion to respond to law and order situations are largely unexplored in developing countries . Various community crime prevention theo - ries show importance of collective action to sustain community co - hesiveness and ﬁght fear of crime . Similar to developed countries , OSN use also inﬂuences police organizations in developing na - tions like India . In developing nations , residents and police are still evolving skills to use OSN as means of communication . There is little known about a ) if residents can use of OSN as an e - government service to exchange crime related actionable information with po - lice , b ) if police can provide citizens service beyond replying to residents’ request during regular and routine interactions on OSN or c ) if OSN can help police understand crime and fear of crime among residents . Thus , our study aims to answer these research questions . 3 . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND We now discuss the theories that provide a background explain - ing the characteristics that affect the adoption and use of OSN for policing and crime prevention . 3 . 1 Victimization Theory According to Victimization theory , a crime is an event that can happen when an offender ﬁnds a victim in an exploitable environ - ment [ 17 ] . Removing any one of the three – victim , offender or ex - ploitable environment can deter crime from being executed . There - fore , a victim may analyse risk involved in the environment he / she is part of and accordingly decide . For example , residents of - ten avoid secluded areas as they think it might be unsafe to visit them . In case of a crime , victims may choose to react individu - ally or collectively . The individual reaction can disable residents trust in others , isolate them , and contribute to the disintegration of community . In extreme cases , such individuals might take the law into their hands . However , if residents choose to take collective action to ﬁght crime , this may help to reduce victimizations and in - crease social cohesion . For example , people might trust individual or authority that promises to restore law and order . Residents and police may conduct community meetings to plan an action on crime and address resident’s concern . The police organizations develop strategies to increase the probability of citizen participation in col - lective efforts as such intervention strategies can help to prevent victimizations and increase community cohesion [ 17 ] . In India , most crime prevention approaches provide potential victim with the information in order to protect them from falling in danger or prevent crime ( e . g . , police websites to keep citizens informed about crime affected places ) rather than increasing com - munity crime prevention . In this paper , we examine BCP Face - book Page ( blrcitypolice ) designed to involve residents to partici - pate in crime prevention . We found that though this page provides residents with information , residents use the Facebook page to fa - cilitate collective action and keep police informed . According to victimization theory , fear of crime is a consequence of experienc - ing direct ( self - victimization ) or indirect victimization ( getting to know about crime from different sources ) . We also examine how the knowledge of victimization theory can help police understand the fear of crime among residents and policing needs . 3 . 2 Modern organization’s communication Literature suggests that communication is a complex task for the modern organizations . All organizations take different approaches to involve residents for accomplishing the tasks [ 29 ] . Similarly , modern police organization need well - equipped communication sys - tem to promote the ﬂow of information [ 15 ] . This information ﬂow is vital for operational effectiveness so that police have clear and comprehensive picture of what is happening . Communication style ( such as being polite and patient ) and engagement with the users ( being expressive about the situation ) inﬂuence the success of the organization [ 29 ] . We analyze the elements of communication such as communication style and engagement type to understand how police and residents use OSN to communicate , engage , and share information among themselves and how helpful would the interac - tion through OSN be to improve policing . 4 . METHODOLOGY In this section , we discuss general Bangalore police strategy to interact with community , and follow this with discussion about the data collection , and analysis methodology for our study . 4 . 1 City Policing in Bangalore Bangalore is an Information Technology ( IT ) hub of India and supports people with diverse backgrounds such as different ethnic communities . Recent reports show that the city experienced max - imum number of robbery and dacoity cases in the country . It was the second highest city to receive reports for cases of rape , kidnap , and murder [ 8 ] . Thus , crime remains a major concern for residents of the city . Since , it is the fourth - largest metropolitan city in In - dia and supports a population of almost ten million [ 14 ] , police departments need increased support to counter crime . Bangalore city police provide various ways for residents to reach the police individually . These approaches include a telephone helpline to po - lice control rooms , a women’s helpline , Children’s helpline , Elder’s helpline . Formal procedures to ﬁle a complaint include residents visiting the police station , mailbox to drop the complaint at all po - lice stations , letter to the concerned ACP / DCP , or Police Control Room or by E - mail . Residents unsatisﬁed with the police can visit the nearest police station to ﬁle a complaint . The City Police juris - diction consists of seven zones – North , South , East , West , Central , South East and North East . An ofﬁcer of the rank – Deputy Com - missioner of Police heads each zone . Each zone is further divided into subdivision and each subdivision is headed by an Assistant Commissioners of Police [ 2 ] . For community policing and crime prevention , police introduced provision of neighborhood watch committee i . e . members watch - ing their neighborhood turn by turn , join beat constables to per - form night beats , inform police about any child or youth going astray , and arrange social and cultural get - togethers to understand neighborhoods [ 2 ] . These provisions are mostly non - technology based . Realizing the potential of OSN , Bangalore police started its Facebook page in the year 2011 , for community engagement at the city level . The page has more than 100 , 000 likes and police allow citizens to post on this page , providing them [ police ] a two - way information - sharing mechanism . Residents use OSN to inform res - idents about various crimes and opinion on policing activities . Po - lice time and again have emphasized that OSN should not be treated as grievance redressing systems . Similar to Facebook page , Ban - galore Police also has a veriﬁed twitter account ( @ BlrCityPolice ) which has almost 11K followers . Since the number of followers is less ( almost ten times ) in comparison to Facebook , in this study we look at Facebook use . We plan to do the comparison with Twitter in follow - up future work . 4 . 2 Data Collection We selected the Bangalore community and studied their online interaction with police on Facebook Page to investigate OSN sig - niﬁcance in community accountability and satisfaction to ﬁght crime . We collected data from online Facebook page of Bangalore City Police and used different mechanisms to ﬁlter the required posts for analysis . To start with , we collected all the public posts posted from 21 st July - 21 st Aug , 2014 on BCP Facebook page . Since we are interested in studying resident’s satisfaction , we ﬁltered all posts and comments from residents to police . We used the ﬁltered posts to understand , what did the residents used this page for ? Next , we collected all the posts that were replied by police . In total , we collected 255 posts and 1 , 600 comments from residents . The col - lected posts and comments ( from the police and residents ) included only public posts and did not include private messages that people might have sent using Facebook to police . We collected all the metadata like time , date , story , and usernames through the Face - book API using a python script . We also collected likes and shares on these posts . 4 . 3 Data Analysis We analyzed the collected data to understand communication content , style and engagement type . This was followed by analyz - ing the fear of crime and safety concerns that residents expressed in their posts and comments on the Facebook page . As used in previous research , we use inductive thematic approach ( a qualita - tive method ) to analyze the posts [ 18 ] . We coded the content and description of each post to study the emerging themes . Communication content and style : Our analysis of the posts , resulted in a detailed categorization of the ﬁltered posts . We read each post and the codes were iteratively examined and condensed . Finally , we had 40 codes that were grouped further into 24 themes ( see Table 1 ) to show various crime and complaints that emerged from the Facebook page . We also analyzed whether the citizens re - port direct incidences of victimization ( reporting a personal expe - rience ) or if the page received indirect victimization ( report crime that happened with somebody else ) posts . Next , we developed a coding scheme to understand communication style used by police and residents on OSN , i . e . , whether they used formal or informal language to communicate with citizens . We also performed lexical analysis using word trees to understand the fear of crime and safety concerns among residents . Table 1 : Themes showing various crime / complaints that emerged from the con - tent posted on Facebook page by residents . Theme Explanation Missing Missing people Promotional Promoting products for policing Query How to get police assistance , where to complain Trafﬁc Trafﬁc menace on roads General resource infor - mation Information regarding police stations etc . Phone theft Stolen phones Hit and run Road rage Case inquiry Seeking progress on pending cases Online fraud Nigerian Scam , Credit card frauds etc . resident dissatisfaction Dissatisfaction with policing working FIR issue Cases FIR was refused Greetings Good wishes to community and police Fraud Real world frauds e . g . Property Fraud , ﬁnancial fraud Police misconduct Behavior issues with police Theft Burglary and stolen vehicles Suggestion Suggestion to improve policing Construction issue Illegal construction and construction hours Community action residents requested by fellow residents to come to - gether and ﬁght crime Auto - driver Problems with drivers of public transport e . g . , Au - torisckshaw , Taxi , Buses etc . Neighborhood People making menace in local society , e . g . hawk - ers , drunkards etc . Women harassment Women sexual assault Success story Posting about solved cases Appreciation Post Appreciating police for good work Satisfaction resident satisfaction on solved cases Engagement type : Engagement type includes four categories : acknowledge , reply , follow - up and ignore posts ( See Table 2 ) . Ac - knowledged posts category consisted of the post that police liked or wrote “thanks for sharing the information . ” Reply category in - cluded the posts to which police suggest a solution , follow - up posts consisted of posts in which the complainant resident asks for fur - ther information or police asks for more details . Finally , ignored posts were those posts that received no reply from the police . Table 2 : Engagement types that police used to interact with residents . Type Explanation Acknowledge Like or say thanks for information Reply Suggest a solution Follow - up Ask for further details Ignore No reply 5 . FINDINGS In this section , we ﬁrst discuss the different communication el - ements i . e . content , style and engagement . Next , we show how OSN data help understand fear , direct and indirect victimization , and needs of residents . 5 . 1 Communication Content To understand whether actionable information was available on this page , we analyzed the type of content residents posted on BCP Facebook page . Figure 2 shows the percentage of resident’s posts ( N = 255 ) related to categories shown in Table 1 . Maximum com - plaints that residents posted were related to neighborhood safety ( 36 posts ) , e . g . , “Today I saw some drunk boys ﬁghting with the staff of Temptation lounge bar in Koramangala behind Legend of Rocks . They had hockey , knife and daggers . After ﬁghting one of them who was drunk too much started ﬁghting with a boy and two girls going on the road in front of Balaji temple . . . . Please look into this matter and put curb on such incidents in the future . Thanks . ” Neighborhood issues were followed by posts appreciating police work ( 31 posts ) , for instance , a resident posted , “Congratu - lations MN Reddi for your swift action within days of taking a new post ! . ” Suggestion to police was the third largest category of posts , e . g . , “Hi , Sir today everybody uses smartphone or high end costly mobile phones and there are lot of lost phone cases unsolved in this regard the police can setup [ make ] a separate team to solve the cases . Hope you will think about it . ” Next , we analyzed the categories of posts that most residents liked and commented on ( See Figure 3 ) . The posts that were most liked included appreciation of police work and success story shared by residents . The next category of posts that were most liked by residents were women harassment posts and posts including cases of women sexual assault . For example , “Dear Bangalore City Po - lice , eve teasers [ common term for people harassing women ] are increasing day by day . Bus stops , auto stands , college gates , etc . are becoming nightmares to women . In and around majestic bus stand , the problem is even worse . Today’s eve - teaser may turn into a rapist tomorrow , so please take action . ” The 5 th most liked cat - egory was neighborhood issues such as street violence , issues with street hawkers , car parking issues , and unidentiﬁed vehicles . Resi - dent’s post regarding dissatisfaction with police working and police misconduct got least likes and comments from residents . From 255 resident’s posts , police responded to 172 posts . Maxi - mum cases that received police response were about neighborhood safety issues ( 11 . 48 % ) followed by suggestion for using new tech - nologies and improving security in particular areas ( 9 . 02 % ) . Police did not reply to posts that encouraged or appreciated their work ; however , police liked such posts to acknowledge observing them . To most residents’ suggestion , police replied that the police depart - ment was planning to implement them . 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Traﬃc FIR issue Construc8on issue Online fraud The > Community ac8on Query Dissa8sfac8on Women harassment Police misconduct Fraud Autodriver Sugges8on Apprecia8on Post Neighbourhood Figure 2 : Shows distribution of types of cases reported on Facebook . X - axis shows the number of posts 0 " 50 " 100 " 150 " 200 " Dissa * sfac * on " " FIR " issue " Gree * ngs " Fraud " Police " misconduct " The > " Sugges * on " Construc * on " issue " Community " ac * on " " Autodriver " Neighbourhood " Women " harassment " Success " story " Apprecia * on " Post " Sa * sfac * on " Comments " Likes " Figure 3 : Shows likes and comments posted on different types of cases reported on Facebook . X - axis shows the number of posts We found that people posted queries , gave information , made complaints , appreciated police efforts and provided feedback on different policing activities using BCP Facebook Page . Apart from the type of concern , these posts could be used to assemble action - able information as spatial data ( See Figure 4 ) and temporal data about the crime . For example , a resident posted “Saturday evening . Time – between 5 . 30 pm and 6pm . Location : The circle between Freedom Park and the route that goes into Cubbon Park , towards Century Club . Not a single police posted here . I was waiting for an auto at the circle and these two guys rode by asking if they could drop me . . . . Please ensure there are police put here for safety . ” The posts on Facebook Page helped police to know direct , persis - tent , and most apparent concerns of the residents . 5 . 2 Communication Style On comparing communication style , we found that residents used a mixed style of communication including both informal ( 187 posts ) and formal interaction ( 68 posts ) . Some residents while express - ing their concerns , disagreement and dissatisfaction used formal words like “Dear” or “Respected Sir” . For example , “Dear Sir , Re - quest to take action on Railway Station parking contractors they are not issuing parking slips . . . today @ Yashwantpur Railway Sta - tion Tumkur Roadside Entrance Parking . ” While using an informal style of writing , residents used words like “hi BCP” and slangs like “Kudos” , “pls” , etc . For instance , “Kudos to the Banasawadi Traf - ﬁc Police Team . My Salute and sincere thanks to the Banasawadi Figure 4 : Shows spatial information ( places where residents experienced crime ) was available in the posts of the residents . Trafﬁc Inspector XXX . . . . An ANGEL in disguise . ” Residents also used violent words like “kill” , “hang” , or abusive words while ex - pressing need for punishment to criminals . A resident posted , “Kill him [ criminal ] . Feed him to dogs or wolves or rats . Zero toler - ance . ” In comparison to residents , police always used a formal com - munication style of writing . While replying to resident’s posts po - lice politely addressed resident with their name and used words like “Dear XXX” , before replying with a solution to the issue . However , if residents continued to complain about the issue , police chose to repeat the same answer as given before or not reply . Police used words like “please” and “kindly” while asking residents to pro - vide information about the crime . Police expressed their gratitude through words like “thanks” while acknowledging resident’s posts . “Dear XXX , Please provide the exact landmark . . Thank you . ” This strategy to engage in online conversation with residents through OSN such as Facebook can become an efﬁcient instrument that help police always stay visible and connected with residents . 5 . 3 Engagement Type To analyze , whether police Facebook page was becoming just repository of complaints and suggestions , we assigned each resi - dent post with a type of engagement ( acknowledge , reply , follow - up , and ignore ) . We found that the police chose to react to 172 posts from residents , ignoring 82 posts . Among the 172 posts to which police replied to 43 . 44 % complaints and said that the posts were forwarded to the concerned police station , ofﬁcer - in - charge , or higher authorities like commissioner of police . For instance , a police comment stated , Dear XXX , This post has been forwarded to appropriate Police Station for taking necessary action on this . Thank you . Almost 22 % posts were suggested to contact the police station with the necessary details , e . g . Dear XXX , Please lodge a complaint at your nearest police station with the details and con - tact police inspector in this regard . They will assist you further in this . Thank you . For 21 . 31 % , police acknowledged the residents with a thanks or a reply that they will look into the matter , for ex - ample , “Dear XXX , We will take all possible legal measures in this regard . Thank you . ” Almost 10 % posts required follow - up as these posts needed to contain more details for the police to help residents . Police com - mented on such posts asking residents to post more details . For instance , “Dear XXX , Please provide the police station details . Thank you . ” Among these posts that needed follow - up from res - idents , we found that 29 posts were such in which residents replied back to the police . If the post had enough information , it was forwarded to the appropriate authority for action . In reply to the comments on follow - up reply of police , some citizens answered that they [ residents ] disagreed with the solution or suggestion pro - vided by police ; however , police did not reply further to such posts . In such cases , one particular resident replied saying that the solu - tion provided by the police is the correct suggestion . Police liked some 50 posts that were mainly appreciation or greetings posted by residents . On an average police took almost a day to give re - sponse for residents post . The statistics for the temporal analysis of when the residents posted and when police responded to are as follows : average time ( 30 . 53 hours ) , maximum time taken ( 211 . 16 hours ) , minimum time taken ( 4 minutes ) , and standard deviation ( 41 . 26 hours ) . Police ignored posts that were newspaper articles forwarded by a resident with no speciﬁc request , e . g . , Wishing to share something good about a task undertaken by Police in Ker - ala . . . http : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = 09csXiarD7U” 5 . 4 Understanding Fear Research shows that “crime weakens the fabric of social life by increasing fear , suspicion , and distrust . It also reduces public sup - port for the law , in terms of unwillingness to report crime and crit - icism of the police . ” [ 17 ] We analyzed , how people used Facebook page to express their concern and fear . We found multiple occur - rence of words like fear ( occurred 7 times ) , concern ( occurred 8 times ) , worried ( occurred 6 times ) , trouble ( occurred 4 times ) , no - tice of ( occurred 13 times ) and issue ( occurred 22 times ) . Mostly , residents were fearful of self - causality ; residents who were vic - tims of some crime mentioned being worried ( See Figure 5 ) about more harm being caused to them and used OSN to call for police help . Residents feared that somebody might misuse stolen vehicles and documents . Some mentioned threat of being attacked or be - ing traced by offenders . Residents used word notice to get police attention on their fear or concern . Figure 5 : Shows popular discussions on BCP page where citizens mentioned be - ing worried about crime and safety . Word Tree visualizations of popular discus - sions on BCP page where citizens mentioned “worried” . The visualization shows phrases that branch off from “worried” across all the text in the posts . A larger font - size means that the word occurs more often . Apart from direct mention of the word fear and worried , we found multiple occurrences of various words such as concerned , troubled , and issue , showing the fear and dissatisfaction in the polic - ing activities . Lexical analysis shows , participants mentioned being concerned about police station , control room or ofﬁcer not taking necessary action , when needed . For instance , a resident posted , “This photo [ of a criminal incident ] is taken just less than 30 me - ters of Surana College , South End Circle - in this road Asst . Com - missioner of Police ofﬁce is also situated - This Sidvin Condiments person sells Cigarette , Pan etc . , to college students and there is one software company also there next to this shop - many people smoke in front of this shop also on the Footpath - there are many police personnel who pass on this road but are silent spectators ! ! This is our Kanoon [ Law ] and is this the way of maintaining law and order in Bangalore . ” Residents said that as concerned residents , they would like to know what actions police took . In some posts , residents said that they hope , the concerned police ofﬁcer would contact residents to solve the problem . Some people expressed fear of going to the police station to report issues . 5 . 4 . 1 Report Victimization : indirect or direct Victimization theory shows fear is a consequence of either direct or indirect experience with the crime event . We found that Face - book page was used both to report direct and indirect victimization cases . We found that out of 255 posts , 91 posts ( 35 . 68 % ) reported direct cases of victimization , 61 posts ( 23 . 92 % ) reported indirect experience of a crime . In indirect experience , residents witnessed a crime but were not victims of it . Rest of the posts were of a dif - ferent nature such as appreciations , greetings , or the general query that did not represent direct or indirect victimization . While reporting direct victimization cases , residents posted how they were victimized and requested police to take action . For ex - ample a resident said , “My Vehicle KA - 02 - HW - 3183 white color Honda Dio was stolen from Kadamba Hotel ( Near Modi Hospital ) , RajajiNagar on Friday ( 25th July ) evening between 6 : 30 - 7 : 45PM . Please help in tracing my vehicle . ” In few direct victimization posts , one individual , on behalf of a group , complained of being victimized and used words like “We faced” . For example , a resident posted , “ Hi Bangalore City Police , We are facing many hassles with Auto Rickshaws operating from a stand near Vydehi Hospital , Whiteﬁeld . . . . We would appreciate if you could take immediate action against this and help us out . I am sure residents of White - ﬁeld and near around areas will be thankful ! ” This showed a form of collective action against crime ( self - experienced ) that informed police that it was a problem for many people . While reporting indirect experience of a crime , residents posted the details of a crime they witnessed and expected police to help the victims . Indirect victimization posts indicated collective action in which residents supported other residents from being victimized . “Dear BCP , though I stay at JP Nagar , but being part of KSFC Lay - out RWA ( Banaswadi Police station ) , I got to know that there are frequent problem at KSFC Layout near BBMP Hall . . . 8 - 10 youths were creating a public nuisance > ( shouting , boozing , manhan - dling , etc . ) yesterday i . e . on 27 / 7 / 14 , Sunday night 9 pm . We need your support to help avoid a molestation scenario at KSFC Layout . Thank you” This showed a form of collective action against crime ( not faced by complainant him / herself ) but informing police that it was a problem for many people . 5 . 5 Online Public Communication : Increased Accountability Facebook provides opportunities for police organisation to ob - tain information about what frustrates public and hold its ofﬁcers accountable . Using Facebook , residents asked questions which held police accountable for their action and functioning . For in - stance , a resident posted “Where is our police ? Seems like these criminals are not scared of anyone . . . SHAME ! ! ! ” Also , Bangalore police also actively participated on this platform supporting organ - isational policy of public accountability . Police maintained their communication style even while answering to frustrated residents . Figure 6 shows one such conversation between police and a res - ident . A resident said , “Dear Commissioner of Police , After all these rapes , molestations and kidnappings occurring in cars and vehicles with tinted cars , how is it that we can see so many cars and buses , and especially school buses plying around with their ve - hicles tinted ? or curtains inside that block the windows ? Doesn’t it encourage and embolden the criminals ? Why aren’t all the con - stables empowered to punish the drivers of tinted or curtained ve - hicles like cars and buses , on the spot ? ” Police responses followed the protocols and policy of ofﬁcial responses . This strategy shows that OSN based communication can change dissatisfaction among residents to accountability on an online public platform . Figure 6 : Police maintained their communication style while answering to frus - trated residents . We found that OSN also helped residents to express discontent about some of the ofﬁcial protocols . For example , a resident posted about police solving women sexual assault case , “ Skating instruc - tor held for 6 - yr - old’s rape . A 30 - year - old skating instructor was arrested on Sunday on the charge of raping a six - year - old girl stu - dent at Vibgyor High , Marathahalli . ” This post was followed by a ﬂurry of comments from public expressing concerns such as delay in justice for such victims and killing the culprit . For instance , a resident said , “Why can’t you shoot at his head . ” These conversa - tions continued for quite a while , and the post was among the top commented posts ( 532 likes , 184 comments ) . Responses were sent to and fro by the community members . Police , however , chose not be part of these conversations and did not reply to these comments . This kind of OSN usage leaves an open question that how exposure to crime news inﬂuences the community opinion about police . We performed lexical analysis with word trees using words such as why , where , which , how can . Figure 7 provides a deeper view into the structure around the accountability posts using word tree visualizing use of why . This analysis helped us to understand differ - ent ways residents held police accountable . Residents questioned why police functioned in speciﬁc ways . We also found instances , where residents reported need for mutual accountability . There were multiple posts in which residents accepted that they had equal responsibility ( as the police ) to keep the city safe ( See Figure 8 ) . 5 . 6 Understanding residents’ needs and wants Research shows that increased fear and anxiety can be encoun - tered , if the police know what residents expect and want from the police . The expectations of residents , if met , can increase feeling of safety in community [ 17 ] . We performed lexical analysis to under - stand what are residents need and want from the police . The word tree in Figure 9 summarizes the needs and wants of the residents . The word need occurred in 48 time and want occurred 17 times in posts and comments . The analysis shows major needs of the residents could be clubbed into two categories , a ) need for more resources and b ) need to punish , strict legal system , need to take issues with senior ofﬁcers . Figure 7 : Word Tree visualizations of posts in which residents questioned police using the word why . Figure 8 : A post showing that residents accepted that they had the equal respon - sibility ( as the police ) to keep the city safe One of the prominent need that residents posted was asking for more resources to improve policing . These requests included needs such as increased patrolling , more CCTV cameras , the need of po - lice on OSN and developing mechanism using which people can take an instant picture and send to the police for immediate action . For example , a resident posted , “Congrats Mr . M N Reddi . The safety of womanhood is with you and your team . A small sugges - tion : Make mandatory to install CCTV at all public and private institution ; . . . with better CCTV at the entrance for their venue . This will bring additional check and help . While mentioning the need to strengthen legal procedure and po - lice resources , residents discussed developing a strict law system and giving strict punishments . For example , a resident posted , “He [ criminal charged with a girl’s sexual assault ] should be hanged till death ! I am scared to send my little ones to the school ! ” The resi - dents felt that they were dependent on police to make the city safe ; e . g . , a resident posted , “Sir , will this punishment stop him attack - ing women ever in his life . . . . honestly this is not enough . We want a safe city and we are dependent on you . ” The posts show the res - idents’ concern and expectation that police need to be ‘on top of things’ . These posts also demonstrate the extent residents’ think police should react to offenders if needed . This post also shows that residents believed giving harsh punishments could be a way to reduce crime in the city . 6 . DISCUSSION In this paper , we study OSN role in improving Online Public Communication between police and residents for : a ) obtaining ac - tionable information related to crime ; and b ) evaluating resident’s satisfaction with safety that police provides in urban cities . The re - sults show that OSN use by residents to reach the police needs to address a combination of technical and social science challenges : Observable OSN for Actionable Information and Collective Ac - tion : We ﬁnd that people posted relevant queries , shared informa - ( a ) Tree shows occurrence of the word “need” in the posts and comments . The size of word increases with multiple occur - rences . ( b ) Tree shows the occurrence of word “want” in the posts and comments . The size of word increases with multiple occurance Figure 9 : Word Tree visualizations of posts in which citizens expressed want to or need to tell their needs to police . This tree shows phrases branching from phrases “need to” and “want to” in the text from our dataset . The word that occurs more frequently is larger in size . tion , made complaints and provided feedback on different polic - ing activities using BCP Facebook Page . Police can use residents’ posts and comments posted on the Facebook page to collate ac - tionable information on the type of the crime , location , and time of the crime . Residents’ posts that receive the maximum reply from the police is about neighborhood safety ( 11 . 48 % ) followed by resident’s suggestion for using new technologies and improving security in particular areas ( 9 . 02 % ) . Analysis of BCP Facebook page shows that active participation of police to answer resident’s queries is also needed to make OSN useful as a crime prevention tool . In our study , police responses are grouped into four cate - gories – acknowledge , reply , ignore , and follow - up the post . Police efforts to answer residents’ post show that when OSN is used as a Crime prevention technology ; it should offer social engagement that includes facilitating problem - solving discussions and allowing citizens to participate in collective action . Residents use OSN to express safety concerns and needs and police can use this informa - tion to prioritize policing activities based on citizens’ input . This prioritization can be used to address the crime early and can help improve citizens’ trust in law and order . In order to maximize OSN advantage in providing actionable in - formation , technologists should consider making OSN tools more “observable” for both police and residents . Police on OSN may receive a large volume of posts at a high velocity . For this , new tools with better functionality can be developed that help police to observe , respond , and follow - up with residents . We ﬁnd that cur - rently there are no means to mark posts that need a reply or follow up , differentiate posts that just need an acknowledgment of thanks and should not be mixed with crime critical messages . Similarly for residents , observable interfaces can help identify posts of inter - est . We ﬁnd that most of the suggestions by the police to citizens were repetitive , e . g . , meeting the concerned authority and asking for more details . If OSN is made more observable , then residents can easily get this information from existing posts . Making OSN “observable” can make addressing crime easy and efﬁcient . OSN as Instrumental communication platform : We ﬁnd that so far police choose to adopt a very formal communication style while interacting with residents on Facebook . This style is gov - erned by organizational goals to forward complaints to appropriate ofﬁcers . Police try to maintain distinct police - public relationship by , not getting into descriptive assistance for residents . Thus , police followed an instrumental approach on OSN [ 29 ] . Literature shows police often fear situation going out of control while publicly in - teracting with citizens that lead to wrong impressions about police organization [ 20 ] . Literature also shows police’s decision to use an instrumental approach could be to avoid high maintenance , over - stepping of organizational boundaries ; easy polarization of public opinions ( as required by the expressive approach ) [ 12 ] . Following the instrumental approach support such ﬁndings in the literature . The literature on communication for the modern organization shows that organizations that follow expressive approach while pro - viding service tend to enjoy a longer and satisfactory association with users [ 29 ] . Residents , however , use an informal approach to reach the police and other residents for improving policing . These posts contained detail explanations , slangs , and personal experi - ences . Such interaction in literature is considered as expressive ap - proach and is expected to increase the longevity of an organization . However , being extremely expressive on OSN can invite problems . In some cases , citizens were arrested because of mentioning com - ments on OSN that hurt community feelings [ 3 ] . There is a need to design technology that can assist users to identify information that is not law abiding with curtailing the freedom of speech . OSN to contact concerned authorities : We ﬁnd that by us - ing Facebook , police informs that the resident’s post is forwarded to the concerned authority and in some cases , police request citi - zens to reach the speciﬁed police station with details of the crime . However , police do not give immediate solutions through OSN . A reason to ask citizens approach the police station or authority rather than giving immediate solution can be that the police need to verify the information posted on Facebook . In some cases , evidence such as Facebook image are secondary evidence and , therefore , need veriﬁcation [ 1 ] . This strategy of asking citizens contact police sta - tion can also help reduce false reporting . It would be interesting to analyze how many residents who are asked to contact authorities do so and how much is the assistance offered by these authorities useful for residents . OSN for Mutual Accountability : Our results show that OSN offers various opportunities to improve accountability and intro - duce transparency in the community policing process . We ﬁnd that using OSN police help residents reach the concerned authorities . Police also accept resident’s complaint publicly on police miscon - duct and replied to citizens about actions being taken . This can help reduce the anxiety and dissatisfaction among the residents . These results are aligned with the literature that shows for success of com - munity policing platform accountability is essential [ 12 ] . OSN is used considerably by residents to spread positive work of police and success stories . Thus , as suggested by victimization theory , the posts containing good work , success story and appreciation of police can help to generate feeling of being protected among res - idents . Residents publicly discussed and informed police about threats and concerns which were to a large extent acknowledged by police and other residents . These exchanges could have helped address residents’ accountability concerns . OSN for Understanding fear and Victimization effects : De - veloping countries have been using individualistic technology so - lutions such as helplines to assist victimized citizens whereas com - munity policing has been largely non - technology based . Victimi - sation theory and OSN use of police give a larger perspective that technologies that encourage collective action can be designed for effective community policing . OSN use when combined with . Victimisation theory’s concepts can help predict factors that induce fear or increase feeling of safety through collective measures . We see that residents posted various experiences where they mentioned fear , trouble , worry , and concern after being victimized . Facebook page offered opportunity for police to understand citizens’ fear us - ing this data . Victimization theory suggests that individual complaints and at - tempts to ﬁght crime result in community disintegration and iso - lation of individuals . We ﬁnd that OSN offers an opportunity to reduce the number of residents who try to ﬁght crime individually and seek police help . A large number of residents post direct vic - timization cases where they experienced crime . The individual who is a victim of a crime gets support from other residents in the form of comments , likes , and probable solutions . Some of the posts also echo safety concern and help others to lodge complaints on behalf of individuals whom themselves cannot express crime . Thus , con - verting the individual action to a collective response . 7 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this study , the results show that police can use OSN to ob - tain actionable information like location , place , and evidence of a crime using OSN . Police adopt formal and polite communica - tion style on OSN to address resident concerns . We ﬁnd that the police uses different types of engagement with residents . Police helped victimized residents reach the concerned authority and for - warded complaints to appropriate departments . Also , police used OSN to acknowledge residents for their suggestions and apprecia - tion for police . Our results show that OSN offers an opportunity for public accountability of police and residents for policing . This transparency can be used to increase accountability and to foster trust in the police . The posts can help to generate feeling of being protected . We plan to use this information to design systems that can as - sess : a ) actionable information available through Facebook page and forward it to the concerned authority and b ) track the engage - ment type in each post for instance , was the post acknowledges , does it need a follow - up or a reminder , mark the posts which don’t require further action so that actionable information is not lost in the ﬂurry of posts . This can help to improve residents’ satisfaction by maximizing the number of posts that police answers . The sys - tem will be able to highlight the reply of police to the residents for future reference . Data persists to stay on online social networks ; we plan to assess how this information can be used to suggest resi - dents facing similar issues to avoid delay in action . In our system , we also plan to use the content from Facebook to assess resident’s behavior towards crime and safety . Authors are aware that police in India use other platforms like Twitter and YouTube ; however the number of residents following the police on Twitter and YouTube is far less than Facebook . We leave the comparison of police pres - ence on different OSN platforms to understand the complete OSN strategy for future . Also , we plan to do comparison of our data with police in developed countries for future . 8 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Shrey Bagroy and Sonal Goel in helping us with the coding and visualisation of the content . We would like to thank TCS research for funding the project . Also , we would like to thank all the members of Cybersecurity Education and Research Center and Precog who have given us continued support throughout the project ; special thanks to Aditi Gupta and Siddhartha Asthana . 9 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Amendments to the Indian Evidence Act , 1872 ( 1 of 1872 ) . http : / / www . cyberlawclinic . org / iea . htm . [ 2 ] Bangalore city police commissionerate . http : / / www . bcp . gov . in / Community . aspx . [ 3 ] Indian Women Arrested over Facebook Post . http : / / newsfeed . time . com / 2012 / 11 / 19 / indian - woman - arrested - over - facebook - like / , Nov 2012 . [ 4 ] Blom , J . , Viswanathan , D . , Spasojevic , M . , Go , J . , Acharya , K . , and Ahonius , R . Fear and the city : Role of mobile services in harnessing safety and security in urban use contexts . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 1841 – 1850 . [ 5 ] Chen , H . , Zeng , D . , Atabakhsh , H . , Wyzga , W . , and Schroeder , J . Coplink : Managing law enforcement data and knowledge . Commun . ACM 46 , 1 ( Jan . 2003 ) , 28 – 34 . [ 6 ] Chermak , S . and Weiss , A . Maintaining legitimacy using external communication strategies : An analysis of police - media relations . Journal of Criminal Justice 2005 . [ 7 ] Denef , S . , Bayerl , P . S . , and Kaptein , N . Social Media and the Police - Tweeting Practices of British Police Forces during the August 2011 Riots . In Proc . CHI 2013 , 3471 – 3480 . [ 8 ] Gouhar , I . Bangalore second in crime rate in country . http : / / www . thehindu . com / news / cities / bangalore / bangalore - second - in - crime - rate - in - country / article4816838 . ece , Jun 2013 . [ 9 ] Gupta , A . , Joshi , A . , and Kumaraguru , P . Identifying and Characterizing User Communities on Twitter during Crisis Events . Workshop on UMSocial , Co - located with CIKM 2012 . [ 10 ] Heverin , T . , and Zach , L . Twitter for city police department information sharing . In Proc ASIST 2010 . [ 11 ] Heverin , T . , and Zach , L . Twitter for city police department information sharing . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 47 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 7 . [ 12 ] Hughes , A . L . , St Denis , L . A . , Palen , L . , and Anderson , K . M . Online public communications by police & ﬁre services during the 2012 hurricane sandy . In Proc . CHI 2014 , 1505 – 1514 . [ 13 ] Hughes , A . , L . Palen , J . Sutton , S . Liu , and S . Vieweg . “Site - Seeing” in disaster : An examination of on - line social convergence . ISCRAM 2008 . [ 14 ] India Online . Population of bangalore 2014 . http : / / www . indiaonlinepages . com / population / bangalore - population . html . [ 15 ] Jeans , D . The Relationship Between Police and Other Government Agencies : Recent Changes in Perspective in Queensland ( 1993 ) . [ 16 ] Kavanaugh , A . , Fox , E . A . , Sheetz , S . , Yang , S . , Li , L . T . , Whalen , T . , Shoemaker , D . , Natsev , P . , and Xie , L . Social media use by government : From the routine to the critical . In Proceedings of the Annual International Digital Government Research Conference : Digital Government Innovation in Challenging Times , dg . o ’11 , ACM ( 2011 ) , 121 – 130 . [ 17 ] Lewis , D . A . , and Salem , G . Community crime prevention : An analysis of a developing strategy . Crime & Delinquency 27 , 3 ( 1981 ) , 405 – 421 . [ 18 ] Lewis , S . , and Lewis , D . A . Examining technology that supports community policing . In Proc . CHI 2012 , 1371 – 1380 . [ 19 ] López , C . A . , and Butler , B . S . Consequences of content diversity for online public spaces for local communities . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW ’13 , ACM ( 2013 ) , 673 – 682 . [ 20 ] Los Angeles News . NYPD Twitter campaign backlash spreads to LAPD . http : / / abclocal . go . com / kabc / story ? section = news / local / los _ angeles & id = 9514478 , 2014 . [ 21 ] Mendoza , M . , Poblete , B . and Castillo , C . Twitter under crisis : Can we trust what we RT ? 1st Workshop on Social Media Analytics SOMA 2010 . [ 22 ] Mergel , I . Social media adoption : Toward a representative , responsive or interactive government ? In Proceedings of the Annual International Conference Digital Government Research , dg . o ’14 , ACM ( 2014 ) , 163 – 170 . [ 23 ] Nayak , V . 92 Million Facebook Users Makes India The Second Largest Country [ STUDY ] . http : / / www . dazeinfo . com / 2014 / 01 / 07 / facebook - inc - fb - india - demographic - users - 2014 , 2014 . [ 24 ] Qu , Y . , Wu , P . and Wang , X . Online Community Response to Major Disaster : A Case Study of Tianya Forum in the 2008 China Earthquake . In Proc 42nd Hawaii Int’l Conf . on System Sciences 2009 . [ 25 ] Roy , D . Bangalore City Police Finds Its Voice through Social Media . www . cio . in / article / bangalore - city - police - ﬁnds - its - voice - through - social - media , October 2012 . [ 26 ] Satchell , C . , and Foth , M . Welcome to the jungle : Hci after dark . In CHI 2011 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 753 – 762 . [ 27 ] Starbird , K . and Palen , L . “Voluntweeters” : Self - organizing by digital volunteers in times of crisis . In Proc . CHI 2011 , 1071 – 1080 . [ 28 ] Stephens , D . W . , Hill , J . , and Greenberg , S . Strategic Communication Practices : A Toolkit for Police Executives . Community Oriented Policing Services , U . S . Department of Justice , Sept . 2011 . [ 29 ] Thomas , J . C . , and Kellogg , W . A . The Necessity of Expressive Communication in Organizations . http : / / www . truthtable . com / ExpressiveCommunicationBuildsMutualTrust . html . [ 30 ] Tullio , J . , Huang , E . , Wheatley , D . , Zhang , H . , Guerrero , C . , and Tamdoo , A . Experience , adjustment , and engagement : The role of video in law enforcement . In Proc CHI 2010 , 1505 – 1514 . [ 31 ] Vieweg , S . , Hughes , A . , Starbird , K . , and Palen , L . Micro - blogging during two natural hazards events : What twitter may contribute to situational awareness . In Proc CHI 2010 , 1079 – 1088 . [ 32 ] Wigand , F . D . L . Twitter takes wing in government : Diffusion , roles , and management . 11th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research ( 2010 ) .