Cell , Vol . 99 , 81 – 92 , October 1 , 1999 , Copyright ª 1999 by Cell Press MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice Develop Dwarfism , Osteopenia , Arthritis , and Connective Tissue Disease due to Inadequate Collagen Turnover that MMPs play an important role in mediating funda - mentalcellularprogramsthatdependonstromalremod - eling such as cell migration , angiogenesis , and wound healing ( Mignatti and Rifkin , 1996 ; Okada et al . , 1997 ; Nagase , 1998 ) . In addition , MMPs may be important Kenn Holmbeck , 1 , 7 Paolo Bianco , 3 , 7 John Caterina , 1 Susan Yamada 1 Mark Kromer , 1 Sergei A . Kuznetsov , 2 Mahesh Mankani , 2 Pamela Gehron Robey , 2 A . Robin Poole , 4 Isabelle Pidoux , 4 Jerrold M . Ward 5 and Henning Birkedal - Hansen , 1 , 6 1 MMP Unit cellular tools in embryonic development , in growth , in mammary involution , and in a number of diseases such 2 Craniofacial and Skeletal Diseases Branch National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research as arthritis , atherosclerosis , and cancer ( Liotta et al . , 1991 ; Stetler - Stevenson et al . , 1993 ; Galis et al . , 1995 ; Bethesda , Maryland 20892 3 Universita “La Sapienza” Werb et al . , 1996 ; Chin and Werb , 1997 ; Lark et al . , 1997 ) . While most MMPs are secreted , MT - MMPs , a recently Rome 00161 and Universita dell’Aquila identified subset of MMPs , are membrane - associated ( Sato et al . , 1994 ; Takino et al . , 1995 ; Will and Hinzmann , L’Aquila 67100 Italy 1995 ; Puente et al . , 1996 ; Pei , 1999 ) . MT - MMPs are type I membrane proteins with a single transmembrane do - 4 Joint Diseases Laboratory Shriners Hospitals for Children main and an extracellular catalytic domain . The mem - brane localization makes MT - MMPs particularly suited Canadian Unit McGill University to function in pericellular proteolysis ( Sato et al . , 1996 ) . MT1 - MMPis highlyexpressedinembryonic skeletaland Montreal , Quebec , H3G 1A6 Canada periskeletal tissues ( Kinoh et al . , 1996 ; Apte et al . , 1997 ) , and has been suggested to serve as a membrane recep - 5 Veterinary and Tumor Pathology Section Animal Sciences Branch tor or activator of MMP - 2 ( Gelatinase A ) and possibly other secreted MMPs ( Strongin et al . , 1995 ; Cowell et Division of Basic Sciences National Cancer Institute al . , 1998 ) . Recent data indicate that MT1 - MMP may also function as a fibrinolytic enzyme in the absence of plas - Frederick , Maryland 21702 – 1201 min and mediate pericellular proteolysis in angiogenesis ( Hiraoka et al . , 1998 ) . Mouse strains deficient in several individual MMPs Summary ( MMP - 2 , MMP - 3 , MMP - 7 , MMP - 9 , MMP - 12 ) have been developed . All of these showed little or no impairment of MT1 - MMP is a membrane - bound matrix metallopro - development and reproduction . In each case , however , teinase ( MT - MMP ) capable of mediating pericellular specificcellularfunctionswerealteredorimpairedeither proteolysis of extracellular matrix components . MT1 - spontaneously or following defined experimental chal - MMPisthereforethoughttobeanimportantmolecular lenge ( Shipley et al . , 1996 ; Itoh et al . , 1997 ; Wilson et tool for cellular remodeling of the surrounding matrix . al . , 1997 ; Masson et al . , 1998 ; Mudgett et al . , 1998 ; Vu et To establish the biological role of this membrane pro - al . , 1998 ) . To address by similar means the physiological teinase we generated MT1 - MMP - deficient mice by role of MT1 - MMP , we generated mutant mice deficient gene targeting . MT1 - MMPdeficiency causes craniofa - in MT1 - MMP activity . We demonstrate here that MT1 - cial dysmorphism , arthritis , osteopenia , dwarfism , and MMP deficiency givesrise to a setof severe , generalized fibrosis of soft tissues due to ablation of a collageno - connective tissue abnormalities by impairing an essen - lytic activity that is essential for modeling of skeletal tial collagenolytic activity . and extraskeletal connective tissues . Our findings demonstrate the pivotal function of MT1 - MMP in con - Results nectivetissuemetabolism , andillustratethatmodeling of the soft connective tissue matrix by resident cells Generation of MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice is essential for the development and maintenance of To disrupt expression of the MT1 - MMP gene , a 3 . 35 kb the hard tissues of the skeleton . segment containing sequences from the 3 (cid:57) half of intron 1 through the 3 (cid:57) end of exon 5 was replaced with a PGK Introduction controlled HPRT minigene ( van der Lugt et al . , 1991 ) ( Figure 1A ) . This deletion removedfrom the mature MT1 - Matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) constitute a family of MMP protein amino acid residues 6 – 274 including all zincendopeptidasesthatarecapableofdegradingmost but five residues of the prodomain and eight residues of the structural components of the extracellular matrix of the catalytic domain , rendering any polypeptide ex - ( Birkedal - Hansen et al . , 1993 ; Birkedal - Hansen , 1995 ; pressed from this mutant gene catalytically inactive . The Werb , 1997 ) . The wide substrate specificity suggests targeting vector was transfected into ( HM - 1 ) HPRT - defi - cient mouse embryonic stem cells ( Magin et al . , 1992 ) and 35 of 71 HAT - resistant cell clones were identified 6 To whom correspondence should be addressed ( e - mail : hbhansen @ aslegitimatelytargeted . Chimericoffspringderivedfrom dir . nidcr . nih . gov ) . 7 These authors contributed equally . two individual cell clones were mated to Swiss Black Cell82 Figure 1 . Targeting of MT1 - MMP ( A ) Strategy for targeting of MT1 - MMP . The structure of the mouse MT1 - MMP endoge - nous gene , the MT1 - MMP transgene tar - geting vector , the targeted MT1 - MMP gene and the corresponding protein products are depicted as diagrams . In the gene diagram , intron sequences are depicted as open and exon sequences as black boxes . Important restriction sites are indicated . Restriction sites in parenthesis are mutated and not cleavable . The selective markers HPRT and HSV - tk are depicted as shaded boxes . The position of primers used for detection of the targeted allele are indicated with A and B . Probes used for hybridization are indicated as P5 (cid:57) and P3 (cid:57) . Protein diagram abbrevia - tions are as follows : PRO , prodomain ; CAT , catalytic domain ; HIN , hinge region ; PEX , hemopexin domain ; TM , transmembrane do - main . “Deleted region” indicates the part of the MT1 - MMP protein that is removed by the homologous recombination event . ( B ) Identification of transgenic animals by Southern blot : (cid:49) / (cid:49) , wild - type ; (cid:49) / (cid:50) , hetero - zygous ; (cid:50) / (cid:50) , homozygous mutant . HindIII - restrictedsamplesweresizefractionatedandhybridizedtotheP3 (cid:57) probe . HindIII / BglII - restrictedsamplesweresizefractionatedandhybridizedtotheP5 (cid:57) probe . The fragment size of the analytical restriction digest is indi - cated in base pair length and with double arrowhead lines in ( A ) . ( C ) Detection of MT1 - MMP mRNA in total ne - onate RNA by Northern blot . The genotypes are abbreviated as described for Southern blot . Probes used for detection of fraction - ated RNA are indicated ( P5 (cid:57) and P3 (cid:57) ) . ( D ) Dorsal view of 10 - day - old MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) mouse and control littermate ( MT1 (cid:49) / (cid:50) ) . ( E ) Close - up of 79 - day - old MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) mouse . mice and germline transmission of the targeted allele and after day 50 experienced progressive wasting , patchy hair loss , reduced mobility , kinking of the wrist , was obtained with chimeras derived from both clones ( Figure 1B ) . Interbreeding of heterozygous mice gave and hyperlordosis / hyperkyphosis ( Figures 1D and 1E ) . The mutant mice showed no signs of sexual maturation , rise to the expected Mendelian distribution of homozy - gous mutant mice ( MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) ) , heterozygous ( MT1 (cid:49) / (cid:50) ) mice , and most of the animals died between days 50 and 90 . In most , if not all cases , death occurred due to wasting . and wild - type ( MT1 (cid:49) / (cid:49) ) mice . RNA prepared from total neonatal MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) tissues and probed with exon 1 – or Heterozygous mice appeared indistinguishable from wild - type littermates . Thus , deleterious effects of any exon 6 – 9 – specific probes showed no transcripts of the size or intensity characteristic of MT1 - MMP mRNA from protein translated from the low levels of aberrant size message detected by Northern blot did not account for wild - type or heterozygous littermates ( Figure 1C ) . the observed phenotype in MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) animals . MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice Are Viable but Display Severe Runting , Wasting , and Increased Mortality MT1 - MMP Deficiency Causes Skeletal Dysplasia , Arthritis , Severe Osteopenia , and Generalized Neonate MT1 - MMP - deficient mice could not be distin - guished visibly from heterozygous and wild - type lit - Soft Tissue Disorders MT1 - MMP deficient mice gradually developed a severe termates at birth although subsequent X - ray analyses showed evidence of aberrant cranial bone formation skeletal phenotype ( Figures 1D , 1E , and 2 ) . Short snout , orbital protrusions , hypertelorism , and dome - shaped already at birth . Hair growth and eye opening occurred without retardation , but growth impairment ( smaller skull with bulging parietal and interparietal regions be - cameobviousatday5 ( Figures1Dand1E ) . Membranous body size and weight ) became evident as early as 5 days . In cohorts of 30 mice weaning weight for MT1 (cid:50) / (cid:50) ossification of calvarial bones was delayed and suture closure was never completed ( Figures 2A and 2C ) . Be - animals ranged from only 3 . 5 to 5 g versus 12 to 16 g for wild - type or heterozygous mice , and 33 % of mutant ginning at day 5 , the limb bones appeared shorter than in control littermates and grew to approximately 65 % animals died from wasting before weaning . Surviving mutant mice gained little weight over the next few weeks of the length of controls by day 45 ( Figures 2B and Connective Tissue Disease in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice 83 Figure 2 . Bone Development in MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice ( A ) Alizarinred / alcianbluestainingofskullsof MT1 - MMP - deficient ( (cid:50) / (cid:50) ) and control ( (cid:49) / (cid:49) ) mice demonstrating larger fontanelles and gradually increasing cranial dysmorphism of mutant mice ( 3 (cid:51) magnification ) . ( B – D ) Lateral X - ray images of 80 - day - old MT1 - MMP - deficient ( B ) and wild - type lit - termate ( D ) , ( 0 . 75 (cid:51) magnification ) . ( C ) 3 (cid:51) magnification of cranial vault from the animal in ( B ) . Notethewidesuturesandthedisplace - ment of the interparietal bone ( arrowheads ) . ( E and F ) X - ray images of hind limb bones from 80 - day - old MT1 - MMP - deficient ( F ) ( 3 (cid:51) magnification ) and wild - type littermate ( E ) ( 2 (cid:51) magnification ) . Note the severe osteope - nia of the mutant mouse . ( G – J ) Histology of the femora of 60 - day - old MT1 - MMP - deficient ( G and I ) and wild - type ( H and J ) mice . Note the severe reduction of trabecular bone in the spongiosa and the thinner cortex in the mutant animal ( G – H ) . Goldner’s stain . Bars (cid:53) 150 (cid:109) m ( G and H ) ; 400 (cid:109) m ( I and J ) . 2D – 2F ) . Osteopenia became increasingly apparent and by cartilage primordia ( Kaufmann , 1998 ) . We identified a distinct anomaly in postnatal development of these bone mass was severely reduced in animals aged 40 days or older ( Figures 2G – 2J ) . Concurrently , MT1 - MMP - primordia in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice , which also helped to more clearly define the normal process gov - deficient mice developed severe generalized arthritis ( Figures 3A – 3F ) . All joints showed overgrowth of a hy - erning ossification . To our knowledge , this process has notpreviouslybeenfullydescribed . Thepostnataldevel - percellular , vascularized synovial tissue and destruction of articular cartilage , resulting in ankylosis ( Figure 3E ) . opment of the most conspicuous primordium , the pari - etal cartilage ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) —which is located in TRAP - positive , osteoclast - like giant cells were promi - nent within articular and periarticular soft tissues ( Fig - the region where parietal and interparietal bones later develop—is shown in Figure 4 . Toward the base of the ures 3C and 3D ) . Tendons , ligaments , synovial capsules , musculotendinal junctions , and septal / fascial structures cranium , the parietal cartilage merged with the cartilage precursor of the pars petrosa of the temporal bone . In associated with skeletal muscle all displayed increased cell proliferation and vascularity , and became increas - normal mice , the cartilaginous precursor of the pars petrosa , and the parietal cartilage ( both clearly detect - ingly fibrotic . Older animals developed progressive fi - brosis ofthe dermisand ofhair follicles , which coincided able in newborn mice ) were completely replaced by bone at day 15 ( Figures 4A – 4D ) . Upon completion of the with hair loss . process , the osseous pars petrosa and the osseous interparietal / parietal bones were joined by typical su - Abnormal Cranial Morphogenesis in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice : Impaired Removal of Calvarial Cartilage tures . The pars petrosa ossified endochondrally whereas the parietal and interparietal bones ossified intramem - Primordia Interferes with Membranous Bone Formation and Suture Closure branously over the outer aspect of the parietal cartilage . Endochondral ossification of the cartilage precursor of Membranous ossification of the parietal , orbital , and lower frontal regions of the mouse calvarium , which are the pars petrosa occurred in timely fashion in both nor - mal and mutant mice but the parietal cartilage was never dysmorphic in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice , is preceded Cell84 Figure 3 . Arthritis in MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice Metatarsal – phalangeal joint of 40 - day - old MT1 - MMP - deficient mouse ( A ) , and normal littermate ( B ) . Note the prominent synovitis and the overgrowth of inflamed synovial tis - sue over the articular cartilage ( arrows ) in ( A ) . ( CandD ) Osteoclast - likecellsinarticularsoft tissues of MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . ( C ) TRAP - positive cells at the lateral aspect of a fibrocartilage meniscus in the knee joint . ( D ) Large numbers of TRAP - positive cells in the synovial overgrowth covering the articular surface of the condyle . ( E ) Severe ankylosis due to extensive fibrosis of the articular soft tisues in the knee joint of a 103 - day - old MT1 - MMP - deficient mouse . ( F ) Control littermate . Asterisks indicate the fibrotic tissue in the mutant mouse and the normal synovial adi - pose cushion in the wild type . Bars (cid:53) 200 (cid:109) m ( AandB ) ; 150 (cid:109) m ( CandD ) ; 800 (cid:109) m ( EandF ) . removed in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . This primordium mice eventually did ossify , in the absence of vascular canals , butbyanalternativemechanism . Theendochon - persistedbut wasgradually transformedinto anincreas - dral ossification proceeded directly from the perichon - ingly fibrotic and acellular vestige on the inner aspect drium behind osteoclastic resorption of the calcified of the underdeveloped parietal / interparietal bone at cartilage matrix , but only after full expansion of the region least up to 60 days of age ( Figures 4E – 4H ) . The re - of cartilage mineralization to the very periphery of the gressing parietal cartilage in normal animals never epiphyses ( Figures5I – 5J ) . Followingthisdelayeddevelop - calcified but gradually dissolved and disappeared by a ment of secondary epiphyseal centers , the metaphyseal process that did not involve osteoclasts . We interpret growth plates of mutant mice underwent progressive the persistence of the parietal cartilage vestige in MT1 - thinning and disorganization ( Figures 2G and 2H ) . BrdU MMP - deficient mice to indicate that a collagenolytic labeling revealed that chondrocyte proliferation was mechanism responsible for dissolution of this cartilage markedly reduced in growth plates of 39 - day - old MT1 - matrix was impaired . This specific chondrolytic process MMP - deficient mice ( Figures 5K and 5L ) whereas no is MT1 - MMP - dependent and indispensable for timely such difference was observed at 10 days ( not shown ) . removal of cartilage primordia as they are replaced by bone formed by intramembranous ossification . Increased Osteoclastic Resorption and Decreased Bone Formation are Associated With Progressive Endochondral Ossification in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice : Fibrosis of Periskeletal Soft Tissues and Arthritis Deficient Vascularization of Hyaline Cartilage The progressive osteopenia observed in adult MT1 - Disrupts Secondary Ossification and Growth MMP - deficient mice was a result of increased bone re - Plate Development sorption as well as diminished bone formation . Exces - Maturation , hypertrophy , and calcification of pre - and sive osteoclastic resorption was observed in all bones early postnatal metaphyseal growth plates were essen - of mutant mice aged 40 days or older ( Figures 6A – 6C ) . tially normal in mutant mice . In contrast , the postnatal The largest number of osteoclasts was found near bone / development of the epiphyseal ( secondary ) ossification soft tissue interfaces : at the bony edges of the open centers was markedly delayed . Vascular canals , which fibrotic cranial sutures , within and near arthritic joints normally penetrate the uncalcified hyaline epiphyseal and near tendon , ligament , and capsule insertions of cartilage , did not form . Vascular invasion and subse - long bones . Dual calcein labeling revealed that bone quent endochondral ossification of the epiphyseal cen - formationwasdramaticallyreducedinMT1 - MMPdeficient ters normally proceeds from these canals ( Figures 5A – mice ( Figures 6D and 6E ) . The periosteal osteogenic 5H ) , and their absence in mutant animals severely layer of long bones showed marked fibrosis , reduced retarded secondary ossification . After a delay of about cell proliferation ( data not shown ) , and structural disor - ganization in mice aged 40 days or older ( Figures 6F – 6I ) . 8 days , the epiphyseal centers of MT1 - MMP - deficient Connective Tissue Disease in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice 85 Figure 4 . Impaired Chondrolytic Regression ofCalvarialCartilagePrimordiainMT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice Coronal sections through the interparietal bones of newborn , 10 - , 15 - , and 60 - day - old normal ( A – D ) and mutant ( E – H ) littermates . In newborn mice , the interparietal ( and parietal ) bones grow on the outside of a cartilage pri - mordium in continuity with the pars petrosa of the temporal bone ( A – D ) . Cartilage hyper - trophy is obvious in the pars petrosa at day 10 , bothinnormalandmutantmice ( asterisks in B and F ) . Above the region of cartilage hypertrophy , the parietal cartilage primor - dium disappears in normal mice , leaving room for the advancing front of membranous ossification ( [ B ] , double arrows , and details in [ I ] and [ J ] ) . Inmutantmice , afibrousvestige of the cartilage primordium ( [ F ] , double arrows and details in [ K ] , and [ L ] ) contiguous with the hypertrophic cartilage of the pars petrosa ( [ F ] , asterisk ; [ K ] , thick arrow ) re - mains . At day 15 in normal mice ( C ) , both the parspetrosa ( C , asterisk ) andtheinterparietal bonearefullyossified , andjoinedbyatypical suture ( C , thick arrow ) . At day 15 in mutant mice ( G ) endochondral ossification of the pars petrosa has been completed ( G , aster - isk ) , butmembranousossificationoftheinter - parietal bone is incomplete , and the vestige of the cartilage primordium persists at its in - ner aspect ( G , double arrow ) . The lower end of this primordium interferes with suture for - mation ( G , thickarrow ) . At60days , thesuture has become highly fibrotic in mutant mice ( H , thick arrow ) and an acellular fibrous vestige of the primordial cartilage is still detectable ( H , double arrows ) . ( I – L ) Sections from 10 - day - old mice stained with Masson’s tri - chrome ( I and K ) and alcian blue ( J and L ) . ( I and J ) normal mice , ( K and L ) mutant lit - termates . Thick arrows indicate the unre - moved parietal cartilage vestige , which has lost alcianophilia for the most part ( L ) . Thin arrows indicate the forming interparietal bone . The dashed line marks the site of the developing suture , and the boundary be - tween the pars petrosa and the parietal carti - lage . Bars (cid:53) 150 (cid:109) m ( A – H ) ; 70 (cid:109) m ( I – L ) . Osteoblasts located at or near bone surfaces were dis - mice demonstrated that the expression level of type I and type II collagen was equivalent in all animals ( data placed into the dense fibrotic periosteal matrix and frequently showed abundant coarse cytoplasmic inclu - not shown ) . We therefore concluded that excess colla - gen deposition was unlikely to be caused by increased sions containing collagen fibrils ( Figures 6J – 6L ) . North - ern blot analysis of total RNA from wild type and mutant expression . Cell86 Figure 5 . AbnormalLongBoneDevelopment in MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice ( A and B ) Femur , 5 - day - old mutant and nor - mal mice . Formation of epiphyseal vascular canalswithinuncalcifiedepiphysealcartilageisabsentinthemutantmouse ( A ) andpresent in the normal littermate ( B , arrow and inset ) . ( C and D ) Femur , 10 - day - old mutant and nor - malmice . Obviousfeaturesofepiphysealcar - tilage hypertrophy in the mutant mouse ( C ) . Note the complete absence of vascular ca - nals and of ossification . Ossification of sec - ondary ( epiphyseal ) center has started in the normal mouse ( D ) . Invasion of the epiphyseal ossification center proceeds from vascular canals ( D , boxed , E and F ) which penetrate the uncalcified cartilage of the epiphyseal condyle . ( G and H ) Proximal epiphyses of the tibia of mutant ( G ) and normal ( H ) mice , day 16 . Ossification of the epiphysis is extensive in the normal mouse , but only beginning in the mutant . ( I and J ) Femoral epiphysis of 16 - day - old mutant mouse . Invasion of the carti - lage is led by calcified - cartilage resorbing osteoclasts ( I ; arrows , J ) . Osteoclastic re - sorptionofthenowmineralizedcartilagepro - ceeds without prior development of vascular canals . ( K and L ) BrdU labeling of the tibial growth plates from 39 - day - old mice showing markedly reduced labeling in the mutant ( K ) . Compare to the normal littermate ( L ) . Bars (cid:53) 300 (cid:109) m ( A – D ) ; 120 (cid:109) m ( EandF ) ; 200 (cid:109) m ( G – I ) ; 70 (cid:109) m ( J ) ; 180 (cid:109) m ( K and L ) . MT1 - MMP Deficiency Impairs Collagenolytic Activity osteogenic cells were loaded onto either ( denatured ) insoluble collagen - type - I - based ( Gelfoam ) or hydroxy - and Osteogenic Potential of Osteoblasts Since our findings showed that bone formation was apatite - based carriers and transplanted into the subcu - tis of immunocompromised , but MT1 - MMP - sufficient markedly reduced in MT1 - MMP deficient animals , we asked whether MT1 - MMP deficiency caused an intrinsic mice . With both carriers , cells from control mice formed complete ectopic ossicles composed of abundant bone dysfunction of osteogenic cells , rather than systemic ( e . g . , hormonal , nutritional ) imbalances , or dysfunction and hematopoietic marrow ( Figure 7A ) . In contrast , cells from mutant littermates formed only scant amounts of of other skeletalcell types or tissues ( for instance vascu - lature ) . To answer this question , we isolated clonogenic bone indicating that the osteogenic activity of marrow - derived osteogenic cells from these animals was se - osteoprogenitor cells ( CFU - F ) from the bone marrow of mutant mice and normal littermates , and probed their verely deficient ( Figure 7A ) . The Gelfoam matrix was efficiently degraded and replaced by bone and marrow ability to form bone in a transplantation assay ( Krebs - bach et al . , 1997 ) . Cellsfrom mutant mice showed higher in ossicles formed by MT1 - MMP - sufficient cells , whereas a significant fraction of the collagenous carrier material colony forming efficiency than cells from normal lit - termates ( data not shown ) , indicating that CFU - F were remainedundegradedinossiclesformedbymutantcells ( Figure 7A ) . We concluded that MT1 - MMP - deficient not quantitatively deficientin the bone marrowof mutant mice . Culture - expanded populations of marrow - derived marrow stromal cells possess two seemingly related Connective Tissue Disease in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice 87 Figure 6 . Bone Resorption and Formation in MT1 - MMP - Deficient Mice ( A ) TRAP staining of whole calvaria of 68 - day - old mutant ( (cid:50) / (cid:50) ) and normal ( (cid:49) / (cid:49) ) littermates . The TRAP staining results in “painting” of the patent sutures in the mutant ( arrowheads ) , indicatingosteoclasticactivity . ( B andC ) TRAP staining ofthe femoral cortex ( metaphysis ) in 68 - day - old mutant ( B ) and wild - type ( C ) littermates ( Nomarski optics ) . Note the large excess of osteoclasts in ( B ) . ( DandE ) Calceinlabelingof69 - day - oldmice , tibial metaphysis . Mutant animals display a dramatic reduction in bone forming activity ( D ) compared to the wild - type littermate ( E ) . ( F – I ) Sections of femur of 51 - day - old normal mouse ( FandH ) andmutantlittermate ( Gand I ) , stained with H & E ( F and G ) , and reacted for ALP ( H and I ) to demonstrate osteogenic cells ( arrows ) . Inthemutant , thecorticalbone is markedly reduced in thickness and is lined byathickfibroticlayer . ALP - positivecellsare dispersed across the fibrotic layer ( I , arrows ) . ( J – L ) Osteoblasts of the fibrotic perisoteum ofolderanimalscontainintracellularcollagenfibrils . ( J ) , Trichrome strain . ( K ) , ALP activity and ( L ) , EM . Bars (cid:53) 2 . 1 mm ( A ) ; 180 (cid:109) m ( B – E ) ; 200 (cid:109) m ( F – I ) ; 10 (cid:109) m ( J and K ) ; 1 . 5 (cid:109) m ( L ) . defects : impairment of osteogenic capacity and impair - with TNF (cid:97) / IL - 1 (cid:98) . Cells from MT1 - MMP - deficient lit - termates , however , completely failed to degrade the ment of collagenolytic / gelatinolytic activity . collagen matrix demonstrating that MT1 - MMP defi - ciency imparts a severe defect in collagenolytic activity MT1 - MMP - Deficient Skin Fibroblasts Are Incapable of Degrading Type I Collagen Matrices In Vitro and that degradation of type I collagen fibrils in this system is absolutely dependent on MT1 - MMP ( Figure 7B ) . Because of the apparent inability of MT1 - MMP - deficient marrow stromal cells to degrade the collagenous Gel - foam matrix , we sought to verify that MT1 - MMP - defi - cient cells were deficient in collagenolytic activity . Skin Discussion fibroblasts isolated from newborn mice were seeded in a pellet on a reconstituted type I collagen fibril film and Targeted disruption of the MT1 - MMP gene in mice re - sults in a series of severe connective tissue growth and incubated in serum - free medium . Cells derived from wild - type or heterozygous mice readily degraded the remodeling disorders including dwarfism , osteopenia , fibrosis of soft tissues , arthritis , and skeletal dysplasia . underlying collagen film particularly when stimulated Cell88 Figure 7 . Osteogenesis and Collagen Break - down by MT1 - MMP - Deficient and Wild - Type Cells ( A ) Function of osteogenic progenitor cells evaluatedbytheirabilitytoformectopicossi - cles following transplantation in a collagen - based carrier in SCID mice . ( a ) Low - power view of the ossicle formed by cells derived from control animals . Note the well - devel - opedbonecortexandmarrowcavitywithtra - becularbone . ( c ) Low - powermagnificationof an ossicle formed by cells derived from MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . Note the absence of cortical bone and little evidence of a marrow cavity . ( b ) High power view of the ossicle in ( a ) showing hematopoiesis , trabecular bone and adipocytes . ( d ) High power view of the ossicle in ( c ) . Note the large amount of unde - graded carrier . Bars (cid:53) 0 . 8 mm ( a and c ) ; 250 (cid:109) m ( b and d ) . ( B ) Collagenolytic activity of newborn skin fi - broblasts seeded on a reconstituted type I collagen film . Note the failure of MT1 - MMP - deficient to degrade the collagen film . Inability to degrade and remodel unmineralized collage - severely impaired to the extent that coordinated growth of the bone / soft tissue unit was compromised . As the nous matrices at sites that normally express MT1 - MMP inthedevelopingmouseemergesasacommondenomi - soft tissues failed to remodel , the bone surface at the soft tissue insertion sites became a target for excessive nator for these abnormalities . Consistent with these ob - servations , cells derived from MT1 - MMP - deficient ani - osteoclastic bone resorption . Since bone is the only structure that can be efficiently remodeled in mutant mals have lost an indispensable collagenolytic activity againsttypeI / IIcollagen - richmatrices . Ourfindingsthus animals , we propose that increased bone resorption vis - a ` - vis the development of soft tissue fibrosis constitutes illustrate the pivotal and indispensable role of this colla - genolytic activity in stromal remodeling and in the devel - a partially successful compensatory response enabling continued growth . opment , growth , and maintenance of connective tissue structures throughout the body . Impaired Remodeling of Periskeletal Soft Tissues MT1 - MMP Is Essential for Growth Plate Function and Secondary Ossification Gives Rise to Compensatory Osteoclastic Bone Resorption to Accommodate Growth Endochondral bone formation at metaphyseal growth plates involves coordinated removal of calcified carti - TheskeletonisamajortargetforadverseeffectsofMT1 - MMP deficiency ( reduced longitudinal growth , cranial lage by osteoclasts and subsequent replacement by bone deposited by osteoblasts . This process is essen - dysmorphism , osteoclasia , and osteopenia ) . None of these effects , however , reflect any detectable impair - tially normal in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice throughout prenataldevelopmentandevenforsometimeafterbirth . ment of the osteoclast - mediated degradation of bone or calcified cartilage matrix . Rather , bone resorption and We therefore conclude that the complex developmental program required for proper growth plate function osteoclastic activity are greatly increased in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . This is in agreement with the notion that ( chondrocyte differentiation , maturation , hypertrophy , cartilage calcification , osteoclastic erosion ) , per se , is the collagenous - matrix - degrading activity of osteo - clasts primarily is dependent on acidic proteinases of not dependent on MT1 - MMP activity . The development of epiphyseal ( secondary ) centers of ossification , how - the cathepsin family ( Garnero et al . , 1998 ; Saftig et al . , 1998 ) , thus questioning MT1 - MMP activity as essential ever , is disrupted in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . Invasion of the uncalcified epiphyseal hyaline cartilage by vascu - for bone resorption . The progressive fibrosis of liga - ment , tendon and capsular insertions in bone suggests lar canals which represents a critical early step in the development of the secondary centers of ossification that timely remodeling of these soft tissue matrices was Connective Tissue Disease in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice 89 ( Lutfi , 1970 ; Kuettner and Pauli , 1983 ; Cole and Weze - bones , parietal and interparietal bones ) develop by membranous ossification but are preceded by conspic - man , 1985 ) failed to occur . It is noteworthy that such vascular canals have previously been shown to express uous cartilage primordia ( Kaufmann , 1998 ) . Taken to - gether , these findings suggest that development and MT1 - MMP ( Sta˚hle - Ba¨ckdahl et al . , 1997 ) . The formation of vascular canals involves degradation of uncalcified timely removal of cartilage primordia are critical steps in cranial morphogenesis and suture formation . It is also cartilage to clear a path for invading vessels that bring inosteogenic precursorcells forthe ensuingossification interesting to note that facial features similar to those of the MT1 - MMP - deficient mouse have been reported process . MT1 - MMP plays a critical role in this angio - genic process although angiogenesis in general is not previously in a mouse mutation , pn ( Kidwell et al . , 1961 ) , with the same chromosomal location as mt1 - mmp ( Apte impaired in mutant mice . The failure to form vascular canals coincided with the onset of diminished longitudi - et al . , 1997 ) . Unfortunately , thismouse strain is no longer available . nal growth of long bones . The growth plates soon after showed progressive abnormalities including thinning , disorganization , and lack of chondrocyte proliferation . Remodeling of Unmineralized Connective Tissue Considering their normal appearance prior to this time , Is Essential for Bone Formation we speculate that the delay of epiphyseal ossification We have demonstrated that the function of bone - form - may impair growth plate function . It has previously been ing cells is severely impaired by MT1 - MMP deficiency . suggested that mesenchymal cells which reach the inte - This defect is coincident with signs of severe disorgani - rior of the epiphyseal cartilage by association with the zation and disruption in the osteogenic periosteum . bloodvesselsinvascularcanalsalsoserveasareservoir Transplantation of osteogenic cells to MT1 - MMP - suffi - of precursor cells for epiphyseal cartilage growth ( Lutfi , cient hosts confirmed that MT1 - MMP deficiency caused 1970 ) . If that is indeed the case , it is likely that the delay an intrinsic defect of osteogenic cells that could not be of epiphyseal vascularization results in a shortage of rescued by an MT1 - MMP - sufficient environment . The chondrocyte precursors and subsequent growth plate transplantation experiment also showed that the defect atrophy , as observed in MT1 - MMP null mice . in osteogenesis is coupled to inability to degrade a col - lagenous matrix , a finding that is consistent with exten - sive fibrosis of the osteogenic periosteum and disrup - MT1 - MMP Deficiency Demonstrates the Fate and tion of its highly ordered cellular architecture . The Function of Cartilage Primordia in Cranial unusual finding of collagen fibrils inside osteoblasts , Membranous Ossification moreover , suggested that these cells attempted to mo - The craniofacial dysmorphology of MT1 - MMP - deficient bilize a compensatory phagocytic pathway of collagen mice is particularly intriguing because it provides new degradation ( Melcher and Chan , 1981 ) . We therefore insights into normal craniofacial development . The cra - speculate that inability to remodel the surrounding col - niofacial abnormalities appear to be primarily associ - lagenous matrix may result in disorganization of the ated with formation of membranous cranial bones and osteoblast layer , displacement of osteoblasts , and fail - removal of their cartilage primordia . The role of these ure to achieve a level of coordinated function required primordia is currently unclear , but they represent a for bone formation . prominent feature of embryonic cranial development in the mouse that has repeatedly been noted , but never fully explained ( Ducy et al . , 1997 ; Otto et al . , 1997 ; Chen MT1 - MMP Deficiency Gives Rise to Arthritis The development of severe arthritis in aging MT1 - MMP - et al . , 1998 ; Kaufmann , 1998 ) . Membranous ossification of the parietal / interparietal bones proceeds through deficient mice is particularly noteworthy in view of the many reports in the literature of overexpression of indi - synchronous progression of bone formation and re - moval of the parietal cartilage so that the narrow over - vidual MMPs in human arthritis ( Sta˚hle - Ba¨ckdahl et al . , 1997 ; Johnson et al . , 1998 ) . This observation should be lapping boundary between the two moves gradually and continuously from the top toward the base of the skull . carefully considered before employing MMP inhibitors in arthritis therapy . The arthritis that develops in MT1 - The developing bone forms outside the cartilage primor - dium and not within it as is the case in endochondral MMP - deficient mice bears some resemblance to both murine collagen - induced arthritis and human rheuma - ossification . Our findings have shown that these carti - lage primordia do not calcify and are not removed by toid arthritis ; one noted element of similarity being the development of TRAP - positive osteoclast - like cells in osteoclasts , butratherby anentirelydifferentdirectional chondrolytic process that is highly coordinated with the articular and periarticular soft tissues ( Gravallese et al . , 1998 ; Suzuki et al . , 1998 ) . Although our experiments progression of bone formation . This chondrolytic pro - cess is specifically impaired in MT1 - MMP - deficient have notaddressed thepathogenesis of arthritisin MT1 - MMP - deficient mice , we note that interfaces between mice . Consequently , an uncalcified , fibrous remnant of the calvarial cartilaginous primordium remains “inside” bone / cartilage and articular soft tissues are most se - verely affected . These are also sites where MT1 - MMP the cranial bones far into adulthood . It is interesting to note that underdevelopment of calvarial cartilage pri - is expressed at particularly high levels ( Apte et al . , 1997 ) . In the knee for example , the insertion of the cruciate mordia in the lmx1b mutant mouse is associated with premature closure of cranial sutures ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) , ligament where ligament , bone , and articular cartilage interface was most profoundly affected . These observa - whereas in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice failure to remove the cartilage primordia results in permanently open su - tions raise the question whether the arthritic changes in MT1 - MMP - deficient mice develop as a result of inap - tures . We note that all dysmorphic cranial bones in the MT1 - MMP - deficient mice ( orbital portions of frontal propriate remodeling during growth . Cell90 HAT - resistant clones were expanded and screened for the legiti - MT1 - MMP Mediates Pericellular Collagenolysis mate targeting event using a primer complementary to the HPRT and Is Indispensable for Development minigene p01 : 5 (cid:57) GTG CGA GGC CAG AGG CCA CTT GTG TAG CG and Growth 3 (cid:57) ; and a primer complementary to sequences not included in the Our findings have shown that MT1 - MMP is indispens - targeting vector p02 : 5 (cid:57) GAA GAA GTA GGT CTT CCC ATT GGG able for growth and development and that lack of this CAT 3 (cid:57) . Cell clones containing the targeted allele were further char - acterized by Southern blot analysis . For analysis of the 3 (cid:57) end of enzyme cannot be adequately compensated by other the targeted gene , DNA was restricted with HindIII , gel fractionated , membrane - associated MMPs , by other MMPs or by and hybridized to a 495 bp PCR - generated cDNA probe spanning other collagen degrading mechanisms . MT1 - MMP has all of exons 6 through 8 . For analysis of the 5 (cid:57) end of the targeted been implicated as a possible activator of MMP - 2 and gene , DNA was restricted with HindIII / BglII , gel fractionated , and MMP - 13 ( Strongin et al . , 1995 ; Cowell et al . , 1998 ) , and hybridized to an 80 bp SstII probe spanning exon 1 . MT1 - MMP is sometimes , but not always coexpressed To generate chimeric mice , targeted ES cells were injected into 72 hr – old blastocysts from C57BL / 6 mice and implanted into pseu - with either MMP - 2 or MMP - 13 in mice ( Gack et al . , 1995 ; dopregnant B6D2 or C57BL / 6 (cid:51) DBA females ( NCI – Frederick , Fred - Mattot et al . , 1995 ; Kinoh et al . , 1996 ; Apte et al . , 1997 ) . erick , MD ) . Offspring were mated to Black Swiss mice ( Taconic , MMP - 2 - deficient mice , however , display a rather subtle Germantown , NY ) togenerateheterozygousanimalsforthetargeted phenotype that appears to have little , if anything , in gene . These were subsequently interbred to generate homozygous common with the MT1 - MMP phenotype ( Itoh et al . , mutant progeny . 1997 ) , thus all but dispelling the hypothesis that the Genotyping of animals was performed by PCR amplification of DNA obtainedfrom tailbiopsies withprimers p01 : 5 (cid:57) GTGCGA GGC MT1 - MMP - deficient phenotype is primarily caused by CAG AGG CCA CTT GTG TAG CG 3 (cid:57) and p03 : 5 (cid:57) CTT TGT GGG TGA failure to activate MMP - 2 . Moreover , MT1 - MMP and CCC TGA CTT GC 3 (cid:57) to detect the targeted allele ; and primers p04 : MMP - 13 are not coexpressed in embryonic tissues such 5 (cid:57) CTA GGC CTG GAA CAT TCT AAC GAT C 3 (cid:57) and p03 : 5 (cid:57) CTT TGT as tendon , which later become profoundly affected in GGG TGA CCC TGA CTT GC 3 (cid:57) to detect the wild - type allele . MT1 - MMP - deficient mice . We thereforesurmise thatthe effects of MT1 - MMP deficiency , at least in the mouse , Preparation of RNA may not exclusively be mediated by lack of activation TotalRNAwaspreparedbysnapfreezingtissueinliquidN 2 followed by extraction in Trizol ( GIBCO - BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) . Twenty - of MMP - 13 . At the cellular level , however , MT1 - MMP microgramsamplesoftotalRNAweresizefractionatedonformalde - deficiency does lead to the loss of an indispensable hyde agarose gels , immobilized on nylon membranes , and hybrid - collagenolyticactivity . Basedonthese observationsand ized to the radiolabeled probes used for Southern blot analysis . on existing evidence that MT1 - MMP is capable of cleav - ing extracellular matrix substrates such as collagen and X - Ray Imaging fibrin ( Ohuchi et al . , 1997 ; Hiraoka et al . , 1998 ) , we raise X - ray imaging of animals was performed in a Faxitron MX - 20 X - ray thequestionwhetherMT1 - MMPfunctionsasacollagen - machine ( Faxitron X - ray Corp . , Buffalo Grove , IL ) . ase in its own right or through activation of known or In Vivo Labeling yet unrecognized type I / type II collagen - degrading pro - Calcein ( 25 mg / kg bodyweight in 2 % NaHCO 3 ) was injected i . p . at teinases . Regardless , loss of MT1 - MMP - directed prote - day 0 and 10 days later . Tissues were harvested at day 12 and fixed olysis results in profound and far reaching physiological in 70 % ethanol . Bones were processed for methyl - methacrylate consequences . Equally significant , the phenotype illus - embedding and 10 (cid:109) m sections were analyzed by fluorescence trates the importance of collagenous stromal remodel - microscopy in a Zeiss Axiophot . BrdU labeling was performed as ing for development and growth , and for maintenance described ( Vu et al . , 1998 ) . of the otherwise invisible functional continuity between Histology and Microscopy the soft and hard tissue components of the skeleton . Tissues were fixed in neutral buffered formalin , decalcified in formic acid or EDTA , paraffin embedded , sectioned at 6 (cid:109) m , and stained Experimental Procedures with H & E , Masson’s trichrome , PAS stain , or alcian blue . Additional samplesoflongboneswerefixedembeddedundecalcifiedinglycol - All procedures were performed in accordance with an institutionally methacrylate ( GMA ) at low temperature or in methyl - methacrylate approved protocol for the use of animals in research . ( MMA ) . Two - to - four (cid:109) m – thick GMA sections were reacted for TRAP or ALP activity as described ( Bianco et al . , 1984 ) . MMA sections were stained with Goldner’s or von Kossa’s stains . Entire calvaria Construction of Targeting Vector and Generation were fixed in 70 % ethanol for 5 min and reacted for TRAP and ALP of Transgenic Mice using Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) kits . Alcian blue / alizarin red stain was The MT1 - MMP replacement type targeting vector was constructed performedasdescribed ( Kaufmann , 1998 ) . ForEM , micewereperfu - using gene sequences cloned from a 129 strain mouse genomic sion fixed with 2 % paraformaldehyde / 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M library in the Lambda Fix II vector ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . The cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 4 . Samples were decalcified in 0 . 1 M EDTA targeting vector cloned into pBluescript SK (cid:49) included a 4 . 9 kb 5 (cid:57) in 0 . 15 M phosphate buffer , postfixed in 1 % OsO 4 , and embedded homology spanning sequences from BglII site in the proximal pro - in Spurr’s medium . Thin sections were photographed in a JEOL 100 moter to the XbaI site in the middle part of intron 1 . The 1 . 3 kb 3 (cid:57) CXII electron microscope . homology encompassed sequences from the PvuI site in exon 5 to the KpnI site in exon 8 . Sequences from the XbaI site in intron 1 throughthe PvuIsite inexon 5were replacedwith aphosphoglycer - In Vivo Assay of Osteogenic Capacity of Bone Marrow – Derived Stromal Cells from Normal ate kinase promoter – driven HPRT minigene EcoRI cassette ( van der Lugt et al . , 1991 ) . The targeting vector was completed by addition and Transgenic Mice Osteogenic precursor cells ( bone marrow stromal cells ) were de - of an HSV - tk minigene cloned into the KpnI site in the 3 (cid:57) terminus of the short homology and the KpnI site of the plasmid polylinker . rivedfrom thebone marrowof2 - month - old miceas described ( Kuz - netsovandGehronRobey , 1996 ) . Confluentcultureswerepassaged HM - 1 mouse ES cells ( Magin et al . , 1992 ) were transfected with the targeting vector and subjected to selection in growth medium 3 times , and 2 . 4 (cid:51) 10 6 BMCSs were mixed with denatured type I collagen sponges ( 25 – 50 mm 2 , Gelfoam , Upjohn , Kalamazoo , MI ) or supplemented with 0 . 1 mM hypoxanthine , 16 (cid:109) M thymidine , 0 . 4 (cid:109) M aminopterin ( HATsupplement , GIBCO - BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) , and hydroxyapatite - tricalcium phosphate ceramic particles ( 40 mg of particles , Zimmer , Warsaw , IN ) and transplanted to the subcutis 2 (cid:109) M ganciclovir ( Roche Laboratories , Nutley , NJ ) . Connective Tissue Disease in MT1 - MMP (cid:50) / (cid:50) Mice 91 of immunocompromised ( NIH - bg - nu - xidBR ) mice ( Harlan Sprague Garnero , P . , Borel , O . , Byrjalsen , I . , Ferreras , M . , Drake , F . H . , McQue - ney , M . S . , Foged , N . T . , Delmas , P . D . , and Delaisse , J . M . ( 1998 ) . The Dawley , Indianapolis , IN ) . Ossicles were harvested for histology at collagenolytic activity of cathepsin K is unique among mammalian 8 weeks as described ( Krebsbach et al . , 1997 ) . proteinases . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 32347 – 32352 . Collagen Degradation Assay Gravallese , E . M . , Harada , Y . , Wang , J . T . , Gorn , A . H . , Thornhill , T . S . , The capacity ofcells to degrade type I collagenfibrils was assessed and Goldring , S . R . ( 1998 ) . Identification of cell types responsible asdescribed ( Havemose - Poulsenetal . , 1998 ) . Briefly , 24 - wellplates for bone resorption in rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile rheumatoid were coated with a 1 – 2 (cid:109) m film of reconstituted rat tail tendon type arthritis . Am . J . Pathol . 152 , 943 – 951 . I collagen fibrils , and a pellet of 37 , 500 cells in 25 (cid:109) l growth medium Havemose - Poulsen , A . , Holmstrup , P . , Stoltze , K . , and Birkedal - ( DMEM , 10 % [ v / v ] FBS ) was seeded in the center of each well . Hansen , H . ( 1998 ) . Dissolution of type I collagen fibrils by gingival Newborn skin fibroblasts were allowed to attach for 5 hr , washed fibroblastsisolatedfrompatientsofvariousperiodontitiscategories . 3 times in HBSS , and then incubated for 5 days in serum free Opti - J . Periodontal Res . 33 , 280 – 291 . MEM I ( GIBCO - BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) with or without addition of Hiraoka , N . , Allen , E . , Apel , I . J . , Gyetko , M . R . , andWeiss , S . J . ( 1998 ) . 10 (cid:50) 9 M IL - 1 (cid:98) and 10 (cid:50) 8 M TNF (cid:97) . Following incubation , cells were Matrix metalloproteinases regulate neovascularization by acting as removed with trypsin / EDTA and the residual collagen fibril film pericellular fibrinolysins . Cell 95 , 365 – 377 . stained with Coomassie blue . Itoh , T . , Ikeda , T . , Gomi , H . , Nakao , S . , Suzuki , T . , and Itohara , S . ( 1997 ) . Unaltered secretion of beta - amyloid precursor protein in Acknowledgments gelatinase A ( matrix metalloproteinase 2 ) - deficient mice . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 22389 – 22392 . We thank Anna - Maria Spliid , and the NIDCR Animal Care Unit for Johnson , L . L . , Dyer , R . , and Hupe , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Matrix metallopro - invaluablehelpwithhusbandryandrecordkeeping , theNIDCRGene teinases . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2 , 466 – 471 . Targeting Facility and Glenn Longenecker for blastocyst injections Kaufmann , M . H . ( 1998 ) . The Atlas of Mouse Development , Revised and implantation , and Bill Swaim for EM imaging . This work was Edition ( San Diego : Academic Press ) . supported in part with fellowships for K . H . from the Danish Cancer Society and the Danish Medical Research Council . Kidwell , J . F . , Gowen , J . W . , andStadler , J . ( 1961 ) . Pugnose—areces - sive mutation in linkage group 3 of mice . J . Hered . 52 , 145 – 148 . Received May 14 , 1999 ; revised August 27 , 1999 . Kinoh , H . , Sato , H . , Tsunezuka , Y . , Takino , T . , Kawashima , A . , Okada , Y . , and Seiki , M . ( 1996 ) . MT - MMP , the cell surface activator of References proMMP - 2 ( pro - gelatinase A ) , is expressed with its substrate in mouse tissue during embryogenesis . J . Cell . Sci . 109 , 953 – 959 . Apte , S . S . , Fukai , N . , Beier , D . R . , and Olsen , B . R . ( 1997 ) . The matrix Krebsbach , P . H . , Kuznetsov , S . A . , Satomura , K . , Emmons , R . V . , metalloproteinase - 14 ( MMP - 14 ) gene is structurally distinct from Rowe , D . W . , and Gehron Robey , P . ( 1997 ) . Bone formation in vivo : other MMP genes and is co - expressed with the TIMP - 2 gene during comparison of osteogenesis by transplanted mouse and human mouse embryogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 25511 – 25517 . marrow stromal fibroblasts . Transplantation 63 , 1059 – 1069 . Bianco , P . , Ponzi , A . , and Bonucci , E . ( 1984 ) . Basic and ‘special’ Kuettner , K . E . , and Pauli , B . U . ( 1983 ) . Vascularity of cartilage . In stains for plastic sections in bone marrow histopathology , with spe - Cartilage , B . K . Hall , ed . ( New York : Academic Press ) , pp . 281 – 312 . cialreferencetoMay - GrunwaldGiemsaandenzymehistochemistry . Kuznetsov , S . , and Gehron Robey , P . ( 1996 ) . Species differences Basic Appl . Histochem . 28 , 265 – 279 . in growth requirements for bone marrow stromal fibroblast colony Birkedal - Hansen , H . ( 1995 ) . Proteolytic remodeling of extracellular formation in vitro . Calcif . Tissue Int . 59 , 265 – 270 . matrix . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 7 , 728 – 735 . Lark , M . W . , Bayne , E . K . , Flanagan , J . , Harper , C . F . , Hoerrner , L . A . , Birkedal - Hansen , H . , Moore , H . , Bodden , M . K . , Windsor , L . J . , Hutchinson , N . I . , Singer , I . I . , Donatelli , S . A . , Weidner , J . R . , Williams , Birkedal - Hansen , B . , De Carlo , A . , and Engler , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Matrix H . R . , Mumford , R . A . , and Lohmander , L . S . ( 1997 ) . Aggrecan degra - metalloproteinases : a review . Crit . Rev . Oral Biol . Med . 4 , 197 – 250 . dation in human cartilage . Evidence for both matrix metallopro - teinaseandaggrecanaseactivityinnormal , osteoarthritic , andrheu - Chen , H . , Ovchinnikov , D . , Pressman , C . L . , Aulehla , A . , Lun , Y . , and matoid joints . J . Clin . Invest . 100 , 93 – 106 . Johnson , R . L . ( 1998 ) . Multiple calvarial defects in lmx1b mutant mice . Dev . Genet . 22 , 314 – 320 . Liotta , L . A . , Steeg , P . S . , and Stetler - Stevenson , W . G . ( 1991 ) . Cancer metastasisandangiogenesis : animbalanceofpositiveandnegative Chin , J . R . , and Werb , Z . ( 1997 ) . Matrix metalloproteinases regulate regulation . Cell 64 , 327 – 336 . morphogenesis , migration and remodeling of epithelium , tongue skeletal muscle and cartilage in the mandibular arch . Development Lutfi , A . M . ( 1970 ) . Mode of growth , fate and function of cartilage 124 , 1519 – 1530 . canals . J . Anat . 106 , 135 – 145 . Cole , A . A . , and Wezeman , F . H . ( 1985 ) . Perivascular cells in cartilage Magin , T . M . , McWhir , J . , and Melton , D . W . ( 1992 ) . A new mouse embryonic stem cell line with good germ line contribution and gene canals of the developing mouse epiphysis . Am . J . Anat . 174 , targeting frequency . Nucleic Acids Res . 20 , 3795 – 3796 . 119 – 129 . Masson , R . , Lefebvre , O . , Noel , A . , Fahime , M . E . , Chenard , M . P . , Cowell , S . , Knauper , V . , Stewart , M . L . , D’Ortho , M . P . , Stanton , H . , Wendling , C . , Kebers , F . , LeMeur , M . , Dierich , A . , Foidart , J . M . , et Hembry , R . M . , Lopez - Otin , C . , Reynolds , J . J . , andMurphy , G . ( 1998 ) . al . ( 1998 ) . In vivo evidence that the stromelysin - 3 metalloproteinase Inductionofmatrixmetalloproteinaseactivationcascadesbasedon contributes in a paracrine manner to epithelial cell malignancy . J . membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase : associated activation Cell Biol . 140 , 1535 – 1541 . of gelatinase A , gelatinase B and collagenase 3 . Biochem . J . 331 , 453 – 458 . Mattot , V . , Raes , M . B . , Henriet , P . , Eeckhout , Y . , Stehelin , D . , Van - denbunder , B . , and Desbiens , X . ( 1995 ) . Expression of interstitial Ducy , P . , Zhang , R . , Geoffroy , V . , Ridall , A . L . , andKarsenty , G . ( 1997 ) . collagenase is restricted to skeletal tissue during mouse em - Osf2 / Cbfa1 : a transcriptional activator of osteoblast differentiation . bryogenesis . J . Cell . Sci . 108 , 529 – 535 . Cell 89 , 747 – 754 . Melcher , A . H . , and Chan , J . ( 1981 ) . Phagocytosis and digestion of Gack , S . , Vallon , R . , Schmidt , J . , Grigoriadis , A . , Tuckermann , J . , collagen by gingival fibroblasts in vivo : a study of serial sections . Schenkel , J . , Weiher , H . , Wagner , E . F . , and Angel , P . ( 1995 ) . Expres - J . Ultrastruct . Res . 77 , 1 – 36 . sion of interstitial collagenase during skeletal development of the mouse is restricted to osteoblast - like cells and hypertrophic chon - Mignatti , P . , and Rifkin , D . B . ( 1996 ) . Plasminogen activators and drocytes . Cell Growth . Differ . 6 , 759 – 767 . matrix metalloproteinases in angiogenesis . Enzyme Protein 49 , 117 – 137 . Galis , Z . S . , Sukhova , G . K . , Kranzhofer , R . , Clark , S . , and Libby , P . ( 1995 ) . Macrophage foam cells from experimental atheroma consti - Mudgett , J . S . , Hutchinson , N . I . , Chartrain , N . A . , Forsyth , A . J . , tutively produce matrix - degrading proteinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . McDonnell , J . , Singer , I . I . , Bayne , E . K . , Flanagan , J . , Kawka , D . , Shen , C . F . , Stevens , K . , Chen , H . , Trumbauer , M . , and Visco , D . M . Sci . USA 92 , 402 – 406 . Cell92 ( 1998 ) . Susceptibility of stromelysin 1 - deficient mice to collagen - Werb , Z . ( 1997 ) . ECMandcellsurfaceproteolysis : regulatingcellular ecology . Cell 91 , 439 – 442 . induced arthritis and cartilage destruction . Arthritis Rheum . 41 , 110 – 121 . Werb , Z . , Sympson , C . J . , Alexander , C . M . , Thomasset , N . , Lund , L . R . , MacAuley , A . , Ashkenas , J . , and Bissell , M . J . ( 1996 ) . Extracellular Nagase , H . ( 1998 ) . Cell surface activation of progelatinase A ( proMMP - 2 ) and cell migration . Cell . Res . 8 , 179 – 186 . matrix remodeling and the regulation of epithelial - stromal interac - tions during differentiation and involution . Kidney Int . Suppl . 54 , Ohuchi , E . , Imai , K . , Fujii , Y . , Sato , H . , Seiki , M . , andOkada , Y . ( 1997 ) . S68 – 74 . Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase digests interstitial colla - gens and other extracellular matrix macromolecules . J . Biol . Chem . Will , H . , and Hinzmann , B . ( 1995 ) . cDNA sequence and mRNA tissue distributionofanovelhumanmatrixmetalloproteinasewithapoten - 272 , 2446 – 2451 . tial transmembrane segment . Eur . J . Biochem . 231 , 602 – 608 . Okada , A . , Tomasetto , C . , Lutz , Y . , Bellocq , J . P . , Rio , M . C . , and Basset , P . ( 1997 ) . Expression of matrix metalloproteinases during Wilson , C . L . , Heppner , K . J . , Labosky , P . A . , Hogan , B . L . , and Matri - sian , L . M . ( 1997 ) . Intestinal tumorigenesis is suppressed in mice rat skin wound healing : evidence that membrane type - 1 matrix met - alloproteinase is a stromal activator of pro - gelatinase A . J . Cell Biol . lacking the metalloproteinase matrilysin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 1402 – 1407 . 137 , 67 – 77 . Otto , F . , Thornell , A . P . , Crompton , T . , Denzel , A . , Gilmour , K . C . , Rosewell , I . R . , Stamp , G . W . , Beddington , R . S . , Mundlos , S . , Olsen , B . R . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Cbfa1 , a candidate gene for cleidocranial dyspla - sia syndrome , is essential for osteoblast differentiation and bone development . Cell 89 , 765 – 771 . Pei , D . ( 1999 ) . Identification and characterization of the fifth mem - brane - type matrix metalloproteinase MT5 - MMP . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 8925 – 8932 . Puente , X . S . , Pendas , A . M . , Llano , E . , Velasco , G . , and Lopez - Otin , C . ( 1996 ) . Molecularcloningofanovelmembrane - typematrixmetal - loproteinase from a human breast carcinoma . Cancer Res . 56 , 944 – 949 . Saftig , P . , Hunziker , E . , Wehmeyer , O . , Jones , S . , Boyde , A . , Rom - merskirch , W . , Moritz , J . D . , Schu , P . , and von Figura , K . ( 1998 ) . Impaired osteoclastic bone resorption leads to osteopetrosis in ca - thepsin - K - deficient mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 13453 – 13458 . Sato , H . , Takino , T . , Okada , Y . , Cao , J . , Shinagawa , A . , Yamamoto , E . , and Seiki , M . ( 1994 ) . A matrix metalloproteinase expressed on the surface of invasive tumour cells . Nature 370 , 61 – 55 . Sato , H . , Kinoshita , T . , Takino , T . , Nakayama , K . , andSeiki , M . ( 1996 ) . Activation of a recombinant membrane type 1 - matrix metallopro - teinase ( MT1 - MMP ) by furin and its interaction with tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases ( TIMP ) - 2 . FEBS Lett . 393 , 101 – 104 . Shipley , J . M . , Wesselschmidt , R . L . , Kobayashi , D . K . , Ley , T . J . , and Shapiro , S . D . ( 1996 ) . Metalloelastase is required for macrophage - mediated proteolysis and matrix invasion in mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3942 – 3946 . Sta˚hle - Ba¨ckdahl , M . , Sandstedt , B . , Bruce , K . , Lindahl , A . , Jimenez , M . G . , Vega , J . A . , and Lopez - Otin , C . ( 1997 ) . Collagenase - 3 ( MMP - 13 ) is expressed during human fetal ossification and re - expressed in post - natal bone remodeling and in rheumatoid arthritis . Lab . In - vest . 76 , 717 – 728 . Stetler - Stevenson , W . G . , Aznavoorian , S . , and Liotta , L . A . ( 1993 ) . Tumor cell interactions with the extracellular matrix during invasion and metastasis . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 , 541 – 573 . Strongin , A . Y . , Collier , I . , Bannikov , G . , Marmer , B . L . , Grant , G . A . , and Goldberg , G . I . ( 1995 ) . Mechanism of cell surface activation of 72 - kDa type IV collagenase . Isolation of the activated form of the membrane metalloprotease . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 5331 – 5338 . Suzuki , Y . , Nishikaku , F . , Nakatuka , M . , and Koga , Y . ( 1998 ) . Osteo - clast - like cells in murine collagen induced arthritis . J . Rheumatol . 25 , 1154 – 1160 . Takino , T . , Sato , H . , Shinagawa , A . , and Seiki , M . ( 1995 ) . Identifica - tion of the second membrane - type matrix metalloproteinase ( MT - MMP - 2 ) gene from a human placenta cDNA library . MT - MMPs form auniquemembrane - typesubclassintheMMPfamily . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 23013 – 23020 . van der Lugt , N . , Maandag , E . R . , te Riele , H . , Laird , P . W . , and Berns , A . ( 1991 ) . A pgk / hprt fusion as a selectable marker for targeting of genesinmouseembryonicstemcells : disruptionoftheT - cellrecep - tor delta - chain - encoding gene . Gene 105 , 263 – 267 . Vu , T . H . , Shipley , J . M . , Bergers , G . , Berger , J . E . , Helms , J . A . , Hana - han , D . , Shapiro , S . D . , Senior , R . M . , and Werb , Z . ( 1998 ) . MMP - 9 / gelatinase B is a key regulator of growth plate angiogenesis and apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes . Cell 93 , 411 – 422 .