 Abstract — Ontologies provide a common understanding of a specific domain of interest that can be communicated between people and used as background knowledge for automated reasoning in a wide range of applications . In this paper , we address the design of multilingual ontologies following well - defined knowledge engineering methodologies with the support of novel collaborative development approaches . In particular , we present a collaborative platform which allows ontologies to be developed incrementally in multiple languages . This is made possible via an appropriate mapping between language independent concepts and one lexicalization per language ( or a lexical gap in case such lexicalization does not exist ) . The collaborative platform has been designed to support the development of the Universal Knowledge Core , a multilingual ontology currently in English , Italian , Chinese , Mongolian , Hindi and Bangladeshi . Its design follows a workflow - based development methodology that models resources as a set of collaborative objects and assigns customizable workflows to build and maintain each collaborative object in a community driven manner , with extensive support of modern web 2 . 0 social and collaborative features . Keywords — Knowledge Diversity , Knowledge Representation , Ontology Development . I . I NTRODUCTION ECENTLY , there have been great advances in semantic - aware and context - aware applications [ 12 ] . Semantic - aware applications are mainly intended to assist with information retrieval . They are designed to return more accurate search results by trying to extract the embedded meaning of the search keywords . On the other hand , context - aware applications are smart applications capable of detecting the user’s social and physical surroundings ( i . e . physical location or weather forecast ) and provide in - site recommendations and short answers to user’s queries submitted in natural language . Both semantic - aware and context - aware applications rely on knowledge - based approaches , i . e . approaches which exploit the semantics of the information in order to deliver timely and useful information . Examples of knowledge based approaches include : automatic classifications [ 14 ] , ontology matching [ 15 ] - [ 17 ] , ontology mapping [ 11 ] , and common sense reasoning [ 2 ] , and natural language data and metadata understanding [ 28 ] . One of the main requirements of knowledge - based approaches is to consider the diversity in human knowledge as people in different parts of the world have different ways of living and thinking . Diversity appears in natural language as Ahmed Tawfik , Fausto Giunchiglia , and Vincenzo Maltese are with the Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science , Faculty of Computer Science , University of Trento , Italy ( e - mail : { tawfik , fausto , maltese } @ disi . unitn . it ) . the same word may refer to more than one meaning ( homonymy ) and the same meaning might be referred to with different words ( synonymy ) . Diversity appears in knowledge has a function of local goals , school of thought , culture . A major challenge appearing here is how to deal with diversity in order to increase the accuracy of semantic - aware and context - aware applications . In fact , this requires huge multilingual resources which must provide adequate coverage for the diversity of the world and means of transforming this big amount of linguistic data into useful domain - specific knowledge that could be shared and reused effectively . This challenge reflects two main research directions that we need to go through : ( 1 ) Defining methodologies for capturing and organizing multilingual information in a formal way ; and ( 2 ) Designing and implementing usable tools for gathering diverse terminologies and cross - culture knowledge . Our main contribution in this paper is a collaborative platform that facilitates the management of diversity across cultures , in language and knowledge , via the development of localized domain ontologies . The collaborative platform is designed to work on the content of the Universal Knowledge Core ( UKC ) , a multi - language resource we have been developing in collaboration with several partners world - wide 1 . Its data model is in line with the work described in [ 12 ] . In fact , the UKC offers a neat separation between natural language and formal language which we believe is a fundamental feature to be able to manage diversity in knowledge . The platform provides an interactive and user - friendly web environment that allows geographically distributed linguistic and domain experts to contribute in a collaborative manner . Their collaboration takes place following a collaborative development methodology , based on the notions of collaborative objects and collaborative workflows , which specifies the development processes , user roles , and access rights . The workflow - based development methodology proposed in this paper frames linguistic resources as a set of collaborative objects and assigns customizable workflows to build and maintain each collaborative object in a community driven manner . The platform supports both the development and validation phases which are typically considered as two distinct phases in the ontology development and maintenance life cycle , where the latter strictly follows the former . The platform is also equipped with extensive support of modern web 2 . 0 social and collaborative features . Such features 1 The UKC project is coordinated by the University of Trento and sees the collaboration of several universities world - wide , each of them responsible of one language . A Collaborative Platform for Multilingual Ontology Development Ahmed Tawfik , Fausto Giunchiglia , Vincenzo Maltese R World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3945 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 fato to prpr w pr thw m th info co lepa fo in fo cl it m thm vi st cova th na co [ 9 ex w kn simm chSp noan ac re Fo w eaw co acilitate comm o discuss vario o common agr The rest of rovides an ov resents usage which allowed resents the col he notions o workflows . Se methodology fo he UKC . Sec nterface . Secti ocus on web - b oncludes the p I WordNet [ 5 xical resourc articular , it is or the terms nstance , the te or young child learly biased t is , WordNet multicultural en he developmen mapping betwe ia semantic r ored in the orresponding arious languag he concept do atural languag omponent of t 9 ] and its guid xhibit any cult A . The Natur Words are t word in a natur nown as word The Natural milar way to meaning into s haracterized b peech ( POS ) . oun , adjective nd given that ccount for lexi Relations be elations . The N or instance , an word senses ha arly antonym word “fail” w orresponding munication bet ous domain - re eements . this paper is verview of the scenarios and us to collect llaborative de of collabora ection V de for the design ction VI des on VII summ based ontology paper and poin II . U NIVERSAL 5 ] [ 19 ] is am ces . However only in Briti reflect the B erm “primary dren ; usually towards the Br t is not direc nvironment . W nt of the UK een language relations ( call Concept Cor synsets group ges , or a lexic oes not exist ge in [ 12 ] , sto the UKC ) . We ding principles tural , spatial o ral Language the basic ling ral language m d senses . Language C o o WordNet synsets ( sets by having a na The POS ind e , verb , or ad t we deal w ical gaps . etween word NLC defines ntonym is a s aving the same late . Fig . 1 which has to two synse tween the exp elated topics , s organized as e UKC meth d the results of t useful requi evelopment m ative objects escribes how of the collab scribes its ar marizes the rela y developmen nts out to the f L K NOWLEDGE mong the mo r , it has sev sh English , an British societ y school” is d the first 6 or ritish educatio ctly usable in We address th KC . In fact , t - independent led the forma re component ping words w cal gap in cas in a certain l ored in the Na e employ the s [ 10 ] to ensur or temporal bia Core ( NLC ) guistic units may have one ore ( NLC ) mo as it groups of synonyms atural languag dicates whethe dverb . Differe with multiple d senses are several types ymmetric rela e POS and op gives an exam two differen ets . The first perts and allow share ideas an s follows . Sec odology . Sec f an early expe irements . Sect methodology ba and collab w we applie borative platfo rchitecture an ated work wit nt tools . Secti future work . E C ORE ost widesprea veral limitatio nd the glosse ty and cultur defined as “a r 8 grades” w onal system . T n a multilingu hese limitation the UKC prov concepts con al language i t of the UK ith same mea e a lexicalizat language ( cal atural Languag DERA metho re that glosses as . of languages e or more me odels a langua s words with s ) . A synset ge gloss and a er a word is e ently from W languages , w known as s of lexical re ation connecti pposite meanin mple of the E nt senses , i synset is ass w them nd reach ction II tion III eriment tion IV ased on borative ed the orm for nd user th main on VIII ad used ons . In es given re . For school which is Thus , as ual and ns with vides a nnected in [ 12 ] , C ) and aning in tion for lled the ge Core odology s do not s . Each eanings , age in a h same is also a part of either a ordNet , we also lexical elations . ing two ng , e . g . English n turn sociated wime ass wh funthe co “an lanbe assthe co frowi lansyn Fisynsenin rel W be rel an Fo rel comi ith two senses eaning of “t sociated with hich correspo nctioning” . In e Italian syn rresponds to a ndare in avari B . Concept C The Concep nguage - indepe tween them . sociated with e CC . Each concept ncept ID , and om the firstly ith the conce nguage - indepe nsets , as well ig . 1 The relatio nstes and conce nses , synsets an n this figure ins Concepts are lations . The e define two m tween conce lations . Hiera nd therefore al or instance , the lation which ncepts that i inivan is - a ca s ( fail , and go to be unsucc another two w ond to the m n the same figu set ( fallire , a a lexical gap i ia” , which is n Core ( CC ) pt Core ( CC endent conc Every synse exactly one t is associate d a concept lab defined langu ept . Fig . 1 g endent conc as some sema on between the epts together wi nd concepts . Co stead of providinlabels e related to o network obta main types of epts : hierarch archical relatio llow the form e most comm is a specia indicates the ar . On the oth o wrong ) whic cessful” . The word senses ( f meaning of ure the first sy abortire ) and in Italian ( lite not a lexical un C ) codifies cepts and s et or lexical g language - inde ed a unique i bel as a descri uage - depende gives an exam cepts to antic relations English word “ ith the Italian w oncepts are lang ng the concept in English other concept ained forms t f semantic rela hical relation ons are transit mation of hier on hierarchic a alization rela necessity of her hand , asso ch correspond e second syn fail , and break “stop operat ynset correspo the second rally one shou nit ) . information semantic re gap in the N ependent conc dentifier , call iptive word ob ent synset asso mple of asso language - dep s between conc “fail” , its word word “fallire” , it guage independ ID , we show co ts through se the actual ont ations that ma ns and asso tive and asym archies of con al relation is t ation betwee specializatio ociative relatio d to the nset is kdown ) ing or onds to synset uld use about elations NLC is cept in led the btained ociated ciating pendent cepts . senses , ts word dent but oncept emantic tology . ay exist ociative mmetric ncepts . the is - a n two n , e . g . ons are World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3946 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 those relations which connect concepts in different hierarchies in the CC . For instance , the has - member is a relation between concepts where the source denotes a set and the target is one of its members , e . g . football player member - of football team . III . S CENARIO AND E ARLY E XPERIMENT A . Description of the Usage Scenario The main usage scenario that we want to support is the development and maintenance of multi - language ontologies . In particular , here we focus on the UKC . For this task we follow the DERA methodology [ 9 ] . DERA aims at the development of domain ontologies as hierarchies of entity classes , relations and attributes . DERA is an evolution of the faceted approach borrowed from library science that is known to guarantee the creation of high quality , extensible and scalable ontologies . Each developed hierarchy is called a facet as it codifies a specific aspect of the domain . For instance , in the geography domain facets of classes include locations ( e . g . landforms and bodies of water ) , facets of relations include containment ( e . g . part - of ) and direction ( e . g . north - of , east - of ) relations , attributes include latitude , longitude , depth , and length [ 3 ] , [ 10 ] . The two fundamental steps of the methodology are the analysis and synthesis . During the analysis each term is analyzed in order to unambiguously determine its meaning and to come up with a suitable gloss for it . The output of the analysis is basically a set of synsets . During the synthesis concepts are generated out of synsets and facets are actually built . We want such process to be collaborative and support both : ( a ) The ontology development [ 9 ] , i . e . the process by which an ontology is built starting from a certain development language ; ( b ) The ontology localization [ 7 ] of the ontology in other languages , i . e . the process by which each concept in the ontology is associated to either a synset or a lexical gap in the target language . For instance , while the development may start in English , we may decide later on to localize the ontology in Mongolian . B . Description of the Usage Scenario We performed an early experiment at the purpose of collecting useful requirements for our collaborative platform . The experiment focused on ontology development . 1 . Experimental Setting With the experiment , conducted in Trento , we aimed at the development of an ontology of flowing bodies of water including concepts like river and fiord . Candidates were taken from the GeoWordNet ontology [ 13 ] that is an ontology generated by the integration of WordNet with GeoNames 2 . We followed a peer - review approach carried out by one developer and three different reviewers who had to decide about the acceptance or rejection of the submitted candidate terms in a way similar to the paper review process for conferences . We 2 http : / / www . geonames . org / used EasyChair 3 to moderate the assignment and review phases . More in detail , EasyChair was used to support the analysis phase of the DERA development where each synset and corresponding gloss was provided by one developer , accompanied by a detailed explanation of the rationale behind such gloss , and commented by the reviewers who could either accept or reject it . In both cases the reviewers provided feedback and typically suggested modifications to the gloss and / or complained on the rationale . Reviewers followed guidelines for validation indicated by the DERA methodology . Examples of matters that they needed to check include ( a ) adequacy of the external resources used , ( b ) adherence with the guiding principles ( e . g . principles of ascertainability , permanence and relevance ) , ( c ) correct elimination of redundant concepts and individuals , ( d ) correct categorization into entity classes , relations and attributes . The synthesis phase was conducted off - line over the synsets agreed during the analysis phase . Reviewers were recommended to provide as much feedback as they could to reduce the probability of rejection after the rebuttal phase . 2 . Results of the Experiment  Figures The inspection of GeoWordNet led to the selection of 69 candidate terms to be analyzed , given that they looked relevant for flowing bodies of water . The developer spent approximately 190 hours to generate and upload the submissions . For each candidate term , a submission was generated . A submission can correspond to a candidate synset ( e . g . river ) , the proposal to ignore the term because irrelevant for the ontology to be developed ( e . g . fountain of youth ) or because it is rather an individual ( e . g . Weser river ) . The first iteration of the review process took approximately 10 hours on average to each reviewer and lead to an initial acceptance rate of 81 % . The rebuttal phase took approximately 9 hours of further development time and 2 hours on average to each reviewer . Overall the two iterations lead to a final acceptance rate of 87 % .  Advantages and Limitations of EasyChair Concerning the advantages , we found out that EasyChair nicely supports the assignment , collection and moderation of the reviews ; it partially supports communication between participants via email facilities ; it helps converging to commonly agreed decisions . However , EasyChair is not properly designed for ontology development and validation , but rather for paper review . We identified the following weaknesses :  Pull vs . Push approach : it is based on a pull ( authors submit ) rather that push ( developers are assigned a task ) approach .  Static Workflow : the workflow is static and cannot be changed . It does not support continuous refinement loops , but only up to one rebuttal phase . In case of rejection from the reviewers , a synset can be resubmitted , but it is 3 http : / / www . easychair . org / World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3947 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 hard to keep track of how the submission and the reviews evolve ( i . e . , what has been changed by the developer with the refinement ? Did the developer accommodated for the feedback received ? ) .  Levels of development / validation : it does not provide a broad view of the implications of an acceptance , i . e . the position that a certain concept would take in the ontology if accepted ( w . r . t . the parent , the siblings and the children ) . In fact , EasyChair can be used to only support the DERA analysis , and not the synthesis ( i . e . , we cannot get an overview of how the facet is overall getting shape ) .  Order of development / validation : given that deeper nodes are defined in terms of higher nodes , the order of review should be top - down , i . e . from the root to the leaves ( and not in the order of submission ) ; the tool does not give any suggestion about the order .  Cost of the process : the process is too costly in terms of time . Everything was submitted and resubmitted as document attachments . This turned out to be impractical as it took significant time and it is not even possible to reconstruct the sequence of submissions as new ones override old ones .  Reputation : there is an issue of appropriately engaging developers and validators . EasyChair does not support the possibility to maintain a social network of experts to be allocated on demand on the basis of their skills . 3 . Next Steps The experiments motivated us to develop a more flexible collaborative platform that overcomes the limitations described above . IV . C OLLABORATIVE M ETHODOLOGY Our collaborative methodology incorporates web 2 . 0 features to the development process through the use of collaborative objects and collaborative workflows . We start by defining the concepts of collaborative objects and collaborative workflows , highlighting the differences between collaborative and non - collaborative objects and between collaborative workflows and standard process management workflows . Then we proceed by explaining the proposed collaborative methodology in a step by step basis and applying the methodology for UKC development and localization tasks . A . Collaborative Object A collaborative object is a web - based item that could be instantiated in a collaborative manner . Examples of well - known collaborative objects include web based online meetings and social events organized using shared online calendar . The main difference between a collaborative and non - collaborative object stands in the fact that the former needs to be defined based on common agreement . B . Collaborative Workflow In order to explain clearly the concept of a collaborative workflow , we initially start by defining the standard process management workflow as an automation of a work process during which the tasks are passed from one participant to another according to predefined rules and each participant is assigned a specific user role ( such as the role of developer or validator ) . An efficient process design and implementation should result in an improved work process and elimination of any unnecessary steps . The standard workflow process is designed and implemented using workflow management software . On the other hand , we define the collaborative workflow as an automated process implemented using workflow management software augmented with social collaboration software ( online discussions , interactive polls , or any other collaborative software tool ) . The collaboration software is introduced in order to facilitate communication via facilities supporting discussions and exchange of ideas among the participants . The collaborative workflow is expected to provide significant efficiency gains to the process by removing the communication barrier between participants and transforming the single - user decision making steps into common decision agreement steps . The main requirement for supporting a collaborative workflow is to provide social collaboration facilities and a work breakdown structure of an automated process . The work breakdown structure is provided in the form of different types of process nodes and user roles that are meant to constitute the main structure and sequence of workflow process steps . We define and use six different types of nodes . A node can be a state , a human task , a condition , a fork , a join , a timer , and a notification . Each node has a unique set of properties ; we explain them briefly as follow : 1 - A state : represents a step in the workflow process that executes immediately and requires no user intervention . Any workflow process starts with an initial state and terminates with a final state ( Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 2 Workflow States 2 - A task : represents a step in the workflow process that requires a user input . The task is blocked until user input completes . Tasks are linked with defined user roles or user groups sharing a common role , i . e . a user who can complete a validation task must be holding the reviewer role ( Fig . 3 ) . Fig . 3 Human task which requires user intervention World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3948 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - on - A conditio on the con 4 ) . - Fork and processing flow into parallel pro back and r successful - A timer : ensure that or left undo users ( Fig . - A notifica participant 7 ) . C . Steps in t h The method ntology deve on : represents dition the wor Fig . 4 Wor d Join : are u in a workflow two parallel ocessing tasks retains the or completion of Fig . 5 Workf assigns a spe t important tas one for a long 6 ) . Fig . 6 W ation : is a s to commun Fig . 7 Work he Methodolog dology we p elopment and a decision m rkflow takes a rkflow Conditio used together w process . Th sub - flows i s then the join riginal workfl f the parallel s flow Fork and J ecific duration sks in a work g period of tim Workflow Timer message se nicate a piece kflow Notificati gy propose is no d localization aking step and a specific rou on r to model p e fork node sp n order to p n node merge flow only in sub - flows ( Fig Join n for tasks in flow aren’t fo me due to abs r ent to one of informatio ion ot limited to n but it is d based ute ( Fig . parallel plits the perform es them case of g . 5 ) . n order orgotten sence of of the on ( Fig . o UKC generic enfac ord me 1 - 2 - 3 - anlev we deim app to de nough to be a ct , we are con der to exp ethodology is Definition requires m collaborativ Definition consists in collaborativ collaborativ collaborativ of the proje defined wo project und required . Mapping O this phase collaborativ collaborativ partial as it objects to collaborativ going throu We argue th nd highly cust vel of accurac e presented in Fig . 8 Collab V . T HE C O In this sectio veloped to su mplemented it proach . The U explain and v The collabora velopment ph applied to an nsidering the plain and v in three main of the Coll modeling the ve and non - co of the Collab the definitio ve process ve objects . W ve workflows ect under dev orkflows may der developme Objects to Co e the desig ve workflow ve object . H t is not manda collaborativeve objects ar ugh any proces hat the propos tomizable whi cy and time s Section III . borative and no OLLABORATIV on , we describ upport the UKC t following o UKC constitut verify the meth ative process hase and va ny collaborativ UKC as a pra verify the n phases : laborative O e project as ollaborative ob borative Wor on of the use needed to We may de based on the velopment . Th vary based o ent and the nu ollaborative W gner needs needs to be However , such atory to map workflows . re directly m ss managemen sed methodol ich is expecte saving w . r . t . th on - collaborative VE P LATFORM F be the collabo C developmen our collaborat tes an excelle hodology . takes place i lidation phas ve developme actical case st methodology . Objects : This s a collecti bjects . rkflows : This er roles and manipulatin fine one or structure and he complexity on the nature umber of partic Workflows : D to specify employed fo h mapping c all the collab In fact , unm manipulated w nt procedure . logy is fine g ed to provide he early expe e Objects in UK FOR THE UKC orative platfo nt . We design tive methodo nt practical us in two main p se . The cond ent . In tudy in . The phase on of s phase of the ng the more nature of the of the cipants During which or each can be orative mapped without grained a high eriment KC C orm we ned and logical se case phases : ditions , World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3949 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 cous Sy Th au do cono spex di     dean who obas vare rene ac co ot sin ta fosh fo w in syU onstraints , tra sing collabora A . Definition In UKC ( Fig ynset , Lexical he Concept ob uto - generated oes not have oncepts . In ot otion also trig B . Definition At the purpo pecific user st xperts . The u ifferent catego UKC Pub content of t UKC dev developers ( i . e . , Create UKC valid reject CU developers UKC Adm system feat as creating to users , collaborativWe then def evelopers and nd ( 2 ) The gr workflow ( Fig . olding the UK bject via CU ssigns a valid alidator role . eject the dev ejection , the t eeds to revise ccepted . The ollaboration f ther features ) . The group a ngle approval aken by a grou or instance , at hould accept th C . Mapping In UKC , we or the ontolog workflow for nvolves seman ynsets , lexical UKC are not m ansitions betw ative workflow n of the Collab g . 8 ) , four co Gap , Semant bject is the on together with e yet a corre ther words , th gers the gener n of the Collab ose of definin tudies by con user studies r ories of users a blic Users : th the UKC in re velopers : kn s who perform e , Update , or D dators : top le UD maintena s . ministrators : tures and can g users , creatin , assigning ve objects and fined two typ d validators : ( roup approva . 9 ) process i KC developer UD operation dation task to The validato veloper’s rec task is sent b and resubmit whole proc features ( com approval work l workflow ex up of validato least two out he manipulati Objects to Co decided to fol gy developme localization ntic relations a l gaps , and l mapped to any ween the two ws . borative Objec ollaborative ob tic Relation , a nly non - collab h the creation espondence w he first langu ration of the c borative Workf ng the user r nducting inter revealed that are necessary ose who are ead only mode nowledge ex m CUD mai Delete ) on the evel experts w ance operatio those who perform adm ng groups and collaborativ d creation of i pes of workflo 1 ) The single al workflow . is instantiated r role manipu ns . The work o a participan or decides w cent manipu back to the s t iteratively un cess is augm mments , discu kflow ( Fig . 1 xcept that the ors based on of three valid on . ollaborative W llow the group ent tasks and tasks . Ont and synsets . L exical relation collaborative phases are cts bjects were d and Lexical R orative object n of a synset with already uage defining concept . kflows roles , we per rviews to kno the followin : allowed to vi e . xperts and intenance ope e UKC conten who can appr ons perform have full ac ministrative tas d assigning us ve workflow interactive pol ows involving e approval wo The single ap d when a par ulates a collab kflow proces nt holding the whether to acc lation . In c same develop ntil the task is mented with ussions board 10 ) is similar approval dec a specific con dators ( majorit Workflows p approval wo the single ap tology devel Localization in ns . Other obj workflow . defined defined : elation . t as it is t which defined a new rformed owledge ng four iew the domain erations nt . rove or med by cess to ks such er roles ws to lls . g UKC orkflow ; pproval rticipant borative ss then e UKC cept or case of er who s finally social ds , and r to the cision is ndition ; ty vote ) orkflow pproval opment nvolves jects in im co its co F VI . A A . Overall Ar The UKC mplemented as ntained web own web pa ntaining a g Fig . 9 Single A Fig . 10 Group A A RCHITECTUR rchitecture collaborative s a portlet a application , i ages , services group of po Approval Work Approval Work RE AND U SER I e platform application . A . e . mini web s and data so ortlets integra flow kflow NTERFACE is designed A portlet is application th ources . A web ated together d and a sel f - hat has b page r in a World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3950 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 consistent and systematic way is called a portal page . Therefore , a web portal could be defined as web page that brings multiple web applications or portlets together and allows for effective communication and integration between them . Portlet applications are managed by a portlet container . It provides the environment for portlet management and forms the infrastructure required for running a portlet application . It allows managing portlet instances and handling communication between portlets and with data sources . There are several open - source portlet containers available nowadays . The choice of a portlet container plays an important role in portlet application projects , since it can help reduce the development time by providing built - in portlets and the ability to access container’s built - in portlets features from the newly custom portlets . The choice of a suitable portlet container should be driven by the project requirement specifications . We have conducted a comparative study of the available open - source portlet containers and decided to use Liferay 4 . Liferay is an open source portlet container that comes with built - in portlets for web 2 . 0 social and collaboration features . In addition , it has a built - in workflow engine that allows for running custom defined workflows . Liferay provides a robust platform for building social and collaborative portlets that could be extended and customized according to any project requirement specifications which perfectly fits with our methodology and requirements . Fig . 11 shows the overall architecture for the UKC collaborative platform . It is composed of two data sources , the UKC database and an information management database ( storing administration information , discussions and polls ) and a Liferay portlet container ensuring smooth data excahnge between the four portlets :  UKC Portlet is reponsible for the communication with the UKC database , and the management of tasks in their various statuses ( assigned , pending approval , accepted , or rejected ) .  Administration Portlet is reponsible for the administration services such as user management , collaborative objects definition , workflows definition and assigning collaborative objects to collaborative workflows .  Discussions Portlet is reponsible for handling the discussion boards , creating new discussion threads and management of ongoing discussions .  Polls Portlet is reponsible for handling polls , creating polls , displaying polls and counting poll results . B . User Interface Design Fig . 12 shows the UKC collaborative platform user interface we developed . The main interface for developers and validators is composed of five tabs : ( 1 ) The Home page ( 2 ) UKC Portlet , ( 3 ) Task Notifications list , ( 4 ) Discussion boards ; and ( 5 ) Interactive Polls . In Fig . 6 , the UKC portlet tab is selected . 4 www . liferay . com Fig . 11 UKC Collaborative Platform Overall Architecture At the top region , the user can initiate a new search by typing a word and choosing the desired working and reference languages , respectively . The working language is the default language , when the user performs a search or an update operation ; the system applies the changes based on the selected working language . The reference language is mainly for multilingual support in order to view the working language synset in another language or a lexical gap if there is no corresponding synset . The middle region is divided into two main panels ( Synsets and Concepts ) . Both panels are accompanied with an interactive toolbar to facilitate the manipulation of synsets , lexical and semantic relations by performing CRUD operations ( i . e . , Create , Read , Update , or Delete ) . Both panels are also accompanied with a display manager for updating the visual display of the displayed synsets and concepts . For each synset , it’s possible to show or hide the : synset gloss , example sentences , the language - independent concept identifier , or the corresponding sysnet in the reference language . In addition , it’s possible to filter the displayed synsets by their part of speech or lexical relation type . On the other hand , for each concept , it’s possible to show or hide the language independent concept identifier and to filter the displayed concepts by their semantic relation type . A dynamic synchronization exists between the two middle panels , the synsets panel and concepts panel , which takes place when the user selects any synset from the left region , the system automatically displays the corresponding concept in the right region . The bottom region contains a set of color legends which are used to differentiate between working language synsets ( black font ) , reference language synsets ( blue font ) , or other language ( red font ) which is another possible case that could happen when the language independent concept label is obtained from another language different from both working and reference languages . In this case , the concept label will be retrieved from the UKC database and highlighted as a label from another language in a red font . Using the synchronized synsets and concepts panels accompanied by the interactive toolbars , the display manager which provides full control on the displayed information , and the visual separation of languages using different color coding , World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3951 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 wm av tocl to w an Wfe W faar ofpa on we should end manipulation to vailable lingu There are o ools supportin lassified into t ools ; and ( 2 ) In A . Semantic Semantic W with Semantic W nd languages , Ontology de Wiki based sy ew years wi Wikipedia 5 , as amiliar to man re similar to th f content and m aragraphs we ntology develo 5 http : / / www . wi d up having a ool which allo uistic resourc VII . R E only a few w ng collaborat two main cat nteractive web Wiki Based To Wiki aims to c Web by introd such as RDF evelopment t stems have g ith the incre they could ny domain ex he traditional methodology go through opment tools . ikipedia . org / an elegant lin ows linguistic ces with mi F LATED W ORK web - based on tive developm egories : ( 1 ) S b based tools . Tools combine tradi ducing seman and OWL to t ools that are gained popula ease of acti be easily ex xperts . Seman wiki , but they of developme the main Se nguistic analy experts to enr inimal effort Fig . 12 UKC Co K ntology devel ment . They Semantic Wik itional wiki s ntic web techn the traditional based on Se arity during th ive contribut xtended and b ntic Wiki base y differ in the ent . On the fol emantic Wiki ysis and rich the t while coag int ollaborative Pla opment can be ki based systems nologies l Wiki . emantic he past tors to become ed tools e nature llowing i based 1 - 2 - mmunicating reement thro teractive polls atform User Int OntoWiki ontologies are represen related di contextual v and calenda collaborativ rapidly edi editing mo See Is Wha since inform as it is prese supported b tracking all contribution or commen ( iii ) entities CofficientM ontologies f the wiki . I hypertext m collaborativ an argumen with each ot ough the di s in case of con terface [ 1 ] provides as informatio nted as web ac gital resourc views for enti ar views for ve content en iting or addi de analogous at You Get ) mation can be ented to users by OntoWiki : l changes per ns to the onto nts , and inform s rating . Makna [ 23 ] from scratch o Imported onto model accordi ve developme ntation ontolo ther in order iscussion bo nflicts . visual represe on maps . Infor ccessible page ces . OntoW ities , i . e . map Instance data nrichment by ing contents s to the WYS editing strate e edited in the s . Social collab : ( i ) comment rformed by co logy schema , mation about allows part or to import ex ologies are m ing to a pred ent is augmen ogy that forma to reach a co oards and cr entations of d rmation map es and interlin iki also pr p views for loc a . The tool su y enabling us through an SIWYG ( Wha egy for text e e same enviro boration featu ting on conten ontributors su additions of e the contributo ticipants to xisting ontolo mapped to th defined schem nted with the alizes the argu ommon reating domain entries nked to rovides cations upports sers to inline at You editing , onment ures are nts ( ii ) uch as : entities or ; and create ogies to he wiki ma . The use of uments World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3952 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 exchanged between participants ( issues , ideas and discussions ) and provides a reasoning mechanism that can alert users about if they agree and disagree on the introduction of the same ontology entity . 3 - MoKi [ 8 ] is a tool for modeling ontologies and enterprise process models in a collaborative MediaWiki 6 based approach . The tool associates a wiki page containing both unstructured and structured information to each entity of the ontology . The unstructured information contains the MediaWiki markup format ( text , images , drawings , or any markup format ) while the structured information contains description knowledge stored according to the modeling language adopted ( RDF or XML ) where each entity is described by means of triple having the form ( subject , relation , object ) . B . Interactive Web Based Tools Ontology development tools that are designed and implemented as interactive web based tools need to provide facilities for : ontology development ; ontology visualization [ 6 ] [ 18 ] ; the design of multi - user interactive interfaces ; concurrency control ; mechanisms for data storage and alignment . On the following paragraphs we go through the main and the most promising interactive web based development tools . 1 - OntoLingua [ 4 ] is among the first tools developed to provide collaborative ontology development facilities on the web . It supports collaborative ontology construction by providing simultaneous work tasks through group sessions , i . e . a user opens a session and then may assign another group of people ownership to it . This enables any other member of that group to join the session and work simultaneously on the same set of ontologies . One of the main drawbacks of this tool stands in the outdated web standards used ; for instance , the server cannot notify users that a change has occurred until they revisit the page again . The tool also has no support for social collaboration . 2 - Protégé [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] is an open - source tool with a suit of plug - ins that allows domain experts to construct domain models and knowledge - based applications using ontologies . Protégé supports the creation , manipulation and visualization of ontologies in various formats ( RDF , OWL , and XML ) . The Protégé platform supports two main ways of modeling ontologies ; The Protégé - frames editor models ontologies as a set of classes organized in a subsumption hierarchy to represent fundamental concepts and a set of slots associated to classes to describe their properties and relationships , The Protégé - OWL editor models ontologies for the semantic web using the Web Ontology Language ( OWL ) . WebProtégé [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] is an extension project that supports collaborative ontology editing through the web . It allows multiple users to edit the same ontology at the same time and all changes made by one user are seen 6 http : / / www . mediawiki . org / immediately by other users with the possibility of adding comments and annotations . Collaborative Protégé has an extension for supporting project specific workflows that could be defined using a generic ontology for modeling workflows [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] . A workflow execution engine is required to interact with Protégé to run the modeled workflow for a specific project . Palma , R . [ 20 ] also proposed an editorial workflow - based approach for collaborative ontology development but both approaches differ from our approach since their workflow is modeled for a specific project and our approach offers a customized workflow for each collaborative object in the developed project . Table I provides a brief comparison between our platform and the commonly used ontology development tool . VIII . C ONCLUSIONS In this paper we presented a collaborative methodology and the collaborative platform we developed for the development of Multilanguage ontologies able to address diversity in language and knowledge . The platform , we developed for the UKC , is an effective collaborative ontology development environment that allows for knowledge engineering in multiple languages . We presented the work done in terms of methodology , architecture and user interface . The proposed workflow - based approach is flexible , highly customizable and makes use of recent web 2 . 0 social and collaborative features . As part of the future work , we are planning to continue evolving the platform to effectively use it for the development of the UKC worldwide . World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3953 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121 TABLE I C OMPARISON BETWEEN O UR C OLLABORATIVE P LATFORM AND C OMMONLY U SED O NTOLOGY D EVELOPMENT T OOLS ON THE W EB Linguistic Tool Content Analysis Using Interactive Tool Collaborative Enrichment Ontology Localization Web 2 . 0 Features Workflow Support Workflow Per Collaborative Object Moki No Yes No Yes No No OntoWiki No Yes No Yes No No CofficientMakna No Yes No Yes No No OntoLingua No Yes No No No No Protégé Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Our Tool Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes A CKNOWLEDGMENT The research leading to these results has received funding from the CUbRIK Collaborative Project , partially funded by the European Commission ' s 7th Framework ICT Programme for Research and Technological Development under the Grant agreement no . 287704 . We would like to thank all the members of the KnowDive group for their effort in developing the UKC . We also would like to thank Amit Kumar Sarangi , Enrico Bignotti and Subhashis Das for their participation in the early experiment conducted using EasyChair . . Finally , special thanks to the EasyChair team for giving us a permission to use their platform in our early experiment . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Auer , S . , Dietzold , S . , & Riechert , T . ( 2006 ) . OntoWiki – a tool for social , semantic collaboration . In The Semantic Web - ISWC 2006 ( pp . 736 - 749 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 2 ] Bouquet , P . , & Giunchiglia , F . ( 1995 ) . Reasoning about theory adequacy . a new solution to the qualification problem . Fundamenta Informaticae , 23 ( 2 ) , 247 - 262 . [ 3 ] Dutta , B . , Giunchiglia , F . and Maltese , V . ( 2012 ) . A facet - based methodology for geo - spatial modelling . Journal on Data Semantics May 2012 , Volume 1 , Issue 1 , pp 57 - 73 . [ 4 ] Farquhar , A . , Fikes , R . , & Rice , J . ( 1997 ) . The ontolingua server : A tool for collaborative ontology construction . International journal of human - computer studies , 46 ( 6 ) , 707 - 727 . [ 5 ] Fellbaum , C . ( 1998 ) . WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . [ 6 ] Fluit , C . , Sabou , M . , & Van Harmelen , F . ( 2006 ) . Ontology - based information visualization : toward semantic web applications . In Visualizing the semantic web ( pp . 45 - 58 ) . Springer London . [ 7 ] Ganbold , A . , Farazi , F . and Giunchiglia , F . ( 2014 ) . An Experiment in Managing Language Diversity Across Cultures . The Sixth International Conference on Information , Process , and Knowledge Management . [ 8 ] Ghidini , C . , Rospocher , M . , & Serafini , L . ( 2010 ) . Moki : a wiki - based conceptual modeling tool . ISWC 2010 Posters & Demonstrations Track : Collected Abstracts , 658 , 77 - 80 . [ 9 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Dutta , B . , & Maltese , V . ( 2014 ) . From Knowledge Organization to Knowledge Representation . Knowledge Organization . 41 ( 1 ) , 44 - 56 . [ 10 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Dutta , B . and Maltese , V . and Farazi , F . ( 2012 ) . A facet - based methodology for the construction of large - scale geospatial ontology . Journal on Data Semantics ( JoDS ) , Vol . 1 , Issue 1 ( 2012 ) , pp . 57 - 73 . [ 11 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Maltese , V . , & Autayeu , A . ( 2012 ) . Computing minimal mappings between lightweight ontologies . International Journal on Digital Libraries , 12 ( 4 ) , 179 - 193 . [ 12 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Maltese , V . , B . Dutta ( 2012 ) . Domains and Context : First steps towards managing diversity in knowledge . Journal of Web Semantics ( JWS ) Vol 12 - 13 ( 2012 ) : Special Issue : Reasoning with Context in the Semantic Web . [ 13 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Maltese , V . , Farazi , F . , & Dutta , B . ( 2010 ) . GeoWordNet : a resource for geo - spatial applications . In The Semantic Web : Research and Applications ( pp . 121 - 136 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 14 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Marchese , M . , & Zaihrayeu , I . ( 2007 ) . Encoding classifications into lightweight ontologies . In Journal on data semantics VIII ( pp . 57 - 81 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 15 ] Giunchiglia , F . , McNeill , F . , Yatskevich , M . , Pane , J . , Besana , P . , & Shvaiko , P . ( 2008 ) . Approximate structure - preserving semantic matching . In On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems : OTM 2008 ( pp . 1217 - 1234 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 16 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Yatskevich , M . , & McNeill , F . ( 2007 ) . Structure preserving semantic matching . [ 17 ] Giunchiglia , F . , Yatskevich , M . , & Shvaiko , P . ( 2007 ) . Semantic matching : Algorithms and implementation . In Journal on Data Semantics IX ( pp . 1 - 38 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 18 ] Katifori , A . , Halatsis , C . , Lepouras , G . , Vassilakis , C . and Giannopolou E . ( 2007 ) . Ontology visualization methods - a survey . Journal on ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) Surveys Homepage archive , Volume 39 Issue 4 , Article No . 10 [ 19 ] Miller , George A . ( 1995 ) . WordNet : A Lexical Database for English . Communications of the ACM Vol . 38 , No . 11 : 39 - 41 . [ 20 ] Palma , R . , Haase , P . , Corcho , O . , Gómez - Pérez , A . , & Ji , Q . ( 2008 ) . An editorial workflow approach for collaborative ontology development . In The Semantic Web ( pp . 227 - 241 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 21 ] Sebastian , A . , Noy , N . F . , Tudorache , T . , & Musen , M . A . ( 2008 ) . A generic ontology for collaborative ontology - development workflows . In Knowledge Engineering : Practice and Patterns ( pp . 318 - 328 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 22 ] Sebastian , A . , Tudorache , T . , Noy , N . F . , & Musen , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Customizable workflow support for collaborative ontology development . In 4th International Workshop on Semantic Web Enabled Software Engineering ( SWESE ) at ISWC ( Vol . 2008 ) . [ 23 ] Tempich , C . , Simperl , E . , Luczak , M . , Studer , R . , & Pinto , H . S . ( 2007 ) . Argumentation - based ontology engineering . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 22 ( 6 ) , 52 - 59 . [ 24 ] Tudorache , T . , & Noy , N . F . ( 2007 , July ) . Collaborative Protege . In CKC . [ 25 ] Tudorache , T . , Noy , N . F . , Tu , S . , & Musen , M . A . ( 2008a ) . Supporting collaborative ontology development in Protégé ( pp . 17 - 32 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . [ 26 ] Tudorache , T . , Nyulas , C . , Noy , N . F . , & Musen , M . A . ( 2013 ) . WebProtégé : A collaborative ontology editor and knowledge acquisition tool for the web . Semantic web , 4 ( 1 ) , 89 - 99 . [ 27 ] Tudorache , T . , Vendetti , J . , & Noy , N . F . ( 2008b , October ) . Web - Protege : A Lightweight OWL Ontology Editor for the Web . In OWLED ( Vol . 432 ) . [ 28 ] Zaihrayeu , I . , Sun L . , Giunchiglia , F . , Pan , W . , Ju , Q . , Chi , M . and Huang X ( 2007 ) . From Web Directories to Ontologies : Natural Language Processing Challenges World Academy of Science , Engineering and Technology International Journal of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Vol : 8 , No : 12 , 2014 3954 International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 8 ( 12 ) 2014 ISNI : 0000000091950263 O p e n S c i e n ce I nd e x , I ndu s t r i a l a nd M a nu f ac t u r i ng E ng i n ee r i ng V o l : 8 , N o : 12 , 2014 w a s e t . o r g / P ub li ca ti on / 10000121