Contesting the City : Enacting the Political Through Digitally Supported Urban Walks Clara Crivellaro 1 , Rob Comber 1 , Martyn Dade - Robertson 2 , Simon J . Bowen 1 , Peter Wright 1 , Patrick Olivier 1 1 Culture Lab , School of Computing Science Newcastle University , UK 2 School of Architecture Planning and Landscape Newcastle University , UK { c . crivellaro / rob . comber / martyn . dade - robertson / s . bowen / p . c . wright / p . olivier } @ ncl . ac . uk ABSTRACT We present a method for the situated discovery and articulation of issues at the intersection between the politics of place making and city planning . We describe the construction and use of designed tools , such as historical political archives ; counterfactual maps ; and cards to invite situated dialogue between the social and institutional practices and mechanisms that produce our cities . Grounded in an account of the political as vernacular and embodied , our analysis advance understandings on the politics of design , and on the complex interrelationship between places and political spaces . We outline how HCI can adopt methods and develop sensitivities to support democratic practices and publics envisioning their urban futures . Author Keywords Walking , digital media , place , politics . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The role of design and technologies to support socio - political action and publics affecting change in their everyday lives is an area of growing interest in HCI [ 7 , 32 , 34 ] . This area is characterized by a political activist agenda [ 9 , 26 , 36 ] where methods and approaches are developed to support publics participating in the creation of their socio - material futures [ 23 , 39 ] , prompt reflection [ 30 ] , debates and contestations [ 3 , 8 , 27 ] and action [ 29 , 32 ] . With the recent turn in HCI research engaging with matters of concern and to support democratic practices [ 13 , 1 , 8 ] , the HCI community is just beginning to understand how methods to engage with public issues , and imagined futures can impact on people’s everyday lives [ 18 , 39 ] . In this paper , we explore a method ( City Walks ) for the situated discovery of issues connecting city residents with the processes and mechanism at play in the construction of their cities . The method involves a two - part socio - material design of digitally supported walks that situates vernacular debate about the city , in the city itself and puts historical and institutional perspectives into play with the lived and felt experiences of local people [ 42 ] . We contribute 1 ) a theoretical framework positioned in vernacular political discourse [ 18 ] ; 2 ) a detailed description of how the framework informed our City Walks method and the design of digitally supported tools ; 3 ) a deployment of the method , which combined digital archive material and newly generated content on the walks . We provide an analysis of the data collected through the walks and post - walk interviews to illuminate the method’s political work [ 8 ] , design in use [ 41 ] and guide future research on HCI’s role as initiator of political spaces for action and change . BACKGROUND HCI researchers have advanced critical debates and insights on the value and diversity of design activities [ 39 ] exploring the relationship between design , technology and the political [ 1 , 10 , 31 ] . Political consciousness has been conceptualized in HCI as a process along and across time in which people come to define what matters to them and directions for change [ 2 , 7 , 13 ] . This perspective entails the potential for HCI to facilitate opinion formation and connect those affiliating to particular values and beliefs with each other [ 13 , 7 ] . For example , [ 25 ] highlight how resources , experiences and technologies play a central role in the development of affiliations . Further [ 1 ] advised the need to provide social mapping and collaborative tools for advocacy groups to connect and work together . The focus on relationality in HCI is convoyed by an acknowledgement of the socio - material structure of human activities [ 3 , 35 , 25 ] when designing with and for communities and environments . For instance , [ 11 ] define the work of design as the creation of a socio - technical situation focusing on the people and the environment in which technology is used to serve social ends . Similarly , [ 3 ] explore how technology and participatory design processes create “socio - material” relations to open agonistic spaces where poly - vocal debates can engender innovative solutions . Other practices such as adversarial [ 8 ] and Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from { HYPERLINK " mailto : Permissions @ acm . org " } . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 , 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04… $ 15 . 00 . { HYPERLINK " http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702176 " } HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2853 speculative design [ 28 ] explore the potential for design to tackle public concerns . In the first instance , [ 8 ] suggests that political design involves the initiation of spaces to contest matters of concern rather than improving “mechanisms and procedures to governance” [ 8 [ p . 9 ] ] . Likewise , speculative design , comprising cross - disciplinary practices , aims at instigating debates by highlighting uncomfortable or unintended consequences of issues [ 28 ] . While in these works HCI design is positioned as initiator of inquiries around public issues , [ 31 ] questioned how political artifacts might actually enter real - life human actions , and urged design to intervene in the urban space . In this regard researchers have stressed the need to investigate further situated , embodied everyday practices and the interrelationship between space , place and technology [ 17 , 22 ] . For example , [ 2 , 35 ] highlight how political notions of sustainability must be understood in connection to the felt experiences and social practices in physical environments . Similarly , [ 37 ] suggest bridging the interface and embodiments in order to develop critical approaches to the study of space and place of political actions and its implication for democracy . With politically engaged research entering the CHI community’s discourse , we not only need to further understand how HCI design might “do” the work of politics [ 10 ] , but also how it can contribute to civic life and democratic practices in significant ways . With this paper we apply a methodological perspective based on vernacular politics [ 18 ] to the design of a method for the situated and co - located discovery and articulation of issues and debates in and about the city . Utilising the city’s material fabric and situated media , we aim at opening political spaces and dialogue between the concerns of everyday life and the politics of city planning . METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK Our City Walks method is inspired by Hauser’s analysis of the politics of everyday talk ( vernacular rhetoric ) in social movements , defined as collective challenges associated with people’s sustained interaction with authorities [ 18 ] . Hauser’s perspective locates the possibilities for social action in and through everyday talk – seen as site for the expression of values that is inherently subversive precisely because it is spoken by those who are not in power [ 18 ] . In Hauser’s model everyday talk is characterized by ‘polyvocality’ , reflecting a variety of ‘voices’ entering a discourse in which everyday objects , acts and expressions are seen as symbolic re - presentations of a social reality whose meanings are contingent and socially constitutive . In Hauser’s account , everyday talk associated with social movements comprises three further defining features . Firstly , it can contain ‘negative bonding with the opposition’ to define values and aims . For instance , ‘negative bonding’ might involve building a connection with opposing authorities or perspectives in order to ascertain needs , values and wishes . A second characteristic feature is that it entails the exposure of ‘ markers of positionality’ , signifying affiliation or disassociation with particular beliefs or norms . Such markers might be performed in codes of language , dress or public behavior for instance . Lastly , everyday talk builds social movements through ‘expressions of solidarity’ – ‘ways of doing and saying’ that supports the movement’s aims and values [ 18 ] . Drawing from this model , our method explores how everyday actions , including designed objects , their uses and interactions , can entail opportunities to turn the mundane into interrogations of the status quo . Our methodological framework also recognizes that HCI researchers are necessarily implicated as political voices in the process of participation by bringing people’s perceptions into the service of a particular organizational effort [ 41 ] . Thus , we considered our involvement in the production of the method and of the city through our study and interventions [ 15 ] . RESEARCH CONTEXT AND PROCESS Our method was developed in Newcastle upon Tyne , a city of 279 , 100 inhabitants , located in the North East of England . The research involved the collaboration with Amber - a local Film and Photography Collective ; Northern Architecture - a local charity championing architecture and place making ; and Amblr - a multi - media company . Amber’s collective artistic agenda , dedicated to documenting urban regeneration in Northern England , has been regarded as oppositional due to their aspiration to produce alternative representations of working class communities through photography and filmmaking [ 20 ] . At the center of our City Walk method is an historical archive , here a 1960s film archive provided by Amber , comprising local politicians’ interviews revealing controversies and anecdotes about major redesign and infrastructural developments aimed at turning Newcastle upon Tyne into the modern city of the 21 st century . The political archive provided a rich resource to engage with the political processes that led to the city’s present socio - material constitution and elicit reflection and discussions around the city’s possible futures . The research developed over a period of eight months . From an initial examination of Amber’s archive coupled with situated inquiry , a walk and co - design workshops with study partners , the research involved the socio - material design of the City Walks method and the recruitment and delivery of the walks . A total of 30 participants engaged in the walks , recruited by one of our study partners , and through a social media site . Participants were diverse in background , nationality , occupation and gender and ranged from 21 to 65 years of age . In the next section we describe the initial research leading to the method’s socio - material design . Scoping design opportunities Firstly we conducted research within the city’s urban core in order to develop sensitivities and understanding on the relationship between the issues raised in the archive , the HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2854 visible material traces of the past and practices in the contemporary city . In line with [ 33 ] , we utilized photography , diaries , interviews and situated engagements with people met in these locations . We also sought to explore the contemporary significance of the archive with research partners and to this end , we invited them to co - design a walk through the city and narrate compelling aspects of the archive from their perspectives . The walk raised questions around our relationships with civic space , authority and planning practices and the way individual and collective values are reflected in the material fabric of the city . Following the walk , research partners convened to co - design the City Walk method . THE CITY WALK METHOD City Walk was co - designed as a two - part method , exploring Hauser’s everyday talk and its features : negative bonding , markers of positionality and polyvocality . In part one , the archive material was used to construct tools to elicit participants’ expression of issues and positions and provoke discussion . Data generated in part one informed the design of tools used in the second part of City Walks , where participants’ voices were integrated with the archival material ( figure 1 ) . In the next sections we illustrate the socio - material design rationale of the digital elements and tools in the first and second parts of the method . Figure 1 . The City Walks two parts method design process Socio - material design 1 Urban walking as an everyday act of resistance . We chose to employ walking as an occasion for dialogue and a potential mundane expression of resistance . Walking has long been considered a practice of cultural , ecological and political significance . For instance , [ 12 ] regarded walking a tactic of resistance , entailing enactments that either uphold or disregard the status quo . Further , [ 38 , 40 ] explored walking in cities as a democratizing force seeking equality of access , freedom of movement and the dissolution of state control . In recent years walking has also been utilized in the social sciences as method to engage with our identities as reflected in our surroundings . For instance [ 6 ] proposed an understanding of places as experiential ‘gathering’ processes , constitutive of one sense of self and [ 21 ] demonstrated how walking with people allows us to gain a better understanding of different ways of ‘being in the world’ . Rather than an individual activity , we looked at group walks as collective , relational and dynamic endeavors [ 41 ] , aiming at creating collective experiences and opportunities for dialogue . The city map as a rhetorical artifact . In order to initiate inquiry , we chose to design a counterfactual map of the city as a way to problematize the ‘real’ . In this respect , [ 24 ] highlighted the latent politics embedded in maps effected through the revelation or disguise of textual / visual information . Further , [ 19 ] noted maps’ power of naming as strongly connected with the power to individuate , reinforce or create identities . The design of a counterfactual map was intended to stimulate reflection and new relationships between what is there and what could be there . The counterfactual map’s design was informed by historically unrealised plans , a subjective interpretation of political visions as described in the political archives , and the initial situated research and walk with research partners . The map featured counterfactual streets and fictional buildings , highlighted unofficial histories and practices in the city ( graffiti , skateboarding , etc . ) , and assigned existing buildings and areas with different purposes ( eg . university as a hub of free education , shopping center as the city parliament , etc . ) . The counterfactual map ( figure 2 , bottom - left ) also intended to scaffold the negotiation of the walk among participants through collaborative sense making . The political archive as a resource for negative bonding . We used the archive as a way to engage participants with institutional processes . In so doing our aim was to stimulate connections to current mechanisms of city planning and participants’ expression of personal stances , opinions and values . We selected audio material from the film archive according to the following categories : excerpts exposing political mechanism underpinning planning projects , particular regeneration efforts in the city and visions of democracy . Inspired by these archival extracts we designed 12 prompts cards featuring open - ended statements and questions inviting personal responses ( figure 2 , top - left ) . NFC technology embedded in each card gave access to archival excerpts held on mobile phones . Extracts ranged from 30 seconds to 2 . 5 minutes in length and were listened to via a Bluetooth portable speaker , inviting participants to gather around it ( figure 2 , bottom - right ) . Prompt cards as markers of positionality in place and space . Each group member was given two prompt cards , which they were invited to associate with particular sites of their choice along the walk . Having identified a site , participants were asked to stop the group , explain their choice and then listen to the archival content embedded in the card . Talking time was set to two minutes per participant at a time and participants were also given the tasks to audio - record and photo - document group members’ opinions and site choices . In this way , through their card ‘placement’ participants would enact a ‘marker of positionality’ in both place and space : the situated place in the city and the discursive space in which meaning is constructed and exposed ( figure 2 , top - left and right ) . In summary , the socio - material design ( figure 2 ) intended to invite negotiation and implicate participants in shaping HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2855 the walk by associating their cards to sites they found significant along the way . Groups were given routes based on the counter - factual map to provide a loose structure and ensure groups would do their walk within the time limit . Figure 2 . Socio - material design – 1 City Walks 1 19 participants took part in walks during the first part of our method . Each walk involved small groups ( 4 to 6 participants ) to ensure each member equal opportunities to have input in the walk within time constraints . Each walk lasted between 2 . 5 and 3 . 5 hours . During walks , participants spent time examining the map , discussing possible interpretations and navigational choices , which involved many playful moments that helped them socialise . Decoding the map , given its ambiguous design , was a slow , discursive and ongoing process unfolding with the act of walking , and comparing the counterfactual map with the city . Participants generated stops at sites and topics for discussion by associating their cards to particular sites of choice . Personal associations between the counterfactual map , cards and the city influenced choices . While for most participants these were serendipitous , others reserved their cards for particular sites on their routes . For instance a participant placed his card ‘capitalism – making the rules and living within them’ at the University site , marked in the map as ‘Hub of Free Education’ . This prompted a discussion around the capitalization of education and the role of universities in forging new urban developments . Another participant placed her card ‘revolutionary perspective – what do you think would be beneficial in the city’ in a private car park where she had organized a public cultural event in the past . This was followed by a debate about the loss and re - appropriation of public places . Another participant placed his card ‘owning the future – properties snapped up by builders and developers’ at the site of a building used by local skateboarders that was recently demolished , and marked on the map as ‘old town’ . In this way , the participant highlighted how new developments and policies dictate the exclusion of particular cultural practices in the city . Listening to the archive material in the walks sparked further questions , and was used to exemplify or extend discussions in other directions . Participants having to take photos of each other produced playful moments , and also provided opportunities to consider what aspects of the location highlighted particular issues that participants wanted to communicate . Socio - material design 2 The walks comprising the first part of our method as described above , provided new content ( places and opinions ) that was used for the construction of socio - material design in the second part of our method ( figure 3 ) . Polyvocality - cumulating diverging voices . Content generated in City Walks 1 informed a new counterfactual map and the participants’ voices were put into dialogue with the voices of the archive . Participants’ new audio material were mixed with short archival extracts . Each new mix of recordings featured diverging opinions and contradictory histories and was assigned to the particular locations pinpointed in previous walks by participants . In this way , the ‘ polyvocality’ of multiple perspectives would be exposed at each location . Figure 3 . Socio - material design - 2 Hence , we made booklets corresponding in the new map to particular locations whose names were inspired by the new audio materials . For instance , a construction site was renamed as ‘Owning the Future Square’ where a previous walker had talked about the loss of a culturally important place ; an incomplete walkway was renamed ‘Monument to People’s Power’ , referring to a campaign that stopped a planning development , and so on . Each booklet included instructions encouraging site exploration , NFC tags triggering related audio material and a question for groups to collectively consider at each place . Lastly a brochure was designed to contain booklets and map ( figure 3 , top - left ) . City Walks 2 11 new participants took part in walks during the second part of our method . Each walker / participant was given a brochure and each group the following instructions : collectively decide locations to visit from the ones presented in the brochure ; collectively work out a route to get to those locations ; at each locations open the booklet relating to it and follow the instructions . Participants were also given a camera , smart phone and Bluetooth portable speaker . A time limit for talking was not set for these walks HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2856 leaving their unfolding purposely open to internal group dynamics . As in previous walks , examining the map and negotiating ways to reach each location produced a playful atmosphere and helped participants socialise . Following the instructions at each location produced excitement and curiosity . The mix of audio materials presenting divergent opinions and the ‘questions’ provoked notably different interpretations that led to animated discussions . Participants engaged in debates around issues of land ownerships in the city , new and old planning rules , the uncertain future of particular areas and possible alternative uses of specific places . ANALYSIS The data set , including field notes , audio and photographic documentation of the walks taken by researchers and participants and follow up interviews were analysed using a thematic analysis approach [ 5 ] . Findings are presented under the following themes : re - discovering the city and revealing issues , instigating situated debates , and sources and validations of imagining . Re - discovering the city and revealing issues The walks invited each group to organize themselves in order to perform their walk . For some participants the lack of a leader was “challenging” , entailing a realization that “working in small groups can be hard work” . Yet the walks were also a creative process of discovering and questioning “real things that you don’t normally talk about with other people” . This is reflected in the words of a participant who felt , that it “ seemed to be more about the process of travelling rather than reaching a destination” . In this respect the tools provided were important in shaping group dynamics and the way walks and discussions unfolded . For instance , walks’ long duration and participants’ negotiation of the counterfactual map were significant aspects that allowed personal contemplation of the map and developed participants’ confidence in sharing their thoughts . Furthermore , for walkers “having to physically come back together to listen closely to one sound output” added to the social experience . The cards in walks comprising part one of our method provided walkers with a focus to pinpoint and articulate significant aspects of individual and collective identities expressed through everyday practices , ( hi ) stories and memories - exposing affiliations to particular values and social practices as reflected in chosen places . Personal anecdotes , discussions , and reflections took place both whilst walking along and standing face - to - face . At times , participants detoured from the suggested route in order to take the group to particular places they wanted to talk about . The exposure of personally meaningful stories , ideas and issues as reflected in the material city assembled walkers around specific urban situations and matters of concerns – e . g . the city football stadium as symbol of local identity ; a cycle route traversed by a participant everyday under a road bypass ; the proposal for a new public square ; the capitalization of education reflected in new developments ; preclusion of cultural practices such as graffiti in public spaces ; etc . In this way , places came to re - present personal concerns while uncovering tensions between city planning and people’s lived experiences , values and cultural practices in the city . Below , two participants draw a distinction between places driven by market imperatives and what people value doing in places . “I used to hang around here a lot when I was a kid and it used to have a different atmosphere round here than it does now , now they’ve opened it out and made it quite corporate [ … ] There used to be little lovely dark cubby holes and stuff , where as a kid , when you wanted to get away from adult control or whatever , was good to hang around . Now there’s a Wagamama . It just doesn’t feel right , you know ? It just doesn’t know what it is anymore” ( Kay ) “it is like a public square , but what is surrounding it is actually commercialised so it’s all driving towards actual profit rather than community interaction . It’s just a bit of a threat that more public squares will becoming sterilised” ( Drew ) Kay’s sketch of her activities as a youngster in the square , highlight her embodied connections to the place . The square’s loss of identity due to new developments is re - contextualized in other locations and near - future prospects by Drew . The market driven values reflected in the square are illustrated as ‘ sterile ’ and presented in conflict to an idea of ‘public - ness’ and ‘ community interaction’ associated instead with idiosyncrasies and diversity . Another participant further emphasised such contrast , reflecting on young people’s practices in the city . “Some of that is about that kind of grass roots thing . It’s not about public consultation , but about the public doing things and then being recognised , which that kind of visionary , top down development doesn’t really allow” ( Tom ) In this excerpt , Tom contributes a consideration of the tense relationship between place making and the bureaucratic and formal procedure of town planning , highlighting a central aspect of such tension : the necessity to acknowledge social production processes by local authorities . While participants in part one of our method were given individual cards , in part two groups were given tasks inviting site exploration and questions to collectively consider alongside the audio material . The paths walkers traversed and places they dwelled in engendered contingent associations , interpretations and feelings , entailing an aspect of ‘extra - ordinariness’ within the ordinary . “you would never walk around spaces like that because you don’t make time in your day to do things like that [ … ] and you get the feeling , the atmosphere by being there” ( Tina ) Tina refers here to walking across a site of a demolished building and climbing the roof of a car park – highlighting the embodied nature of her experiences . Maps and instructions prompted the discovery of issues , but also the revealing of dis / associations with particular HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2857 places / practices in the city . For example , a group collectively identified a pub as the ‘City Parliament’ marked on the map . The booklet suggested entering the ‘Parliament’ and listening to the conversations for a few minutes . However the group jointly decided to abstain from it , labeling the place as “not the kind of place where people like me go to” . Yet being there challenged participants’ own judgments . Here Joy reflects on a particular encounter . “We sort of said we are not going in there , it looks really horrible , but then someone really nice came out and started to chat on with us” ( Joy ) . After spending time there , participants revisited their own assumptions . For some participants , standing in that particular place and the topic at hand ( ‘your own parliaments’ ) assumed symbolic meaning , reflected in the influences that being there had on their discussion . In this way , re - discovering places and issues , through the audio materials gathered in previous walks and from the archive , turned locations in the city into public matters . Below , a participant reconsiders city planning as a matter of collective participation . “ You just take it for granted [ … ] as we are about as involved now as in the 60ies that is we are not involved at all – somebody else is doing it all” ( Joan ) Joan draws a connection between past and contemporary socio - political dynamics in city planning – making the past relevant to her perceived present state of affairs . Instigating situated debates The groups engaged discursively in the walks , examining the causal nexus of the specific concerns at hand . Issues generated by participants and topics heard in related audio materials engendered challenging discussions . In this respect , holding a recording device while talking was significant in pacing and drawing attention to talking and listening times . Differences in individual and collective visions relating to social needs , urban developments and technologies were exposed also in respect to the tensions of past visions ( heard in the archival material ) and near - future developments . For instance , a group standing in the construction site of a new development ( marked in the map as ‘Citizens Lab’ ) endeavored in a discussion around technological advance expressed in the new construction of a center for scientific excellence . Yet , the group’ discourse was challenged by one of the participants . “I think that his [ politician ] analysis of computing trips lots of people up - that is the infrastructure that we need to make things happen doesn’t rely on bricks and mortar . In many respects this is a very regressive development , precisely because of that [ … ] All of this stuff about big data , it’s all disappearing into air” ( Andy ) Andy’s vision for a better communication infrastructure is contrasted with the near - future development , first proposed in the 1960s , highlighting how in his view interventions should adapt to collective needs . In this way , audio excerpts evoked in participants’ different interpretations and opinions reflecting individual worldviews . Walkers engaged in debates assembling ‘knowledges’ and life experiences tied to particular notions of belonging , historical and socio - political circumstances . For example , in walks comprising part two of our method , audio extracts around the distribution of decisional power regionally or nationally evoked different memories in participants : of a time of political turmoil in a participants’ youth ; experiences participating in regional assemblies ; cultural experiences in a participants’ native country . “Up till I came to England I didn’t know I was working class I had no idea . I had no idea about that kind of politics you know the North East went through miners strike and some really hard times [ … ] I didn’t have to live through that so I can see why is a row thing probably in a lot of people’s minds [ … ] you know politics in Ireland is religion while here is a class thing” ( Joy ) Recollecting aspects of sensitive lived experiences of power ( and powerlessness ) in a time of political struggle engendered emotional reactions in some of the participants . Joy hints at the ways socio - political histories of place infer particular identities , also reflected in her understandings of what might constitute politics and the political . Joy here displays empathic engagement towards experiences and associated emotions evoked in walkers - others , but also reflects on the difficulty to fully comprehend them . In this regard , differences among walkers’ life experiences were framed with an impossibility to agree on certain matters . “I am from the North East [ … ] Lou is a lovely woman but she is not from the North East and she will never know what it was like to grow up in the North East under Thatcher regime [ … ] Its stuff that I am passionate about and my passion comes from a different way of thinking and growing up in a different way” ( Vera ) Vera exposes boundaries of membership defined around her sense of belonging to a particular ( hi ) story and personal investment excluding those who don’t shared her same experiences . Boundaries of membership came to the fore also in other instances . For example in the following excerpts , two participants expressed disengagement and uneasiness towards other member’s modalities of debating . “I always have been taught to be polite to let other people have their say . Unfortunately other people aren’t quite as polite in that respect [ … ] and sometimes its pointless to argue with someone when you know that the argument can’t be won” ( Tim ) “I don’t feel like I belong to a party because I still feel new to the area [ … ] You could see that people are really passionate [ … ] it goes to lots of arguments because lots of people don’t know how to express themselves calmly or speak up their mind clearly” ( Ella ) Participants illustrate debating as a civil , thoughtful , composed endeavor rather than a passionate one . Also , while Tim equates debating to a competition to be ‘won’ , Ella detached from debates relating to party politics due to a lack of affiliation . Yet for most participants the confrontation with different worldviews played a crucial part of the experience . In the following extract Eve explains HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2858 how these engendered reflections in regards to her values and how these are mirrored in her daily actions . “it was very honest that she was saying those things like I don’t bother getting interested and I thought well yes there are things that are happening that interest me or that I get concerned about but I don’t necessarily act on them [ … ] it actually had an impact . You know calling the council asking what’s going on , I don’t think I would have thought in that way before this [ walk ] ” ( Eve ) Eve refers to phoning the council the day after the walk to inquire about a new development in her neighborhood . Her action here is presented as a result of the walk experience and reflections around her role in respect to her concerns . Sources and validation of imagining For participants as well as for researchers , the walks were learning experiences - an opportunity to listen to different perspectives , learn from others and reflect on institutional and social roles and practices that produce the city . They were occasions to reconsider the city . Walkers’ accounts , such as the re - appropriation of a private car park for public events , and anecdotes from the archive opened prospects to re - consider places in the city in new ways . “it does change things for how I perceive those parts of the city because it makes you think about other possibilities . I won’t be able to visit those places again without remembering reflections of things that happened , ‘cos they sit in my memory” ( Lou ) The walks produced new ‘memories’ in the participants’ life repertoire , but also opened up new ways of thinking . The experience is formulated below as having a situational , but also ongoing effect beyond the walk itself . “I came home and I researched a lot of things that we did on the walk [ … ] so I looked at the maps and what used to be there [ … ] also what could it be used for in the future like straight away I went and checked if there were any news about the site” ( Tim ) The ambiguity of the counterfactual map opened avenues for further inquiries and readings . While walking , participants appropriated it confronting it with the city , making conjectures , becoming its ‘creative actor’ . Some participants projected a strong sense of locality in the map . “I found the map really interesting , the fact that it seems a lot more socialist than we actually are at the minute , or that we’ve come to be in Newcastle because obviously , that’s our heritage , it’s very socialist and very much about the workingman . ” ( Kay ) Kay presents a particular characterisation of history and politics – a collective historical past at odds with the present state of affair . In this respect , the archives , histories and personal stories were used as resources , evidence and exemplars to hinder or validate the envisioning of other possibilities . For instance , in the following excerpt , Lou refers to the possibility of proposing new rules in the city . “you couldn’t really do , how would you do that but then when we heard that bit of the archive I thought ‘oh ! They did do it so it’s not impossible and they just decided [ … ] and they did it . ” ( Lou ) In this way , the archive provided a resource to validate and open up alternatives in respect to the way rules and political decisions are made . On the other hand , uncertainty around the future of particular places , audio material with diverging opinions and situated explorations of places worked together affectively to entrust walkers with choices between alternatives and imminence on the matter . “We were a bit concerned that it was going to be another shopping mall [ … ] so it got us thinking about what it could be and something that hopefully would be free for people to use . ” ( Ella ) “I just thought leave it green [ … ] You live in the city and you pay all the taxes and nobody ask you [ … ] it could be my fault cause I don’t keep up on what’s on the website but they don’t tell you because they don’t want people to know because they already have plans [ . . . ] but if there we were more of [ … ] we could have a bit more control if the people had to listen to us ” ( Fay ) In these excerpts , walkers reflect on the tensions between institutional and civic roles , rights and responsibilities . Monetary - based ( ‘taxes’ ) relations to governance that presents ready - made solutions are contrasted with opportunities for publics to propose their own . Conceiving a different prospect for the place is coupled with a call for publics to ‘voice’ and institutions to ‘listen’ , both necessary to achieve change . In Fay’s vision , the institutions - people relationship is characterized by mutual promises and dependency . Matters of mutual reliance and expectations around the action of others were also reflected in the visions afforded by technologies . For instance , in part two City Walks , a group was confronted with envisaging ‘citizen’s advertisements’ as opposed to commercially led ones . A participant proposed a public LED displays for tweets in the public square where they were standing , and the group engaged in a discussion around its practicalities considering issues of censorship . “you don’t really have a stand on either way [ … ] it wouldn’t be possible , one people would abuse it , if it wasn’t policed and if it was policed then the police would abuse it ” ( Dom ) Dom suggests the impossibility of reaching freedom of expression in public places . His expectations around other people’s behavior display a polarization limiting the possibility of conceiving alternatives . Here , potentials afforded by technology are critically positioned in regard to issues of surveillance and authority . Furthermore , the use of a particular technology in the walks ( smart phone and NFC tags ) sparked concerns around its potential to support civic action and democratic processes . “It’s not just about Wi - Fi richness though it’s about what you carry in your pocket . Some people won’t have a device . It’s like that from now on you have to pay a license to be able to comment on a planning application . It puts limitation on the right to comment for instance [ … ] so it’s a question of democracy and the landscape of access of connectivity” ( Les ) Les exposes critical tensions in socio - technical prospects , which while serving a re - distribution of power , may actually contribute to widening the gap of inequality and HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2859 exclusion . Yet , for other participants , the particular use of technology stimulated reflections not simply in terms of what technology might afford , but also around citizens’ own conduct in relation to governance . “I don’t know the city well enough [ … ] I just stick to my own little place [ … ] but if you complain about something you are not really having a say as about what it becomes [ … ] We are the people who live here and we should say what we want [ … ] unless people went out and left messages , have a say you know – you might start and see things changing a bit for the better” ( Joy ) Joy envisages people going for walks in the city and leaving messages about their concerns in places as a way to actively contribute to the making of places ( ‘ what it becomes’ ) . It is notable here , how Joy’s everyday practice ( ‘sticking to her own little place’ ) is contrasted by a formulation of her own sense of ( future oriented ) ‘civic’ agency . DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK Our method and analysis of deployments show how HCI can initiate situated dialogue between the politics of city planning and practices and concerns of everyday life through design and technologies . It also reveals how envisioning alternative possibilities is entangled with lived experiences , historical memory and expectations towards ourselves , others and authorities . In the next section , we discuss the benefits and tensions afforded by our City Walks method , how situated media and design can construct political spaces to impact the making of places and HCI research’ challenges as initiator of political processes to support democratic practice . Places and political spaces The tools in our two - part method implicated participants in the construction of situated political spaces inviting the expression of cultural identities , values and concerns as reflected in the material fabric of the city . Previous research argued that designing for place requires the provision of structures for place making through participation , appropriation and adaptation [ 17 ] . The maps , cards association to places and unveiling of audio material opened spaces for alternative relationships to form , conveying rich implications for the layering of meaning and the re - appropriation of places through discursive spaces [ 18 ] . Our method provides a framework for the revealing of ‘positionings’ within the production of the city , connecting cultural processes of place making and the political sphere . Research has long stressed the centrality of physicality and the need for HCI design to adopt methods [ 35 ] and approaches [ 14 ] to engage with embodied practices [ 2 ] and sensorial aspects of places [ 22 ] . Further [ 14 , 41 ] argued for the importance to engage with places’ socio - political , economic and historical contexts HCI designs for . The use of a our socio - technical tools including the political archive and data gathered across the walks , configured the city as material evidence for public discourse [ 8 ] , as something to inquire into through situated cross - examination , open to potential subversions and imaginations [ 14 , 15 ] . In this sense , our method , involving the situated connection of causal nexuses and institutional processes with the material city and the lived experience of people through technologies and mapping tools , has political rather than ethnographic purpose . Previous work highlighted the extent to which design and interfaces can be political [ 8 , 24 ] . This method adopts this problem / design space alongside situated media by exploiting its potential to prompt embodied connections and different approaches by which the city can be understood , interpreted and re - imagined [ 14 ] . Future work might investigate how this method can be used to produce multiple maps and experience the city from different perspectives for an embodied engagement with concerns towards the development of political spaces , place meaning and the constitution of publics [ 10 , 26 ] to affect change . Debates and dialogue Previous research called for HCI to engage with the design of politics and the negotiation of meaning as an important site of political activity [ 13 ] . This method provides an instantiation in which HCI design and situated media can shape social activities for political ends . Based on our methodological perspective , the design of tools and media content with diverging perspectives set the walkers in shared circumstances inviting collaborative sense - making while prompting critical engagement and debates . The use of cards in the first part of our method assured a ‘safe’ space for the individual expression of concerns , affording moments for self - reflection also when listening to others . Audio content in walks of the second part of the method provoked discussion that despite pointing to an impossibility of agreement , provided an opportunity for walkers to connect to each other’s across lines of difference and re - discover or remember what mattered to them . Also , the audio material provoked at times emotionally charged debates and challenging accounts of lived experiences , which had an impact on both participants and researchers . Previous work urged the need to engage with controversies among people with opposing concerns [ 3 , 8 ] , but highlighted that constructive debates require the ability to accepts others’ views as legitimate [ 3 ] . Yet , our findings highlight that such abilities can be assumed , showing tensions around rules of engagement , equality in walkers’ modalities of expression and notions of contestation as something to be won . Future research might engage with nuanced approaches to disputes , where con - testing - from its etymological root ‘ bearing witness together’ – might entail the provision of encounters between institutions and individuals and among city residents in which we can expose together and testify to one another ( rather than against one another ) . However , while these political processes are critical to advance public understanding ( dialogue ) and opinion formation , they can HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2860 also entail unintended consequences . Future work might explore further the provision of participatory ‘safe spaces’ to do so , while bringing to the fore the ‘ polyvocality ’ of people’s views side by side . Methods for democratic practices Previous work urged methods to build technical and social capacity [ 26 ] to increase people’s sense of agency in shaping future uses of technology [ 23 ] . Our method offered opportunities to articulate , imagine , but also contest uses and consequences of technologies to facilitate current and near - future productions of the city . Building on previous work that reconfigured the design process as initiator of publics [ 26 ] , and concerned with the construction of material environments [ 8 ] , our method explores how HCI design can be used to build social capacity through situated examinations of the past , present and future making of our socio - material environment . Most critically it provided opportunities to articulate how political processes of city planning and the city ‘ should be’ [ 27 ] while reflecting on individual and collective roles and agency in this regard . In line with previous work that stressed how the awareness of ourselves as agents of change is entwined with the institutional organisation and regulation that produce cities [ 13 ] - a central aspect of our method is that it afforded encounters and explorations of our relationship with current and historical authority , while constituting new experiences in the life repertoire of walkers . As civic action stems from past experiences , where experience is set against aspirations for a different imagined situation judged in terms of practicalities and opportunity for realization [ 16 ] - we argue that such explorations are a crucial step towards sustainable ways to support publics defining for themselves what might constitute their sense of agency and the ‘common good’ . Entailing the engagement with others self - interests and authorities , our method is a step towards the building of collective capacities that are in dialogue with the institutions that can actualize civic will [ 4 ] . Previous work called for an investigation of how the practices of design contribute to public discourse and civic life [ 8 , 31 ] . By working in public , with and for publics , we attempted to make HCI research accountable and open to public inspection . Our methodological perspective , concerned with vernacular politics as a site for the expression of values and of social action , provides a way in which HCI can support everyday politics , and begin to explore the consequences of our work in this realm . The challenge for HCI design supporting democratic practice requires that we also understand how democracy is lived [ 18 ] . As civic communications contain empirical evidence of a political learning process , we call future work to further investigate how communication practices in their multiple forms ( technologies , designed objects , everyday debates , mobilities , media spaces , the material city , etc . ) shape public understanding and choice to guide the re - making of our socio - material futures . CONCLUSION We presented the design of a two - part method , City Walks , informed by a rhetorical model of everyday talk in social movements . In the construction of our method , we positioned HCI research as initiator of political spaces exploring everyday concerns in dialogue with the mechanisms and practices of city planning through the use of a historical archive , counterfactual maps and participants newly generated content . Our method offers a way in which HCI research can contribute to civic life and public discourse . We argue that if HCI design wants to engage with the concerns of everyday life ( everyday politics ) it needs to develop methods and understanding on the consequences of the tools it uses to forge discussions and debates , which are at the heart of opinion formation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank research participants and partners , Amber , Amblr and Northern Architecture . This research was funded by the AHRC Creative Exchange Knowledge Exchange Hub ( AH / J005150 / 1 ) and the EPSRC Digital Economy Theme Social Inclusion through the Digital Economy Research Hub ( EP / G066019 / 1 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Aoki , P . M . , Honicky , R . J . , Mainwaring , A . , et al . A Vehicle for Research : Using Street Sweepers to Explore the Landscape of Environmental Community Action . In Proc . of CHI ‘09 , ACM ( 2009 ) , 375 - 384 . 2 . Bidwell , N . , Syia , M . , Marsden , G . , et al . Walking and the social life of solar charging in rural africa . ACM TOCHI , ( 2008 ) , 20 , 4 , 22 . 3 . Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , and Hillgren , P . A . Participatory design and “democratizing innovation” . In Proc . PDC 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 41 - 50 . 4 . Boyte , H . , C . , Everyday Politics : Reconnecting Citizens and Public Life , University of Pennsylvania Press , 2005 . 5 . Braun , V . , Clarke , V . , Using thematic analysis in reaserch , Qualitative Research in Psychology , 2006 , 3 ( 2 ) , 77 - 101 . 6 . Casey , E . , S . , How to get from space to place in a farily short stretch of time , in Senses of Place , Santa FE : School of American Research Press , 1997 . 7 . Crivellaro , C . , Comber , R . , Bowers , J . , Wright , P . , Olivier , P . , A Pool of Dreams : Facebook , Politics and the Emergence of a Social Movement , In Proc . CHI’14 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) , 3573 - 3582 . 8 . DiSalvo , C . Adversarial Design ( Design Thinking , Design Theory ) . The MIT Press , 2012 . 9 . Di Salvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Neighborhood Network Project : A case Study of Critical Engagement and Creative Expression Through Participatory Design . In Proc . of CHI’10 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 41 - 50 . 10 . Di Salvo , C , Lukens , J . , Lodato , T . , Jenkins , T . , Kim , T . , Making Public Things : How HCI Design Can HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2861 Express Matters of Concern . In Proc . CHI’14 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) , 2397 - 2406 . 11 . Dearden , A . and Light , A . Designing for e - Social Action An Application Taxonomy . In Proc . Design Reaserch Society Conference 2008 , Sheffield Hallam University ( 2008 ) . 12 . De Certeau , M . , The practice of everyday life , Berkeley University of California Press , 2011 . 13 . Dourish , P . HCI and environmental sustainability : the politics of design and the design of politics , In Proc . DIS 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1 - 10 . 14 . Dourish , P . , Mainwaring , D , S . , Ubicomp’s Colonial Impulse , In Proc . Ubicomp’12 , ACM ( 2012 ) , 133 - 144 15 . Farias , I . , The Politics of Urban Assemblages , City , 2011 , 15 ( 3 ) , 365 - 374 16 . Fowler , A . Biekart , K . , ( eds ) Civic Driven Change : Civic Imagination in Action , The Hague Institute of Social Studies , 2008 . 17 . Harrison , S . , Dourish , P . , Re - place - ing space : The Role of Place and Space in Collaborative Systems , In Proc . CSCW ’96 , ACM Press ( 1996 ) , 67 - 76 . 18 . Hauser , G . , McClellan , E . , D . , Vernacular Rhetoric and Social Movements : performances of resistance in the rhetoric of the everyday , in McKenzie Stevens , S . , Malesh , P . , Active Voices : Composing a Rhetoric of Social Movements , Suny Press , 2009 . 19 . Harvey , D . , The Condition of Postmodernity , Wiley - Blackwell , 1999 . 20 . Holland , R . , Vail , J . , The art of social movement : cultural opportunity , mobilisation and framing in the early formation of the Amber Collectives , Poetics , 2012 , 40 , 22 - 43 . 21 . Lee , J . , Ingold , T . , Fieldwork on Foot : Perceiving , Perceiving , Routing , Socializing , in Collins , P . , Coleman , S . , ( eds ) Locating the Field , Space , Place and Context in Anthropology , Oxford : Berg , 2006 . 22 . Lentini , L . , Decortis , F . , Space and Places : When Interacting with and in Physical Space Becomes a meaningful Experience , Personal Ubiquitous Comput , 2010 , 14 , 407 - 415 . 23 . Light , A . , Democratizing Technology : Making Transformations using designing , Performance and Props , In Proc . CHI’11 , ACM Press , ( 2011 ) , 2239 - 2242 . 24 . Light , A . , The Politics of Representing Culture in Ubiquitous Media : Challenging National Cultural Norms by Studying a Map with Indian and British Users , Personal Ubiquitous Comput , 2011 , 15 : 585 - 596 25 . Le Dantec , C . , Di Salvo , K . , Infrastructing and the formation of publics in participatory Design , Social Studies of Science , 2013 , 43 ( 2 ) , 241 - 264 26 . Le Dantec , C . , Participation and Publics : Supporting Community Engagement . In Proc . CHI’12 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 1351 - 1360 . 27 . Le Dantec , C . , The Right Way to Make Smart City , http : / / goo . gl / Y9tNDr , retrieved on 05 . 22 . 14 28 . Lukens , J . , Di Salvo , C . , Speculative Design and Technological Fluency , MIT Press , 2012 , 3 ( 4 ) , 23 - 40 . 29 . Kuznetsov , S . , Odom , W . , Moulder , V . , et al . HCI , Politics and the city : engaging with urban grassroots movements for reflection and action . Ext . Abtracts CHI 2011 , ACM ( 2011 ) , 2409 - 2412 . 30 . Kuznetsov , S . , Paulos , E . , and Gross , M . WallBots : interactive wall - crawling robots in the hands of public artists and political activists . In Proc . DIS 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 208 – 217 31 . Markussen , T . , The Disruptive Aesthetic of Design Activism : Enacting Design between Arts and Politics , DesignIssue , 2013 , 29 , 1 . 32 . Olander , S . , Lenskjold , T . , U . , Yndigegn , Foverskov , M . , Mobilising for Community Building and Everyday Innovation , Interactions , 2011 , 18 ( 4 ) , 28 - 32 . 33 . Paulos , E . , Jenkins , T . , Urban Probes : Encountering our Emergent Urban Athmosphere . In Proc . CHI’05 , ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 341 - 350 . 34 . Paulos , E . , Citizen Science : Enabling Participatory Urbanism , in Foth , M . , Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics : The Practice and Promise of The Real Time City , IGI Global , 2009 . 35 . Pink , S . , Mackley , L . , K . , Mitchell , V . , et al . Applying the lens of sensory ethnography to sustainable HCI , ACM TOCHI , 2008 , 20 , 4 , 25 . 36 . Ratto , M . , Boler , M . , DIY Citizenship : Critical Making and Social Media , The MIT Press , 2014 . 37 . Rodriguez - Amat , R . J . , Brantner , C . , Space and Place matters : a tool for the analysis of geolocated and mapped protests , New Media and Society , 2014 , 1 - 20 . 38 . Sadler S . , The Situationist City , MIT Press , 1999 . 39 . Sanders , E . , B . , N . , Stappers , P . J . , Probes , Toolkits and Prototypes : Three Approaches to Making in Co - Design , CoDesign , 2014 , 10 ( 1 ) , 5 - 14 . 40 . Self , W . , Walking is Political , The Guardian , retrieved on 03 . 14 , http : / / goo . gl / X44Fbb 41 . Suchman , L . , Human Machine Reconfigurations Plans and Situated Actions , Cambridge University Press , 2000 42 . Wright , P . , McCarthy , J . , Experience - Centered Design : Designers , Users and Communities in Dialogue , Morgan and Claypool , 2010 . HCI for Civic Engagement CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2862