LANGUAGE AND COGNITIVE PROCESSES , 2003 , 18 ( 516 ) , 513 - 562 Situated simulation in the human conceptual system Lawrence W . Barsalou Emory University , Atlanta , GA , USA Four theories of the human conceptual system - semantic memory , exemplar models , feed - forward connectionist nets , and situated simulation theory - are characterised and contrasted on five dimensions : ( 1 ) architecture ( modular vs . non - modular ) , ( 2 ) representation ( amodal vs . modal ) , ( 3 ) abstraction ( decontextualised vs . situated ) , ( 4 ) stability ( stable vs . dynamical ) , and ( 5 ) organisation ( taxonomic vs . action - environment interface ) . Empirical evidence is then reviewed for the situated simulation theory , and the following conclusions are reached . Because the conceptual system shares mechanisms with perception and action , it is non - modular . As a result , conceptual representi : itions are multi - modal simulations distributed across modality - specific systems . A given simulation for a concept is situated , preparing an agent for situated action with a particular instance , in a particular setting . Because a concept delivers diverse simulations that prepare agents for action in many different situations , it is dynamical . Because the conceptual system ' s primary purpose is to support situated action , it becomes organised around the action - environment interface . After briefly reviewing current theories of the conceptual system , this article explores the proposal that situated simulations lie at the heart of it . The emphasis will be on empirical evidence for this view . For theoretical development , see Barsalou ( 1999 ) , Barsalou ( in press ) , and Simmons and Barsalou ( 2003b ) . Generally speaking , a conceptual system contains knowledge about the world . A fundamental property of this knowledge is its categorical nature . A conceptual system is not a collection of holistic images of the sort that a Requests for reprints should he addressed to Lawrence W . Barsalou , Department of Psychology , Emory University , Atlanta , GA 30322 , USA . E - mail : barsalou @ emory . edu . http : / / userwww . service . emory . edu / - harsalou / . I am grateful to James Hampton for the opportunity to write this paper . I am also grateful to James Hampton . Helen Moss , Art Glenberg , and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier draft . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grants SBR - 9421326 , SBR - 9796200 , SBR - 9905024 , and BCS - 0212134 to Lawrence W . Barsalou . © 2003 Psychology Press Ltd http : / / www . tandf . co . ukljournals / pp / O 1690965 . html DOI : 1 0 . 1080 / 0 1690960344000026 514 BARSALOU camera , video recorder , or audio recorder captures . Instead a conceptual system is a collection of category knowledge , where each represented category corresponds to a component of experience - not to an entire holistic experience . Whenever selective attention focuses consistently on some component ( or components ) of experience , knowledge of a category develops ( cf . Schyns , Goldstone , & Thibaut , 1998 ) . Each time a component is attended to , the information extracted becomes integrated with past information about the same component in memory . When attention focuses on a blue patch of colour , for example , the information extracted is stored with previous memories of blue , thereby producing categorical knowledge for this component . 1 Over time , myriad components accumulate memories in a similar manner , including objects , events , locations , times , introspective states , relations , roles , properties , and so forth . Certainly the learning that produces categorical knowledge occurs within a biologically constrained architecture and thus is biased towards learning some categories more easily than others . Furthermore some preliminary category representations are likely to be in place before learning begins . The relative contributions of learning and biology do not receive further discussion here , although their interaction is central to the development of conceptual systems . Categorical knowledge for components of experience plays fundamental roles in the cognitive system , providing representational support for all cognitive processes . Consider online processing . As people interact with the environment and attempt to achieve goals , the conceptual system contributes in three ways . First , it supports perception , predicting the entities and events likely to be perceived in a scene , thereby speeding their processing ( e . g . , Biederman , 1981 ; Palmer , 1975 ) . The conceptual system also helps construct perceptions through figure - ground segregation , anticipation , filling in , and other sorts of perceptual inferences ( e . g . , Peterson & Gibson , 1994 ; Reed & Vinson , 1996 ; Samuel , 1997 ; Shiffrar & Freyd , 1990 , 1993 ) . Second , the conceptual system supports categorisation . As entities and events are perceived , the conceptual system assigns them to categories . Third , once something has been assigned to a category , category knowledge provides rich inferences constituting expertise about the world . Rather than starting from scratch when interacting with something , agents benefit from knowledge of previous category members . Besides being central to online processing of the environment , the conceptual system is central to offiine processing in memory , language , and 1 Italics will be used to indicate concepts , and quotes will be used to indicate linguistic forms ( words , sentences ) . Thus , SKY indicates a concept , and " sky " indicates the corresponding word . Within concepts , uppercase words will represent categories , whereas lowercase words will represent properties of categories ( e . g . , SKY vs . / Jlue ) . SITUATED SIMULATION 515 thought . In each of these tasks , processing a non - present situation is often of primary importance , with perception of the current environment being suppressed to facilitate processing the imagined situation ( Glenberg , Schroeder , & Robertson , 1998 ) . In memory , a past situation is recon structed . In language , a past or future situation is represented , or even an impossible one . In thought , a past , future , or counter - factual situation is analysed to support decision making , problem solving , planning , and causal reasoning . In all three types of offtine processing , the conceptual system plays central roles . In memory , the conceptual system provides elaboration at encoding , organisational structure in storage , and reconstructive inference at retrieval . In language , the conceptual system contributes to the meanings of words , phrases , sentences , and texts , and to the inferences that go beyond them . In thought , the conceptual system provides representations of the objects and events that occupy reasoning . Finally the conceptual system plays a third central role in cognition . Besides supporting online and offtine processing , it supports the productive construction of novel concepts ( e . g . , Hampton , 1997 ; Rips , 1995 ; Wisniewski , 1997 ) . The conceptual system is not limited to representing entities and events that an agent has experienced in the world . Because the conceptual system establishes categorical knowledge about components of experience , it can combine these components in novel ways to represent things never encountered . Thus an agent can combine categorical knowledge for striped and WATERFALL to represent the novel category , STRIPED WATERFALL . Because of this ability , the conceptual system can categorise novel entities during online processing ( e . g . , a striped waterfall ) , and it can represent these novel entities offiine in language and thought . This powerful process allows humans to imagine non - present situations , thereby increasing their fitness in the evolutionary landscape ( cf . Donald , 1991 , 1993 ) . THEORIES OF THE CONCEPTUAL SYSTEM Theorists have proposed many accounts of the conceptual system . This section first sketches three types of theory that have dominated research for the last 30 years : semantic memory , exemplar models , and feed forward connectionist nets . In reviewing these theories , only their most standard forms are presented . For each theory , a wide variety of models exists , and an even wider variety is possible . Presenting the standard forms of these theories serves simply to illustrate the diversity of the theories possible . When relevant , important variants to standard forms are noted . Following these first three approaches , a fourth and relatively novel approach is presented : situated simulation theory . 516 BARSALOU To characterise and contrast these four approaches , they will be positioned on five dimensions that structure the space of possible theories . Certainly other dimensions are potentially relevant , but these particular five capture important differences between the four types of theory considered here . These dimensions are also useful in organising the literature review that follows . As Table 1 illustrates , these five dimensions are architecture , representation , abstraction , stability , and organisation . Their definitions will become clear as the four theoretical approaches are presented . Semantic memory Semantic memory is the classic theory of the conceptual system , arising from a proposed distinction between semantic and episodic memory ( Tulving , 1972 ) . Semantic memory models still dominate much theoretical thinking about the human conceptual system . Specific examples include the network models of Collins and Quillian ( 1969 ) , Collins and Loftus ( 1975 ) , and Glass and Holyoak ( 1975 ) . As Hollan ( 1975 ) notes , prototype and other feature set models ( e . g . , Reed , 1972 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) are roughly equivalent to their network counterparts , together forming a more general class of semantic memory models . For an extensive review of semantic memory models , see Smith ( 1978 ) . As Table 1 illustrates for architecture , semantic memory is widely viewed as modular , that is , as an autonomous system , separate from the episodic memory system and also from sensory - motor systems . Semantic memory does not share representation and processing mechanisms with these other modules , but is instead a relatively independent module with distinct characteristics . TABLE 1 Four theories of the human conceptual system and their properties Semantic Exemplar Feed - forward Situated simulation Dimension memory models nets theory Architecture Modular Modular Modular Non - Modular Representation A modal A modal A modal Modal Abstraction Decontextualised Situated Situated Situated Stability Stable Stable Dynamical Dynamical Organisation Taxonomic ( Taxonomic ) ( Taxonomic ) Action - Environment Interface Note . The most standard form of each theory is characterised in this table . As the text illustrates . many variants exist for each theory . For organisation . " taxonomic " in parentheses indicates that taxonomic structure is implicit in these theories , not explicit . SITUATED SIMULATION 517 One of these distinct characteristics is its representational format . As Table 1 illustrates , representations in semantic memory are widely viewed as amodal . Most basically , they are not the same as representations in sensory - motor systems . Instead they are redescriptions of sensory - motor representations into some new representation language that does not have sensory - motor qualities . Rather than being modality - specific , these representations are amodal , namely , arbitrary symbols that stand for sensory - . motor representations and for the environmental entities they represent . Represeritations in semantic memory are further viewed as relatively decontextualised , as the dimension for abstraction in Table 1 illustrates . In the typical theory , the representation of a category is a prototype or definition that distills relatively invariant properties from exemplars . Lost in the distillation are idiosyncratic properties of exemplars and background situations . Thus the representation of chair might be a decontextualised prototype that includes seat , back , and legs , with idiosyncratic properties and background situations filtered out . Although functional properties may be extracted and stored , they again are decontextualised invariants , not detailed information about specific situations . The resulting represen tation has the flavour of a detached encyclopedia description in a database of categorical knowledge that describes the world . Along with being decontextualised , semantic memory representations are typically viewed as relatively stable . For a given category , different people share roughly the same representation , and the same person uses the same representation on different occasions . Finally , semantic memory is widely viewed as organised taxonomically . Increasingly specific categories are nested in more general ones , with central sets of categories arising at the superordinate , basic , and subordinate levels of taxonomic hierarchies . Similarity plays a central role in establishing the inclusion relations that underlie these hierarchies , with similar categories at one level being nested in the same category at the next higher level . Background theories constrain the similarity computations that produce individual categories and clusters of categories ( e . g . , Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) . Exemplar models Beginning with Medin and Schaffer ' s ( 1978 ) context model , exemplar models have provided a strong competitor to semantic memory models . Many important variants of the basic exemplar model have been developed , including Nosofsky ( 1984 ) , Estes ( 1986 ) , Heit ( 1998 ) , and Lamberts ( 1998 ) . 518 BARSALOU Architecturally , exemplar models are generally modular in that exemplar knowledge is assumed to reside in memory stores outside sensory - motor systems . Those exemplar models , though , that view exemplar representations as implicit memories can be . construed as non modular , given that they use sensory - motor systems for storing exemplar memories ( e . g . , Brooks , 1978 ; Jacoby & Brooks , 1984 ) . According to these latter models , exemplars are perceptual 1nemories of encoded events , and can therefore be construed as residing in sensory - motor systems . Because the dominant exemplar models tend not to view exemplar memories this way , at least explicitly , they are coded as modular in Table 1 . To the extent that exemplar memories are stored outside sensory - motor systems , their representations are amodal , differing from sensory - motor representations . Similar to semantic memory models , redescriptions in an amodal language represent the content of exemplar memories , standing in for the sensory - motor properties experienced for them originally . Typically in these models , symbols represent the values of an exemplar on relevant sensory - motor dimensions . Again , though , exemplar models that view exemplars as implicit memories can be construed as having modal representations , where the representation of an exemplar is a reenactment of the sensory - motor state encoded for it ( e . g . , Roediger & McDermott , 1993 ) . Where exemplar models differ most from semantic memory models is on the dimension of abstraction . Whereas semantic memory models distill properties across exemplars and store them as abstractions , exemplar models simply store exemplar memories , which· can include much situational detail . Because exemplar models store situation - specific knowledge of category members , rather than abstracting across them , these models are coded as situated for the abstraction dimension in Table 1 . On the dimension of stability , exemplar models , like semantic memory models , are relatively stable . Most exemplar models assume that all exemplar memories for a category are accessed every time the category is processed . Although an exemplar set can be very large , its constant application across different occasions is relatively stable , with all exemplars being applied . Exemplar models that sample small subsets of exemplars , on the other hand , are dynamic ( e . g . , Barsalou , Huttenlocher , & Lamberts , 1998 ; Nosofsky & Palmeri , 1997 ) . Because such models arc relatively rare , exemplar models have been coded as stable in Table 1 . Exemplar models typically do not address the dimension of organisation in Table 1 . Nevertheless , exemplar models can be viewed as implicitly producing taxonomic organisation via the similarity mechanisms that control exemplar retrieval . Specifically , when a new exemplar is presented to an exemplar model , clusters of similar exemplars tend to become most active . When a new dog is presented , DOG exemplars tend to become the SITUATED SIMULATION 519 most active , and also MAMMAL and ANIMAL exemplars to lesser extents . In general , an exemplar memory becomes increasingly active as it shares properties with the new exemplar . The clusters that result from these activation gradients can be viewed as implementing implicit taxonomic organisation , where the implicit nature of this organization is indicated in Table 1 by parentheses around " taxonomic " . It is important to add , however , that theorists have not yet developed accounts of how exemplar models utilise this implicit structure to perform taxonomic reasoning ( Hampton , 1998 ) . Feed - forward connectionist nets Feed - forward nets constitute a relatively recent but increasingly influential theory of the conceptual system . For general accounts of these nets , see Rumelhart , Hinton , and Williams ( 1986 ) and Bechtel and Abrahamsen ( 2002 ) . For specific applications of the feed - forward architecture to representing conceptual knowledge , see Hinton ( 1989 ) , Kruschke ( 1992 ) , and Rumelhart and Todd ( 1993 ) . A variety of other connectionist formalisms have also been used to model the conceptual system , which are not covered here ( e . g . , Farah & McClelland , 1991 ; Gluck & Bower , 1988 ; McClelland & Rumelhart , 1985 ; Shanks , 1991 ) . Of primary interest here are the properties of feed - forward nets as an account of conceptual knowledge . Architecturally , feed - forward nets maintain a modular conceptual system . Whereas the input layer of a feed - forward net is typically interpreted as a perceptual system , its hidden layer is typically viewed as a conceptual system . Thus one " module " of units underlies perception , whereas a second underlies conception , thereby maintaining a modular distinction between the two . Complex interactions do indeed arise between these two systems , such that they are not modular in the sense of being impenetrable ( cf . Fodor , 1983 ; Pylyshyn , 1984 ) . Nevertheless different representational systems underlie perception and cognition , thereby maintaining modularity . As will be seen shortly , it is possible to formulate a conceptual system in which the same neural units represent information in both perception and conception . It is also worth noting that other connectionisl architectures operate this way as well . Thus modularity only applies to connectionist nets of the feed - forward variety , along with others that have separate pools of units for perception and conception . Because of this modular architecture , the internal representations in feed - forward nets are amodal . Prior to learning , connections between the input and hidden layers are set initially to small random values , making learning possible . As a result , a somewhat arbitrary mapping develops between the input and hidden layers , with conceptual representations I J , 520 BARSALOU being redescriptions of the perceptual representations . With each new set of weights , a different mapping develops . 2 The arbitrariness that results is much in the spirit of semantic memory representations . In both cases , conceptual representations on the hidden units differ from perceptual representations on the input units . Clearly details of ihe representations differ , with connectionist representations being statistical , and semantic memory representations being symbolic . Nevertheless both are amodal redescriptions of perceptual input at a more general level of . analysis . On the dimension of organisation , feed - forward nets implicitly organise categories around taxonomic similarity , as in exemplar models . To the extent that different exemplars share similar properties , the same hidden units represent them . As a result , taxonomic clusters develop attractors in the net ' s weight space to represent them implicitly ( e . g . , Rumelhart & Todd , 1993 ) . On presenting a new exemplar to a net , attractors for the closest taxonomic clusters - at multiple levels - are most likely to become active . Where feed - forward nets depart from semantic memory models is on abstraction and stability . Rather than establishing decontextualised representations of categories , feed - forward nets store situated representa tions in two senses . First , these nets store much idiosyncratic information about exemplars ( as in exemplar models ) , rather than discarding it during the abstraction of category invariants . Although invariants may be abstracted , much idiosyncratic information is maintained that plays central roles in processing . Second , feed - forward nets store background informa tion about the settings in which exemplars occur . Rather than extracting focal knowledge of a particular chair from a living room scene , much correlated information about the scene is stored as well ( e . g . , Rumelhart , Smolensky , McClelland , & Hinton , 1986 ) . As a result , activating an exemplar typically retrieves setting information , and vice versa . On the dimension of stability , the conceptual representations in feed forward nets are highly dynamical . Rather than representing a category with a stable representation , as in semantic memory and exemplar models , a connectionist net represents a category with a space of representations . Essentially a category ' s representation is an attractor within the possible activation states of the hidden units , with an infinite number of states around the attractor providing possible representations . On a given occasion , the representation activated is a function of the network ' s current state , input , and learning history . Thus a concept is a dynamical 2 Important invariants exist across the different mappings . Nevertheless many mappings are possible , with each being a redescription of the input . As we will see , it is possible to conceive of conceptual representations that are not redescriptions . SITUATED SIMULATION 521 system that produces a family of representational states , depending on current conditions . The situated simulation theory The view of the conceptual system advanced here differs from semantic memory on all five dimensions in Table 1 . First , the situated simulation theory is nonrmodular . Rather than having separate systems for sensory motor ·and conceptual processing , a common representational system underlies both . As described shortly , conceptual processing uses reenact ments of sensory - motor states - simulations - to represent categories . Although perception and conception are similar , they are not identical , given that bottom - up mechanisms dominate the activation of sensory motor systems during perception , whereas top - down mechanisms are more important during conception . Furthermore the representations activated in conception are partial reenactments of sensory - motor states , and may often exhibit bias and reconstructive error . Nevertheless perception and conception are far from being modular autonomous systems . As a result of this non - modular architecture , conceptual representations are modal , not amodal . The same types of representations underlie perception - and conception . When the conceptual system represents an object ' s visual properties , it uses representations in the visual system ; when it represents the actions performed on an object , it uses motor representations . The claim is not that modal reenactments constitute the sole form of conceptual representation . As described later , hidden unit representations , like those in feed - forward nets , may also play a role . The claim is simply that modal reenactments are an important and widely utilised form of representation . Turning to abstraction and stability , the situated simulation view assumes that conceptual representations are contextualised and dynamical . A concept is not a single abstracted representation for a category , but is instead a skill for constructing idiosyncratic representations tailored to the current needs of situated action . As described in more detail later , a concept is a simulator that constructs an infinite set of specific simulations ( Barsalou , 1999 ) . Thus the simulator for CAR can construct many simulations of different cars , from different perspectives , used for different purposes . In principle , a simulator can produce an infinite number of simulations , varying dynamically with the agent ' s current goal and situation . More than the focal category is represented in a given simulation . As discussed later , additional information about background settings , goal directed actions , and introspective states are also typically included in these sirllulations , making them highly contextualised . Furthermore , 522 BARSALOU because a simulator tailors simulations to current situations , a wide variety of simulations represents the category across different situations , not just one . The result is a conceptual system that is highly contextualised and dynamical , much like feed - forward nets , but with mo ~ al representations instead of amodal ones . Finally , the situated simulation view proposes that the conceptual system is organised around situated action , not around taxonomies . As described later , a fundamental problem in situated action . is mapping action effectively into the world , and an intriguing possibility is that the conceptual system develops to facilitate this mapping . In particular , ad hoc and goal - derived categories develop to bind roles in action with instantiations in the environment . As systems of these mappings develop , the conceptual system becomes organised around the action - environment interface . Classic taxonomies play a secondary role in organising sub domains of knowledge to support this interface . EVIDENCE FOR THE SITUATED SIMULATION THEORY The remainder of this article reviews evidence that situated simulation underlies the conceptual system . The review will be organised around the five dimensions in Table 1 . Because the dimensions of architecture and representation are tightly coupled , evidence showing that conceptual representations are non - modular and modal will be reviewed together in the next section . In the third section ( abstraction ) , findings will show that conceptual representations are contextualised to support situated action . In the fourth section ( stability ) , findings will show that the simulations serving situated action arise from dynamical systems . In the fifth section ( organisation ) , findings will suggest that the conceptual system becomes organised around the action - environment interface . Evidence for a modal non - modular conceptual system On the dimensions of architecture and representation , the issues are , first , whether the conceptual system is separate from sensory - motor systems , and second , whether it uses modal vs . amodal representations . At this point it is useful to define the construct of a sensory - motor state . First , such states can be defined as patterns of neural activation in a sensory - motor system . On seeing a chair , for example , its representation in the visual system is a pattern of neural activation along the ventral and dorsal streams . This way of thinking about sensory - motor states is well established and widely accepted ( e . g . , Palmer , 1999 ; Zeki , 1993 ) . Second , SITUATED SIMULATION 523 these states can be viewed as conscious mental experiences . Clearly , though , what becomes conscious is a relatively small subset of the unconscious processing taking place neurally . Furthermore various theoretical issues arise in discussing conscious experience that are tangential to those of interest here . For these two reasons , the remainder of this article focuses on the neural representation of sensory - motor states . The subsets of these states that achieve consciousness will be of secondary interest , although this is certainly an important issue . Viewing sensory - motor states as active patterns in modality - specific neural systems provides a means of distinguishing modular amodal views from non - modular modal views . According to modular amodal views , a conceptual representation is not a neural pattern in a sensory - motor system - the neural pattern that represents an entity during its perception is not active during its conceptualisation . Instead neural activation in some other brain system represents the object conceptually . Furthermore the neural representation in conception takes a different form than the one in perception , with the same form representing conceptual properties across different modalities . In contrast , non - modular modal views make a very different claim . When a category is represented conceptually , the neural systems that processed it during perception and action become active in much the same way as if a category member were present ( again , though , not identically ) . On conceptualising CAR , for example , the visual system might become partially active as if a car were present . Similarly the auditory system might reenact states associated with hearing a car , the motor system might reenact states associated with driving a car , and the limbic system might reenact emotional states associated with enjoying the experience of driving ( again all at the neural level ) . Thus a fairly large and significant difference exists between how the modular amodal and the non - modular modal views represent concepts . As a result , it would seem that much research in the literature would have addressed which is correct . Surprisingly little research has . Instead widespread acceptance of modular amodal views reflects theoretical considerations . As Barsalou ( 1999 ) conjectured , the rise of modular amodal systems reflected the development of logic , statistics , and computer science in the early twentieth century , and the later incorporation of these developments into the cognitive revolution . Because amodal representa tion languages have considerable expressive power , because they can be formalised , and because they can be implemented in technology , they captured the imagination of the field , took over theoretical thinking , and became widely practiced . Clearly , however , a strong empirical case should exist for such an assumption , even if it is useful theoretically . The next three sub - sections 524 BARSALOU review findings that question it . In the first , much research indicates that sensory - motor representations are widespread throughout cognition , and therefore should be likely in the conceptual system as well . The second sub - section reviews recent behavioural tests designed _ explicitly to assess whether categories are represented in modality - specific systems . The third sub - section reviews recent evidence from cognitive neuroscience that bears on this issue . Behavioural evidence for sensory - motor representations throughout cognition . In studying diverse forms of cognitive processing , researchers have obtained widespread evidence for sensory - motor representations . In some cases , demonstrating such representations was a goal . In most cases , though , researchers were addressing other hypotheses but nevertheless reported findings that can be interpreted post hoc as indicating the presence of sensory - motor representations . Indeed some of these researchers might not agree with this post hoc interpretation of their findings ! For this reason , direct a priori tests of this issue are critical , and the results of such tests will be reported in the next two sub - sections , after reviewing more general evidence here . In perception , fi11ing - in and anticipatory inferences suggest that sensory motor representations from the conceptual system enter fluently into perceptual processing . In the phoneme restoration effect , hearers simulate the experience of a phoneme - absent in the speech signal - using sensory motor knowledge about the word that contains it , and also about the speaker ' s voice ( e . g . , Warren , 1970 ) . Recently Samuel ( 1997 ) reported that these simulations activate early sensory systems , implicating sensory representations in these linguistic inferences . Similarly , in representational momentum , viewers simulate the visual trajectory of an object beyond the trajectory displayed physically ( e . g . , Freyd , 1987 ) , implicating visual knowledge in these inferences . Knowledge about whether a particular type of object moves quickly or slowly affects simulated trajectories , suggesting that object representations contain perceptual representations of motion ( e . g . , Reed & Vinson , 1996 ) . Visual inferences from knowledge about the body similarly influence perceived bodily motion , overriding the minimal transformation law of apparent motion ( e . g . , Shiffrar & Freyd , 1990 , 1993 ; Stevens , Fonlupt , Shiffrar , & Decety , 2000 ) . Perceivers fill in the blind spot with perceptual representations that underlie conceptual knowledge about object shape ( Ramachandran , 1992 , 1993 ) . Perceptual representations of objects also drive figure - ground segregation towards representations of known objects ( e . g . , Peterson & Gibson , 1994 ) . In all these cases , sensory - motor representations in conceptual knowledge appear to fuse with incoming sensory information to construct perceptions ( Hochberg , 1998 ) . SITUATED SIMULATION 525 Sensory - motor representations have been widely implicated in working memory , particularly in mental imagery . Considerable amounts of behavioural work indicate that mental imagery results from activating sensory - motor representations ( e . g . , Finke , 1989 ; Kosslyn , 1980 ; Shepard & Cooper , 1982 ) , as does much neural work ( e . g . , Farah , 2000 ; Kosslyn , 1994 ) . Sensory - motor representations are not only central in visual imagery , they are also central in motor imagery ( e . g . , Grezes & Decety , 2001 ; Jeannerod , 1995 , 1997 ; Deschaumes - Molinaro , Dittmar , & Vernet Maury , 1992 ; Parsons , 1987a , b ) and in auditory imagery ( e . g . , Zatorre , Halpern , Perry , Meyer , & Evans , 1996 ) . Sensory - motor representations are widely implicated in long - term memory . In the literature on mnemonic strategies , imagery and concrete ness effects implicate such representations ( e . g . , Paivio , 1986 ) . In the boundary extension effect , images of scenes appear responsible for extending a picture ' s memory beyond its boundary ( e . g . , Intraub , Gottes man , & Bills , 1998 ) . In verbal overshadowing , images activated via words appear responsible for distortions of studied pictures and other sensory motor experiences ( e . g . , Schooler , Fiori , & Brandimonte , 1997 ) . In haptic priming , images of motor movements prime memory ( e . g . , Klatzky , Pelligrino , McCloskey , & Dougherty , 1989 ) . In implicit memory , percep tual processing is essential for establishing robust implicit learning ( e . g . , Jacoby , 1983 ) , and also explains the narrow transfer gradients around it ( e . g . , Jacoby & Hayman , 1987 ) . Furthermore , imagining a stimulus produces about 60o / o of the priming produced by actually perceiving it , consistent with the presence of perceptual representations ( e . g . , Roediger & McDermott , 1993 ) . Finally , neural work has localized both implicit and explicit memory in sensory - motor systems ( e . g . , Buckner , Petersen , Ojemann , Miezin , Squire , & Raichle , 1995 ; Nyberg , Habib , Mcintosh , & Tulving , 2000 ; Wheeler , Petersen , & Buckner , 2000 ) . Glenberg ( 1997 ) reviews further findings that implicate sensory - motor representations in memory . Considerable evidence also exists for sensory - motor representations in language . In numerous experiments , Bower and Morrow ( 1990 ) found that mental models of text meaning have spatial qualities ( also see Glenberg , Meyer , & Lindem , 1987 ) . Much earlier work on comprehension inferences similarly suggested the presence of spatial representations ( e . g . , Bransford & Johnson , 1973 ) . Other research has shown that readers take spatial perspectives on scenes described in texts ( e . g . , Black , Turner , & Bower , 1979 ; Spivey , Tyler , Richardson , & Young , 2000 ) . Intraub and Hoffman ( 1992 ) showed that readers confuse pictures with texts , suggesting that they imaged the texts ' meanings . Gernsbacher , Varner , and Faust ( 1990 ) found that comprehension ability for pictured events correlated highly with com prehension ability for texts , suggesting that sensory - motor representations I ' I : 526 BARSALOU underlie both . Potter , Kroll , Yachzel , Carpenter , and Sherman ( 1986 ) showed that replacing words with pictures did not disrupt sentence processing , suggesting that the pictures were integrated effortlessly into a sensory - motor representation of the sentence ' s meaning ( also see Glaser , 1992 ) . Gibbs ( 1994 ) reviews findings suggesting that sensory - motor representations are central to the processing of metaphor ( also see Lakoff & Johnson , 1980 ) . Finally , sensory - motor representations have been implicated in various forms of thought . In decision making , Kahneman and Tversky ( 1982 ) suggested that people use a simulation heuristic to evaluate possible choices . In reasoning , Johnson - Laird ( 1983 ) and Fauconnier ( 1985 , 1997 ) argued that mental models underlie reasoning , where mental models can be viewed as sensory - motor representations . In causal reasoning , Ahn and Bailenson ( 1996 ) argued that imagining causal mechanisms is central to causal reasoning , where these imagined mechanisms could be implemen ted as simulations . Philosophers of science frequently note that scientific and mathematical discoveries arise from imagery ( e . g . , Barwise & Etchemendy , 1990 , 1991 ; Hadamard , 1949 ; Nersessian , 1999 ) . Similarly , researchers have argued that children and adults use mental models in basic arithmetic reasoning ( e . g . , Huttenlocher , Jordon , & Levine , 1994 ) . Together all of these findings implicate sensory - motor representations across the spectrum of cognitive processes , from perception to abstract thought . It thus seems quite likely that such representations would also occur in the conceptual system . Clearly , however , one must be cautious about post hoc interpretations of previous work , and applying them to the representation of concepts . Direct a priori assessments of sensory - motor representations in conceptual processing are obviously much more desirable . The next two sub - sections review such work . Direct behavioural assessments of modal vs . amodal representations For the past 10 years , my students and I have been designing experiments to assess whether perceptual simulations represent concepts ( see Barsalou , Solomon , & Wu , 1999 , for an early review ) . We have focused on two tasks that are widely believed to access conceptual knowledge : property generation and property verification . In property generation , a participant hears the word for a category ( e . g . , " chair " ) , and then verbally generates characteristic properties of the underlying concept out loud ( e . g . , " seat , legs , back , you sit on it " ) . In property verification , a participant reads the word for a category on a computer ( e . g . , " chair " ) , and then verifies whether a subsequently presented property is true or false of the category ( e . g . , " seat " vs . " faucet " ) . Whereas property generation is an active , production - oriented task extended over time , property verification is a more passive , recognition - oriented task under time pressure . SITUATED SIMULATION 527 Nearly all accounts of these tasks have assumed that participants access amodal representations to perform them ( e . g . , Collins & Quillian , 1969 ; Conrad , 1972 ; Kosslyn , 1976 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ; Smith , 1978 ) . When producing or verifying properties , participants consult semantic networks , feature lists , frames , etc . to produce the required information . In contrast , we hypothesized that participants simulate a category member to represent a category , and then consult the simulation to produce the requested information . In property generation , participants scan across the simula tion , and produce words for properties in its sub - regions . In property verification , participants evaluate whether the test property can be found in a sub - region of the simulation . Instructional equivalence . To assess these theoretical possibilities , we evaluated two types of evidence : instructional equivalence and perceptual work . To assess instructional equivalence , the performance of neutral participants was compared with the performance of imagery participants . Neutral participants received the standard task instructions used through out the literature . For property generation , they were asked to generate properties characteristic of each object concept . For property verification , they were asked to verify whether or not each property was true of the object . Imagery participants were explicitly asked to use imagery . For property generation , they were asked to image each object and then describe the image . For property verification , they were asked to image the object and only respond true once they found the property in the image . Much previous work in the imagery literature demonstrates that participants instructed to use imagery do so , and our experiments independently demonstrate this as well . Of primary interest for instructional equivalence is how the performance of the neutral and imagery participants compares . According to amodal views , these two groups should perform differently . Whereas neutral participants should use amodal representations , imagery participants should use sensory - motor representations ( or at least pretend to use them because of task demands ) . As a result , significant differences should occur between the two groups . Various amodal views make this prediction . On Pylyshyn ' s ( 1981 ) tacit knowledge view , subjects only have amodal knowledge , but know how to deploy it so that they appear to be using imagery . If this account is correct , then imagery instructions should induce the tacit knowledge that produces imagery - like performance , but the neutral instructions should not - neutral participants should spontaneously employ amodal representations in a non - imagery - like 1nanner . As a result , the two groups should perform differently . Similarly , views that postulate modal representations alongside amodal ones also tend to predict differences in performance . In Kosslyn ' s ( 1980 ) 11 : 1 : i ' I ! . [ , , : I 111 ; if l ' i l ' j II 1 ' I , , ' 528 BARSALOU original theory , imagery primarily arises when task demands induce participants to construct it in working memory . When participants can use amodal representations , they tend to fall back on them , because these representations can be deployed more rapidly and easily . As a result , imagery and neutral performance should differ . Kosslyn ( 1976 ) offers empirical evidence for this prediction . In contrast , the simulation view predicts that neutral and imagery participants should generally perform similarly . Neutral ·participants should spontaneously run the same sorts of simulations as imagery participants . Because they do not have amodal representations , they simulate categories to represent them , even when not asked explicitly to do so . As a result , neutral and imagery participants produce the same basic patterns of performance . 3 Findings from Wu and Barsalou ( 2003 ) support the simulation account . In Wu and Barsalou , the properties generated were coded into 37 property types , with the frequency of each type computed once for the neutral condition and once for the imagery condition . The 37 average frequencies for the neutral participants were then correlated with those for the imagery participants . Across three experiments , the correlations were . 99 , . 81 , and . 96 , after correcting for unreliability of the mean frequencies . This high agreement suggests that the neutral and imagery participants accessed the same sorts of representations as they produced properties , not different ones . One potential concern is that the critical result is a null effect . Thus it is important to show that instructional manipulations can change property distributions . For this reason , a third instructional condition was included in which participants generated associated words for each category name . When the frequency distributions for this condition were compared to the neutral and imagery conditions , the correlations were substantially lower . Clearly an instructional manipulation can change the distribution of properties . Of interest is that the imagery instructions did not change the distribution relative to the neutral condition . 4 3 An important caveat is that neutral participants will readily use word associations instead of simulations - to perform conceptual tasks , when task conditions allow this superficial fonn of processing . In several papers described shortly , this superficial pro1 . : essing was observed ( Kan et . al . , 2003 ; Solomon & Barsalou , 2003 ; Wu & Barsalou , 2003 ; for a review , see Glaser , 1992 ) . Most importanlly , however , when task conditions block superficial responding based on word associations , the conceptual processing enforced appears to consist of simulations , as findings in each paper indicate . 4 One difference that did occur was the imagery parti1 . : ipants produced more properties than neutral participants , consistent with the conclusion that imagery instructions induce participants to construct more detailed simulations than those constructed spontaneously by neutral participants . Again , though , the distributions of properties were virtually identical between the two groups , suggesting that both constructed the same type of representation . SITUATED SIMULATION 529 One might worry that participants use simulation in property generation because the task is production oriented , and because they have unlimited time to use all of their resources to represent categories . Perhaps such simulations would not occur in a recognition - oriented task under time pressure ( cf . Kosslyn , 1976 , 1980 ) . For this reason , we also assessed the presence of simulations in property verification ( Solomon & Barsalou , 2003 ) . To ass . ess instructional equivalence , the average verification time and error rate were first computed for each critical concept - property pair ( e . g . , CHAIR - seat ) . The data across 100 or more pairs in a given experiment were then regressed onto a large set of potential predictors , namely , various factors that we thought might predict RTs and errors . These predictors fell into three general groups : linguistic , perceptual , and expectancy . The linguistic predictors included the associative strength between the concept and property words in both directions , the word frequency of the properties , and their length . The perceptual predictors included the size and position of the properties , whether they were occluded , whether they would be handled during situated action , and so forth . The expectancy predictors assessed the polysemy of the property words ( i . e . , the typical property word takes many different senses across objects ; consider leg , handle , button , etc . ) . Of primary interest was that the regression equations for the neutral and imagery conditions were qualitatively the same - indeed in some analyses , they were quantitatively identical . The same pattern of predictors explained performance in both conditions . Generally speaking , perceptual variables were most important for both , followed by the expectancy variables , and then the linguistic variables . This finding in two experiments suggests that imagery and neutral participants used similar representations to perform the task . Neutral participants appeared to be using simulations , similar to imagery participants . 5 Thus the instructional equivalence found in property generation was not an artifact of the task being production oriented and having no time pressure ( i . e . , property listing ) . In a recognition - oriented task under time pressure ( i . e . , property verification ) , a similar result occurred . Again , the prediction of a null effect is tempered by the fact that in other conditions not described here , qualitatively different regression equations explained 5 One difference that did occur was the imagery par1icipants verified properties more slowly than neutral participants , consistent with the conclusion drawn for property generation that imagery instructions induce participants to construct more detailed simulations thlln those constructed spontaneously by neutral participants . Again , though , the regression equations were virtually identical between the two groups , suggesting that both constructed the same type of representation . 530 BARSALOU performance . Different strategies for performing the task are possible , yet imagery instructions did not change performance relative to the neutral condition . Perceptual effort . To further assess the presence of simulations in conceptual processing , we and other researchers have manipulated perceptual variables , such as occlusion , size , shape , orientation , and modality , analogous to previous work in mental imagery . If participants are constructing perceptual simulations to represent categories , then perceptual variables should affect task performance . In contrast , if participants are using amodal representations , it is much less obvious that such variables should have effects . Indeed no amodal theory has ever predicted that variables like size , orientation , and occlusion should affect conceptual processing . ~ u . and Barsalou ( 2003 ) manipulated occlusion by having half the part1c1pants generate properties for noun concepts ( e . g . , LAWN ) , and the othe ~ half generate properties for the same nouns preceded by revealing modifiers ( e . g . , ROLLED - UP LAWN ) . In perception , occluded properties do not receive much attention because they are hidden behind an object ' s surface . Thus we predicted that if people simulate LAWN to generate its properties , they should rarely produce its occluded properties , such as dirt and roots . In cont . rast , when pe . ople perceive a rolled - up lawn , its normally occluded properties become v1s1ble and more salient . Thus we predicted t ~ at when people prod ~ ce properties for ROLLED - UP LAWN , pre viously occluded properties would become salient in simulations and be produced more often . Amodal theories of conceptual combination do not readily make this prediction , given that they are relatively compositional in nature ( e . g . , Smith , Osherson , Rips , & Keane , 1988 ) . Unless additional post hoc assumptions are added that produce interactions between nouns and modifiers , the properties for LAWN are not obviously changed by ROLLED UP in these theories ( e . g . , the accessibility of dirt and roots does not vary ) . As predicted , the number of internal properties was higher when revealing modifiers were present than when they were not . Internal properties : were also produced earlier in the protocols and in larger clusters . This effect occurred not only for familiar noun combinations , such as HALF WATERMELON , but also for novel ones , such as GLASS CAR . Furthermore , the increase in occluded properties was not the result of rule ~ for Froperties sto ~ ed with the modifiers , given that a particular modifier did not always increase occluded properties ( e . g . , ROLLED - UP SNAKE ) . Occluded properties only increased when the modifiers referred to entities whose internal parts become unoccluded in the process of conceptual combination ( e . g . , ROLLED - UP LAWN ) . Together this SITUATED SIMULATION 531 pattern of results is consistent with the prediction that when a simu . lation reveals occluded properties , they are produced more often , relative to when they are occluded in a simulation . Turning to property verification , Solomon and Barsalou ( 2003 ) found that perceptual variables predicted performance for neutral participants better than did linguistic and expectancy variables . In particular , property size was the most important of the perceptual variables ( as measured by per cent . unique variance explained ) . As a prope ~ ty beca ~ e larg ~ r , it took longer to verify , presumably because a larger region of a s1mulat10 ~ had to be processed . Notably property size was the most central predictor of performance in a conceptual task with ling ~ istic materials and ~ o imagery instructions , after removing variance explained by all other vanables . Solomon and Barsalou ( 2001 ) similarly found that property shape was a critical factor in property verification . When participants verified a property on one trial , it facilitated verifying the same property later , but only if the detailed shape was similar . Thus verifying mane for PON1 : ~ as facilitated by previously verifying mane for HORSE but not by venfy1ng mane for LION . This effect was not the result of the greater overall similarity between HORSE and PONY than between HORSE and LI ? N When the similarity of a property between all three concepts was high , facilitation was the same . For example , verifying belly for PONY was facilitated as much by verifying belly for LION as by verifying belly for HORSE . Thus perceptual similarity of the property was the critical factor , not conceptual similarity . Zwaan , Stanfield , and Yaxley ( 2002 ) similarly reported that property shape affects conceptual processing , but during language comprehension . Participants read a short vignette about an object that implied one _ of several possible shapes . Whereas some participants read about a fly1 . ng bird others read about a sitting bird ( i . e . , the implied shape of the bud diff ~ red between the two vignettes ) . After reading the vignette , participants named a visually presented object ( shown in isolation , n ? t in a scene ) . When a bird was shown , sometimes it was flying , and ~ ther times sitting . As the simulation view predicts , participants named ob1ects faster when their shapes matched the implied shapes in the vignettes than when they did not . As participants read the vignettes , they simulated objects in the implied shapes . . . Stanfield and Zwaan ( 2001 ) similarly showed that onentatton affects conceptual processing during language comprehension . Participants read vignettes that imp ! ied objects in particular orientations . Whereas some participants read about pounding a nail into the wall , oth ~ ~ s read about pounding a nail into the floor . Immediately thereafter , parttc1 ~ ants s ~ w an isolated object and had to indicate whether it had been ment1 ~ ne ~ in ~ he vignette . Sometimes the orientation of an object matched its 1mphed ' II i I 532 BARSALOU orientation in the text , and sometimes it did not ( e . g . , a horizontal nail vs . a vertical one ) . verification was fastest when the orientations matched . Two other recent findings further support simulations in language comprehension ( Glenberg & Robertson , 2000 ; K ; aschak & Glenberg , 2000 ) . When participants read about a novel object performing a function , their comprehension of it was effortless , as long as the object ' s affordances produced the function . For example , when a character in a story needed a pillow , participants understood immediately that a sweater filled with leaves would work , but that a sweater filled with water would not . Similarly , in the context of hitting things with a baseball bat , " crutching an apple " to someone made perfect sense , even though it was a novel construction . According to these researchers , people understand such constructions by simulating the corresponding events and assessing the functional affordances in these simulations , much as they would assess them in actual perception . When affordances produce the critical function , comprehension occurs . Most importantly , it is difficult and cumbersome for amodal representation languages to compute these affordances . The fact that they arise so naturally in simulations further supports the presence of simulations in comprehension . . Finally , Pecher , Zeelenberg , and Barsalou ( 2003 ) have shown modahty switching effects in conceptual processing . Previous work in perception shows that detecting a signal on a modality suffers when the previous signal was on a different modality than on the same one ( e . g . , Spence , Nicholls , & Driver , 2000 ) . For example , verifying the presence of a light flash is faster when the previous signal was a light flash than when it was an auditory tone . Pecher et al . demonstrated a similar phenomenon in property verification using linguistic materials and no imagery instructions . When participants verified a conceptual property on one modality , processing was faster when the previous property came from the same modality as opposed to a different one . For example , verifying loud for BLENDER was faster when rustling was verified for LEAVES on the previous trial than when tart was verified for CRANBERRIES . Scaling of the materials found that properties drawn from the same modality were no more associated than the properties from different modalities . Furthermore , when highly associated properties were verified on contiguous trials , they were verified no faster than unassociated properties . Thus switching between modalities was responsible for the obtained effects , not associative strength . Evidence from cognitive neuroscience . As the previous two sections illustrate , a strong behavioural case is developing for simulations in the conceptual system . A strong neural case is developing as well in the lesion and neuroimaging literatures . In these latter areas , researchers have SITUATED SIMULATION 533 explored the hypotheses that categories are represented in sensory - motor areas of the brain , and have reported much evidence for it . In the lesion literature , researchers have reported that a lesion in a particular sensory - motor system increases the likelihood of losing categories that rely on that system for processing exemplars online . For example , damage to visual areas increases the chances of losing LWING THINGS , because visual processing is often the dominant modality when interacting with these entities ( e . g . , Damasio & Damasio , 1994 ; Gainotti , Silveri , Daniele , & Giustolisi , 1995 ; Humphreys & Forde , 2001 ; McRae & Cree , 2002 ; Warrington & Shallice , 1984 ) . Conversely , damage to motor areas increases the chances of losing MANIPULABLE ARTIFACTS such as TOOLS , because motor processing is often the dominant modality ( e . g . , Damasio & Damasio , 1994 ; Gainotti et al . , 1995 ; Humphreys & Forde , 2001 ; McRae & Cree , 2002 ; Warrington & McCarthy , 1987 ) . Similarly , damage to colour processing areas produces deficits in colour knowledge ( e . g . , DeRenzi & Spinnler , 1967 ; Damasio & Damasio , 1994 ) , and damage to spatial processing areas produces deficits in location knowledge ( e . g . , Levine , Warach , & Farah , 1985 ) . Controversy currently surrounds these findings , with some theorists stressing the importance of other factors besides damage to sensory - motor systems . For example , Caramazza and Shelton ( 1998 ) propose that localized brain areas represent specific categories that are evolutionarily important , such as ANIMALS . Tyler , Moss , Durrant - Peatfield , and Levy ( 2000 ) propose that the statistical distribution of property information determines the localization of categories and their vulnerability to lesion based deficits . Simmons and Barsalou ( 2003b ) argue that all these views are correct and propose a theory that integrates them . Following Damasio ( 1989 ) , Simmons and Barsalou propose that two levels of representation underlie conceptual knowledge . At one level , reenactments of sensory - motor states are central to representing categories . At a second level , statistical representations in association areas - much like those on the hidden layers of feed - forward nets - conjoin sensory - motor states into coherent repre sentations . Simmons and Barsalou argue that these conjunctive hidden units cluster spatially by similarity . For example , the hidden units that organise sensory - motor features for ANIMALS cluster spatially together , whereas the hidden units that organise sensory - motor features for ARTIFACTS cluster spatially elsewhere ( in a more distributed manner , due to lower within - category similarity ) . Such organisation implements the localised category representations important for Caramazza and Shelton , and also the statistical structure important for Tyler et al . Nevertheless the reenactment of sensory - 1notor states is also central . A primary function of statistical representations in association areas is to reactivate sensory - 534 BARSALOU motor states in feature maps so that information relevant to the current task can be extracted from these simulations . Most importantly , lesions at various levels of this system can produce the diverse forms of deficits found throughout the lesion literature . Whereas lesions in association areas can produce deficits for individual categories , lesions in feature maps can produce deficits across multiple categories that rely on them ( e . g . , McRae & Cree , 2002 ) . Depending on which mechanism of the simulation process is lesioned , different deficits resnlt . The neuroimaging literature offers further support for simulations in conceptual processing . Consistent with the lesion literature , different sensory - motor areas become active for different types of categories . When people process categories for which the visual modality is important ( e . g . , ANIMALS ) , visual areas become active ( e . g . , Martin , Ungerleider , & Haxby , 2000 ; Martin , Wiggs , Ungerleider , & Haxby , 1996 ; Perani , Schnur , Tettamanti , Gorno - Tempini , Cappa , & Fazio , 1999 ; Pulvermilller , 1999 ; Spitzer et al . , 1998 ) . Conversely , when people process categories for which the motor modality is important ( e . g . , TOOLS ) , motor areas become active ( e . g . , Martin , Haxby , Lalonde , Wiggs , & Ungerleider , 1995 ; Martin et al . , 2000 ; Martin et al . , 1996 ; Perani et al . , 1999 ; Pulvermiiller , 1999 ; Spitzer et al . , 1998 ) . Similarly , when people process colour , colour areas become active ( e . g . , Chao & Martin , 1999 ; R6sler , Heil , & Hennighausen , 1995 ; Martin et al . , 1995 ; Martin et al . , 2000 ) . Finally , when people process locations , spatial systems become active ( e . g . , R6sler et al . , 1995 ) . All these results are consistent with the conclusion that people simulate categories in sensory - motor systems . Notably , however , the sensory - motor areas identified by fMRI studies of conceptual processing are typically not identical to the primary sensory - motor areas active in actual perception and action . Instead , the two sets of areas are usually immediately adjacent within the same modality - specific system ( e . g . , both in the visual system ) . An important issue for future work is to provide greater insight into the specific roles that these two sets of areas play . For example , the areas active in conceptual processing could be feature maps common to both conception and sensory - motor processing , whereas the areas active only in sensory motor processing are used exclusively in bottom - up processing and execution . Alternatively , the areas active in conceptual processing could be the association areas described earlier thal conjoin sensory - motor features ( Damasio , 1989 ; Simmons & Barsalou , 2003b ) . Still another possibility is that these areas implement classic amodal symbols . Much further work of many types is necessary to resolve this issue . Single - cell recording studies may be particularly informative , especially on the question of whether associative neurons reactivate feature map neurons to produce simulations . SITUATED SIMULATION 535 Finally , neural support has accumulated for three lines of the behavioural work described earlier . Kan et al . ( 2003 ) repeated Solomon and Barsalou ' s ( 2003 ) property verification study in an fMRI scanner ( only using neutral subjects ) , and found activation in the fusiform gyrus , a visual area important in high - level object processing and imagery . Notably , when conditions of the experiment allowed participants to use word association instead of imagery , the fusiform was no longer active , indicating its role only when simulations were predicted to represent categories . Whereas superfici < il conceptual processing can effectively utilize word representa tions , deeper conceptual processing appears to trigger - and perhaps require - simulations ( also see Solomon & Barsalou , 2003 ; Wu & Barsalou , 2003 ) . Simmons , Pecher , Hamann , Zeelenberg , and Barsalou ( 2003 ) repeated the Pecher et al . ( 2003 ) modality - switching study in an fMRI scanner . In this particular version of the experiment , participants verified properties in blocks organised into six modalities : vision , audition , movement , touch , smell , and taste . For each modality , a profile of sensory - motor modalities became active , which corresponded to the profile of modalities that people reported experiencing subjectively for the respective concept - property pairs . Thus , processing these pairs engaged multi - modal sensory - motor processing . Finally Zwaan , Stanfield , Yaxley , and Scheffers ( 2001 ) measured ERPs in further studies on object shape . When an object ' s shape in a text and a picture mismatched , ERPs occurred that indicate visual mismatches further implicating visual representations in language processing . ' Theoretical issues . If one is convinced by the empirical case for simulation in the conceptual system , a problem arises . For decades , theorists have argued that perceptual representations do not have sufficient expressive power to represent conceptual knowledge ( e . g . , Pylyshyn , 1973 ) . Even if empirical evidence exists for simulations , it remains to be shown how they could implement a fully functional conceptual system . Barsalou ( 1999 ) offers an existence proof that a fully functional conceptual system could rest on sensory - motor simulations . In principle , such a system can distinguish types from tokens , produce categorical inferences , generate novel concepts productively in conceptual combina tion , represent the propositional hierarchies that underlie text comprehen sion , and represent abstract concepts . Clearly a computational implementation of such a theory must be developed , and considerable empirical evidence must be gathered for its specific mechanisms . In principle , though , it appears feasible , at least , that sensory - motor mechanisms could help implement the human conceptual system . ' I •I I ' 1 . . 1 I 11 , ! : Iii i ! ' ' . . ' I ' I ' I · . , I , I 1 536 BARSALOU Furthermore the following empirical conclusions appear warranted at this time . The conceptual system appears neither fully modular nor fully amodal . To the contrary , it is non - modular in sharing many important mechanisms with perception and action . Additiona ~ ly it traffics heavily in the modal representations that arise in sensory - motor systems . Evidence for situated simulations Two metaphors capture the opposing positions on the isslie of abstraction ( i . e . , Dimension 3 in Table 1 ) . At one extreme , the conceptual system is a detached database . As categories are encountered in the world , their invariant properties are extracted and stored in descriptions , much like an encyclopaedia . The result is a database of generalised categorical knowl edge that is relatively detached from the goals of specific agents . At the other extreme , the conceptual system is an agent - dependent instruction manual . According to this metaphor , knowledge of a category is not a general description of its members . Instead a concept is a skill that delivers highly specialised packages of inferences to guide an agent ' s interactions with specific category members in particular situations . Across different situations , different packages tailor inferences to different goals and situational constraints . According to this view , the information stored for a category is organised into situation - specific units , not into a general description . A package of situation - specific inferences will be referred to as a situated conceptualisation . Across different situations , a concept generates different conceptualisations , each designed to optimise one particular type of situated action with the respective category . A given situated conceptua lisation contains four types of information : ( 1 ) contextually - relevant properties of the focal category ; ( 2 ) information about the background setting , ( 3 ) likely actions that the agent could take to achieve an associated goal ; ( 4 ) likely introspective states that the agent might have while interacting with the category , such as evaluations , emotions , cognitive operations , etc . 0 Following the previous section , it will be assumed that these four types of inferences are delivered via neural simulations in the respective 6 An unaddressed issue is whether contextual information about settings , actions , and mental states resides within concepts proper or is associated to them externally . Alternatively no clear demarcation may exist between them , with one shading into the other . Resolution of this issue is not critical to the thesis here , which is simply that packages of correlated inferences are delivered to support situated action . regardless of where they originate . SITUATED SIMULATION 537 modality - specific areas . Specifically , contextually relevant object proper ties are simulated in the ventral stream , settings are simulated in parietal areas , actions are simulated in the motor system , and introspective states are simulated in areas that process emotion and reasoning . Together , simulations of these four inference types produce the experience of being there conceptually ( Barsalou , 2002 ) . When it becomes necessary to process a category , its concept delivers a situated conceptualisation that creates a multi - modal representation of what it would be like to process the category in that Situation . 7 The next four sub - sections review evidence that the conceptual system delivers situated conceptualisations , with each sub - section providing evidence for one type of situated inference : contextualised category representations , background settings , actions , and introspective states . Evidence for contextualised category representations . Much research across multiple literatures demonstrates that concepts do not produce the same representation over and over again across situations . Instead a concept produces one of many possible representations that is tailored to the current context . Barsalou ( 1982 ) provides a typical example of this finding . Participants read a sentence and then verified whether a subsequent property was true or false of the underlined subject noun . Between participants , the predicate of the sentence varied to manipulate the situation , as between : The basketball was used when the boat sank . The basketball was well worn from much use . As this example illustrates , the predicate in each sentence situates BASKETBALL in a different context . Immediately after reading one of these sentences , participants verified whether floats was true of BASKET BALL . When floats was relevant to the sinking situation in the first sentence , participants verified it faster than when it was irrelevant to the normal use situation in the second sentence . As participants read about the boat sinking , the concept for BASKETBALL produced relevant infer ences - it did not produce the same representation in both contexts . 7 1be phrase " being there conceptually " could be taken to mean that agents experience these contexts of action consciously . The sense of " being there conceptually " ' intended here is that neural systems ready themselves for perceptions and actions likely to be present while processing a category in the current situation . Clearly these neural systems may produce conscious states as they prepare themselves for situated action . Again , though , much more neural processing takes place than consciousness reveals , and the focus continues to be on the neural proceSsing that underlies consciousness . I 1 538 BARSALOU Many additional studies have reported similar results ( for a review , see Yeh & Barsalou , 2003 ) . In online studies of sentence processing , for example , context effects on lexical access are legion ( e . g . , Kellas , Paul , Martin , & Simpson , 1991 ; Tabossi , 1988 ) . Similarly in memory research , context effects on word encoding are widespread ( e . g . , Greenspan , 1986 ; Tulving & Thomson , 1973 ) . In category learning , background knowledge about a situation constrains the properties of objects salient in them ( e . g . , Murphy , 2000 ) . Evidence for setting inferences . When the conceptual system represents a category , it does not represent the category in isolation . Instead it typically situates the category in a background setting . Again much work supports this conclusion , as reviewed in Yeh and Barsalou ( 2003 ) . Consider an experiment by Vall6e - Tourangeau , Anthony , and Austin ( 1998 ) . Participants performed the instance generation task , namely , they received a category ( e . g . , FRUIT ) and produced instances of it ( e . g . , APPLE , KIWI , PEAR ) . Virtually all accounts of this task assume that participants generate instances from conceptual taxonomies . For FRUIT , participants might first produce instances from CITRUS FRUIT , then from TROPICAL FRUIT , then from WINTER FRUIT , and so on . In contrast , Vall6e - Tourangeau et al . ( 1998 ) conjectured that participants situate the category in a background setting , scan across the setting , and report the instances present . To produce FRUIT , for example , participants might imagine being in the produce section of their grocery store and report the instances found while scanning through it . To assess this possibility , Val16e - Tourangeau et al . ( 1998 ) first had participants produce the instances of common taxonomic categories ( e . g . , FRUIT ) and also of ad hoc categories ( e . g . , THINGS PEOPLE TAKE TO A WEDDING ) . After producing instances for all the categories , participants were asked how they produced instances for each category , indicating one of three possible strategies . First , if the instances came to mind automatically , participants indicated the unmediated strategy . Second , if the instances were retrieved in clusters from a taxonomy , participants indicated the semantic strategy . Third , if the instances were retrieved from a situation , participants indicated the experiential strategy . As Val16e - Tourangeau et al . predicted , searching situations was the dominant strategy for producing instances . Participants used the experi ential strategy 54° / o of the time , followed by the semantic strategy ( 29° / o ) and the unmediated strategy ( 17o / o ) . Surprisingly this pattern was the same for taxonomic and ad hoc categories . Because ad hoc categories arise in goal - directed events , it is not surprising that they would be associated with situations . Surprisingly , though , taxonomic categories were equally . , ' SITUATED SIMULATION 539 situated . Walker and Kintsch ( 1985 ) and Bucks ( 1998 ) report similar findings . The Wu and Barsalou ( 2003 ) experiments described earlier further demonstrate that categories are situated in background settings . Partici pants were explicitly asked to produce characteristics true of the target objects ( e . g . , WATERMELON ) . Nothing in the instructions requested or even implied the relevance of background settings . As Figure 1 shows , however , participants produced setting information regularly . Across four experinients , the percentage of setting information ranged from 19° / o to 35° / o , averaging 25 % . As participants simulated the target objects , they implicitly situated them in background settings , leading to the inadvertent production of many setting properties ( e . g . , park , picnic table , etc . for WATERMELON ) . Much evidence further demonstrates a tight coupling between object representations and situations ( as reviewed in Yeh & Barsalou , 2003 ) . For example , work on visual object processing shows that objects are strongly linked to background scenes ( e . g . , Biederman , 1981 ; Bar & Ullman , 1996 ; Intraub , Gottesman , & Bills , 1998 ; Mandler & Parker , 1976 ; Mandler & Stein , 1974 ; Murphy & Wisniewski , 1989 ) . When an isolated object is perceived , a background scene is typically inferred immediately . I• Experiment 1 • Experiment 2 D Experiment 3 D Experiment 41 80 70 60 - 50 c : Cll ( , ) 40 . . . Cll 30 II . 20 10 0 Category Object Settings Introspections Property type Figure 1 . Proportion of property types across the four experiments in Wu and Barsalou ( 2003 ) . Properties of the target objects were explicitly requested in the instructions to participants ( Object ) . However , participants also produced related taxonomic categories ( Category ) , ~ long with information about the background settings ( Settings ) and agents ' introspective states ( Introspections ) . I ! i I 540 BARSALOU Evidence for action inferences . Thus far we have seen that conceptual representations contain contextually relevant properties , and that they are situated in background settings . As the results in this next sub - section show , the conceptual system places agents squarely in these settings , producing inferences about the actions they could take on situated objects . Consider an fMRI experiment by Chao and Martin ( 2000 ) . As participants viewed pictures in the scanner , their task was to name them implicitly . Four types of pictures were presented : manipulable objects ( e . g . , HAMMER ) , dwellings , animals , and human faces . All participants were right - handed and lay motionless in the scanner . Nevertheless a circuit involving the motor system became active while participants perceived the manipulable objects . Notably this circuit did not become active for the other pictures . Furthermore it was only active in the left hemisphere , namely , the side that controls right - handed movements - again the participants were right handed . This finding suggests that on seeing a manipulable object , such as a hammer , the conceptual system generated appropriate motor inferences for handling it with the right hand . Even though the target task was visual categorisation , and even though participants were required to lie still in the scanner , their motor systems nevertheless implicitly generated movements for interacting with the manipulable objects . Presumably such inferences prepare agents for situated action . Consider a similar finding from Adolphs , Damasio , Tranel , Cooper , and Damasio ( 2000 ) . Again participants ' task solely involved visual processing , but this time the visual categorisation of facial expressions . On each trial , participants saw a face and had to indicate whether the expression was happy , sad , angry , etc . , with the correct response being defined as the dominant emotion categorisation across a large group of judges . Of interest lo Adolphs et al . were the brain areas that produce these categorisations . To assess this , they sampled from a registry of patients having lesions in different brain areas . If an area is important for categorising visual expressions of emotion , then lesions in the area should produce task deficits . The critical finding was that large deficits were found for patients with lesions in somatosensory cortex . Why would somatosen sory lesions produce deficits on a visual task ? Adolphs et al . argue that simulating facial expressions on one ' s own face is central to visually recognising expressions on other faces . When somatosensory cortex is damaged , such simulations become difficult , and facial categorisation suffers . Work in social cognition supports this conclusion . Wallbott ( 1991 ) videotaped participants ' faces as they visually categorised emotional expressions on other faces . Interestingly , participants regularly simulated the emotional expressions that they were categorising on their own faces . SITUATED SIMULATION 541 More importantly , when a participant correctly simulated the expression being categorised , their accuracy increased . Similarly Niedenthal , Brauer , Halberstadt , and Innes - Ker ( 2001 ) found that preventing participants from simulating expressions decreased their ability to categorise facial expres sions on others , relative to participants free to move their faces . Together all these findings illustrate that the motor and somatosensory systems become involved in the visual processing of faces . Such . simulations can be viewed as motor inferences produced by the conceptual system to support situated action . In many settings , if another person is experiencing an emotion , it is often useful for the perceiver to enter the same state . Thus , if another person is angry about something , it may be supportive to be angry as well . Social contagion similarly supports being jointly happy or jointly sad about a shared event . In these cases , once the concept for a particular emotion becomes active , appropriate motor and somatosensory states for entering into it follow . Other recent studies further support the importance of action inferences in high - level cognition . Smith , Thelen , Titzer , & McLin ( 1999 ) concluded that the motor system plays a central role in the A - not - B error ( i . e . , misremembering that an object is hidden at an earlier location rather than at its current one ) . Rather than being a purely cognitive phenomenon reflecting factors such as object permanence , this error results from the close coupling of the cognitive and motor systems . Perseverative reaches by the motor system to old locations interfere with spatial memory , when these actions are inconsistent with an object ' s current location . Glenberg and Kaschak ( 2002 ) similarly show that comprehending a sentence about a motor movement can interfere with the act of responding . For example , when participants used a forward hand move ment to indicate that sentences are coherent and not anomalous , they responded faster when the judged sentence described a forward movement than a backward one ( e . g . , " Close the drawer " vs . " Open the drawer " ) . Glenberg ( 1997 ) discusses other such findings . Finally , when participants perform motor actions while generating properties , the actions change conceptual simulations in predictable ways . In Barbey and Barsalou ( 2003 ) , participants believed that the experiment addressed the ability to perform factory operations while communicating with a supervisor . Following Wu and Barsalou ' s ( 2003 ) occlusion effect , Barbey and Barsalou ( 2003 ) had participants occasionally perform an action that would open up an object and reveal its internal properties ( e . g . , the motion of opening a drawer while producing properties for DRESSER ) . As predicted , participants produced more internal properties ( e . g . , socks and sweater for DRESSER ) when they performed revealing actions ( e . g . , opening a drawer ) than when they performed non - revealing actions ( e . g . , turning a wheel chair ' s wheels ) . Only a few participants had i ' I ' I , , I I 11 l : i I l I 542 BARSALOU an inkling of the hypothesis ( never a complete understanding ) , and the effect was no stronger for these participants than for the others . Furthermore , a control group was generally unable to label the actions correctly , and the probability of labelling actions correctly was unrelated to the production of action - related properties . Thus revealing actions appeared to produce object simulations that prepared participants for situated action . Simmons and Barsalou ( 2003a ) similarly show that motor actions affect visual categorisation . When an action is consistent with a visual object , the object is categorised faster than when the action is inconsistent ( e . g . , categorising a FAUCET while performing the motion of turning a faucet vs . turning a dial ) . Together all these results suggest a close coupling between the motor and conceptual systems . On the one hand , when people conceptualise a category , they infer relevant actions that they could take on it . On the other , when people perform an action , it influences the construction of conceptual representations . Barsalou , Niedenthal , Barbey , and Ruppert ( in press ) review many additional findings in social psychology that point to the same conclusion . Evidence for introspective state inferences . Not only do people infer possible actions that they could take on categories in background settings , they further infer introspective states likely to arise during these interactions . Again consider the Wu and Barsalou ( 2003 ) data in Figure 1 . As we saw earlier , participants produced many properties about background settings when the explicit instruction was to produce proper ties of target objects . Of interest here is the fact that participants also produced many properties about the likely introspective states of agents during situated action . These included evaluations of whether objects are good , bad , effective , etc . They also included emotional reactions to objects , such as happiness , along with other cognitive states and operations relevant to interacting with them ( e . g . , comparing an object to alternatives ) . On the average , lOo / o of the properties produced were about introspective states , ranging from 6° / o to 15° / o across experiments . As participants simulated the target objects , they situated them in background settings that included themselves as agents . Because these simulations of " being there " included introspective states , properties of these states entered the protocols . Perspective effects in various tasks further implicate introspective states in conceptual simulations . Spivey et al . ( 2000 ) had participants listen to a vignette while wearing an eye - tracking helmet ( which they believed was turned off at the time ) . Different participants heard different vignettes , where the critical variable was the implied perspective for viewing a scene . Some participants , for example , heard about the top t i ' - ~ : i ·ffe SITUATED SIMULATION 543 of a skyscraper , whereas others heard about the bottom of a canyon . As participants listened to their story , they tended to adopt the relevant perspective motorically . Participants hearing about the skyscraper top were most likely to look up , whereas participants hearing about the canyon bottom were most likely to look down . Participants adopted the relevant perspective on the situation , acting as if they were " there " . Other findings similarly show that the cognitive system produces the perspective of " being there " while comprehending language and retrievillg information from memory ( e . g . , Anderson & Pichert , 1978 ; Black et al . , 1979 ; Spivey & Geng , 2001 ) . Further work demonstrates the role of perspective in conceptual processing . Barsalou , Barbey , & Hase ( 2003 ) videotaped participants as they produced properties for object concepts . Occasionally the object was something that would typically be above a person ( e . g . , BIRD ) or on the ground ( e . g . , WORM ) . When participants produced properties for objects above them , their eyes , face , and hands were more likely to drift up than for objects below them , and vice versa . These findings suggest that participants simulated " being there " with the objects as they produced their properties . Finally Borghi and Barsalou ( 2003 ) found that participants typically generate properties from perspectives relevant to situated action . Thus participants tended to produce properties that would be experienced up close to an object and from its front , as if interacting with it . " Being there " conceptually . Results reviewed in the previous four sub - sections support the conclusion that the conceptual system is not a detached database of encyclopaedic knowledge . Instead the conceptual system is more like an agent - dependent instruction manual , tailoring conceptual representations to the current needs of situated action . Furthermore these situated conceptualisations take the form of simula tions that create the experience of " being there " with category members . These simulations include contextually relevant properties of the focal category , background information about the setting , inferences about likely actions , and inferences about likely introspective states . Together these packages of simulated inferences prepare agents for situated action . Evidence for dynamical simulations Rosch ( 1975 ) assessed the stability of typicality gradients and reported stabilities over . 90 . On the basis of such findings , many researchers concluded that stable prototypes represent concepts in semantic memory ( i . e . , Dirriension 4 in Table 1 ) . Different people share the same , , I ! ' ; I· ' : i , 1 I ' ' · ' I I : ! : ii : · . I ' \ I \ I ' I I ~ . 544 BARSALOU proto ~ ype , and the same individual uses the same prototype on different occasions . We have just seen , however , that the conceptual system tailors conceptualisations to specific situations . Thus it would appear that stable representations do not underlie concepts . Instead a concept produces many different conceptualisations , depending on current goals and constraints . How do we reconcile these findings with empirical reports of stability ? The measures that Rosch reported assessed the stability of mean typicality judgements . What she showed is that stable typicality judge ments can be obtained when enough participants contribute to average ratings ( i . e . , the central limit theorem ) . To assess agreement between individual participants , other measures of stability are required . Barsalou ( 1987 , 1989 , 1993 ) reported such measures , and they tell a very different story . For typicality judgements , the average correlation between pairs of participants averaged around . 40 across studies . Different participants appeared to use very different prototypes for judging typicality . Furthermore , the same participant appeared to use different prototypes on different occasions . When the same participant judged typicality again 2 weeks later , the average correlation with their earlier judgements was around . 80 , suggesting a modest change in how they represented the categories . One possibility is that variability in typicality judgements simply reflects noise . An unpublished study , however , obtained . 94 agreement between participants and . 98 agreement within participants when the task was to rank the same exemplars by physical weight instead of by typicality . Thus the ranking task is highly sensitive and relatively noise free when weight is judged . In typicality judgements , though , much larger variability results from different participants retrieving different information to represent a category . Additional findings also ruled out the intei ; pretations that atypical exemplars , stochastic sampling , and knowledge differences underlie this variability ( Barsalou , 1993 ) . Other tasks besides typicality judgement show similar variability in how people conceptualise categories . McCloskey and Glucksberg ( 1978 ) had participants assign basic level categories to supcrordinates in two sessions separated by a month . Roughly 25o / o of the basic level categories changed superordinate membership across the two sessions for natural kinds as well as for artifacts , indicating considerable variability in the criteria used to assign membership . Similarly Barsalou ( 1989 ) reported considerable variability in property generation . On average , two participants only produced 44o / o of the same properties for a given category . Across a 2 - week delay , the same participant only produced 66 % of the same properties in the two sessions . Together with the typicality and member - SITUATED SIMULATION 545 ship data , these findings suggest that stable representations do not underlie concepts . Instead Barsalou ( 1987 , 1989 , 1993 ) concluded that a concept is a dynamical system , which produces a wide variety of representational states , depending on current conditions . Smith and Samuelson ( 1997 ) reached a similar conclusion after reviewing similar findings from the conceptual development literature . In long - term memory , a tremendous amount of stored information underlies a concept . On a given occasion , only a small subset of this information is retrieved , namely , the information that is currently most accessible . Three factors dynamically determine the most accessible subset of a concept ' s content on a given occasion : frequency , recency , and context . As information is processed frequently for a category , it becomes better established in memory , and more accessible across contexts . If one person regularly experiences large dogs , whereas another regularly experiences small ones , large and small will become relatively more accessible for each individual , respectively . Similarly information processed recently for a category becomes temporarily elevated in accessibility , such that its inclusion in concepts increases during a brief temporal window . If a person was recently licked by a dog , licks becomes temporarily elevated for a limited time , and is more likely to be included in representations of DOG . Finally the current context affects the accessibility of conceptual information . As shown earlier , floats becomes more accessible for BASKETBALL in the context of needing a life preserver than in other contexts ( Barsalou , 1982 ) . Presumably , associations from the current context prime related properties in the knowledge for a concept , increasing their accessibility temporarily . As these examples illustrate , frequency , recency , and context together determine the category information most accessible for a particular conceptualiser in a particular context . From individual to individual , and from context to context , the information most accessible for a category fluctuates dynamically , producing conceptualisations that vary consider ably . Viewing conceptual variability from the perspective of situated ac tion . The earlier theme of situated action is consistent with the results on conceptual variability . According to the situated action view , a concept is not a general description used over and over again across situations . Instead a concept is an ability or skill to construct specific representations that support different courses of situated action . Because a concept produces . a wide variety of situated conceptualisations , substantial variability in its representation arises . Because different information about 546 BARSALOU a category is needed in different situations , different conceptualisations are constructed . Finally we saw earlier that a concept produces experiences of " being there " with a category . For this reason , Barsalou ( 1999 ) proposed that a concept is a simulator . Rather than being a detached database of category information , a simulator produces a wide variety of simulations tl : iat create the experience of " being there " in different contexts of situated action . Thus the simulator for CHAIR produces simulations of interacting with a living room chair , an office chair , a theatre chair , ajet chair , a ski - lift chair , and so forth . To create the experience of " being there " in each of these situations , the simulator produces situation - relevant information about the relevant chair , along with situation - relevant information about the setting , actions , and introspective states . As a person ' s expertise with a category develops , the ability to simulate the relevant contexts of situated action grows . The result is a dynamical system that supports skilled interaction with the category across contexts . Evidence for organisation around the action - environment interface The three previous sections have focused on the internal structure of individual concepts , addressing their representational format , situatedness , and dynamical character . This final section addresses the broader organisation of the conceptual system ( i . e . , Dimension 5 in Table 1 ) . Two metaphors capture the opposing positions on this dimension . At one extreme , people are intuitive taxonomists . Their goal ~ s to discover the categorical structure of the world , develop taxonomic systems that represent this structure , and establish background theories that frame these taxonomies . At the other extreme , people are goal achievers who organise knowledge to support situated action . On this view , the primary organisation of the conceptual system supports executing actions effectively in the environment , with taxonomic hierarchies constituting a secondary - level of organisation that supports this activity . Ad hoc and goal - derived categories . The presence of categories that arise specifically to achieve goals intimates the importance of goal achievement in organising the conceptual system . In particular , ad hoc categories , such as THINGS TO PACK IN A SUITCASE , are derived in the course of achieving specific goals ( e . g . , taking a trip ) . Over time , some of these categories become well established in memory , as when a frequent traveller packs the same things repeatedly in a suitcase ( e . g . , Barsalou & Ross , 1986 ) . Barsalou ( 1983 , 1985 , 1991 ) refers to this general class of SITUATED SIMULATION 547 categories as goal - derived categories , and to novel ones constructed online as ad hoc categories ( see Ross & Murphy , 1999 , for related work ) . Various properties of these categories indicate that they originate in situated action . Barsalou and Borghi ( in prep . ) collected protocols of participants talking about goal - directed events and found that for every action mentioned , there was a 75° / o chance of a goal - derived category being mentioned along with it . Thus these categories are ubiquitous in everyday cognitive processing of events . At a given moment in time , one is likely to find them operative . Barsalou ( 1983 ) demonstrated that ad hoc categories only become salient in the context of pursuing the goals they serve . For example , people have trouble seeing the category that CHAIR , WASTEBASKET , BOX , and ROCK fonn . When a story character has the problem of holding a door open on a hot windy day , however , the category THINGS TO HOLD A DOOR OPEN comes to mind immediately . Such context effects suggest that ad hoc categories are closely coupled with reasoning about goals . Barsalou ( 1985 ) reports that goal - derived categories are organised internally to optimise goal achievement . When the typicality gradients of these categories are assessed , ideals associated with goal - achievement underlie them . The members of a goal - derived category do not become more typical as they approach its prototypical ( average ) properties . Instead they become more typical as they approach ideal values . Thus members of THINGS TO PACK IN A SUITCASE do not become more typical as they approach average size and weight for the category ; instead they become more typical as they approach ideally small size and ideally light weight . The association of ideals with goal - derived categories further indicates their close coupling with goals . When achieving a goal , it is usually necessary to instantiate relevant goal - derived categories to implement a plan ( Barsalou , 1991 ) . When taking a trip , for example , it is necessary to instantiate THINGS TO PACK IN A SUITCASE . The association of ideals with these categories helps maximise goal achievement . By comparing possible instantiations to a category ' s ideals , an agent can find instantiations that will be optimally effective . For example , comparing THINGS TO PACK EN A SUITCASE with ideally small and light helps identify those instantiations that contribute to optimal travel . 8 Notably taxonomic categories are also associated with ideals , further showing that even these categories serve situated action . For example , the ideal of sweetness is associated with FRUIT , whereas the ideal of nutritiousness is associated with VEGETABLES ( Barsalou , 1985 ) . By 8 Although ideals are useful for optimising instantiations in planning , they aren ' t sufficient for determining category membership . Other properties must typically be considered as well . - ! ' l 548 BARSALOU selecting instantiations close to these ideals while eating , goals related to taste and diet are optimised . Additional research similarly demonstrates the centrality of ideals across a wide variety of conceptual domains ( e . g . , Borkenau , 1990 ; Chaplin , John , & Goldberg , 1988 ; Lehrer , 1992 ; Loken & Ward , 1990 ; Lynch , Coley , & Medin , 2000 ) . In summary , goal - derived categories arise during the process of achieving goals . They are mentioned frequently during goal - related events , they typically become salient during goal pursuit , and their internal representations optimise goals . The role of goal - derived categories in the cognitive system . One might think that goal - derived categories are merely a quaint curiosity of the conceptual system . Although interesting , they are relatively peripheral , with taxonomic categories constituting the core . Thus the question arises : What role do goal - derived categories play in the conceptual system ? To answer this question , it is instructive to consider standard models of problem solving and planning ( e . g . , Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . Perhaps by examining these models , the role of goal - derived categories in them can be ascertained . According to standard models of problem solving and planning , goal achievement has the following basic phases : ( 1 ) An agent selects a goal to pursue . ( 2 ) The agent selects a sequence of actions to achieve the goal . ( 3 ) The agent executes the action sequence in the environment . ( 4 ) The agent evaluates the outcome of the action sequence . If the outcome is satisfactory , goal pursuit ends ; if it is not , the agent iterates through Steps 1 , 2 , and 3 until the goal is achieved or abandoned . Where might goal - derived categories arise in this sequence ? One possibility is in Step 3 during the execution of action sequences in the environment . To implement an action sequence , it is necessary to solve the interface problem , that is , the problem of integrating action with the environment effectively ( see meshing in Glenberg , 1997 , for a similar construct ) . Consider shopping for groceries . To buy groceries successfully , it is necessary to interface the shopping sequence with the environment . The instantiation of roles in event sequences is central to this process ( Barsalou , 1991 ) . Roles in grocery shopping include STORES THAT SELL GROCERIES , TRANSPORTATION TO THE STORE , PAY MENTS THE STORE ACCEPTS , and STORE HOURS . To successfully achieve grocery shopping , it is necessary to map each of these roles into environmental instantiations appropriately ( e . g . , a particular store , transportation , payment , hours ) . When one of these roles is not instantiated successfully , the goal may fail . SITUATED SIMULATION 549 For highly routinised action sequences in familiar environments , the interface problem is not salient . Because mappings from roles to the environment have become well - established in memory , people integrate action with the environment effortlessly ( e . g . , in weekly grocery shopping ) . The interface problem becomes salient when knowledge of these mappings is absent , as while grocery shopping in a country very different from one ' s own . Under such conditions , the importance of mappings between roles in action and entities in the environment becomes apparent . Based on the above analysis of the interface problem , Barsalou ( 1991 ) concluded that goal - derived categories constitute the mappings between roles in event sequences and instantiations in the environment . Further ~ more , establishing these mappings is essential to achieving the four basic phases of problem solving and planning just described . In the absence of successful mappings , problem solving and planning fail . Goal - derived categories appear to be a fundamental component of goal - directed behaviour . Figure 2 illustrates this account within the framework of situated simulation theory ( see Barsalou , 1999 , for further discussion ) . lmagine having the goal of changing a burned - out light bulb on the ceiling . Panel B of Figure 2 illustrates the scene that the agent might see . Panel A represents the agent ' s simulated attempt to change the light bulb . After simulating a failed reach to the bulb while standing on the floor , the agent concludes that it is beyond reach . Thus the agent simulates something to stand on and tries again . Notably at this point , the agent may not simulate a particular thing to stand on , but only the idea of standing on a large sturdy object that resides in a schematic space - time region of the simulation . As Barsalou ( 1999 ) illustrates , simulations can contain schematic components that partially represent entities , not just detailed representations of them . One can imagine standing on a large sturdy object without knowing exactly what it is - one simply knows that it can be stepped onto safely and extend one ' s reach significantly . Once the agent has simulated standing on something to reach the bulb , the environment is searched for possible instantiations of the schematic region . As the mapping between Panels A and B illustrates , several objects in the scene might seem likely to work , based on running them as instantiations in the simulation ( i . e . , the stool , chair , and table ) . Once this mapping from the schematic role to the environment has been established , it creates an ad hoc category , namely , THINGS THAT COULD BE STOOD ON TO CHANGE THE L / GHTBULB . Broadly speaking , the account just provided could underlie ad hoc and goal - derived categories in general . By and large , these categories can be viewed as mapping a space - time region in a simulated action sequence to a set of poSsible instantiations in the environment . Panel C of Figure 2 550 BARSALOU A W - ·O - . . B , ' / s . [ iJ [ ] ~ · l ! I , E - m ' Figure 2 . Accounting for the ad hoc categories of THINGS THAT COULD BE STOOD ON TO CHANGE A LIGHTBULB ( A ) and THINGS THAT COULD BE USED TO HOLD A DOOR OPEN ( C ) , which construe common entities in the same scene differently ( B ) . From Barsalou ( 1999 ) , with permission from Cambridge University Press . illustrates another example , namely , THINGS THAT COULD BE USED TO HOLD THE DOOR OPEN . Furthermore , many of these mappings are so conventionalized that simple lexemes name them ( Barsalou , 1991 ) . For BUY , the lexemes " seller " , " buyer ' ' , " merchandise " , and " payment " name roles in the verb ' s meaning for AGENT , PATIENT , THEME , and INSTRUMENT , respectively . Each of these roles can be viewed as a space - time region in a simulation that maps into possible instantiations in the environment . Lexemes similarly name mappings for many other common verbs , projecting from their associated roles to goal - derived categories ( e . g . , FOOD and UTENSIL for EAI ) . To the extent that this account is correct , it suggests that the action environment interface is central to the conceptual system . Most notably , it SITUATED SIMULATION 551 suggests that an important class of categories arises at this interface . Categories do not simply arise from discovering structure in the environment , as is typically assumed for common taxonomic categories . Instead a central class of categories arises from binding space - time regions in simulated action sequences with instantiations in the environment . Without this sort of conceptual structure , people could not achieve goals effectively . Orgaiiisation around the action - environment interface . If important categories originate at the action - environment interface , it suggests a larger organisation of the conceptual system ( Barsalou , 1991 ) . Rather than being organized around taxonomic categories , the conceptual system may be organised around this interface , with taxonomic categories playing a supporting role . On this view , the three most basic domains of the conceptual system represent action , the environment , and the mapping between them . Each of these domains is addressed briefly in turn . The domain of action represents conceptual knowledge about how to achieve goals . Included in this domain is knowledge about particular goals , the action sequences used to achieve them , and the roles within these action sequences . Classic theories of scripts and frames provide pre liminary accounts of what this knowledge might look like ( e . g . , Schank & Abelson , 1977 ) . The domain of the environment contains two important kinds of information . First , it contains knowledge of specific settings that an agent knows , such as homes , work environments , neighbourhood environments , and so forth . A given person has a world model that represents the settings he or she has experienced . Surprisingly little work has addressed such knowledge , with most related work addressing either route finding in cognitive maps or generic concepts for settings ( e . g . , Tversky & Hemen way , 1983 ) . Much more work seems necessary to explore how people represent the specific physical settings that they experience regularly in their respective worlds ( cf . Minsky , 1977 ) . Second , conceptual knowledge of the environment contains classic taxonomies . To represent specific settings in one ' s environment , it is useful to have knowledge about the particular kinds of things encountered in them . As one enters a new office , for example , knowledge of CHAIRS and TABLES is retrieved to recognise and interact with new category members , and to establish representations of them in knowledge for the specific setting . In a sense , common taxonomies are like palettes in object oriented drawing programs : They provide a tool for creating tokens of known categories in the representation of new settings . On this account , taxonomic categories play a secondary role in supporting the action environment interface . 552 BARSALOU Finally , the third knowledge domain is the system of mappings between the first two . As agents increasingly solve the interface problem , they establish goal - derived categories that link roles in action sequences with instantiations in the environment . The result is a much more complicated system of relations than shown in Figure 2 . In Figure 2 , direct mappings link roles directly to instantiations . In actuality , deep hierarchies of mappings appear to mediate action and the environment . In Barsalou ( 1991 ) , participants often described subcategories of mappings between a role and its instantiations ( also see Barsalou & Borghi , in prep . ) . Consider PAYMENTS . This role in BUY does not map directly into the concrete forms of payment available to an agent . Instead it first maps into subcategories such as CASH , CHECKS , CREDIT CARDS , LOANS , etc . In tum , each of these may map into more specific subcategories , such as CREDIT CARDS breaking down into CREDIT CARDS WITH AVAILABLE BALANCE and CREDIT CARDS WITH LOW INTEREST RATES . Eventually this taxonomy maps into particular instances in the environment . As expertise with achieving an action sequence develops , extensive systems of mappings like these grow to support it , thereby constituting a third basic domain of the conceptual system . CONCLUSIONS Three general conclusions follow from the work reviewed here . First , the conceptual system develops to serve situated action . At the broad level of organisation , an important class of categories arises to streamline the action - environment interface . During goal pursuit , goal - derived categories provide mappings from roles in action sequences to instantiations in the environment . At the level of individual categories , simulators produce situated conceptualisations that support goal achievement . Each concep tualisation is a package of inferences that specifies contextually relevant properties of the focal category , information about a likely background setting , possible actions that an agent could take , and likely introspective states that might arise . Together these inferences produce the experience of " being there " with a category member , preparing an agent for situated action in a particular context . Second , these situated conceptualisations are delivered via multimodal simulations . Whereas inferences about objects are delivered via sensory systems , inferences about actions are delivered via motor and somatosen sory systems . Similarly inferences about introspective states are delivered via limbic and frontal areas that process emotion and thought . Rather than arising in a modular and amodal conceptual system , these representations arise as simulations or partial reenactments in modality - specific brain SITUATED SIMULATION 553 areas . As a result , each type of inference is represented in a different representation language native to its modality - a single representation language does not redescribe them all amodally . Third , a concept is a dynamical system . A given simulator can construct an indefinitely large number of specific simulations to represent the respective category . Rather than a concept being a fixed representa tion , it is a skill for tailoring representations to the constraints of situated action . Because the same category can take different forms , be encountered in a variety of settings , and serve many goals , a fixed representation would not be optimal . No single representation could possibly serve all of these different situations well . A much better solution arises from having a simulator tailor conceptualisations to particular situations . Clearly many open questions remain . Empirically the literature reviewed earlier is certainly not the final say on the matter . Nevertheless , these findings are sufficiently compelling to indicate that the situated simulation view should be entertained seriously . Theoretically a host of issues arises in explaining how situated simulations achieve important conceptual functions , such as productivity , propositions , and abstract concepts . Although Barsalou ( 1999 ) and Barsalou ( in press ) present preliminary solutions , further development is clearly necessary , as well as empirical support . Again , though , these proposals offer hypotheses of the conceptual system that seem sufficiently plausible to be entertained seriously . Furthermore this approach offers solutions to problems that have been relatively intractable for amodal views . As Barsalou ( 1999 ) notes , simulations provide a powerful interface between cognition and percep tion . Not only does this provide a solution to the symbol grounding problem ( Searle , 1980 ) , it explains how conceptual representations can be brought to bear so effortlessly on perception , and how the two can be fused together so easily . This approach also offers a natural account of how the human conceptual system could have evolved from earlier species . It is easy to imagine non - humans having a similar representational system that evolved into ours , whereas it is much harder to imagine how an amodal system could have evolved uniquely for humans . As many theorists have suggested , the major change in humans was a linguistic system that provided powerful control over the same basic sort of conceptual system found in earlier species . Another outstanding question is whether amodal theories can account for the sorts of findings reviewed in this paper . In principle , they probably can , given their expressive power . As Barsalou ( 1999 ) notes , however , these explanations are typically provided post hoc within a framework that is unfalsifiable . Thus these accounts should be viewed cautiously . 11 I [ 554 BARSALOU Ultimately , the issue boils down to a priori evidence . Empirically and theoretically , what a priori cases can be made for these differing views ? The matter is clearly far from being settled at this time . Nevertheless , one ' s view of the conceptual system affects how one thinks about the rest of cognition . It is difficult , if not impossible , to think about the cognitive system without committing to a particular theory of concepts . As we saw at the outset , representations in the conceptual system underlie all forms of cognitive activity , including high - level perception , working memory , long - term memory , language , and thought . One ' s view of the conceptual system affects theorising about all these other activities . As Barsalou ( 1999 , Section 4 ) shows , viewing conceptual representations as simulations provides a novel view of basic cognitive processes . As recent research further indicates , entertaining the possibility of simulation stimulates new hypotheses that future research can explore . At a minimum , the situated simulation theory has the potential to provoke thinking and research on the nature of the human conceptua ( l system , as the field evolves towards increasingly sophisticated theories . REFERENCES Adolphs , R . , Damasio , H . , Trane ! , D . , Cooper , G . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 2000 ) . A role for somatosensory cortices in the visual recognition of emotion as revealed by three dimensional lesion mapping . Journal of Neuroscience , 20 , 2683 - 2690 . Ahn , W . , & Bailenson , J . ( 1996 ) . Cansa ! attribution as a search for underlying mechanisms : An explanation of the conjuction fallacy and the discounting principle . Cognitive Psychology , 31 , 82 - 123 . Anderson , R . C . , & Pichert , J . W . ( 1978 ) . Recall of previously unreca ! lable information following a shift in perspective . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 17 , 1 - 12 . Bar , M . , & Ullman , S . ( 1996 ) . Spatial context in recognition . Perception , 25 , 343 - 352 . Barbey , A . K . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . Actions interact with conceptual representations during property generation . Manuscript in preparation . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1982 ) . Context " independent and context - dependent information in concepts . Memory and Cognition , 10 , 82 - 93 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory and Cognition , 11 , 211 - 227 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1985 ) . Ideals , central tendency , and frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded structure in categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 629 - - 654 . B ; nsa ! ou , L . W . { 1987 ) . The instability of graded structure : Implications for the nature of concepts . ln U . Neisser ( Ed . ) , Concepts and conceptual development : Ecological and intellectual factors in categorization { pp . 101 - 140 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1989 ) . lntraconcept similarity and its implications for interconcept similarity . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 76 - 121 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Barsalou , L . W . { 1991 ) . Deriving categories to achieve goals . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : Advances in research and theory ( Vol . 27 , pp . 1 - 64 ) . I SITUATED SIMULATION 555 San Diego , CA : Academic Press . [ Reprinted in A . Ram & D . Leake ( Eds . ) , Goal - driven learning ( 1995 , pp . 121 - 176 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press / Bradford Books . ] Barsalou , L . W . ( 1993 ) . Structure , flexibility , and linguistic vagary in concepts : Manifestations of a compositional system of perceptual symbols . In A . C . Collins , S . E . Gathercole , & M . A . Conway ( Eds . ) , Theories of memory ( pp . 29 - 101 ) . Hove , UK : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Ltd . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 - 660 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 2002 ) . Being there conceptually : Simulating categories in preparation for situated action . In N . L . Stein , P . J . Bauer , & M . Rabinowitz ( Eds . ) , Representation , memory , and development : Essays in honor of Jean Mandler ( pp . 1 - 16 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Barsalou , L . W . ( in press ) . Abstraction as dynamic construal in perceptual symbol systems . In L . Gershkoff - Stowe & D . Rakison ( Eds . ) , Building object categories . [ Carnegie Symposium Series . ] Majwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Barsalou , L . W . , & Barbey , A . K . , & Hase , S . ( 2003 ) . Spontaneous body movements during property generation for concepts . Manuscript in preparation . Barsalou , L . W . , & Borghi , A . { 2003 ) . The MEW theory of knowledge : Evidence from concepts for settings , events , and situations . Manuscript in preparation . Barsalou , L . W . , Huttenlocher , J . , & Lamberts , K . ( 1998 ) . Basing categorization on individuals and events . Cognitive Psychology , 36 , 203 - 272 . Barsalou , L . W . , Niedenthal , P . M . , Barbey , A . K . , & Ruppert , J . K . ( in press ) . Social embodiment . in B . H . Ross ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation { Vol . 43 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Barsalou , L . W . , & Ross , B . H . ( 1986 ) . The roles of automatic and strategic processing in sensitivity to superordinate and property frequency . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 116 - 134 . Barsalou , L . W . , Solomon , K . O . , & Wu , L . L . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks . In M . K . Hiraga , C . Sinha , & S . Wilcox ( Eds . ) , Cultural , typological , and psychological perspective ~ · in cognitive / inguistir . : s : The proceedings of the 4th conference of the International Cognitive Linguistics Association ( Vol . 3 , pp . 209 - 228 ) . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Barwise , J . , & Etchemendy , J . ( 1990 ) . Information , infons , and inference . In R . Cooper , K . Mukai , & J . Perry ( Eds . ) , Situation theory and its applications ( pp . 33 - 78 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Barwise , J . , & Etchcmendy , J . ( 1991 ) . Visual information and valid reasoning . In W . Zimmerman & S . Cunningham ( Eds . ) , Visualization in mathematics ( pp . 9 - 24 ) . Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America . Bechtel , W . , & Abrahamsen , A . ( 2002 ) . Connectionism and lhe mind : Parallel processing , dynamics , and evolution in networks . Cambridge , MA : Basil Blackwell . Biederman , I . ( 1981 ) . On the semantics of a glance at a scene . In M . Kubovy & J . R . Pomerantz ( Eds . ) , Perceptual organization ( pp . 213 - 253 ) . Hi ! lsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Black , J . B . , Turner , T . J . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1979 ) . Point of view in narrative comprehension , memory , and production . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 18 , 187 - 198 . Borghi , A . M . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . Perspective in the conceptualization of categories . Manuscript in preparation . Borkeneau , P . ( 1990 ) . Traits as ideal - based and goal - derived social categories . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 , 381 - 396 . Bower , G . H : , & Morrow , D . G . ( 1990 ) . Mental models in narrative comprehension . Science , 247 , 44 - 48 ' T I 1 556 BARSALOU Bransford , J . D . , & Johnson , M . K . ( 1973 ) . Considerations of some problems of comprehen sion . In W . G . Chase ( Ed . ) , Visual information processing . New York : Academic Press . Brooks , L . R . ( 1978 } . Nonanalytic concept formation and memory for instances . In E . Rosch & B . B . Lloyd { Eds . ) , Cognition and categorization ( pp . 169 - 211 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Buckner , R . L . , Petersen , S . E . , Ojemann , J . G . , Miezin , F . M . , Squire , L . R . , & Raichle , M . E . ( 1995 ) . Functional anatomical studies of explicit and implicit memory retrieval tasks . Journal of Neuroscience , 15 , 12 - 29 . Bucks , R . S . ( 1998 ) . Intrusion errors in Alzheimer ' s disease . Doctoral dissertation , University of Bristol . · Carnmazza , A . , & Shelton , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Domain - specific knowledge systems in the brain : The animate - inanimate distinction . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , JO , 1 - 34 . Chao , LL , & Martin , A . ( 1999 ) . Cortical regions associated with perceiving , naming , and knowing about colors . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 11 , 25 - 35 . Chao LL , & Martin A . ( 2000 ) . Representation of manipulable man - made objects in the dorsal stream . Neuroimage , 12 , 478 - 84 . Chaplin , W . G . , John , O . P . , & Goldberg , LR . ( l988 ) . Conceptions of states and traits : Dimensional attributes with ideals as prototypes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 541 - 557 . Collins , A . M . , & Loftus , E . F . ( 1975 ) . A spreading activation theory of semantic processing . Psychological Review , 82 , 407 - - 428 . Collins , A . M . , & Quillian , M . R . ( 1969 ) . Retrieval time from semantic memory . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 8 , 240 - 248 . Conrad , C . ( 1972 ) . Cognitive economy in semantic memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 92 , 149 - 154 . Damasio , A . R . ( 1989 ) . Time - locked multiregional retroactivation : A systems - level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition . Cognition , 33 , 25 - - 62 . Damasio , A . R . , & Damasio , H . ( 1994 ) . Cortical systems for retrieval of concrete knowledge : The convergence zone framework . In C . Koch & J . L . Davis ( Eds . ) , Large - scale neuronal theories of the brain ( pp . 61 - 74 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . DeRenzi , E . , & Spinnler , H . ( 1 % 7 ) . Impaired performance on color tasks in patients with hemispheric lesions . Cortex , 3 , 194 - - 217 . Deschaumes - Molinaro , C . , Dittmar , A . , & Vernet - Maury , E . ( 1992 ) . Autonomic nervous system response patterns correlate with mental imagery . Physiology and BehaYior , 51 , 1021 - 1027 . Donald , M . ( 1991 ) . Origins of the modern mind : Three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Donald , M . ( 1993 ) . Precis of " Origins of the modern mind : Three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition " . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 16 , 739 - 791 . Estes , W . K . ( 1986 ) . Array models for category learning . Cognitive Psychology , 18 , 500 - - 549 . Farah , M . J . ( 2000 ) . The neural bases of mental imagery . In M . S . Gazzaniga ( Ed . ) , The cognitive neurosciences ( 2nd edn . , pp . 965 - 974 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Farah , M . J . , & McClelland , J . L . ( 1991 ) . A computational model of semantic memory impairment : Modality specificity and emergent category specificity . Journal of E . Xperi mental Psychology : General , 120 , 339 - 357 . Fauconnier , G . ( 1985 ) . Mental jpaces . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fauconnier , G . ( 1997 ) Mappings in thought and language . New York : Cambridge University Press . Finke , R . A . ( 1989 ) . Principles of mental imagery . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fodor , J . A . { 1983 ) . The modularity of mind : An essay on faculty psychology . Cambridge , MA : Bradford Books , MIT Press . SITUATED SIMULATION 557 Freyd , J . J . { 1987 ) . Dynamic mental representations . Psychological Review , 94 , 427 - 438 . Gainotti , G . , Silveri , M . C . , Daniele , A . , & Giustolisi , L . ( 1995 ) . Neuroanatomical correlates of category - specific semantic disorders : A critical survey . Memory , 3 , 247 - 264 , Gernsbacher , M . A . , Varner , K . R . , & Faust , M . E . ( 1990 ) . Investigating differences in general comprehension ski ! L Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , und Cognition , 16 , 430 - - 445 . Gibbs , R . W . , Jr . ( 1994 ) . The poetics of mind : Figurative thought , language , and understanding . New York : Cambridge University Press . Glass , A . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1975 ) . Alternative conceptions of semantic memory . Cognition , 3 , 313 - 339 . Glaser , W . R . ( 1992 ) . Picture naming . Cognition , 42 , 61 - 105 . Glenberg , A . M . ( 1997 } . What memory is for . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 20 , 1 - 55 . Glenberg , A . M . , & Kaschak , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Grounding language in action . Psychonomir Bulletin & Review , 9 , 558 - 569 . Glen berg , A . M . , Meyer , M . , & Lindem , K . ( 1987 ) . Mental models contribute to foregrounding during text comprehension . Journal of Memory and Language , 26 , 69 - 83 . Glen berg , A . M . , & Robertson , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Symbol grounding and meaning : A comparison of high - dimensional and embodied theories of meaning . Journal of Memory and Language , 43 , 379 - - 401 . Gienbcrg , A . M . , Schroeder , J . L . , & Robertson , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Averting the gaze disengages the environment and facilitates remembering . Memory and Cognition , 26 , 651 - - 658 . Gluck , M . A . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1988 ) . Evaluating an adaptive network model of human learning . Journal of Memory and Language , 27 , 166 - - 195 . Greenspan , S . L . ( 1986 ) . Semantic flexibility and referential specificity of concrete nouns . Journal of Memory and Language , 25 , 539 - 557 . Grezes , J . , & Decety , J . ( 2001 } . Functional anatomy of execution , mental simulation , observation , and verb generation of actions : A meta - analysis . Human Brain Mapping , 12 , 1 - 19 . Hadamard , J . ( 1949 ) . The psychology of invention in the mathematical field . New York : Dover Books . Hampton , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Conceptual combination . In K . Lamberts & D . Shanks ( Eds . ) , Knowledge , concepts , and categories . ( pp . 133 - 159 ) . Hove , UK : Psychology Press . Hampton , J . A . ( 1998 ) . The role of exemplar models in the representation of natural language concepts . Talk presented at a Workshop on Exemplar Models of Category Knowledge , University of Lcuven , Belgium , May . Heit , E . { 1998 ) . Influences of prior knowledge on selective weighting of category members . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 , 712 - 731 . Hinton , G . E . ( 1989 ) . Leaming distributed representations of concepts . In R . G . M . Morris ( Ed . ) , Parallel distribwed processing : Jmplicutions for psychology and neurobiology ( pp . 46 - 61 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Hochberg . J . ( Ed . ) ( 1998 ) . Perception and cognition al century ' s end : Handbook of perception and cognition ( 2nd edn . ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Hollan , J . D . ( 1975 ) . Features and semantic memory : Set - theoretic or network model ? Psychological Review , 82 , 154 - - 155 . Humphreys , G . W . , & Forde , E . M . E . ( 2001 ) . Hierarchies , similarity , and interactivity in object recognition : " Category - specific " neuropsychological deficits . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 24 , 453 - 509 . Huttenlocher , J . , Jordon , N . C . , & Levine , S . C . ( 1994 ) . A mental model for early arithmetic . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 123 , 284 - 296 . ' J ! I 558 BARSALOU Intraub , H . , Gottesman , C . V . , & Bil ! s , A . J . ( 1998 ) . Effects of perceiving and Imagining scenes on memory for pictures . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 , 186 - - 201 . Intraub , H . , & Hoffman , J . E . ( 1992 ) . Reading and visual memory : Remembering scenes that were never seen . American Journal of Psychology , 105 , 101 - 114 . Jacoby , L . ( 1983 ) . Remembering the data : Analyzing interactive processes in reading . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22 , 485 - 508 . Jacoby , LL . , & Brooks , LR . ( 1984 ) . Nonanalytic cognition : Memory , perception , and concept learning . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation : Advances in research and theory ( Vol . 18 , pp . l - - 47 ) . New York : Academic Press . · Jacoby , LL . , & Hayman , C . A . G . ( 1987 ) . Specific visual transfer in word identification . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 13 , 456 - - 463 . Jeannerod , M . ( 1995 ) . Mental imagery in the motor context . Neuropsychologia , 33 , 1419 - 1432 . Jeannerod , M . ( 1997 } . The cogni1ive neuroscience of action . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental models . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1982 } . The simulation heuristic . In D . Kahneman , P . Slovic , & A . Tversky ( Eds . ) , Judgmenl under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases ( pp . 201 - 210 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Kan , LP . , Barsalou , L . W . , Solomon , K . O . , Minor , J . K . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Role of mental imagery in a property verification task : fMRI evidence for perceptual representations of conceptual knowledge . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 20 , 525 - 540 . Kaschak , M . P . , & Glenberg , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Constructing meaning : The role of affordances and grammatical constructions in sentence comprehension . Journal of Memory and Language , 43 , 508 - 529 . Kellas , G . , Paul , S . T . , Martin , M . , & Simpson , G . B . ( 1991 ) . Contextual feature activation and meaning access . In G . B . Simpson ( Ed . ) , Understanding word and sentence . New York : Elsevier . Klatzky , R . L . , Pelligrino , J . W . , McCloskey , B . P . , & Doherty , S . ( 1989 ) . The role of motor representations in semantic sensibility judgments . Journal of Memory and Language , 28 , 56 - 77 . Kosslyn , S . M . ( 1976 ) . Can imagery be distinguished from other fonns of internal representation ' ! Evidence from studies of information retrieval time . Memory and Cognition , 4 , 291 - 297 . Kosslyn , S . M . ( 1980 ) . Image and mind . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Kosslyn , S . M . ( 1994 ) . Image and brain . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kruschke , J . K . ( 1992 ) . ALCOVE : An exemplar - based connectionist model of category learning . Psychological Review , 99 , 22 - - 44 . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lamberts , K . ( 1998 ) . The lime course of categorization . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 24 , 695 - 711 . Lehrer , A . ( 1992 ) . Names and naming : A frame approach . In A . Lehrer & E . Kittay ( Eds . ) , Frames , fields , and contrasts : New essays in semantic and lexical organization ( pp . 123 - 142 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Levine , D . N . , Warach , J . , & Farah , M . J . ( 1985 ) . Two visual systems in menal imagery : Dissociation of " What " and " Where " in imagery disorders due to bilaterial posterior cerebral lesions . Neurology , 35 , 1010 . . . 1018 . Loken , B . , & Ward , J . ( 1990 ) . Alternative approaches to understanding lhe determinants of typicality . Journal of Consumer Research , 17 , 111 - 126 . Lynch , E . B . , Coley , J . D . , & Medin , D . L . ( 2000 } . Tall is typical : Central tendency , ideal dimensions , and graded category structure among tree experts and novices . Memory and Cognition , 28 . 41 - 50 . SITUATED SIMULATION 559 Mandler , J . M . , & Parker , R . E . ( 1976 ) . Memory for descriptive and spatial information in complex pictures . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human , Learning , and Memory , 2 , 38 - 48 . Mandler , J . M . , & Stein , N . ( 1974 ) . Recall and recognition of pictures by children as a function of organization and distractor similarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 102 , 657 - 669 . Martin , A . , Haxby , J . V . , Lalonde , F . M . , Wiggs , C . L . , & Ungerleider , L . G . ( 1995 ) . Discrete cortical regions associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of action . Science , 270 , 102 - 105 . Martin , A . , Ungerleider , L . G . , & Haxby , J . V . ( 2000 ) . Category - specificity and the brain : The sensory - motor model of semantic representations of objects . In M . S . Gazzaniga ( Ed . ) , The new cognitive neurosciences ( 2nd edn . , pp . 1023 - 1036 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Martin , A . , Wiggs , C . L . , Ungerleider , L . G . , & Haxby , J . V . ( 1996 ) . Neural correlates of category - specific knowledge . Nature , 379 , 649 - 652 . McOelland , J . L . , & Rumethart , D . E . ( 1985 ) . Distributed memory and the representation of general and specific information . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 114 , 159 - 188 . McCloskey , M . , & Glucksberg , S . ( 1978 ) . Natural categories : Well - defined or fuzzy sets ? Memory and Cognition , 6 , 462 - - 472 . McRae , K . , & Cree , G . S . ( 2002 ) . Factors underlying category - specific deficits . In E . M . E . Forde & G . W . Humphreys ( Eds . ) , Category specificity in mind and brain ( pp . 211 - 249 ) . Hove , UK : Psychology Press . Medin , D . L . , & Schaffer , M . ( 1978 ) . A context theory of classification learning . Psychological Review , 85 , 207 - 238 . Minsky , M . L . ( 1977 ) . A framework for representing knowledge . In P . H . Winston ( Ed . ) , The psychology of computer vision ( pp . 211 - 277 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Murphy , G . L . ( 2000 ) . Explanatory concepts . In R . A . Wilson & F . C . Keil ( Eds . ) , Explanation and cognition ( pp . 361 - 392 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in conceptual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 - 316 . Murphy , G . L . , & Wisniewski , E . ( 1989 ) . Categorizing objects in isolation and in scenes : What a superordinate is good for . Journal of Experimental Psychology , Learning , Memory and Cognition , 15 , 572 - 586 . Nersessian , N . J . ( 1999 ) . Model - based reasoning in conceptual change . In Magnani , L . , Nersessian , N . J . , & Thagard , P . ( Eds . ) Model - based reasoning in scientific discovery . New York : Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers . Newel ! , A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Nicdenthat , P . M . , Brauer , M . , Halberstadt , J . B . , & Innes - Ker , A . H . ( 2001 ) . When did her smile drop ? Facial mimicry and the influences of emotional state on the detection of change in emotional expression . Cognition and Emotion , 15 , 853 - - 864 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1984 ) . Choice , similarity , and the context theory of classification . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , JO , 104 - 114 . Nosofsky , R . M . , & Palmeri , T . J . ( 1997 ) . An exemplar - based random walk . model of speeded classification . Psychological Review , 104 , 266 - 300 . Nyberg , L . , Habib , R . , Mcintosh , A . R . , & Tulving , E . ( 2000 ) . Reactivation of encoding related brain activity during memory retrieval . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 97 , 11120 - 11124 . Paivio , A . ( 1 _ 986 ) . Mental representations : A dual coding approach . New York : Oxford University Press . 560 BARSALOU Palmer , S . E . ( 1975 ) . Tue effects of contextual scenes on the identification of objects . Memory and Cognition , J , 519 - 526 . Palmer , S . E . ( 1999 ) . Vision science : Photons to phenomenology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Parsons , L . M . ( 1987a ) . Imagined spatial transformations of one ' s body . Journal of £xperimMial P . 1·ychology : General , 116 , J 72 - 19 ! . Parsons , L . M . ( 1987b ) . Imagined spatial transformations of one ' s hands and feet . Cognitive Piyclwlogy , 19 , 178 - 241 . pec ] ler , D , Zeelenberg , R . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . Verifying different - modality properties forconreptsproduces switching costs . Psychological Science , 14 , 119 - 124 . Perani , D . . Schnur , T . , Tettamanti , M . , Gorno - Tempini , M . , Cappa , S . F . ; & Fazio , F . ( 1999 ) . Word and picture matching : A PET study of semantic category effects . Neuropsychologia , . 17 , 293 - 306 . Petersoo , MA , & Gibson , B . S . ( 1994 ) . Must figure - ground organization precede object recognition ? Psychological Science , 5 , 253 - 259 . rotter , M . C . , Kroll , J . F . . Yachzel , B . , Carpenter , E . , & Sherman , J . ( 1986 ) . Pictures in sentences : Undt : rstanding without words . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , / 15 , 281 - 294 . Pulvcrmiiller , F . ( 1999 ) . Words in the brain ' s language . Behavioral and Brain Sciem : es , 22 , Z5 } 3J6 . Pylyshyn . Z . W . ( 1973 ) ~ What the mind ' s eye tells the mind ' s brain : A critique of mental imagery . Psychological Bulletin , 80 , 1 - 24 . Pylyshyn . Z W . ( 1981 ) . The imagery debate : Analogue media vs . tacit knowledge . Psydwlogical Review , 88 , 16 - - 45 . rytysJiyn . ZW . ( 1984 ) . Computation and cognition . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ramachandran , V . S . ( 1992 ) . Filling in gaps in perception : Part 1 . Current Direcrions in Psychological Science , 1 , 199 - 205 . Ram ~ chandran , V . S . ( 1993 ) . Filling in gaps in perception : Part II : Scotomas and phantom limb ~ Current Directions in Psychological Science , 2 , 56 - - 65 . Re < ! d , C . L , & Vinson , N . G . ( 1996 ) . Conceptual effects on representational momentum . } Olil / ! lllof Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 22 , 839 - - 850 . Rced , S . K . ( Jg72 ) . Pattern recognition and categorization . Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 382 - 407 . Rips , L . J . ( 19g5 ) . The current status of research on concept combination . Mind and Language , JG . n - 104 . Roerliger , H . L III & McDermott , K . B . ( 1993 ) . Implicit memory in normal human subjects . In F . Boller & J . Grafman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of neuropsychology ( Vol . 8 , pp . 63 - 131 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . RosdJ , E . ( 1975 ) . Cognitive representation of semantic categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 192 - 233 . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . B . ( 1975 ) . Family resemblances : Studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 573 - - - 605 . Rtillcr , F . , Heil , M . , & Hennighausen , E . ( 1995 ) . Distinct cortical activation patterns during lo ! IJl·lellll memory retrieval of verbal , spatial , and color information . Journal of Cognitive N1t1rtJ $ cience , 7 , 51 - 65 . RIJS . ' i , H . H . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1999 ) . Food for thought : Cross - classification and category organization in a complex real - world domain . Cognitive P . 1ychology , 38 , 495 - 553 . Rumelharl , D . E . , Hinlon , G . E . , & Williams , R . J . ( 1986 ) . Learning internal representations by error propagation . In D . E . Rumelhart , J . L . McClelland , & the PDP Research Group , Pura / le / dfalrifmted processing . Explorations in the micro . wructure of cognition , Vol . I : Foiwlariom , ( pp . 318 - 362 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rumclharl , D . E . . Smolensky , P . , McClelland , J . L . , & Hinton , G . E . ( 1986 ) . Schemata and itiluentisl thought prol : esses in PDP models . In J . L . McClelland , J . L . & D . E . Rumelhart , SITUATED SIMULATION 561 D . E . , and the PDP Research Group ( 1986 ) , Parallel distributed processing . Explorations in the microstnlcture of cognition : Vol . 2 . Psychological and biological models ( pp . 7 - 57 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rumelhart , D . E . , & Todd , P . M . { 1993 ) . Learning and connectionist representations . In D . E . Meyer & S . Kornblum ( Eds . ) , Attention and performance 14 : Synergies in experimental psychology , artificial intelligence , and cognitive neuroscience ( pp . 3 - 30 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Samuel , A . G . ( 1997 ) . Lexical activation produces potent phonemic percepts . Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 97 - 127 . Schank , R . C . , & Abelson , R . P . ( 1977 ) . Scripts , plans , goals , and understanding : An inquiry into human knowledge structures . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Schooler , J . W . , Fiore , S . M . , & Brandimonte , M . A . ( 1997 ) . At loss from words : Verbal overshadowing of perceptual memories . The Psychology of Lecirning and Motivation , 37 , 291 - 340 . Schyns , P . G . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Thibaut , J . P . ( 1998 ) . The development of features in object concepts . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 1 - 54 . Searle , J . R . ( 1980 ) . Minds , brains , and programs . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 3 , 417 - 424 . Shanks , D . R . ( 1991 ) . Categorization by a connectionist network . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 17 , 433 - 443 . Shepard , R . N . , & Cooper , L . A . ( 1982 ) . Mental images and their transformations . New York : Cambridge University Press . Shiffrar , M . , & Freyd , J . J . ( 1990 ) . Apparent motion of the human body . Psychological Science , 4 , 257 - 264 . Shiffrar , M . , & Freyd , J . J . ( 1993 ) . Timing and apparent motion path choice with human body photographs . Psychological Science , 6 . 379 - 384 . Simmons , W . K . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003a ) . Consistent actions . 1peed visual object categorization . Manuscript in preparation . Simmons , W . K . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003b ) . The similarity - in - topography principle : Reconciling theories of conceptual deficits . Cognilive Neuropsychology , 20 , 451 - 486 . Simmons , W . K , Pecher , D . , Hamann , S . B , Zeelenberg , R . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . fMRI evidence for modality - specific processing in six modalities . Manuscript in preparation . Smith , E . E . ( 1978 ) . Theories of semantic memory . In W . K . Estes ( Ed . ) . Handbook of learning and cognitive processes ( Vol . 6 , pp . 1 - 56 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Smith , E . E . , Osherson , D . N . , Rips , L . J . , & Keane , M . ( 1988 ) . Combining prototypes : A selective modification model . Cognitive Science , 12 , 485 - 528 . Smith , L . B . & Samuelson , L . K . ( 1997 ) . Perceiving and remembering : Category stability , variability and development . In Lamberts , K . & Shanks , D . R . ( Ed ) . Knowledge , concepts and categories . ( pp . 161 - 195 ) . Hove , UK : Psychology Press . Smith , L . B . , Thelen , E . . Titzer , R . , & McLin , D . ( l 999 ) . Knowing in the context of acting : The task dynamics of the A - not - B error . Psychological Review , 106 , 235 - 260 . Solomon , K . 0 . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2001 ) . Representing properties locally . Cogni1ive Psychology , 43 , 129 - 169 . Solomon , K . O . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . Perceptual . 1·imulation in property verification . Manuscript submitted for puhlication . Spence , C . . Nicholls , M . E . R . , & Driver , J . ( 2000 ) . The cost of expecting events in the wrong sensory modality . Pen·eption and Psychophysics , 63 , 330 - 336 . Spitzer , M . , Kischka , U . , Giickel , F . , Bellemann , M . E . , Kammer , T . , Seyyedi , S . , Weisbrod , M . , Schwartz , A . , & Brix , G . ( 1998 ) . Functional magnetic resonance imaging of category specific cor ~ il : al activation : Evidence for semantil : maps . Cognitive Brain Research , n , 309 - 319 . 562 BARSALOU Spivey , M . , & Geng , J . ( 2001 ) . Oculomotor mechanisms activated by imagery and memory : Eye movements to absent objects . Psychological Research , 65 , 235 - 241 . Spivey , M . , Tyler , M . , Richardson , D . , & Young , E . ( 2000 ) . Eye movements during comprehension of spoken scene descriptions . Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the CognitiYe Science Society ( pp . 487 - 492 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Stanfield , R . A . , & Zwaan , R . A . ( 2001 ) . The effect of implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture recognition . Psychological Science , 12 , 153 - - - 156 . Stevens , J . A . , Fonlupt , P . , Shiffrar , M . , & Decety , J . ( 2000 ) . New aspects of motion perception : Selective neural encoding of apparent human moven : ients . NeuroReport , 11 , 109 - 115 . Tabossi , P . ( 1988 ) . Effects of context on the immediate interpretation of unambiguous nouns . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 14 , 153 - 162 . Tulving , E . ( 1972 ) . Episodic and semantic memory . In E . Tulving & W . Donaldson ( Eds . ) , Organization and memory ( pp . 381 - 403 ) . New York : Academic Press . Tulving , E . , & Thomson , D . M . ( 1973 ) . Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory . Psychological Review , BO , 352 - 313 . Tversky , B . , & Hemenway , K . ( 1983 ) . Categories of environmental scenes . CognitiYe Psychology , 15 , 121 - 149 . Tyler , L . K . , Moss , H . B . , Durrant - Peatfield , M . R . , & Levy , J . P . ( 2000 ) . Conceptual structure and the structure of concepts : A distributed account of category - specific deficits . Brain and Language , 75 , 195 - 231 . Va116e - Tourangeau , F . , Anthony , S . H . , & Austin , N . G . ( 1998 ) . Strategies for generating multiple instances of common and ad hoc categories . Memory , 6 , 555 - 592 . Walker , W . H . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1985 ) . Automatic and strategic aspects of knowledge retrieval Cognitive Science , 9 , 261 - 283 . Wallbott , H . G . ( 1991 ) . Recognition of emotion from facial expression via imitation ? Some indirect evidence for an old theory . British Journal of Social Psychology , 30 , 207 - 219 . Warren , R . M . ( 1970 ) . Perceptual restoration of missing speech sounds . Science , 167 , 392 - 393 . Warrington , E . K . , & McCarthy , R . A . ( 1987 ) . Categories of knowledge : Further fractionations and an attempted integration . Brain , J 10 , 1273 - - 1296 . Warrington , E . K . , & Shallice , T . ( 1984 ) . Category specific semantic impairments . Brain , 107 , 829 - - 854 . Wheeler , M . E . , Petersen , S . E . , & Buckner , R . L . ( 2000 ) . Memory ' s echo : Vivid remembering reactivates sensory " specific cortex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 97 , 11125 - 11129 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . When concepts combine . Psychonomic Bulletin and ReYiew , 4 , 167 - 183 . Wu , L . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . Perceptual simulation in property generation . Manuscript submitted for publication . Yeh , W . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . The situated character of concepts . Manuscript submitted for publication . Zatorre , RJ . , Halpern , A . R . , Perry , D . W . , Meyer , E . , & Evans , A . C . ( 1996 ) . Hearing in the mind ' s ear : A PET investigation of musical imagery and perception . Journal of CognitiYe Neuroscience , 8 , 29 - 46 . Zeki , S . ( 1993 ) . A vision of the brain . Oxford : Blackwell Scientific . Zwaan , R . A . , Stanfield , R . A . , & Yaxley , R . H . ( 2002 ) . Do language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of objects ? Psychological Science , 13 , 168 - 171 . Zwaan , R . A . , Stanfield , R . A . , Yaxley , R . H . , & Scheffers , M . K . ( 2001 ) . Language comprehenders activate implied shapes : Evidence from recognition , naming , and ERP . Paper presented at the 42nd Meeting of the Psychonomic Society , Orlando , FL