a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0308275v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 7 O c t 2003 Distinct regimes of elastic response and deformation modes of cross - linked cytoskeletal and semiﬂexible polymer networks D . A . Head 1 , 2 , A . J . Levine 2 , 3 and F . C . MacKintosh 1 , 2 1 Department of Physics and Astronomy , Vrije Universiteit , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 2 Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics , University of California at Santa Barbara CA 93106 , USA . 2 Department of Physics , University of Massachusetts , Amherst MA 01060 , USA . ( Dated : October 27 , 2018 ) Semiﬂexible polymers such as ﬁlamentous actin play a vital role in the mechanical behavior of cells , yet the basic properties of cross – linked F – actin networks remain poorly understood . To address this issue , we have performed numerical studies of the linear response of homogeneous and isotropic two – dimensional networks subject to an applied strain at zero temperature . The elastic moduli are found to vanish for network densities at a rigidity percolation threshold . For higher densities , two regimes are observed : one in which the deformation is predominately aﬃne and the ﬁlaments stretch and compress ; and a second in which bending modes dominate . We identify a dimensionless scalar quantity , being a combination of the material length scales , that speciﬁes to which regime a given network belongs . A scaling argument is presented that approximately agrees with this crossover variable . By a direct geometric measure , we also conﬁrm that the degree of aﬃnity under strain correlates with the distinct elastic regimes . We discuss the implications of our ﬁndings and suggest possible directions for future investigations . PACS numbers : 87 . 16 . Ka , 62 . 20 . Dc , 82 . 35 . Pq I . INTRODUCTION The mechanical stability , response to stress , and lo - comotion of eukaryotic cells is largely due to networks of biopolymers that collectively form what is known as the cytoskeleton [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ] . Filamentous actin ( F – actin ) , microtubules and other intermediate ﬁlamentous proteins make up the cytoskeletal network , along with a variety of auxiliary proteins that govern such factors as cross - linking and ﬁlament growth . By understand - ing the relation of the individual ﬁlament properties and dynamically evolving gel microstructure to the rheologi - cal / mechanical properties of intracellular structures , one will better understand the general framework for cellu - lar force generation and transduction [ 2 , 6 , 7 , 8 ] . Such stress production and sensing underlies such fundamental biological processes as cell division , motility [ 9 ] , and ad - hesion [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] . Given the importance of biopoly - mer networks in determining the mechanical response of cells , there is an obvious interest in understanding the properties of such networks at a basic level . Understand - ing stress propagation in cells also has implications for the interpretation of intracellular microrheology exper - iments [ 14 , 15 ] . However , biopolymers also belong to the class of semiﬂexible polymers , so – called because their characteristic bending length ( however deﬁned ) is com - parable to other length scales in the problem , such as the contour length or the network mesh size , and thus cannot be neglected . Such semiﬂexible polymers pose interesting and fun - damental challenges in their own right as polymer ma - terials . The understanding of the properties of in - dividual semiﬂexible polymers is quite highly devel - oped [ 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] ; in ad - dition , the dynamical and rheological properties of these polymers in solution [ 24 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 ] have largely been elucidated . The remaining problem of deter - mining the rheology of permanently cross - linked gels of semiﬂexible polymers , however , has proved quite subtle . Related theoretical approaches considered thus far have either assumed a simplifying network geometry , such as a lattice [ 34 ] or a Cayley tree [ 35 ] , or assumed that the dominant deformation modes are aﬃne [ 36 ] or dominated by transverse ﬁlament ﬂuctuations and bending [ 37 , 38 ] . In this paper we study the static mechanical proper - ties of random , semiﬂexible , cross - linked networks in the linear response regime with the aim of shedding light on the more complex , nonequilibrium cytoskeleton . Our approach is deliberately minimalistic : we consider two – dimensional , athermal systems with no polydispersity in ﬁlament properties . Although obviously simpliﬁed , this restricts the parameter space to a manageable size and al - lows for a fuller characterization of the network response . The central ﬁnding of our work is the existence of quali - tatively distinct regimes in the elastic response and local deformation in networks , each with characteristic signa - tures that should be observable experimentally . The basic distinction between stress propagation in ﬂexible and semiﬂexible networks is that in the former elastic deformation energy is stored entropically in the reduction of the number of chain conformations between cross - links [ 39 , 40 ] while in the latter , the elastic energy is stored primarily in the mechanical bending and stretch - ing of individual chains . In a ﬂexible , cross - linked mesh there is only one microscopic length scale : the mean dis - tance between cross - links or entanglements , l c . Since the actual identity of a ﬂexible chain is immaterial on scales beyond this mean cross - linking distance , chain length plays only a very small role [ 41 ] . In a semiﬂexible gel , however , chains retain their identity through a cross - link 2 because the tangent vectors on a given chain remain cor - related over distances much longer than ξ , the mesh size . Thus , it is reasonable to expect that the elastic proper - ties of the network depend on both the mesh size and the length of the chains . Upon increasing the density of ﬁlaments and thus the density of cross - links ( hereafter we refer to ﬁlament den - sity only as one quantity determines the other in 2d ) the system acquires a static shear modulus via a continuous phase transition at the rigidity percolation point . This corresponds to moving from left to right in the lower half of the phase diagram shown in Fig . 1 . This critical point ( solid line in Fig . 1 ) is at higher density than the connectivity percolation point . Since our model ignores the entropic elasticity of the network , below this critical density associated with rigidity percolation , the material has no static shear modulus and may be considered a liq - uid . We will discuss the ﬁnite temperature implications of this zero – temperature phase transition in more detail . The elastic properties of the fragile gel ( solid ) that exists just above this critical point are controlled by the physics of rigidity percolation . By increasing the cross - link density further we en - counter a regime over which the elastic deformation of the gel is dominated by ﬁlament bending and is highly nonaﬃne . This nonaﬃne regime ( NA ) is consistent with prior predictions by Kroy and Frey [ 37 , 38 ] . Within the NA regime the static shear modulus scales linearly with the bending modulus of the individual ﬁlaments , κ , but the elastic moduli are not controlled by properties of the rigidity percolation critical point . Most remarkably , how - ever , the deformation ﬁeld under uniformly applied stress is highly heterogeneous spatially over long length scales comparable even to the system size . We will quantify the degree of nonaﬃnity as a function of length scale and use this nonaﬃnity measure to demonstrate that the degree of nonaﬃnity in the NA regime increases without bound as one goes to progressively smaller length scales . Such materials are then poorly described by standard contin - uum elasticity theory on small length scales . By further increasing the ﬁlament density , one ap - proaches a crossover to a regime of aﬃne deformation ( A ) , in which the strain is uniform throughout the sam - ple , as the velocity ﬁeld would be in a simple liquid under shear . This cross - over is shown in Fig . 1 by the dashed lines above the NA region . In this regime , elastic energy is primarily stored in the extension / contraction of ﬁlaments . Also , in contrast to the NA regime , the growth of the degree of nonaﬃnity saturates as a func - tion of decreasing length scale . The elastic response of the network is governed primarily by the longitudinal compliance of ﬁlaments , and the shear modulus can be calculated from the combination of this realization and the assumption of aﬃne , uniform deformation as shown in Refs . [ 24 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 36 ] . We will show that there is one dimensionless parameter λ that controls the NA → A crossover . It is set by the ratio of the ﬁla - ment length to a combination of parameters describing log ( c ) log ( L ) solution nona ff i ne affine entropic affine mechanical FIG . 1 : A sketch of the expected diagram showing the various elastic regimes in terms of molecular weight L and concentra - tion c ∼ 1 / l c . The solid line represents the rigidity percola - tion transition where rigidity ﬁrst develops at a macroscopic level . This transition is given by L ∼ c − 1 . The other , dashed lines indicate crossovers ( not thermodynamic transitions ) , as described in the text . As sketched here , the crossovers be - tween nonaﬃne and aﬃne regimes demonstrate the indepen - dent nature of these crossovers from the rigidity percolation transition . the density of the network and the individual ﬁlament stiﬀness . In the aﬃne regime , the longitudinal response actu - ally can arise from two distinct mechanisms : there are two forms of compliance of a semiﬂexible ﬁlament under extensional stress , one essentially entropic [ 36 ] and the other essentially mechanical [ 38 ] . In the ﬁrst case , the compliance relates to the thermally ﬂuctuating ﬁlament conformation , which , for instance , is straightened - out un - der tension . A change in the length of a ﬁlament between cross - links results not in simple mechanical strain along that ﬁlament but rather in a reduction of the popula - tion of transverse thermal ﬂuctuations along that ﬁla - ment thereby reducing the entropy of the ﬁlament . This reduction results in an elastic restoring force along the length of the ﬁlament . This is the dominant compliance for long enough ﬁlament segments ( e . g . , between cross – links ) . In the second case , the compliance is due to a change in the contour length of the ﬁlament under ten - sion , which , although small , may dominate for short seg - ments ( e . g . , at high concentration ) . Thus , in general , we ﬁnd two distinct aﬃne ( A ) regimes , which we refer to as entropic ( AE ) and mechanical ( AM ) . Moving still further up and to the left in the diagram shown in Fig . 1 we would eventually reach a regime ( not shown ) in which the ﬁlament lengths between cross - links are much longer than their thermal persistence length and standard rubber elasticity theory would apply . This regime is of no experimental importance for the actin system . To complete our description of the diagram , we note that by increasing the ﬁlament concentration in the entropic aﬃne regime , one must ﬁnd a transition from 3 entropic to mechanical elasticity ( AE −→ AM ) within a regime of aﬃne deformation . Here we conﬁne our attention to two - dimensional per - manently cross - linked networks and consider only en - thalpic contributions to the elastic moduli of the system . In eﬀect we are considering a zero - temperature system , except that we account for the extensional modulus of F - actin that is principally due to the change in the thermal population of transverse thermal ﬂuctuations of a ﬁla - ment under extension . We do not expect there to be a signiﬁcant entropic contribution to the free energy com - ing from longer length scale ﬁlament contour ﬂuctuations because of their inherent stiﬀness . This justiﬁes our ne - glect of the sort of entropic contributions to the ﬁlament free energy that are typically considered in the analy - sis of rubber elasticity of ﬂexible polymers . We discuss this more below . The low dimensionality of the model system , on the other hand , is more signiﬁcant since the essentially straight chains in two dimensions will not in - teract sterically under small deformations . In our model , only one length scale is required to describe the random network , the mean distance between cross - links , l c . In three dimensions , however , chains can interact sterically and two quantities are needed to fully describe the ran - dom network , the density of cross - links and density of ﬁlaments . In our zero - temperature analysis of the system pre - sented in this paper , we do not explicitly probe the dif - ference between the NA −→ AE and the NA −→ AM cross - overs . Their diﬀerence enters our description of the system via a choice made for the form of µ , the exten - sion modulus of an individual ﬁlament . For physiological actin , we expect that the relevant transition will be the NA −→ AE . We discuss this further in section V . The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows . In Sec . II we deﬁne our model system in terms of the mechanical properties of individual ﬁlaments and the manner in which they interconnect to form the network . An overview of the simulation method used to ﬁnd the mechanical equilibrium under an imposed strain is also given . We describe in Sec . III the rigidity percolation transition , at which network rigidity ﬁrst develops . We then describe the crossover from a nonaﬃne regime above the rigidity transition to an aﬃne regime in Sec . IV . A scaling argument is also presented for this crossover . The macroscopic mechanical response is also demonstrated to be linked to geometric measures of the degree of aﬃne deformation at a local level . In Sec . V , we show how the network response in the aﬃne regime can be either essentially thermal or mechanical in nature . In Sec . VI , we discuss primarily the experimental implications of our results . II . THE MODEL The bending of semiﬂexible polymers has been success - fully described by the wormlike chain model , in which non – zero curvatures induce an energy cost according to a bending modulus κ . For small curvatures , the Hamil - tonian can be written H bend = 1 2 κ Z ds ( ∇ 2 u ) 2 ( 1 ) where u ( s ) is the transverse displacement of the ﬁlament , and s is integrated along the total contour length of the ﬁlament . Transverse ﬁlament dynamics can be inferred from this Hamiltonian [ 19 ] . For ﬁnite temperatures , ( 1 ) can also be used to predict the longitudinal response of an isolated ﬁlament ; however , as T → 0 the ﬁlament buckles , preconﬁguring a breakdown of the linear response [ 38 ] . We also consider the response of a ﬁlament to compres - sion / extensional deformations through the elastic Hamil - tonian given by : H stretch = 1 2 µ Z d s (cid:18) d l ( s ) d s (cid:19) 2 ( 2 ) where d l / d s gives the relative change in length along the ﬁlament . ( 2 ) is just a Hookean spring response , with a stretching modulus µ that is here taken to be inde - pendent of κ , although they can both be related to the cross – sectional radius and elastic properties of individual ﬁlaments ( see Sec . IV C ) . The networks are constructed by the sequential ran - dom deposition of monodisperse ﬁlaments of length L into a two – dimensional shear cell with dimensions W × W . Since the position and orientation of ﬁlaments are uniformly distributed over the allowed ranges , the net - works are isotropic and homogeneous when viewed on suﬃciently large length scales . Each intersection between ﬁlaments is identiﬁed as a cross – link , the mean distance between which ( as measured along a ﬁlament ) is denoted l c , so that the mean number of cross – links per rod is L / l c − 1 . Deposition continues until the required cross - linking density L / l c has been reached . An example net - work geometry is given in Fig . 2 . The system Hamiltonian is found by using discrete ver - sions of ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) which are linearized with respect to ﬁlament deﬂection , ensuring that the macroscopic re - sponse is also linear . The detailed procedure is described in the Appendix . It is then minimized to ﬁnd the network conﬁguration in mechanical equilibrium . Since entropic eﬀects are ignored : we are formally in the T ≡ 0 limit . The ﬁlaments are coupled at cross – links , which may exert arbitrary constraint forces but do not apply constraint torques so that the ﬁlaments are free to rotate about their crossing points . We comment on the validity of this assumption in greater detail in Sec . VI below . Speciﬁ - cally , we ﬁnd that whether or not the physical crosslinks are freely - rotating , the mechanical consequences of such crosslinks is small for dilute networks , provided that the networks are isotropic . Once the displacements of the ﬁlaments under the applied strain of magnitude γ have been found , the energy per unit area can be calculated , which within our linear approximation is equal to γ 2 / 2 4 FIG . 2 : An example of a network with a cross – link density L / l c ≈ 29 . 09 in a shear cell of dimensions W × W and peri - odic boundary conditions in both directions . This example is small , W = 52 L ; more typical sizes are W = 5 L to 20 L . times the shear modulus G or the Young’s modulus Y , for shear and uniaxial strain , respectively [ 42 ] . Thus the elastic moduli can be found for a speciﬁc network . The procedure is then repeated for diﬀerent network realiza - tions and system sizes until a reliable estimate of the modulus is found . See Figs . 3 and 4 for examples of solved networks . The free parameters in the model are the coeﬃcients µ and κ and the length scales L and l c . We choose to absorb κ into a third length scale l b derived from the ratio of µ and κ , l 2b = κ µ ( 3 ) Although the simulations assume a constant angular cur - vature between nodes , it is possible to assign l b the phys - ical interpretation of the natural length over which a free ﬁlament bends when diﬀering tangents are imposed at each end , as seen by a simple Euler minimization of the Hamiltonian . Hence we use the subscript l b , denoting ‘bending length . ’ Since µ now gives the only energy scale in the problem , it scales out , along with one of the length scales ( say L ) , and thus we are left with two dimension - less control parameters : the ﬁlament rigidity l b / L and the cross – link density L / l c . Note that there is also a fourth length scale , namely the system size W , but all of the results presented below are for suﬃciently large systems that the W – dependence has vanished . We now explore the various deformation regimes of the system beginning with the most fragile , sparse shear – supporting networks that exist just above the rigidity percolation transition . FIG . 3 : Color online An examples of a low – density network with L / l c ≈ 8 . 99 in mechanical equilibrium , with ﬁlament rigidity l b / L = 0 . 006 . Dangling ends have been removed , and the thickness of each line is proportional to the energy density , with a minimum thickness so that all rods are visible ( most lines take this minimum value here ) . The calibration bar shows what proportion of the deformation energy in a ﬁlament segment is due to stretching or bending . III . RIGIDITY PERCOLATION TRANSITION For very low cross – link densities L / l c the rods are ei - ther isolated or grouped together into small clusters , so that there is no connected path between distant parts of the system and the elastic moduli vanish . As the den - sity of cross – links is increased , there is a conductivity percolation transition at L / l c ≈ 5 . 42 when a connected cluster of inﬁnite size ﬁrst appears [ 43 ] . If there was an energy cost for rotation at cross – links , an applied shear strain would now induce a stress response and the elas - tic moduli would become non – zero [ 44 ] . This is also the case when thermal ﬂuctuations generate stresses along the ﬁlaments [ 45 ] . However , for networks with freely – rotating cross – links at zero temperature , such as those under consideration here , the network is able to deform purely by the translation and rotation of ﬁlaments . Such a ﬂoppy mode costs zero energy and thus the elastic moduli remain zero . This continues to be the case un - til the rigidity percolation transition at a higher density L / l c ≈ 5 . 93 [ 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] , when there are suﬃcient ex - tra constraints that ﬁlaments must bend or stretch and the moduli become non – zero . A full description of the network behavior just above the transition has been given elsewhere [ 50 ] , so here we summarize the results . Just above the rigidity transi - tion , both G and Y increase continuously from zero as 5 FIG . 4 : Color online The same as Fig . 3 for higher densities L / l c ≈ 29 . 09 ( a ) and L / l c ≈ 46 . 77 ( b ) . For calibration of the colors see Fig . 3 . a power in L / l c , with diﬀerent prefactors but the same exponent f , G , Y ∼ (cid:18) L l c − L l c (cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) trans (cid:19) f . ( 4 ) We have found that f = 3 . 0 ± 0 . 2 [ 50 , 51 ] , consistent with the value 3 . 15 ± 0 . 2 found independently [ 44 ] . It is also possible to measure geometric properties of rigid clusters , such as their fractal dimension ; this has been done using the pebble game method , and found to give exponents that are similar to that of central force ( i . e . Hookean spring ) percolation on a lattice [ 46 ] . However , such net - works cannot support bending , whereas we have found that the system Hamiltonian for our model is dominated by its bending term near to the transition . We conclude that our system is in a diﬀerent universality class to cen - tral force percolation , at least as far as the ideas of uni - versality apply to rigidity percolation ; indeed , it casts doubt on the validity of universality for force percolation as a whole , as discussed below . Note that this discrep - ancy cannot be due to any form of long range correlation in the morphology of the system , since our random net - works are constructed in such a way as the ensure geo - metric correlations cannot extend beyond the length of a single ﬁlament . Note also that although cross – links in our random networks are connected by ﬁlament sections of varying lengths , thus producing a broad distribution of spring constants which can also destroy universality ac - cording to the integral expression in [ 52 ] , our networks do not violate this condition . This is simply because there is a maximum length L , and hence a minimum spring constant µ / L , between any two cross – links , ensuring a low – end cut – oﬀ to the distribution of spring constants . Similar considerations hold for the bending interaction . Of the exponents that are used to characterize the crit - ical regime , those measured by the pebble game method reﬂect topological or geometric properties of the grow - ing rigid cluster . The exponent f is of a diﬀerent class since it measures the mechanical properties of the fragile solid that appears at the critical point . Our observation of distinct f ’s for two systems ( i . e . our simulations and central force lattices ) that appear to share the same geo - metric and topological exponents suggests that , although there are large universality classes for the topological ex - ponents describing the interactions that produce the ap - propriate number of constraints , the scaling of the shear modulus admits a larger range of relevant perturbations . We suspect that while rigidity itself is a highly nonlocal property of the network , the modulus depends critically on how stress propagates through particular fragile , low density regions of the rigid cluster . Thus the modulus de - pends on details of how stress propagates locally through perhaps a few cross - links so that the mechanical charac - teristics of the ﬁlaments and the cross - links become rel - evant . The possibility of experimentally observing the physics associated with the zero – temperature , rigidity percola - tion critical point [ 50 ] sensitively depend on the size of the critical region . As with other strictly zero tempera - ture phases transitions , there can be experimental con - sequences of the critical point physics only if the system can be tuned to pass through the critical region , since the critical point itself cannot be explored . At ﬁnite temper - ature , the network below the rigidity percolation point ( but above the connectivity , or scalar percolation point ) has a residual static shear modulus generated by entropic tension in the system . One might imagine that one may crudely estimate size of the critical regime around the rigidity percolation transition by comparing the decaying zero - temperature ( i . e . mechanical ) modulus of the net - work above the phase transition G ∼ ( L / l c − L / l c | trans ) f to the entropic modulus below it , G en ∼ k B T / l 3c . Unfor - 6 tunately to make such an estimate one implicitly makes assumptions about the , as yet unknown , cross - over ex - ponents . Regardless , we speculate that the critical per - colation point may indeed have physical implications at room temperature . First , due to the signiﬁcant stiﬀness of the ﬁlaments , this residual entropically generated mod - ulus should be small and thus the physics of the zero - temperature critical point may have experimental rele - vance . Secondly , one may interpret the observed diﬀer - ence between the numerically extracted and calculated scaling exponents z that describes the dependence of λ on l c / l b as evidence of corrections to mean - ﬁeld scaling due to the proximity of the rigidity percolation critical point . This interpretation is strengthened by the fact that additional data points at smaller values of l c ( i . e . higher cross – link density and thus farther from the rigid - ity percolation point ) but ﬁxed λ conform more closely to our mean - ﬁeld scaling exponent . Thus , it is reasonable to expect that one may observe phenomena associated with rigidity percolation in sparsely cross - linked actin systems . IV . ELASTIC REGIMES The coarse - grained deformation of a material is nor - mally described by the strain ﬁeld that is deﬁned at all spatial points . Both the internal state of stress and the density of stored elastic energy ( related by a functional derivative ) are then functions of the symmetrized defor - mation tensor . In our model , the underlying microscopic description consists entirely of the combination of trans - lation , rotation , stretching and bending modes of the ﬁl - aments . Of these , only the latter two store elastic energy and thereby generate forces in the material . Thus a com - plete description of the energetics of a ﬁlament encom - passing these two modes must lead to a macroscopic , or continuum elastic description of the material . The state of deformation itself , however , is purely a geometric quantity ; it can be discussed independently of the energetics associated with the deformation of the ﬁl - aments themselves . We will characterize the deformation ﬁeld as aﬃne if deformation tensor is spatially uniform under uniformly applied strain at the edges of the sample . Of course , this strict aﬃne limit is never perfectly real - ized within our simulations , but , as shown below , there is a broad region of parameter space in which the deforma - tion ﬁeld is approximately aﬃne , in the sense that quan - titative measures of the network response asymtote to their aﬃne predictions . This entire region shall be called “aﬃne” . Since in continuum elastic models the stored elastic energy depends only on the squares ( and possi - bly higher even powers ) of the spatial gradients of the symmetrized deformation tensor , it is clear that uniform strain is a global energy minimum of the system consis - tent with the uniformly imposed strain at the boundary . The spatial homogeneity of the strain ﬁeld allows one to draw a particularly simple connection between the elastic properties of the individual elements of the net - work and its collective properties . Because under aﬃne deformation every ﬁlament experiences exactly the same deformation , the collective elastic properties of the net - work can be calculated by determining energy stored in a single ﬁlament under the aﬃne deformation and the averaging over all orientations of ﬁlaments . Note this calculation constitutes a mean - ﬁeld description of elas - ticity . If the strain ﬁeld is purely aﬃne ( i . e . , is uniformly dis - tributed throughout the sample ) on length scales larger than the microscopic length scales ( e . g . , the distance be - tween cross – links ) , then it can be Taylor expanded to give a locally uniform strain in which all elements of the strain tensor are constants . It is then straightforward to see that the ﬁlaments would purely stretch ( or compress ) and the moduli would be independent of ﬁlament bend - ing coeﬃcient κ . Indeed , it is possible to derive exact expressions for G and Y in this case , as described below . Conversely , nonaﬃne deformation on microscopic lengths arises as a result of ﬁlament bending , and hence a dependency on κ and well as µ . This is what we ﬁnd above the rigidity percolation transition , on increasing network concentration or molecular weight . Surprisingly , however , this is not restricted to the neighborhood of the transition , but constitutes a broad regime of the available parameter space . This nonaﬃne regime is dominated by bending , as can be seen by the fact that G and Y are independent of µ below . It is important to note that continuum elasticity breaks down on length scales over which the deformation ﬁeld is nonaﬃne . In addition , the appearance nonaﬃne deformations invalidates the sim - ple , mean - ﬁeld calculation of the moduli which assumes that every ﬁlament undergoes the deformation . Gener - ically , the moduli in the nonaﬃne deformation regime will be smaller than their value calculated under the as - sumption of aﬃne deformation . Nonaﬃne deformation ﬁelds in eﬀect introduce more degrees of freedom since the deformation ﬁeld is nonuniform . Using those extra degrees of freedom , the system is able to further lower its elastic energy by nonaﬃne deformations and thereby reduce its modulus . Only upon increasing the number of mutual constraints in the system , can one constrain the system to aﬃne deformations and thereby maximize its modulus . A . Nonaﬃne , bending – dominated Starting from the most sparse networks just above the rigidity percolation transition , we ﬁrst encounter the non - aﬃne regime on increasing L / l c . We ﬁnd empirically that throughout this regime ( until the cross - over to aﬃne de - formation of one kind or the other – AM or AE ) the mod - uli of the network are controlled by the bending modes of the ﬁlaments . This nonaﬃne response can be distin - guished from the scaling regime around the transition , which is also nonaﬃne , by the lack of the diverging length scale associated with a continuous phase transition ; in 7 the simulations , this corresponds to the independence of G and Y on system size W for relatively small W , as opposed to the increasingly large W required for conver - gence close to the transition . The dependence of G on the system parameters in this regime can be semi – quantitatively understood as follows . Consider what happens when κ → 0 . In this limit , ﬁl - aments can freely bend and only stretching modes con - tribute to the dynamic response . This Hookean case has already been investigated by Kellom¨aki et al . for the same random network geometries as considered here [ 53 ] . They found the striking result that ﬂoppy modes exist for all densities in the linear response , i . e G ≡ Y ≡ 0 . In these ﬂoppy modes , the ﬁlaments will bend at cross – links , but without costing energy since κ ≡ 0 . If κ is now continuously increased from zero , then there should be a range of suﬃciently small κ in which the angles remain unchanged but now incur an energy cost according to ( 1 ) , giving a total energy and hence G that is proportional to κ . To make this idea more speciﬁc , suppose that when κ ≡ 0 the angles of ﬁlament deﬂection at cross – links , { δθ } , are distributed with zero mean and variance σ 2 δθ . By assumption , σ 2 δθ can only depend on the two geometric lengthscales L and l c , or to be more precise on their ratio L / l c . From ( 1 ) , the energy at each cross – link is δ H bend ∼ κ (cid:18) σ δθ l c (cid:19) 2 l c ( 5 ) The mean number of cross – links per unit area is NL / 2 l c , where N is the number of ﬁlaments per unit area . N can be exactly related to L / l c using the expression derived in [ 50 ] ; however , for current purposes it is suﬃcient to use the approximate relation L / l c ≈ ( α − 1 ) / ( 1 − 2 / α ) , where α = 2 L 2 N / π . Thus ( 5 ) summed over the whole network gives G bend ∼ κσ 2 δθ l 3c ( 6 ) Therefore plotting GL / µ = σ 2 δθ Ll 2b / l 3c versus l b / L on log – log axes will give a straight line of slope 2 , as conﬁrmed by the simulations below . It is also possible to infer the variation of σ δθ on L / l c from either the simulations or the scaling argument presented below , but since this is not an easily measurable quantity experimentally , nothing more will be said about it here . A bending – dominated re - sponse was assumed in the calculations of Frey et al . [ 38 ] and Joly – Duhamel et al . [ 54 ] , although the 2D and 3D density dependencies will of course be diﬀerent . B . Aﬃne , stretching – dominated Under an aﬃne strain , the network response consists purely of stretching modes and it is straightforward to calculate the corresponding modulus G aﬃne . Consider a rod of length L lying at an angle θ to the x – axis . Under a shear γ xy , this will undergo a relative change in length δL / L = γ xy sin θ cos θ , and therefore an energy cost δ H stretch = 1 2 µLγ 2 xy sin 2 θ cos 2 θ ( 7 ) The sin 2 θ cos 2 θ factor reduces to 1 / 8 after uniformly av - eraging over all θ ∈ ( 0 , π ) . Summing over the network as in the nonaﬃne case gives G aﬃne = 2 N h δ H stretch i θ γ 2 xy ≈ π 16 µ L (cid:18) L l c + 2 l c L − 3 (cid:19) ( 8 ) where we have also corrected for dangling ends by renor - malising the rod lengths L → L − 2 l c . In the high— density limit L / l c → ∞ , ( 8 ) asymtotes to G aﬃne ∼ π 16 µ l c ( 9 ) Since the number of rods per unit area is N ∼ 1 / ( Ll c ) , then the concentration of protein monomers of charac - teristic size a is c ∼ NL / a ∼ ( al c ) − 1 and thus G ∼ ( ac ) α with α = 1 . For comparison , theories of thermal 3D sys - tems predict α = 75 for calculations based on a tube pic - ture [ 30 , 31 , 32 ] , α = 115 for aﬃne scaling relations [ 36 ] , and α = 2 for the T = 0 three – dimensional cellular foam [ 34 ] . The above calculation can be repeated for an aﬃne uni - axial strain γ yy to give similar expressions for the Young’s modulus Y , with the sin 2 θ cos 2 θ term in ( 7 ) replaced with sin 4 θ . Since this averages to 3 / 8 , Y aﬃne diﬀers by a factor of 3 , Y aﬃne = 3 G aﬃne ( 10 ) Hence the Poisson ratio ν = Y / 2 G − 1 for aﬃnely sheared networks is ν aﬃne = 12 , which should be compared to the 3D lattice prediction ν = 13 [ 34 ] and the 3D Cayley tree value ν = 14 [ 35 ] . C . Scaling argument and crossover between elastic regimes We now attempt to identify the dominant mode gov - erning the deviation from the aﬃne solution . The rele - vant length scales for this mode are derived , which , by comparing to other lengths in the problem , allow us to es - timate when the crossover between stretching – dominated and bending – dominated regimes should occur . This pre - diction correctly predicts the qualitative trends of the 8 deviation from aﬃnity with the lengths L , l c and l b . However , it is not as successful quantitatively as an em - pirical scaling law described in Sec . IV D . Nonetheless we believe it contains the essential physics and therefore warrants a full description . To proceed , we note that the stretching – only solution presented above assumes that the stress is uniform along a ﬁlament until reaching the dangling end . It is more realistic to suppose that it vanishes smoothly . If the rod is very long , far from the ends and near the center of the rod it is stretched / compressed according to the macro - scopic strain γ 0 . We assume that this decreases toward zero near the end , over a length l k , so that the reduction in stretch / compression energy is of order µγ 2 0 l k . The am - plitude of the displacement along this segment , which is located near the ends of the rod is of order d ∼ γ 0 l k . This deformation , however , clearly comes at the price of de - formations of surrounding ﬁlaments , which we assume to be primarily bending in nature ( the dominant constraints on this rod will be due to ﬁlaments crossing at a large an - gle ) . The typical amplitude of the induced curvature is of order d / l 2 ⊥ , where l ⊥ characterizes the range over which the curved region of the crossing ﬁlaments extends . This represents what can be thought of as a bending correla - tion length , and it will be , in general , diﬀerent from l k . The latter can also be thought of as a correlation length , speciﬁcally for the strain variations near free ends . We determine these lengths self - consistently , as follows . The corresponding total elastic energy contribution due to these coupled deformations is of order ∆ E 1 = − µγ 20 l k + κ (cid:18) γ 0 l k l 2 ⊥ (cid:19) 2 l ⊥ l k l c , ( 11 ) where the ﬁnal ratio of l k to l c gives the typical number of constraining rods crossing this region of the ﬁlament in question . In simple physical terms , the rod can reduce its total elastic energy by having the strain near the free ends deviate from the otherwise aﬃne , imposed strain ﬁeld . In doing so , it results in a bending of other ﬁlaments to which it is coupled . From this , we expect that the range of the typical longitudinal displacement l k and transverse displacement l ⊥ are related by l 3 ⊥ ∼ l 2b l 2 k / l c . ( 12 ) Of course , the bending of the other ﬁlaments will only occur because of constraints on them . Otherwise , they would simply translate in space . We assume that the transverse constraints on these bent ﬁlaments to be pri - marily due to compression / stretch of the rods which are linked to them . These distortions will be governed by the same physics as described above . In particular , the length scale of the corresponding deformations is of or - der l k , and they have a typical amplitude of d . Thus , the combined curvature and stretch energy is of order ∆ E 2 = µγ 20 l k l ⊥ l c + κ (cid:18) γ 0 l k l 2 ⊥ (cid:19) 2 l ⊥ , ( 13 ) where , in a similar way to the case above , l ⊥ / l c deter - mines the typical number of ﬁlaments constraining the bent one we focus on here . This determines another re - lationship between the optimal bending and stretch cor - relation lengths , which can be written l 4 ⊥ ∼ l 2 b l k l c . ( 14 ) Thus , the longitudinal strains of the ﬁlaments decay to zero over a length of order l k ∼ l c (cid:18) l c l b (cid:19) 2 / 5 , ( 15 ) while the resulting bending of ﬁlaments extends over a distance of order l ⊥ ∼ l c (cid:18) l b l c (cid:19) 2 / 5 . ( 16 ) The physical implications of Eqs . ( 15 ) and ( 16 ) is that a length of each ﬁlament of order l k experiences non - aﬃne deformation and this nonaﬃne deformation causes changes in the local strain ﬁeld over a zone extending a perpendicular distance l ⊥ from the ends of that ﬁlament . Thus when l k becomes comparable to the length of the ﬁlament , L , the network should deform in a nonaﬃne manner . We will refer to this length along the ﬁlament contour over which one expects to ﬁnd nonaﬃne defor - mation as λ . These results make sense , as increased bending rigid - ity can be expected to increase the bending correlation length l ⊥ , while decreasing the longitudinal correlation length l k because of the stiﬀ constraints provided by the cross – links . Both lengths , of course , tend to increase with decreasing concentration of cross – links , i . e . , with increasing l c . This scaling analysis assumes , however , that l c < l k , ⊥ . Furthermore , we expect that l b < l c in general . This is because the bending stiﬀness of a rod κ ∼ Y f r 4 increases with the fourth power of its radius r , while µ ∼ Y f r 2 increases with the square of the radius , where Y f is the Young’s modulus of the ﬁlament . Thus , l b is expected to be of order the rod diameter , which must be smaller than the distance between cross - links , especially considering the the small volume fractions φ of less than 1 % in many cases . For rods of radius r in three dimensions , we expect that l c ∼ a / √ φ . Thus , l b / l c may be in the range of 0 . 01 to 0 . 1 . This means that we expect that l k > l ⊥ , although both of these lengths are of order l c . Thus , the natural dimensionless variable de - termining the degree of aﬃnity of the strain is the ratio of the ﬁlament length to l k , the larger of the two lengths that characterize the range of nonaﬃne deformation ; i . e . when the ﬁlaments are very long compared with the eﬀec - tively stress - free ends , then most of the rod segments ex - perience a stretch / compression deformation determined by their orientation and the macroscopic strain . 9 It is possible , however , that l ⊥ above may become smaller than l c , especially for either very ﬂexible rods or for low concentrations . This is unphysical , and we expect the bending of constraining ﬁlaments above to extend only over a length of order l c when l b / l c becomes very small . This results in a diﬀerent scaling of l k , given by l k ∼ l 2 c / l b . ( 17 ) Although we see no evidence for this scaling , it may be - come valid for small enough l b / l c . D . Numerical results for elastic moduli We now summarize our numerical results starting ﬁrst at lowest ﬁlament densities . Away from the rigidity tran - sition , the shear modulus G continues to increase mono - tonically with the cross - link density L / l c at a rate that only weakly depends on the ﬁlament rigidity l b / L , as shown in Fig . 5 . Indeed , for high densities G approaches the aﬃne prediction G aﬃne which , due to the absence of bending modes under aﬃne strain as discussed at the beginning of Sec . IV , is independent of l b . The ﬁlament rigidity l b does , however , inﬂuence the crossover to the aﬃne solution as will be discussed below . The Young’s modulus Y and the Poisson ratio ν = Y / 2 G − 1 for a range of densities are shown in Fig . 6 . It is apparent that ν remains close to the aﬃne prediction ν aﬃne = 12 , ex - cept possibly near the transition where it takes the value 0 . 35 ± 0 . 1 [ 50 ] ( here as elsewhere , quoted errors are sin - gle standard deviations ) . Note that , in two dimensions , area – preserving deformations have ν = 1 , so ν = 0 . 5 does not imply incompressibility . For comparison , the thermodynamically stable range is − 1 ≤ ν ≤ 1 [ 42 ] . The robustness the aﬃne prediction of the Poisson ratio even deep in the NA regime is somewhat surprising and is not accounted for in our arguments . Varying the ratio l b / L over many orders of magnitude at ﬁxed L / l c reveals a new regime in which G ∝ κ , rather than G ∼ G aﬃne ∝ µ as in the aﬃne regime described above . An example is given in Fig . 7 , where it can be seen that G ∝ l 2b ∝ κ , suggesting that this regime is dom - inated by bending modes , a claim that is supported by the theoretical considerations presented in Sec . IV A and the work of Frey et al . [ 38 ] and Joly – Duhamel et al . [ 54 ] . We also conﬁrm in the inset to this ﬁgure that the regime for which G ≈ G aﬃne is dominated by stretching modes , and that this new regime with G ∝ κ is dominated by bending modes , as expected . The crossover between the two regimes can be quanti - ﬁed by the introduction of a new length λ , being a com - bination of l b and l c characterized by an exponent z , λ = l c (cid:18) l c l b (cid:19) z . ( 18 ) 0 5 10 15 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 G L / µ L / l c l b / L = 0 . 02 l b / L = 0 . 006 l b / L = 0 . 002 Affine limit FIG . 5 : The normalized shear modulus GL / µ versus the cross – link density L / l c for three diﬀerent bending lengths l b / L . The solid line gives the aﬃne solution ( 8 ) and the dashed lines adjoining the data points are to guide the eye . Here and throughout , errors are no larger than the symbols . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 5 10 15 20 25 G L / µ o r Y L / µ L / l c Young’s Y Shear G 0 0 . 5 1 5 15 25 ν L / l c FIG . 6 : The shear and Young’s moduli G and Y for l b / L = 0 . 006 against L / l c . The interconnecting lines are to guide the eye . ( Inset ) The Poisson ratio ν = Y / 2 G − 1 against L / l c for the same l b / L . The ratio L / λ can then be used to ascertain which regime the network is in , in the sense that λ ≪ L corresponds to the aﬃne regime , and λ ≫ L corresponds to the non - aﬃne regime . Note that this is only possible outside the neighborhood of the rigidity transition . For densities in the approximate range 13 < L / l c < 47 , a very good data collapse can be found by using λ 1 = 3 p l 4c / l b or z = 13 , as demonstrated in Fig . 8 . This empirical relation has already been published [ 51 ] . However , as clearly evident from the ﬁgure , it appears to fail for the small number of very high density points that we have now been able to attain . Conversely , the scaling argument of Sec . IV C generates the relevant length scale λ 2 = l k = 5 p l 7c / l 2b or z = 25 . Although the data does not collapse for this sec - ond form , as evident from Fig . 9 , it appears to improve the overall collapse for larger densities ( i . e . further from the rigidity transition point ) . A possible explanation for 10 10 - 6 10 - 4 10 - 2 1 10 - 6 10 - 4 10 - 2 1 p s t r e t c h 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 G / G a ff i ne l b / L G ∝ κ FIG . 7 : Shear modulus G versus ﬁlament rigidity l b / L for L / l c ≈ 29 . 09 , where G has been scaled to the aﬃne predic - tion for this density . The straight line corresponds to the bending – dominated regime with G ∝ κ , which gives a line of slope 2 when plotted on these axes . ( Inset ) The proportion of stretching energy to the total energy for the same networks , plotted against the same horizontal axis l b / L . 10 - 2 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 1 10 1 10 2 G / G a ff i ne L / λ L / l c = 13 . 91 29 . 01 46 . 77 77 . 42 FIG . 8 : G / G aﬃne versus L / λ with λ = 3 p l 4c / l b for diﬀerent densities L / l c , showing good collapse except for the highest density considered . The enlarged points for L / l c ≈ 29 . 09 correspond to the same parameters as in Fig . 12 . this is that λ 2 is the correct asymptotic length , but does not apply for networks of intermediate density , where the empirical form λ 1 is much more successful , perhaps due to corrections to scaling from the transition point as dis - cussed in Sec . III . ( This is also the relevant range for biological applications ) . However , our current computa - tional resources cannot go to higher densities , and so we must leave this question to be resolved at a later date , by either improved theory or increased processor speeds . Although the goal of this paper is to characterize the behavior of semiﬂexible polymer networks over the whole of the parameter space , it is nonetheless instructive to also consider parameters corresponding to physiological actin networks . The lengths L , l c and l b for F – actin in physiological conditions can be approximated as follows . 10 - 2 10 - 7 10 - 6 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 1 1 10 1 10 2 G / G a ff i ne L / λ 2 L / l c = 13 . 91 29 . 01 46 . 77 77 . 42 FIG . 9 : The same data as Fig . 8 plotted against L / λ 2 with λ 2 = 5 p l 7c / l 2b , as predicted by the scaling argument in the text , showing slight but consistent deviations from collapse for this range of L / l c . The distance between cross – links has been quoted as l c ≈ 0 . 1 µm [ 38 ] , which for ﬁlament lengths L ≈ 2 µm gives a cross – link density L / l c ≈ 20 . As already argued in Sec . IV C , we can estimate l b by regarding the ﬁlament as a solid elastic cylinder with radius r , in which case l b ∼ r ≈ 10 nm . Thus we ﬁnd that l b / L ∼ r / L ∼ 10 − 3 , which gives L / λ ≈ 5 . Looking at Fig . 8 , this suggests that cytoskeletal networks are in the crossover region . Similarly , L / λ 2 ≈ 4 leading to the same basic conclusion . E . Spatial correlations A further way of probing the degree of aﬃnity of a net - work is to consider a suitable spatial correlation function . Whatever quantity is chosen , it is clear that there can be no ﬂuctuations if the strain is purely aﬃne . This is not the case with nonaﬃne strains , which will induce local - ized bending modes that couple to the local geometry of the network and thus may ﬂuctuate from one part of the network to the next . Thus correlations between ﬂuctua - tions should have a longer range when the deformation is more nonaﬃne , qualitatively speaking . The two – point correlation function between spatially – varying quantities A ( x ) and B ( x ) can be generally deﬁned as C AB ( r ) = h A ( x ) B ( x + r ˆ n ) i − h A ( x ) ih B ( x ) i ( 19 ) where the angled brackets denote averaging over all net - work nodes x and direction unit vectors ˆ n . Fig . 10 shows an example of C ερ , where ρ is the local mass density of ﬁlaments and ε is the energy per unit ﬁlament length , re - stricted to either stretching or bending energy as shown in the key . There is a clear anti – correlation between den - sity and both forms of energy at short separations , show - ing that the magnitude of deformation is heterogeneously distributed throughout the network , being greater in re - gions of low mass density and smaller in regions of high 11 mass density . Qualitatively , the network concentrates the largest deformations into low mass density regions , thus reducing the macroscopic energy cost . This eﬀects both bending and stretching modes equally : there is no in - creased likelihood of one mode over the other for regions of given density , as demonstrated by the collapse of C ερ for both energy types collapse after normalization , also given in this ﬁgure . The sizes of locally – correlated regions can be inferred from the decay of a suitable autocorrelation function , such as the combined energy E ( stretching plus bending ) per unit length . C EE ( r ) is plotted in Fig . 11 for diﬀer - ent density networks . The trend is for C EE ( r ) to decay more slowly with r for lower L / l c at ﬁxed l b / L , suggest - ing larger ‘pockets’ of non – uniform deformation for lower network densities , presumably becoming inﬁnitely large at the transition , where the correlation length diverges al - gebraically with the known exponent ν ≈ 1 . 17 ± 0 . 02 [ 46 ] . We have been unable to extract a meaningful length scale from our C EE ( r ) data and hence are unable to conﬁrm the value of this exponent . F . Measures of aﬃnity Intuitively , the degree to which the network deforma - tion is or is not aﬃne depends on the length scale on which we look . For length scales comparable to the sys - tem size , the deformation must appear aﬃne since we are imposing an aﬃne strain at the periodic boundaries . Only on some smaller length scale might deviations from aﬃnity be observed . If the deformation ﬁeld is nonaﬃne on length scales corresponding to the microscopic lengths L , l c or l b , then the ﬁlaments will ‘feel’ a locally non – uniform strain ﬁeld and the assumptions leading to the prediction of G aﬃne will break down . To quantify the degree of aﬃnity at a given length scale , consider the inﬁnitesimal change in angle under an imposed shear strain between two network nodes sep - arated by a distance r . Denote this angle θ , and its corresponding aﬃne prediction θ aﬃne . Then a suitable measure of deviation from aﬃnity on length scales r is h ∆ θ 2 ( r ) i = h ( θ − θ aﬃne ) 2 i ( 20 ) where the angled brackets denote averaging over both network points and diﬀerent network realizations . An example of h ∆ θ 2 ( r ) i is given in Fig . 12 , and clearly shows that it monotonically decays with distance , as intuitively expected . Also , the deviation from aﬃnity is uniformly higher for lower l b / L at the same L / l c , in accord with the greater deviation of G from G aﬃne observed above . Although h ∆ θ 2 ( r ) i decreases monotonically with r , the decay is slow , almost power – law like over the ranges given . This suggests that there is no single ‘aﬃnity length scale’ above which the deformation looks aﬃne , and be - low which it does not . However , we can read oﬀ the degree of aﬃnity at the cross – link length scale r = l c , - 1 - 0 . 75 - 0 . 5 - 0 . 25 0 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 C ε ρ ( r ) r / L BendStretch FIG . 10 : The correlation function C ερ ( r ) between local mass density ρ and energy density ε , where ε is restricted to either stretching or bending energy as shown and ρ is the length of ﬁlaments within a radius L / 4 of the network point . The cross – link density L / l c ≈ 21 . 48 , l b / L = 0 . 006 and both lines have been normalized so that | C ερ ( r = 0 ) | = 1 . which ( after normalising to the strain γ ) should by ≪ 1 for an aﬃne deformation , and ≫ 1 for a nonaﬃne one . This is evident when comparing Fig . 12 to the G / G aﬃne for the same systems in Fig . 8 ; 1 γ 2 h ∆ θ 2 ( l c ) i ≪ 1 does indeed correspond to G ≈ G aﬃne , and G ≈ G bend for 1 γ 2 h ∆ θ 2 ( l c ) i ≫ 1 . The monotonically increasing deviation from aﬃnity with decreasing L / λ can also be seen using an indepen - dent aﬃnity measure , as used by Langer and Liu [ 55 ] . Consider the displacements { δ x i } of each node i after the strain has been applied , relative to their unstrained positions . Each of these has a corresponding aﬃne pre - diction δ x aﬃne i that can be simply computed given the node’s original position and the type of strain applied . Then a scalar measure of the global deviation from aﬃn - ity is the root mean square of the diﬀerence between the measured displacements and their aﬃne values , i . e . m 2 = h ( δ x i − δ x aﬃne i ) 2 i ( 21 ) where the angled brackets denote averaging over all nodes i . In Fig . 13 we plot m / L against L / λ , and ob - serve the expected monotonic increase of the deviation from aﬃnity with decreasing L / λ . However , the data for diﬀerent L / l c do not collapse . The problem is that , unlike in Figs . 8 and 9 , it is not obvious how m should be normalised to give a dimensionless quantity ; we have tried using the lengthscales L , l b , l c and λ , but none of these generate good collapse . It is likely that some com - bination of these lengths will collapse the data , but we have been unable to ﬁnd it empirically , and we have no theoretical prediction for this aﬃnity measure . 12 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 C EE ( r ) r / L 13 . 92 18 . 95 21 . 48 31 . 63 77 . 42 FIG . 11 : Autocorrelation of the combined ( stretching plus bending ) energy density E for l b / L = 0 . 006 and the L / l c given in the key . The system sizes were W = 15 L ( L / l c = 13 . 92 ) , 10 L ( 18 . 95 and 21 . 48 ) , 6 14 L ( 31 . 63 ) and 2 12 L ( 77 . 42 ) . 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 0 . 1 1 〈 ∆ θ 2 〉 / γ 2 r / L 0 . 034 = l c / L ↑ L / λ = 1 . 63 3 . 50 7 . 55 16 . 26 35 . 03 FIG . 12 : Plot of the aﬃnity measure h ∆ θ 2 ( r ) i normalized to the magnitude of the imposed strain γ against distance r / L , for diﬀerent l b / L . The value of r corresponding to the mean distance between cross – links l c is also indicated , as is the solid line 1 γ 2 h ∆ θ 2 ( r ) i = 1 , which separates aﬃne from nonaﬃne networks to with an order of magnitude ( the actual crossover regime is somewhat broad ) . In all cases , L / l c ≈ 29 . 1 and the system size was W = 15 2 L . V . THERMAL EFFECTS In the above , we have considered a mechanical , purely athermal model of networks governed by two microscopic energies : ( i ) the bending of semiﬂexible ﬁlaments , and ( ii ) the longitudinal compliance of these ﬁlaments that describes their response to compression and stretching forces . We have already discussed the role of tempera - ture in terms of the formation of a solid via the rigidity percolation transition . Now , we examine the transition between the AM and AE regimes . For a homogeneous ﬁlament of Young’s modulus Y f , the corresponding single - ﬁlament parameters κ ( the 0 . 1 1 1 10 100 m / L L / λ L / l c = 13 . 91 29 . 01 46 . 77 FIG . 13 : The root mean square deviation of node displace - ments from their aﬃne prediction , m / L , plotted against the same L / λ 1 as in Fig . 8 . Symbol sizes are larger than errors , so the apparent scatter is real . bending rigidity ) and µ ( the one - dimensional compres - sion / stretch modulus ) are determined by Y f and geo - metric factors : κ ∼ Y f a 4 , and µ ∼ Y f a 2 , where 2 a is the ﬁlament diameter . From here on , we refer to the later ( mechanical ) modulus as µ M . At ﬁnite temperature , however , there will be trans - verse ﬂuctuations of the ﬁlaments that give rise to an additional longitudinal compliance . Physically , this com - pliance comes from the ability to pull - out the thermal ﬂuctuations of the ﬁlament , even without any stretch - ing of the ﬁlament backbone . The corresponding linear modulus for a ﬁlament segment of length l is [ 36 ] µ T = κℓ p l 3 ∼ a 2 ℓ p l 3 µ M , ( 22 ) where ℓ p = κ / ( kT ) is the persistence length . The full compliance of such a segment is then l / µ = l / µ M + l / µ T , corresponding to an eﬀective linear modulus of µ = µ M µ T µ M + µ T . ( 23 ) Thus , the thermal compliance dominates for lengths larger than 3 p a 2 ℓ p , while the segment behaves for all practical purposes as a rigid rod with linear modulus µ M for lengths smaller than 3 p a 2 ℓ p . Thus , there appear to be two distinct regimes within the aﬃne regime : for higher concentrations , speciﬁ - cally for l c . 3 p a 2 ℓ p , the longitudinal compliance of the ﬁlaments is governed by the mechanical compres - sion / stretching of ﬁlament segments and the modulus is given by Eq . ( 8 ) ; this is the AM regime . At lower concen - trations , speciﬁcally for l c & 3 p a 2 ℓ p , the single - ﬁlament compliance is dominated by thermal ﬂuctuations and G ∼ πκℓ p 16 l 4c . ( 24 ) This is the AE regime . For the networks under discus - sion , which are described by a single variable l c that both 13 represents the spacing of ﬁlaments and distance between constraints or cross – links , the boundary between these two aﬃne regimes is simply determined by concentra - tion , which is naturally measured as 1 / l c . For actin , we estimate the characteristic length 3 p a 2 ℓ p to be of order 100 nm . Thus , only when the distance between cross – links is less than a distance of order 100 nm will the bulk response of the network depend on the purely mechanical extension of actin ﬁlaments . Experimentally , these two aﬃne regimes should be dis - tinguished by their scaling dependencies of the linear shear moduli G on various parameters . A clearer , quali - tative distinction , however , should be seen in their non - linear behavior . Speciﬁcally , in the thermal regime , the maximum strain ( either at which the network yields or ﬁrst exhibits non - linear behavior ) is expected to decrease with increasing concentration of polymer or cross – links [ 36 ] . This is because of the limited extent of thermal com - pliance , which decreases for shorter ﬁlament segments that appear more straight . This is in contrast with me - chanical networks where the nonlinearities are governed by geometry ( e . g . , connectivity and orientation of ﬁla - ments ) . This would suggest a concentration - independent maximum or characteristic strain , as is seen in some col - loidal gels [ 56 ] . Moreover , the actual form of the force - extension rela - tion for a semiﬂexible polymer in the limit of segment lengths l ≪ ℓ p takes on a universal form , depending only on a characteristic extension l 2 / ℓ p and characteris - tic force π 2 κ / l 2 . This force - extension relation predicts a universal strain stiﬀening of semiﬂexible gels in the aﬃne regime , in contrast with a nonlinear modulus in the me - chanical aﬃne regime that will be much more dependent in the type of ﬁlament [ 57 ] . VI . IMPLICATIONS AND DISCUSSION Starting with solutions having no ( zero - frequency ) elastic behavior , as the ﬁlament concentration c f , molec - ular weight ( ﬁlament length ) L , or density of cross – links is increased , there is a point where macroscopic elastic behavior is ﬁrst observed . This is the rigidity percolation transition , and it occurs for a ﬁxed value of L / l c , where 1 / l c is a particularly convenient measure of ﬁlament con - centration , as it represents the line density ( length per volume ) in our 2 - d system , apart from a factor of order unity . We have shown that there are three distinct elastic be - haviors of semiﬂexible networks above the rigidity tran - sition : ( i ) when either the molecular weight ( ﬁlament length ) or concentration is low , a nonaﬃne regime is expected in which the modulus is determined at a mi - croscopic level by ﬁlament bending ( transverse compli - ance ) [ 34 , 38 ] ; ( ii ) as either the molecular weight or con - centration increases , a crossover is expected to an elas - tic regime in which the deformations are aﬃne ( uniform strain ) and in which the elastic response at the large scale is governed by the thermal / entropic longitudinal compli - ance of ﬁlament segments ; ( iii ) at still higher concentra - tions or cross – link densities , this single - ﬁlament compli - ance becomes dominated by the mechanical compliance of bare ﬁlament stretching and compression . The crossover between ( i ) and ( ii ) is given by a ﬁxed value of L / λ of order 10 , where λ is a microscopic length characterizing the range of nonaﬃne deformation along a ﬁlament backbone . We expect this length to be of order l c , the distance between cross – links . But , it should also depend on the ﬁlament stiﬀness through the length l b = p κ / µ . In fact , it can only depend on the two lengths l b and l c in our networks . Thus , we expect that λ = l c ( l c / l b ) z . We have presented a scaling argument that shows this for z = 2 / 5 , while we ﬁnd empirically that z ≃ 1 / 3 for biologically relevant densities . The boundary between nonaﬃne and aﬃne regimes is thus given by L ∼ λ . In the mechanically - dominated regime , l b = p κ / µ M , while in the thermal regime , l b = p κ / µ T ∼ s l 3c κ a 2 ℓ p µ M . ( 25 ) Thus , in the mechanical regime , the boundary is given by L ∼ l 1 + z c , while in the thermal regime , the boundary is given by L ∼ l 1 − z / 2 c . In either case , we see that this crossover has a diﬀerent functional dependence on con - centration , demonstrating once again that the physics of this crossover is distinct from the rigidity percolation transition . We show a sketch of the expected diagram of the various regimes depending on L and c f in Fig . 1 . The boundary between mechanically - dominated and thermal regimes is simply given by l c ∼ 3 p a 2 ℓ p , as we have noted above . We can make several additional observations concern - ing the behavior of real networks , based on our simple model . First , we note the strong dependence of the shear modulus on the cross – link density , as illustrated in Eq . 24 and already noted for 3D aﬃne networks in Ref . [ 36 ] . In fact , in the 2D networks presented here , we have made no distinction between the mesh size ( or typical separation of neighboring ﬁlaments ) ξ and the cross – link separation l c . We observe from this strong dependence of the modu - lus on l c , which is independent of ﬁlament concentration in 3D , that the modulus of semi - ﬂexible gels can be var - ied signiﬁcantly ( in fact , by orders of magnitude ) with changes only in cross – link density at the same ﬁlament concentration . This is very diﬀerent from the situation for ﬂexible polymer gels , and may well be important for cells , in that the mechanical properties can be tuned by local variations in the densities or binding constants of various actin binding proteins . Furthermore , as we have shown [ 44 , 51 ] , the modulus becomes a very strong function of concentration ( which , again , will translate to cross – link density on 3D net - works ) in the nonaﬃne regime . In the nonaﬃne regime , the modulus can vary by several orders of magnitude with respect to the stiﬀer aﬃne gels . As this nonaﬃne regime 14 is expected for just a few ( speciﬁcally , of order 10 or fewer ) cross – links along a single ﬁlament , it may also be possible that the cell can reduce its stiﬀness signiﬁcantly , and even ﬂuidize , by decreasing the number of cross – links per ﬁlament or the ﬁlament length . In addition , by using its proximity to the NA −→ AE cross - over , the cell can tune its nonlinear mechanical properties . In the AE regime the cytoskeletal network should be strongly strain – stiﬀening due to the nonlinear extensional prop - erties of individual ﬁlaments [ 36 ] . In the NA regime , there should be a much larger linear regime since the bending modes of the ﬁlaments , which dominate the de - formations in the NA regime have a much larger linear response regime . Finally , we speculate that in the aﬃne regime , the mechanical properties of the cell should be insensitive to the details of the cytoskeletal microstruc - ture ; in the AE regime the mean - ﬁeld character of the network enforced by the large ratio of L to λ suggests that local eﬀects of cross - linker type or network topol - ogy to self - average . On the other hand , within the NA regime , the cellular mechanical properties may be quite sensitive to such local network modiﬁcations . In this model , we have assumed freely - rotating crosslinks . In the case of actin networks , however , it is well know that many associated proteins can bind actin ﬁlaments at either preferred or ﬁxed angles [ 1 ] . This can have two distinct eﬀects : one geometric , and the other mechanical . One the one hand , the model we have described is only for isotropic networks . Thus , if actin crosslinking results in an anisotropic network ( e . g . , with oriented bundles ) , then one cannot describe such a sys - tem with the model presented here . If , on the other hand , the networks remain isotropic , but with rigid bond angles between ﬁlaments , then we expect to see additional rigidity of the networks as a re - sult . The size of this eﬀect can be estimated for the aﬃne regime ( AE and AM , in fact ) . We ﬁnd that the relative contribution to the network elastic modulus due to such crosslinks is only of order l b / l c , which is expected to be small for realistic networks of actin , both in vitro and in vivo . In simple terms , this is simply due to the very large lever arm that a ﬁlament segment of length l c ( say , of order 1 micrometer ) between crosslinks has over a small a small actin binding protein of size a few nanometers . More precisely , this can be seen by noting that in shearing two ﬁlaments that cross at a ﬁnite angle in the shear plane , a ﬁxed bond angle between the ﬁla - ments will give rise to a distortion ( i . e . , nonaﬃne ) of the resulting ﬁlament conformations within a region l b near the crosslink . ( This length corresponds to the range over which ﬁnite bending occurs , e . g . , when a ﬁnite bending moment is imposed at a ﬁlament end . ) The angle of this bend will be at most of order the macroscopic strain ǫ in the aﬃne regime . This results in a bending elastic energy of order κǫ 2 / l b per crosslink , compared with the longitu - dinal elastic energy of order µǫ 2 l c per segment between crosslinks . Noting that l 2b = κ / µ , we ﬁnd that the latter term ( which corresponds to the freely - rotating crosslink case ) is larger than the former by a factor of order l b / l c . For simple mechanical networks at T = 0 , as we con - sider in most of this paper , l b is of order the molecular diameter , which is much smaller than the distance be - tween overlapping ﬁlaments , let alone crosslinks in any real actin network . In the in vitro networks that have been studied , we expect this ratio to be no larger than at most a few percent . In the case of networks at ﬁnite temperature , as we discuss in Sec . V , l b ∼ p l 3 c / ℓ p , for which the ratio above is of order p l c / ℓ p . By deﬁnition , this is smaller than 1 for semiﬂexible networks . Thus , in any case , the corrections to the aﬃne elastic moduli due to possible ﬁxed - angle crosslinks ( in isotropic networks ) is expected to be small . In the related studies by Wilhelm and Frey [ 44 ] , who also consider the T = 0 mechanical properties of net - works such as ours , the authors looked at both ﬁxed - angle and freely - rotating crosslinks . They found that the rigidity percolation transitions occurred at somewhat dif - ferent values of concentration for ﬁxed - angle and freely - rotating bonds . But , they report that very similar be - havior was observed for the two cases above the critical points . Speciﬁcally , they found no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the dependence of the shear moduli with concentration in the non - aﬃne elastic regime . Thus , it would appear that no substantial diﬀerences due to the mechanics of crosslinks can be expected in either aﬃne nor nonaﬃne regimes , at least for the relatively sparse isotropic networks that actin forms . Acknowledgements AJL and FCM would like to acknowledge D . A . Weitz for helpful conversations . AJL would like to acknowledge the hospitality of the Vrije Universiteit . DAH was partly funded by a European Community Marie Curie Fellow - ship . This work is supported in part by the National Sci - ence Foundation under Grant Nos . DMR98 - 70785 and PHY99 - 07949 . APPENDIX The ﬁlaments are deposited into the shear cell as al - ready described in Sec . II . This is internally represented by the set of points { x i } consisting of all cross – links and midpoints between cross – links ( the midpoints are in - cluded so that the ﬁrst bending mode between any two cross – links is represented ) . Relative motion between the x i contributes to the system Hamiltonian according to discrete versions of ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . A change in separation from l 0 to l 0 + δl between any two adjacently connected points incurs an energy cost δ H stretch = µ 2 (cid:18) δl l 0 (cid:19) 2 l 0 ( 26 ) 15 In addition to this , a non – zero angle δθ between the vec - tors x i − x i − 1 and x i + 1 − x i , where x i − 1 , x i and x i + 1 are consecutive adjacent points on the same ﬁlament , con - tributes δ H bend = κ 2 (cid:18) δθ l ′ (cid:19) 2 l ′ ( 27 ) where l ′ is the mean of the lengths to either side of the central point , i . e . l ′ = 1 2 ( | x i − x i − 1 | + | x i + 1 − x i | ) . cross – linked ﬁlaments are coupled by imposing the same x i at intersections , but there is no energy cost for relative angles between ﬁlaments : cross – links can freely rotate . Each contribution ( 26 ) , ( 27 ) is linearised with respect to changes in the x i and summed to create the system Hamiltonian H ( { x i } ) . Either a uniaxial or shear strain γ is applied to the system through the periodic bound - aries in a Lees – Edwards manner [ 58 ] . The Hamiltonian H ( { x i } ) is then minimized with respect to the { x i } by the conjugate gradient method [ 59 ] . Two optimizations are included . The Hessian matrix A ij = ∂ 2 H / ∂x i ∂x j is preconditioned by M − 1 , where M has the same diagonal 2 × 2 matrices of A but is zero elsewhere . Furthermore , cross – links that lie within a given small distance , typ - ically ≈ 10 − 3 L , are coalesced . This improves the con - ditioning of A and hence the speed of convergence con - siderably , while producing only minimal change in the measured quantities , except precisely at the transition . [ 1 ] B . Alberts , D . Bray , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and J . D . Watson , Molecular Biology of the Cell , 3rd edition ( Garland , New York , 1994 ) ; P . A . Janmey Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 , 4 ( 1991 ) . [ 2 ] E . L . Elson Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biochem . 17 , 397 ( 1988 ) . [ 3 ] P . A . Janmey , S . Hvidt , J . Lamb , T . P . Stossel Nature 345 , 89 ( 1990 ) . [ 4 ] F . C . MacKintosh and P . A . Janmey , Curr . Opin . Sol . St . and Mat . Sci . 2 , 350 ( 1997 ) . [ 5 ] E . Sackmann in Physics of biomolecules and cells , eds . H . Flyvbjerg , F . J¨ulucher , P . Ormos and F . David ( Springer , Paris , 2002 ) . [ 6 ] J . Bohm , F . C . MacKintosh , J . V . Shah , L . E . Laham , P . A . Janmey , and J . Gluck Biophys . J . 72 , TU287 ( 1997 ) . [ 7 ] N . Wang , J . P . Butler , D . E . Ingber Science 260 , 1124 ( 1993 ) . [ 8 ] D . Stamenovic and N . Wang J . Appl . Physiol . 89 , 2085 ( 2000 ) . [ 9 ] T . P . Stossel Science 260 , 1086 ( 1993 ) ; T . P . Stossel Sci . Am . 271 , 54 ( 1994 ) . [ 10 ] J . R . Ralphs , A . D . Waggett , and M . Benjamin Matrix Bio . 21 , 67 ( 2002 ) . [ 11 ] D . Mazia , G . Schatten , and W . Sale J . Cell Bio . 66 , 198 ( 1975 ) . [ 12 ] Z . Guttenberg , B . Lorz , E . Sackmann , and A . Boulbitch Europhys . Lett . 54 , 826 ( 2001 ) . [ 13 ] D . Braun and P . Fromherz Phys . Rev . Lett . 81 , 5241 ( 1998 ) . [ 14 ] S . Yamada , D . Wirtz , and S . C . Kuo Biophys . J . 78 , 1736 ( 2000 ) . [ 15 ] B . Fabry , G . N . Maksym , J . P . Butler , M . Glogauer , D . Navajas , J . J . Fredberg Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 148102 ( 2001 ) . [ 16 ] M . Fixman , J . Kovac J . Chem . Phys . 58 , 1564 ( 1973 ) . [ 17 ] C . F . Schmidt , M . B¨armann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sack - mann Macromol . 22 , 3638 ( 1989 ) ; T . Piekenbrock and E . Sackmann , Biopolymers 32 , 1471 ( 1992 ) . [ 18 ] S . B . Smith , L . Finzi , and C . Bustamante , Science 258 , 1122 ( 1992 ) ; C . Bustamante , J . F . Marko , E . D . Siggia , and S . Smith , Science 265 , 1599 ( 1994 ) . [ 19 ] E . Farge and A . C . Maggs Macromol . 26 , 5041 ( 1993 ) . [ 20 ] F . Gittes , B . Mickey , J . Nettleton , and J . Howard , J . Cell Biol . 120 , 923 ( 1993 ) . [ 21 ] A . Ott , M . Magnasco , A . Simon , and A . Libchaber , Phys . Rev . E 48 , R1642 ( 1993 ) . [ 22 ] J . Wilhelm and E . Frey Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 2581 ( 1996 ) . [ 23 ] R . Granek J . Phys . II ( Paris ) 7 , 1761 ( 1997 ) . [ 24 ] F . Gittes and F . C . MacKintosh Phys . Rev . E 58 , R1241 ( 1998 ) . [ 25 ] A . Caspi , M . Elbaum , R . Granek , A . Lachish , and D . Zbaida , Phys . Rev . Lett . 80 , 1106 ( 1998 ) . [ 26 ] R . Everaers , F . Julicher , A . Ajdari , and A . C . Maggs , Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 , 3717 ( 1999 ) . [ 27 ] T . Odijk Macromol . 16 , 1340 ( 1983 ) . [ 28 ] A . N . Semenov Chem . Soc . Faraday Trans . 82 , 317 ( 1986 ) . [ 29 ] R . Ruddies , W . H . Goldman , G . Isenberg , and E . Sack - mann Biochem . Soc . Trans . 21 , 37S ( 1993 ) . [ 30 ] H . Isambert and A . C . Maggs Macromol . 29 , 1036 ( 1996 ) . [ 31 ] B . Hinner , M . Tempel , E . Sackmann , K . Kroy , E . Frey Phys . Rev . Lett . 81 , 2614 ( 1998 ) . [ 32 ] D . C . Morse Phys . Rev . E 58 , R1237 ( 1998 ) . [ 33 ] D . C . Morse Macromol . 31 , 7030 ( 1998 ) ; D . C . Morse Macromol . 31 , 7044 ( 1998 ) ; D . C . Morse Macromol . 32 , 5934 ( 1999 ) ; M . Pasquali , V . Shankar , and D . C . Morse Phys . Rev . E 64 , 020802 ( 2001 ) . [ 34 ] R . L . Satcher and C . F . Dewey , Biophys . J . 71 , 109 ( 1996 ) . [ 35 ] J . L . Jones and R . C . Ball , Macromolecules 24 , 6369 ( 1991 ) . [ 36 ] F . C . MacKintosh , J . K¨as and P . A . Janmey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4425 ( 1995 ) . [ 37 ] K . Kroy and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 306 ( 1996 ) . [ 38 ] E . Frey , K . Kroy and J . Wilhelm , in Dynamical Networks in Physics and Biology , ed . D . Beysens and G . Forgacs ( EDP Sciences – Springer , Berlin , 1998 ) . [ 39 ] P . G . de Gennes , Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics ( Cornell , Ithaca , 1979 ) ; M . Doi and S . F . Edwards , The - ory of Polymer Dynamics ( Oxford University Press , New York , 1986 ) . [ 40 ] M . Rubenstein and R . H . Colby , Polymer Physics ( Oxford University Press , London , 2003 ) . [ 41 ] Since dangling chain ends can carry no static stress , the volume fraction of such dangling ends serves only to di - lute the cross - links . This eﬀect can lead to corrections of at most l c L . In three dimensions , it is also true that in - terchain steric interactions can play a role in determining the modulus of the material since entanglements can lead 16 to topologically enforced cross - linking of the chains . [ 42 ] L . D . Landau and E . M . Lifschitz , Theory of Elasticity , 2nd ed . ( Oxford , Pergamon Press , 1986 ) . [ 43 ] G . E . Pike and C . H . Seager , Phys . Rev . B 10 , 1421 ( 1974 ) . [ 44 ] J . Wilhelm and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 108103 ( 2003 ) . [ 45 ] M . Plischke and B . Jo´os , Phys . Rev . Lett . 80 , 4907 ( 1998 ) . [ 46 ] M . Latva - Kokko and J . Timonen , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 066117 ( 2001 ) ; M . Latva - Kokko , J . M¨akinen and J . Ti - monen , Phys . Rev . E 63 , 046113 ( 2001 ) . [ 47 ] M . Sahimi , Phys . Rep . 306 , 213 ( 1998 ) . [ 48 ] J . ˚Astr¨om , S . Saarinen , K . Niskanen and J . Kurkij¨arvi , J . Appl . Phys . 75 , 2383 ( 1994 ) . [ 49 ] J . A . ˚Astr¨om , J . P . M¨akinen , M . J . Alava and J . Timonen , Phys . Rev . E 61 , 5550 ( 2000 ) . [ 50 ] D . A . Head , F . C . MacKintosh and A . J . Levine Phys . Rev . E 68 , 025101 ( R ) ( 2003 ) . [ 51 ] D . A . Head , A . J . Levine and F . C . MacKintosh , Phys . Rev . Lett 91 , 108102 ( 2003 ) . [ 52 ] M . Sahimi , Heterogeneous materials Vol . 1 ( Springer – Verlag , New York , 2003 ) . [ 53 ] M . Kellom¨aki , J . ˚Astr¨om and J . Timonen , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 2730 ( 1996 ) . [ 54 ] C . Joly – Duhamel , D . Hellio , A . Ajdari and M . Djabourov , Langmuir 18 , 7158 ( 2002 ) . [ 55 ] S . A . Langer and A . J . Liu , J . Phys . Chem . B 101 , 8667 ( 1997 ) . [ 56 ] T . Gisler , R . Ball , and D . A . Weitz , Phys . Rev . Lett . 82 , 1064 ( 1999 ) . [ 57 ] P . Janmey , private communication . [ 58 ] A . W Lees and S . F . Edwards , J . Phys . C 5 , 1921 ( 1972 ) . The uniaxial strain γ yy was imposed by allowing an in - ﬁnitesimal gap between cell images in the y – direction , valid for our linearized , static networks . [ 59 ] W . H . Press , S . A . Teukolsky , W . T . Vetterling and B . P . Flannery , Numerical recipies in C , 2nd ed . ( CUP , Cam - bridge , 1992 ) .