Abstract - - Transformer monitoring is the measurement , collection , and careful analysis of all relevant data regarding an electric transformer . If we measure the right data in real time and learn how to interpret this data , a good insight into the working condition of a transformer can be delivered . Constant monitoring results then in either required and immediate maintenance or can provide more maintenance - free time . Keywords —Data Mining , Online Monitoring , Molecular Acoustics , Multivariate Statistics I . I NTRODUCTION Transformers and On Load Tap Changer ( OLTC’s ) are used where the electrical AC voltage must be changed . Regardless of whether they are used for the operation of railway networks , general energy supply of industry and private households or other tasks . Flawless functioning is a necessity . However , operating conditions for these important key elements in our energy network are becoming more and more extreme , which consequently also places higher demands on the working components like the insulating fluids . The most important and ultimately the only means of protection for such systems is the liquid dielectric . Regular checking of these liquids ( mineral or ester - based oils ) is becoming more important than ever , as they provide information about the condition and allow conclusions to be drawn about the entire transformer or OLTC . A possible early detection of incipient errors in such systems and components is extremely advantageous and very cost - effective in the long term since unplanned downtimes and maintenances are reduced . A stable , future - oriented and - proof supply of electrical energy can only be guaranteed if the operating conditions of the transformers , in particular their electrical insulation , are monitored continuously and online . This paper reviews some of the transformer oil tests and their significance for an online monitoring . II . T ODAY ’ S S ITUATION The worldwide power supply is getting more and more into a critical state or has already reached it in some regions of the earth . The transformers used to adjust and stabilize the grid This fundamental research and development work was supported by Development Bank of Saxony ( SAB ) , Germany with Grants No . 100576766 ( TrafoNeedle ) as well as No . 100624156 ( JANUS ) . The authors would like to express their deep gratitude for supporting our research efforts in this new monitoring method voltage make a significant contribution to ensuring the stability of the global energy supply . However , aging and stress put on the transformer cause changes in the oil . These changes inform the operator about the electrical insulation and cooling ability of the oil during operation of the transformer and thus about its safety status . So , monitoring these parameters is of crucial importance . A . Materials and Methods Theoretically , this task is solved by regular sampling and testing according to the IEC regulations . Basic monitoring is recording the easily ascertainable main parameters of the system , e . g . , of the transformer . There are mainly two methods , a dielectric - chemical analysis , which gives an insight into the oil quality , and the chromatographic methods , which allow statements to be made about the " inner life " of the oil - insulated high - voltage systems . The dielectric - chemical parameters are the breakdown voltage ( BDV ) ( IEC 60156 ) and the dielectric loss factor “tgδ” ( tan _ Delta ) ( IEC60247 ) . Determining the breakdown voltage and the dielectric loss factor offer the possibility of assessing the current insulation condition of the oil . An increased water content ( Wc ) ( IEC 60814 ) drastically worsens the insulating properties of the oil . Other oil properties such as the neutralization number ( IEC 62021 - 1 ) are used to make a prognosis about the further operation of the transformer . The neutralization number or Total Acid Number ( TAN ) indicates the oxidation state of the insulating oil . If the neutralization number is too high , the formation of organic acids is very advanced and there is a risk of sludge precipitation , which can result in serious consequential damage . An increased neutralization number is often reflected in a reduced surface tension of the oil ( ISO 6295 ) . The oxidized oil components act as surfactants and therefor influence the surface tension . This is measured as the interfacial tension ( IFT ) in the oil / water system and is a very sensitive measure for the expected further aging behavior of the insulating oil . As a preventive measure against accelerated oxidation , the oil is usually treated with approx . 0 . 3 % of the oxidation inhibitor DBPC ( IEC 60666 ) . Determining the decomposition gases ( DGA ) dissolved in the oil ( IEC 60567 and 60599 ) allow What can we learn from a deep dive into transformer oil analysis data Matthias Wrobel School of Engineering and Design Technical University of Munich Arcisstrasse 21 , 80333 Munich , Germany matthias . wrobel @ tum . de Marcin Lewandowski Institute of Fundamental Technological Research , Polish Academy of Sciences , Pawinskiego 5B ; 02 - 106 Warsaw , Poland mlew @ ippt . pan . pl Miroslaw Wrobel Institute of Fundamental Technological Research , Polish Academy of Sciences , Pawinskiego 5B ; 02 - 106 Warsaw , Poland miroslaw . wrobel @ gmx . net 978 - 1 - 6654 - 8076 - 5 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 ©2022 IEEE 2022 4 t h I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n E l e c t r i c a l , C o n t r o l a nd I n s t r u m e n t a t i o n E n g i n ee r i n g ( I C E C I E ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 8076 - 5 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I C E C I E 55199 . 2022 . 10000392 2 conclusions about impending faults in the transformer . Local thermal overloads of the insulation system or partial discharges within the solid insulation can be detected . The determination of the furans in the insulating oil ( IEC 61198 ) has been used for some time as an additional information - source about the condition of the solid insulation . Through abnormal thermal aging of solid insulation ( cellulose ) , various furan derivatives are formed , which greatly accelerate the aging of the solid insulation [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . All these parameters are based on the presented IEC procedures and deliver important and valuable information so preventive measures can be taken in good time before the transformer suffers major damage . They also allow claims to be made about the lifetime condition of the insulation in an oil - insulated high - voltage system , e . g . , transformer or OLTC . Unfortunately , these types of measurements and analysis for the purpose of monitoring the correct operation of any given transformer are only being carried out by selective and sporadic laboratory analyses of the oil . Far away from actual operation and with sometimes great delay . This means , that no real - time and immediate action can be taken and a response to measured parameters is taking place , long after the circumstances have changed . We will show that the traditional periodic sampling and testing of insulating oil from high voltage systems is no longer the most contemporary and appropriate technique in a real - time preventive maintenance program . B . Study Procedures Only a proactive approach based on real - time and online oil condition monitoring can extend the transformers life . Authorities agree that despite the current IEC 60567 regulation , incorrect and careless sampling and testing techniques are at the root of 99 percent of " poor " dielectric and DGA readings . Showing once again that the human factor is the weakest " link in the chain " [ 3 ] . According to IEC 60567 “Oil - filled electrical equipment - Sampling of gases and oil for analysis of free and dissolved gases” and IEC60475 “Method for sampling liquid dielectrics” the sample should be taken from that part of the container , where the insulating liquid is likely to be most contaminated . Two samples can usually be taken to assess the quality of a delivery ( point 4 . 1 . 1 ) . Furthermore , in the same standard , in point 4 . 1 . 2 , the quantity of the sample to be taken is explained . It depends on the tests to be carried out and the methods used . Typically , a 2 liters samples is taken . In addition , there is the clarification in point 4 . 1 . 4 . 1 Sampling from transformer tank ; “the valve is opened and at least 10 liters of insulating liquid are allowed to flow slowly into a waste oil container ; the sample bottles are rinsed with the insulating liquid ; The sample bottles are filled” [ 2 ] . What does 10 liters mean for a medium - sized 110kV / 15kV ; 75MVA transformer with approx . 30m³ oil volume ? “Fig . 1” When using the drain valve AA023 " Bottom " for oil sampling , we have approx . 0 . 5 liters of oil in the line ( this is negligible ) , if we use the drain valve AA022 " Middle " for oil sampling , we will already have approx . 1 . 5 liters in the line ( no longer negligible ) . What is than the volume we can take for our sampling by running , say 12 liters of oil through - then grabbing 2 liters sample of new oil for the lab test ? Assuming that the new oil is tapped in a sphere around the connection , this results in a sphere with an effective radius of 13 to 15 cm around the tapping point . Let us compare this with the transformer dimension , they are 7350 x 2970 x 4755 [ cm ] ( LxWxH ) . We know that every oil - insulated high - voltage system is unique due to its aging , design , and load history . The oil reflects this history . So , the question arises : Is it a representative sample of our oil ? Does the single sample give an insight view into the " inner life " of this oil - insulated high - voltage system ? The measurement practice that has been common up to now “only” provides us with a snapshot under laboratory conditions . As already written , there is also always a risk that the oil sample taken from the transformer will be falsified due to incorrect handling and even if the oil is treated properly , the measurement done of the oil parameters under IEC guidelines – usually at 20°C - cannot provide any information on the behavior of the oil at operating temperatures which are greatly deviating from 20°C . Such information can be taken only from online systems , but the very important point is that some methods of laboratory analysis are based on procedures such as titration [ 4 ] . Applying the more stringent chemical titration in an on - line process is currently not possible without contaminating the oil with the titrant . In this case , we should find out whether the values that the titration methods give us cannot be obtained in other ways . A continuous measurement of the oil parameters not only offers exact instantaneous values , but also shows chronological trends . With this knowledge , the resource transformer or OLTC can be used ( loaded ) in a more targeted manner and by doing so , optimizing the economic efficiency of the equipment . In such a case two major questions appear : What knowledge and skills are required to develop and use such online monitoring system ? What knowledge about oil behavior do we have and need ? Let ' s make some assumptions based on the measurement standards already described above . If we were able to build a unit that could measure the following oil properties : Temperature [ °C , F ] Relative humidity ( RS ) [ % ] Water content ( Wc ) [ ppm ] Neutralization number ( TAN ) [ mg / kg ] Interfacial tension ( IFT ) [ mN / m ] Dielectric strength ( BDV ) [ kV ] Dissipation factor ( tan _ Delta ) [ deg ] Fig . 1 . typical connection and sampling field of a 40 MVA ; 110 kV / 15 kV transformer 3 Color [ N ] Dissolved gas Hydrogen - H2 [ ppm ] Ethylene - C2H2 [ ppm ] Methane CH4 [ ppm ] Carbon Monoxide - CO [ ppm ] Carbon Dioxide - CO2 [ ppm ] we would be able do a true , real - time measurement on any oil - filled electrical equipment . As the parameters acquired with such a system are completely in line with already established , well - known and implemented IEC procedures . This then becomes a real online “laboratory” that immediately informs us of the first “disease symptoms” of our oil - insulated high voltage systems . Here , too , it must be mentioned that such measuring system is not intended to replace laboratory analysis , which is our " gold standard " . The measuring system should only call up the laboratory analyzes , when necessary , in order to proof the findings C . Data Processing and Statistics To answer the second question : " What knowledge about the oil behavior do we have and need ? ” we learned a lot from evaluating oil sample data . Based on laboratory praxis nowadays , we were able to show , that it is sufficient to measure only a few of the described parameters to evaluate the oils “status quo” and maybe find a solution to the titration problem . Tests and calculation routines for the multivariable analysis and the resulting numbers and figures show the " inner " connection between various oil parameters such as oil moisture ( Wc ) , acid number ( TAN ) , temperature ( Temp ) , Interfacial tension ( IFT ) , breakdown voltage ( BDV ) , dielectric loss factor “tgδ” ( tan _ Delta ) and Color . Multivariable analysis is one of the main statistical methods used in studies with multiple inputs . In this paper , we will give a short overview of multivariable analysis and introduce some of the core models that statisticians use to analyze experimental data . One of the difficulties inherent in multivariate statistics is the problem of visualizing data that has many variables ( in our environment here including age , acidity , temperature , water content , breakdown voltage , etc . ) . For example , a function chart showing a graph of the relationship between many of the oil ' s variables is “Fig . 2” . Fortunately , in datasets with many variables , groups of variables often move together . One reason is that there can be more than one variable measuring the same “driving principle” that determines the behavior of the system [ 5 ] . In many systems there are only few such “driving principle or forces” . A multiplicity of laboratory equipment makes it possible to measure dozens of system variables simultaneously “Fig . 3” . In this case we can use this information redundancy very well to determine the oil parameters and their behaviors over time , or we can simplify the problem by replacing a group of variables with a single new variable or measurement . The principal component analysis is a quantitatively rigorous method to achieve this simplification which creates a new set of variables or measurements . The best example of this assumption is a case where , during our previous investigation , we found that water Wc v . TAN balance can be used to estimate the BDV . A single aluminum coated piezoelectric resonator was used to measure a type of Acoustic Disbalance [ AcDis ] closely related to the ultrasonic relaxation process of the oil molecules . Our work with aluminum - coated piezoelectric resonators has shown that it is possible to map the BDV matrix solution very well , including the border behavior of the oil samples , with a simple look - up table [ 6 ] . The experimental evidence with acoustic resonators shows that the absorption in most liquids is mainly caused by viscosity ( in the case of transformer oil it is directly related to IFT and TAN ) and by thermal conduction , with the effect of radiation being negligible [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] . Fig . 2 . Function chart graph of the relationship between many of the oil’s variables . The color bar shows the correlation coefficient between all these variables – BLUE is a positive and RED is negative correlation Fig . 3 . Partial correlation between all variables is displayed numerically and as a color bar . The distribution function of individual variables is also shown - it is a different view on the same variables shown in function chart Fig . 2 4 This proceeding shows us that the mathematical and statistical investigation of the relationships in the oil data leads to different possible sensor combinations that would not traditionally be expected , as shown in " Fig . 4 " . Some algorithms and advance mathematical method are , like humans , able to infer complex causalities , formulate generalizations , and create strong abstractions from data that is insufficient , noisy , corrupted by outliers , or ambiguous . Based on the known variable representation , presented on “Fig . 4” , we will show the best examples of how the " Deep Data Dive " method works . This is the estimation of the neutralization number ( TAN ) based only on the moisture ( Wc ) , dissipation factor ( tan _ Delta ) and Color of the oil , without resorting to the titration method . The details are presented on “Fig . 4 “and “Fig . 5” as well as in “Table I . ” TABLE I R OBUST R EGRESSION DATA FOR NEUTRALIZATION NUMBER ( TAN ) ESTIMATION USING TAN _ DELTA , W C AND C OLOR We have looked at the design and analysis of algorithms tailored to data analysis problems to get the best estimator for TAN measurement . These special structures allow for so - called sparse representations with reduced dimensionality , which we used for the computationally efficient treatment of the data analysis problems considered . For this estimation so - called Robust Regression was used . Robust regression is a method which can be used as an alternative to ordinary least squares regression when there are outliers or influential observations , in the dataset one is working with [ 10 , 11 ] . A quick look at “Fig . 4” with the partial correlations and data distribution plots in “Fig . 5” , show that this is obviously the case . Distribution is a function that describes the relationship between observations in a sample space , from a practical perspective . The distribution provides a parameterized mathematical function that can be used to calculate the probability for each individual observation from the sample space . It shows us what values the various parameters assume in real life and what we can expect when analyzing an oil sample . III . R ESULTS While monitoring the transformers and OLTCs as the most valuable assets , we all face a variety of issues on a daily basis . The problem often arises that at a certain point you just can ' t get any further and your thoughts get stuck . Such a problem emerges , for example , when the oil samples from our most valued system deteriorate dramatically over the course of a few months . We start to think about what went wrong and whether we could do more to monitor these changes and get the important information early on – just take a lab sample more often ? Fortunately , scientific and technological discoveries always appear out of the fact that a given problem must be solved or the given solution was not satisfactory enough to meet all possible outcomes . It’s these circumstances that require creativity and new perspectives . Preceding the discoveries that were mentioned , we tried to do just that and drew inspiration from the principals of the well - known Disney - method . The Disney Method is about putting yourself in different roles and looking at the subject from a new perspective [ 12 ] . Fortunately , since the same oil is subject to aging and exhibits correlatable changes that determine the behavior of the system , it turns out that different oil parameters can be determined by combinations of other # # # # C ALL : # # RLM ( FORMULA = TAN ~ WC _ T + TAN _ DELTA _ T + C OLOR , DATA = RWE _ A ) # # # # # # R ESIDUALS : M IN 1Q M EDIAN 3Q M AX - 0 . 14565 - 0 . 01411 - 0 . 00205 0 . 01453 1 . 02210 # # # # C OEFFICIENTS : V ALUE S TD . E RROR T VALUE I NTERCEPT 0 . 004 0 . 0013 3 . 039 W C _ T 0 . 006 0 . 0004 13 . 941 TAN _ DELTA _ T 0 . 007 0 . 0096 11 . 540 C OLOR 0 . 019 0 . 0005 36 . 720 # # # # R ESIDUAL STANDARD ERROR : 0 . 00211 ON 3923 DEGREES OF FREEDOM # # ( 48 OBSERVATIONS DELETED DUE TO MISSINGNESS ) # # Fig . 5 . Distribution and Structural data dependency of the neutralization number TAN on the color and tan DELTA . To make the diagram easier to read , the tan _ Delta and the TAN are displayed on a logarithmic scale . Color is displayed as a discrete value according to DIN ISO 2049 : 2001 - 06 Fig . 4 . Partial correlation diagram shows the internal dependency of the various oil parameters as well their distribution . In this case , the TAN dependency of tan _ Delta , Wc , and Color is of particular interest . 5 parameters . As all data sets of oil parameters measured in the laboratory according to IEC standards show , there are groups of variables that move together . This situation allows substitute of various measurements , e . g . titration or BDV , which cannot currently be performed online , with simple optical or electrical measurements of the oil . The Wc , BDV and TAN could be calculated very precisely and replaced with measurements of other oil parameters . The neutralization number ( TAN ) , as shown here , can be determined very precisely using known methods for measuring the loss factor ( tan _ Delta ) and the color [ 13 , 14 ] . IV . D ISCUSSION The data presented here is based on measurements on mineral oil - based transformer oil . Due to years of experience with electrical systems with this type of oil , we were able to draw on enormously large data collections . The question now arises as to whether these interactions can also be represented for ester oil . Ester - based transformer oils will , not only in our opinion , replace the current and long - used standard mineral oil in the future . From an ecological point of view , transformer oil based on mineral oil is not the ideal dielectric for offshore wind farms , for example . Mineral oil spills can have devastating effects on the natural environment - including animals , plants , water , and humans - due to the polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCB ) and polychlorinated terphenyls ( PCT ) found in mineral oil . Unlike mineral oils , natural ester dielectrics ( ester oil ) are non - toxic in water and soil , non - hazardous , and quickly and thoroughly biodegradable [ 15 ] . Recent installations of ester oil filled power and distribution transformers around the world , due to their natural dielectric properties , have shown the industry that this can be a path towards a cheaper , more resilient , better performing , and safer industry . However , the corresponding measurement and monitoring data are currently not as numerous as for mineral oils , which should make the analyzes shown here more difficult . V . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Andrzej Dabrowski for his help and great assistance with the statistical calculations and critical comments on the original version of this document . All calculations were made on the open - source environment RStudio Ver . 1 . 3 . 1056 and R version 4 . 0 . 2 ( Copyright ( C ) 2020 The R Foundation for Statistical Computing . " R " : A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing , Vienna , Austria . www . r - project . org and www . rstudio . com ) were used to process all oil data and calculate the correlation between the parameters and the properties derived from the laboratory oil sample measurements . VI . D ISCLOSURE AND C ONFLICT OF I NTEREST The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest . VII . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] IEC 60567 Oil - filled electrical equipment - Sampling of gases and oil for analysis of free and dissolved gases [ 2 ] IEC60475 Method for sampling liquid dielectrics [ 3 ] I . A . R . Gray , “A Guide to Transformer Oil Analysis” , 2005 . [ 4 ] https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Titration ( last access to the page on 07 / 27 / 2022 ) [ 5 ] Ron Wehrens , “Chemometrics with R - Multivariate Data Analysis in the Natural Sciences and Life Sciences” , ISBN 978 - 3 - 642 - 17840 - 5 , Springer Verlag 2011 . [ 6 ] M . Wrobel , " Acoustic hybrid sensor for BDV monitoring in insulating oil , " 2017 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium ( IUS ) , 2017 , pp . 1 - 1 , doi : 10 . 1109 / ULTSYM . 2017 . 8092958 . [ 7 ] R . Auerbach , " Oberflächenspannung und Schallgeschwindigkeit " , Experientia 4 . 12 , p . 473 - 474 , 1948 [ 8 ] Alexander O . Niedermayer , et al . " A2 . 4 - Accurate Determination of Viscosity and Mass Density of Fluids using a Piezoelectric Tuning Fork Resonant Sensor“ , Proceedings SENSOR 2015 , p . 66 - 71 , 2015 [ 9 ] Robert Schäfer , et al . „Ultrasonic concentration measurement of aqueous solutions using PLS regression " , Ultrasonics 44 , p . 947 - 950 , 2006 [ 10 ] Fox , John , and Sanford Weisberg . " Robust regression . " An R and S - Plus companion to applied regression 91 ( 2002 ) . [ 11 ] https : / / stats . oarc . ucla . edu / r / dae / robust - regression / ( last access to the page on 07 / 27 / 2022 ) [ 12 ] https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Disney _ method ( last access to the page on 07 / 27 / 2022 ) [ 13 ] J . M . Guerrero , A . E . Castilla , J . A . S . Fernández and C . A . Platero , " Transformer Oil Diagnosis Based on a Capacitive Sensor Frequency Response Analysis , " in IEEE Access , vol . 9 , pp . 7576 - 7585 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1109 / ACCESS . 2021 . 3049192 . [ 14 ] Pei Wang , M . R . Raghuveer , W . McDermid and J . C . Bromley , " A digital technique for the on - line measurement of dissipation factor and capacitance , " in IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation , vol . 8 , no . 2 , pp . 228 - 232 , April 2001 , doi : 10 . 1109 / 94 . 919938 . [ 15 ] Transformer Technology Magazine , ” Transformer Lifeblood : Oils & Fluids Part I” , Issue 16 , p . 19 - 23 , p . 46 - 51 , 2021