Profound understanding of emergent mathematics : broadening the construct of teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge Brent Davis & Moshe Renert Published online : 12 September 2012 # Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2012 Abstract We discuss the teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of mathematics in this article , arguing two main points as we report on a 2 - year study involving 22 practicing teachers . First we argue that teachers ’ knowledge of mathematics might be productively construed as a complex evolving form , a significant dimension of which is tacit knowledge . Second , based on our first point , we suggest that this knowledge is better understood as a learnable disposition than a domain to be mastered . Keywords Mathematics knowledge for teaching . Concept study . Tacit knowledge . Mathematics education . Teacher education Since the 1970s , investigations of the impact of teachers ’ formal mathematical preparation on their effectiveness in the classroom have reaffirmed an early finding by Begle ( 1979 ) : there is surprisingly little correlation between the number of mathematics courses that teachers took in college and the performance of their students on standardized tests . These findings have troubled many within the field of mathematics education for decades . How could it be that deeper disciplinary backgrounds are not more strongly linked to teacher effectiveness ? Widely endorsed answers to this question began to emerge in the 1990s . Several researchers noted that stock courses in mathematics are focused on completed results that often hide the messiness and complications that led to their production . In contrast , teaching in primary school entails struggling with the messiness and working through the complica - tions as students produce novel mathematical insights . This realization has prompted many to argue that teachers ’ attitudes toward mathematics knowledge are necessarily different from those of research mathematicians . Chevallard ( 1985 ) drew attention to this point by highlighting the “ didactic transposition ”— that is , the modifications entailed when knowl - edge that was intended as a tool to be put to use is translated into knowledge that is intended to be taught and learned . In a similar vein , Ball and Bass ( 2000 ) have noted that research Educ Stud Math ( 2013 ) 82 : 245 – 265 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10649 - 012 - 9424 - 8 B . Davis ( * ) : M . Renert University of Calgary , Calgary , AB , Canada e - mail : brent . davis @ ucalgary . ca mathematicians are largely oriented toward packing insights into tight formulations ( theo - rems , formulae , etc . ) , whereas teachers are more oriented toward unpacking . Aligned with this insight , Ma ( 1999 ) elaborated Shulman ’ s ( 1986 ) notion of “ pedagogical content knowl - edge ” to put forward the construct of “ profound understanding of fundamental mathemat - ics . ” The name describes the particular character of teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of mathematics as fundamental — that is , “ foundational , primary , and elementary ” ( p . 116 ) — and as profound — that is referring to a “ deep , vast , and thorough ” knowledge of concepts and their interconnections ( p . 120 ) . The suggestion that a specific type of pedagogical content knowledge is associated with the teaching of mathematics has reached near - consensus among researchers . In a recent review of studies of teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of mathematics , Baumert et al . ( 2010 ) summed it up as follows : Findings show that [ teachers ’ content knowledge of mathematics ] remains inert in the classroom unless accompanied by a rich repertoire of mathematical knowledge and skills relating directly to the curriculum , instruction , and student learning . ( p . 139 , emphasis added ) Despite widespread agreement on this point , there is a decided lack of consensus around the nature of teachers ’ “ inert ” mathematical content knowledge and how it might be accessed or activated . A large number of formal investigations have focused on explicit manifestations of disciplinary knowledge — that is , the sorts of insights that can be assessed directly through observation , interviews , or written tests . Such explicit knowledge is typi - cally deemed to be teachable , as reflected in studies of the disciplinary content of teacher preparation programs ( e . g . , Schmidt , Houang , & Cogan , 2011 ) . 1 Other researchers ( e . g . , Adler & Davis , 2006 ; Davis , 2011 ; Davis & Renert , 2009 ) , influenced largely by the work of Polanyi ( 1966 ) , have suggested that the most important knowledge for teaching tends to be enacted and tacit , and so neither easily identified nor readily measured . While in no way denying the importance of teachers ’ ability to demon - strate competence in formal mathematics , some of these investigations have emphasized the networks of association that underlie the conceptual fluency of expert teachers . As has been established in other domains of expertise , expert performance is enabled by well - established and automatized ( i . e . , not necessarily accessible to consciousness ) webs of association , from which the expert effortlessly “ selects ” an interpretation , scenario , or cluster of actions that is likely to best fit unfamiliar situations ( see Ericsson , Charness , Feltovich , & Hoffman , 2006 ) . Experts are typically unable to explain or justify their choices when asked about them ; they simply recognize their interpretations or actions as appropriate in the circumstances encoun - tered . We believe that teachers ’ content knowledge manifests largely in this way . As we elaborate in this article , viewing teachers ’ knowledge in this way carries significant impli - cations for how it is studied , assessed , and developed . 1 Profound understanding of emergent mathematics Our discussion is framed by a critique of Ma ’ s notion of profound understanding of fundamental mathematics . While we resonate with her interpretation of the word profound , 1 See , e . g . , the Teacher Education and Development Study in Mathematics ( TEDS - M ) , the most recent reports of which are available at http : / / teds . educ . msu . edu / . 246 B . Davis , M . Renert particularly as illustrated through her highly networked diagrams , we are less comfortable with the adjective fundamental . Specifically , we propose that characterizing teachers ’ disciplinary expertise as “ foundational , primary , and elementary ”— terms which suggest a closed set of insights and understanding that might be catalogued and assessed — may be antithetical to the project of researching the complexity of teachers ’ knowledge . As an alternative to Ma ’ s construct , we develop the notion of “ profound understanding of emergent mathematics . ” In brief , we argue that the knowledge needed by teachers is not simply a clear - cut and well - connected set of basics , but a sophisticated and largely enactive mix of familiarity with various realizations of mathematical concepts and awareness of the complex processes through which mathematics is produced . ( Note : the term realizations borrows from Sfard , 2008 , and is used to refer to associations that a learner might use to make sense of a mathematical construct . ) In anchoring our usage of the term “ emergent ” to the adaptive , evolutionary dynamics described by complexity researchers , we intend to flag the coherent - but - never - fixed character of the complex form of mathematical knowledge for teaching . The distinction between fundamental and emergent is not a subtle one . It often seems that school mathematics — and , correspondingly , teacher knowledge of mathematics — is regarded as limited , straightforward , and static . We argue the contrary : teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of mathematics is vast , intricate , and evolving . As developed in the pages that follow , while it is true that the explicit contents of school mathematics are limited and quite stable , the tacit and associative understandings that enable that explicit knowledge are extensive and complex . Moreover , no individual could possibly be aware of the whole range of interpretations that might be invoked in even primary school mathematics . Rather than think of this knowledge as a discrete body of foundational knowledge held by individuals , then , we offer that it may be more productive to view it as a flexible , vibrant category of knowing that is distributed across a body of professionals . We thus frame mathematics knowledge for teaching in terms of a learnable participatory disposition within an evolving knowledge domain . The notion of “ learnable participatory disposition ” is central to our research , and it is one that we attempt to explicate as this report unfolds . The participatory “ concept study ” research project that we report on in this article was undertaken with teachers rather than on teachers with the intention of affecting the ways they think about , feel about , and engage with mathematical concepts — as individuals , with colleagues , and with their students . Although still in its early stages , our research indicates that teachers ’ involvement in such shared activities can have immediate and significant impact on their knowledge of mathe - matics and on their teaching practices . In particular , these activities appear to support a shift in teachers ’ perceptions of the nature of mathematics , away from pre - given and unchanging facts , toward open and evolving human understandings that can be discussed and debated . We suspect that an illustrative anecdote might be useful at this point . The following account was written by a practicing Grade 6 / 7 teacher who took part in concept study with us : “ Thou Shalt Not ” In 2007 , the mathematics curriculum was changed . While reviewing the new docu - ment , I noticed an addition to the standard learning outcome that covers the divisibility rules for 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , and 10 : explain “… why a number cannot be divided by zero . ” My first response was , “ That ’ s new . ” My second response was , “ Wait , I don ’ t have any idea why you can ’ t divide by zero ! How can I teach that ? ” Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 247 In my first try teaching the concept I relied on the grade - level resources , which recommended an “ exploratory ” lesson . I did this after a warm up intended to highlight the relationship between division and the other operations ( particularly subtraction and multiplication ) . Reading student work afterwards , I realized that the lesson had failed in a fundamental way : students didn ’ t differentiate between the questions 0 ÷ 8 and 8 ÷ 0 . Even though they gave an answer of “ zero ” for the first and an answer of “ no answer ” , or “ undefined ” , for the second , students concluded that both of these responses meant “ nothing ” , and therefore the two questions were the same . This led to re - teaching with explicit instruction : 0 ÷ 8 0 0 , which is an answer . 8 ÷ 0 is undefined , which means it has no answer , and is not possible . It is not the same question as 0 ÷ 8 . For my second try the next year , I went back to the teacher ’ s guide . I found more explicit background information using models of repeated subtraction and inverse multiplication . After the failure of the exploratory lesson , I tried a more structured approach , where I introduced the models to the students first with possible divisions , then with division by zero . This time , students were able to differentiate the different questions , but their explanations tended to ignore the models I had provided for their own responses based on grouping . These explanations were fuzzy , vague , and often incorrect ; students were able to state that a number could not be divided by zero , but could not explain why . I sought out several grade - level colleagues for advice on how they taught the lesson . The responses ? They didn ’ t — they skipped the concept entirely . I asked some high school teachers how they respond to student questions on division by zero . The responses : don ’ t . Just don ’ t . My third try teaching the concept was the first after participation in the M 4 T cohort , 2 and in a concept study of multiplication . At the beginning of the year , I had engaged my students in an exploration of the models of multiplication , with some of the results from our concept study that the students would have encountered so far ( multiplication is repeated addition , grouping , array making , and area ) . Two months later , my introduction for the division - by - zero lesson was the question : what is division ? Students worked in groups to brainstorm models of division , which we brought together on chart paper as a class . Collectively , students had developed models based on grouping , repeated subtraction , number line hopping ( including the goal being zero ) , fractions and the inverse of multiplication . We then used the models to specif - ically model the equation 6 (cid:1) 2 ¼ 3 . Next , the students were asked to use the models to represent 6 ÷ 1 0 6 , and 0 ÷ 6 0 0 . I then changed the question to 6 ÷ 0 0 ? , and asked students to work with the models . Students began to respond with phrases like “ it doesn ’ t make sense ” and “ it ’ s all wonky ” , which lead to introduction of the term “ undefined ” . In the follow - up work , the success was clear : students could answer the questions about division by zero correctly , and also clearly explain why , using the meaning of division . The concept study of multiplication seems to have led directly to students being able to grasp this difficult mathematical concept . 2 The “ M 4 T [ mathematics - for - teaching ] cohort ” is the title of the Master ’ s of Education program that served as the context of the events described in this article . 248 B . Davis , M . Renert This narrative is one of many that we have collected through the course of working with the teachers . While we do regard these sorts of accounts as important indicators of sort in pedagogy that is associated with an open participatory disposition toward mathematics , we do not offer this narrative as data or evidence here . Rather , it is presented to illustrate the hallmarks of a profound understanding of emergent mathematics — in particular , a tentativeness toward over - arching statements and an attentiveness to the contributions of participants . Such tentativeness and attentiveness , we contend , contribute to a climate of collective knowledge building in the classroom . We argue below that this capacity to engage learners in collective learning of mathematics is as much a part of teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge as the formal content that might be assessed on a written test ( see also Davis & Simmt , 2006 ) . Returning to our critique of Ma ’ s construct , it is thus important to emphasize that we do not intend to dispose of it or minimize its importance . On the contrary , emergent mathe - matics does not preclude what has already been established and embodied in a cultural system . With regard to teachers ’ knowledge , profound understanding of emergent mathe - matics includes but broadens profound understanding of fundamental mathematics . In particular , a profound understanding of emergent mathematics foregrounds and embraces the necessary tensions of stability - and - novelty and coherence - and - decentralization , afford - ing the latter elements of these dyads the same status as the former . 2 Emergence Capra ( 2005 ) offered a systemic analysis of the building blocks of life in diverse phenomena : biological cells , consciousness , and social reality . Capra ’ s synthesis is based on the assump - tion that there is a fundamental unity to life and that different living systems exhibit similar patterns of organization . This assumption is supported by the major findings of complexity science , systems theory , and cognitive sciences of the past three decades . Accordingly , the pattern of organization of living systems is the self - generating network . Living systems are cognitive learning systems , where cognition is closely related to the process of autopoiesis ( self - organization , self - generation ) and can be observed as evolution on multiple scales . That is , complex living / learning systems are coupled to their environments and continually respond to environmental influences with structural changes . Living systems are also dissipative structures , that is , they are open to the environment and operate far from equilibrium where new forms of order may emerge . Within the complexity sciences , the word emergence has been adopted to collect these notions . As Goldstein ( 1999 ) explained , emergence is “ the arising of novel and coherent structures , patterns and properties during the process of self - organization in complex systems ” ( p . 51 ) . We assert that the notion of emergence can be applied in a number of ways to mathematics for teaching . Specifically , it can be used to understand and characterize the dynamics and structures of this branch of knowledge . It highlights not only situation - specific selections and adaptations but the systemic , distributed , and self - organizing character of teachers ’ content knowledge . It is not uncommon to encounter suggestions that mathematics “ is a living , breathing , changing organism …” ( Burger & Starbird , 2005 , p . xi ) or that it “ emerges as an autopoietic [ i . e . , self - creating and self - maintaining ] system ” ( Sfard , 2008 , p . 129 ) . As an example , Mazur ( 2003 ) offered some historical case studies of the emergence of mathematical concepts . Multiplication , for example , was likely originally conceived as repeated addition and / or some sort of a grouping process . However , this conception breaks down when one attempts to add 5 8 to itself 3 4 times , π to itself d times , or to assemble − 2 groups of − 3 . Mathematicians struggled to elaborate multiplication as new number systems unfolded . Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 249 Their responses were never purely logical and , in most cases , new realizations — that is , associations that might be used to interpret a concept , including definitions , rules , analogies , applications , and so on — arose out of emergent arguments and were incorporated into always evolving conceptual constructs . For instance , construal of multiplication as area making ( in which case the factors are lengths ) makes it is easier to interpret and envision calculations involving fractions and real irrationals . Other realizations are needed to make sense of multiplication of negative integers and imaginary numbers . It is this sense of emergence we intend to invoke in the phrase “ profound understanding of emergent mathematics . ” Our construct gestures toward an understanding of teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge as a responsive and evolving autopoietic system of realizations that is distributed across a body of educators . Staying with the example of multiplication , and on the basis of our analyses of North American textbooks , we feel justified in asserting that most learners will have encountered at least a dozen distinct realizations of multiplication by the 8th grade . They include : skip counting , hopping along a number line , stretching and compressing a number line , grid making , area generation , dimension jumping , scaling , a linear function , and a process that might be illustrated by repeated folding , splitting , or layering . Such diversity contributes to robust and flexible understandings ( see , e . g . , English , 1997 ; Harel & Confrey , 1994 ; Lakoff & Núñez , 2000 ) that enable the experienced practitioner to move fluidly among interpretations , blending them and automatically selecting ones that fit the circumstances at hand — rarely conscious of what selections have been made and the conceptual implications of those selections . The subtleties of the capacity to move among interpretations tend to be difficult for expert practitioners to appreciate . In particular , teachers and other expert knowers are often unable to differentiate among realizations that novices are unable to reconcile ( Sfard , 2008 ) . To illustrate , Fig . 1 shows four different interpretations of multiplication along with entailments for the meanings of multipliers , multiplicands , and products . While some obvious overlaps exist Fig . 1 “ 2 × 3 ” as viewed through four interpretations of multiplication : multiplication as ( a ) repeated grouping , ( b ) grid ( or area ) making , ( c ) number - line stretchingorcompressing , and ( d ) a linear function ( y 0 mx ) 250 B . Davis , M . Renert among these instances , shifting from one instance to the next involves significant conceptual leaps . It is not simply that the underlying images are different ; the actions that are mapped onto the concept of multiplying ( i . e . , clustering vs . rectangulating vs . compressing vs . sloping ) are lodged in very different webs of association . Each mapping opens up and shuts down different interpretive possibilities . These webs of association , we contend , are not merely accumulative , but aspects of emergent forms . That is , as they interact , they cohere into grander constructs that can open up surprising new dimensions . In this sense , a concept such as multiplication is one element in an ever - evolving ecosystem of elements , which constitutes the dynamic system of Western mathematics . A profound understanding of emergent mathematics , then , entails both the complex dynamics at work in the development of mathematical knowledge and the specific realizations of elementary concepts that might be relevant and meaningful to learners . We move now to report on our ongoing work with teachers . 3 Concept study This report is organized around what we call “ concept study , ” the specific structure with which we engage with practicing teachers in the examination and elaboration of mathematical understandings . The phrase “ concept study ” combines elements of two prominent notions in contempo - rary mathematics education research : concept analysis and lesson study . Concept analysis , which was well represented in mathematics education research from the 1960s to the 1980s , focuses on explicating logical structures and associations that inhere in mathematical con - cepts . As Usiskin , Peressini , Marchisotto , and Stanley ( 2003 ) described it , concept analysis involves tracing the origins and applications of a concept , looking at the different ways in which it appears both within and outside mathematics , and examining the various repre - sentations and definitions used to describe it and their consequences ( p . 1 ) . Usiskin et al . extended their description to include ways of representing ideas to learners , alternative definitions and their implications , histories and evolutions of concepts , applica - tions , and learners ’ interpretations of what they are learning . We blend this emphasis with the collaborative structures of lesson study , which “ teachers engage in to improve the quality of their teaching and enrich students ’ learning experiences ” ( Fernandez & Yoshida , 2004 , p . 2 ) . Lesson studies are oriented towards new pedagogical possibilities through participatory , collective , and ongoing engagements . Concept study is thus guided by these assumptions : & At the individual level , understandings of mathematical concepts and conceptions of mathematics are emergent . & At the cultural level , teachers are vital participants in the creation of mathematics , principally through the selection of and preferential emphasis given to particular inter - pretations over others . & As the level of social collectives , teachers ’ knowledge of mathematics is largely tacit but critical elements of it can be made available to conscious interrogation in group settings . & Individual and collective knowing cannot be dichotomized ; collective possibilities are enfolded in and unfold individual understandings . The last two points are of particular relevance . A common observation across our concept studies has been that individual teachers can rarely identify more than a handful of Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 251 interpretations of a given concept when presented with a direct question ( e . g . , “ What is multiplication ? ”— see , e . g . , Davis & Simmt , 2003 ; Davis , 2008 ; Davis & Renert , 2009 ) . In contrast , in our experience , cross - grade groups of teachers consistently generate rich lists of metaphors , analogies , and images when invited to situate the concept in the context of their teaching experiences . These lists then act as gateways into the excavation of embodied and figurative dimensions , a process that can quickly result in a reworking of the concept itself . We refer to this process as substructing . Substructing is derived from the Latin sub - , “ under , from below ” and struere , “ pile , assemble ” ( and the root of strew and construe , in addition to structure and construct ) . To substruct is to build beneath something . In industry , substruct refers to reconstructing a building without demolishing it — and , ideally , without interrupting its use . Likewise , as they engage in the sorts of concept - study strategies that we describe below , teachers rework mathematical concepts , sometimes radically , while using them almost without interruption in their teaching . While the term “ substructing ” may connote a descending motion , substructing is both reductive and productive . It is reductive in that it starts by re - collecting and re - membering experiential , linguistic , and other elements that infuse the meaning of a concept . It is productive in a complexivist sense , in which acts of re - presentation often compel new integrative structures and novel interpretations . These constructs , in turn , may become substructs of subsequent knowing . This recursive process corresponds with the understand - ing of emergent knowledge as both dynamic and stable / coherent : always deepening , crys - tallizing , and becoming , while always embodying the memory of its evolution in its structures . To this end , the process of substructing operationalizes the structures of emergent mathematical knowledge . Substructing might be contrasted with the process of “ unpacking ” Ball and Bass ( 2000 ) , which corresponds with a view of mathematical knowledge as manifesting in compressed and relatively static forms . In any case , the purpose of concept study and substructing activities is not to immerse teachers in ongoing debate on the ontological status of multiplication , specifically , or mathematics , more generally . Rather , the focus is on how humans come to understand mathematical concepts . Our present report focuses on concept study work carried out over a period of 2 years with a cohort of 23 teachers enrolled in a Master ’ s program focused on the theme of Mathematics for Teaching . The teachers in the group represented almost all grade levels . Six were mathematics specialists in high schools , three were science specialists in high schools , seven taught mathematics ( along with other subjects ) at the middle school level , and seven were elementary school generalists . Mathematics backgrounds varied from no formal coursework beyond high school to graduate level study . Consistent with insights into the “ intelligence ” of collectives ( cf . Davis & Simmt , 2003 ) , we regarded these sources as diversity , not as problems to be evened out , but as sources of conceptual variation that might be tapped and elaborated in collaboration . The cohort met twice a month in daylong sessions in order to fulfill the program ’ s coursework requirements . About 2 h of each session was devoted to concept study work . Some of the concept studies were led by us , while others were led by the teachers . Each of the participating teachers was required to design and lead a concept study , either individually or as part of a group , and to report on the findings in a concluding paper for the program . The participants ’ motivations to engage in concept studies were therefore very different from those we encountered in previous concept study sessions , which tended to be less formal and involved in - service teachers seeking to improve their practice . The graduate program ’ s formal structure meant that , among other things , some focused reading could be required of participants ( shared readings included Ball & Bass , 2000 ; Begle , 1979 ; Lakoff & Núñez , 2000 ; Ma , 1999 ; Shulman , 1986 ; Davis & Simmt , 2006 ) . 252 B . Davis , M . Renert The structures of concept study described in this report have a 10 - year history and arose initially out of casual encounters of groups of teachers who shared an interest in better understanding specific concepts and topics in mathematics ( cf . Davis & Simmt , 2003 , 2006 ) . Based on that work , we identified a set of four emphases that had proven productive for the ongoing collective elaboration of mathematical concepts within various groups and across various mathematical topics ( Davis & Renert , 2009 ) . These we have titled realizations , landscapes , entailments , and blends . We used these emphases as starting points for organiz - ing the cohort ’ s concept study work , and first introduced them , in the context of a one - semester course on research methods , as strategies that had previously proven useful for substructing mathematical concepts . We proceed with brief descriptions of the four emphases and end by describing a more recent fifth emphasis , pedagogical problem solving , which unfolded through our work with the cohort . It is important to note that we do not offer the emphases as “ steps ” or “ levels . ” We see them as aspects that are always already present ( alongside other interpretive strategies that we either have not noticed or have not made explicit ) . The word emphasis was chosen to signal the simultaneity of such elements . That said , the strategies were not implemented rigidly . Indeed , as events unfolded , the members of the cohort revised and refined the strategies in a recursively elaborative manner . The data we report were raw data generated by the teachers and were not coded . Emphasis 1 Realizations As noted above , the term realizations is used to collect all manner of associations that a learner might draw on and connect in efforts to make sense of a mathematical construct ( Sfard , 2008 ) . More precisely , a realization of a signifier S refers to “ a perceptually accessible object that may be operated upon in the attempt to produce or substantiate narratives about S ” ( p . 154 ) . The distinction between a signifier and a realization is often blurred , as mathematical realizations can often be used as signifiers and realized further . Among many possible elements , realizations might draw on : & Formal definitions ( e . g . , multiplication is repeated grouping ) & Algorithms ( e . g . , perform multiplication by adding repeatedly ) & Metaphors ( e . g . , multiplication as scaling ) & Images ( e . g . , multiplication illustrated as hopping along a number line ) & Applications ( e . g . , multiplication used to calculate area ) & Gestures ( e . g . , multiplication gestured in a step - wise upward motion ) . To be clear , the assertion and assumption here is not that any particular realization is right , wrong , adequate , or insufficient . It is that personal understanding of a mathematical concept is an emergent form , arising in the complex weaves of such experiential and conceptual elements . With regard to teachers ’ knowledge , we offer that realizations are the “ objects ” or “ agents ” of the complex system of mathematics for teaching . The process of collectively identifying realizations , and their related signifiers , is neither linear nor obvious . Each knower holds and utilizes a personal set of realizations . Some of these are common to all participants , while others are idiosyncratic or shared by only a few . Moreover , ones ’ realizations are not fixed . They evolve through the process of learning . Not only do they become more numerous , some earlier ones are discarded or expanded when new applications arise . Well - rehearsed realizations ( e . g . , “ multiplication is repeated addition ” ) can be so well rehearsed that they may eclipse other interpretive possibilities . Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 253 To circumvent the tendency to go directly to well - rehearsed definitions , we framed the first session of our concept study as an invitation for the participating teachers to explore how the concept of multiplication is introduced , taken up , applied , and / or elaborated at different grade levels . We also asked the participants to identify problems that learners encounter as they study multiplication . These opening prompts contributed to a rich set of realizations . The collected response , assembled after small groups worked for 30 min , is presented in Fig . 2 . It bears noting that there are some striking similarities and differences between this list and those generated by other groups ( e . g . , Davis & Renert , 2009 ; Davis & Simmt , 2006 ) . We have observed considerable stability across groups of teachers — pre - service and practicing , novice and experienced , grade - specific and cross - grade — in the range and quantity of interpretations generated . In every context so far , participants have generated about a dozen interpretations , of which “ grouping ” and “ repeated addition ” are always the first . A distinc - tion is almost always made between realizations appropriate to continuous applications and those appropriate to discrete applications . In contrast , the list in Fig . 2 lacks some distinc - tions made by other groups — e . g . , grouping realizations that use number lines and reordering according to grade level . We suspect this lack of consolidation is due to the rather short timeframe allocated to this concept study . Returning to the construct of profound understanding of emergent mathematics , we see realizations as interacting elements within the evolving system of teachers ’ mathematics knowledge . Since realizations evolve through learning , part of mathematics learning might be productively understood as the evolution of networks of realizations . Emphasis 2 Landscapes There are dramatic differences of conceptual worth among realizations . Some can reach across most contexts in which a learner might encounter a concept ; others are situation - Fig . 2 Teacher - generated realizations of multiplication and related concerns 254 B . Davis , M . Renert specific or perhaps learner - specific . For us , this realization compelled a strategy to organize and contrast assembled lists of realizations . Because efforts at organization often resulted in two - dimensional mappings , we selected the word landscapes to refer to this emphasis within concept studies . Briefly , a landscape is a macro - level view , whereas a realization is a micro - level view , of a concept . Our strategy was to invite participants to identify moments in the K - 12 - mathematics curriculum that compel significant shifts in understandings of multiplication . One result was a grade - indexed listing of realizations and curriculum topics . Drawing on Greer ’ s ( 1994 ) observation that many different criteria could be used to organize this information , the group explored distinctions that might be used as axes in a mapping . The following dimensions were proposed : grade level , grounding metaphor , underlying image ( e . g . , number line ; grid ; area , graph ) , dimension ( s ) of underlying image ( 0 , 1 , 2 , 2 + ) , types of factors ( i . e . , discrete / continuous ) , curriculum topics , processes versus objects , keywords ( e . g . , “ by , ” “ of , ” “ times ” ) , applications , factors with / without units , and errors / misconceptions . Par - ticipants constructed maps and tables based on different criteria . Products were posted and compared , and the collective settled on grade level and grounding metaphor as most useful . The mapping presented in Fig . 3 , in which Lakoff and Núñez ’ s ( 2000 ) notion of “ grounding metaphor ” is used to organize constructs along the horizontal axis , is one of more than a dozen distinct landscapes created by the group using different axes . It is important to emphasize that this exercise is not merely representative . In fact , in this case , it proved to be quite productive . Some observations that arose in the discussion were : & Multiplication is introduced informally ( but not explicitly ) in terms of motion as early - grade teachers skip count ( in particular , by 2 , 3 , 5 , and 10 ) . Frequently , skip counting is accompanied by tracing out the movement on number lines and in number charts . An implicit emphasis on motion precedes an explicit emphasis on the constructive activities of grouping and repeated addition . Fig . 3 A collective mapping of some of the realizations Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 255 & The movement across categories of interpretation in different grade levels seems to be fluid and deeply connected ; yet it is rarely made explicit . For example , the sequence of “ skip - counting → number - line hopping → repeated addition ” had not been previously noticed by any of the participants . When this sequence was rendered explicit by the investigation , the participants agreed that it was an “ easy ” and “ natural ” progression . The qualities of easy and natural were in turn critiqued as rooted in well - rehearsed sequences of experience and instruction ( i . e . , natural to participants ’ histories and easy relative to practiced applications ) . & There are also pedagogical moments in which elaborations are important yet non - intuitive . In particular , there appears to be a major conceptual leap in the shift from “ object collection ” interpretations ( which are well suited for whole numbers applications ) to “ object construc - tion ” interpretations ( useful for continuous applications , including other number systems and algebra ) . As might be expected , the activity of mapping out the developmental trajectory of this one concept occasioned considerable and engaged discussion among teachers of their respective contributions to students ’ emergent understandings . Notably , as they made reference to “ seeing the big picture of what we ’ re doing ” and “ knowing what one another is adding , ” the discussions were collegial and collaborative . School mathematics , that is , was not treated as an assembly - line process with well - delineated duties , but an elaborative project with shared responsibilities . Emphasis 3 Entailments As mentioned above , and as illustrated in Fig . 1 , each realization of a concept carries a set of implications . The intention of this emphasis is to examine the entailments of different realizations to related concepts ( e . g . , how does understanding multiplication as number - line hopping impact our understanding of the commutative property of multiplication ) . In the process of exploring different entailments , participants are forced to consider the concept afresh and not only in well - rehearsed ways . Some surprises emerge . Our third session was thus organized around “ entailments charts ” ( see Fig . 4 ) , a strategy developed by a different group of teachers in an earlier concept study ( Davis , 2008 ) to elaborate the connections and differences among realizations . An entailment chart consists of a listing of realizations in the first column , with as many additional columns as desired to record unpackings of the usually uninterrogated implications of those realizations for related concepts and topics . The teachers worked on aspects of the entailment chart in small groups . Figure 5 represents a subsequent consolidation of their work into a single chart . Just as had been encountered in a previous concept study with a different group of teachers ( Davis , 2008 ) , the resulting chart was met with expressions of surprise and confusion . For example , upon comparing different “ readings ” of commutativity , one participant commented , “ I get the idea of the communicative property – flipping the factors doesn ’ t change the product – but I ’ m realizing I don ’ t get what ’ s under it . ” This comment was in specific reference to the “ obviousness ” of commutativity when multiplication is interpreted in array or area terms , and the obscurity of the concept when most other interpretations of multiplication are taken up . The topic of prime was the source of similar expressions of surprise , particularly as participants noted that realizations rooted in continuous phenomena ( e . g . , number lines , areas , and linear functions ) were not well fitted to a discussion of the topic . Voicing of that point led into a discussion of how teachers “ choose ” interpretations without thinking — that 256 B . Davis , M . Renert is , select realizations that fit well with specific aspects of a concept , without consciously reflecting on their entailments for other aspects of the concept . Another topic of engagement , prompted by the suggestion that teachers make non - conscious choices , was the implicit criteria that teachers might be using to select realizations . Possibilities included mathematical appropriateness , sufficiency , and familiarity . Agreement was quickly reached that , while not often considered , other vital criteria might be conceptual reach , potential for elaboration , and transparency . That was coupled to the qualification that the teacher must also be thinking systemically while choosing . As the examples of commutativity and primeness illustrate , some concepts become incoherent when associated with particular realizations . The discussion closed with some reflection on the likelihood that the ability to move fluidly among realizations was not so much a matter of “ having a firm handle ” on those realizations ; it was , rather , more about having lost the ability to differentiate among them — Fig . 4 Some analogical implications of different realizations of multiplication ( note : uppercase is used to flag realizations and their analogical entailments ) Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 257 reminiscent of Sfard ’ s ( 2008 ) reminder that , as with many expert knowers , teachers are often unable to distinguish among elements that their students and novices cannot reconcile . Emphasis 4 Blends The three emphases described so far are focused mainly on making fine - grained distinctions among realizations and their entailments . Not surprisingly , while there was strong engagement within these emphases , many of the participating teachers voiced some frustrations as the shared work unfolded . Multiplication is , after all , a mathematically coherent concept , not an assemblage of images and implications . The blending emphasis is intended to address that point . It is about seeking out meta - level coherences by exploring the deep connections among identified realizations and / or assembling those realizations into a more encompassing interpre - tation — which , of course , might be expected to introduce emergent possibilities . For this emphasis , we drew principally on cognitive science research into conceptual blends ( Fauconnier & Turner , 1998 ) — that is , the emergence of new and more powerful discursive objects through combinations and mash - ups of existing objects . In particular , following diSessa ( 2004 ) , we introduced conceptual blends in terms of metarepresentations . 3 As diSessa described , metarepresentational skills comprise “ modifying and combining representations , and … selecting appropriate representations ” ( p . 296 ) , subcomponents of which include inventing and designing new representations , comparing and critiquing them , applying and explaining them , and learning new representations quickly . In previous concept studies , a few blends / metarepresentations arose spontaneously ( Davis , 2008 ; Davis & Renert , 2009 ; Davis & Simmt , 2006 ) . However , in this group , we tried to condition the emergence of blends in a more deliberate manner . We found out that causing emergent insight was impossible . This is not to say that the time set aside for this layer was unproductive . We had decided in advance that , should explorations stall , we would introduce metarepresentations from other concept studies . The cohort ’ s engagements around them pro - duced some interesting emergent insights . The first blend to be introduced was from a concept study reported by Davis & Simmt ( 2006 ) , in which a grid - based algorithm was used to highlight some connections among standard algorithms for multiplying multi - digit whole , decimal fractions , mixed numbers , and binomials ( Fig . 5 ) . The second was from a study reported by Davis & Renert ( 2009 ) , through which participants developed an interpretation that brought together multiplication as number - line stretching / compressing , as 3 The term metarealizations might be better fit to the discussion here , given our usage of Sfard ’ s “ realizations ” in prior levels . However , for this writing , we use “ metarepresentation ” for two reasons . First , it is the term that was used during the concept study . Second , it is a term that can be found in the broader research literature . Fig . 5 A grid - based blend that highlights the similarities of multiplicative processes involving additive multiplicands 258 B . Davis , M . Renert scaling , as a linear function ( Fig . 6 ) . As described elsewhere , the emergent product had several “ bonus ” features , among which was a new interpretation of integer multiplication in terms of a number line that inverts as it compresses through zero . ( The explanation is not a brief one , and so is omitted here . ) The surrounding conversation focused mainly on the manner in which some of the previ - ously identified realizations did or did not fit within these metarepresentations . Another prominent theme was the extent to which the two metarepresentations might be reconciled into a unifying blend . More generally , discussions revolved around the conceptual novelty that can emerge in metaprepresentations — and how in turn , such metarepresentations might eventually be blended into even more encompassing , emergent interpretations . And so , although our hope for new metarepresentations was not met , outcomes of expanded awarenesses of the web of associations within mathematics and the breadth and relevance of mathematics education research were achieved . Emphasis 5 Pedagogical problem solving By the completion of the fourth session together , participants appeared to be comfortable with the construct of “ emergent mathematics ” insofar as it related to learning and teaching — that is , with the suggestion that mathematics understandings and insights arise in the interplay of realizations and other experiences . The encounter described in this section took place 7 months after the fourth session . During the intervening period , participants were involved in small - group concept studies . Clusters organized in self - selected groups , and each group took on an investigation of a specific mathematical topic of their choice , employing and adapting the emphases described above . Groups varied in size from two to five , with most involving three participants . Group foci included subtraction , equality , division , factoring , circles , and zero . By the time that we introduced this emphasis , then , participants were comfortable with “ emergent mathematics . ” Our hope at this point was to focus their explorations of concepts onto persistent conundrums of mathematics teaching . We thus introduced an emphasis on “ peda - gogical problem solving , ” defined in terms of grappling with questions that are commonly encountered in schools and that may be deceptively easy to pose but very difficult to answer in a Fig . 6 A graph - based metarepresentation that blends linear models of multiplication Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 259 manner that satisfies many students . Participants were asked to identify examples in advance of the concept study meeting , and their suggestions included : & Is 1 prime ? & Is π a number ? & Is ∞ a number ? & What does it mean to divide by zero ? & What ’ s the difference between undefined , indeterminate , and infinite ? To the experienced mathematics knower , these questions might seem trivial , with estab - lished and unambiguous ( or , at least , context - specific ) responses . Such is not usually the case for novices , such as young learners , as most experienced teachers will attest . Our unexpressed ( to the group ) intentions around the notion of profound understanding of emergent mathematics were very specific here . We wondered if challenging participants to bring their diverse areas of conceptual expertise to bear on a common question might occasion a sophisticated and productive exploratory conversation that would be useful to them in their teaching . In this specific concept study meeting , we posed the question , “ What ’ s 5 / 0 ? ” , with the intention of addressing the last three of the five questions listed in the previous paragraph . Before delving into the discussion , we offer three preliminary definitions , taken from Wolfram MathWorld : Indeterminate : A mathematical expression can … be said to be indeterminate if it is not definitively or precisely determined . Infinite : Greater than any assignable quantity of the sort in question . Undefined : An expression in mathematics which does not have meaning and so which is not assigned an interpretation . ( http : / / mathworld . wolfram . com / ) It bears noting that , despite the very different definitions , these three words have similar original meanings . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , indeterminate is drawn from the Latin in - ( “ not ” ) + de - ( “ off ” ) + terminare ( “ to mark the end or boundary ” ) ; infinite derives from the Latin in - ( “ not ” ) + finis ( “ end ” ) ; undefined combines un - ( “ not ” ) + definire ( “ to limit , determine ”— which , in turn derives from the root finis ) . In other words , all three terms carry senses of openness , unending , and lack of specificity , which likely contribute to confusions and conflations . To complicate matters , it turns out that all three words can be applied to 5 / 0 , depending on the perspective taken . We offer three such perspectives from among the many that arose during the concept study . The complexity of the situation arises in the fact that there are a great many interpreta - tions of “ 5 ” ( as a discrete count , a position on a continuous number line , comparison value , etc . ) , the slash “ / ” ( as divided by , inverse of , out of , per , in , to , etc . ) , and 0 ( nothing , starting position , center point , stationary , etc . ) . Participants were invited to bring their particular expertise to bear on the discussion . For the sake of brevity , we focus only on those from the subgroups that had concentrated on division and factoring — qualifying this selection by emphasizing that the slash in 5 / 0 can be interpreted in many other ways . Among the interpretations of division that the division group brought to bear on the construct , 5 / 0 were sharing , inverse of multiplication , and repeated subtraction . If the division is interpreted as sharing and the 5 and 0 as quantities , 5 / 0 can be understood either quotitively ( i . e . , how many groups of 0 are in 5 ? ) or partitively ( i . e . , what is the size of each 260 B . Davis , M . Renert group when 5 is partitioned into 0 groups ? ) . The group consensus was that the former “ makes more sense ” than the latter , which seems to contain a contradiction ( i . e . , if there are no groups , it makes no sense to ask about the size of each group ) . Following the definitions presented above , they argued , it seems that multiple answers are defensible . That is , 5 / 0 is Infinite , in the quotitive interpretation , because there are clearly a boundless number of size - 0 groups can be drawn from a group of 5 – i . e . , the quotient is greater than any assignable quantity of the sort in question . Undefined , in the partitive interpretation , because the expression is meaningless and cannot be assigned a sensible interpretation . Similar responses were derived by interpreting division as repeated subtraction . The situation was not much clarified when a subgroup that had been focusing on factoring offered their response . As they saw things , the quotient 5 / 0 is equivalent to the missing factor , n , in 0 × n 0 5 ( or n × 0 0 5 ) . There is no such factor , and so 5 / 0 must be Indeterminate , because although the expression can be assigned a sensible interpreta - tion , it cannot be definitively or precisely determined . Once again , this reporting is only a thin slice of the discussions in the concept study . Another subgroup , for example , approached the question by focusing on the meaning of the zero and found distinct rationales for all three responses . 4 Discussion : substructing teachers ’ mathematical knowledge Our intention in identifying and describing the five emphases of concept study above — realizations , landscapes , entailments , blends , and pedagogical problem solving — is to better understand aspects of the complexity of teachers ’ profound understanding of emergent mathematics . The first four emphases are focused on realizations of mathematical concepts : their multiplicity , their roles in teaching and learning , their shifting significances , their nuanced interconnections and varied entailments , and their blending potentials . Teachers ’ engagement with these emphases in a concept study setting promotes a disposition to substruct teachers ’ expert knowledge by making explicit the evolving network of associations within mathematics for teaching . Whereas the first four emphases are focused on mathematical concepts , the fifth emphasis — pedagogical problem solving — represents a deliberate movement into processes entailed in pedagogical practice . Pedagogical problem solving aims to capitalize on the interpretive potentials that arise on the collective level when individual expertise is drawn together around perplexing problems of shared interest . It resituates the enterprise of concept study in the everyday complexities of mathematics teaching and problem solving , where multiple concepts are more typically at play . It is in such situations that the immensity and emergent possibilities of mathematics for teaching can come into focus . It is important to emphasize that the purpose of engaging with the question of the meaning of 5 / 0 was not to home in on a correct response . The core concern is not with the nature of mathematics but with the complexities of learning and teaching mathematics . Enhanced under - standings of established mathematics were important but not the primary consideration . The intention was to attune awareness to the complexity of such constructs as 5 / 0 , and in the process to grapple with the confusions and frustrations that young learners might experience . All of the Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 261 teachers in the group confessed to having brushed aside “ division by 0 ” in their teaching with the dismissive comment “ it can ’ t be done . ” In contrast , subsequent to this concept study , several of the teachers undertook studies of division by 0 with some of their classes , adapting discussions as appropriate to Grades 5 , 7 , 10 , and 11 ( the narrative presented earlier in the article is one example ) . These teachers reported back that not only were their students able to engage in nuanced discussions when prompted to consider diverse interpretations of number , division , and zero , they did so with an enthusiasm that was unusual for mathematics classes . We continue to receive regular and consistent reports ( some of which are supported by systematic in - class observations ) that this freely interpretive manner of engagement is readily generalized to many topics in mathematics class , not just those into which the teachers delved in concept study — and these reports announce for us a next important stage in research into teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of mathematics . It would appear that a key benefit of concept studies is not so much that they foster familiarity with specific substructed mathematical concepts , but that they impart strategies for substructing any and all mathe - matical concepts . Participating teachers regularly report that the amount of class time that they spend on active and explicit discussion of interpretations has increased dramatically . In some cases , it has become the principal mode of engagement . In other words , casting teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge of teaching as an emergent , participatory domain — at least on the level of the group at the centre of this report — appears to contribute to immediate , generalizable , and sustained transformations in pedagogy . 5 Looking ahead We are presently engaged in systematic , observation - based studies of classroom practice with the goal of assessing the relationship between teachers ’ capacities to substruct math - ematical concepts and their in - class practices . There are other emergent foci in our ongoing concept study work with teachers . One of the more interesting “ accidental ” areas of investigation that has arisen revolves around which aspects of teachers ’ formal mathematics knowledge are invoked as they substruct concepts and engage in pedagogical problem solving . For example , the construct 0 / 0 arose regularly in our investigation of division by 0 . This construct is often analyzed using the tools of differential calculus . Participants in the group who were familiar with differential calculus were able to drill deeper into the construct than others . It bears mention that early decades of research into teachers ’ knowledge of mathematics did not draw distinctions among areas of advanced disciplinary competence . As concept studies expand to include more con - cepts within the school curriculum , it will be interesting to keep track of other areas of advanced study , such as number theory and topology , that might engender deeper analysis these concepts . Generally , we found that many of the participants with extensive mathematical prepara - tion were reluctant at first to depart from their well - rehearsed interpretations of concepts . However , once they began to do so , they were able to go much further than their colleagues in identifying emergent interpretations , articulating connections , and crafting extensions . Our observations are consistent with the long - standing commonsense suspicion that ad - vanced mathematical study must matter in effective teaching . It appears that preparation in advanced mathematics both constrains and enables . The concept study environment can serve to remove some of the constraints of formal mathematical study and to bring about an openness to novel interpretations and elaborations . With regard to the broader field of research into teachers ’ disciplinary knowledge , then , we would situate this work as an elaboration of the valuable work that has been done since 262 B . Davis , M . Renert the 1970s . That contribution might be construed in terms of adding a new question to the mix . Elsewhere ( Davis & Renert , 2013 ) , we have characterized the evolution of this realm of inquiry in terms of a movement through different questions : ( 1 ) What mathematics do teachers need to know in order to teach mathematics ? — which , as discussed at the start of the article , was rooted in the assumption that teachers need to know more advanced mathematics than the mathematics they are teaching , and thus principally associated with studies that sought correlations between teachers ’ course - work in mathematics and their students ’ achievement ( e . g . , Begle , 1979 ) ; ( 2 ) What specialized pedagogical content knowledge do teachers need to know in order to teach mathematics ? — which highlighted some of the networked complexity of math - ematical knowledge for teaching ( e . g . , Ma , 1999 ) , and ( 3 ) What mathematical knowledge is entailed by the work of teaching mathematics ? — which pulled some of the enacted complexity of teachers ’ knowledge into the fore - ground ( e . g . , Adler & Davis , 2006 ; Ball & Bass , 2000 ) . It is important to recognize that successive questions do not obviate earlier concerns . Rather , the second iteration of research encompassed and elaborated the first iteration , just as the third iteration included and transcended the previous two . All of them matter . We strive for this same attitude as we move toward our own formulation of the question : ( 4 ) What mathematics does the teaching community ( need to ) know ? We feel that this formulation adds two elements to the mix : First , it highlights the collective character of mathematics for teaching . Second , it foregrounds the largely tacit nature of teachers ’ mathematics knowledge ( in the parenthetical “ need to ” ) . As for our response to this question , we offer that teacher ’ s disciplinary knowledge of mathematics is a way of being with mathematics knowledge that enables educators to structure learning situations , interpret student actions mindfully , and respond flexibly , in ways that enable learners to extend understandings and expand the range of their interpretive possibilities through access to powerful connections and appropriate practice . Returning to the Baumert et al . ’ s statement about the inert nature of teachers ’ mathemat - ical knowledge , we assert that our concept studies point to a critical element of pedagogical content knowledge needed to activate otherwise “ inert ” formal mathematics — emergence . Moreover , we believe that much could be gained if mathematics teaching included concept - study - like emphases . Although there is little evidence derived from large - scale research projects to support our assertion and beliefs , there is considerable incidental evidence to make the case for a renewed effort on explicating and elaborating tacit knowledge in teaching . For example , the video portion of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study revealed that teachers in Hong Kong and Japan were roughly twice as likely as U . S . teachers to invoke diverse interpretations of concepts ( Hiebert et al . , 2003 ) . Studies on the importance of metaphorical reasoning ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Richards , Morrison , & Holyoak , 1986 ; Zook , 1991 ) further support the call for increased classroom emphasis on diverse interpretations . They show that associative learning can be useful if it is made explicit and if novices are provided with sustained interpretive assistance . These criteria appear to be met in foreign curricula of jurisdictions that perform well in international tests . At present , we are engaged in a longitudinal study of the impact that teachers ’ sustained engagement in concept - study activities has on their teaching practice and on their students ’ understanding . This work is proceeding through focus - group interviews , in - class observations and collaborations , ongoing teacher journaling , and student reporting . We assess student Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 263 understanding through performance on standardized tests , students ’ engagement with in - class tasks , students ’ dispositions toward the discipline , and interview - based evaluations of students ’ capacity to apply and extend concepts in novel situations . While this study is still in its preliminary stages , the results to date are consistent with earlier work on the relationship between the emergent character of human learning and teachers ’ ability to support higher levels of conceptual understanding in their students ( Cobb , Yackel , & Wood , 1992 ; Franke , Carpenter , Levi , & Fennema , 2001 ) , and on the impact of conceiving of the classroom as a collective learner rather than as a collection of learners ( Burton , 1999 ; Davis & Simmt , 2003 ) . We end by clarifying how we understand the relationship between mathematics and mathematics for teaching . The principal focus in concept study is on the creation of new possibilities for mathematics teaching that are rooted in more nuanced understandings and elaborations of extant mathematics ; the goal is not to create new formal mathematics — a task that would require very different validation criteria . The essential questions for us do not revolve around the ontological status of mathematical concepts or around teachers ’ production of new mathematics . Rather , we seek to study new emergent possibilities for understanding mathematics . This framing is consistent with and elaborates the now - common observation that effective teaching is never simply a matter of transmission . Teaching always entails transfor - mation , but that transformation is typically understood to happen to the learners . Following others ( e . g . , Brousseau , 1997 ) , we include the body of mathematical knowledge within the space of teachers ’ transformative influence . After all , teachers have the most direct and pervasive influence in defining what is mathematically interpretable for most of the population . As a research community , mathematics educators are still far from making definitive claims about the relationships between teachers ’ profound understandings of mathematics and their students ’ mathematical understandings . Our suspicion is that efforts to address this vexing quandary will require more fine - grained analyses than large - scale assessments , in large part because many of the most important aspects of teachers ’ knowledge are simply unavailable for explicit and immediate assessment . They are tacit and can only emerge through participation in collective explorations , such as concept studies . References Adler , J . , & Davis , Z . ( 2006 ) . Opening another black box : Researching mathematics for teaching mathematics teacher education . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 37 , 270 – 296 . Ball , D . L . , & Bass , H . ( 2000 ) . Interweaving content and pedagogy in teaching and learning to teach : Knowing and using mathematics . In J . Boaler ( Ed . ) , Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning ( pp . 83 – 104 ) . Westport : Ablex . Baumert , J . , Kunter , M . , Blum , W . , Brunner , M . , Voss , T . , Jordan , A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Teachers ’ mathematical knowledge , cognitive activation in the classroom , and student progress . American Educational Research Journal , 47 , 133 – 180 . Begle , E . G . ( 1979 ) . Critical variables in mathematics education : Findings from a survey of the empirical literature . Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America and National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Brousseau , G . ( 1997 ) . Theory of didactical situations in mathematics : Didactiques des mathématiques , 1970 – 1990 . ( N . Balacheff , M . Cooper , R . Sutherland , & V . Warfield , Trans . ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Burger , E . B . , & Starbird , M . ( 2005 ) . The heart of mathematics : An invitation to effective thinking ( 2nd ed . ) . Emeryville : Key College Publishing . Burton , L . ( Ed . ) . ( 1999 ) . Learning mathematics : From hierarchies to networks . London : Falmer . Capra , F . ( 2005 ) . The hidden connections : A science for sustainable living . New York : Harper . Chevallard , Y . ( 1985 ) . La transposition didactique . Grenoble : La Pensée Sauvage . Cobb , P . , Yackel , E . , & Wood , T . ( 1992 ) . Interaction and learning in mathematics classroom situations . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 2 , 99 – 122 . 264 B . Davis , M . Renert Davis , B . ( 2008 ) . Is 1 a prime number ? Developing teacher knowledge through concept study . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School ( NCTM ) , 14 ( 2 ) , 86 – 91 . Davis , B . ( 2011 ) . Mathematics teachers ’ subtle , complex disciplinary knowledge . Science , 332 , 1506 – 1507 . Davis , B . , & Renert , M . ( 2009 ) . Mathematics for teaching as shared , dynamic participation . For the Learning of Mathematics , 29 ( 3 ) , 37 – 43 . Davis , B . , & Renert , M . ( 2013 ) . The math teachers know . New York : Routledge ( in press ) . Davis , B . , & Simmt , E . ( 2003 ) . Understanding learning systems : Mathematics teaching and complexity science . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 34 ( 2 ) , 137 – 167 . Davis , B . , & Simmt , E . ( 2006 ) . Mathematics - for - teaching : An ongoing investigation of the mathematics that teachers ( need to ) know . Educational Studies in Mathematics , 61 ( 3 ) , 293 – 319 . diSessa , A . A . ( 2004 ) . Metarepresentation : Native competence and targets for instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 ( 3 ) , 293 – 331 . English , L . ( Ed . ) . ( 1997 ) . Mathematical reasoning : Analogies , metaphors , and images . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Ericsson , A . K . , Charness , N . , Feltovich , P . , & Hoffman , R . R . ( 2006 ) . Cambridge handbook on expertise and expert performance . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Fauconnier , G . , & Turner , M . ( 1998 ) . Conceptual integration networks . Cognitive Science , 22 ( 2 ) , 133 – 187 . Fernandez , C . , & Yoshida , M . ( 2004 ) . Lesson study : A Japanese approach to improving mathematics teaching and learning . Mahwah : Erlbaum . Franke , M . L . , Carpenter , T . P . , Levi , L . , & Fennema , E . ( 2001 ) . Capturing teachers ’ generative change : A follow - up study of professional development in mathematics . American Educational Research Journal , 38 , 653 – 689 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychologist , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 38 . Goldstein , J . ( 1999 ) . Emergence as a construct : History and issues . Emergence : Complexity and Organization , 1 ( 1 ) , 49 – 72 . Greer , B . ( 1994 ) . Extending the meaning of multiplication and division . In G . Harel & J . Confrey ( Eds . ) , The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics ( pp . 61 – 87 ) . Albany : State University of New York Press . Harel , G . , & Confrey , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1994 ) . The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics . Albany : State University of New York Press . Hiebert , J . , Gallimore , R . , Garnier , H . , Givvin , K . B . , Hollingsworth , H . , Jacobs , J . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Teaching mathematics in seven countries : Results from the TIMSS 1999 video study ( NCES 2003 - 013 ) . U . S . Department of Education . Washington , DC : National Center for Education Statistics . Lakoff , G . , & Núñez , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Where mathematics comes from : How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being . New York : Basic Books . Ma , L . ( 1999 ) . Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics : Teachers ’ understanding of fundamental mathematics in China and the United States . Hillsdale : Erlbaum . Mazur , B . ( 2003 ) . Imagining numbers ( particularly the square root of minus fifteen ) . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux . Polanyi , M . ( 1966 ) . The tacit dimension . New York : Doubleday . Richards , J . F . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1986 ) . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 . Schmidt , W . H . , Houang , R . , & Cogan , L . S . ( 2011 ) . Preparing future math teachers . Science , 332 , 1266 – 1267 . Sfard , A . ( 2008 ) . Thinking as communicating : Human development , the growth of discourses , and mathema - tizing . New York : Cambridge University Press . Shulman , L . S . ( 1986 ) . Thosewhounderstandteach : Knowledgegrowthinteaching . EducationalResearcher , 57 , 1 – 22 . Usiskin , Z . , Peressini , A . , Marchisotto , E . A . , & Stanley , D . ( 2003 ) . Mathematics for high school teachers : An advanced perspective . Upper Saddle River : Pearson . Zook , K . B . ( 1991 ) . Effects of analogical processes on learning and representation . Educational Psychology Review , 3 , 41 – 72 . Profound understanding of emergent mathematics 265