Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx Soft constraints in interactive behavior : the case of ignoring perfect knowledge in - the - world for imperfect knowledge in - the - head (cid:1) , (cid:1)(cid:1) Wayne D . Gray a , ∗ , Wai - Tat Fu b a Department of Cognitive Science , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Carnegie Building ( Room 108 ) , 110 8th Street , Troy , NY 12180 , USA b Department of Psychology , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 - 3890 , USA Received 15 October 2002 ; received in revised form 15 September 2003 ; accepted 15 December 2003 Abstract Constraints and dependencies among the elements of embodied cognition form patterns or micros - trategies of interactive behavior . Hard constraints determine which microstrategies are possible . Soft constraints determine which of the possible microstrategies are most likely to be selected . When selection is non - deliberate or automatic the least effort microstrategy is chosen . In calculating the effort required to execute a microstrategy each of the three types of operations , memory retrieval , perception , and action , are given equal weight ; that is , perceptual - motor activity does not have a privileged status with respect to memory . Soft constraints can work contrary to the designer’s intentions by making the access of perfect knowledge in - the - world more effortful than the access of imperfect knowledge in - the - head . These impli - cations of soft constraints are tested in two experiments . In experiment 1 we varied the perceptual - motor effort of accessing knowledge in - the - world as well as the effort of retrieving items from memory . In experiment 2 we replicated one of the experiment 1 conditions to collect eye movement data . The re - sults suggest that milliseconds matter . Soft constraints lead to a reliance on knowledge in - the - head even when the absolute difference in perceptual - motor versus memory retrieval effort is small , and even when relying on memory leads to a higher error rate and lower performance . We discuss the implications of (cid:1) Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogsci . 2003 . 12 . 001 (cid:1)(cid:1) An earlier , much simpler version of this report was presented as an eight - page conference paper at CHI2001 . That paper is archived as Gray and Fu ( 2001 ) . ∗ Corresponding author . E - mail address : grayw @ rpi . edu ( W . D . Gray ) . 0364 - 0213 / $ – see front matter © 2004 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogsci . 2003 . 12 . 001 Report Documentation Page Form Approved OMB No . 0704 - 0188 Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response , including the time for reviewing instructions , searching existing data sources , gathering and maintaining the data needed , and completing and reviewing the collection of information . Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information , including suggestions for reducing this burden , to Washington Headquarters Services , Directorate for Information Operations and Reports , 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway , Suite 1204 , Arlington VA 22202 - 4302 . Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law , no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number . 1 . REPORT DATE DEC 2003 2 . REPORT TYPE 3 . DATES COVERED 00 - 00 - 2003 to 00 - 00 - 2003 4 . TITLE AND SUBTITLE Soft constraints in interactive behavior : the case of ignoring perfect knowledge in - the - world for imperfect knowledge in - the - head 5a . CONTRACT NUMBER 5b . GRANT NUMBER 5c . PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 6 . AUTHOR ( S ) 5d . PROJECT NUMBER 5e . TASK NUMBER 5f . WORK UNIT NUMBER 7 . PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME ( S ) AND ADDRESS ( ES ) Carnegie Mellon University , Department of Psychology , Pittsburgh , PA , 15232 8 . PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER 9 . SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME ( S ) AND ADDRESS ( ES ) 10 . SPONSOR / MONITOR’S ACRONYM ( S ) 11 . SPONSOR / MONITOR’S REPORT NUMBER ( S ) 12 . DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release ; distribution unlimited 13 . SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The original document contains color images . 14 . ABSTRACT 15 . SUBJECT TERMS 16 . SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF : 17 . LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 18 . NUMBER OF PAGES 24 19a . NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON a . REPORT unclassified b . ABSTRACT unclassified c . THIS PAGE unclassified Standard Form 298 ( Rev . 8 - 98 ) Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39 - 18 2 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx soft constraints for routine interactive behavior , accounts of embodied cognition , and tool and interface design . © 2004 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Interactive behavior ; Rational analysis ; Knowledge in - the - world ; Human – computer interaction ; Embodied cognition ; Embodiment level ; Soft constraints ; Bounded rationality ; Interface design ; Information access ; Eye tracking 1 . Introduction Knowledge can be in - the - world or in - the - head ( see , e . g . , Larkin & Simon , 1987 ; Norman , 1989 ) . A well - designed interface can place knowledge in - the - world so that it is available in a known location when a user needs it . Support for acquiring knowledge from in - the - world rather than retrieving it from in - the - head is widely touted as one of the main advantages of direct manipulation interfaces over command language ones ( Frohlich , 1997 ; Hutchins , Hollan , & Norman , 1985 ; Shneiderman , 1982 ) . This cognitive engineering view is congru - ent with accounts of embodied cognition that suggest a privileged status for perceptual - motor effort compared to retrieval effort ( Ballard , Hayhoe , & Pelz , 1995 ; Ballard , Hayhoe , Pook , & Rao , 1997 ; Wilson , 2002 ) . But , is this all of the story ? From a cognitive engineering per - spective , is knowledge in - the - world always to be preferred to knowledge in - the - head ? From a cognitive theory perspective , does perceptual - motor activity have a privileged status over memory ? In this paper , we examine the use of knowledge in - the - world when the knowledge is on the screen , in a well - known location , and the access effort is typical of that encountered by a user of an operating system that supports multiple , overlapping windows . We argue that in routine interactive behavior , the path of least effort is a soft constraint that guides interactive behavior and that these soft constraints may be calculated by giving equal weight to the time required for perception , action , and memory retrieval . Milliseconds matter in that differences in effort measured in milliseconds sufﬁce to induce users to ignore perfect knowledge in - the - world for imperfect knowledge in - the - head . We begin by situating our account of soft constraints within the current discussion of em - bodied cognition . We then elaborate the concept of soft constraints by casting it in the rational analysis framework ( Anderson , 1990 , 1991 ; Oaksford & Chater , 1998 ) . In the next section we introduce three scenarios that are typical of routine computer - human interaction and dis - cuss the perceptual - motor and memory factors that each requires to access knowledge . We present estimates of the effort of the perceptual - motor and memory retrieval for each scenario , and use these estimates to provide a rational analysis of each scenario . We conclude the sec - tion by deriving two sets of behavioral predictions from our rational analysis ; one set for the relative differences between scenarios in the number of errors made , and a second set for rel - ative differences between scenarios in the frequency of accessing knowledge in - the - world . In Section 4 , we test our predictions in two empirical studies . In Section 5 , we summa - rize our results and discuss the implications of our work for cognitive theory and cognitive engineering . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 3 2 . Soft constraints in interactive behavior For many interactive devices , the sequence and methods of operation is determined by hard constraints . For example , if your task goal is to take $ 100 out of your checking account using an ATM , you must ﬁnd an ATM , insert your card , key in your pin number , press fast cash , take the money , and then take the card . For any one ATM , the constraints built into its design dictate the set of possible patterns of interactive behavior ( i . e . , microstrategies ) . Knowing what hard constraints exist , it is possible to build models that bracket the minimum and maximum human performance that can be expected with a given interface design ( Gray & Boehm - Davis , 2000 ; Kieras & Meyer , 2000 ) . Soft constraints complement hard constraints . Hard constraints determine what patterns of interactive behavior are possible . In contrast , rather than mandating a pattern , soft constraints suggest which of the possible patterns are likely to be chosen and executed . For example , in an empirical study reported by Gray ( 2000 ) , out of nine subjects who discovered how to program a simulated VCR , seven adopted the task - to - device rule hierarchy of Fig . 1 and two adopted minor variants . In the work reported here , of the 80 subjects shown Fig . 1 as the experimenter programmed the ﬁrst show , all used that task - to - device rule hierarchy to program the next four shows . Although extreme variation was possible , little variation was found . Working within the hard constraints explicitly designed into the artifact , soft constraints determined how people attempted to use the VCR . Soft constraints arise from the rational ( adaptive ) nature of human cognition ( Anderson , 1990 ; Simon , 1956 ) ; namely , that human cognition is assumed to be well adapted to the Fig . 1 . The task - to - device rule hierarchy for programming the particular VCR used in experiment 1 and 2 . This task - to - device rule hierarchy is largely determined by soft constraints . ( Subgoals are represented by boxed nodes . Leaf nodes are unboxed and may represent multiple keystrokes . The dashed line leading from DO - startMode and DO - endMode indicate that subgoals SET - startMode and SET - endMode must be performed before the others . Contrariwise , the dashed line from VIDEOTAPE to RECORD indicates that RECORD must be performed last . With those three exceptions , the subgoals of a goal may be performed in any order . ) 4 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx characteristics of the environment . Under the rationality assumption , goal - directed actions are chosen and executed through interactions between the human’s adaptive mechanisms and the environment in ways that optimize efﬁciency and effectiveness . However , given the wide range of possible variations of natural and artiﬁcial environments , optimization can only be estimated based on local cues of the environments . Anderson’s rational analysis approach ( Anderson , 1990 , 1991 ; Anderson and Schooler , 1991 ; Oaksford and Chater , 1998 ) assumes that the estimation process is based on the statistical characteristics of the natural environment . Speciﬁcally , the choice of one pattern of behavior against another depends on whether it has a higher expected utility – a measure which takes into account the statistical estimates of both effectiveness and efﬁciency . We believe that the root of soft constraints lies in human adaptivity , and the measure of expected utility reﬂects the adaptive mechanisms in cognition . In this paper , we will use the calculations of expected utilities to make quantitative comparisons of different possible patterns of behavior . We maintain that the selection of different patterns of behavior is a non - deliberate process at the neuronal or subsymbolic level ( Anderson & Lebiere , 1998 ) . In this paper , we ignore effectiveness to focus on how considerations of effort lead to the selection of alternative microstrategies . This focus on effort reﬂects a simplifying as - sumption that , almost by deﬁnition , common methods of interacting with standard computer interfaces accomplish what they set out to do and , hence , are highly effective . In what fol - lows , we focus on the implications that rational analysis has for soft constraints on interactive behavior . 2 . 1 . Not all efforts are equal , are they ? Wilson ( 2002 ) delineates six senses of the term embodied cognition . Of the six , the one near - est to our work is the one in which “we off - load cognitive work onto the environment” ( p . 626 ) . This sense of embodied cognition is embraced by Dana Ballard and associates ( Ballard et al . , 1995 , 1997 ) , who have pronounced the interactions among elementary cognitive , perceptual , and action operations at the 1 / 3 of a sec time scale “the embodiment level . ” Like Ballard , we see this level as where elementary operations begin to cohere into the patterns of activities that form the bases of interactive behavior . To our eye , these patterns emerge at the 1 / 3 of a sec level whether the analysis is done using a cognitive engineering tool such as CPM - GOMS ( Gray & Boehm - Davis , 2000 ; Gray , John , & Atwood , 1993 ) , ACT - R with its new buffer - based architecture ( Anderson , Bothell , Byrne , & Lebiere , in press ) , or EPIC ( Kieras & Meyer , 1997 ) . Where we diverge from Ballard and others is in their belief in the “minimum memory strategy” ( Wilson , 2002 ) ; namely , that perceptual - motor activity has a privileged status in that , all else equal , perceptual - motor effort is generally preferred to memory effort . This belief is so pervasive that it appears to need an explicit statement to the contrary when it is not shared . For example , Shirouzu , Miyake , and Masukawa ( 2002 ) warn , in a footnote , that “We do not maintain that external resources without internal cognitive workings are preferred or that such preferences are the essential human cognitive nature” ( footnote 4 ) . We are not the ﬁrst to complain about the current unqualiﬁed enthusiasm for the utility of knowledge in - the - world . Indeed , in the context of graphical representations , Scaife and Rogers W . D . G r a y , W . - T . F u / C ogn iti ve S c i e n ce xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 5 Fig . 2 . A CPM - GOMS model of the microstrategy required to move to , click on , and perceive information in the Show Information Window . Total predicted time is 1 , 280ms . CPM - GOMS is a network modeling technique ( Schweickert et al . , 2003 ) . In the middle row are cognitive operators with a default execution time of 50 - ms each . Above that line are the perceptual operators and below it are the motor operators . The ﬂow of operators is from left - to - right with connecting lines indicating dependencies . Within an operator type the dependencies are sequential . However , between operator types the dependencies may be parallel . The numbers above each operator indicate the time , in milliseconds , for that operator to execute . Time is accumulated from left - to - right along the critical path . ( The critical path is indicated by bold lines connecting shadowed boxes . ) Abbreviations : crsr , cursor ; loc , location ; mvCrsr , move cursor ; POG , point of gaze ; trgt , target . See Gray and Boehm - Davis ( 2000 ) for more detailed information . 6 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ( 1996 ) concluded that despite the “intuition” of the value of graphical representations “we have no well - articulated theory as to how such an advantage might work” ( p . 200 ) . In the work presented here , we take the stance that , at the embodiment level of analysis , milliseconds matter and they matter the same regardless of the type of activity with which they are ﬁlled . Going beyond this , we sketch a process account , at the 1 / 3 of a sec level of analysis , that can be used to predict characteristics of task environments that facilitate or discourage the use of knowledge in - the - world for knowledge in - the - head . 2 . 2 . Patterns of interactive behavior Patterns of interactive behavior emerge at the embodiment level of cognition ( Ballard et al . , 1997 ) . Basic patterns of activity that take about 1 / 3 of a sec to execute combine with other basic patterns to form microstrategies ( Gray & Boehm - Davis , 2000 ) that accomplish a unit task ( Card , Moran , & Newell , 1983 ) . As suggested by Fig . 2 , the patterns highlight the control of interactive behavior , with central cognition orchestrating processes such as mouse movements , eye movements , perception , shifts in attention , memory encoding , and memory retrieval ( memory encoding and retrieval is not shown in Fig . 2 ) . The time needed to execute a microstrategy is determined by the duration of operators along its critical path ( Fig . 2 ) ( Gray & Boehm - Davis , 2000 ; Schweickert , Fisher , & Proctor , 2003 ) . In our analyses , no discount is given for the type of operator ; that is , time for perception and motor operators that occur along the critical path is weighed the same as time for memory retrievals . 2 . 3 . Summary of soft constraints in interactive behavior Soft constraints bring concrete predictions based on the adaptive nature of interactive be - havior . As with any rational analysis , the complete calculation of soft constraints would have to include considerations of effectiveness as well as of effort . However , to simplify our analyses we will ignore effectiveness and concentrate on effort . In routine interactive behavior selecting a microstrategy is non - deliberate . Although select - ing the best means by which to perform the next step can become the subject of deliberate selection , such deliberations would take longer than the execution of the behavior selected . Rather , the adaptive mechanisms in cognition allow non - deliberate selection of microstrategies to service our goals with a reasonable level of effectiveness and efﬁciency . 3 . Three scenarios and their perceptual - motor and memory factors for accessing knowledge Imagine three scenarios ( each of which corresponds to an experimental condition ) that vary the effort required to access knowledge in - the - world versus in - the - head : 1 . Information is clearly visible on the screen in front of a user so that the user has free access to information via an eye movement ( the Free - Access condition , see Fig . 3 ) . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 7 Fig . 3 . Screen shot of VCR and Show Information Window for the Free - Access condition . Notice that the ﬁelds of the Show Information Window are open at all times . For the Gray - Box and Memory - Test conditions , the ﬁelds would be covered by gray boxes during the trial . 2 . The window is partly visible but the desired information is covered . To uncover the information the user needs to move the mouse to and click on the window to bring it to the foreground . In experiment 1 , we mimic this common circumstance by covering the ﬁelds of the information window with gray boxes . Field information is uncovered when the gray box is clicked ( the Gray - Box condition ) . 3 . Similar to the above , but the partly visible window contains well - learned information and bringing the window to the foreground obscures the original task window . In exper - iment 1 , we make the material in the information window well - learned by requiring the Memory - Test group to study and pass a test on it before the trial begins . During program - ming only one window is visible at a time , either the task window or the information window . For each scenario , perfect knowledge is readily available in - the - world . However , we predict that , between conditions , the small differences in effort required to obtain that information will lead to the occasional adoption of microstrategies that rely on error prone memory . Hence , de - spite perfect information in - the - world , performance will be more successful in some conditions than in others . 8 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx For these three scenarios there are four components of effort that may be required to access knowledge in - the - world or to retrieve it from in - the - head . When information is located in an uncertain location then perceptual - motor search is required . When information is located in a familiar location then perceptual - motor search can be replaced by perceptual - motor access . Alternatively , if information is to be obtained from the head , it must ﬁrst be acquired thereby entailing memory encoding effort . Once in - the - head , using the information requires that it be retrieved from memory , thereby entailing a memory retrieval effort . To simplify our analysis we will ignore two of these four effort components : perceptual - motor search and memory encoding . In our study , knowledge in - the - world is contained in an infor - mation window with well - deﬁned ﬁelds for different categories of information ( see Fig . 3 ) . The location of the information window is constant throughout the study as is the location of the window’s information ﬁelds . We assume that the effort of location learning is small ( Ehret , 2000 , 2002 ) and is incurred during the training phase of the study . Hence , during the study there is no perceptual - motor search , only perceptual - motor access . We also ignore the effort of memory encoding . In the Memory - Test condition the information required is studied and tested before each trial begins . If a subject fails the test they must continue studying until the test is passed . Hence , in the Memory - Test condition , as in our third example , the memory encoding effort has been met before the trial begins . For the Free - Access and Gray - Box conditions we assume that a weak memory trace is pro - duced , one that is just strong enough to be used to program the next step in the VCR . For such a weak trace , whatever encoding occurs , can take place simultaneously with moving the eyes ( Free - Access ) or mouse ( Gray - Box ) from the information window to the VCR . By ignoring perceptual - motor search and memory encoding , we focus our analysis on a comparison of perceptual - motor access and memory retrieval . For the Free - Access condition perceptual - motor access time includes the time needed to shift visual attention plus an eye movement to a known location and to encode the simple information at that location . For the Gray - Box and Memory - Test condition , perceptual - motor access effort also includes the time to move the cursor to and click on the gray box . For memory retrieval , we make four assumptions , the ﬁrst three of which assume the modal theory of memory contained in most introductory cognitive psychology textbooks . First , mem - ories are retrieved in response to some environmental or mental cue . Second , cues do not always uniquely specify a single memory . Third , the order , probability of recall , and speed of recall is determined by the relative strength of the memory to the cue . The assumption that strong memories take less time to retrieve than do weak memories is key to our arguments but is moderated by our last assumption . Fourth , memory is noisy in the signal - processing sense of the term ( Altmann & Gray , 2002 ; Anderson & Lebiere , 1998 ) . If a given memory , M , has a certain true strength of association , x , to a given cue then noise , σ , may serve to temporarily increment [ M ( x + σ ) ] or decrement [ M ( x − σ ) ] its true strength . This last assumption conspires to give lie to the certainty of knowledge in - the - head . 3 . 1 . A rational analysis of the scenarios The rational analysis framework leads us to make a pair of very general predictions con - cerning the strategies that will be used . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 9 1 . The lower the effort of perceptual - motor access relative to memory retrieval , the greater the reliance on perfect knowledge in - the - world . 2 . Contrariwise , the higher the effort of perceptual - motor access relative to memory re - trieval , the greater the reliance on imperfect knowledge in - the - head . To work out the speciﬁc predictions for the three conditions of our study , Free - Access , Gray - Box , and Memory - Test , we must ﬁrst come up with estimates of the efforts of perceptual - motor access versus memory retrieval for each condition . These estimates will enable us to predict the relative tradeoff of perceptual - motor access versus memory retrieval strategies between conditions . Based on these effort estimates , we will use our knowledge of cognitive science in general and memory strength in particular to derive two sets of behavioral predictions that will be tested in the experiments that follow . 3 . 1 . 1 . Access and retrieval efforts For each of the three conditions , Free - Access , Gray - Box , and Memory - Test , we can de - rive estimates of the time needed for perceptual - motor access and memory retrieval . For the Free - Access group we use the estimate of 500 - ms as the time needed to initiate an eye move - ment , move the eye and visual attention to a known location , perceive the simple information at that location ( a single word or number ) , and for cognition to verify that the information had been received . This 500 - ms estimate is derived from two sources . The ﬁrst source is a small ACT - R 5 . 0 model 1 that simply moves visual attention from one location to another and returns the information at the second location . Using default parameters , this model yields a effort estimate ( C ) of 470 ms . The second source is the CPM - GOMS models provided by Gray , John , & Atwood ( 1993 ) . In terms of perceptual - motor access efforts , both the Memory - Test and Gray - Box groups have to do the same thing ; namely , move visual attention , their eyes , and the cursor to the correct ﬁeld in the Information Window , click on its gray box , and perceive a simple word . Extrapolating from the CPM - GOMS models and data presented by Gray and Boehm - Davis ( 2000 ) for the distances moved here , this time should be between 1 , 000 and 1 , 500 ms . This estimate brackets the estimate for effort obtained from two different modeling approaches . A CPM - GOMS model developed speciﬁcally for this paper ( included as Fig . 2 ) yields an estimate of 1 , 280 ms ; whereas a modiﬁed version of our simple ACT - R model yields an estimate for effort , C , of 1 , 120 ms . ( The modiﬁcations simply added a mouse movement and click to the ﬁrst ACT - R model . ) Effort , measured in time , to retrieve a weak memory is between 500 and 1 , 000 ms . Although for important memories , retrieval can be repeatedly cued with the same or different stimulus , 1 , 000 ms is the upper estimate that Anderson and Lebiere ( 1998 ) provide for the time that the cognitive system will allocate to any one retrieval attempt . This estimate of retrieval time for weak memories applies to the Free - Access and Gray - Box conditions . Before the Memory - Test group begins a trial they must study and pass a test on the infor - mation required for that trial . Hence , for them , the memories retrieved are strong . Our estimate for the time needed to retrieve a strong memory ranges from 100 to 300 ms ( Altmann & Gray , 2002 ; Byrne & Anderson , 2001 ) . 10 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 3 . 1 . 2 . Strategic predictions by condition The estimates of the effort derived above ( and shown in Table 1 ) enable us to predict the rel - ative mix of perceptual - motor access or memory retrieval for each condition . The Free - Access condition should favor perceptual - motor access over memory retrieval . Indeed , the low effort of perceptual - motor access should rule out use of the slow retrieval of weak and erroneous mem - ories . However , although we estimated the range of memory retrieval times to be from 500 to 1 , 000 ms , there may well be some strong memories that can be retrieved faster than this . For the most part , most memories that can be retrieved faster than perceptual - motor access should be correct . But , because of noise in the memory system some number of erroneous traces may be relied on . For the Gray - Box condition , the higher perceptual - motor effort should compete with the effort of retrieving a weak memory . Correct memories will tend to be weak and not much stronger than competing memories for information from older shows or other ﬁelds . Because of noise in the memory system some erroneous traces will be retrieved in place of correct traces . Finally , for the Memory - Test condition retrieval should be much faster than perceptual - motor access making memory retrieval the preferred microstrategy . Because strong but recently rehearsed material decays rapidly ( Altmann & Gray , 2002 ) , there should be little compe - tition from older memories with the result that the correct memories should be reliably retrieved . The above predictions are based on characteristics of the human perceptual - motor and mem - ory systems . Soft constraints are imposed on behavior by the interaction of these characteristics and the characteristics of the environment ( i . e . , in this case , the effort required to access a piece of information ) . The same kind of analysis can be easily carried out to derive soft constraints in other environments . 3 . 1 . 3 . Behavioral predictions by condition The above analyses led us to make two sets of behavioral predictions . One set is for the relative number of errors made , whereas the other set is for the relative number of times the information window is accessed . Table 1 Estimates ( in ms ) of perceptual - motor and memory retrieval effort by condition Condition Perceptual - motor access Memory retrieval Free - Access 500 a 500 – 1 , 000 b ( weak ) Gray - Box 1 , 000 – 1 , 500 c 500 – 1 , 000 b ( weak ) Memory - Test 1 , 000 – 1 , 500 c 100 – 300 d ( strong ) a Estimate based on an ACT - R 5 . 0 model ( see Note 1 ) and CPM - GOMS models from Gray et al . ( 1993 ) . b Estimate from Anderson and Lebiere ( 1998 ) . c Estimate based on the models developed by Gray and Boehm - Davis ( 2000 ) , an ACT - R 5 . 0 model ( see Note 1 ) and the CPM - GOMS model presented as Fig . 2 . d Estimates based on models developed by Altmann and Gray ( 2002 ) and Byrne and Anderson ( 2001 ) . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 11 For relative number of errors , we predict that the most errors will be made for the Gray - Box condition , followed by Free - Access , with the least being made by the Memory - Test condition . This prediction follows as the Gray - Box condition will place undue reliance on the faster retrieval of error prone weak knowledge in - the - head over the slower , but surer , perceptual - motor access of perfect knowledge in - the - world . For its part , the Free - Access condition should rely on the combination of fast perceptual - motor access and the fast retrieval of recently encoded , but strong , memories . However , the 500 ms for perceptual - motor access means that , with a boost in activation from random noise , occasionally a weak and erroneous memory will be quickly retrieved and used in lieu of a slightly more effortful perceptual - motor access . In contrast , as subjects in the Memory - Test condition are tested on show information before they are allowed to program a trial , this knowledge should be strong and readily accessible . We expect the least errors from this group . We have a two - part prediction for the relative number of times the information window is accessed . The ﬁrst prediction is the most obvious . If something needed for task performance is not available in - the - head then it must be acquired from in - the - world . The Memory - Test group studies and is tested on show information before each trial begins . If the memory test manipulation is successful then show information will be stored in memory and will not need to be accessed during the trial . However , neither the Free - Access nor the Gray - Box groups have the advantage of prior study . For them knowledge must be acquired from in - the - world during the trial . Hence , the Free - Access and Gray - Box groups should access show information during the trial more often than does the Memory - Test group . On the other hand , if there is some memory then the Free - Access condition should access the Information Window more than Gray - Box because the effort of perceptual - motor access is lower . For example , assume there is a memory , M , of strength x , whose retrieval time relative to perceptual - motor ( PM ) access is : TIME [ PM ( eye - movement ) ] < TIME [ M ( x ) ] < TIME [ PM ( mouse - movement ) ] . Under these circumstances , the Free - Access condition would make an eye - movement , but rather than make a mouse - movement , the Gray - Box condition would rely on memory retrieval . 3 . 2 . Auxiliary assumption Our focus is on extending rational analysis to the choices made every 500 – 1 , 000 ms in the course of routine interactive behavior . The basic prediction is that non - deliberate selection acts to minimize the effort of an interaction . Our predictions depend on an auxiliary assumption that is not directly tested but will be supported if our predictions hold . The auxiliary assumption holds that time is a reasonable surrogate for measuring cognitive as well as perceptual - motor effort . Although time may be ultimately deemed a correlate not a causal mechanism , our assumption is that for patterns of behavior lasting from 500 to 1 , 000 ms time is a reasonable basis for measuring effort . However , as discussed earlier , this assumption is not without its critics . Perceptual - motor effort is assumed by some to have a privileged status in that , all else equal , perceptual - motor effort is supposed to be generally preferred to memory effort . Support for our predictions will be interpreted as indirect evidence for this auxiliary assumption . 12 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 3 . 3 . Summary of predictions The predictions derived from our analysis of soft constraints in interactive behavior are clear . For errors we expect the Gray - Box condition to make the most , the Memory - Test to make the least , and the Free - Access to be somewhere in between . For the frequency of information access , we expect the Free - Access condition to access the information window more than the Gray - Box condition . Both of these conditions should access it more than the Memory - Test condition . Our claim is that the conditions we test are not extreme , but are similar to those that occur during daily use of desktop computers . Under these conditions , despite the availability of perfect knowledge in - the - world , the soft constraints analysis predicts the reliance on imperfect knowledge in - the - head . 4 . Experimental data In selecting a task , two criteria were important . First , we needed a clear separation between using the task interface versus accessing information for the task . Second , we wanted a task that would not force users to keep or manipulate knowledge in - the - head ; that is , storage in memory for more than a few seconds should be an optional , not a necessary requirement of task performance . These criteria led us to select the task of programming a VCR to record a television show . Meeting our ﬁrst criterion , the VCR interface was constant across conditions . With the task interface held constant , we varied the ease with which information for the to - be - recorded television show ( i . e . , start time , end time , day - of - week , and channel ) could be retrieved from memory or accessed by the perceptual - motor system . Meeting our second criterion , the VCR did not require users to keep or manipulate knowledge in - the - head . Information from the world could be obtained , used immediately , and then forgotten . 4 . 1 . Experiment 1 Experiment 1 had three conditions ; all used a simulation of a commercial VCR built in Macintosh Common Lisp TM . 4 . 1 . 1 . Methods 4 . 1 . 1 . 1 . Subjects . Seventy - two undergraduates , 24 per condition , participated for course cred - its . Subjects were assigned to conditions randomly in blocks of threes . The experiment took approximately 30 min . Subjects were individually run . 4 . 1 . 1 . 2 . Data collection . All clicks on any button object in the simulation were time stamped to the nearest tick ( 16 . 67 ms ) and saved to a log ﬁle along with a complete record of the information in the VCR’s displays ( e . g . , mode , time , day - of - week , channel , and so on ) . If subjects moved the cursor from the VCR window to the Show Information Window the mouse exit and mouse enter events were recorded and time stamped . Likewise , any clicks on the gray boxes covering the ﬁelds of the Show Information Window were also time stamped and saved W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 13 to the log ﬁle along with the name of the ﬁeld and the information it contained . Hence , from the log ﬁle it is possible to reconstruct a complete trace of the subject’s interaction with the VCR and Show Information Window . 4 . 1 . 1 . 3 . Procedure . With minor differences described below , the procedure for all conditions was the same . The study began with the subject watching as the experimenter programmed the ﬁrst trial of show 0 . During the show 0 the task - to - device rule hierarchy shown in Fig . 1 was placed in front of the subject and the experimenter referred to it as s / he programmed the show . After the ﬁrst trial the experimenter watched as the subject programmed show 0 to criterion . At that point , the experimenter removed the task - to - device rule hierarchy and left the room while the subject programmed shows 1 – 4 . ( As show 0 was an instruction and practice show , it is excluded from the analyses reported below . ) Each subject programmed shows 1 – 4 to the criterion of two successive correct trials . Each trial began with the subject pressing a START TRIAL button and ended with the subject pressing STOP TRIAL . At the end of each trial , the experimental software provided feedback as to how long the trial took and as to whether the show had been programmed correctly . If the show was not programmed correctly , the subject was provided feedback on the ﬁrst error that the software found . The order in which errors were checked was : clock time , start time , end time , day - of - week , channel , and program record . For all conditions and both experiments , each trial began with the VCR covered by a black box with the Show Information Window clearly visible and immediately below the VCR ( see Fig . 3 ) . In addition to ﬁelds containing the show’s name , start time , end time , day - of - week , and channel , the Show Information Window also contained the START TRIAL button . Clicking on this button began the trial , changed START TRIAL to STOP TRIAL , and removed the black box that had covered the VCR . For the Free - Access condition , the labels and ﬁelds of the Show Information Window were clearly visible throughout each trial . In contrast , for the Gray - Box condition , the labels in the Show Information Window were visible but gray boxes covered all ﬁelds except the show name . For example , to see the channel ﬁeld the subject had to move the cursor to and click on the gray box covering that ﬁeld . The value remained visible as long as the cursor remained in the ﬁeld . For the Memory - Test condition , clicking on the START button removed the Show Infor - mation Window and opened a memory test window . The memory test window required the subject to select the show’s start - hour , start - 10 min , start - min , end - hour , end - 10 min , end - min , day - of - week , and channel from a series of pop - up menus . After setting the show information the subject clicked the OKAY button . If the information had not been set correctly , the subject iterated between the Show Information Window and Memory Test Window until the memory test was passed at which time they could begin the trial . ( A memory test was required before each trial of each of the four shows . ) As the VCR was being programmed , we encouraged the Memory - Test group to retrieve show information from memory by discouraging the use of the Show Information Window . As per the Gray - Box condition , gray boxes covered the ﬁelds of the Show Information Window . In addition , moving the cursor out of the VCR window , caused the VCR to be covered by a black box . The black box stayed until the subject moved the cursor back to and clicked on the VCR window . 14 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 4 . 1 . 2 . Results and discussion Two sets of dependent measures are analyzed . The ﬁrst set contains two performance mea - sures of errors : trials - to - criterion and a measure of goal suspension . The second set is a process measure that examines the number of times the information window was accessed . 4 . 1 . 2 . 1 . Performance measures : errors . Trials - to - criterion . A trial started when the subjected clicked the START TRIAL button and continued until the STOP TRIAL button was clicked . Trials for each show continued until the show was programmed correctly for two successive trials . Given that , in each condition , show information was readily available in - the - world , we might have expected all subjects in all conditions to have spent a maximum of two trials per show . A trials - to - criterion score of greater than two , reﬂects the number of trials that , when the subject clicked the STOP TRIAL button , were not correctly programmed . Hence , we interpret trials - to - criterion greater than two as reﬂecting a reliance on imperfect memory in lieu of accessing knowledge in - the - world . A two - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) was conducted on the number of trials to reach the criterion of two successive correct shows . Condition ( Free - Access , Gray - Box , Memory - Test ) was a between - subjects factor and show ( 1 – 4 ) was within - subjects . The main effect of condition was signiﬁcant , F ( 2 , 69 ) = 4 . 48 , p = . 015 ( MSE = 10 . 04 ) , as was the main effect of show , F ( 3 , 207 ) = 5 . 90 , p = . 0007 ( MSE = 5 . 05 ) . The interaction of condition by show was not signiﬁcant ( F < 1 ) ( see Fig . 4 ) . Planned comparisons by condition yielded a signiﬁcant difference between Gray - Box and Memory - Test ( p = . 0002 ) as well as between Free - Access and Memory - Test ( p = . 037 ) . The difference between the Free - Access and Gray - Box condition was not signiﬁcant . Despite the ready availability of knowledge in - the - world , both the Gray - Box and Free - Access group made more errors than did the group that had show knowledge strongly encoded in - the - head . Goal suspension . The trials - to - criterion measure focused our attention on the number of trials that ended in error ; that is , the number of trials that ended with a show being incorrectly Fig . 4 . Trials - to - criterion for experiment 1 . Subjects were required to program each show to the criterion of two successive correct trials . Hence , for shows 3 and 4 the Memory - Test group is close to the minimum number of trials possible . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 15 programmed . The more shows that were incorrectly programmed the greater the trials - to - criterion . In contrast , for goal suspension we examine errors that were made , but latter detected and corrected on trials that ended successfully . The measure of goal suspension is derived from Gray’s ( 2000 ) goal - structure analysis of errors of performance 2 . For the VCR simulation there are eight ﬁelds that must be set to correctly program the VCR ; day - of - week , channel , start - hr , start - 10 min , start - min , end - hr , end - 10 min , end - min . Given the structure of the device , the measure of goal suspension is quite simple : Once a subject starts to change a setting , how often was it abandoned before being correctly completed ? For example , if for show 2 the to - be - set channel was 21 , and the current channel was 11 , then if the subject began setting the channel but stopped before 21 ( e . g . , going off to set the day - of - week ) , then this is one goal suspension . For goal suspensions , we examined only trials that were successfully programmed . In the context of a successfully programmed trial , goal suspensions are potential errors . They require that the subject detect that the setting is not complete and correct the setting before pressing the STOP TRIAL button . Note that accessing show information during a setting was not considered goal suspension . For example , if a subject started programming the channel setting , interrupted his or herself to check the Show Information Window , and then resumed programming the channel—this would not be considered a goal suspension . We interpret goal suspensions as due to reliance , at least temporarily , on imperfect knowledge in - the - head rather than on perfect knowledge in - the - world . If subjects compare the current setting of , e . g . , channel , with the value of channel in the Show Information Window then they would not stop , but would continue programming until the current channel matched the goal channel . Goal suspensions are a rarity . Examining patterns of goal suspensions requires that a vast quantity of correct data be collected and parsed . Across all three conditions of experiment 1 , 36 , 877 mouse clicks were collected and time stamped on correct trials . These mouse clicks were parsed into 12 , 560 goals using the action - protocol analyzer developed by Fu ( 2001 ) with the task - to - device rule hierarchy shown in Fig . 1 . Less than 1 % of all goals , 122 , resulted in goal suspensions . For each group the mean number of goal suspensions per subject is shown in Fig . 5 . An overall ANOVA produced a marginally signiﬁcant effect , F ( 2 , 69 ) = 2 . 64 , p = . 078 . The statistical signiﬁcance bars ( SSBs ) in Fig . 5 are based on planned comparisons . If two SSBs Fig . 5 . Mean goal suspensions per subject across the three conditions . statistical signiﬁcance bars ( SSBs ) show the pairwise statistical signiﬁcance between means . 16 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx look different ( i . e . , they do not overlap ) , the corresponding pairwise comparison is different ( at the . 05 level of signiﬁcance adopted for this study ) ( for more information on SSBs see Schunn , 2000 ) . As indicated by Fig . 5 , the Gray - Box condition made signiﬁcantly more goal suspensions than did the Memory - Test condition , but there were no signiﬁcant differences between the other comparisons . A χ 2 comparison that looked at whether or not each subject made goal suspensions , was signiﬁcant ( p = . 05 ) . Fifty percent of the Free - Access subjects made goal suspensions , 75 % of the Gray - Box subjects , and 42 % of the Memory - Test subjects . 4 . 1 . 2 . 2 . Discussion of performance measures . The ﬁrst two dependent measures , trials - to - criterion and goal suspensions , yield a consistent pattern . The Memory - Test condition is best , and the Gray - Box is worst with the Free - Access condition somewhere in the middle . These data present us with an interesting quandary . All groups had access to all show information at all times , yet they made errors that kept them in the study longer than they needed to be . The subjects had to program each show until they got it correct twice in succession . Hence , the penalty for ending the trial in error was having to stay in the experiment longer . Subjects in the Free - Access or Gray - Box groups could have matched the performance of the Memory - Test group by simply comparing their settings against the Show Information Window before clicking the STOP TRIAL button . Similarly , the penalty for a goal suspension was having to go back and complete the suspended goal at a later time at the risk of ending the trial in error . Subjects in the Gray - Box condition could have easily double - checked show information before suspending their current goal . Both of these measures , trials - to - criterion and goal suspensions , suggest that soft constraints lead to reliance on imperfect memory for show information rather than more reliable perceptual - motor access . 4 . 1 . 2 . 3 . Process measure : accesses of knowledge in - the - world . Our process measure counts the number and the pattern of information accesses to the Show Information Window . For the Memory - Test and Gray - Box conditions , each click on a gray box was counted . The pattern of when information was accessed versus when the information was programmed was derived from the log ﬁles . This process measure can be used to address two questions . The ﬁrst is a construct validity issue ( Gray & Salzman , 1998 ) : Did the Memory - Test manipulation lead to the retrieval of show information from memory instead of accessing it from the display ? The second examines what the patterns of information access reveal about the use of knowledge in - the - world . Construct validity . Did the Memory - Test group rely on memory retrieval or on perceptual - motor access ? Throughout shows 1 – 4 , the 24 subjects in the Gray - Box condition clicked on information ﬁelds 293 times over 223 correct trials for an average of 1 . 31 checks per show . In contrast , the 24 subjects in the Memory - Test condition clicked on an information ﬁeld 10 times during 205 correct trials for an average of 0 . 05 checks per show . This contrast suggests that the memory manipulation was successful and that the Memory - Test group almost exclusively relied on retrievals from memory as their source of show information . Patterns of information access . Given that subjects in the Gray - Box condition could access knowledge in - the - world whenever they wanted it , can their patterns of information access provide any clue regarding why this group did not do as well as the Memory - Test group ? W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 17 Fig . 6 . ( A ) For the Gray - Box condition from experiment 1 , the graph shows the mean accesses per subject per trial , SSBs , based on 24 subjects , show the pairwise statistical signiﬁcance between means . ( B ) For the Free - Access condition from experiment 2 , the graph shows the mean accesses per subject per trial , SSBs , based on eight subjects , show the pairwise statistical signiﬁcance between means . Fig . 6A shows the mean number of information accesses per correct trial per subject for the Gray - Box condition . Each information access was categorized by when it occurred in relation to when the information was used . For example , if a subject accessed channel information but set something else before setting channel , this access was classiﬁed as before . If after accessing the channel information the subject’s next act was to program the channel setting , this access was classiﬁed as right - before . Any interruption of a setting to access the information for that setting was classiﬁed as middle . If immediately after setting the channel the subject’s next act was to access the channel information , this access was classiﬁed as right - after . Any later access of an information ﬁeld was classiﬁed as after . Of these ﬁve categories of information access we will be most interested in the right - before , middle , and right - after categories . The right - before and right - after categories refer to well - deﬁned points in time ; immediately before or after a setting was programmed . The middle category refers to a well - deﬁned time interval . In contrast , the before category refers to the time from the beginning of the trial until immediately after the prior setting was programmed . Complementary , the after category refers to a time after programming had begun on the next setting to the end of the trial . Hence , in contrast to right - before , middle , and right - after , the before and after categories refer to events that could occur at any place within an uncertain time interval . A within - subject ANOVA yielded signiﬁcant between - category differences in when the Gray - Box group accessed show information , F ( 4 , 92 ) = 15 . 36 , p < . 0001 ( MSE = 0 . 11 ) . The SSBs in Fig . 6A are based on the Tukey Honestly Signiﬁcant Difference ( HSD ) test . As shown by the SSBs , more accesses were performed right - before the information was needed than at any other time . There were no signiﬁcant pairwise comparisons between any of the other access categories . 18 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx Occasionally , the Gray - Box group will access knowledge in - the - world right before they program the setting . However , they are unlikely to access this knowledge while they are pro - gramming a setting ( middle ) , and they are equally unlikely to access it right after they have programmed a setting . Any veriﬁcations of the correctness of their settings that the Gray - Box group is doing must be based on retrieval of imperfect knowledge in - the - head , not on a com - parison with perfect knowledge in - the - world . We will return to a discussion of the experiment 1 information access data after presenting experiment 2 . 4 . 2 . Experiment 2 Experiment 1 was interesting but incomplete , as it provided no information on how often or when the Free - Access condition accessed show information . To remedy this deﬁcit we conducted experiment 2 . Experiment 2 was run to provide eye - tracking data on the Free - Access condition . With these data , we could examine the frequency and patterns with which the Free - Access group accessed the ﬁelds in the Show Information Window . 4 . 2 . 1 . Method Experiment 2 had one condition that replicated the Free - Access condition with one main difference : subjects were eye - tracked as they programmed the VCR . To facilitate eye - tracking , the size of the Show Information Window was increased to increase the visual separation between each of the information ﬁelds . 4 . 2 . 1 . 1 . Subjects . We report results from the ﬁrst eight undergraduates who we could success - fully eye track . All subjects , whether or not they could be eye - tracked , received course credit for their participation . Because of the necessity to calibrate the eye - tracker on each subject , experiment 2 took approximately 45 min . 4 . 2 . 1 . 2 . Eye tracking . Eye tracking was performed using an ASL 504 remote optics eye tracker . Head movements were tracked using a Flock - of - Birds TM magnetic head tracker . Eye data was sampled and saved to a log ﬁle 60 times per second ( once every 16 . 67 ms ) . Fixations were determined using the algorithm developed by Karsh and Breitenbach ( 1983 ) . Basically , we say that a ﬁxation occurs when at least six consecutive data points fall within a 3 × 4 pixel rectangle ( where the deﬁnition of “consecutive” points is that they have to be less than 32 ms apart ) . Areas of interest were created around each information box . Consecutive ﬁxations in the same area of interest were counted as a single access . 4 . 2 . 2 . Results With fewer subjects , 8 versus 24 , the variability for the experiment 2 Free - Access group was greater than that for the comparable experiment 1 group . However , performance on trials - to - criterion and goal suspensions were within the range we would expect based on the experiment 1 data . W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 19 Eye tracking yields a much ﬁner grain of analysis and greater data density than the measures we reported in experiment 1 . Hence , despite the fewer number of subjects , the greater data density per subject might be expected to yield relatively stable estimates of the pattern of information access . Fig . 6B shows the mean number of information accesses per correct trial per subject for the Free - Access condition in experiment 2 . A within - subject ANOVA showed the between category differences to be signiﬁcant , F ( 4 , 28 ) = 5 . 38 , p = . 002 , MSE = 0 . 29 . The SSBs in Fig . 6B are based on the Tukey HSD test . The SSBs show no difference in number of accesses between the before , right - before , and after categories . However , each of these three categories signiﬁcantly differs from the middle category and is marginally different from the right - after category . There are no differences between the middle and right - after categories . 4 . 3 . Discussion of information access in experiments 1 and 2 The patterns of information access in the Gray - Box condition of experiment 1 and the Free - Access condition of experiment 2 have some interesting similarities . Both groups are more likely to access information right - before they need it instead of when they are using it ( i . e . , middle ) or right - after . Apparently , both groups were so complacent in their ability to retrieve the correct information from memory or in the feeling - of - knowing that came from looking at a value they had just set that they were unwilling to pay the perceptual - motor effort needed to verify that the current setting was , indeed , the target setting . The differences in patterns of information access are as revealing as the similarities . First , the lower the perceptual - motor effort required to access information , the more frequent the ac - cesses . Over all categories the experiment 2 Free - Access group is 4 . 3 times more likely to access information than is the Gray - Box group . However , although the number of accesses decreases in all categories between the Free - Access and Gray - Box conditions , the one category that is partially protected is the right - before category . The Gray - Box group appears to devote a higher proportion of its information accesses to the right - before category than does the Free - Access group . The higher number of accesses before and after suggests that the Free - Access group does more advance storage than the Gray - Box group and more comparing of the VCR settings to the show information . 5 . General discussion 5 . 1 . Success of predictions—support for hypotheses and assumptions Plugging Table 1 estimates of perceptual - motor and cognitive effort into our rational analysis led us to derive soft constraints in different experimental conditions and make several predic - tions concerning performance and process . For performance we predicted that the Memory - Test condition would be best and Gray - Box the worst with the Free - Access group somewhere in the middle . We found this rank - order with both performance measures . For trials - to - criterion there were signiﬁcant differences between Memory - Test and each of the other two conditions , but not signiﬁcant differences between these two . For goal suspensions planned comparisons 20 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx revealed a signiﬁcant difference between Memory - Test and Gray - Box with no other signiﬁcant between group differences . The process measure supported the assumption that the Memory - Test group would rely on memory retrieval rather than perceptual - motor access . Eyeballing the difference in this measure across experiments suggested that the Free - Access group made many more perceptual - motor accesses of the Information Window than did the Gray - Box group . This difference supports the prediction that information accesses would vary as a function of perceptual - motor effort . The process measure directly supports the prediction that on many occasions when the Gray - Box or Free - Access condition might have been expected to rely on knowledge in - the - world they relied , instead , on knowledge in - the - head . For example , while programming ( mid - dle ) a setting and right - after programming a setting the Gray - Box condition made almost no accesses of the Show Information Window ( see Fig . 6A ) . The Free - Access condition made only slightly more middle and right - after accesses , averaging approximately 1 / 2 an access per person per trial ( see Fig . 6B ) . These behavioral measures support our predictions based on our notion of least effort tradeoffs as soft constraints that govern non - deliberate selection of microstrategies in inter - active behavior . The success of our analysis in predicting experimental outcomes provides indirect support for our auxiliary assumption . For patterns of interactive behavior lasting be - tween 500 and 1 , 000 ms , time is a reasonable surrogate measure for cognitive as well as for perceptual - motor effort . Unless our estimates of the duration of memory and perceptual - motor processes are way off , the success of our predictions suggests that the time spent retriev - ing something from memory is weighed the same as time spent in perceptual - motor activity . 5 . 2 . Implications The perceptual - motor and memory effort manipulated in these studies are of the same order of magnitude as the effort paid by the typical user of direct - manipulation interfaces . The effort associated with the Memory - Test condition is similar to that paid by the author who relies on his strong memory for details contained in a chart tucked away at the end of the manuscript . The Free - Access condition is similar in perceptual - motor effort to many situations in which information that is available in one open window is required by a program running in another open window . Finally , subjects in the Gray - Box condition spent an effort equivalent to that required by users who must move to and click on a partially covered window to bring the information it contains to the foreground . Indeed , given the pedestrian nature of the manipulations , it is interesting and important that the three conditions produced the pattern of results that they did . It may not be completely surprising that such small differences in perceptual - motor efforts affected strategy ( Wickens , 1992 ) , but we are surprised that they inﬂuenced performance . In - deed , the most striking aspect of the between - group differences in performance is that all were avoidable . All performance differences can be traced to differences in willingness to either memorize or access show information . For each trial the Memory - Test group had quick and reliable access to show information in memory . The other groups made more errors that re - sulted in more trials - to - criterion and more goal - suspensions . Apparently , veriﬁcation is lower W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 21 effort—and hence more likely—if based on knowledge in - the - head rather than accessing knowledge in - the - world . The results we obtained demonstrate the “bounds” of rationality ( Simon , 1956 ) . Since the adaptive mechanisms in cognition operate on local estimates of the characteristics of the envi - ronment , there is no guarantee that the pattern of behavior chosen will lead to global optimal performance . However , these bounds bring out the importance of soft constraints ; expectations of global optimal performance are na¨ıve unless soft constraints are engineered to support it . 5 . 2 . 1 . Implications for routine interactive behavior Although the level of perceptual - motor and memory effort manipulated in these studies was representative of that encountered in many human - system interactions , this effort is much lower than that involved in many others . For example , for a typical process control operator , accessing knowledge in - the - world may require more than simply clicking on a gray box , it may require getting out of a seat and moving across the room to an information display . Similarly , unlike the situations we studied , visually busy web pages impose a substantial search effort on accessing knowledge in - the - world . Hence , for much routine interactive behavior , we would expect the effort - beneﬁt tradeoff to favor accessing imperfect knowledge in - the - head over perfect knowledge in - the - world . 5 . 2 . 2 . Implications for design Some readers may object , as did one reviewer of our conference presentation ( Gray & Fu , 2001 ) , that if the VCR had been designed differently then the observed failures to access knowl - edge in - the - world would not have occurred . However , this observation is not an objection to the current research but , rather , is precisely the point . It is well - established that design of the task en - vironment inﬂuences the strategies adopted ( Cary & Carlson , 1999 , 2001 ; Neth & Payne , 2001 ; O’Hara & Payne , 1998 , 1999 ; Payne , Howes , & Reader , 2001 ) . The goal of our research is to un - derstand how interactive behavior emerges from the constraints and opportunities provided by the interaction of embodied cognition with the task being performed and the interface designed to perform the task . The difﬁculty lies in understanding how small changes in interface design interact with embodied cognition to produce interactive behavior . Hence , the proper focus of our study is not the interface per se , but the human . What is important is not the observation that different interface designs produce different patterns of interactive behavior , but understanding the interaction of design with embodied cognition that leads to these different patterns . 5 . 2 . 3 . Implications for embodied cognition Our results would be different if the knowledge in - the - world we studied was not text and linguistic but was something else . Our results would be different if the amount of information required for task performance was greater or lesser than what we used . Our title is misleading as once information is acquired via the perceptual - motor system it is then in - the - head not in - the - world . We have heard and agree to all of these points . Indeed , our point is precisely that the most adaptive pattern of interactive behavior is one that is the least effort given the current task and the current task environment . Change the environment or the task then another pattern will be most adaptive . However , like Scaife and Rogers ( 1996 ) , rather than appealing to hand - waving 22 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx theories or intuitive accounts of what should be easier for people to do , we call for an account of the control of interactive behavior ; that is , the ways in which central cognition orchestrates processes such as mouse movements , eye movements , perception , shifts in attention , memory encoding , and memory retrieval . The contrary appeal to intuitive accounts seems to come from both the practitioner and researcher communities . The practitioners seize on their bumper sticker approaches to de - sign guidance ( put knowledge in - the - world ) while the researchers have theirs ( “we off - load cognitive work onto the environment , ” Wilson , 2002 ) . We argue for a more nuanced approach , one that does not presume the privileged status of any location or type of operation . Indeed , we would rephrase Wilson’s third sense of embodied cognition to read , “the cognitive control of interactive behavior minimizes effort by using a least effort combination of the mechanisms available to it . ” All mechanisms or subsystems are on the table . There is no reason to think that one mechanism or subsystem has a privileged status in relation to another . The leap from “we can use knowledge in - the - world” to “knowledge in - the - world has a privileged status compared to knowledge in - the - head” is not required . What is required is a careful and ﬁne - grained analysis of the patterns of interactive behavior needed to perform a task . 6 . Conclusions : soft constraints in interactive behavior It is not surprising that people who are forced to memorize show information do well . Nor would it be surprising to ﬁnd that people who must acquire information from their environment take longer and require more steps than those who have already acquired it . What is surprising is that perfect knowledge in - the - world produces less than perfect performance even in a simple task whose demands are about what we all encounter daily in our use of interactive systems . Soft constraints are imposed by the designer on the user . Whether or not designers are aware of soft constraints or of their effect on user performance , soft constraints exist and their inﬂuence is real . There is a clear need for the cognitive engineering community to develop tools and a new generation of analytic guidelines that can build a consideration of soft constraints into artifact design and facilitate the evaluation of soft constraints after an artifact has been built . Our analysis of soft constraints is based on process models at the embodiment level of analysis . It is at this level that we see cognitive , perceptual , and action operators orchestrated into patterns of interactive behavior . These patterns form the activities and microstrategies of embodied cognition . This convergence of theory and practice suggests that the embodiment level is the right level of description for functional cognition . We are optimistic that a cognitive science that is inspired by problems in the world and attempts to develop engineering tools for these problems will be grounded at the embodiment level . Notes 1 . A compressed ﬁle ( StuffIt TM format ) containing two Lisp ﬁles and an Excel work - book may be downloaded from the annex maintained by the Cognitive Science Society , W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 23 see supplementary material http : / / cogsci . psy . utexas . edu / supplements / . The Lisp ﬁles are written in Macintosh Common Lisp ( MCL ) but use the uniform - interface standard for ACT - R and hence the windows created as well as the models should run under ACL Lisp ( though this has not been tested ) . Each Lisp ﬁle implements one of the models discussed in this section . The Excel workbook includes sample runs of each model and estimates of effort after 1 , 10 , 100 , and 1 , 000 cycles . 2 . Note that the terminology has changed from that used in Gray ( 2000 ) . What we are referring to as goal suspensions were referred to there as premature pops . Acknowledgments The work reported was supported by a grants from the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research AFOSR # F49620 - 97 - 1 - 0353 and F49620 - 03 - 1 - 0143 , as well as the Ofﬁce of Naval Research ONR # N000140310046 . References Altmann , E . M . , & Gray , W . D . ( 2002 ) . Forgetting to remember : The functional relationship of decay and interfer - ence . Psychological Science , 13 ( 1 ) , 27 – 33 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1990 ) . The adaptive character of thought . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Anderson , J . R . ( 1991 ) . Is human cognition adaptive ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 14 ( 3 ) , 471 – 517 . Anderson , J . R . , Bothell , D . , Byrne , M . D . , & Lebiere , C . ( in press ) . An integrated theory of the mind . Psychological Review . Anderson , J . R . , & Lebiere , C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Atomic components of thought . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Anderson , J . R . , & Schooler , L . J . ( 1991 ) . Reﬂections of the environment in memory . Psychological Science , 2 , 396 – 408 . Ballard , D . H . , Hayhoe , M . M . , & Pelz , J . B . ( 1995 ) . Memory representations in natural tasks . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 7 ( 1 ) , 66 – 80 . Ballard , D . H . , Hayhoe , M . M . , Pook , P . K . , & Rao , R . P . N . ( 1997 ) . Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 20 ( 4 ) , 723 – 742 . Byrne , M . D . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 2001 ) . Serial modules in parallel : The psychological refractory period and perfect time - sharing . Psychological Review , 108 ( 4 ) , 847 – 869 . Card , S . K . , Moran , T . P . , & Newell , A . ( 1983 ) . The psychology of human – computer interaction . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Cary , M . , & Carlson , R . A . ( 1999 ) . External support and the development of problem - solving routines . Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning Memory and Cognition , 25 ( 4 ) , 1053 – 1070 . Cary , M . , & Carlson , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Distributing working memory resources during problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology - Learning Memory and Cognition , 27 ( 3 ) , 836 – 848 . Ehret , B . D . ( 2000 ) . Learning where to look : The acquisition of location knowledge in display - based interaction . Dissertation Abstracts International : Section B : The Sciences & Engineering , 60 ( 10 - B ) , 5239 . Ehret , B . D . ( 2002 ) . Learning where to look : Location learning in graphical user interfaces . CHI Letters , 4 ( 1 ) , 211 – 218 . Frohlich , D . M . ( 1997 ) . Direct manipulation and other lessons . In M . Helander , T . K . Landauer , & P . Prabhu ( Eds . ) , Handbook of human – computer interaction ( 2nd ed . , pp . 463 – 488 ) . New York : Elsevier . Fu , W . - T . ( 2001 ) . ACT - PRO : Action protocol tracer—a tool for analyzing discrete action protocols . Behavior Research Methods , Instruments , & Computers , 33 ( 2 ) , 149 – 158 . 24 W . D . Gray , W . - T . Fu / Cognitive Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx Gray , W . D . ( 2000 ) . The nature and processing of errors in interactive behavior . Cognitive Science , 24 ( 2 ) , 205 – 248 . Gray , W . D . , & Boehm - Davis , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Milliseconds matter : An introduction to microstrategies and to their use in describing and predicting interactive behavior . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 6 ( 4 ) , 322 – 335 . Gray , W . D . , & Fu , W . - T . ( 2001 ) . Ignoring perfect knowledge in - the - world for imperfect knowledge in - the - head : Implications of rational analysis for interface design . CHI Letters , 3 ( 1 ) , 112 – 119 . Gray , W . D . , John , B . E . , & Atwood , M . E . ( 1993 ) . Project Ernestine : Validating a GOMS analysis for predicting and explaining real - world performance . Human – Computer Interaction , 8 ( 3 ) , 237 – 309 . Gray , W . D . , & Salzman , M . C . ( 1998 ) . Damaged merchandise ? A review of experiments that compare usability evaluation methods . Human – Computer Interaction , 13 ( 3 ) , 203 – 261 . Hutchins , E . L . , Hollan , J . D . , & Norman , D . A . ( 1985 ) . Direct manipulation interfaces . Human – Computer Inter - action , 1 ( 4 ) , 311 – 338 . Karsh , R . , & Breitenbach , F . W . ( 1983 ) . Looking at looking : The amorphous ﬁxation measure . In R . Groner , C . Menz , D . F . Fisher , & R . A . Monty ( Eds . ) , Eye movements and psychological functions : International views ( pp . 53 – 64 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Kieras , D . E . , & Meyer , D . E . ( 1997 ) . An overview of the EPIC architecture for cognition and performance with application to human – computer interaction . Human – Computer Interaction , 12 ( 4 ) , 391 – 438 . Kieras , D . E . , & Meyer , D . E . ( 2000 ) . The role of cognitive task analysis in the application of predictive models of human performance . In J . M . Schraagen , S . F . Chipman , & V . L . Shalin ( Eds . ) , Cognitive task analysis ( pp . 237 – 260 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Larkin , J . H . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1987 ) . Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth ten thousand words . Cognitive Science , 11 , 65 – 99 . Neth , H . , & Payne , S . J . ( 2001 ) . Addition as interactive problem solving . In J . D . Moore & K . Stenning ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 698 – 703 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Norman , D . A . ( 1989 ) . The design of everyday things . New York : DoubleDay . O’Hara , K . P . , & Payne , S . J . ( 1998 ) . The effects of operator implementation cost on planfulness of problem solving and learning . Cognitive Psychology , 35 , 34 – 70 . O’Hara , K . P . , & Payne , S . J . ( 1999 ) . Planning and the user interface : The effects of lockout time and error recovery cost . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies , 50 ( 1 ) , 41 – 59 . Oaksford , M . , & Chater , N . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Rational models of cognition . New York : Oxford University Press . Payne , S . J . , Howes , A . , & Reader , W . R . ( 2001 ) . Adaptively distributing cognition : A decision - making perspective on human – computer interaction . Behaviour & Information Technology , 20 ( 5 ) , 339 – 346 . Scaife , M . , & Rogers , Y . ( 1996 ) . External cognition : How do graphical representations work ? International Journal of Human – Computer Studies , 45 ( 2 ) , 185 – 213 . Schunn , C . D . ( 2000 ) . Statistical signiﬁcance bars ( SSB ) : A way to make graphs more interpretable . Retrieved February 08 , 2004 , from http : / / www . Irdc . pitt . edu / schunn / SSB / index . html . Schweickert , R . , Fisher , D . L . , & Proctor , R . W . ( 2003 ) . Steps toward building mathematical and computer models from cognitive task analyses . Human Factors , 45 ( 1 ) , 77 – 103 . Shirouzu , H . , Miyake , N . , & Masukawa , H . ( 2002 ) . Cognitively active externalization for situated reﬂection . Cog - nitive Science , 26 ( 4 ) , 469 – 501 . Shneiderman , B . ( 1982 ) . The future of interactive systems and the emergence of direct manipulation . Behaviour and Information Technology , 1 ( 3 ) , 237 – 256 . Simon , H . A . ( 1956 ) . Rational choice and the structure of the environment . Psychological Review , 63 , 129 – 138 . Wickens , C . D . ( 1992 ) . Engineering psychology and human performance ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : HarperCollins . Wilson , M . ( 2002 ) . Six views of embodied cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 9 ( 4 ) , 625 – 636 .