IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 203 Research Article Ingroup Dynamics and Perceived Effectiveness of Partially Distributed Teams L INDA P LOTNICK , S TARR R OXANNE H ILTZ , AND R OBIN P RIVMAN Abstract— Research problem : Partially distributed teams ( PDTs ) are virtual teams that consist of at least two distinct geographically dispersed subgroups that communicate mainly through information and communication technology ( ICT ) . As such teams become increasingly prevalent , it is important to understand how to manage them to maximize team effectiveness . The perceptions of effectiveness of PDTs may be signiﬁcantly decreased when they are characterized by ingroup dynamics , consisting of preferential attitudes and actions toward collocated members , with accompanying conﬂict and lack of trust in regard to the distant subteam ( s ) . Research questions : Do ingroup dynamics negatively impact perceptions of effectiveness in PDTs and , if so , how strongly ? What factors can lessen ingroup dynamics—speciﬁcally , can training or reliable ICT support decrease ingroup dynamics ? Does organizational context affect these relationships ? Does whether or not the PDT is international affect these relationships ? Does the number of subgroups in a PDT affect these relationships ? Literature review : Social identity theory suggests how ingroup dynamics may emerge and create fault lines between subteams in a PDT . Effectiveness is deﬁned in terms of process performance , which refers to how well the teamwork process has been undertaken . Prior research suggests that ICT reliability and training for work in distributed teams may decrease ingroup dynamics and improve effectiveness . International members , the speciﬁc organizational context , and the number of subteams per team might moderate these relationships . Methodology : An online survey of professionals with experience in PDTs was conducted , with two subsamples—one from a single large telecommunications company and one from a mix of organizations . Partial least squares regression was used to build and test a model of the relationships among the variables measured . Results : Ingroup dynamics have a strong negative relationship with perceived effectiveness . Overall , technology reliability and training signiﬁcantly reduce ingroup dynamics . In the telecommunications company , training increased ingroup dynamics ; thus , training may not always be beneﬁcial , depending on organizational culture and the modes and types of training provided by a speciﬁc organization . Neither international membership on the team nor the number of subgroups per team was a signiﬁcant multigroup moderator on any path in our model . Conclusions : These results help to extend social identity theory into this domain as they elucidate speciﬁcally that ICT reliability and training promote effectiveness of PDTs and that ingroup dynamics affect the perceptions of effectiveness in such teams . The results give managers guidance on what issues of PDTs to focus on to promote the effectiveness of PDTs . Index Terms— Global communication , global teams , ICT reliability , partially distributed teams , project management , social identity theory . I NTRODUCTION D istributed or virtual teams and cross - organizational projects and communication are becoming very prevalent in our global economy . Virtual teams have been deﬁned as geographically , organizationally , or time - dispersed workers using information and telecommunications technology to facilitate collaboration [ 1 ] . The partially distributed Manuscript received February 14 , 2015 ; revised January 23 , 2016 ; accepted January 24 , 2016 . Date of publication August 16 , 2016 ; date of current version November 21 , 2016 . This work was supported in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation . L . Plotnick is with the Mathematical , Computing , & Information Sciences Department , Jacksonville State University , Jacksonville , AL 36265 USA ( email : lplotnick @ jsu . edu ) . S . R . Hiltz is with the College of Computing Sciences , New Jersey Institute of Technology , Newark , NJ 07102 USA ( email : Roxanne . Hiltz @ gmail . com ) . R . Privman is with Leanne LLC , Teaneck , NJ 07666 USA ( email : Robin1nj @ yahoo . com ) . IEEE 10 . 1109 / TPC . 2016 . 2583258 team ( PDT ) , in which at least one subgroup has two or more members that are geographically collocated , is one frequent conﬁguration among the many variations that can occur in terms of the distribution of virtual team members among sites [ 2 ] . ( Note that if only one subgroup is collocated , and all other members are distributed , the distributed members tend to form a distinguishable second subgroup [ 9 ] . ) Other conﬁgurations include fully distributed virtual teams , in which no members are collocated , and hybrid teams , in which the full team meets face to face sometimes but interacts through information and communications technology ( ICT ) on a day - to - day basis . Cummings [ 3 ] found that 60 % of the Fortune 500 telecommunications companies that he examined used PDTs . Ingroup dynamics , or “us vs . them , ” and lack of “shared social identity” [ 4 ] have been identiﬁed as a key problem for such teams . Ingroup dynamics can be identiﬁed as occurring when members of 0361 - 1434 C (cid:2) 2016 IEEE . Personal use is permitted , but republication / redistribution requires IEEE permission . See http : / / www . ieee . org / publications standards / publications / rights / index . html for more information . 204 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 subgroups in an organization , group , or society identify with that subgroup rather than the whole , and exhibit a more favorable attitude toward each other than they do toward the members of other subgroup ( s ) [ 5 ] . Some components of this concept are denigration and negative stereotyping of the other subgroup ( s ) [ 6 ] and giving less consideration to their contributions [ 7 ] , as well as conﬂict and lack of trust . Ingroup dynamics contrasts with whole - team shared identity , a sense of “we - ness , ” which includes referencing the whole group or team as a collective , creating a sense of belonging to the “same” team [ 8 ] , and having “team spirit . ” In a PDT , collocated members can meet face to face , chat in the hallway , have lunch together , and otherwise socialize with each other , but must rely on computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) for working with members at remote locations . The difference in communication channels within collocated subgroups versus between distant subgroups that are reliant upon ICT for day - to - day communication makes PDTs especially susceptible to ingroup dynamics [ 2 ] , [ 9 ] . PDTs are thus a distinct conﬁguration worthy of study . Prior studies of PDTs consisting of subgroups of students have manipulated and explored some of the factors that are related to their effectiveness , including conﬁguration , distance between subgroups , leadership , trust , use of communication media , and ingroup dynamics , for example [ 2 ] , [ 10 ] . Nevertheless , PDTs have received insufﬁcient research attention [ 2 ] , [ 11 ] . A recent qualitative examination of nine global teams consisting of two subgroups in different countries describes the problems and issues that frequently arise , and the ways in which the teams adapted to and often overcame associated ingroup dynamics [ 12 ] . However , to our knowledge , there have been no previously published large - scale studies of working professionals who participate in PDTs that focus on quantitative analysis of the factors that make such teams effective . Technology - mediated communication in virtual teams is associated with higher levels of affective and task conﬂict , as group members may neglect to censor their comments and accommodate the preferences of their distant team members [ 13 ] . Besides relying on different communication mixes for within versus between subgroup communication , even the use of electronic media tends to exhibit different norms [ 14 ] . It follows that in PDTs , there is more likelihood for conﬂict and lack of trust between subgroups than within subgroups , a manifestation of the ingroup dynamics effect . A ﬁrst paper on the results of the data collected for the study described in this paper [ 15 ] emphasized a literature review of the factors that make PDTs especially susceptible to ingroup dynamics , and focused mainly on content analysis of responses to open - ended questions from a survey of industry professionals who are members of PDTs . Those responses described ingroup dynamics and its effects . In this paper , we use the quantitative data from the survey to build and test a model of antecedents of the relationship between ingroup dynamics and team effectiveness , deﬁned as the perceived quality of the teamwork process . We focus on the potential of two factors that may decrease ingroup dynamics in PDTs : training and reliable and supported ICT . We test the model to examine our two overarching research questions : RQ1 . Do ingroup dynamics negatively impact perceptions of effectiveness in PDTs and , if so , how strongly ? RQ2 . Under which circumstances are ingroup dynamics lessened ? We then look at several factors drawn from the previous literature that may moderate these relationships : organizational context ( RQ3 ) , international distribution of the subteams ( RQ4 ) , and the number of subteams ( RQ5 ) . In the remainder of this paper , we discuss the background of the ingroup / outgroup dynamics ( us vs . them ) and review studies that have examined it in virtual teams or PDTs . We also extend the related concept of faultlines to apply to PDTs , and review literature about effectiveness in virtual teams in general and in PDTs , in particular , including factors ( such as training and communication technology support ) that inﬂuence perceived PDT effectiveness , either directly or indirectly . Based on the literature , we propose a model for explaining perceived effectiveness in PDTs that is based on the premise that ingroup dynamics are a very strong determinant , and test the hypotheses that are included in the model using two subsamples drawn from different organizational contexts . A description of the characteristics of the teams studied not only helps to understand the characteristics of the samples used and , thus , the generalizability of the results , but also contributes to understanding the nature of PDTs that exist in PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 205 current organizations . Finally , we discuss our results and conclusions , and limitations of the research , and summarize our contributions . L ITERATURE R EVIEW This section reviews prior theories and research related to the concepts used in the research . It covers ingroup dynamics and team effectiveness ; the potential mediating effects of ingroup dynamics on the impact of ICT reliability , support , and training for work in PDTs ; and selected other factors that might moderate the effects of ICT reliability and support and of training on ingroup dynamics . Theoretical Orientation A pragmatic framework was chosen for this study , based on key theories and constructs that have helped explain the social dynamics of PDTs in prior research . Social identity theory predicts an association between ingroup dynamics and perceived effectiveness . Social identity theory concepts are used in the literature to explain the phenomenon of ingroup dynamics , which splits a social entity into ingroups and outgroups , and the emergence of faultlines ( created by some distinguishing characteristic of members such as demographic trait ( s ) , culture , geographic location , etc . ) between subteams in a PDT . A social identity is part of an individual’s self - concept that comes from perceived membership in a relevant social group [ 16 ] . Group identity emerges when people deﬁne a collection of people as members of the same social category [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] . Ingroup dynamics starts with a process of comparison between individuals in one group ( the ingroup ) to those of another group ( the outgroup ) , in the context of this paper , a comparison between one’s own subgroup in a PDT and the other remote subgroup ( s ) . This comparison process is not unbiased and objective but is instead a psychological mechanism for enhancing one’s self - esteem by overestimating the positive attributions of one’s own group and overestimating the negative attributions of the other group . In the process of such comparisons , an individual tends to ( 1 ) Favor the ingroup over the outgroup ( For example , [ 14 ] reviews experiments in which it was found that collocated group members communicated almost exclusively with each other . ) ( 2 ) Exaggerate and overgeneralize the differences between the ingroup and the outgroup ( to enhance group distinctiveness and perceived prestige ) ( 3 ) Evaluate the ingroup more favorably [ 19 ] ( 4 ) By contrast , perceive conﬂict with the outgroup and a relative lack of comfort , trust , and respect for them The physical grouping of workers by geographic site in and of itself qualiﬁes as a dimension of diversity , deﬁned as an attribute used by people to think that someone else is different [ 20 ] . Since location is an apparent attribute , it becomes an important social category that divides a team into those who are immediately present and those who are not . In addition , cultural differences between subgroups , including differing culturally formed communication styles , can prevent some team members from understanding the needs , language , and societal constraints of remote subgroups [ 21 ] . Cultural differences are common in global PDTs , where individual subgroups are located in different countries . Therefore , measures taken to improve team functioning and identity should reduce ingroup dynamics and improve the perceptions of effectiveness in such teams . Selection of Literature for the Review Search terms used to locate potentially relevant papers included “distributed teams” and “virtual teams” as well as “partially distributed teams . ” Key research papers were identiﬁed based on relevance of the works to our research on effectiveness of these types of teams , and their citation counts , and then these lines of research were traced by ﬁnding high - quality empirical studies that cited the key early works , in sources such as SCOPUS , Science Direct , and Google Scholar . In addition , recent contents of journals and conference proceedings that have published several papers related to this topic were manually searched , such as the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON P ROFESSIONAL C OMMUNICATION and the Journal of Management Information Systems . We read related papers and extracted relevant information about theory , studies , and practice to inform the theoretical basis for our study , including research questions and hypotheses . Additional Findings from the Literature : Other PDT features , in addition to those addressed directly by social identity theory , can heighten ingroup dynamics susceptibility , such as differences in organizational cultures , and long - term ties and team identiﬁcation within a subgroup , hindering relationship building with newly joined members . These results may occur especially when PDTs are formed as a result of mergers and acquisitions . 206 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 Sometimes , these new organizational structures are unwelcome to members of the newly formed team [ 22 ] . Even under good conditions where a PDT may be formed because the “best expertise” is available in another location , such organizational diversity imposes another layer of challenge and division between subgroups . For example , each site may be accustomed to different norms and practices that may result in feelings of inequality and subsequently in ingroup dynamics conduct [ 23 ] . Technological incompatibilities between subgroups can increase ingroup dynamics as well . Virtual teams may experience conﬂict when members are unable to resolve differences and compromise on the use of a speciﬁc software package or approach [ 24 ] . Differences in organizational preferences for certain communication systems between subgroups in dif - ferent organizations , issues with national communi - cation infrastructure between subgroups in different countries , and cultural preferences for appropriate communication channels have also been noted [ 25 ] . Among other PDT - speciﬁc features that make them susceptible to the ingroup dynamics effect is the limited synchronous availability that often results from signiﬁcant time zone differences among subteams , especially in global PDTs . Limited synchronous availability worsens between - subgroups communication difﬁculties and further impairs relationship building between them [ 26 ] . It greatly increases reliance on asynchronous communication and , therefore , increases the likelihood of conﬂicts and lack of trust that may occur regarding coordination [ 27 ] . The imbalance in communication channels ( face to face versus electronic media ) in distributed groups has been shown to result in coalition formation [ 28 ] . The literature has established that face - to - face contact fosters social integration [ 29 ] . Therefore , the communication imbalance serves as a catalyst to the development of subgroup identity and further bias in favor of collocated members and against distant ones . Conﬂict may arise especially if subgroup members of the latter feel like second - class citizens [ 10 ] . In sum , previous research indicates that physical separation between different subteams in a PDT , coupled with the presence of collocated members at the distributed sites , creates the potential for a powerful geographic “faultline” [ 30 ] and accompanying ingroup dynamics . Faultlines have been deﬁned ( based on Lau and Murnighan’s original conception [ 23 ] ) as “hypothetical dividing lines that split a group into two or more subgroups based on the alignment of one or more individual attributes” [ 31 , p . 969 ] . However , as Wilson et al . [ 32 ] point out , recent research has expanded the attributes on which faultlines can be based to nondemographic attributes . Polzer et al . [ 30 ] found that geographic dispersion in and of itself can impair group functioning by activating a faultline . As discussed by Wilson et al . [ 32 ] , who extend construal - level theory to distributed groups , events or objects that are physically or temporally distant are also distant psychologically . Ingroup dynamics , including conﬂict and lack of trust between subteams , are likely to occur when faultlines exist . We will incorporate measures of ingroup dynamics into our model and examine how they are related to perceived PDT effectiveness , as well as how they may be mitigated by factors such as ICT reliability , training , and the organizational environment , all of which may reduce ingroup dynamics by creating an effective , common working environment for dispersed team members . Therefore , the subsequent sections of our literature review include the topics of effectiveness , ICT reliability and its relationship to trust , conﬂict , and training , with a focus on training to use ICT for team communications . Perceived Effectiveness : Ingroup dynamics are likely to occur in partially distributed teams , but how do they impact team performance ? This is an important question for result - oriented managers . The research literature suggests that information systems project performance consists of two dimensions , process performance and product performance [ 33 ] . Process performance refers to how well the teamwork process has been executed . It is measured by ontime / onbudget completion , team satisfaction , team morale , and so forth . These are metrics that can be applied across a variety of project types . Product performance refers to the performance of the resulting information system . It includes system quality , functionality , impact , and similar factors . This research focuses on perceptions of process performance because it can be measured in the same way for different types of projects and various stages of completion , including the initial speciﬁcations stage of software development when there is no artifact that is operational . Trust : A commonly used deﬁnition of trust , and the one that we adopted in this research , is that of Mayer et al . : PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 207 the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the expectation that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor , irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that other party . [ 36 , p . 712 ] . Trust has been shown to have important effects on team outcomes for virtual teams , such as satisfaction and performance [ 37 ] , [ 38 ] . Polzer et al . [ 3 ] found that virtual team members experience more conﬂict with and less trust in distant teammates than collocated teammates . Trust is one of the components of the measure of ingroup dynamics for this study . The other is conﬂict between subgroups . ICT Reliability , Trust , and Ingroup Dynamics : In their study of virtual teams composed of telecommunications professionals , Saafein and Shaykhian [ 34 ] found that perceived reliable communication tools were an important factor affecting performance . In PDTs , this perception may result because reliable and appropriate communication tools are absolutely necessary to build and sustain trust [ 35 ] . In a PDT , distance can impede communication , and resulting misunderstandings may create the impression that obligations have not been fulﬁlled [ 39 ] . Kasper - Fueher and Ashkanasy [ 40 ] note that trust is built on the communication of trustworthiness . In a PDT , this must be accomplished between subgroups by the use of ICT . To sustain the “swift trust” that may build quickly in a virtual team or between subgroups in a PDT , they also note that communication lines ( that is , ICT ) must remain open for further , sustainable communications between virtual members . They propose that unreliable ICT will lead to less effective communication of trustworthiness in virtual organizations [ 40 ] . Trust has been shown to be a necessary component of team effectiveness [ 38 ] . Taken together with ICT reliability , then , trust can be communicated , and that trust can decrease conﬂict and lack of trust ( ingroup dynamics ) , which can , in turn , improve effectiveness . Thus , one of the potential antecedents of ingroup dynamics is the degree of reliability of and support for the information and communication technologies used by a PDT . Training : Preparation for Distributed Teamwork : Incorporating training into the team’s life cycle is a management function . Some researchers recommend management intervention to establish effective practices . For example , Powell et al . , [ 1 ] suggest that consistent training among all team members improves team performance . Kirkman and Mathieu [ 41 ] argue that training in virtual teams to develop shared mental models and training on tools used to bridge the virtual gap are crucial , and such training should take place before it is needed . Current practices and future needs of training for virtual teams were investigated by Rosen et al . [ 42 ] , who found that most training in organizations was inadequate . Future training needs were rated by survey responders . Leadership training , especially in leading meetings , coaching , and mentoring virtually , was found to be very important . Technology - related training priorities were identiﬁed as the ability to use certain communication technologies and select the necessary technologies to ﬁt the team’s task . Other training priorities identiﬁed were the establishment of trust and conﬂict management , cultural sensitivity and communication , and team - building skills . In a recent case study based on interviews with 19 members of an engineering PDT located in the US and Britain , Hovde [ 21 ] reports that several participants said that the cross - cultural training provided was useful , despite the fact that some of it dealt in stereotypes that proved inaccurate in actual practice . Effective synchronous communication techniques in temporally dispersed teams were discussed by Espinosa and Carmel [ 43 ] . They wrote that training team members to understand the issues of time separation is an educational technique used by successful temporally distributed teams . Training on diversity awareness in distributed teams is recommended by Sarker and Sahay [ 24 ] . They state that especially when differences in temporal expectations are bound up with cultural distance among virtual team members , teams will beneﬁt from training exercises that surface these differences and encourage explicit discussion and agreement . That training in distributed teams improves performance was also found by Kaiser et al . [ 44 ] . They recommend training in communication and technology . Townsend and DeMarie [ 45 ] note that although enormous strides have been made in communication software , virtual team members will need specialized training—not only in how to use the technology , but also in how to effectively communicate at a distance . Many of the traditional cues of social interaction are lost in even the best communication systems . Virtual team members must be taught how to maintain effective 208 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 communication within the constraints of their environment . Townsend and DeMarie also suggest that team members should be trained to use considerably more linguistic precision in their communication , since they will be unable to modify speech with shoulder shrugs or descriptive gestures . In their study of “swift - starting” virtual teams , Munkvold and Zigurs [ 46 ] found that quick familiarization with the use of communication technology enables the team members to reach their potential . Yori et al . [ 47 ] recommend that virtual team members be taught common cultural values and social protocols . Based on the aforementioned research ﬁndings , a second possible antecedent of ingroup dynamics to be included in our research model is the extent of different types of training relevant to the perceived effectiveness of PDTs . Research Questions and Hypotheses This section presents the literature review that results in our set of research questions and hypotheses , and the resulting causal model that we developed , focused on the perceived effectiveness of PDTs as inﬂuenced by ingroup dynamics and on two factors that can decrease ingroup dynamics—ICT reliability and training . Hypotheses : Our hypotheses are listed here and discussed further below . H1 . The lower the ingroup dynamics in PDTs , the higher will be perceived effectiveness . Given the recognition in the literature that distributed communication and work provide challenges to group identity and that distributed groups rely mainly ( or completely ) on mediated communication , we focus Research Question 2 on the possible mitigation of group dynamics through training and robust ICT . H2 . The more training received by PDT members , the lower will be the ingroup dynamics . H3 . Communications technology reliability and support will decrease the level of ingroup dynamics in PDTs . We also explore three possible moderators of the relationships in the model derived from RQ1 and RQ2 , asking : RQ3 . Does organizational context affect these relationships ? RQ4 . Does whether or not the PDT is international affect these relationships ? RQ5 . Does the number of subgroups in a PDT affect these relationships ? To explore these hypotheses and research questions , we discuss the constructs of the research questions , propose three hypotheses , and build a model to test them . Ingroup Dynamics and Effectiveness : Forsyth [ 48 ] summarizes a large amount of group dynamics literature by observing that group cohesion has been shown to increase stability , satisfaction , and efﬁcient communication . Because stability , satisfaction , and efﬁcient communication increase effectiveness , and ingroup dynamics reduce group cohesion , it follows logically that ingroup dynamics will have a negative impact on perceptions of effectiveness . Ingroup dynamics tends to create conﬂict and lack of trust , thereby impairing group function . These factors have been shown to be inﬂuential in the performance of virtual teams [ 49 ] . For example , O’Leary and Mortensen [ 2 ] found that social categorization ( another term for ingroup dynamics related to shared identity or its absence ) in teams with geographically based subgroups ( for example , PDTs ) triggers signiﬁcantly weaker identiﬁcation with the team , less effective transactive memory , more conﬂict , and more coordination problems . Other prior research on workgroup faultlines also indicates that subgroups can result in negative effects on group processes and outcomes . ( See , for example , [ 50 ] and [ 51 ] ) . Although the literature shows that some teams can be effective despite ingroup dynamics [ 33 ] , we found overwhelming evidence of problems related to them in most PDT - related literature that we reviewed . Although organizations may have incorporated measures , such as training and improved ICT , which may ameliorate some of the issues of ingroup dynamics , those measures will be used to varying degrees by different organizations and , with the extensive issues that faultlines can cause , are unlikely to completely resolve the problems associated with a PDT . We therefore expect that for PDTs , a strong relationship exists whereby as ingroup dynamics increase , perceived effectiveness decreases , leading to our ﬁrst hypothesis to address RQ1 ( Do ingroup dynamics negatively impact the perceptions of effectiveness in PDTs and , if so , how strongly ? ) : H1 . The lower the ingroup dynamics in PDTs , the higher will be the perceived effectiveness . PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 209 Practices That Can Reduce Ingroup Dynamics in PDTs : Many variables are likely to affect ingroup dynamics . In this study , we consider the effects of several types of training , and the reliability of and support for the ICT channels used for between - subgroup communication . Prior research suggests that these factors may improve effectiveness in virtual teams [ 24 ] , [ 52 ] . We therefore believe that they will increase perceptions of effectiveness in PDTs as well , by reducing ingroup dynamics . H2 and H3 address RQ2 ( Under which circumstances are ingroup dynamics lessened ? ) . Early and uniform training has been found to foster cohesiveness , trust , teamwork , satisfaction , and higher perceived decision quality [ 53 ] . The nature and timing of training may vary , but prior studies suggest that it can be helpful in increasing the effectiveness of virtual teams . We identiﬁed three types of training activities that were effective when used in classroom settings to encourage ingroup dynamics reduction in PDTs [ 52 ] . These activities are training in the use of communication technologies , training in teamwork , and team building activities . Based on ﬁndings in classroom settings and virtual team research [ 42 ] , we hypothesize : H2 . The more training ( preparation for distributed teamwork ) received by PDT members , the lower will be their ingroup dynamics . Communication Technology Reliability and Support : We deﬁne communications technology reliability as the extent to which the systems used consistently perform as intended . Technology is central to PDTs , as distant subgroups rely on it to communicate . Although the speciﬁc set of communications media used or problems encountered are likely to be important , our study did not use the team as the unit of analysis and includes many different teams with different mixtures of communication technology that could not be adequately measured via reports from a single member of a team . Therefore , the respondents were not asked which particular technologies were used in their communications with distributed subgroups . Ingroup dynamics can also be heightened when technology problems cause miscommunication or lead to misattribution . Technology problems ( for example , ﬁles are not delivered due to size limits ; data are stored in improper format ) are often reported in virtual teams [ 54 ] . These problems can hinder performance , since time and energy must be used to overcome them . Thus , the aspect of technology we focus on is ( perceived ) reliability , including the support needed to help solve any problems when they occur . The relationship between virtual team performance and communication media use was analyzed by McDonough et al . [ 55 ] . They found that greater use of videoconferencing was negatively associated with performance . However , they propose that the results may have been due to the poor quality ( poor reliability ) of the medium . Surely , video technology has vastly improved since the aforementioned studies , but the relevant lesson here is that poor ICT reliability can lead to ingroup dynamics . That user anxiety about using technology such as the internet for vital communication is reduced when users perceive that they have reliable resources to support the technology was found by Thatcher et al . [ 56 ] . ICT reliability and support are thus the second variable that we propose will affect the extent of ingroup dynamics , leading to our third hypothesis : H3 . Communications technology reliability and support will decrease the level of ingroup dynamics in PDTs . O UR R ESEARCH M ODEL To test our hypotheses , we built a partial least - squares model . Partial least - squares regression ( PLS ) was chosen as the method for analyzing the results . It is a form of structural equation modeling that is very appropriate for causal inquiry in communication - related research , especially when the model includes both formative and reﬂective constructs [ 57 ] . The independent ( exogenous ) variables are ICT reliability and training , both of which will impact ingroup dynamics ( endogenous variable ) . Ingroup dynamics are then proposed to impact the perceptions of effectiveness . The research model shown in Fig . 1 models the hypotheses that arise from the research questions and literature review . However , other factors may inﬂuence how ingroup dynamics affect perceived effectiveness . We address some of the more salient ones after testing our model to attempt to discern whether they moderate the main constructs of the research model . For example , in speciﬁc organizations , the effects of training or of technology support on ingroup dynamics may vary because of differences in organizational training and support programs and in organizational cultures . In addition , some organizations may have used PDTs for a decade or 210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 Fig . 1 . Proposed model for ingroup dynamics and perceived effectiveness in PDTs . more , while others may be relatively new to this form of organization . Thus , PDTs in different organizations may also differ in terms of the amount of experience their members have had working in this type of team and , therefore , in their need for training . Organizational differences may also be confounded with other factors that could inﬂuence the need for training and ICT support , such as the extent to which the teams are international . These issues are addressed by RQ3 ( Does organizational context affect these relationships ? ) and will be examined for our data by testing whether or not the organization acts as a signiﬁcant multigroup moderating variable . Similarly , we did not have speciﬁc hypotheses about the nature of the possible moderating effects of international distribution of subgroups ( RQ4 : Does whether or not the PDT is international affect these relationships ? ) or the effects of the number of subgroups ( RQ5 : Does the number of subgroups in a PDT affect these relationships ? ) on the relationships shown for H2 and H3 in the initial model , but we will report on exploratory analysis after the tests of the hypotheses . In terms of the impact of cultural differences that are more prevalent in international teams than among subteams in different parts of the same country , research reviews tend to show that cultural differences are important to team dynamics . For example , in a review of 38 studies of global work , Hinds et al . [ 58 ] found that national cultural differences can cause communications misunderstandings , fuel conﬂict , undermine trust , and lead to errors and project delays . However , as Watson - Manheim et al . [ 59 ] discuss , virtual team researchers in the past tended to assume that boundaries , such as different time zones and cultures , will necessarily cause problems , and will thus affect all international teams . But as they also point out , “boundaries are a dynamic phenomenon and may have different consequences under different circumstances [ 59 , p . 29 ] ” . Findings have been inconsistent , and being internationally distributed may not always be problematic for virtual work . Similarly , Cramton and Hinds [ 12 ] adopt a dynamic and situated ( “embedded” ) model of cultural adaptation in global teams . Their study of nine software development teams led to the development of a theory they call “nested structuration” to describe the complexity of the cultural adaptation process in global teams . Thus , current theory is tending toward “it depends” and “maybe” in determining whether being global will impact ingroup dynamics and team effectiveness . Another potential moderator that has been the focus of limited prior research is the number of subteams . Theoretically , it would seem that when there are only two subteams , ingroup dynamics may be most likely to occur . Given subteams A , B , and C , for instance , B may agree with A on some issues and with C on other issues , thus not always lining up across a single potential faultline . An empirical study [ 60 ] did ﬁnd maximum faultlines where there were only two subgroups . However , few studies have explored the effects of different numbers of subteams on ingroup dynamics , and as with studies of international distribution of subteams , we located no prior research on the potential moderating effect of this factor on the impacts of training , ICT reliability , or ICT support . In sum , in addition to testing our research model , we extend the analysis by asking whether the expected relationships are modiﬁed by three additional organizational factors : organizational context , the international character of the PDT ( distributed across two or more nations ) , and the number of subgroups per team . M ETHODOLOGY This section describes the methodological choices and procedures followed in the study . After discussing our choice of the survey method with PLS to test the causal model , we describe the participants , data collection and analysis procedures , and the measures used for the concepts . Choice of Research Methodology Because we aimed to include as participants professionals from PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 211 a large number of PDTs and a variety of industries , we chose to use a survey to collect data and quantitative analysis as the research method rather than qualitative methodologies such as interviews or case studies . Our aim in reaching a diverse and large population was to avoid confounding the results with characteristics that may be speciﬁc to a few teams ( as in a case study ) or one industry . As a result , this study uses survey research to build and test a causal model of antecedents of the impacts of ingroup dynamics on the perceptions of effectiveness of PDTs in organizations . In choosing an online survey of working professionals , we were constrained in survey length and , thus , in the number of variables and measures that could be included , because working professionals and their managers are resistant to long surveys . Thus , the study does not attempt to examine in depth all of the factors that may impact the effects of ingroup dynamics on perceived effectiveness , as such an examination would require a lengthy questionnaire or interviews , rather than a necessarily short online survey . Participants We sought participants who are professionals working in industry with experience working in PDTs . Our survey subjects come from two different samples—one from a variety of organizations including ﬁnancial , telecommunications , pharmaceutical , emergency management , and other types of organizations ( Other ) , and one from a single large Fortune 100 telecommunications company ( Company X ) . The participants did not receive rewards other than the satisfaction of assisting this research . The procedures and instrument were approved by a university institutional review board ( IRB ) as exempt , and , as required , the survey included an informed consent form . How Data Were Collected This section describes the process for collecting the data used in this study . We describe the instrument used to collect data , the process for administering the instrument , the data - analysis method , and the means of assuring reliability and validity . Instrument : A survey was the sole instrument for data collection . We worked to create a brief yet broad survey that could capture the levels of the variables of interest to us ( for example , ingroup dynamics , ICT reliability and support , training , characteristics of the PDT , and perceived effectiveness of the PDT ) . Based upon the literature review and existing survey items in the literature , we developed an online survey using SurveyMonkey . The ﬁrst survey page included a description of the study and examples to illustrate the characteristics of a PDT , a consent form , and survey logic to eliminate potential responders who did not meet the IRB or research requirements ( for example , did not participate in PDTs or were under the age of 18 ) . The survey , which consisted of 21 questions , included questions about ingroup dynamics , perceived effectiveness , trust , training , and technology . The survey also included questions pertaining to the conﬁguration of the PDT to indicate , for example , whether it was an international team and to determine the number of subteams . We used validated measures , adapting them as needed , from existing information systems literature when possible , including a large - scale student PDT study [ 52 ] . We were not able to use all of the questions in the scales we adopted our questions from because of the pressing need to keep our survey short . Therefore , we used and modiﬁed items that were , in our opinion , most comprehensively representative of the constructs they measure . Since these are reﬂective constructs , each item measures the construct fully so that our need to reduce the number of items we used did not change the meaning of the measured construct . The shortened scales were validated through statistical tests . We consider ingroup dynamics as a formative construct because it consists of different variations of between - subgroup behaviors and perceptions . For a formative construct , the removal or addition of any dimension will change the construct’s meaning . On the other hand , for a reﬂective construct , all of the indicator items ( questions ) measuring it measure the same idea [ 61 ] . Based on pilot study ﬁndings and the literature review , we divided ingroup dynamics into two component reﬂective constructs ( conﬂict and lack of trust ) . Our survey used items from the literature to measure these component constructs ( trust [ 38 ] and conﬂict [ 52 ] ) . Measures of both trust integrity ( trust ) and conﬂict were based on 7 - point semantic differential scales ; trust integrity was measured with ﬁve items ( adapted from [ 38 ] ) and conﬂict with three items . We did not label the reverse - coded trust measure as “distrust” because research has shown that trust and distrust are not ﬂip sides of the same coin , but are distinct , albeit related , constructs [ 62 ] , [ 63 ] . Perceived effectiveness was measured using 7 - point semantic differential scales with six items . The 212 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 items used to measure perceived performance and satisfaction with the team and project experience were adapted from previous studies [ 33 ] , [ 52 ] . We measured three types of training , each with a single item : team building ( team - building exercises ) , technology training , and training for working effectively with remote team members . Since these are distinct types of training , we consider the construct “training” as a formative construct with the three types of training as indicators . The construct ICT reliability was measured by two semantic differential items : one to measure the degree to which the ICT used was reliable , the other to measure how well supported it was . We pilot tested the survey with 30 professionals prior to the large - scale study described here . The pilot study included three open - ended questions as well as a preliminary version of our questionnaire and is described in detail in [ 15 ] . The full survey is in Appendix I , and the items used to measure each construct in the model are shown in Appendix II . Process for Administering the Instrument : For the Other sample , we recruited participants through snowball sampling using the LinkedIn professional network , and the Meet - Up social network . We started recruiting participants with the third author’s professional network as well as through various professional groups ( mainly on LinkedIn ) whose description seemed in line with distributed teamwork ( for example , the Software Offshoring and Outsourcing Group ) . We also distributed the survey to several departments of Company X , where one author had managerial contacts willing to encourage their groups to participate , with permission from management to use “company time” to respond . Both samples were presented with the same survey . Participants received email invitations to access the survey , plus two reminder email messages . They were also asked to forward the invitation to other colleagues . The respondents were asked to consider and describe a particular PDT they had worked on and then to consider this team while answering the remainder of the survey questions . The survey was closed after three weeks , and data were downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for analysis . How Data Were Analyzed Although it would have been preferable to include marker variable items in the survey , we did not because we were constrained by the Company X requirement that the survey be as short as possible . Therefore , common method bias was fully tested by using Harmon’s One - Factor Test and dismissed [ 64 ] , [ 65 ] . The data were ﬁrst tested for normal distributions using the standard Kolmogorov - Smirnov tests . Because the data were not normally distributed for each reﬂective construct , as is appropriate [ 61 ] , we chose nonparametric statistical tests ( for example , Mann - Whitney U ) as opposed to parametric tests which require normal distributions of data analyzed . Descriptive statistics , such as frequencies , were used to describe the distribution of variables of interest , particularly to describe the characteristics of the survey participants . Once the validity of the model was conﬁrmed using conﬁrmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) , we tested the structural model using partial - least - square regression ( PLS ) . PLS is an alternative to using structural equation modeling ( SEM ) to analyze a research model . The structural model tests are used to test the relationships in the model for signiﬁcance and strength . A major advantage of using PLS is that it does not involve any assumption regarding the population distribution [ 66 ] . For samples such as ours that are not small in size , Goodhue et al . [ 67 ] found that PLS is robust when there are moderate deviations from normality , and because our variables were not normally distributed , this is an advantage for using PLS in our tests of the model . We were further convinced that PLS was an appropriate approach by Rigdon’s argument [ 68 ] that PLS has strengths of its own that SEM lacks . In addition , as Reinartz et al . [ 69 ] note , PLS is a better choice than SEM when researchers are focusing on theory development and prediction , as we are . We constructed a PLS model using SmartPLS [ 70 ] of the relationships of the variables involved in the hypotheses we tested . Our model has two reﬂective constructs ( perceived effectiveness and ICT reliability ) , one 1 st order formative construct ( training ) and one 2 nd order formative construct ( ingroup dynamics ) . A 2 nd order formative construct has , as its indicators , reﬂective constructs that require special handling in SmartPLS . We used a two - step technique that ultimately uses the Latent Variable Scores from the ﬁrst step as reﬂective indicators for the constructs of the model [ 71 ] . This technique requires that the PLS algorithm be run twice . We show the results of the second PLS run . A bootstrapping algorithm in SmartPLS [ 70 ] was PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 213 also run using 1000 sample observations . The bootstrapping results of interest are the t - scores that indicate which paths in the model are signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level of signiﬁcance . After the research model was tested and conﬁrmed , we tested the proposed moderators of the relationships in the model for which we had no speciﬁc hypotheses . We used Henseler’s PLS multigroup analysis technique as described by Sarstedt et al . [ 72 ] . This approach was appropriate because it does not require normality of data . This technique uses PLS analysis and additional calculations . A macro - enabled Excel spreadsheet to perform the calculations was provided to us by J . Henseler ( email , April 6 , 2014 ) . When analyzing the entire model ( structural model by PLS or measurement model by CFA ) , the reﬂective construct indictors are used as separate indicators for their respective constructs . However , when using univariate or bivariate tests ( for example , frequencies ) , reﬂective constructs with more than one indicator ( for example , perceptions of effectiveness , conﬂict , trust integrity ) were analyzed with the average scores of the indicators as the measurement of the construct . It would be inappropriate to follow this procedure for formative constructs as the indicators for them measure different dimensions of the construct . Assuring Reliability and Validity Conﬁrmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) was used to assess the measurement model ( how well variables represent constructs involved in the theoretical model—measures of validity ) . We found adequate levels of goodness of ﬁt , construct validity , discriminant validity , and nomological validity [ 74 ] . We addressed each dimension of CFA for the full data set . As is appropriate , in addition we used theory to make decisions regarding the results of the CFA [ 61 ] , [ 65 ] , [ 68 ] . PLS regression also tests for reliability , convergent validity , and discriminant validity of the structural model , in addition to the tests of the relationships in the model . We used the benchmarks recommended by Hair et al . [ 61 ] to assess the reliability and validity of the structural model with each data set . For our measure of ICT reliability , most teams ( 86 % ) reported that their technologies are reliable and well supported . Reliability of the technology and its support were well correlated . A conﬁrmatory factor analysis placed them on one factor with Cronbach’s alpha = 0 . 93 , indicating that they measured the same exogenous variable , and a correlation ( Spearman’s rho ) of these two non - normal variables showed high and signiﬁcant correlation ( r = 0 . 816 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Therefore , we consider both to be reﬂective indicators of the construct ICT reliability . Appendix III contains details of the tests of the measurement model results . R ESULTS We organized this section to show the results of analyses for each of the research questions so that the reason for using the statistical tests and the implications of the results are clear . In this section , we begin by describing the characteristics of the participants of the research survey in “Who Participated in the Study ? ” In “Results of a PLS Test of the Model , ” we graphically show the results of running a PLS test of the structural model and describe , in subsections , the results for each of our three hypotheses . Finally , in “Tests of Potential Moderators of the Structural Model , ” we describe the tests of the potential moderators of relationships in our model . These potential moderators are the organization ( whether belonging to the Other sample or to Company X ) , whether or not the team was international and the number of subteams in the teams reported upon by the participants . Who Participated in the Study ? Two hundred and ﬁfty - one subjects began the survey . Of those , eight subjects’ responses were removed from the data set because they did not answer every question related to the constructs in the model . As a result , the ﬁnal sample size was 243 ( 110 from Company X and 133 from Other ) . Overall , 39 % of the 243 respondents reported that their teams consisted of only two subgroups ; 32 % of the teams had three subgroups ; 16 % of the teams had four ; and the remaining 13 % had ﬁve . Table I gives descriptive statistics for some key variables , including the reﬂective constructs of interest , as well as a comparison test ( Mann Whitney U ) of those variables between Company X and Other . The results show that levels of conﬂict are generally low , and generally there is disagreement with statements about lack of trust , but there are some teams with higher levels of conﬂict . Overall , the teams rate their perceptions of effectiveness as 214 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 TABLE I S ELECTED R ESULTS FOR W HOLE S AMPLE , C OMPANY X , AND O THER C OMPANIES Variable All Median N = 243 All Skewness AllMean ( SD ) X Median N = 110 X Skewness XMean ( SD ) OtherMedian N = 133 Other Skewness OtherMean ( SD ) Mann - Whitney U Z p Conﬂict 2 1 . 225 2 . 31 ( 1 . 24 ) 2 − 0 . 803 2 . 14 ( 1 . 19 ) 2 − 0 . 894 2 . 45 ( 1 . 27 ) − 2 . 166 0 . 030 Trust Integrity 5 . 8 − 1 . 025 5 . 62 ( 1 . 12 ) 6 − 1 . 041 5 . 84 ( 1 . 04 ) 5 . 6 − 1 . 011 5 . 44 ( 1 . 15 ) − 3 . 052 0 . 002 Effectiveness 5 . 67 − 0 . 806 5 . 45 ( 1 . 12 ) 5 . 67 1 . 394 5 . 54 ( 1 . 19 ) 5 . 5 1 . 129 5 . 37 ( 1 . 05 ) − 1 . 632 0 . 103 NumberSubgroups 3 1 . 032 3 . 03 ( 1 . 03 ) 3 0 . 987 3 . 02 ( 0 . 99 ) 3 1 . 07 3 . 05 ( 1 . 07 ) − 0 . 047 0 . 962 Age of team 2 – 4 years 0 . 114 2 – 4 years 2 – 4 years 0 . 156 2 – 4 years 2 – 4 years 0 . 083 2 – 4 years − 0 . 384 0 . 701 Age of team member 35 6 . 29 38 . 58 ( 6 . 29 ) 45 5 . 87 40 ( 5 . 87 ) 35 6 . 41 37 . 41 ( 6 . 41 ) − 3 . 197 0 . 001 Team size 15 18 . 83 21 . 97 ( 18 . 83 ) 14 16 . 79 19 . 44 ( 16 . 8 ) 17 20 . 18 24 . 07 ( 20 . 18 ) − 1 . 854 0 . 064 % international 42 . 8 % 30 . 91 % 52 . 24 % − 3 . 400 0 . 001 fairly high . However , the results also show that both conﬂict and trust integrity are signiﬁcantly different by organization . An examination of the mean ranks produced by the Mann Whitney U tests suggests that for conﬂict , the Other group reported more conﬂict , and for trust integrity , the Company X group reported more lack of trust . There were also signiﬁcant differences for age and the number of teams that were international . Company X had signiﬁcantly older respondents than did the Other group , and had more teams that were international . Thus , the two groups ( Company X and Other ) were signiﬁcantly different in ways that might be important to the effects of training on ingroup dynamics . Results of the PLS Test of the Structural Model Results of a PLS Test of the structural model are shown in Fig . 2 . The R 2 weights are shown in the construct ovals , and the path weights are shown on the path lines . The bootstrap algorithm showed that all t - scores were greater than 1 . 65 ( minimum for our N of 243 ) , indicating that all paths are signiﬁcant . The results indicate that the path weights are all in the direction hypothesized . The path from ingroup dynamics to perceived effectiveness has the strongest weight . Using the assessments and benchmarks recommended by Hair et al . [ 61 ] resulted in a ﬁnding that the structural model is reliable and valid . Results of Testing for Hypothesis 1 : Hypothesis 1 states : The lower the ingroup dynamics in PDTs , the higher will be perceived effectiveness . As noted above , all paths in the model are signiﬁcant , including the path from ingroup dynamics to perceived effectiveness . The R 2 shown for perceived effectiveness suggests that 39 . 5 % of the variance of perceived effectiveness is accounted for by the variance of ingroup dynamics . With a path weight of − 0 . 629 this relationship is shown to be negative , thus supporting Hypothesis 1 . Results of Testing for Hypothesis 2 : Hypothesis 2 states : The more training ( preparation for distributed teamwork ) received by PDT members , the lower will be their ingroup dynamics . The path from training to ingroup dynamics is signiﬁcant and negative with a path weight of − 0 . 157 . Thus , support is found for Hypothesis 2 . Results of Testing for Hypothesis 3 : Hypothesis 3 states that Communications technology reliability and support will decrease the level of ingroup dynamics in PDTs . The path from the construct measuring communications technology and support ( ICT reliability ) is also signiﬁcant , with a negative path weight of − 0 . 310 ; thus support is found for Hypothesis 3 . Note that the R 2 for ingroup dynamics of 0 . 121 suggests that 12 . 1 % of the variance in ingroup dynamics can be accounted for by the variance in ICT reliability , together with the variance in training . Tests of Potential Moderators of the Structural Model : We also examined possible constructs that might moderate the relationships shown in the model but for which , as explained above , we did not pose hypotheses . We examined the potential moderation effects of organization ( Company X versus Other ) , international membership ( international versus not PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 215 Fig . 2 . Results of the PLS test of the structural model . international ) and number of subgroups ( two per team versus more than two per team ) on each path of our model . Although our sample teams ranged from two to ﬁve subgroups , we chose to look at the two categories comprised of respondents in teams with exactly two subgroups and those in teams with more than two subgroups for two reasons . First , some prior research has shown that when there are exactly two subgroups in a PDT , conﬂict and other problems are more likely [ 30 ] . Second , the number of respondents in teams with two subgroups ( N = 94 ) and the number of respondents in teams with three subgroups ( N = 78 ) swamped the number of respondents in four subgroups ( N = 40 ) and ﬁve subgroups ( N = 31 ) . The only signiﬁcant multigroup moderation effect uncovered through these tests was the moderation of organization on the path from training to ingroup dynamics ( p < 0 . 001 ) . For the Company X group , the path weight was positive , contrary to our hypothesis , while for the Other group , the path weight was negative , as we had hypothesized . In fact , running PLS for the two groups separately resulted in a path weight of − 0 . 287 for the Other group , and a path weight of 0 . 211 for the Company X group . A number of plausible explanations exist for this surprising result . Our speculations about possible reasons are , in part , based upon the experiences and observations of one of the authors who had spent time as a PDT member in Company X . First , if the Company X groups had been working together for a while before training took place and the entire group wasn’t trained at the same time , the group may have felt a disruption when one or more members needed to be absent to take training . Such an event could have increased conﬂict , for example , which would have increased ingroup dynamics . Cummings and Kiesler [ 75 ] found that prior experience with distributed team members helped overcome some of the issues of collaborating at a distance ( for example , time , geographic distance ) by building stronger collaborative ties . If Company X members had worked with their distributed members previously , that experience could have added to the cohesiveness of the team and caused training to be seen as disruptive . Second , Company X had older team members who may have had more experience and maturity , and may well have not perceived training as helpful . This explanation is consistent with the ﬁndings that Company X respondents reported more lack of trust and yet less conﬂict . The Company X participants may have experienced increased trust issues due to the global nature of their teams but had less conﬂict because , with their maturity , they may have been able to ﬁnd ways to work through the issues that being global presents . Third , in Company X , training is often conducted face to face at one subgroup’s location site ; even if those at the other sites were invited , they do not tend to travel to attend . This practice at Company X could further exacerbate faultlines between geographically separated subgroups . While data were not collected to explore this possibility , it also may be a result of differences in training processes for the Company X respondents as opposed to the non - Company X respondents . That is , factors other than the training content itself ( for example , disruption of work time ) may have caused disturbances in group dynamics for the Company X respondents . The analysis will continue with a closer look at the responses of the two groups of subjects ( Company X and Other ) . Further Exploration of the Finding That Training Increases Ingroup Dynamics for Company X Respondents : Given the results of our exploration of moderators , we analyzed differences between the two groups of respondents ( Company X and Other ) 216 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 Fig . 3 . Final model . for each variable ( item in the survey ) . Because none of the data were normally distributed ( Kolmogorov - Smirnov tests were performed ) , we used nonparametric Mann - Whitney U tests . For the variables that serve as indicators for training , ICT reliability , and perceived effectiveness , no statistically signiﬁcant differences were found . For the variables that serve as indicators for the construct trust integrity , we do ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences for the items approach ( z = − 2 . 175 , p = 0 . 030 ) , priority ( z = − 2 . 995 , p = 0 . 003 ) , and trust ( z = − 02 . 770 , p = 0 . 6 ) . In addition , a statistically signiﬁcant difference is found for the variable disagree which is an indicator of the construct conﬂict ( z = − 2 . 137 , p = 0 . 033 ) . Note that both trust integrity and conﬂict are indicators of the formative construct ingroup dynamics . The mean ranks of those variables for which there is a signiﬁcant difference indicate that for the variables that serve as indicators for trust integrity ( approach : Company X : 111 . 79 , Other : 130 . 45 ; priority : Company X : 107 . 52 , Other : 133 . 97 ) as well as for the variables that serve as indicators for conﬂict ( trust : Company X : 108 . 91 , Other : 132 . 82 ; disagree : Company X : 111 . 75 , Other : 130 . 48 ) , the Other organizations had higher levels of conﬂict and lower levels of lack of trust than did the Company X teams . This ﬁnding is consistent with the speculation discussed earlier of why training for Company X subjects increased ingroup dynamics . That is , if they had fewer conﬂicts in general , they may have been more cohesive teams and , thus , been more sensitive to the disruptions of training that they may have thought was unnecessary . What can be observed is that not all organizations are the same . This ﬁnding has implications for management when planning activities such as training . Our ﬁnal model is shown in Fig . 3 . TABLE II S IGNIFICANT R ESULTS OF M ANN - W HITNEY U T ESTS O N ICT _ R ELIABILITY AND I NGROUP D YNAMICS V ARIABLES Trust Disagree Compete Reliable Support Z p Z p Z p Z p Z p 2 . 399 0 . 01 2 . 15 0 . 03 2 . 030 0 . 04 2 . 282 0 . 01 2 . 749 0 . 006 Further Exploration of the Findings for Number of Subgroups and International Distribution : While the tests of multigroup moderators did not show , for any path , that either international membership or number of subgroups had a signiﬁcant moderator effect , we tested further to see whether the variables that act as indicators for the reﬂective constructs that serve as indicators for ICT reliability and ingroup dynamics differed by international membership or number of subgroups , using nonparametric Mann Whitney U tests . For the number of subgroups , no signiﬁcant differences were found for any of the indicator variables . However , when the indicator variables were compared by international membership , some signiﬁcant differences were found . ( See Table II . ) The international group rank was consistently lower than the noninternational group rank where differences were signiﬁcant . However , since the multigroup moderator variable tests did not show any differences between the groups for any path by international membership ( taking into account all of the indicators of the constructs ) , one can surmise that the differences shown for individual indicators is not large enough to create a signiﬁcant difference when all indicators of a construct are considered at once . Of interest is that the reliable and support indicators both showed signiﬁcant differences by international membership ; they are the only two indicators of the reﬂective construct ICT reliability , PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 217 and yet the path from ICT reliability to ingroup dynamics is not signiﬁcantly moderated by international membership . Therefore , we suspect that differences in ICT reliability ( by international membership ) are not sufﬁcient to create differences in ingroup dynamics . An examination of the PLS model demonstrates that although the path weight of the path from ICT reliability to ingroup dynamics is signiﬁcant ( − 0 . 310 ) , it is not large . That is , while ICT reliability has a signiﬁcant negative effect on ( is a negative predictor of ) ingroup dynamics , the impact is not large . Therefore , it may not be surprising that small but signiﬁcant differences between the international group and noninternational group of the indicators of ICT reliability do not create a signiﬁcant difference in the path weight for the two groups . Finally , it is important to recall that the Mann Whitney U tests examined each indicator in isolation . Any interaction or other effects of other variables are not taken into account as they are when performing PLS tests of the model . These ﬁndings support the ﬁnding that the two groups ( Company X and Other ) do not differ in the direction or signiﬁcance of predictions . C ONCLUSIONS , L IMITATIONS , AND S UGGESTIONS FOR F UTURE R ESEARCH This section begins with the conclusions drawn from the results of the study , including implications for practice and for research and theory . It then discusses limitations to the study that may impact or limit such conclusions and , ﬁnally , recommended suggestions for future research . Conclusions A central and important ﬁnding of our research is the strength of the relationship between ingroup dynamics and perceived effectiveness . We have extended social identity theory and faultline theory to the context of partially distributed teams and observe that ingroup dynamics is a powerful predictor in this context . Ingroup dynamics ( conﬂict , and reduced trust / integrity between subgroups ) had a highly negative impact on perceptions of effectiveness . Since this is the ﬁrst study to our knowledge to study these relationships quantitatively in a large number of industry PDTs ( as opposed to student teams ) , the results are important as guidance to management about which issues endemic to PDTs are most important to focus upon . Implications for Practice : Organizations are concerned with team effectiveness , and because increased ingroup dynamics detract from effective teamwork , it is important to study how they may be reduced . We extended social identity theory to examine two key precursors of ingroup dynamics that are amenable to managerial action . Training in communication technology , training in teamwork , and team - building activities proved to be important antecedents of this relationship , albeit not in a consistent way . Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of training and team building in partially distributed teams in some settings , while in others ( in our case , Company X ) , training can have a deleterious effect . This ﬁnding is important as it illustrates that not all organizations are the same nor react in the same ways , so management needs to take care when planning activities to improve teams . That is , the organization and its culture , people , history , and so forth must all be considered before undertaking efforts to improve PDT team effectiveness . We’ve also shown that reliable well - supported technology can even out the differences between subgroups that rely on it and , thus , signiﬁcantly increase team members’ perceptions of effectiveness . Organizations should therefore ensure sufﬁcient technology support , such as appropriate technology training , help desks , backup plans , maintenance , and training . These are important implications of our ﬁndings for managers . Our ﬁndings that the number of subgroups ( two , or more than two ) had no signiﬁcant relationship with measures of ingroup dynamics and that international membership on teams had only spotty and weak relationships are interesting and potentially important because they differ from ﬁndings reported for studies of student teams . These ﬁndings suggest that management need not expend great effort in addressing these issues in a real - world setting . Remember that in our sample only about one - third of the teams had been in existence fewer than two years , and one - third for ﬁve years or more . We speculate that the faultlines that may be associated with having only two subgroups and with being distributed internationally may decrease substantially over time , as teams adapt to these problems or else are disbanded because they cannot adapt . This observation is consistent with the ﬁndings of [ 12 ] in a recent qualitative analysis of nine global teams . Implications for Research and Theory : The use of PDTs has become increasingly common in our 218 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 global economy . Thus , it is important to understand how to make such teams effective , identifying both risks and risk mitigation strategies [ 76 ] . As evident in the literature review , most prior PDT studies were performed in classroom settings or in ﬁeld studies with a small number of teams . Student studies have limitations and may differ from corporate results [ 77 ] . One limitation of student studies is the length of the academic term as a dictator for project length ; most student teams tend to exist for days to weeks , whereas teams in industry exist for months to years . Student teams may also differ from work teams in their ability to understand and collaborate with varying cultures . Thus , an important contribution of this research is to test some hypotheses that have been found to apply to student PDTs , within organizational settings . The prior ﬁeld studies we reviewed were based on very few teams per study and , therefore , were subjected to the idiosyncrasies of these teams . Our approach and the results obtained are based on samples of a large variety of industry teams . This is the ﬁrst study of this type . Methodologically , a contribution is the development and validation of a concise instrument to measure ingroup dynamics in PDTs . In sum , the key contribution of this study is its focus on ingroup dynamics and the demonstration of its importance in actual organizational PDTs . The strong correlation of ingroup dynamics with reduced perceptions of effectiveness indicates that managers should pay careful attention to this social dynamic and take action to mitigate it . Limitations To reach a wide array of PDTs , we asked individuals that belong to such teams to ﬁll out surveys based on their opinions . However , their opinions cannot be compared to those of others on the same teams . In addition , these are measures of individual perceptions at one point in time ; we were unable to follow teams over time to see how and why ingroup dynamics , perceptions of effectiveness , and other variables might change . The retrospective responses made in the survey may have had been made at different lengths of time from the actual team experience for different subjects . Also , since the team could not be a unit of analysis in this study , we cannot examine factors such as organizational boundaries and the ways that they may affect ingroup dynamics . In particular , we expect that multiorganizational teams that are formed because of outsourcing or mergers may have considerably more problems with ingroup dynamics than PDTs formed from different locations within the same organization , but we cannot test that proposition with the data from this study . Speciﬁc to the model presented in this paper is that results cannot be veriﬁed by other sources . When a researcher conducts a case study of teams in a company , project results , transcripts , and related records may be available for veriﬁcation and triangulation of results . We relied on a single source of data , anonymous self reports from an online survey . While we used items from the literature whenever possible , the ﬁnal measures of ingroup dynamics had only been tested previously on a small pilot group of 33 subjects . The sample is also biased toward the East Coast of the US , and toward the telecommunications industry . Suggestions for Future Research We have shown that use of reliable and well - supported technologies for communication between teams and appropriate training can be valuable in reducing ingroup dynamics . However , “too much” or poorly designed required training can cause resentment and , thus , actually increase ingroup dynamics . Future research should extend our study and explore the types of training that are especially appropriate for PDTs , given contextual factors such as prior experience working in such teams . However , it should also attempt to identify and test the power of other factors such as technology choices , motivation for distribution of the team ( for example , to access expertise , joint venture ) and domain of projects , that are open to at least some control by management , and that may help to explain variations in ingroup dynamics in PDTs . In addition , future research should be conducted with a more globally representative sample of PDT members and types of organizations . Methodologically , future research should complement our survey of a large cross section of participants from many different but unidentiﬁed teams , with longitudinal team - based measures that could more precisely measure the effects of different types of managerial interventions over time . For example , it could measure the extent of ingroup dynamics before and then a month or so after a speciﬁc type of training is offered . Finally , the new measure we introduce for ingroup dynamics should be used and validated in future research . PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 219 A PPENDIX I F ULL S URVEY I NSTRUMENT 220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 221 222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 223 224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 225 A PPENDIX II S URVEY I TEMS FOR E ACH C ONSTRUCT Construct Sub Con - struct Variable Question / Item Training TrainTech I received training in the communicationtechnology . TrainRemote I received training to help me communicate effectively with team members who work in remote locations . TrainBuild I participated in team building exercises . Please rate your team ( including all subgroups ) based on the following dimensions . Effectiveness Efﬁc Efﬁciency Qual Quality of results Sched Adherence to schedule SatProj Satisfaction with the project Experience SatTeam Satisfaction with the Team Experience EffecTeam Team Effectiveness Respect There is mutual respect . In - group Dynamics Trust Integrity Approach I feel comfortable approaching them for help . Spirit There is good team spirit . Priority They give my work the priority I need . Trust Overall , they are trustworthy and show a great deal of integrity . Conﬂict Disagree Much disagreement exists . Blame They blame my subgroup for their mistakes . Compete They compete with my subgroup in unproductive ways . ICT Reliability Reliable Our communication technologies are reliable . Support Our communication technologies are well supported . A PPENDIX III M ODEL T EST R ESULTS Goodness of Fit In Table III , results that do not meet speciﬁc criteria set by the sources we consulted ( including [ 61 ] , [ 65 ] , [ 74 ] , and [ 78 ] ) are bolded . We are unconcerned about chi - square results because our N is large [ 61 ] . Otherwise , the results indicate that the data set of all respondents has an adequate goodness of ﬁt , results with the goodness - of - ﬁt index ( GFI ) being only slightly TABLE III R ESULTS OF G OODNESS - OF - F IT T ESTS Measure All Respondents N 243 Recursive Model yes Chi - Square 258 . 31 ( p < 0 . 001 ) RMSEA 0 . 093 CFI 0 . 935 GFI 0 . 877 AGFI 0 . 824 CMID / DF 3 . 075 TABLE IV R ESULTS OF AVE AND C ONSTRUCT V ALIDITY T ESTS All Respondents Construct AVE CR Perceived Effectiveness 0 . 7017 0 . 9335 ICT Reliability 0 . 8705 0 . 9308 Trust Integrity 0 . 6411 0 . 8746 Conﬂict 0 . 5921 0 . 8117 below the benchmark of 0 . 9 or above set by Paswan [ 74 ] as desirable . Validity and Reliability We used formulae provided by Paswan [ 74 ] to compute average variance extracted ( AVE ) and construct validity . SPSS Amos was used for the rest of the analysis . We ﬁrst examined the loading estimates ( called standardized regression weights in AMOS CFA ) to see if they met the requirement recommended by Hair et al . [ 61 ] that the absolute value of each be above 0 . 5 . The range of loading estimate absolute values was between 0 . 582 and 0 . 940 , and so the criterion was met . Paswan [ 74 ] recommends that the AVE for all constructs be greater than 0 . 5 for convergent validity and that the construct reliability ( CR ) be 0 . 7 or greater . In Table IV , the results of the CFA show that these criteria are met and so the model has convergent and construct validity . A rule of thumb for discriminant validity is that all construct AVE estimates should be larger than the corresponding squared interconstruct correlation estimates ( SIC ) [ 74 ] . The SICs were calculated in Excel using the algorithm suggested by Paswan [ 74 ] . As can be seen in Table V , the benchmark set by Paswan is met and , therefore , discriminant validity is shown . 226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 TABLE V T ESTS FOR D ISCRIMINANT V ALIDITY R ESULTS All Respondents Construct AVE SIC ( s ) Perceived Effectiveness 0 . 7017 0 . 4942 , 0 . 1798 , 0 . 1354 ICT Reliability 0 . 8705 0 . 1354 , 0 . 0936 , 0 . 1318 Trust Integrity 0 . 6411 0 . 4942 , 0 . 4316 , 0 . 0936 Conﬂict 0 . 5921 0 . 1798 , 0 . 4316 , 0 . 1318 TABLE VI T ESTS OF N OMOLOGICAL V ALIDITY All Data Estimates ( covariance p ) Perceived Effectiveness ↔ Trust Integrity − 0 . 918 ( p < 0 . 001 ) Effectiveness ↔ Conﬂict − 0 . 649 ( p < 0 . 001 ) ICT Reliability ↔ Trust Integrity − 0 . 423 ( p < 0 . 001 ) ICT Reliability ↔ Conﬂict − 0 . 588 ( p < 0 . 001 ) For nomological validity to be shown , constructs should correlate with one another in the direction ( positive or negative ) predicted by the research model . Table VI shows the correlations of the reﬂective constructs . Note that training is a ﬁrst - order formative construct so we do not include its indicators in the CFA . Also , ingroup dynamics is a second - order formative construct with reﬂective constructs as its indicators . Therefore , we include only the reﬂective construct indicators of ingroup dynamics in the CFA . Signiﬁcance is assessed by the p value in the covariance table ( s ) output by AMOS . We show only the relationships represented in our model . All covariances are signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level of signiﬁcance and the correlations are in the hypothesized directions . Thus , nomological validity is shown . CFA tests of the standardized residual covariances between items can indicate whether items should be retained or deleted . We used the benchmarks recommended by Hair et al . [ 61 ] to assess the CFA . Based upon our tests of the residuals , we did not need to delete any items . Therefore , it was acceptable to continue the analysis with tests of the structural model . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank R . Ocker for her collaboration on this research program that focuses on partially distributed teams . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] A . Powell , G . Piccoli , and B . Ives , “Virtual teams : A review of current literature and directions for future research , ” Database Adv . Inf . Syst . , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 6 – 36 , 2004 . [ 2 ] M . B . O’Leary and M . Mortensen , “Go ( con ) ﬁgure : Subgroups , imbalance , and isolates in geographically dispersed teams , ” Organiz . Sci . , vol . 21 , no . 1 , pp . 115 – 131 , 2010 . [ 3 ] J . N . Cummings , “Work groups , structural diversity , and knowledge sharing in a global organization , ” Manage . Sci . , vol . 50 , no . 3 , pp . 352 – 364 , 2004 . [ 4 ] R . Privman , S . R . Hiltz , and Y . Wang , “In - group ( us ) versus out - group ( them ) dynamics and effectiveness in partially distributed teams , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 56 , no . 1 , pp . 33 – 39 , Mar . 2013 . [ 5 ] H . Tjafel and J . C . Turner , “The social identity theory of intergroup behavior , ” Psychol . Intergroup Rel . , vol . 81 , pp . 7 – 24 , 1986 . [ 6 ] A . R . Flippen , “Understanding groupthink from a self - regulatory perspective , ” Small Group Res . , vol . 30 , no . 2 , pp . 139 – 165 , 1999 . [ 7 ] D . M . Mackie , L . T . Worth , and A . G . Asuncion , “Processing of persuasive in - group messages , ” J . Personal . Social Psychol . , vol . 58 , no . 5 , pp . 812 – 822 , 1990 . [ 8 ] A . L . Fayard and G . DeSanctis , “Enacting language game : The development of a sense of ‘weness’ in online forums , ” Inf . Syst . J . , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 383 – 416 , 2010 . [ 9 ] N . Bos , N . S . Shami , A . C . Olson , and N . Nan , “In - group / out - group effects in distributed teams : An experimental simulation , ” in Proc . Conf . Comput . Supported Cooperative Work , pp . 429 – 436 . [ 10 ] R . J . Ocker , H . Huang , R . Benbunan - Fich , and S . R . Hiltz , “Leadership dynamics in partially distributed teams : An exploratory study of the effects of conﬁguration and distance , ” Group Dec . Negot . , vol . 20 , no . 3 , pp . 273 – 292 , 2011 . [ 11 ] P . Weimann , M . Pollock , E . Scott , and I . Brown , “Enhancing team performance through tool use : How critical technology related issues inﬂuence the performance of virtual project teams , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 56 , no . 4 , pp . 332 – 353 , Dec . 2013 . [ 12 ] C . D . Cramton and P . J . Hinds , “An embedded model of cultural adaptation in global teams , ” Organiz . Sci . , pp . 1 – 26 , 2014 . [ 13 ] P . J . Hinds and D . E . Bailey , “Virtual teams : Anticipating the impact of virtuality on team processes and performance , ” in Proc . Acad . Manage . , Toronto , ON , Canada , Aug . 2000 , pp . C1 – C6 . [ 14 ] A . Cheshin , Y . Kim , D . B . Nathan , N . Ning , and J . S . Olsen , “Emergence of differing electronic communication norms within partially distributed teams , ” J . Personnel Psychol . , vol . 12 , no . 1 , pp . 7 – 21 , 2013 . [ 15 ] Blinded for review . PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 227 [ 16 ] J . Turner and P . Oakes , “The signiﬁcance of the social identity concept for social psychology with reference to individualism , interactionism and social inﬂuence , ” Brit . J . Social Psychol . , vol . 25 , no . 3 , pp . 237 – 252 , 1986 . [ 17 ] J . C . Turner , “Social categorization and the self - concept : A social cognitive theory of group behavior , ” in Advances in Group Processes : Theory and Research . E . J . Lawler , Ed . Greenwich , CT , USA : JAI , 1985 , pp . 77 – 122 . [ 18 ] J . C . Turner , M . A . Hogg , P . Oakes , S . D . Reicher , and M . S . Wietherall , Rediscovering the Social Group : A Self - Categorization Theory . Oxford , UK : Blackwell , 1987 . [ 19 ] S . L . Gaertner , J . F . Dovidio , B . S . Banker , M . Houlette , K . M . Johnson , and E . A . McGlynn , “Reducing intergroup conﬂict : From superordinate goals to decategorization , recategorization , and mutual differentiation , ” Group Dynam . : Theory , Res . , Practice , vol . 4 , no . 1 , pp . 98 , 2000 . [ 20 ] K . Y . Williams and C . A . O’Reilly , “Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research , ” in Research in Organizational Behavior . R . I . Sutton and B . M . Staw , Eds . , Greenwich , CT , USA : JAI , 1998 , pp . 77 – 140 . [ 21 ] M . R . Hovde , “Factors that enable and challenge international engineering communication : A case study of a United States / British design team , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 57 , no . 4 , pp . 242 – 265 , Dec . 2014 . [ 22 ] W . E . Bradley , R . P . Haines , and G . S . Vozikis , “Trust in virtual teams : The use of a directive sentence in the script of the thinklet in recent advances in computers , ” in Computing and Communications . A . M . Mastorakis , Ed . Greece : WSES Press , 2004 , pp . 122 – 127 . [ 23 ] D . C . Lau and J . K . Murnighan , “Demographic diversity and faultlines : The compositional dynamics of organizational groups , ” Acad . Manage . Rev . , vol . 23 , no . 2 , pp . 325 – 340 , 1998 . [ 24 ] S . Sarker and S . Sahay , “Information systems development by US - Norwegian virtual teams : Implications of time and space , ” presented at the IEEE HICSS , Waikoloa , HI , USA , 2002 . [ 25 ] D . J . Pauleen , “An inductively derived model of leader - initiated relationship building with virtual team members , ” J . Mange . Inf . Syst . , vol . 20 , no . 3 , pp . 227 – 256 , 2003 - 4 . [ 26 ] C . D . Cramton and S . S . Webber , “Relationships among geographic dispersion , team process , and effectiveness in software development work groups , ” J . Bus . Res . , vol . 58 , no . 6 , pp . 758 – 765 , 2005 . [ 27 ] R . Benbunan - Fich and S . R . Hiltz , “Impacts of asynchronous learning networks on individual and group problem solving : A ﬁeld experiment , ” Group Dec . Negot . , vol . 8 . , pp . 409 – 426 , 1999 . [ 28 ] J . Pool , “Coalition formation in small groups with incomplete communication networks , ” J . Personal . Social Psychol . , vol . 34 , no . 1 , pp . 82 – 91 , 1979 . [ 29 ] K . S . Lojeski , R . Reilly , and P . Dominick , “The role of virtual distance in innovation and success , ” presented at the IEEE HICSS , HI , USA , 2006 . [ 30 ] J . T . Polzer , C . B . Crisp , S . L . Jarvenpaa , and J . W . Kim , “Extending the faultline model to geographically dispersed teams : How colocated subgroups can impair group functioning , ” Acad . Manage . J . , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 679 – 692 , 2006 . [ 31 ] S . M . B . Thatcher and P . C . Patel , “Group faultlines : A review , integration , and guide to future research , ” J . Manage . , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 969 – 1009 , 2012 . [ 32 ] J . Wilon , C . B . Crissp , and M . Mortensen , “Extending construal - level theory to distributed groups : Understanding the effects of virtuality , ” Organiz . Sci . , vol . 24 , no . 2 , pp . 629 – 644 , 2013 . [ 33 ] J . A . Espinosa , W . Delone , and G . Lee , “Global boundaries , task processes and project success : A ﬁeld study , ” Inf . Technol . People , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 345 – 370 , 2006 . [ 34 ] O . Saafein and G . A . Shaykhian , “Factors affecting virtual team performance in telecommunications support environment , ” Telematics Inf , , vol . 31 , no . 3 , pp . 459 – 462 , 2013 . [ 35 ] P . Bjorn and O . Ngwenyama , “Technology alignment : A new area in virtual team research , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 53 , no . 4 , pp . 382 – 400 , Dec . 2010 . [ 36 ] R . C . Mayer , J . H . Davis , and F . D . Schoorman , “An integrative model of organizational trust , ” Acad . Manage . Rev . , vol . 20 , no . 3 , 1995 , pp . 709 – 734 . [ 37 ] N . W . Coppola , S . R . Hiltz , and N . G . Rotter , “Building trust in virtual teams , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 47 , no . 2 , pp . 95 – 104 , Jun . 2004 . [ 38 ] S . L . Jarvenpaa and D . E . Leidner , “Communication and trust in global virtual teams , ” Organiz . Sci . vol . 10 , no . 6 , pp . 791 – 815 , 1999 . [ 39 ] L . Plotnick , S . R . Hiltz , and R . J . Ocker , “Trust in partially distributed teams” presented at the ICIS , paper 25 , Phoenix , AZ , USA , 2009 . [ 40 ] E . C . Kasper - Fueher and N . M . Ashkanasy , “Communicating trustworthiness and building trust in interorganizational virtual organizations , ” J . Manage . , vol . 27 , no . 3 , pp . 235 – 254 , 2001 . [ 41 ] B . L . Kirkman and J . E . Mathieu , “The dimensions and antecedents of team virtuality , ” J . Manage . , vol . 31 , no . 5 , pp . 700 – 718 , 2005 . [ 42 ] B . Rosen , S . Furst , and R . Blackburn , “Training for virtual teams : An investigation of current practices and future needs , ” Human Resource Manage . , vol . 45 , no . 2 , pp . 229 – 247 , 2006 . [ 43 ] J . A . Espinosa and E . Carmel , “The impact of time separation on coordination in global software teams : A conceptual foundation , ” Softw . Process Improve . Practice , vol . 8 , no . 4 , pp . 249 – 266 , 2003 . [ 44 ] P . Kaiser , W . Tullar , and D . McKowen , “Student team projects by internet , ” Bus . Commun . Quart . , vol . 63 , no . 4 , pp . 75 – 82 , 2000 . [ 45 ] A . Townsend and S . DeMarie , “Are you ready for virtual teams ? ” HR Mag . , vol . 41 , no . 9 , pp . 123 – 127 , 1996 . [ 46 ] B . E . Munkvold and I . Zigurs , “Process and technology challenges in swift - starting virtual teams , ” Inf . Manage . , vol . 44 , no . 3 , pp . 287 – 299 , 2007 . 228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 59 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2016 [ 47 ] A . Yori , Y . A . Au , D . Carpenter , X . Chen , and J . G . Clark , “Virtual organizational learning in open source software development projects , ” Inf . Manage . , vol . 46 , no . 1 , pp . 9 – 15 , 2009 . [ 48 ] D . R . Forsyth , Group Dynamics . 3rd ed . Belmont , CA , USA : Wadsworth , 1999 . [ 49 ] M . M . Montoya - Weiss , A . P . Massey , and M . Song , “Getting it together : Temporal coordination and time management in global virtual teams , ” Acad . Manage . J . , vol . 44 , no . 6 , pp . 1251 – 1262 , 2001 . [ 50 ] K . Bezrukova , K . A . Jehn , E . L . Zanutto , and S . M . B . Thatcher , “Do workgroup faultlines help or hurt ? A moderated model of faultlines , team identiﬁcation , and group performance , ” Organiz . Sci . , vol . 20 , no . 1 , pp . 35 – 50 , 2009 . [ 51 ] D . C . Lau and J . K . Murnighan , “Interactions within groups and subgroups : The effects of demographic faultlines , ” Acad . Manage . J . , vol . 48 , no . 4 , pp . 645 – 659 , 2005 . [ 52 ] R . J . Ocker , M . B . Rosson , D . Kracaw , and S . R . Hiltz , “Training students to work effectively in partially distributed teams , ” ACM Trans . Comput . Educ . , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 24 , 2009 . [ 53 ] B . Tan , K . Wei , W . Huang , and G . Ng , “A dialogue technique to enhance electronic communication in virtual teams , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 43 , no . 2 , pp . 153 – 165 , Jun . 2000 . [ 54 ] B . Rosen , S . Furst , and R . Blackburn , “Overcoming barriers to knowledge sharing in virtual teams , ” Org . Dynam . , vol . 36 , no . 3 , pp . 259 – 273 , 2007 . [ 55 ] E . F . McDonough III , K . B . Kahn , and A . Grifﬁn , “Managing communication in global product development teams , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Manage . , vol . 46 , no . 4 , pp . 375 – 386 , Nov . 1999 . [ 56 ] J . B . Thatcher , M . L . Loughry , J . Lim , and D . H . McKnight , “Internet anxiety : An empirical study of the effects of personality , beliefs , and social support , ” Inf . Manage . , vol . 44 , no . 4 , pp . 353 – 363 , 2007 . [ 57 ] P . B . Lowry and J . Gaskin , “Partial least squares ( PLS ) structural equation modeling ( SEM ) for building and testing behavioral causal theory : When to choose it and how to use it , ” IEEE Trans . Prof . Commun . , vol . 57 , no . 2 , pp . 123 – 146 , Jun . 2014 . [ 58 ] P . J . Hinds , L . Liu , and J . Lyon , “Putting the global in global work : An intercultural lens on the practice of cross - national collaboration , ” Ann . Acad . Manage . , vol . 5 , no . 1 , pp . 135 – 188 , 2011 . [ 59 ] M . B . Watson - Manheim , K . M . Chudoba , and K . Crowston , “Perceived discontinuities and constructed continuities in virtual work , ” Inf . Syst . J . , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 29 – 52 , 2012 . [ 60 ] C . D . Cramton and P . J . Hinds , “Subgroup dynamics in internationally distributed teams : ethnocentrism or cross - national learning ? ” Res . Org . Behav . , vol . 26 , pp . 231 – 263 , 2005 . [ 61 ] J . F . Hair , W . C . Black , B . J . Babin , R . E . Anderson , and R . L . Tatham , Multivariate Data Analysis . 6th ed . Upper Saddle River , NJ , USA : Pearson Prentice - Hall , 2006 . [ 62 ] C . X . Ou and C . L . Sia , “To trust or to distrust , that is the question—Investigating the trust - distrust paradox , ” Commun . ACM , vol . 52 , no . 5 , pp . 135 – 139 , 2009 . [ 63 ] Y . - S . Chang and S . - R . Fang , “Antecedents and distinctions between online trust and distrust : Predicting high - and low - risk internet behaviors , ” J . Electron . Commerce Res . , vol . 14 , no . 2 , pp . 149 – 166 , 2013 . [ 64 ] P . M . Podsakoff , S . B . MacKenzie , J . - Y . Lee , and N . Podsakoff , “Common method biases in behavioral research : A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies , ” J . Appl . Pyschol . , vol . 88 , no . 5 , pp . 879 – 903 , 2003 . [ 65 ] J . Gaskin . ( 2012 ) . Conﬁrmatory factor analysis . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / statwiki . kolobkreations . com / wiki / Conﬁrmatory _ Factor _ Analysis . [ 66 ] C . Fornell and F . L . Brookstein , “Two structural equation models : LISERAL and PLS applied to consumer exit - voice theory , ” J . Market . Res . , vol . 19 , pp . 440 – 452 , 1982 . [ 67 ] D . L . Goodhue , W . Lewis , and R . Thompson , “Does PLS have advantages for small sample size or non - normal data ? ” MIS Quart . , vol . 36 , no . 3 , pp . 981 – 1001 , 2012 . [ 68 ] E . E . Rigdon , “Rethinking partial least square path modeling : In praise of simple methods , ” Long Range Plan . , vol . 45 , no . 5 , pp . 341 – 358 , 2012 . [ 69 ] W . Reinartz , M . Haenlein , and J . Henseler , “An empirical comparison of the efﬁcacy of covariance - based and variance - based SEM , ” Int . J . Res . Market . , vol . 26 , no . 4 , pp . 332 – 344 , 2009 . [ 70 ] C . M . Ringle , S . Wende , and A . Will . ( 2005 ) . SmartPLS 2 . 0 beta version . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . smartpls . de . [ 71 ] J . Gaskin . ( 2012 ) . Handling 2nd order factors in amos . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = HBQPqj63Y7s . [ 72 ] M . Sarstedt , J . Henseler , and C . Ringle , “Multigroup analysis in partial least squares ( PLS ) path modeling : Alternative methods and empirical results , ” Meas . Res . Meth . Int . Market . , vol . 22 , pp . 295 – 218 , 2011 . [ 73 ] J . Henseler , Private communication , Apr . 6 , 2014 . [ 74 ] A . Paswan . ( 2009 ) . Conﬁrmatory factor analysis and structural equation modeling : An introduction . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . cob . unt . edu / slides / paswan / BUSI6280 . [ 75 ] J . N . Cummings and S . Kiesler , “Who collaborates successfully ? Prior experience reduces collaboration barriers in distributed interdisciplinary research , ” in Proc . CSCW . San Diego , CA , USA , 2008 , pp . 437 – 446 . [ 76 ] J . M . Verner , O . P . Grereton , B . A . Kitchenham , M . Turner , and M . Niazi , “Risks and risk mitigation in global software development : A tertiary study , ” Inf . Softw . Technol . , vol . 56 , no . 1 , pp . 54 – 78 , 2014 . [ 77 ] J . Fjermestad and S . R . Hiltz , “An assessment of group support systems experimental research : Methodology and results , ” J . Manage . Inf . Syst . , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 7 – 159 , 1999 – 2000 . [ 78 ] J . J . Albright and H . M . Park , “Conﬁrmatory factor analysis using Amos , LISREL , Mplus , and SAS / STAT Calis , ” Working paper . The University Information Technology Services ( UITS ) Center for Statistical and Mathematical Computing , Indiana University , 2009 . PLOTNICK et al . : INGROUP DYNAMICS AND PERCEIVED EFFECTIVENESS OF PDTs 229 Linda Plotnick received the Ph . D . degree in Information Systems from the New Jersey Institute of Technology , Newark , NJ , USA , in 2009 . Currently , she is an associate professor of Computer Information Sciences at Jacksonville State University , Jacksonville , AL , USA . Her current research interests primarily focus on virtual team communication and social media use in emergency management . Starr Roxanne Hiltz is Distinguished Professor Emerita , College of Computing Sciences , New Jersey Institute of Technology , Newark , NJ , USA . Since “retiring” she has had visiting research and / or teaching appointments at the University of Salzburg , University Carlos III of Madrid , Madrid , Spain ; the University of Agder , Norway ; and the Tecnun , University of Navarro , Spain . Her research interests currently include virtual teams and online communities , online learning , emergency - response information systems , and social media . Prof . Hiltz received the ACM Making a Difference Award for 2012 in recognition of her academic research and teaching on the issues of ubiquitous network computing and online learning , and their social impact . Robin Privman received the Ph . D . degree in Information Systems from the New Jersey Institute of Technology , Newark , NJ , USA , in 2009 . She was a Senior Member of the technical staff at AT & T Labs , Information and Software Research . Currently , she runs a small company in NJ developing and marketing TRADE , an educational board game . Her research interests include ingroup / outgroup dynamics , effectiveness , and other aspects of collaboration in partially distributed teams .