Vol : . ( 1234567890 ) Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00795 - 016 - 0151 - 6 1 3 ORIGINAL PAPER Enhanced podocyte vesicle transport in the nephrotic rat Akihiro Tojo 1 · Saaya Hatakeyama 1 · Satoshi Kinugasa 1 · Satoru Fukuda 2 · Toshio Sakai 3 Received : 5 November 2016 / Accepted : 19 December 2016 / Published online : 17 March 2017 © The Japanese Society for Clinical Molecular Morphology 2017 Introduction The slit membrane is believed to be the major filtration bar - rier of proteins because genetic abnormalities of nephrin and its associated molecules in the slit membrane cause nephrotic syndrome in both human and animal models [ 1 – 3 ] . In minimal change nephrotic syndrome , the number of slit membrane is reduced with foot process effacement and the paracellular space between the podocytes becomes narrower than normal , forming a tight junction structure [ 4 , 5 ] . If massive proteins pass through a slit membrane with enlarged slit pores with abnormalities in nephrin and its related proteins , then larger molecules , other than albumin will also be easily filtrated , which fails to explain the selec - tive albuminuria in minimal change nephrotic syndrome [ 6 ] . We therefore hypothesize that albumin can be filtrated through the cell body of the podocyte via a specific trans - port system for albumin . To prove this hypothesis we have observed albumin molecules labeled with 2 nm gold , FITC or Evans Blue in the glomerular filtration barrier of mini - mal change nephrotic syndrome , and found that labeled albumin underwent endocytosis in the podocytes [ 7 , 8 ] . In this study , we investigated the endocytic vesicle transport in the podocyte using three - dimensional observations in a rat model of puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN ) - induced nephrotic syndrome . The endocytic vesicles are transported via motor pro - teins including cytoplasmic dynein , kinesin , or myosin [ 9 , 10 ] . Dynein is a motor protein that carries loads , includ - ing transcription factors , proteins , cell organelle , endocytic vesicles along the cytoplasmic microtubules from the plus end of a molecules to the minus end , whereas kinesin car - ries loads from the minus end to the plus end [ 9 – 11 ] . The minus end of a cytoplasmic microtubule is located at the adherent junction of the epithelial cells [ 12 ] , whereas the Abstract Albumin endocytosis is enhanced in the podo - cytes of minimal change nephrotic syndrome . We investi - gated that the endocytic vesicle transport in the podocyte using three - dimensional observation in a rat model of puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN ) - induced nephrotic syn - drome . At day 7 , Evans Blue - labeled albumin was intrave - nously injected in PAN rats , and one kidney was fixed for a morphological analysis ; the other was used for the iso - lation of glomeruli through sieving and protein analyses . Evans Blue - labeled albumin was found to accumulate in an increased number of vesicles in the podocytes of PAN rat . Continuous sections and its three - dimensional observa - tion demonstrated that vesicles may be transported from the cytoplasm to the apical membrane of the podocytes . The increased protein bands in the gel electrophoresis of the sieved glomeruli of nephrotic rats were analyzed by mass spectrometry in comparison to the control rats . The major proteins increased in the nephrotic rats were cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain , myosin IX , and myosin VIIb . In con - clusion , the podocyte endocytic vesicles carrying albumin increased with glomerular cytoplasmic dynein and myosin in minimal change nephrotic rats . Keywords Podocyte · Albumin · Endocytosis · Dynein · Myosin · Nephrotic syndrome · Proteinuria * Akihiro Tojo akitojo - tky @ umin . ac . jp 1 Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology , The University of Tokyo , 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8655 , Japan 2 Laboratory of Electron Microscopy , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan 3 Sakai Electron Microscope Application Laboratory , Saitama , Japan 87 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 minus end of a centrosome microtubule is located near the nucleus to carry transcription factors toward the nucleus [ 9 , 13 ] . We thus attempted to identify the motor molecules that transport these vesicles in the podocytes , which should increase in the podocytes of nephrotic syndrome using time - of - flight mass spectrometry . Methods The animals and the experimental protocols All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the Guide for Animal Experimentation of the Faculty of Medicine , The University of Tokyo ( approval number P10 - 079 ) . Male Sprague – Dawley rats weighing 110 – 130 g ( Charles River Laboratories , Shizuoka , Japan ) were housed in a temperature - and humidity - controlled room with free access to tap water and standard animal chow . Nephrotic syndrome was induced by a single intraperitoneal injec - tion of puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN , 15 mg / 100 g body weight in 0 . 75 ml saline , n = 6 ; Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO , USA ) . Control rats ( Control , n = 6 ) were injected with an equal volume of saline . After 7 days , the induction of nephrotic syndrome was confirmed by urinary protein excretion , and a labeled albumin infusion study was performed . The animals were anesthetized with pentobarbital ( 50 mg / kg body weight ) , and the right jugular vein was cannulated . Evans Blue ( EB ) was added to 4 % human serum albumin in sterile physiological saline at a 3 : 1 molecular ratio as described previously [ 8 ] . EB - labeled human serum albumin was continuously infused at 1 ml / h for 30 min following a 1 - ml injection through a jugular vein catheter . Thirty minutes after the injection of labeled albu - min , the kidneys were quickly extracted and 2 - mm slices of the kidney were immersion - fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( TAAB , Berks , England ) , 1 % paraformaldehyde in 0 . 2 M cacodylate buffer solution ( Wako , Osaka , Japan ) . Fifty - µm sections were cut with a vibratome and observed with light microscopy . The other slice of kidney was embedded in epoxy resin ( TAAB , Berks , England ) , and 1 - µm - thick sec - tions were cut continuously and pictures of the same glo - merulus were taken sequentially . The series of pictures of Fig . 1 Light microscopy illustrating the kidney slices ( a , b ) and immunogold scanning electron microscopy ( c , d ) at 30 min after the continuous injection of Evans Blue - labeled human albumin in control rats ( a , c ) and in the rats with puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN ) - induced nephrotic syndrome ( b , d ) . g glomerulus , PT proxi - mal tubules , P podocyte , V vesicle , GBM glomerular basement mem - brane , Cap glomerular capillary . The injected human albumin is labeled with immunogold particles ( arrows ) in the vesicles . The scale bars indicate 100 µm ( a , b ) and 0 . 3 µm ( c , d ) 88 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 one glomerulus were constructed into a three - dimensional image using the Fiji ( NIH , ImageJ ) software program to elucidate vesicle localization . Eighty - nanometer - thick ultrathin sections of nephrotic tissue specimens were cut continuously and mounted on four - slit grids that covered Formvar support films . Rou - tine ultramicroscopic samples of human biopsy specimens were observed under high magnification ( approval num - ber # 2796 ) . The sections were counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate , and then were examined under an electron microscope ( Hitachi H - 7000 , Tokyo , Japan ) . Immunogold scanning electron microscopy As described previously , 150 - µm - thick vibratome - cut sec - tions fixed in periodate - lysine - paraformaldehyde solution were incubated with rabbit antibodies against human serum albumin , and then with 25 nm gold - labeled anti - rabbit IgG antibodies . After silver enhancement ( Aurion , Wageningen , the Netherlands ) , the samples were osmium coated , and observed by SEM ( Hitachi S - 4800 ) [ 8 , 14 ] . Glomerular isolation , electrophoresis , and time‑of‑flight mass spectrometry To identify the proteins that increased in the glomeruli of rats with PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome , 200 glomer - uli were isolated by the graded sieving of the kidney , and homogenized in 20µL of 50mM Tris – HCl buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) including the previously described proteinase inhibitors [ 8 ] . Each 50 µg of protein from two PAN rats and a control rat were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS – PAGE ) on a 4 – 20 % gradient gel ( Daiichi Pure Chemicals , Tokyo , Japan ) . The bands were Fig . 2 A three - dimensional view of podocyte vesicles constructed from serial EPON sections of the glomeruli in the control rats ( a , c ) and rats with puromycin aminonucleoside ( PAN ) - induced nephrotic syndrome ( b , d ) . The podocyte vesicles were painted red in each sec - tion that was superimposed in the Fiji NIH ImageJ Volume Viewer software program with slice mode ( a , b ) and also with volume mode ( c , d ) . The scale bars indicate 50 µm 89 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 detected by Coomassie blue staining , and the bands from the PAN rats that contained increased amounts of proteins were cut and the proteins were identified by a peptide mass fingerprinting mass analysis using 4700 Proteomics Ana - lyzer matrix - assisted laser desorption - ionization - time - of - flight with the Program MASCOT 2 . 3 . 01 ( Genomine , Inc . , Gyeongsangbuk - do , Korea ) . Results Evans Blue - labeled human albumin was visualized under light microscopy , as shown in Fig . 1 . The blue dye - labeled albumin was observed in the glomerular cells and in the renal tubules of the PAN rats , but only faintly in control rat . Immuno - scanning electron micro - scopic observation revealed that immunogold particles labeled for human albumin were detected in the endo - cytic vesicles of the PAN rats , but not in the control rat ( Fig . 1 ) . The three - dimensional view of the glomerulus demonstrated that podocyte vesicles were diffusely dis - tributed in the glomeruli of PAN rats , but they were very small in size and number in the control rats ( Fig . 2 ) . The electron microscopic observation of serial sections of podocytes in the rats with PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome revealed that some endocytic vesicles were transferred to the apical membrane of podocytes and seemed to be excreted into Bowman’s space by exocyto - sis ( Fig . 3 ) , whereas the other large vesicles in the api - cal area of podocytes were observed to rupture and open to Bowman’s space ( Fig . 3 ) . To identify the proteins related to increased endocytic vesicles in the PAN rats , proteins from glomeruli isolated by sieving were sepa - rated with SDS – PAGE ( Fig . 4 ) . Numerous protein bands are increased in the glomeruli of rats with PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome in comparison to control rats , includ - ing albumin and IgG . We chose three protein bands that were larger than IgG ( a – c ) and one abundantly increased band of low molecular weight ( d ) , and performed a time - of - flight mass spectrometry analysis . Fig . 3 Electron microscopy illustrating serial sections of podo - cytes ( a – f ) using a slit grid ( inserted in a ) . Some small vesicles were excreted from podocytes ( small or large arrows and arrowhead ) , whereas other large vesicles were found to have ruptured from the apical membrane of the podocyte ( * , + ) . P podocyte , Cap glomeru - lar capillary , GBM glomerular basement membrane , BS Bowman’s space . The scale bar indicates 1 µm 90 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 As shown in Table 1 , cytoplasmic dynein ( a ) and myosin isoforms ( c , d ) were identified in the PAN rat . The cyto - plasmic dynein carried the vesicles along the microtubules , and the myosin isoforms were motor proteins along the actin fibrils . In the podocytes of human nephrotic syndrome , numer - ous vesicles are observed with cytoplasmic fibrils and some vesicles seem to be excreted from the apical membrane ( Fig . 5 ) , thus suggesting that the vesicles are transported along the fibrils with motor proteins . Discussion Albumin endocytosis is enhanced in the podocyte of nephrotic syndrome In this study , we demonstrated that the endocytosis of albu - min was enhanced in the podocytes of minimal change nephrotic syndrome . The various sizes of endocytic vesi - cles were observed in the podocytes of nephrotic syn - drome , whereas only a few small vesicles were observed in the podocytes of control rats using three - dimensionally reconstructed view . It has recently been shown that podocyte endocytosis started from clathrin - coated pits of the basal membrane of podocytes along the capillary wall in the normal mice , and endocytic vesicles of podocytes were increased in mice by the knockout of the GTPase dynamin gene , which mediates the fission reaction of clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 15 ] . Numerous endocytic vesicles were also observed in the podocytes of human nephrotic syndrome ( Fig . 5 ) . However , the significance of the enhanced endocytosis in the podo - cytes remains to be clarified . We recently investigated the glomerular filtration pathway using labeled human albu - min , and we hypothesized that albumin is filtrated through the podocyte cell body in a nephritic condition [ 7 , 8 ] . Motor proteins are increased in the glomerulus of nephrotic syndrome rats To investigate the significance of the increase in endo - cytic vesicles in the podocytes of nephrotic syndrome , the proteins in the isolated glomeruli of rats with minimal change nephrotic syndrome were separated by SDS – PAGE and compared to those in control rats . Several protein bands , including albumin at 68kD and immunoglobulin G at 150kD , increased in the glomeruli of nephrotic syn - drome compared with those in control . Mass spectrometry revealed that the motor proteins , including dynein , myo - sin VII , and myosin IX , were identified in the four major protein bands that were increased in nephrotic syndrome ( Table 1 ) . Electron microscopic observations revealed increased numbers of endocytic vesicles mainly in podo - cytes but not in the glomerular endothelial cells or mesan - gial cells in the nephrotic syndrome model . Thus , the levels of these motor proteins were thought to have increased in the podocytes due to the enhanced endocytosis typically observed in nephrotic syndrome . Cytoplasmic dynein is a motor molecule that transports membrane - bound vesicles and tubules together with their resident molecules over the microtubules from the plus end toward the minus end using the energy of ATP hydrolysis [ 9 – 11 ] . Myosin IX and myo - sin VII are processing - type motor proteins that can con - tinuously move on the actin filaments without dissociation from actin , which may be involved in vesicle trafficking [ 16 ] . In the neuronal axonal transport , kinesin - 1 mediates the anterograde transport of synaptic vesicles , secretory vesicles and mitochondria , whereas cytoplasmic dynein transport cargo , including injured signaling endosomes , lysosomes , lipid droplets , and mitochondria in a retrograde manner from the axonal lesion sites toward the soma along Fig . 4 SDS – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of proteins obtained from glomeruli of control ( Cont ) rats and rats with puromycin amino - nucleoside ( PAN ) - induced nephrotic syndrome . Several protein bands ( a – d ) were obviously increased in the glomeruli of the rats with PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome in comparison to control rats Table 1 A peptide mass fingerprinting mass analysis of the protein bands that increased in the glomeruli of nephrotic rats in comparison to control rats Band MW Top score Protein a 640 140 for gi | 148491097 Cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1 b 330 161 for gi | 149029878 Filamin alpha , isoform CRA - b c 200 223 for gi | 392349606 Myosin IX d 18 64 for gi | 211938461 Myosin VIIb 91 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 the microtubules , especially in the injured nerve [ 17 , 18 ] . Since the nerve cells and podocytes have some homol - ogy [ 19 ] , the increased number of dynein molecules in the podocytes of nephrotic syndrome may suggest that dynein transported numbers of endocytic vesicles along the micro - tubule towards the noncentrosomal minus ends , which is anchored at the adherence junction [ 12 ] . As the foot pro - cess is similar to an axon , the retrograde transport of vesi - cles by dynein from the foot process to podocyte cell body could be increased when the foot process is injured by min - imal change nephrotic syndrome . Glomerular albumin filtration via the transcytosis of albumin‑containing vesicles in minimal change nephrotic syndrome Nephrin in the slit membrane plays an important role as a filtration barrier for albumin , and in the rats of PAN - induced nephrotic syndrome , the expression of nephrin is decreased in association with foot process effacement and massive proteinuria [ 20 ] . If massive pro - teins pass through the enlarged slit pores with reduced nephrin , it is difficult to explain the selective albuminu - ria in minimal change nephrotic syndrome . Furthermore , how does albumin pass through the glomerular capillary wall , when foot processes are effaced and the number of slit diaphragms is decreased and changed to form a tight junction - like structure with discontinuous and concen - trated ZO - 1 under conditions of minimal change nephrotic syndrome [ 4 , 5 , 21 ] . The adherens junction is located just below the tight junction , where cadherin in the adher - ens junction binds with the minus ends of the microtu - bules with a protein binding sequence including cad - herin − β - catenin − p120 - catenin − PLEKHA7 − micro - tubule [ 12 , 22 ] . Actin fibers also bind the adherens junction to a protein binding sequence that includes cad - Fig . 5 Electron micrographs of human renal biopsy samples illustrating the endocytic vesicles in the podocytes of minimal change nephrotic syndrome ( a ) and membranous nephropathy ( b , c ) . Numerous vesicles ( v ) are observed in the podocytes with cytoplasmic fibrils ( f ) and some vesicles are attached to the apical membrane of podocytes ( arrow ) . P podo - cyte , Cap glomerular capillary , GBM glomerular basement membrane , M mesangium , BS Bowman’s space . The scale bars indicate 500 nm 92 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 herin − β - catenin − α - catenin − EPLIN − actin , and the bundles of actin filaments are located beneath the zonula adherens [ 22 ] . Descriptions of the expression of cadherin and catenin in the podocyte have been conflicting ; these proteins are expressed only in the immature podocytes , but not in the adult [ 23 ] , in contrast , cadherin - based adherens junctions form slit diaphragms with nephrin in the normal podocytes and link to the actin - based cytoskeleton [ 24 , 25 ] . In the kidney , myosin IXa ( Myo9a ) is located at the circumferential F - actin belt of the proxi - mal tubule cells , and has a role in albumin endocytosis [ 26 ] . Furthermore , myosin VIIb is localized to the distal tips of the microvilli in the brush border of the proximal tubule , where they may regulate the shuttling of mem - brane - associated proteins [ 27 ] . Given that myosin IX and VIIb were increased in the glomeruli of nephrotic syn - drome , the myosin may have a role in albumin endocy - tosis in the podocytes . In the rat , FcRn is expressed in podocytes , which play a role in the endocytosis of albu - min as receptors in nephrotic syndrome [ 8 ] . An injection of antibodies against FcRn partially reduced albuminuria in the minimal change model , indicating that podocyte albumin endocytosis via the FcRn receptors has a role in albuminuria . However , given that albuminuria was not completely suppressed by antibodies against FcRn , the results may infer that albumin receptors other than FcRn are involved in the endocytosis , or pinocytosis . In this study , we also showed that some of the vesi - cles in the podocytes were opened to the urinary space , which is consistent with the observations in our previous study in which scanning immune electron microscopy revealed that the surface of the podocytes showed many craters and albumin molecules in a rat model of nephrotic syndrome [ 8 ] . We hypothesize that the transport of albu - min via receptor - mediated endocytosis could explain the mechanism of selective albuminuria in minimal change nephrotic syndrome ( Fig . 6 ) . Conclusion The podocyte endocytic vesicles and glomerular dynein motor proteins were increased in the rats with PAN - induced nephritic syndrome . Injected Evans Blue - labeled albumin was taken up in the vesicles and some vesicles were opened in the urinary space , suggesting that selec - tive albuminuria occurs via receptor - mediated endocyto - sis in minimal change nephrotic syndrome . Acknowledgements This work was supported by a Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science to A . T . ( C - 23591214 , C15K09285 ) to AT . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that no conflicts of interests were associated with this study . Fig . 6 A hypothetical schema illustrating the transport of podocyte vesicles by dynein along the microtubules in nephrotic syndrome . The receptor - mediated endocytosis of albumin may explain the selective albuminuria in minimal change nephrotic syndrome 93 Med Mol Morphol ( 2017 ) 50 : 86 – 93 1 3 References 1 . Tryggvason K ( 1999 ) Unraveling the mechanisms of glomerular ultrafiltration : nephrin , a key component of the slit diaphragm . J Am Soc Nephrol 10 : 2440 – 2445 2 . Tryggvason K , Patrakka J , Wartiovaara J ( 2006 ) Hereditary pro - teinuria syndromes and mechanisms of proteinuria . N Engl J Med 354 : 1387 – 1401 3 . Kwoh C , Shannon MB , Miner JH , Shaw A ( 2006 ) Pathogenesis of nonimmune glomerulopathies . Annu Rev Pathol 1 : 349 – 374 4 . Patrakka J , Lahdenkari AT , Koskimies O , Holmberg C , Wartio - vaara J , Jalanko H ( 2002 ) The number of podocyte slit dia - phragms is decreased in minimal change nephrotic syndrome . Pediatr Res 52 : 349 – 355 5 . Lahdenkari AT , Lounatmaa K , Patrakka J , Holmberg C , Wartio - vaara J , Kestila M , Koskimies O , Jalanko H ( 2004 ) Podocytes are firmly attached to glomerular basement membrane in kidneys with heavy proteinuria . J Am Soc Nephrol 15 : 2611 – 2618 6 . Tojo A , Kinugasa S ( 2012 ) Mechanisms of glomerular albumin filtration and tubular reabsorption . Int . J Nephrol 2012 : 481520 7 . Tojo A , Onozato ML , Kitiyakara C , Kinugasa S , Fukuda S , Sakai T , Fujita T ( 2008 ) Glomerular albumin filtration through podocyte cell body in puromycin aminonucleoside nephrotic rat . Med Mol Morphol 41 : 92 – 98 8 . Kinugasa S , Tojo A , Sakai T , Tsumura H , Takahashi M , Hirata Y , Fujita T ( 2011 ) Selective albuminuria via podocyte albumin transport in puromycin nephrotic rats is attenuated by an inhibi - tor of NADPH oxidase . Kidney Int 80 : 1328 – 1338 9 . Roberts AJ , Kon T , Knight PJ , Sutoh K , Burgess SA ( 2013 ) Functions and mechanics of dynein motor proteins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 713 – 726 10 . Fu MM , Holzbaur EL ( 2014 ) Integrated regulation of motor - driven organelle transport by scaffolding proteins . Trends Cell Biol 24 : 564 – 574 11 . Imai H , Shima T , Sutoh K , Walker ML , Knight PJ , Kon T , Bur - gess SA ( 2015 ) Direct observation shows superposition and large scale flexibility within cytoplasmic dynein motors moving along microtubules . Nat Commun 6 : 8179 12 . Meng W , Mushika Y , Ichii T , Takeichi M ( 2008 ) Anchorage of microtubule minus ends to adherens junctions regulates epithe - lial cell – cell contacts . Cell 135 : 948 – 959 13 . Akhmanova A , Hoogenraad CC ( 2005 ) Microtubule plus - end - tracking proteins : mechanisms and functions . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 : 47 – 54 14 . Kinugasa S , Tojo A , Sakai T , Fujita T ( 2010 ) Silver - enhanced immunogold scanning electron microscopy using vibratome sections of rat kidneys : detection of albumin filtration and reab - sorption . Med Mol Morphol 43 : 218 – 225 15 . Soda K , Balkin DM , Ferguson SM , Paradise S , Milosevic I , Gio - vedi S , Volpicelli - Daley L , Tian X , Wu Y , Ma H , Son SH , Zheng R , Moeckel G , Cremona O , Holzman LB , De Camilli P , Ishibe S ( 2012 ) Role of dynamin , synaptojanin , and endophilin in podo - cyte foot processes . J Clin Invest 122 : 4401 – 4411 16 . Sellers JR ( 2000 ) Myosins : a diverse superfamily . Biochim Bio - phys Acta 1496 : 3 – 22 17 . Rishal I , Fainzilber M ( 2014 ) Axon - soma communication in neuronal injury . Nat Rev Neurosci 15 : 32 – 42 18 . Gibbs KL , Greensmith L , Schiavo G ( 2015 ) Regulation of Axonal Transport by Protein Kinases . Trends Biochem Sci 40 : 597 – 610 19 . Kobayashi N , Gao SY , Chen J , Saito K , Miyawaki K , Li CY , Pan L , Saito S , Terashita T , Matsuda S ( 2004 ) Process formation of the renal glomerular podocyte : is there common molecular machinery for processes of podocytes and neurons ? Anat Sci Int 79 : 1 – 10 20 . Kawachi H , Koike H , Kurihara H , Yaoita E , Orikasa M , Shia MA , Sakai T , Yamamoto T , Salant DJ , Shimizu F ( 2000 ) Clon - ing of rat nephrin : expression in developing glomeruli and in proteinuric states . Kidney Int 57 : 1949 – 1961 21 . Kurihara H , Anderson JM , Kerjaschki D , Farquhar MG ( 1992 ) The altered glomerular filtration slits seen in puromycin amino - nucleoside nephrosis and protamine sulfate - treated rats contain the tight junction protein ZO - 1 . Am J Pathol 141 : 805 – 816 22 . Harris TJ , Tepass U ( 2010 ) Adherens junctions : from molecules to morphogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 502 – 514 23 . Yaoita E , Sato N , Yoshida Y , Nameta M , Yamamoto T ( 2002 ) Cadherin and catenin staining in podocytes in development and puromycin aminonucleoside nephrosis . Nephrol Dial Transplant 17 ( Suppl 9 ) : 16 – 19 24 . Reiser J , Kriz W , Kretzler M , Mundel P ( 2000 ) The glomerular slit diaphragm is a modified adherens junction . J Am Soc Neph - rol 11 : 1 – 8 25 . Mundel P , Shankland SJ ( 2002 ) Podocyte biology and response to injury . J Am Soc Nephrol 13 : 3005 – 3015 26 . Thelen S , Abouhamed M , Ciarimboli G , Edemir B , Bahler M ( 2015 ) Rho GAP myosin IXa is a regulator of kidney tubule function . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 309 : F501 - 513 27 . Chen ZY , Hasson T , Zhang DS , Schwender BJ , Derfler BH , Mooseker MS , Corey DP ( 2001 ) Myosin - VIIb , a novel uncon - ventional myosin , is a constituent of microvilli in transporting epithelia . Genomics 72 : 285 – 296