10 When Competing Explanations Converge Coronavirus as a Case Study for Why Scientific Explanations Coexist With Folk Explanations Andrew Shtulman Introduction When someone falls ill , with a fever and a cough , what might be the cause ? A virus is probably the first thought that comes to mind , but other thoughts might come to mind as well . Perhaps the ill person ingested a toxic substance or ate spoiled food . Perhaps they spent too much time outside in the cold or got caught in a downpour . They may be unduly stressed or fatigued . Their vital energy may not be flowing properly , or their internal chemistry may be out of balance . They may have cre - ated bad karma by lying or cheating , or they may have done something unlucky , like break a mirror or walk under a ladder . God might be pun - ishing them for misdeeds , or a jealous neighbor might have cursed them . Natural phenomena like illness lend themselves to many explanations . Knowing a scientific explanation does not mitigate the influence of other explanations , derived through casual observation or conversation . These “folk” explanations are grounded in intuitive theories , or models of the world constructed prior to learning a scientific theory ( Carey , 2009 ; Gopnik & Wellman , 2012 ; Vosniadou , 1994 ) . Intuitive theories , like scientific theories , provide an interpretive framework for making sense of natural phenomena . They help us predict future events , explain past events , contemplate alternative events , and change the outcome of present events . Yet unlike scientific theories , they are imprecise and incomplete and thus provide only an approximate understanding of the domain . Intuitive theories have been shown to impede the learning of scientific theories because they posit a qualitatively different ontology for under - standing domain - relevant phenomena ( Chi , 2005 ; Vosniadou , 1994 ) . They carve up the domain into entities and processes that play no role in the scientific theory . Intuitive theories of motion , for instance , posit the Author Note : This research was supported by James S . McDonnell Foundation grant 220020425 . Correspondence should be sent to Andrew Shtulman , Department of Psychol - ogy , Occidental College , Los Angeles , CA 90041 , shtulman @ oxy . edu . DOI : 10 . 4324 / 9781003184324 - 14 When Competing Explanations Converge 247 false concept of an internal motive force , or impetus ; intuitive theories of growth posit the false concept of an immutable inner nature , or essence ; and intuitive theories of life posit the false concept of an internal cur - rent of energy , or life force ( Shtulman , 2017 ) . Because the concepts of an intuitive theory cannot be aligned with those of a scientific theory , it was long assumed that the former must be restructured to acquire the latter . But recent research suggests that scientific theories , though difficult to acquire , are acquired alongside intuitive ones , leaving both theories intact . Rather than revise and refine a single theory of the domain , we construct multiple theories . The coexistence of intuitive and scientific theories has been revealed through many methods in many populations ( for reviews , see Legare & Shtulman , 2018 ; Shtulman & Lombrozo , 2016 ) . When providing expla - nations , people often appeal to intuitive causes and scientific causes in the same breath , and they willingly endorse both types of causes if suggested as possibilities ( Evans et al . , 2010 ) . When verifying the accuracy of sci - entific statements , they take longer to verify statements that conflict with intuitive theories ( e . g . , “the earth revolves around the sun” ) than to ver - ify closely matched statements that conform to those theories ( e . g . , “the moon revolves around the earth ; ” Shtulman & Valcarcel , 2012 ) . Priming people to adopt an intuitive mindset reduces their endorsement of scien - tific explanations , whereas priming them to adopt a scientific mindset reduces their endorsement of folk explanations ( Preston & Epley , 2009 ) . Manipulating time constraints has a similar effect ; people in a hurry endorse folk explanations they would normally reject and reject scientific explanations they would normally accept ( Barlev et al . , 2017 ) . And as people decide between scientific and folk explanations , they recruit areas of the brain associated with inhibition and error - monitoring ( Allaire - Duquette et al . , 2021 ) . These findings raise a question of both practical and theoretical impor - tance : why do intuitive theories persist ? Why do people continue to rely on explanatory considerations deemed inaccurate or irrelevant by their own scientific knowledge ? Here , I address these questions by considering when and how folk explanations are deployed . I argue that folk expla - nations are retained because , in many situations , they remain as useful as scientific ones . While scientific theories surpass intuitive theories in scope and power , the average person does not require additional scope or power for making sense of everyday phenomena . Such phenomena are the reasons why intuitive theories were constructed in the first place . I explore this proposal in the context of the coronavirus pandemic , examining how intuitive theories of illness support an understanding of coronavirus risks and precautions that overlaps with a scientific under - standing . Intuitive theories of illness appear to converge with scientific theories across many concepts and contexts , but the convergence is not perfect . In fact , the areas of divergence help explain why people hold 248 Andrew Shtulman particular misconceptions about public health information and conform only partially to public health recommendations . Intuitive theories pro - vide a starting point for interpreting scientific information , given their common explanatory goals , but some information will remain uninter - pretable , and some interpretations will run counter to science . Multiple Explanations for Infection Infectious diseases are an existential threat and thus an ever - present con - cern . The more tools we have for tracking and avoiding them , the bet - ter we may fare . Science has identified germs as the cause of infectious disease , and people now learn about germs and germ transmission early in life , but we maintain other , non - scientific views of infection , as well as many non - scientific strategies for avoiding infection , including dietary restrictions , dietary supplements , herbal remedies , acupuncture , home - opathy , colonics , diuretics , sweating , fasting , purging , bleeding , shaman - ism , mysticism , and prayer . Here , I focus on two broad considerations that underlie many of these specific folk beliefs : contact contagion and behavioral prescriptions . Both considerations are relevant to the spread of germs , but they operate independent of a genuinely biological under - standing of germs and thus provide only partial protection from infec - tious disease , if any . Germs Germ theory explains infectious disease as the transmission and repli - cation of microscopic organisms . Germs were first observed under the microscope in the 17th century , but they were not connected to disease for another 180 years ( Thagard , 1999 ) . One of the first scientists to make this connection was Louis Pasteur , and he did so by way of fermentation . While investigating the role of yeast in the fermentation of beer and wine , he discovered that yeast is alive , producing alcohol as a byproduct of digestion . This discovery led him to speculate that disease may be caused by germs similar to how fermentation is caused by yeast . This speculation entailed many counterintuitive propositions : that germs are alive , that germs reside inside other living things , and that germs thrive by consum - ing the bodies of their hosts . Germ theory was hotly debated for decades , but today the notion of a germ is commonplace . Children learn of germs within the first few years of life , through admonishments to avoid them and wash them from their bodies . Preschoolers know that rotting food has germs , that sick people have germs , that germs can be passed from contaminated objects to uncontaminated ones , and that contamination is undetect - able ( Blacker & LoBue , 2016 ; Kalish , 1996 ) . Yet despite this wealth of knowledge , children do not initially think of germs as living things . They When Competing Explanations Converge 249 think of them as toxins—inert substances that cause illness if touched or ingested . Children thus deny that germs engage in biological processes , like metabolism and respiration , and they are prone to conflate diseases caused by germs with diseases caused by poison or pollution ( Solomon & Cassimatis , 1999 ) . Many adults hold the same misconceptions , viewing germs as contagious but not alive ( Au et al . , 2008 ) . Much of our reason - ing about “germs” is thus non - biological , as discussed later . Contact Contagion Avoiding disease has clear advantages from an evolutionary perspective , as pathogens and parasites impose an existential threat . Evolution has thus endowed humans with innate knowledge of contagion , through the emotion of disgust . Humans around the globe are disgusted by the kinds of things that contain pathogens and parasites : bodily products ( like vomit and feces ) , bodily fluids ( like spit and sweat ) , bodily injuries ( like wounds and gore ) , visible signs of infection ( like swelling and dis - coloration ) , olfactory signs of infection ( like flatulence and putrescence ) , parasites ( like ticks and maggots ) , and decomposing organic matter ( like rotten meat and spoiled milk ) . These stimuli elicit feelings of disgust , as well as expressions of disgust : a scrunched nose and an outthrust tongue . The feelings motivate avoidance , and the expression assists in expelling contaminated air or food , as well as warning others of the threat ( Curtis et al . , 2004 ; Rozin et al . , 2008 ) . The evolutionary logic behind the disgust response is seemingly straightforward , but it does have quirks ( Rozin et al . , 1986 ) . Many sub - stances that pose no threat of disease still disgust us , and many disease - ridden objects fail to elicit disgust . Most adults refuse to eat fudge in the shape of feces , hold a disc of plastic vomit between their teeth , drink juice stirred with a sterilized fly swatter , or eat soup out of a brand - new bedpan . Sights or smells associated with pathogens elicit disgust even when no pathogens are present ( and we are aware that no pathogens are present ) . On the other hand , diseases like cholera and smallpox spread because humans are not inherently disgusted by cholera - infected water or smallpox - infested cloth . Likewise , highly avoidable diseases like syphilis and HIV still plague humanity because the acts that spread them are associated with pleasure rather than repulsion ( other sexual taboos with - standing ) . Our evolved knowledge of disease is thus ill - informed . What disgusts us is not always a threat , and what threatens us is not always disgusting . Behavioral Prescriptions A different strategy for avoiding illness is avoiding behaviors associated with illness . If the behavior exposes a person to germs , then this strategy 250 Andrew Shtulman will be effective , but many behaviors become associated with disease for superficial reasons and do not actually increase the risk of infection . People around the world believe that being cold will cause you to catch a cold ( Au et al . , 2008 ; Sigelman , 2012 ) , but a person’s state of warmth generally has no bearing on viral infection . The fact that viruses spread more efficiently in cold weather , when people are clustered indoors and germs survive longer outside a host , has led many to assume that cold - ness generates colds . Other behaviors commonly associated with cold and flu transmission include getting wet , dressing inappropriately for the weather , and eating an ill - mixture of foods ( Au et al . , 2008 ) . In many cul - tures , the behaviors associated with illness have moral overtones , such as stealing or cheating , as these behaviors are believed to invoke the wrath of supernatural agents ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) . Standard forms of health education often emphasize behaviors over causes . They teach people the “do’s and don’ts” of disease prevention rather than the biological pathways of germ transmission . They teach a disconnected set of beliefs not readily adaptable to novel contexts or sources of infection ( Zamora et al . , 2006 ) . “Always wear a condom” may provide a safeguard against STDs in the context of intercourse , but it’s not clear how that rule can be adapted to other forms of sexual activity . In contrast , health education programs that focus on germs yield better outcomes than those focused on behavior ( Au et al . , 2008 ) . Students who are taught to think of viruses as living things outperform students who are taught to curb the spread of viruses , by washing their hands or cov - ering their sneezes , but are not taught what viruses are . The former are better at identifying risk factors for viral transmission , better at explain - ing why those factors impose a risk , and more likely to take precautions against viral transmission in real life . Beliefs about behavior , like beliefs about contagion , provide only an approximation of what causes disease and thus only partial protection against disease itself , when the relevant behaviors cannot be applied to the current context . The disconnect between behavior and germ transmission is even more salient for behaviors that relate to a person’s moral standing . Disease obeys no moral laws , afflicting wrongdoers and do - gooders alike , yet many people believe otherwise . For instance , when told about a criminal who has contracted a deadly disease , many people think his crimes played a role in his disease , endorsing the view that “what goes around comes around” ( Raman & Winer , 2004 ) . Such endorsements are more com - mon among adults than children , implying that the association between morality and illness is learned through informal instruction ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) . Beliefs about karma , or “immanent justice , ” are dissociated not just from germs but also from contagion more generally . Behavioral strategies for avoiding illness are often qualitatively distinct from contagion - based ones . The belief that a person can catch a cold from being cold does not When Competing Explanations Converge 251 entail contagion ; coldness itself is believed to be the cause , and people who endorse this belief fixate on behaviors that will keep them from getting cold . Likewise , the link between moral transgressions and illness is not mediated by contagion . Sometimes prescribed behaviors overlap with con - tagion concerns , such as prohibitions against consuming raw meat or han - dling dead carcasses , but the two concerns are easily dissociated . Beliefs about contact contagion and imprudent behavior thus constitute their own form of explanatory coexistence , independent of knowledge of germs . When people reason about infectious disease , they draw upon a varied col - lection of folk beliefs , some more compatible with germ theory than others . Why Maintain Multiple Explanations ? Before focusing on how explanatory coexistence shapes our understand - ing of coronavirus , let us consider the broader question of why explana - tory systems coexist . In the analysis of coronavirus beliefs and behaviors , I endorse the explanation that intuitive theories remain useful in every - day contexts , but this explanation is one of several possibilities . Intui - tive theories may persist because they have a privileged connection to innate knowledge , because they are deeply entrenched in our current knowledge , because they operate autonomously from scientific theories , or because we simply cannot forget them . These explanations are not mutually exclusive and may apply to different degrees , depending on the theory . But the persistent utility of intuitive theories is a common theme that cuts across domains and learning contexts . Intuitive theories are sometimes viewed pejoratively , as misguided substitutes for theories with greater scope and power ( see DiSessa , 2008 ) , but this view underes - timates intuitive theories’ success at providing a rich and comprehensive understanding of the world around us , including an understanding of newly emergent phenomena like a global pandemic . Innateness ? Humans enter the world prepared to encounter certain kinds of entities , like physical objects and intentional agents , and experience certain kinds of events , like heating and cooling . Evolution has endowed humans with perceptual biases that shape our earliest expectations about these entities and events ( Carey , 2009 ) . For instance , human infants do not need to learn that physical objects are solid , cohesive , and move on contact with other objects . These principles appear to be innate , as revealed by studies in which infants look longer at events that violate these principles than at closely matched events that entail no such violations ( Spelke , 2000 ) . If innateness accounts for the origin of certain beliefs , it might also account for their longevity . Beliefs grounded in basic perceptual biases may not be open to revision and will persist even when we acquire contradictory 252 Andrew Shtulman beliefs , as in the case of learning a scientific theory that contradicts an intuitive theory . While many perceptual biases remain unchanged across the lifespan ( Carey , 2009 ) , they are unlikely to provide a general explanation for the persistence of intuitive theories because these theories are as much a cultural construction as their scientific counterparts . The belief that being cold will cause you to catch a cold comes from the observation that colds are more common during the winter and from cultural input about the link between colds and coldness ( Au et al . , 2008 ) . Folk beliefs with moral overtones ( karma ) or supernatural overtones ( bewitchment ) are also unlikely to be grounded in innate knowledge , as these beliefs emerge in late childhood or early adolescence ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ; Raman & Gelman , 2004 ; Raman & Winer , 2004 ) . Contagion - based explanations for illness are shaped by culture as well ( Rozin et al . , 2008 ) . Certain activities can become associated with contagion through cultural teach - ings even if they pose no inherent threat of disease , such as taboos against eating ( cooked ) pork or taboos against homosexuality , indicating that beliefs about contagion are not inherently tied to innate knowledge . Entrenchment ? Perhaps an intuitive theory need not be innate to survive the acquisition of a scientific theory but merely early - developing . The longer we use an intuitive theory , the more difficult it might be to erase , as it becomes increasingly entrenched in how we view the world . Intuitive theories con - stitute our first understanding of a domain , and as such , they provide a framework for interpreting and organizing a wealth of experience . When we acquire a new theory of a domain , we may need to retain the earlier theory to understand information encoded in its terms , similar to how we may need to retain early versions of a software program to open files that newer versions of the program cannot . Intuitive theories may thus be maintained as a means of accessing or interpreting information encoded prior to the acquisition of a scientific theory . The belief that witches cause AIDs , for instance , is not interpretable on a germ theory of illness and may require earlier theories of illness , incorporating moral or supernatu - ral considerations , to be fully understood . Intuitive theories may indeed serve this function , of retroactive inter - pretation , but they are not limited to this function . Sentence - verification studies reveal that intuitive theories are accessed even when evaluat - ing information learned subsequent to conceptual change ( Shtulman & Valcarcel , 2012 ; Shtulman & Legare , 2020 ) . For instance , people verify the statement “germs have DNA” more slowly and less accurately than “germs have a shape” because germs are understood intuitively as tiny particles but not as living things . If we maintained intuitive theories only to make sense of ideas encoded early in life , then those theories should When Competing Explanations Converge 253 not interfere with the interpretation of genuinely scientific information— in this case , biological information about germs . Other statements about germ biology , such as “heat kills germs” and “germs enter the body through the eyes , ” are also verified more slowly and less accurately than statements that probe a more generic , behavior - based understanding of germs , such as “hand sanitizer kills germs” and “germs enter the body through cuts . ” Intuitive theories appear to be elicited whenever we reason about the phenomena they cover , even novel phenomena . Autonomy ? Another reason intuitive theories might coexist with scientific ones is that they recruit distinct systems of reasoning , commonly known as “System 1” and “System 2” ( Evans , 2008 ; Kahneman , 2011 ) . System 1 operations are fast and frugal , grounded in associative or heuristic - based computa - tions , whereas System 2 operations are slow and deliberate , grounded in analytic or principle - based computations . Perhaps the reason that intui - tive theories survive the acquisition of scientific theories is that intuitive theories are grounded in System 1 and scientific theories are grounded in System 2 , rendering them computationally autonomous . Some intuitive theories do have an associative flavor . Contagion - based theories of illness , for instance , draw heavily on association . Fudge shaped like feces elicits disgust ( and avoidance ) by way of visual associations , clean bedpans elicit disgust by way of functional associations , and the ashes of a cremated body elicit disgust by way of historical associations . But not all intuitive theories are this shallow . Many have a logic and coherence as sophisticated as scientific theories ( Shtulman , 2017 ) . Folk beliefs about bewitchment entail specific ideas about who has the power to bewitch others , who can become bewitched , how bewitchment inter - sects with biology , and how it can be prevented or counteracted ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) . Likewise , the belief that being cold causes a person to catch a cold is embedded in a larger network of beliefs about activities that induce a health - threatening state of coldness , how this state affects the body , and how it can be counteracted ( Au et al . , 2008 ) . What sets an intuitive theory apart from a collection of random misconceptions is its consistency , both internally ( across concepts ) and externally ( across con - texts ) . Such consistency is more characteristic of System 2 than System 1 . Lack of Forgetting ? A more basic explanation for why intuitive theories persist is that we simply do not , or cannot , forget them . Our long - term memory has no obvious capacity limit , and we may retain any cognitive tool that once served a purpose , even when we acquire better tools . Old tools might be recruited when we re - encounter the situations where we last deployed 254 Andrew Shtulman them . This explanation has been offered to account for the influence of misleading testimony on eyewitness memory ; when we hear informa - tion about an event that conflicts with our perception of the event , we appear to encode both versions of the event and later switch between them , depending on the retrieval context ( McCloskey & Zaragoza , 1985 ; Zaragoza & Lane , 1994 ) . We tend to privilege the testimony - based ver - sion under direct questioning but privilege the perception - based version given retrieval cues that align with what we actually perceived . A purely memory - based account of explanatory coexistence treats intuitive theories as vestigial structures , akin to the human tailbone or the human appendix . They are present because they served a function in the past , and they are retained because our cognitive systems do not have the means to delete a representation that has become obsolete after acquiring a more adaptive one . But intuitive theories are not vestigial ; they actively compete with scientific theories , as discussed previously . More significantly , intuitive theories remain active in the minds of pro - fessional scientists . Despite decades of training and experience , scientists , like non - scientists , verify counterintuitive scientific ideas more slowly and less accurately than intuitive ones ( Allaire - Duquette et al . , 2021 ; Kelemen et al . , 2013 ; Shtulman & Harrington , 2016 ) . If intuitive theories are simply triggered by old retrieval cues , then scientists should acquire enough new cues to override the old ones . Yet studies show that scien - tists experience nearly as much conflict as non - scientists when evaluating counterintuitive ideas , suggesting that intuitive theories continue to play an active role in their reasoning . Utility ? The robustness of the conflict between scientific and intuitive theories is difficult to explain if intuitive theories are preserved for historical or structural reasons but not functional ones . If they persist mainly because of their origin—as innate or early developing forms of knowledge—then their influence should wane with domain - relevant experience and educa - tion . If they persist mainly because of format—as an associative or quasi - associative network—then their influence should wane as we acquire new associations between the relevant phenomena and the scientific principles that explain them . But their influence does not wane , at least not substan - tially . Counterintuitive scientific ideas evoke cognitive conflict for experts as well as novices ( Allaire - Duquette et al . , 2021 ; Goldberg & Thompson - Schill , 2009 ; Kelemen et al . , 2013 ) and for ideas that vary in content and complexity ( Barlev et al . , 2017 ; Shtulman & Legare , 2020 ; Stricker et al . , 2021 ) , which implies that intuitive theories remain a useful alternative framework for understanding the world . The utility of intuitive theories is often cited as a reason why scien - tific theories are difficult to learn in the first place ( Chi , 2005 ; Ohlsson , When Competing Explanations Converge 255 2009 ; Shtulman , 2017 ) . If an intuitive theory succeeds at explaining the phenomena it was intended to explain , then why learn a new theory ? Even when intuitive theories are explicitly contrasted with scientific theo - ries in the science classroom , students can be slow to recognize the lat - ter’s superior accuracy , parsimony , and generativity ( Samarapungavan , 1992 ) . The utility of intuitive theories may explain not only why people struggle to learn scientific theories but also why they struggle to deploy them once acquired . In the case of illness , for instance , many diseases can be adequately explained in terms of contact contagion and adequately avoided in terms of behavioral prescriptions . In the next section , I out - line ways that the disease of recent global concern—coronavirus—can be explained and avoided through the lens of intuitive theories , thus bolster - ing their utility . The lens is not a perfect fit ; many intuitive interpretations of coronavirus - related information yield substantive misconceptions . But the illusion of understanding produced by intuitive theories may bolster their utility nonetheless ( Keil , 2003 ) . Multiple Interpretations of Coronavirus The coronavirus pandemic forced laypeople to consider ( or reconsider ) several science - based practices for combatting disease , from wearing masks to social distancing to receiving vaccines . In the following sec - tions , I discuss how each practice can be understood in terms of contact contagion or behavioral prescriptions without considering the biology of viruses and viral transmission . I also highlight maladaptive attitudes and behaviors that may arise from the mismatch between intuitive and scientific theories of disease . Some maladaptive attitudes and behaviors are grounded in sociopo - litical factors , like conspiracy theories and conservative propaganda , but I do not discuss these factors . Instead , I focus on misconceptions that are more clearly grounded in intuitive theories . The wholesale rejection of scientific practices , like masking and vaccination , is unlikely to hap - pen without social impetus , though negative social reactions do often track intuitive misconceptions ( Blancke et al . , 2012 ; Blancke et al . , 2015 ) . Masks and vaccines are more easily rejected if you misunderstand their purpose . Note that well - understood practices like washing hands and disinfecting surfaces have not been the target of conspiracy theories or conservative politics , presumably because it would take more effort to convince us that we should desist . Wearing Masks Coronavirus is a respiratory disease , spread through the air . The dis - ease travels on the respiratory particles we emit when breathing and talking and can linger in the surrounding environment . Masks block 256 Andrew Shtulman the reception of these particles , as well as their emission . Because coro - navirus is transmitted by air rather than touch , it defies our intuitions about contact contagion . Such intuitions are further defied by the fact that coronavirus is transmitted without any visual or olfactory cues . While people readily associate bad odors with contagion , coronavirus - laden air is not detectable by smell . Ironically , diseases spread through water , like cholera and malaria , are associated with air because their transmission vectors smell ; cholera spreads through feces - infected water and malaria spreads through mosquito - infested swamps ( John - son , 2007 ) . A truly airborne disease like coronavirus , on the other hand , is imperceptible . Accordingly , intuitions about contagion do not support the practice of masking ; however , behavioral prescriptions do . The decree to “wear a mask” is easy to share and easy to follow . A person need not understand why a mask is effective to wear one ; the behavior itself can be viewed as a form of protection , similar to staying warm or taking vitamin C to avoid the common cold . Social norms and regulations further enforce this behavior , leading to regular use of masks even without understanding their biological rationale . The absence of such understanding does have consequences , though . People sometimes wear masks in situations that pose no threat of viral transmission ( errors of commission ) and sometimes fail to wear masks in situations that do pose a threat ( errors of omission ) , at least among the unvaccinated , as all people were at the beginning of the pandemic . Experts say that masks are unnecessary in outdoor areas where people can easily distance themselves from others , such as walking one’s dog or jogging along a trail , yet many people con - tinued to wear masks in these situations and sometimes yell at others who do not ( Paulus , 2020 ) . The mandate to wear a mask in public is often overextended to include any situation outside one’s home , even driving alone in the car . On the flipside , people are apt to remove their mask in public situa - tions when the mask interferes with their current goals , such as talking to a friend at the grocery store or responding to a cashier . If wearing a mask is viewed as a good habit , then temporarily removing one’s mask can be viewed as a reasonable allowance , similar to taking a break from one’s diet . But this view neglects the mask’s dual role in minimizing both viral reception and viral emission , particularly in cases of asymptomatic transmission . A purely behavioral understanding of masks obscures their function as a safeguard of public health , not just personal health . The scientific value of masking resides at the aggregate level , yet a behav - ioral understanding shifts its value to the individual level , creating con - flict between personal and social goals ( for additional examples of the mismatch between individual - and aggregate - level explanations , see the chapter in this volume by Johnson and Nagatsu ) . When Competing Explanations Converge 257 Social Distancing Since respiratory diseases spread through breathing , one means of mini - mizing their spread is to stand far enough away from others so the virus - carrying particles in one’s breath disperse before they can be inhaled . This practice is more effective with greater distances and better ventilated spaces . Distancing oneself from a source of contagion is intuitive even without knowledge of viral transmission , so long as the contagion is obvious . We instinctively avoid people who are sneezing , coughing , and vomiting because we understand contagion to be transmissible on contact with sick people and their effluvia . But people who are infected with corona - virus do not initially show symptoms , rending intuitions about contact contagion moot . Moreover , contagion is thought to be spread on contact , but social distancing requires more than just lack of contact ; it requires six feet of separation . Conversing without masks can facilitate viral transmission even when no one is touching , as is likely what happened in the fall of 2020 when several prominent members of the US government contracted coronavirus after attending a social event at the White House ( Buchanan et al . , 2020 ) . That said , the mandate to stay six feet apart can be embraced as a behavioral prescription and followed regardless of the surrounding con - text . But following the rule to the letter leads to situations where people distance themselves unnecessarily , as well as situations where people dis - tance themselves but still create a risk of viral transmission . A case of unnecessary distancing can be seen in the reluctance of schools to reopen after they closed at the start of the pandemic . Many schools justified their prolonged closure by citing the impossibility of spacing students six feet apart in standard classrooms , yet six feet is an unnecessary benchmark if students are wearing masks , which block the virus at its source . In response to this concern , the US Center for Disease Control issued a statement acknowledging that students need remain only three feet apart if they are wearing masks . The reverse situation can be seen in cases where people maintain six feet of distance in poorly ventilated spaces , like restaurants or offices , and then converse without wearing masks . In these spaces , people’s respira - tory particles do not dissipate and can lead to infection at distances far greater than six feet . Social distancing is effective only when considering the surrounding context , because the context determines whether dis - tance alone will suffice . Blind obedience to the rule can easily lead to situ - ations where well - intentioned people create potent transmission vectors . Consider the case of Mark Meadows , who served as White House Chief of Staff during the height of the pandemic . Meadows dutifully wore a mask while in the White House but would remove it to talk to reporters , albeit from a distance of six feet . When a reporter insisted he re - cover his 258 Andrew Shtulman face , Meadows responded , “I’m more than ten feet away . . . I can take this off . I’m not going to talk through a mask” ( Shabad , 2020 ) . Practices like these may have contributed to the high number of White House staff who contracted coronavirus at that time , including Meadows . Sanitizing Hands and Surfaces At the beginning of the pandemic , hand sanitizer and cleaning disinfec - tants became a scarce commodity . People were urged to sanitize their hands regularly , as well as the surfaces of their home . Grocery stores , which typically remained open during lockdowns , implemented elabo - rate cleaning rituals , wiping down carts , checkout lanes , and even the products they were selling . Many stores banned the use of reusable bags , on the assumption that they could act as transmission vectors . When it came to light that coronavirus is spread primarily by air and not surfaces , the mandate to sanitize oneself and one’s belongings persisted . Many companies instituted deep - cleaning regimens that they were reluctant to abandon , even though experts say the practice is unnecessary and waste - ful ( Lewis , 2021 ) . The resources spent on deep cleaning could have been better spent on improving ventilation systems ( though it’s an open ques - tion whether customers would have preferred better ventilation to deep cleaning ) . Washing hands and disinfecting surfaces does , of course , kill germs , but the public’s fixation on sanitization over other forms of disease preven - tion is counterproductive . Many lists of coronavirus prevention strate - gies include handwashing alongside masking and social distancing , even though those strategies do not stand on equal footing . Masking is clearly the most effective strategy of the three , followed by contextually - appro - priate social distancing . Handwashing is generally a good idea , but it’s not a strategy that will minimize the spread of coronavirus in particular . A likely reason people fixate on handwashing and sanitization more generally is its intuitive connection to contagion . While contagion can - not be seen , they are associated with filth and can be eliminated through cleaning and cleansing . If we suspect we have come into contact with contagion , we will wash our hands even without seeing evidence of con - tamination . Handwashing is also widely touted as a disease - prevention strategy , to be followed habitually like brushing one’s teeth . This habit , combined with the intuition that disease spreads through physical con - tact , may lead people to focus on sanitization even when coronavirus is more effectively combatted with proper ventilation . Once again , the overlap between behavioral prescriptions and biological realities is imprecise . Sanitization is not only ineffective against an airborne virus but can actually exacerbate other health problems , such as allergies and immune deficiencies , by depriving the immune system opportunities to respond to microbes in small doses ( Thompson , 2012 ) . When Competing Explanations Converge 259 Diagnostic Testing Testing for the presence of coronavirus was critical for mitigating its spread , given the virus’s prolonged incubation period . A person could contract the virus but not show symptoms for ten days , all the while spreading it to others . This aspect of the disease—that one could have it but show no symptoms—seems counterintuitive , but research suggests that the delay between contracting a disease and showing symptoms is fairly easy to understand . People of varying ages and educational back - grounds grasp this idea ( Legare & Gelman , 2008 ) , possibly because they view diseases from an essentialist perspective ( Ahn et al . , 2000 ) . Illness is understood not just as a cluster of symptoms but as a causal chain , in which having the disease is necessary but not sufficient for developing symptoms . People are also willing to endorse causes with delayed effects if they know a mechanism that can account for the delay ( Buehner & May , 2002 ) . Essentialist views of disease fit well with intuitive beliefs about conta - gion . Contagion , like essences , are invisible yet have perceptible conse - quences . Contagion can be diagnosed from the presence of symptoms , but the absence of symptoms does not guarantee the absence of contagion . In fact , the mere suggestion of contagion can elicit a disgust response , as when people refuse to eat soup from a brand - new bedpan or refuse to drink a beverage stirred with a brand - new flyswatter ( Rozin et al . , 1986 ) . Simply witnessing a disgust reaction in someone else can elicit the same reaction in ourselves , both viscerally and neurologically ( Wicker et al . , 2003 ) . The logic of contagion beliefs accords well with the delayed symptomology of coronavirus and the need to test for coronavirus in asymptomatic people . On the other hand , a contagion - based understanding of infection leads to the expectation that people either have coronavirus or they do not . It affords no understanding of viral load , or the amount of virus in one’s body at a particular time , because contamination is typically viewed as an all - or - nothing phenomenon ( Rottman & Young , 2019 ; see also Fisher & Keil , 2018 ) . While contamination ( or exposure ) mat - ters , viral load is a substantially better predictor of disease outcomes ; it predicts when a person will become contagious , when their symp - toms will commence , and how effective different treatment options will be ( Mukherjee , 2020 ) . Viral load also explains variability in dis - ease severity . The more virus a person is exposed to , the sicker they will become , which explains why healthcare workers could develop severe cases of coronavirus even when they were young and healthy . Viral load also explains the historical success of variolation , or inocu - lating people against diseases by exposing them to small doses of live virus before they might encounter higher doses in the surrounding environment . 260 Andrew Shtulman Variolation has been practiced throughout the world but always remained controversial , presumably because it contradicts our under - standing of contagion as all - or - nothing . This understanding continues to foster inappropriate attitudes about infectious disease today ( Mukherjee , 2020 ) . Rather than view the risk of exposure on a continuum , we are inclined to categorize some situations as safe and others as unsafe . Being at home is a prototypically safe situation , but the surge in coronavirus cases during the holidays suggests that many people transmitted the virus at home , through gatherings of unmasked family members . Applied to diagnostic testing , black - or - white beliefs about infection cause confusion when interpreting test results . Tests can fail to detect a low load of coro - navirus at the beginning of infection , and two tests can reveal different results if one’s viral load falls below some critical threshold . Tests vary in accuracy and sensitivity , just as viruses vary in load and virulence , and neither reality accords with the dichotomous logic of contagion . Treatment Former US President Donald Trump caused a huge stir when he suggested that coronavirus could be cured by applying ultraviolet light internally or by ingesting bleach . Trump was ridiculed for these suggestions , but they are not completely irrational . Radiation and disinfectants are effective at killing germs on surfaces , and some disinfectants can be used on the surface of the body as well . Trump was overapplying his knowledge of sanitization to the treatment of infection . This overapplication was part of a larger pattern in which Trump and his allies touted the discovery of quick - and - easy “cures . ” The most notorious of such cures was Hydroxy - chloroquine , a malaria drug that showed no evidence of treating or pre - venting coronavirus in clinical trials . When Trump was hospitalized for coronavirus himself , he received a variety of treatments—steroids , mono - clonal antibodies , and antiviral drugs—which he also touted as cures . “To me , it wasn’t a therapeutic , ” Trump said in a public address . “It just made me better . I call that a cure” ( Gregorian et al . , 2020 ) . The idea that coronavirus can be cured makes sense on a contagion - based view of the disease , where a contagion is viewed all - or - nothing . In reality , treatments for coronavirus either regulate the immune system , suppressing an overreaction , or modulate viral load , by preventing the virus from replicating . Treatments help the body manage and neutralize the virus rather than destroy it . Further contributing to the lay confla - tion of treatments and cures is that bacterial infections can be cured—by antibiotics—but viral infections cannot . Antibiotics kill bacteria but are useless against viruses because viruses lack the cellular structures targeted by these drugs . Biological distinctions between bacteria and viruses are moot on a contagion - based understanding of disease because a contagion is viewed as essentially non - biological . When Competing Explanations Converge 261 If beliefs about coronavirus “cures” are unconstrained by biology , then potentially any practice can be a cure . And the internet is full of false cures , including drinking water every 15 minutes , drinking ginger tea , drinking alcohol , eating garlic , eating sit should be honey , should be applying essential oils , applying colloidal silver , inhaling saline solution , and taking vitamin C . These pseudoscientific practices are particularly likely to be endorsed by people who rely on intuition over logic ( Teova - novic et al . , 2021 ) . But people who endorse such practices are also likely to engage in practices that are more biologically sound , like handwashing and social distancing . The finding that scientific practices are observed alongside pseudoscientific ones suggests that , for many people , both practices are grounded in non - scientific considerations—namely , contact contagion and behavioral prescriptions ( see Shtulman , 2013 , for further examples of the overlap between scientific and non - scientific reasoning ) . Vaccination Vaccines are a widespread and widely accepted means of preventing viral infection . Cellular material from the virus is injected into the body , allowing the body’s immune system to develop antibodies tailored to the virus , which then prevents a full - blown infection upon subsequent exposure . While anti - vaccination movements have been gaining traction in recent years , particularly in the US , the vast majority of people vac - cinate themselves and their children ( National Center for Health Statis - tics , 2019 ) . The habit of receiving vaccines—against influenza , measles , mumps , rubella , polio , hepatitis , rotavirus , diphtheria , tetanus , meningi - tis , and other viruses—reinforces the behavioral prescription to inocu - late oneself from diseases that once plagued humanity . This prescription allows us to benefit from vaccines without understanding what they are or how they work . Perhaps the sparsest understanding of vaccines is that they function as a shield against contagion . A contagion poses an imminent threat , and vaccines counteract that threat by conferring an enduring immunity . A contagion - based view of viruses can , however , support an alterna - tive model of vaccines that cannot be reconciled with how they actually work . On this model , vaccines function as the antidote to an infection , directly attacking the virus , similar to how antibiotics attack bacteria . Jee and colleagues ( 2015 ) found that this model is widespread among science students , as illustrated by descriptions like this : “A vaccine is like an anti - version of the virus . A vaccine works the same way viruses attack our cells . I think the chemicals or whatever they inject has cells to it , and those are more powerful than the virus itself and it attacks the virus in the body . ” Another student described vaccines as “liquid antibodies . ” This direct - attack model is common among individuals who lack an understanding of the interaction between a virus and its host . Viruses 262 Andrew Shtulman require resources to replicate , and they commandeer those resources by breaking into a host’s cells . Hosts respond by attempting to block the virus’s entry , thus preventing it from replicating . The naïve model neglects the role of the host in this interaction and assumes instead that viruses replicate on their own , with no additional resources required . Such a view can lead to confusion about when a vaccine is effective . Injecting someone who is already infected by a virus will not aid their ability to fight it ; the vaccine must be administered preemptively . Thus , the confla - tion of treatments and cures is compounded by a further conflation of treatments and prophylactics . Trade - offs of Maintaining Multiple Theories The coronavirus pandemic has plunged the average person into a sea of scientific messages and recommendations . In considering six aspects of this pandemic—wearing masks , social distancing , sanitization , diag - nostic testing , treatment , and vaccination—I have attempted to show how intuitive theories can supplement scientific theories in supporting our understanding of infectious disease . Many scientific messages can be understood through the lens of contact contagion , without consid - ering the biology of viruses , and many scientific recommendations can be embraced as behavioral prescriptions , without delving into the epide - miological rationale behind them . A person who thinks of coronavirus as transmittable on contact will be as motivated to distance themselves from others as a person who understands transmission to occur through shared respiratory particles . And a person who views vaccines as shields against contagion will be as motivated to vaccinate themselves as a per - son who understands vaccines as stimulating antibody production . Even people who possess adequate knowledge to understand the science behind public health information may still default to an intuitive inter - pretation because the latter typically require less effort and entail fewer explanatory considerations . For instance , the risk of viral transmission in a public space depends on several factors : the density of the crowd , the history of the crowd , how well the space is ventilated , whether the space is partitioned , how humid the air is , how hot the air is , whether people are talking , and so forth . Following the prescription “wear a mask” bypasses these considerations while typically leading to the same outcome . Additionally , our scientific knowledge is limited in detail and scope ( Rozenblit & Keil , 2002 ) , and we may prefer to deploy a theory that has fewer noticeable gaps and that has also proved successful in the past . Consider your own knowledge of infectious disease . Do you know what a virus is , biochemically , and how it differs from bacteria ? What is an antibody , and how does it stop a virus from replicating ? What are the active ingredients in a vaccine , and how do they stimulate the produc - tion of antibodies ? What materials do diagnostic tests detect , and why When Competing Explanations Converge 263 do these tests sometimes fail ? Details like these may hinder our ability to apply a scientific theory to a novel situation but would not constrain the application of an intuitive theory , which lacks this level of complex - ity . The intuitive notion of contagion , for instance , lacks specification of internal parts , means of transmission , and effects on the body ; a conta - gion is simply an invisible substance that passes on contact and makes a person sick . This notion may lack sophistication , but it fosters many of the same behaviors and attitudes as a biochemically - detailed understand - ing of microbial infection . On the other hand , there are tangible costs to interpreting scientific information through the lens of an intuitive theory . Such theories can foster misconceptions when they only partly cover the scientific phenom - ena they are intended to explain . In the case of coronavirus , mismatches between science and intuition include wearing masks when alone out - side but failing to wear masks when inside with others ( especially prior to vaccination ) , social distancing as a substitute for wearing masks in indoor spaces , fixating on handwashing and deep cleaning rather than the more effective practices of masking and social distancing , interpreting infection as all - or - nothing rather than a continuum of viral load , conflat - ing treatments with cures , and construing vaccines as treatments rather than prophylactics . These mismatches reveal the pernicious influence of intuitive theories , even for scientifically literate adults , and they may be inevitable if intuitive theories are never fully eclipsed by scientific ones . Still , egregious mismatches could be publicly identified and addressed , with the understanding that they arise not from a rejection of science but from a misinterpretation of science . An additional reason people may default to intuitive theories , despite knowing the relevant science , is that intuitive theories are often better aligned with how we talk about natural phenomena in everyday con - texts . This language invites , if not demands , an intuitive interpretation . For instance , we describe coats as “warm” even though the warmth we experience when wearing a coat comes from our own bodies ; a better label would be “insulating . ” We describe wind as “cold” even though the cold we feel in windy weather is just the disruption of our own thermal equilibrium ; a better label for wind would be “disequilibrating . ” When we see meteors burn up in the earth’s atmosphere , we describe them as “shooting stars , ” and when we watch the sun recede from view due to the earth’s rotation , we describe the event as a “sunset” rather than a “sun occlusion . ” The language used to describe infectious disease may also be biased toward intuitive interpretations . Words like “ill” and “sick” can be applied to any malady—infectious or non - infectious , viral or bacterial— and words like “cure” and “remedy” are colloquially applied to any disease - mitigating intervention , including therapeutics and prophylactics . A related reason we may default to intuitive theories over scientific ones is that they are better aligned with how we perceive natural phenomena . 264 Andrew Shtulman We call coats warm because they feel warm , and we call wind cold because it feels cold . Stars appear to shoot across the sky , and the sun appears to set behind the horizon . We may know full well that the Earth is moving , not the sun , but we do not feel the Earth’s motion , nor can we easily adopt the perspective of being situated upon a revolving sphere ( Jee & Anggoro , 2019 ) . With respect to infectious disease , we may know full well that viruses can spread without detection and that a person can have a virus without showing symptoms , but we are predisposed to fixate on perceptible signs of infection—coughing , sneezing , clamminess , diarrhea , vomit—and ignore the threat posed by asymptomatic cases and airborne particles . Coronavirus became a pandemic precisely because it required vigilance against threats we intuitively perceive as nonthreatening . In short , our vocabulary for discussing disease and our perceptual strat - egies for identifying disease align well with intuitive notions of contagion , and this alignment contributes to the utility of such notions beyond our ability to apply them ( or misapply them ) to scientific information about disease . Conclusions A wealth of evidence indicates that intuitive theories survive the acquisi - tion of scientific theories and compete with those theories to interpret domain - relevant phenomena . Sometimes , however , intuitive and scientific theories converge rather than compete , providing the same inferences for different reasons . That is , they conflict in their content but converge in their implications or applications . This convergence may help to explain why intuitive theories persist , as they remain useful even when we have access to a more accurate alternative . The coronavirus pandemic pro - vides a window onto the myriad of ways that folk explanations of disease can supplement scientific ones in supporting everyday reasoning . While the speculations provided here need testing , they paint a different picture of the coexistence of intuitive and scientific theories . These theories may clash in the science lab and science classroom , but they can coexist peace - fully in the minds of scientifically literate adults as we navigate many everyday situations . References Allaire - Duquette , G . , Foisy , L . M . B . , Potvin , P . , Riopel , M . , Larose , M . , & Mas - son , S . ( 2021 ) . An fMRI study of scientists with a PhD in physics confronted with naïve ideas in science . NPJ : Science of Learning , 6 , 11 . Ahn , W . , Kim , N . S . , Lassaline , M . E . , & Dennis , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Causal status as a determinant of feature centrality . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 361 – 416 . Au , T . K . F . , Chan , C . K . , Chan , T . K . , Cheung , M . W . , Ho , J . Y . , & Ip , G . W . ( 2008 ) . Folkbiology meets microbiology : A study of conceptual and behavioral change . Cognitive Psychology , 57 , 1 – 19 . When Competing Explanations Converge 265 Barlev , M . , Mermelstein , S . , & German , T . C . ( 2017 ) . Core intuitions about per - sons coexist and interfere with acquired Christian beliefs about God . Cognitive Science , 41 , 425 – 454 . Blacker , K . A . , & LoBue , V . ( 2016 ) . Behavioral avoidance of contagion in chil - dren . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 143 , 162 – 170 . Blancke , S . , De Smedt , J . , De Cruz , H . , Boudry , M . , & Braeckman , J . ( 2012 ) . The implications of the cognitive sciences for the relation between religion and science education : The case of evolutionary theory . Science & Education , 21 , 1167 – 1184 . Blancke , S . , Van Breusegem , F . , De Jaeger , G . , Braeckman , J . , & Van Montagu , M . ( 2015 ) . Fatal attraction : the intuitive appeal of GMO opposition . Trends in Plant Science , 20 , 414 – 418 . Buchanan , L . , Gamio , L . , Leatherby , L . , Stein , R . , & Triebert , C . ( 2020 , Oct . 5 ) . Inside the White House event now under Covid - 19 scrutiny . The New York Times . Retrieved from : www . nytimes . com / interactive / 2020 / 10 / 03 / us / rose - gar den - event - covid . html Buehner , M . J . , & May , J . ( 2002 ) . Knowledge mediates the timeframe of covaria - tion assessment in human causal induction . Thinking & Reasoning , 8 , 269 – 295 . Carey , S . ( 2009 ) . The origin of concepts . Oxford University Press . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2005 ) . Commonsense conceptions of emergent processes : Why some misconceptions are robust . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 , 161 – 199 . Curtis , V . , Aunger , R . , & Rabie , T . ( 2004 ) . Evidence that disgust evolved to pro - tect from risk of disease . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B : Bio - logical Sciences , 271 , S131 - S133 . DiSessa , A . A . ( 2008 ) . A bird’s - eye view of the “pieces” vs . “coherence” contro - versy ( from the “pieces” side of the fence ) . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , International handbook of research on conceptual change ( pp . 35 – 60 ) . Routledge . Evans , E . M . , Spiegel , A . N . , Gram , W . , Frazier , B . N . , Tare , M . , Thompson , S . , & Diamond , J . ( 2010 ) . A conceptual guide to natural history museum visi - tors’ understanding of evolution . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 47 , 326 – 353 . Evans , J . S . B . ( 2008 ) . Dual - processing accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition . Annual Review of Psychology , 59 , 255 – 278 . Fisher , M . , & Keil , F . C . ( 2018 ) . The binary bias : A systematic distortion in the integration of information . Psychological Science , 29 , 1846 – 1858 . Goldberg , R . F . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Developmental “roots” in mature biological knowledge . Psychological Science , 20 , 480 – 487 . Gopnik , A . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 2012 ) . Reconstructing constructivism : Causal models , Bayesian learning mechanisms , and the theory theory . Psychological Bulletin , 138 , 1085 – 1108 . Gregorian , D . , & Alexander , P . ( 2020 , Oct . 7 ) . Trump returns to Oval Office , declares himself cured of coronavirus . NBC News . Retrieved from : www . nbcnews . com / politics / donald - trump / trump - returns - oval - office - despite - being - treated - coronavirus - n1242460 Jee , B . D . , & Anggoro , F . K . ( 2019 ) . Relational scaffolding enhances children’s understanding of scientific models . Psychological Science , 30 , 1287 – 1302 . Jee , B . D . , Uttal , D . H . , Spiegel , A . , & Diamond , J . ( 2015 ) . Expert—novice differ - ences in mental models of viruses , vaccines , and the causes of infectious disease . Public Understanding of Science , 24 , 241 – 256 . 266 Andrew Shtulman Johnson , S . ( 2007 ) . The ghost map : The story of London’s most terrifying epi - demic and how it changed science , cities , and the modern world . Riverhead Books . Johnson , S . G . B . & Nagatsu , M . ( this volume ) . Individual and structural explana - tion in scientific and folk economics . Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) . Thinking , fast and slow . Farrar , Straus & Giroux . Kalish , C . W . ( 1996 ) . Preschoolers’ understanding of germs as invisible mecha - nisms . Cognitive Development , 11 , 83 – 106 . Keil , F . C . ( 2003 ) . Folkscience : Coarse interpretations of a complex reality . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 368 – 373 . Kelemen , D . , Rottman , J . , & Seston , R . ( 2013 ) . Professional physical scien - tists display tenacious teleological tendencies : Purpose - based reasoning as a cognitive default . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 142 , 1074 – 1083 . Legare , C . H . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Biology , bewitchment , or both ? The coex - istence of natural and supernatural explanatory frameworks across develop - ment . Cognitive Science , 32 , 607 – 642 . Legare , C . H . , & Shtulman , A . ( 2018 ) . Explanatory pluralism across cultures and development . In J . Proust & M . Fortier ( Eds . ) , Interdisciplinary approaches to metacognitive diversity ( pp . 415 – 432 ) . Oxford University Press . Lewis , D . ( 2021 ) . COVID - 19 rarely spreads through surfaces . So why are we still deep cleaning ? Nature , 590 , 26 – 28 . McCloskey , M . , & Zaragoza , M . ( 1985 ) . Misleading post - event information and memory for events : Arguments and evidence against memory impairment hypotheses . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 114 , 1 – 16 . Mukherjee , S . ( 2020 , March 26 ) . How does the coronavirus behave inside a patient ? The New Yorker . Retrieved from : www . newyorker . com / magazine / 2020 / 04 / 06 / how - does - the - coronavirus - behave - inside - a - patient National Center for Health Statistics ( 2019 ) . Immunization statistics . Center for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved from : www . cdc . gov / nchs / fastats / immunize . htm Ohlsson , S . ( 2009 ) . Resubsumption : A possible mechanism for conceptual change and belief revision . Educational Psychologist , 44 , 20 – 40 . Palus , S . ( 2020 , April 30 ) . Stop yelling at runners for not wearing masks ! Slate . Retrieved from : https : / / slate . com / technology / 2020 / 04 / runners - masks - corona - virus . html Preston , J . , & Epley , N . ( 2009 ) . Science and god : An automatic opposition between ultimate explanations . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 45 , 238 – 241 . Raman , L . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2004 ) . A cross - cultural developmental analysis of children’s and adults’ understanding of illness in South Asia ( India ) and the United States . Journal of Cognition and Culture , 4 , 293 – 317 . Raman , L . , & Winer , G . A . ( 2004 ) . Evidence of more immanent justice respond - ing in adults than children : A challenge to traditional developmental theories . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 22 , 255 – 274 . Rottman , J . , & Young , L . ( 2019 ) . Specks of dirt and tons of pain : Dosage distin - guishes impurity from harm . Psychological Science , 30 , 1151 – 1160 . Rozenblit , L . , & Keil , F . ( 2002 ) . The misunderstood limits of folk science : An illu - sion of explanatory depth . Cognitive Science , 26 , 521 – 562 . When Competing Explanations Converge 267 Rozin , P . , Haidt , J . , & McCauley , C . R . ( 2008 ) . Disgust . In M . Lewis , J . M . Haviland - Jones , & L . F . Barrett ( Eds . ) , Handbook of emotions ( pp . 757 – 776 ) . The Guilford Press . Rozin , P . , Millman , L . , & Nemeroff , C . ( 1986 ) . Operation of the laws of sympa - thetic magic in disgust and other domains . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 703 – 712 . Samarapungavan , A . ( 1992 ) . Children’s judgments in theory choice tasks : Scien - tific rationality in childhood . Cognition , 45 , 1 – 32 . Shabad , R . ( 2020 , Oct . 12 ) . Trump chief of staff Mark Meadows refuses to speak to reporters with mask on . NBC News . Retrieved from : www . nbc - news . com / politics / white - house / trump - chief - staff - mark - meadows - refuses - speak - reporters - mask - n1242990 Shtulman , A . ( 2013 ) . Epistemic similarities between students’ scientific and super - natural beliefs . Journal of Educational Psychology , 105 , 199 – 212 . Shtulman , A . ( 2017 ) . Scienceblind : Why our intuitive theories about the world are so often wrong . Basic Books . Shtulman , A . , & Harrington , K . ( 2016 ) . Tensions between science and intuition across the lifespan . Topics in Cognitive Science , 8 , 118 – 137 Shtulman , A . , & Legare , C . H . ( 2020 ) . Competing explanations of competing explanations : Accounting for conflict between scientific and folk explanations . Topics in Cognitive Science , 12 , 1337 – 1362 . Shtulman , A . , & Lombrozo , T . ( 2016 ) . Bundles of contradiction : A coexistence view of conceptual change . In D . Barner & A . Baron ( Eds . ) , Core knowledge and conceptual change ( pp . 49 – 67 ) . Oxford University Press . Shtulman , A . , & Valcarcel , J . ( 2012 ) . Scientific knowledge suppresses but does not supplant earlier intuitions . Cognition , 124 , 209 – 215 . Sigelman , C . K . ( 2012 ) . Age and ethnic differences in cold weather and contagion theories of colds and flu . Health Education & Behavior , 39 , 67 – 76 . Solomon , G . E . , & Cassimatis , N . L . ( 1999 ) . On facts and conceptual systems : young children’s integration of their understandings of germs and contagion . Developmental Psychology , 35 , 113 – 126 . Spelke , E . S . ( 2000 ) . Core knowledge . American Psychologist , 55 , 1233 – 1243 . Stricker , J . , Vogel , S . E . , Schöneburg - Lehnert , S . , Krohn , T . , Dögnitz , S . , Jud , N . , . . . & Grabner , R . H . ( 2021 ) . Interference between naïve and scientific theories occurs in mathematics and is related to mathematical achievement . Cognition , 214 , 104789 . Teovanovi ć , P . , Luki ć , P . , Zupan , Z . , Lazi ć , A . , Ninkovi ć , M . , & Žeželj , I . ( 2020 ) . Irrational beliefs differentially predict adherence to guidelines and pseudosci - entific practices during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Applied Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 35 , 486 – 496 . Thagard , P . ( 1999 ) . How scientists explain disease . Princeton University Press . Thompson , H . ( 2012 , March 22 ) . Early exposure to germs has lasting ben - efits . Nature News . Retrieved from : www . nature . com / news / early - exposure - to - germs - has - lasting - benefits - 1 . 10294 Vosniadou , S . ( 1994 ) . Capturing and modeling the process of conceptual change . Learning and Instruction , 4 , 45 – 69 . Wicker , B . , Keysers , C . , Plailly , J . , Royet , J . P . , Gallese , V . , & Rizzolatti , G . ( 2003 ) . Both of us disgusted in My insula : the common neural basis of seeing and feel - ing disgust . Neuron , 40 , 655 – 664 . 268 Andrew Shtulman Zamora , A . , Romo , L . F . , & Au , T . K . F . ( 2006 ) . Using biology to teach adoles - cents about STD transmission and self - protective behaviors . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 27 , 109 – 124 . Zaragoza , M . S . , & Lane , S . M . ( 1994 ) . Source misattributions and the suggest - ibility of eyewitness memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 20 , 934 – 945 .