Unwritten Magic : Participatory Design of AI Dialogue to Empower Marginalized Voices Amanda Buddemeyer School of Computing and Information / Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh amb467 @ pitt . edu Jennifer Nwogu School of Computing and Information / Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh jen97 @ pitt . edu Jaemarie Solyst Human Computer Interaction Institute , Carnegie Mellon University solyst @ andrew . cmu . edu Erin Walker School of Computing and Information / Learning Research and Development Center , University of Pittsburgh eawalker @ pitt . edu Tara Nkrumah Center for Gender Equity in Science and Technology , Arizona State University tnkrumah @ asu . edu Amy Ogan Human Computer Interaction Institute , Carnegie Mellon University aeo @ andrew . cmu . edu Leshell Hatley Uplift , Inc . leshell . research @ gmail . com Angela Stewart Human Computer Interaction Institute , Carnegie Mellon University angelast @ andrew . cmu . edu Figure 1 : A human - robot interaction created by a participant using Scratch [ 23 ] ABSTRACT Language is an act of identity , but AI has no identity other than that which its creators assign it . Technology creators who do not fully consider how identity information is encoded in AI dialogue risk creating representational harms that negatively impact users’ Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9284 - 6 / 22 / 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3524458 . 3547119 interactions with the technology , particularly young users from groups marginalized in STEM education . One solution is to engage young users in Participatory Design of dialogue , pushing power away from the researcher and toward the young users . This posi - tions users as technology creators who understand AI language as a technosocial phenomenon and who have their own perspective about how identity is best portrayed in AI language . In this work in progress paper , we provide initial impressions from a Youth Ad - visory Group ( YAG ) with 12 middle - school - aged learners of color who are all female or non - binary . 366 GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus Buddemeyer et . al . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; • Com - puting methodologies → Discourse , dialogue and pragmatics ; • Social and professional topics → Race and ethnicity ; Gender ; • Applied computing → Education . KEYWORDS AI , equity , diversity and inclusion , language understanding , gender , race , representational harms ACM Reference Format : Amanda Buddemeyer , Jennifer Nwogu , Jaemarie Solyst , Erin Walker , Tara Nkrumah , Amy Ogan , Leshell Hatley , and Angela Stewart . 2022 . Unwrit - ten Magic : Participatory Design of AI Dialogue to Empower Marginalized Voices . In Conference on Information Technology for Social Good ( GoodIT’22 ) , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3524458 . 3547119 Moon marked and touched by sun / my magic is unwritten Audre Lorde , “A Woman Speaks” 1 INTRODUCTION Expressing ourselves with language is an act of identity ; we encode aspects of ourselves such as age , gender , racial / ethnic identifica - tion , geographic location , socioeconomic class , personality , and much more into the way that we communicate both verbally and in written form [ 16 , 21 , 24 ] . This fact raises under - explored questions in the field of human - computer interaction around how identity information attributed to an artificial intelligence ( AI ) might help or harm users interacting with the AI . For example , users from minoritized groups may be harmed if they perceive negative repre - sentations of congruent identities in AI language or if they perceive AI language to typically represent dominant groups . On the other hand , positive representations of congruent identities in AI lan - guage might have the opposite effect of positioning minoritized users as members of a community of technologists who can shape technology to meet their needs rather than adapting themselves to suit the technology [ 3 , 20 , 27 ] . In this work , we explore these ideas through a case study involving a pedagogical agent designed as a learning companion for middle - schoolers , focusing on learners of color who are female or non - binary . The goal of the case study is to promote the learners to participate in designing the agent’s dialogue and means of expressing itself . We will follow Participa - tory Design practices , defined here as a set of practices that support technology consumers to empower themselves as technology de - signers . Ultimately , the research questions associated with our case study are : ( RQ1 ) What linguistic features do the participants use to express identity in human - robot conversations ? ( RQ2 ) How can dialogue with a conversational agent help learners to reflect on the relationship between language and identity ? ( RQ3 ) How does participating in the design of dialogue impact the participant’s identity as a technologist ? This is a preliminary work and our goal here is not so much to answer these research questions as it is to discuss how answering these questions with this line of research might mitigate potential harms of representation and indeed create positive representations with AI language . The contributions of this work are 1 ) a discussion of how identity manifests in language and how this might create harms of representation [ 4 , 11 ] , and 2 ) an exploration of Participa - tory Design of dialogue as one avenue to mitigate these harms and potentially create a positive experience for users . Additionally , we will discuss some early impressions and how our exploration will continue moving forward . 2 LANGUAGE IN AI COMMUNICATION Sociolinguistic researchers have long understood the many ways that identity manifests in written and verbal communication , en - coding information about race , ethnicity , gender , age , and social class , just to name a few [ 16 , 21 , 24 , 38 ] . Individuals use a num - ber of linguistic features when constructing identity that can be lexical , syntactic , stylistic , phonetic , and more [ 16 , 24 ] . Some of these apply broadly to large social groups such as the habitual be in African American Vernacular English ( AAVE ) or the insertion of a heritage language such as Yiddish and Hebrew among Ashke - nazi Jews . These forms can indicate a particular identity across boundaries of age , gender , and geography . Others are much more intersectional ; the lexical , stylistic , and phonetic choices associated with a “Valley Girl” encodes information about time period , age , gender , race , socioeconomic class , and geography at the same time . This phenomenon can be weaponized both by portraying some groups as superior or “normal” as compared to others , or simply by not representing marginalized groups at all [ 4 , 11 ] . These harms of representation are made more pervasive because members of dominant social groups may perceive their language as “unracial - ized” or “neutral” [ 7 , 16 , 38 ] , leaving the language of marginalized groups to be marked and regulated against this “standard” . More recent work has explored how to work against this weaponization by celebrating non - dominant linguistic forms [ 3 , 15 ] . When we bring this understanding of language and identity to computing spaces , we can ask whether or how users index identity information in AI communication , meaning communication pre - sented to users as coming from an AI . Certainly , we can find many cases where technology creators design conversational AI with a particular identity in mind , often a gender or age range intended to maximize user engagement [ 6 , 26 ] . Recent work has explored the ways that identity information can be unintentionally encoded in generated or produced AI language [ 9 , 19 ] . The implications of this are troubling from an equity perspective . We know that technology creators and researchers are disproportionately White , male , and / or otherwise associated with dominant social groups [ 28 ] . We know that language encodes identity information , often unconsciously for members of dominant social groups . We know that negative representations or a lack of representation altogether can have harmful impacts on technology users in general and young learners in particular . These harms can include forms of alienation such as stereotype threat ( the fear of being judged based on negative stereotypes ) , damage to the learner’s sense of belonging in a tech - nology career or classroom , and / or negative academic or career outcomes that accompany alienation [ 12 , 32 , 33 , 37 ] . All of this sug - gests that conversational AI , particularly pedagogical AI intended 367 Unwritten Magic : Participatory Design of AI Dialogue to Empower Marginalized Voices GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus Figure 2 : A human - human conversation using local slang to mark one conversational partner as an outsider for use with children , might be harmful if users do not see positive representations of their identities in AI language . There are several ways that technology creators might address this issue and there is not necessarily a “one size fits all” solution . One avenue to engender positive representations of user identities in language technologies is to involve the users in the design of the technologies through Participatory Design . 3 PARTICIPATORY DESIGN OF DIALOGUE Though Participatory Design ( PD ) is notoriously difficult to define , we use the following definition : a set of practices that support tech - nology consumers to empower themselves as technology designers . We follow the four commitments of Participatory Design defined by Bødker et . al . [ 5 ] , that PD ( 1 ) commits to democracy , at the workplace and beyond , ( 2 ) empowers people through the process of design , ( 3 ) centers emancipatory practices rooted in mutual learning between designers and people , and ( 4 ) positions human beings as skillful and resourceful in the development of their future practices . Viewed from this lens , the role of HCI researchers is less to de - sign technologies than it is to hone methods that push power away from themselves and ever closer to those who are impacted by the technologies . In Design Justice : Community - Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need , Dr . Sasha Costanza - Chock contrasts this more democratic definition of Participatory Design with “an extractive process to gather new product ideas” [ 10 ] , in which users are po - sitioned as resources to be exploited rather than active shapers of the technology . For example , Bødker et . al describe in their “Case 4” ( p . 33 ) [ 5 ] how power asymmetries in health care were a barrier to Participatory Design of telehealth technologies ; asymmetries exist both between patients and providers and within the hierar - chies of healthcare provider organizations . A primary role of the researchers , therefore , was to provide participants with resources , knowledge , and tools that allowed them engage , envision , and de - sign the technologies . The researchers’ goal was to partner with and support the participants in acting as designers ( Participatory Design ) rather than designing the technology themselves based on their understanding of the participants ( User - Centered Design ) . In this work , we examine techniques for Participatory Design of human - agent dialogue for a pedagogical agent that acts as a learning companion for middle - school - aged female and non - binary learners of color . In particular , we want to encourage learners to reflect on the relationship between language and identity and how this might impact the dialogue they design . We also want learners to understand human - agent dialogue as a socio - technical construct , governed by algorithms that result from human choices . Our work builds on a body of research around PD with chil - dren , including the design of pedagogical robots and conversational agents . Other researchers have contributed to our understanding of how learners position the agent socially [ 2 , 17 , 27 ] , their pre - ferred modalities of interaction [ 17 , 22 ] , what they find engaging or creepy [ 39 ] , how they interact with it as a technological object or how they react to technical problems [ 17 , 22 , 27 , 39 ] , and , in the case of embodied agents , how they co - create the appearance of the agent [ 2 , 17 , 27 ] . Several contributions concerned techniques and materials that helped to share power with the children , elicit their creativity , build trust , and facilitate partnership between adult and child designers [ 1 , 17 , 27 ] . There is a growing body of work that examines how PD practices can promote power - sharing with mem - bers of marginalized groups , such as Harrington and Dillahunt’s ex - ploration of remote speculative co - design with Black young adults [ 18 ] and Spiel et . al . ’s articulation of micro - ethics in PD with dis - abled children [ 34 ] . Several works by Dr . Yolanda Rankin and her co - authors focus on this topic . Rankin and Henderson examined the role that race , gender , and class plays in Black youth’s ideation about conversational agents [ 27 ] . While these works have been founda - tional in our exploration , we are unaware of work that specifically focuses on the design of human - agent dialogue . 368 GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus Buddemeyer et . al . Figure 3 : A human - robot conversation . After several unsuccessful attempts to speak with the robot using vernacular / slang , the user finally switches to “standard” English 4 CASE STUDY : PARTICIPATORY DESIGN OF DIALOGUE WITH MIDDLE SCHOOL LEARNERS OF COLOR We convened a one - week Youth Advisory Group ( YAG ) as a case study in Participatory Design of human - agent dialogue . Following the ideas discussed in Sections 2 and 3 of this work , the ultimate goal of our YAG is to explore how we can support middle - schoolers who are female or non - binary , particularly learners of color , to design human - agent dialogue . Our main role in the case study was to provide the participants with resources and activities that help them to reflect on human - agent dialogue as an algorithm and a technology and also to reflect on how information about identity can manifest in language . Though this work will not provide an - swers to our research questions as stated in Section 1 , pursuing these research questions may provide insight into how identity information encoded in AI language can help or harm participants . These questions have both design and pedagogical goals ; we know from previous research that representational harms in learning artifacts can have negative impacts on both how learners engage with the artifact and on learning outcomes [ 12 , 32 , 33 , 37 ] . No PD process , no matter how inclusive , can create positive representa - tions of all users all the time , and many technologies that these learners will encounter will not have involved culturally responsive PD of any kind . Thus , while part of our goal is to involve learners in the design of a particular agent , we also intend the PD process to build techno - social change agency [ 30 ] that may help the learners to recognize conversational technologies and other technologies as a product of human decisions that can be challenged or changed . Our YAG consisted of 12 learners of color aged 12 - 14 ; of ten participants who provided demographic data , eight self - identified as female only , one self - identified as female , male , and non - binary , and one self - identified as non - binary . Seven self - identified as Black or African American with one each self - identifying as ( 1 ) Black or African American , Native American or Alaskan Native , ( 2 ) Black or African American , White or Caucasian , and ( 3 ) Hispanic or Latin American . Our community partner was a public charter school in the greater Washington , D . C . area ; participants were all students at the school and were recruited by our community partner based on their participation and engagement in coding classes involving the Scratch visual programming language [ 23 ] . We asked our com - munity partner to recruit only girls , transgender learners , and / or non - binary learners because this a population whose voices and experiences as technologists are often silenced or overlooked [ 20 ] . The YAG met in a classroom at their school four times for 90 minutes each . Participants received $ 15 for each 90 - minute ses - sion . Sessions were recorded for data collection purposes and the consent ( for parents / guardians ) and assent ( for participants ) form allowed them to choose whether data could only be shared within the research team or shared for public and academic presentations . In order for our participants to be able to meaningfully partici - pate as technology designers , we provided scaffolding activities to help them understand and reflect on ideas such as the relationship between language and identity and how human - agent dialogue is an algorithm . We started with a role - playing greeting activity where each participant ( and the adults ) chose an identity or rela - tionship idea out of a bag and acted it out while others tried to guess what they were doing . Examples include “you are a celebrity greeting a fan” , “greet an elder in your community” , and “you are the leader of one country greeting the leader of another country” . The participants were generally enthusiastic about the activity ; they struggled with some of the roles but quickly grasped others , altering the formality , vernacular , or acoustic tone of their language to suit a particular “character” . Later in the YAG , we discussed al - gorithms as input , steps , and output . Participants quickly grasped the idea that a robot / agent’s dialogue was an algorithm . The learners produced several types of artifacts during the YAG . As shown in Figures 2 and 3 , they used a comic book template ( simi - lar to a ComicBoarding exercise [ 25 ] ) to design short conversations , some between human conversation partners and some between a human and a robot or agent . Participants were asked to think about how they might use different language depending on the identity 369 Unwritten Magic : Participatory Design of AI Dialogue to Empower Marginalized Voices GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus Figure 4 : “Zero” , the robot figure , is “trying to fit in” . The user , “Claire” , finds his clothes and actions “cringey” and says they were cool “back in 2016” and relationship between the conversation partners . As shown in Figure 5 , they annotated dialogue tree diagrams with sticky notes indicating how they might author the dialogue differently and how they perceived identity and relationship information in the lan - guage . Each item in the dialogue tree was covered by a flap , and the participants lifted the flaps to navigate through the tree . Finally , as shown in Figure 4 , they produced free form artifacts portray - ing a robot or agent , its conversations or interactions , and / or its relationship with its user . In most cases these were created using paper and pen [ 13 ] , but some participants chose to create dynamic artifacts using Scratch , as shown in Figure 1 . The four - day Youth Advisory Group ( YAG ) described here is the first of several planned iterations . In this work , we will not seek to answer our research questions or conduct any sort of formal analysis with incomplete data , but instead discuss some prelimi - nary impressions that will be incorporated into future iterations . We gained three general impressions from this initial YAG : that learners typically associated identity in language with slang , that learners often characterized human - agent interactions using tech - nical problems or a failure of the technology to work as expected , and that PD techniques that focus on storytelling or role - playing may be most effective for designing dialogue . When participants designed dialogue that showcased the identity of conversational partners or relationships between them , we saw several examples where the participants used slang , which we will define narrowly here as “in - group language , meant to promote social solidarity , to stake out and link speakers to salient youth subcultures , and to serve as an insider ’code’ among friends . ” [ 29 ] . We see an example of this in Figure 2 , where one speaker is using a term specific to their in - group in “DMV” ( itself a colloquial term meaning “District of Columbia , Maryland , and Virginia” ) and the the other speaker , from Georgia , does not understand . This is reinforced by in - group or out - group behaviors , as shown in Figure 4 . The human - robot conversation displayed in Figure 3 is an exam - ple of a user who wants to speak to a robot using AAVE ( “What up” ) or slang ( “sup Homey” ) and is forced to adapt their language in order to be understood . This is an example of the second trend we noticed , where participants created human - robot conversation highlighting technology that either doesn’t work in general or doesn’t work for them specifically . This suggests both that learn - ers may have strong ideas about how they think a robot or agent should work and that we as facilitators can do more to position these learners as technology creators . Incorporating more activities aimed toward fueling the participants’ creativity embodies the PD principle that prioritizes emancipatory practices between design - ers ( i . e . facilitators and learners ) . More specifically , engaging the learners of color through exercises that focus on power sharing and identity development as coders can be furthered by speculative design and Afrofuturism [ 18 ] , and Black Feminist Thought [ 27 ] . Finally , in our review of PD methods , we found that many focus on the design of technical objects . Paper prototypes [ 13 ] , bags of stuff [ 14 ] , and layered elaboration [ 36 ] , for instance , are all com - mon PD techniques used with children , but all may work best when designing a technical artifact’s appearance or presence in physical space . Storytelling techniques such as storyboarding [ 35 ] , comicboarding [ 25 ] , and role - playing [ 36 ] may be a more natural fit for designing dialogue . As recommended by Dr . Allison Druin in Cooperative Inquiry [ 13 ] , it may also prove effective to alternate between high - tech and low - tech prototyping techniques to allow learners to ideate freely and then see their ideas in practice . Allow - ing learners to actually program a dialogue system as described by 370 GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus Buddemeyer et . al . Figure 5 : Participants navigated the dialogue tree by lifting the flaps of dialogue items . They used color - coded sticky notes to rewrite dialogue and note how they perceived iden - tity and relationship information in the language Buddemeyer et . al [ 8 ] would allow them to experience and iterate on dialogues that they design . 5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK We conducted a four - day Youth Advisory Group ( YAG ) with 12 middle - school - aged learners of color who are all female or non - binary . Using Participatory Design ( PD ) techniques , we sought to partner with them to design conversations between humans and robots or agents . The program included instruction on understand - ing human - agent dialogue as an algorithmic technology controlled by human choices . We encouraged the participants to reflect on the relationship between language and identity and how this might impact their interactions with the robot or agent . Moving forward , we intend to iterate between further PD of dialogue and deployments of a pedagogical agent that incorporates dialogue ideas from PD . This agent acts as learning companion as part of a culturally responsive curriculum in computational think - ing . Both PD and deployment are part of a culturally responsive curriculum that seek to foster an agentic relationship with technol - ogy in the learners [ 30 , 31 ] . We are also engaged in efforts to better assess the formation of an agentic relationship with technology , though that work is not described here . Our preliminary analysis has found promising ways to engage middle - school - aged learners in age appropriate ways on challeng - ing topics such as dialogue technologies , intersectional identities , and harms of representation . Our findings suggest that our par - ticipants have an intuitive understanding of language as an act of identity , particularly in the form of slang , and enjoy role - playing activities to ideate about how they might design and improve con - versational technologies . Participatory design of dialogue may be a promising avenue to both create positive representations of learners in dialogue and to help learners develop as technologists . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Special thanks to the reviewers and our community partners . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Award Nos . DRL - 1811610 and IIS - 1637809 and the Google Award for Inclusion Research Program . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Patrícia Alves - Oliveira , Ana Paiva , Patrícia Arriaga , and Guy Hofman . 2021 . Children as robot designers . ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction 2 ( 2021 ) , 399 – 408 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3434073 . 3444650 [ 2 ] Lindsey Arnold , Kung Jin Lee , and Jason C Yip . 2016 . Co - designing with children : An approach to social robot design . 2nd Workshop on Evaluating Child Robot Interaction - HRI2016 March ( 2016 ) . [ 3 ] April Baker - Bell . 2020 . Linguistic justice : Black language , literacy , identity , and pedagogy . Routledge . [ 4 ] Su Lin Blodgett , Solon Barocas , Hal Daumé III , and Hanna Wallach . 2020 . Lan - guage ( Technology ) is Power : A Critical Survey of “Bias” in NLP . In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2020 . acl - main . 485 arXiv : 2005 . 14050 [ 5 ] Susanne Bødker , Christian Dindler , Ole S Iversen , and Rachel C Smith . 2021 . Participatory Design . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics 14 , 5 ( 2021 ) , i – 143 . [ 6 ] Frank Broz , Hatice Kose - Bagci , Chrystopher L Nehaniv , and Kerstin Dautenhahn . 2009 . Learning behavior for a social interaction game with a childlike humanoid robot . In Social Learning in Interactive Scenarios Workshop , Humanoids . [ 7 ] Mary Bucholtz . 2001 . The whiteness of nerds : Superstandard English and racial markedness . Journal of linguistic anthropology 11 , 1 ( 2001 ) , 84 – 100 . [ 8 ] Amanda Buddemeyer , Leshell Hatley , Angela Stewart , Jaemarie Solyst , Amy Ogan , and Erin Walker . 2021 . Agentic Engagement with a Programmable Dialog System . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research . 423 – 424 . [ 9 ] AmandaBuddemeyer , ErinWalker , andMaliheAlikhani . 2021 . WordsofWisdom : Representational Harms in Learning From AI Communication . Presented at the 16th Annual European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning , Work - shop on Designing Learning Technologies for Equality , Diversity and Inclusion ( LearnTec4EDI ) . http : / / www . pragmaticist . com / Buddemeyer _ LearnTec4EDI . pdf [ 10 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design Justice : Community - Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . [ 11 ] Crawford , Kate . 2017 . The Trouble with Bias . https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = fMym _ BKWQzk . Accessed : 2021 - 06 - 01 . [ 12 ] Dario Cvencek , Andrew N Meltzoff , and Anthony G Greenwald . 2011 . Math – gender stereotypes in elementary school children . Child development 82 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 766 – 779 . [ 13 ] Allison Druin . 1999 . Cooperative inquiry : Developing new technologies for children with children . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 1999 ) , 592 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 [ 14 ] AllisonDruin , BenjaminBBederson , JuanPabloHourcade , LisaSherman , Glenda Revelle , Michele Platner , and Stacy Weng . 2001 . Designing a digital library for young children . In Proceedings of the 1st ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Digital libraries . 398 – 405 . [ 15 ] Christopher Emdin . 2016 . For White folks who teach in the hood . . . and the rest of y’all too : Reality pedagogy and urban education . Beacon Press . [ 16 ] Carmen Fought . 2006 . Language and ethnicity . Cambridge University Press . [ 17 ] Radhika Garg and Subhasree Sengupta . 2020 . Conversational Technologies for In - home Learning : Using Co - Design to Understand Children’s and Parents’ Perspectives . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376631 371 Unwritten Magic : Participatory Design of AI Dialogue to Empower Marginalized Voices GoodIT’22 , September 7 – 9 , 2022 , Limassol , Cyprus [ 18 ] Christina N . Harrington and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2021 . Eliciting tech futures among black young adults : A case study of remote speculative co - design . Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445723 [ 19 ] Dirk Hovy and Diyi Yang . 2021 . The Importance of Modeling Social Factors of Language : Theory and Practice . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies . https : / / public . flourish . studio / visua [ 20 ] NatalieS . KingandRoseM . Pringle . 2019 . BlackgirlsspeakSTEM : Counterstories of informal and formal learning experiences . Journal of Research in Science Teaching 56 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 539 – 569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 21513 [ 21 ] Robert Brock Le Page and Andrée Tabouret - Keller . 1985 . Acts of identity : Creole - based approaches to language and ethnicity . Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , New York . [ 22 ] Naja A . Mack , Dekita G . Moon Rembert , Robert Cummings , and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . Co - designing an intelligent conversational history tutor with children . Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC 2019 ( 2019 ) , 482 – 487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325336 [ 23 ] John Maloney , Mitchel Resnick , Natalie Rusk , Brian Silverman , and Evelyn East - mond . 2010 . The scratch programming language and environment . ACM Trans - actions on Computing Education ( TOCE ) 10 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 24 ] Sally McConnell - Ginet and Penelope Eckert . 2003 . Language and gender . Cam - bridge University Press . [ 25 ] Neema Moraveji , Jason Li , Jiarong Ding , Patrick O’Kelley , and Suze Woolf . 2007 . Comicboarding : using comics as proxies for participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 1371 – 1374 . [ 26 ] Amy Ogan , Samantha Finkelstein , Elijah Mayfield , Claudia D’adamo , Noboru Matsuda , andJustineCassell . 2012 . " Oh , dearStacy ! " SocialInteraction , Elaboration , and Learning with Teachable Agents . [ 27 ] Yolanda A Rankin and Kallayah K Henderson . 2021 . Resisting Racism in Tech Design : Centering the Experiences of Black Youth . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449291 [ 28 ] Sarah L Rodriguez and Kathleen Lehman . 2017 . Developing the next generation of diverse computer scientists : the need for enhanced , intersectional computing identity theory . Computer Science Education 27 , 3 - 4 ( 2017 ) , 229 – 247 . [ 29 ] Jennifer Roth - Gordon . 2020 . Language and Creativity : Slang . The International Encyclopedia of Linguistic Anthropology ( 2020 ) , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 9781118786093 . iela0192 [ 30 ] Kimberly A Scott and Patricia Garcia . 2016 . Techno - Social Change Agents : Fostering Activist Dispositions Among Girls of Color . Meridians : Feminism , Race 15 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 65 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2979 / meridians . 15 . 1 . 05 [ 31 ] Kimberly A Scott , Kimberly M Sheridan , and Kevin Clark . 2015 . Culturally Responsive Computing : a Theory Revisited . Learning , Media and Technology 40 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 412 – 436 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17439884 . 2014 . 924966 [ 32 ] Mia S . Shaw and Yasmin B . Kafai . 2020 . Charting the identity turn in K - 12 computer science education : Developing more inclusive learning pathways for identities . In 14th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( ICLS ) 2020 , Vol . 1 . 114 – 121 . [ 33 ] Jeff Siegel . 2006 . Language ideologies and the education of speakers of marginal - ized language varieties : Adopting a critical awareness approach . Linguistics and Education 17 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 157 – 174 . [ 34 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , Geraldine Fitzpatrick Micro , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - Ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Chil - dren To cite this version : HAL Id : hal - 01839208 Micro - Ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Children . ( 2018 ) . [ 35 ] Khai N Truong , Gillian R Hayes , and Gregory D Abowd . 2006 . Storyboarding : an empirical determination of best practices and effective guidelines . In Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems . 12 – 21 . [ 36 ] GregWalsh , ElizabethRoss , JasonYip , andAllisonDruin . 2013 . Octoract : aneight - dimensional framework for intergenerational participatory design techniques . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 13 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 37 ] MartinJWasserberg . 2014 . StereotypethreateffectsonAfricanAmericanchildren in an urban elementary school . The journal of experimental education 82 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 502 – 517 . [ 38 ] Walt Wolfram . 2004 . Social Varieties of American English . Language in the USA : Themes for the Twenty - First Century ( 2004 ) , 58 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511809880 . 006 [ 39 ] Jason C . Yip , Kiley Sobel , Xin Gao , Allison Marie Hishikawa , Alexis Lim , Laura Meng , Romaine Flor Ofana , Justin Park , and Alexis Hiniker . 2019 . Laughing is scary , but farting is cute a conceptual model of children’s perspectives of creepy technologies . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings ( 2019 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300303 372