Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 8 , 3095 – 3106 , November 1998 Identiﬁcation of Darlin , a Dictyostelium Protein with Armadillo - like Repeats that Binds to Small GTPases and Is Important for the Proper Aggregation of Developing Cells Kalpa K . Vithalani , * Carole A . Parent , † Eric M . Thorn , Marcus Penn , Denis A . Larochelle , ‡ Peter N . Devreotes , † and Arturo De Lozanne § Department of Cell Biology , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , North Carolina 27710 Submitted July 6 , 1998 ; Accepted August 31 , 1998 Monitoring Editor : James A . Spudich We puriﬁed from Dictyostelium lysates an 88 - kDa protein that bound to a subset of small GTPases , including racE , racC , cdc42Hs , and TC4ran , but did not bind to R - ras or rabB . Cloning of the gene encoding this 88 - kDa protein revealed that it contained multiple armadillo - like repeats most closely related to the mammalian GTP exchange factor smgGDS . We named this protein darlin ( Dictyostelium armadillo - like protein ) . Disruption of the gene encoding darlin demonstrated that this protein is not essential for cytokinesis , pinocytosis , phagocytosis , or development . However , the ability of darlin null cells to aggregate in response to starvation is severely affected . When starved under liquid medium , the mutant cells were unable to form aggregation centers and streams , possibly because of a defect in cAMP relay signaling . This defect was not due to an inability of the darlin mutants to activate adenylate cyclase in response to G protein stimulation . These results suggest that the darlin protein is involved in a signaling pathway that may modulate the chemotactic response during early development . INTRODUCTION The ras superfamily of small GTPases are key regula - tory proteins in a wide range of cellular processes , including membrane trafﬁc , cell proliferation , gene regulation , and cytoskeletal organization . The activity of these proteins is determined by their guanine nu - cleotide content . Small GTPases are activated upon binding guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) 1 and inacti - vated when bound to guanosine diphosphate ( GDP ) . Switching between these two states is modulated by regulatory proteins known as GTPase - activating pro - teins ( GAPs ) and guanine - nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) . In addition , small GTPases bind to a large number of effector proteins to exert their function . Thus , the identiﬁcation of binding partners for small GTPases is essential to understanding their speciﬁc function . In Dictyostelium discoideum ; 30 genes encoding dif - ferent small GTPases have been found . Among these small GTPases , . 5 belong to the ras family , 10 to the * Present address : Department of Molecular Biology , Cleveland Clinic Research Institute , 9500 Euclid Avenue , Cleveland , OH 44195 . † Present address : Department of Biological Chemistry , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , 725 North Wolfe Street , Baltimore , MD 21205 . ‡ Present address : Department of Biology , Clark University , 950 Main Street , Worcester , MA 01610 . § Corresponding author . E - mail address : a . delozanne @ cellbio . duke . edu . 1 Abbreviations used : DTT , dithiothreitol ; GAP , GTPase - activating protein ; GDP , guanosine diphosphate ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; GTP , guanosine triphosphate ; MBP , maltose - binding protein ; PMSF , phenylmethyl - sulfonyl ﬂuoride ; RT , reverse transcription . © 1998 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3095 rab family , and 8 to the rac subfamily . In contrast to the large number of small GTPases identiﬁed in this organism , only a few GTPase - binding proteins have been discovered . A Dictyostelium ras - GEF protein was shown recently to be required for signal transduction during early development ( Insall et al . , 1996 ) . Two proteins similar to the mammalian protein IQGAP were shown to be involved in cytokinesis ( Adachi et al . , 1996 ; Faix and Dittrich , 1996 ; Lee et al . , 1997 ) . Finally , a Dictyostelium gene encoding a rho GAP pro - tein was isolated recently ( Ludbrook et al . , 1997 ) . We recently identiﬁed a novel member of the rac subfamily of small GTPases in a genetic screen de - signed to isolate cytokinesis mutants ( Larochelle et al . , 1996 ) . This protein , racE , is essential for cytokinesis and maintenance of cortical tension but not for any other cytoskeletal function ( Larochelle et al . , 1997 ; Ger - ald et al . , 1998 ) . To better understand the role of this GTPase , we sought to identify Dictyostelium proteins that interact with racE . We report here the identiﬁca - tion of darlin , a Dictyostelium armadillo - like protein that binds to racE and to other small GTPases . Se - quence analysis of the gene encoding this protein ( darA ) revealed that it consists of 11 armadillo - like repeats and has signiﬁcant homology to the mamma - lian GEF smgGDS ( Yamamoto et al . , 1990 ) . Like smg - GDS , darlin preferentially bound to the GDP - bound form of racE . Although darlin is not required for cy - tokinesis , it is necessary for the efﬁcient streaming of cells early in development . This function is mediated by a pathway different from the one that activates adenylate cyclase in response to G protein stimulation . Thus , we postulate that darlin may be involved in the regulation of chemotaxis in early development . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials A randomly sheared Dictyostelium genomic library subcloned into the Eco RI site of L - Zap2 was a generous gift from Dr . Herb Ennis ( Columbia University , New York , NY ) . A random - primed Dictyo - stelium cDNA library ( prepared from cells at 6 h of development ) in l - gt11 was obtained from CLONTECH ( Palo Alto , CA ) . Y1090 and XL1 - MRF bacterial cells were obtained from Stratagene ( La Jolla , CA ) . The pGEX - 2T vector was obtained from Pharmacia ( Piscat - away , NJ ) . Glutathione beads and reduced glutathione were from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) . The pMalc - 2 vector , the amylose resin , and the polyclonal antibody against maltose - binding protein ( MBP ) were obtained from New England Biolabs ( Beverly , MA ) . Other materials used were obtained from previously described sources ( Larochelle et al . , 1996 ; Vithalani et al . , 1996 ) . Expression of racE and Other Small GTPases in Bacteria Reverse transcription ( RT ) - PCR was used to obtain cDNAs coding for Dictyostelium racE and racC . Site - directed mutagenesis was used to create two independent mutations in the racE cDNA to create the constitutively active V20racE ( glycine to valine at position 20 ) and constitutively inactive N25racE ( threonine to asparagine at position Figure1 . IdentiﬁcationofdarlinasasmallGTPase - bindingproteinfrom Dictyostelium . ( A ) Isolation of Dictyostelium proteins that bind to small GTPases . In bacteria we expressed GST and GST fusion proteins of Dic - tyostelium racE , racC , and rabB , and human cdc42Hs , TC4 - ran , and R - ras . The different GST fusion proteins were incubated with Dictyostelium ly - sates and washed , and the proteins were eluted off the beads . The eluted proteins were subsequently analyzed by SDS - PAGE and visualized by silver staining . A protein of ; 88 kDa bound to all GST fusion proteins except that for rabB or to GST alone . GST migrates below the area shown . ( B ) Darlin binds to a subset of small GTPases . Western blot analysis of the samesamplesshowninAusingapolyclonalantibodyagainstthepuriﬁeddarlinprotein . Darlin bound to the GST fusion proteins for racE , racC , cdc42Hs , and TC4 - ran but not to those for R - ras or rabB . Note that the 88 - kDa protein that bound to R - ras ( A ) did not react with the anti - darlin antibody . ( C ) Darlin binds to racE under high ionic strength . The racE – GST fusion protein was incubated with Dictyostelium lysates in a range of NaCl concentrations and analyzed as in A . Darlin binds to racE even underhighionicstrengthbufferconditions . ( D ) Darlinbindspreferentially to the GDP - bound form of racE . GST and GST fusion proteins of racE , the constitutively GTP - bound V20RacE , and the constitutively GDP - bound N25racE were incubated with Dictyostelium lysates in 0 . 4 M NaCl and analyzed as in A . K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3096 25 ) . These cDNAs were then cloned into a Dictyostelium expression vector , pTIKL - Bsr - Exp ( Larochelle et al . , 1997 ) . The cDNAs were removed from this vector using Bgl II and Eco RI and fused to the C - terminal end of the Schistosoma japonicum glutathione S - trans - ferase ( GST ) gene by cloning them into the Bam HI and Eco RI sites of pGEX - 2T . Expression of the resulting racE – GST fusion protein is under the control of the tac promoter ( Smith and Johnson , 1988 ) . The pGEX - 2T vector alone as well as pGEX - 2T containing the respective cDNAs were each transformed into the Escherichia coli strain DH5 - a and stored as glycerol stocks at 2 70°C . The bacterial strains express - ing cdc42Hs - GST , TC4 - ran - GST , and R - ras - GST were generous gifts from Drs . Daniel Lew and Sally Kornbluth ( Duke University , Durham , NC ) , and Dr . Channing Der ( University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC ) , respectively . To purify the fusion proteins , an overnight culture ( 100 ml ) of the respective bacterial strain was diluted 1 : 10 into fresh L - broth contain - ing 100 m g / ml ampicillin and incubated in 2 - l ﬂasks for 2 h at 37°C on an orbital shaker . Isopropyl - b - d - thiogalactopyranoside was added to 0 . 1 mM to induce expression and the culture was incubated overnight at room temperature with shaking . We found that if the induction was carried out at 37°C , it led to sequestration of racE into inclusion bodies . The cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 60 min at 4°C and resuspended to 20 ml in ice - cold lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM dithiothre - itol [ DTT ] , 1 mg / ml lysozyme , 5 m g / ml leupeptin , 1 . 4 m g / ml pepsta - tin , 10 m g / ml phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride [ PMSF ] , and 2 mM so - dium bisulﬁte ) . The resuspended bacteria were placed on ice for 30 min and lysed two times in a French press at 1200 psi . The lysate was centrifuged at 9000 3 g for 10 min at 4°C , the supernatant was trans - ferred to a chilled tube , and fresh protease inhibitors were added . Two milliliters of a prewashed 1 : 1 suspension of glutathione and agarose beads were added to the supernatant and incubated for 30 min on a rotating platform at 4°C . The beads were pelleted , the supernatant was discarded , and the beads were then washed three times with 20 ml lysis buffer without lysozyme , Triton X - 100 , or protease inhibitors . The bead - bound fusion proteins were stored as a 1 : 1 slurry on ice , or the proteins were eluted with 5 mM reduced glutathione in the same wash buffer . Afﬁnity Chromatography Wild - type Dictyostelium AX2 cells were seeded in HL5 medium at 1 3 10 5 cells / ml , grown at 21°C at 240 rpm , and harvested while still in the logarithmic phase . The cells were resuspended to 5 3 10 7 cells / ml in ice - cold binding buffer ( 20 mM piperazine - N , N 9 - bis [ 2 - ethanesulfonic acid ] , pH 6 . 8 , 1 . 5 mM EDTA , 15 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 5 m g / ml leupeptin , 1 . 4 m g / ml pepstatin , 10 m g / ml PMSF , and 2 mM sodium bisulﬁte with or without 400 mM NaCl ) and lysed in an ice - water slurry by sonication ( Virsonic 50 , Virtis , Gardiner , NY ; 50 % output power ) for 3 3 30 sec . Lysis was checked at 40 3 magniﬁcation , and if incomplete , sonication was repeated as needed . The lysate was aliquoted , 1 ml per Eppendorf tube ( Eppen - dorf North America , Madison , WI ) , and cleared by centrifugation at 10 , 000 rpm ( table - top Eppendorf microcentrifuge ) for 10 min at 4°C . The supernatant was transferred to clean chilled tubes , and fresh protease inhibitors were added . Approximately 20 – 30 m g of the appropriate bead - bound GST fusion protein were added to 1 ml lysate . The beads were incubated with the lysate for 1 h at 4°C on a rotating platform and pelleted at 5000 rpm for 2 min . The superna - tant was aspirated , and the beads were washed three times in binding buffer . The GST fusion proteins were then eluted along with any interacting proteins from the agarose beads with 15 mM re - duced glutathione . The eluate was mixed 1 : 1 with 2 3 SDS sample buffer , heated to 100°C for 2 min , and loaded onto 12 % reducing polyacrylamide gels . Some gels were ﬁxed overnight in 20 % trichlo - roacetic acid and subsequently silver stained ( Dunn , 1990 ) . Other gels were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and processed for Western blot analysis using a polyclonal anti - darlin antiserum . Peptide Sequencing of Darlin Darlin protein was puriﬁed as described above from 2 – 3 3 10 10 AX2 cells . The eluted proteins were loaded on a 12 % polyacrylamide - SDS preparative gel and transferred overnight at 4 W at 4°C in CAPS buffer ( 10 mM 3 - [ cyclohexylamino ] - 1 - propanesulfonic acid buffer , pH 11 . 0 , and 10 % methanol ) onto a polyvinylidene diﬂuoride protein - sequencing membrane ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . The poly - Figure 2 . Genomic organization of the darA gene locus . Probe A was obtained by RT - PCR using oligonucleotides designed from peptide sequences obtained from puriﬁed darlin protein . This probe was used to obtain genomic and cDNA clones that encompassed the entire locus . Comparison of the sequence of these clones revealed that the darA open reading frame ( open arrows ) is interrupted by three introns as indicated . A knockout construct was designed using the indicated portions of the darA gene ( 5 9 and 3 9 open bars ) and a blasticidin - resistance selectable marker ( Bsr ) . When this construct recombined into the darA locus by a double crossover , it introduced a Bgl II site 5 . 5 kb away from the Bgl II site in the 3 9 ﬂanking region of the darA gene ( see Figure 7A ) . Probe B is a 450 - bp PCR product from the 3 9 end of the open reading frame . It does not overlap with portions included in the knockout construct . A Dictyostelium Armadillo - like Protein Vol . 9 , November 1998 3097 Figure 3 . Sequence of the darA gene . The open reading frame of the darA gene is divided into four exons ( bold capital letters ) that extend over 2301 bp and encode a protein of 766 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 87 . 7 kDa . The darA coding region is interrupted by three introns ( underlined bold lowercase letters ) of 110 , 100 , and 144 bp . The 5 9 and 3 9 ﬂanking sequences are shown in lower case letters . The 5 9 ﬂanking portion of the gene has two GC - rich clusters ( boxed letters ) that are often associated with promoter elements in Dictyostelium K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3098 vinylidene diﬂuoride membrane was then stained with freshly made Ponceau S and washed in distilled H 2 O . The major protein band , with an apparent molecular mass of 88 kDa , was cut out , transferred to an Eppendorf tube , washed ﬁve times with distilled H 2 O , and frozen at 2 70°C . The membrane - bound protein was then submitted to the Harvard Microsequencing Facility ( Cambridge , MA ) for microsequencing . Three peptides , peptides 1 – 3 , were se - quenced . The sequences were as follows : peptide 1 , EGYYENS - FANDLVSSLSTLSLN ; peptide 2 , VEDNRETIIRSPSNVIEK ; and peptide 3 , DTEHYSEEAVELLI . Molecular Cloning of Darlin The Dictyostelium gene encoding the darlin protein is designated darA . Using the Dictyostelium codon bias ( Sharp and Devine , 1989 ) , we designed six primers based on the sequence of each peptide obtained : AO - 171 ( ggt tat tat gaa aat tca ttt gc ) , AO - 172 ( taa tga tga aac taa atc att agc ) , AO - 173 ( gtg aaa cta tta ttc gtt caa c ) , AO - 174 ( caa taa cat ttg atg gtg aac ) , AO - 175 ( gaa cat tat tca gaa gaa gct gtt g ) , and AO - 176 ( caa cag ctt ctt ctg aat aat gtt c ) . Dictyostelium mRNA was made by incubating biotinylated oligo ( dT ) with total RNA prepared by the diethyl - pyrocarbonate method ( Nellen et al . , 1987 ) followed by afﬁnity chromatography with streptavidin - coupled magnetic beads ( PolyATract mRNA Isolation Systems ; Promega , Madison , WI ) . The mRNA thus obtained was used as a template with oli - go ( dT ) for RT ( Superscript RNase H 2 reverse transcriptase , Life Technologies , Gaithersburg , MD ) to obtain cDNA ( Ausubel et al . , 1994 ) . The appropriate primer pairs were used for PCR ( AmpliTaq ; Perkin Elmer - Cetus , Norwalk , CT ) . The only primers that generated a legitimate PCR product were AO - 175 and AO - 172 . This 700 - bp product was cloned into the pT7 - Blue vector ( Novagen , Milwaukee , WI ) and subsequently used to probe genomic and cDNA libraries using standard protocols ( Ausubel et al . , 1994 ) . Comparison of the sequence of genomic and cDNA clones allowed the mapping of three introns . Clone PCR3 was obtained by PCR using Dictyostelium DNA as a template to complete the sequence of the third intron . The cDNA clones did not include the 3 9 portion of the gene ; thus , we used 3 9 rapid ampliﬁcation of cDNA ends – PCR to determine the end of the coding region . The product of this PCR also contained the polyadenylation site for the darlin mRNA as shown in Figure 5 . We designed two primers to obtain the contiguous full - length darA coding region . One was complementary to the 5 9 end ( AO - 212 : aag gat cca tgg aag aga tac aaa aat taa tta atg aat tag gtg gtt cac ) and another to the 3 9 end ( AO - 210 : tat aag ctt aaa ttg tta att gaa cta aaa ttt ttt gaa tta aat ttg tta atg att gtg gtg c ) . These primers contained a Bam HI site and a Hin dIII site , respectively , and were used to am - plify the full - length cDNA by PCR . Expression of Darlin in Bacteria The full - length darA cDNA was cloned into the Bam HI and Hin dIII sites of pMAL - C2 ( New England Biolabs , Beverly , MA ) . The darA gene was inserted downstream of the malE gene , which encodes MBP and results in the expression of an MBP fusion protein that is expressed under the control of the tac promoter . The resulting vector was then transformed into DH5 - a cells , and miniprep DNA was made from these clones . After restriction - digest analysis , those clones containing the entire coding region of darA were screened for optimal expression levels of the darlin – MBP fusion protein . Two clones were chosen for large - scale protein preparations . To purify MBP or the darlin – MBP fusion protein , 100 ml L - broth containing 100 m g / ml ampicillin were inoculated with the respec - tive bacterial strain and incubated at 37°C overnight . The culture was then diluted 1 : 10 into fresh L - broth and ampicillin in 2 - l ﬂasks and incubated for 2 h at room temperature on an orbital shaker . Isopropyl - b - d - thiogalactopyranoside was added to 0 . 1 mM to in - duce expression , and the culture was incubated overnight at room temperature at 250 rpm on an orbital shaker . The cells were then collected by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 60 min at 4°C and resuspended to 20 ml in ice - cold lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 200 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 5 m g / ml leupeptin , 1 . 4 m g / ml pepstatin , 10 m g / ml PMSF , and 2 mM sodium bisulﬁte ) . The resuspended bacteria were lysed two times in a French press at 1200 psi . The lysate was centrifuged at 9000 3 g for 10 min at 4°C , the supernatant was transferred to a chilled tube , and fresh protease inhibitors were added . Two milliliters of a prewashed 1 : 1 suspen - sion of amylose resin were added to the supernatant and incubated for 30 min on a rotating platform at 4°C . The beads were centrifuged at 1000 3 g for 5 min , the supernatant was discarded , and the beads were then washed three times with 20 ml lysis buffer without protease inhibitors . The bead - bound fusion proteins were stored as a 1 : 1 slurry on ice , or the proteins were eluted with 10 mM maltose in the same buffer . The soluble darlin – MBP fusion protein was used to raise poly - clonal anti - darlin antibodies in rabbits ( Cocalico Biologicals , Reams - town , PA ) . Construction of Darlin Knockout Mutants A construct was designed to disrupt the darA locus using the blasticidin resistance marker from pBsr D Bam ( Adachi et al . , 1994 ) ﬂanked by 1 . 5 kb of 5 9 ﬂanking and 1 . 4 kb of 3 9 ﬂanking sequences from the darA gene as diagramed in Figure 2 . Recombination of this construct into the darA locus leads to the insertion of a Bgl II site that is 5 . 5 kb from a Bgl II site in the 3 9 ﬂanking region of the darA gene . The disruption construct was introduced as a linear fragment into Dictyostelium AX2 cells by electroporation ( Adachi et al . , 1994 ) , and transformed cell lines were selected in 96 - well dishes with HL5 medium supplemented with 10 m g / ml blasticidin S . Individual clones were expanded and analyzed by Southern and Western blots to determine those that contained a disruption of the darA locus . Phenotypic Analysis of Darlin Mutants The development phenotype of the darlin null cells was assessed under three conditions . First , cells were seeded on a bacterial lawn on an SM / 5 agar plate as described ( Vithalani et al . , 1996 ) . Second , cells were plated on nonnutrient agar at 22°C , as previously de - scribed ( Devreotes et al . , 1987 ) . Brieﬂy , cells were washed in devel - opmental buffer ( 5 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 5 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , pH 6 . 2 , 2 mM MgSO 4 , and 200 m M CaCl 2 ) , resuspended at 1 3 10 7 cells / ml , and deposited on the agar plate . Typically , 1 3 10 7 cells were placed on a 35 - mm plate . Once the cells adhered to the surface , the excess buffer was aspirated , and the plates were placed in a humidiﬁed chamber . In wild - type cells , development was complete within 24 h . Cells then were starved under a layer of buffer as described previ - ously ( De Lozanne and Spudich , 1987 ) . Adenylyl Cyclase Assays Enzyme activity was measured on differentiated cells . Brieﬂy , cells were harvested by centrifugation , resuspended at 2 3 10 7 cells / ml in developmental buffer , and shaken for 5 h at 100 rpm with re - peated exogenous pluses of cAMP ( ﬁnal concentration , 50 nM ) . This Figure 3 ( cont ) . ( Driscoll et al . , 1988 ) . After the stop codon at the 3 9 end of the gene , there are four poly ( A ) signals ( AATAAA ) immediately preceding the site of polyadenylation at residue 3158 . The predicted amino acid sequence is shown below the coding sequence . The three peptides that were derived from microsequencing are shown in white letters on a black background . The amino acid sequence is numbered on the left and the nucleic acid sequence on the right . This sequence has the GenBank accession number AF006055 . A Dictyostelium Armadillo - like Protein Vol . 9 , November 1998 3099 starvation period induces the maximal expression of the chemoat - tractant receptor , heterotrimeric G protein subunits , and adenylyl cyclase along with its cytosolic regulators . After a 30 - min treatment with 2 mM caffeine ( to bring the cells to a basal state ) , the cells were washed twice in development buffer without CaCl 2 and resus - pended at 8 3 10 7 cells / ml . Adenylyl cyclase activity was measured in ﬁlter - lysed cells for 2 min at room temperature in the presence of 5 mM MnSO 4 ( intrinsic activity ) , 2 mM MgSO 4 ( basal activity ) , or 40 m M GTP g S and 1 m M cAMP ( G protein - mediated activity ) as pre - viously described ( Parent and Devreotes , 1995 ) . RESULTS Identiﬁcation of a Dictyostelium Protein that Binds to Small GTPases To identify Dictyostelium proteins that interact with members of the rho family of small GTPases , we used a bacterially expressed racE – GST fusion protein as an afﬁnity ligand . The racE – GST fusion protein was bound to glutathione and agarose beads and incu - bated with a Dictyostelium lysate . We subsequently eluted the racE – GST fusion protein from the beads and analyzed them by SDS - PAGE . Using this ap - proach , we identiﬁed a single protein with an appar - ent molecular mass of ; 88 kDa ( p88 ) that bound to racE but not to GST alone ( Figure 1A ) . Moreover , p88 did not bind to a GST fusion protein containing only the C - terminal 40 amino acids of racE or to a GST fusion protein of the tail portion of a Caenorhabditis elegans myosin I protein ( our unpublished results ) . These results suggested that the p88 protein bound speciﬁcally to racE – GST but not to other unrelated GST fusion proteins . To determine the speciﬁcity of binding of p88 to racE , we tested the ability of various other small GTPases to bind to p88 from Dictyostelium lysates . We expressed in bacteria GST fusion proteins of Dictyoste - lium racC and rabB , and human cdc42Hs , TC4 - ran , and R - ras ( Boguski and McCormick , 1993 ; Hall , 1993 ) . The different GST fusion proteins were incubated with Dictyostelium lysates and analyzed as before . As shown in Figure 1A , Dictyostelium proteins of ; 88 kDa also bound to the GST fusions of racC , cdc42Hs , TC4 - ran , and R - ras , but not to that of rabB . However , it was possible that different proteins of ; 88 kDa bound to the different small GTPases . Therefore , we raised a polyclonal antibody against the protein bound by racE ( p88 ) and used it to process a similar gel by Western blot analysis ( Figure 1B ) . This experiment demon - strated that the GST fusion proteins of racE , racC , cdc42Hs , and TC4 - ran were bound by the same 88 - kDa protein that reacted with our antiserum . On the other hand , the 88 - kDa protein that bound to the R - ras – GST fusion protein did not react with our anti - serum and therefore is distinct from p88 . Finally , the rabB - GST fusion protein did not bind to p88 or any other protein of similar size . Once we had determined that p88 bound to a subset of small GTPases , we explored its binding properties in more detail . We ﬁrst examined the binding of p88 to racE in a buffer containing a range of NaCl concentrations from 0 to 0 . 9 M . Although the amount of p88 protein bound to racE – GST de - creased at high salt concentrations , substantial p88 protein remained bound at 0 . 5 M NaCl ( Figure 1C ) . This result suggests that the binding of p88 to racE – GST was not the result of low - afﬁnity ionic interac - tions . Because the binding of many proteins to small GTPases is nucleotide dependent ( Boguski and Mc - Cormick , 1993 ) , we determined whether the binding of p88 was inﬂuenced by the nucleotide bound to racE . We used the constitutively active ( GTP - bound ) and inactive ( GDP - bound ) forms of racE . Proteins corresponding to the GTP - bound V20racE ( valine for a glycine ) and the GDP - bound N25racE ( aspar - agine for a threonine ) were expressed as GST fusion proteins , puriﬁed , and assayed for their ability to bind to p88 from Dictyostelium cytosolic extracts . In the absence of salt , the p88 protein bound equally well to V20racE , N25racE , and wild - type racE . How - ever , when the NaCl concentration was increased to 0 . 4 M , p88 bound preferentially to the GDP - bound N25racE ( Figure 1D ) . Cloning of the Dictyostelium Small GTPase - binding Protein The afﬁnity chromatography approach used to iden - tify p88 was scaled up to purify ; 50 pmol of protein for amino acid microsequencing . Three peptides were isolated and microsequenced . Using the Dic - tyostelium codon bias ( Sharp and Devine , 1989 ) , we designed PCR primers from the sequence of these peptides and ampliﬁed a speciﬁc 700 - bp cDNA product ( Figure 2 , probe A ) . The sequence of the PCR product revealed that peptide 2 was in fact nested between peptides 1 and 3 ( Figure 3 ) , conﬁrm - ing that the three peptides were derived from the same protein . The 700 - bp PCR product was then used in Northern blot analysis to probe total RNA prepared from Dictyostelium vegetative cells . This probe detected an mRNA of ; 2 . 3 kb , a size consis - tent with the molecular mass of the p88 protein Figure 4 . The darA gene is expressed throughout the Dictyostelium developmental program . Northern blot analysis of total RNA har - vested from vegetative wild - type cells ( time 0 ) and every 3 h during development ( times 3 – 24 ) . The blot was probed with a darA PCR probe ( Figure 2 , probe A ) . Molecular weights in kilobases are indi - cated on the left . K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3100 ( Figure 4 , 0 h ) . The same PCR product was used to probe RNA isolated from Dictyostelium cells at dif - ferent stages of the developmental program ( 3 – 24 h poststarvation ) . Figure 4 shows that the mRNA en - coding p88 was expressed throughout the Dictyoste - lium developmental program , suggesting that this protein may be needed throughout the entire life cycle . We then used probe A to screen Dictyostelium genomic and cDNA libraries and obtained multiple overlapping clones . The sequences of the different genomic and cDNA clones were used to compile the sequence of the entire gene encoding the p88 protein ( Figure 3 ) . The open reading frame of this gene ex - tends over 2301 bp and encodes a protein of 766 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 87 . 7 kDa . The coding region is interrupted by three small in - trons , 110 , 100 , and 144 bp in size . As is typical of Dictyostelium genes , these introns and the 5 9 and 3 9 ﬂanking portions of this gene are extremely A - T rich . The 5 9 ﬂanking portion of the gene has two clusters of GC base pairs that are often associated with promoter elements in Dictyostelium ( Driscoll et al . , 1988 ) . At the 3 9 end of the gene there are four consensus poly ( A ) signals ( AATAAA ) immediately preceding the site of polyadenylation . Darlin : a Dictyostelium Protein that Contains Armadillo - like Repeats When we compared the sequence of the gene encod - ing the p88 protein to the GenBank database , we dis - covered that two regions exhibited signiﬁcant homol - ogy to the mammalian GEF , smgGDS ( Yamamoto et al . , 1990 ) ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . The ﬁrst region , amino acids 114 – 249 of p88 , bears 22 % identity and 53 % similarity to amino acids 68 – 203 of smgGDS . Like - wise , the second region , p88 residues 349 – 556 , shows 21 % identity and 43 % similarity to smgGDS residues 220 – 433 . Both regions were aligned by BlastP ( Nation - al Center for Biotechnology Information , Bethesda , MD ) with a probability of 3 3 10 2 6 . Figure 5 . Darlin is similar to mammalian smgGDS and has 11 armadillo - like repeats . ( A ) Diagram indicating the position of armadillo - like repeats in darlin and smgGDS . Each rectangle represents a single repeat . Almost the entire sequence of human smgGDS protein consists of 11 armadillo repeats . The Dictyostelium ( D . d . ) darlin protein also has 11 armadillo - like repeats . The shaded regions ( I – II ) indicate regions of homology between the two proteins as shown in B . ( B ) The darlin sequence was compared with the bovine and human smgGDS sequences from the GenBank database using BlastP . Residues that are identical between the darlin protein and either mammalian smgGDS protein are shown in white letters on a black background . Residues that represent conservative substitutions are shown in black letters on a gray background . The amino acid sequence is numbered on both sides of these regions of similarity . A Dictyostelium Armadillo - like Protein Vol . 9 , November 1998 3101 Mammalian smgGDS is known to contain 11 arma - dillo - like repeats that comprise nearly the entire pro - tein . Originally identiﬁed in the Drosophila armadillo protein ( Peifer and Wieschaus , 1990 ; McCrea et al . , 1991 ) , multiple copies of these 42 amino acid motifs are also found in proteins with diverse functions , such as b - catenin , plakoglobin , the adenomatous polyposis coli gene product , and p120 ( Peifer et al . , 1994 ; Shimizu et al . , 1996 ) . The crystal structure of b - catenin revealed recently that the armadillo repeat consists of three a - he - lices folded tightly against each other and against those from other repeats ( Huber et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , the multiple repeats form an elongated superhelix with a long positively charged groove . Careful analysis of the p88 protein sequence indicated the presence of 11 regions ( illustrated schematically in Figure 5A ) that resemble the armadillo repeat . The alignment of these regions ( Figure 6 ) shows that the motifs present in p88 are distantly related to the armadillo repeat but possess many of the characteristic residues that are important for folding . Therefore , we named this protein darlin , which is encoded by the darA gene . Darlin Is Not an Essential Protein To test the function of darlin in vivo , we generated Dictyostelium mutant cell lines defective in this pro - tein . We constructed a gene disruption vector for the darA gene using the blasticidin - resistance select - able marker ( Figure 2 ) . This vector integrated into the darA locus at a frequency of 15 % . Of 61 blasti - cidin resistant cell lines obtained , 9 had the disrup - tion vector integrated at the darA gene . Southern blot analysis of these cell lines demonstrated that in seven of those mutant cell lines the disruption vec - tor integrated by a double crossover event . In these cell lines , a probe not included in the disruption vector ( probe B ) hybridized to a 5 . 5 - kb Bgl II genomic fragment ( Figure 7A ) . The same probe hy - bridized to a 7 - kb Nco I – Bgl II fragment in wild - type or nonrecombinant cell lines ( Figure 7A ) . The other two recombinant cell lines contained the entire dis - ruption vector inserted into the darA locus by a single crossover event ( our unpublished results ) . To determine whether the disruption of the darA gene resulted in the loss of darlin protein , we analyzed the different cell lines by Western blot analysis using our anti - darlin antibody . This antibody recognizes speciﬁcally the 88 - kDa darlin protein in wild - type or nonrecombinant cell lines ( Figure 7B ) . As expected , the knockout cell lines did not contain any traces of darlin protein ( Figure 7B ) . Because the darlin protein binds to racE , we tested the possibility that darlin plays an important role dur - ing cytokinesis . Darlin 2 and control cells were placed in suspension cultures and monitored for growth . Un - der these conditions , darlin 2 cells grew at the same rate as control cells ( Figure 7C ) and remained uninu - cleate ( our unpublished results ) . This is in contrast with racE null cells or other cytokinesis mutants , which fail to grow in suspension and become large multinucleate cells ( Larochelle et al . , 1996 ) . Therefore , darlin is not essential for cytokinesis . The darlin 2 cultures did have the tendency to reach saturation slightly sooner than wild - type cultures . The titers on the saturated darlin 2 cultures also decreased faster than those of wild - type cultures , but we did not ob - serve a signiﬁcant number of multinucleate cells in these cultures . We also tested the ability of darlin 2 mutants to grow on agar plates with bacteria as a food source and Figure 6 . Alignment of the armadillo - like repeats of darlin with the universal armadillo consensus motif . The 11 recognizable armadillo - like repeats of darlin were aligned with the smgGDS consensus and the universal armadillo consensus sequences according to Peifer et al . , 1994 . Residues that are identical between the darlin repeats and either the smgGDS or the universal armadillo consensus sequences are shown in white letters on a black background . Individual consensus matches within darlin are shown in white letters on a gray background . Dashes in the repeats indicate gaps inserted in the sequence for best alignment . The amino acid sequence is numbered on both sides of the darlin repeats . K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3102 found that they grew to the same extent as control cells ( our unpublished results ) . Therefore , darlin is not essential for phagocytosis or for the digestion of bac - teria under these conditions . Darlin Plays an Important Role During Early Development in Dictyostelium When a Dictyostelium culture depletes the nutrients in the surrounding medium , the starving cells initiate a complex developmental program that culminates with the formation of a fruiting body . To determine whether darlin plays any role during the early stages of development , we placed wild - type and darlin - null cells under starvation buffer on plastic petri dishes . Under these conditions , monolayers of Dictyostelium wild - type cells began development and formed large streams of elongated cells that congregated into very large aggregation centers ( Figure 8 , B and D ) . In con - trast , monolayers of darlin - null cells completely failed Figure 7 . The darA gene is not essential for growth . ( A ) Disruption of the darA gene . Dictyostelium wild - type cells ( DH1 strain ) were trans - formed with a darlin knockout construct ( Figure 2 ) . Genomic DNA from individual clones was digested with Nco I and Bgl II and analyzed on Southern blots probed with probe B ( Figure 2 ) . This probe hybrid - izes to a 7 - kb band in both wild - type and nonrecombinant clones ( 1E2 ) . Integration of the knockout construct at the darA locus results in the formation of a 5 . 5 - kb Bgl II band that hybridizes to probe B ( clones 5A4 and 8F10 ) . ( B ) Disruption of the darA gene abolishes darlin expression . Western blot analysis of cell extracts of wild - type ( DH1 ) , nonrecombi - nant strains ( 1E2 ) , or darA knockout strains ( 5A4 and 8F10 ) probed with an anti - darlin polyclonal antibody . The knockout strains do not have any detectable darlin protein . ( C ) darlin 2 strains grow at normal rates . Cells were placed in suspension culture and monitored for growth for several days . The darlin 2 strains increased in cell density at the same rate as wild - type and control cells . After reaching saturation , the darlin 2 strains decreased in cell density at a faster rate than wild - type and control cells . Figure 8 . Darlin 2 mutants have a defect in early development . Dictyostelium wild - type ( B and D ) and darlin 2 ( A and C ) cells were allowed to grow to conﬂuency on plastic Petri dishes . The media were then replaced by starvation buffer , and the cultures were photographed after 12 h . Wild - type cells formed large aggregation centers that congregated into organized streams of elongated cells . Darlin 2 cells failed to form aggregation centers and streams . In addition these cells did not elongate to the same extent as wild - type cells . Bars : ( A and B ) , 1 mm ; ( C and D ) , 0 . 2 mm . ( E and F ) Cells were plated on nonnutrient agar and allowed to undergo development at room temperature . The pictures were taken 24 h after plating . Wild - type ( F ) and control cells formed normal size slugs that dif - ferentiated into normal fruiting bodies ( our unpublished observa - tions ) . The darlin - null cells ( E ) formed very small aggregating cen - ters that lead to the formation of very small slugs and fruiting bodies . Bar , 0 . 3 cm . A Dictyostelium Armadillo - like Protein Vol . 9 , November 1998 3103 to initiate aggregation and did not form any streams or aggregation centers ( Figure 8 , A and C ) . To further explore the developmental properties of darlin - null cells , we plated them on nonnutrient agar plates . Un - der these conditions , the deposited cells are not sub - merged under liquid and can complete the develop - mental program , forming fruiting bodies within 24 h . Although both wild - type ( Figure 8F ) and darlin - null cells were able to form slugs and fruiting bodies of normal size , the darlin - null mutants formed small ag - gregating centers that lead to the formation of very small slugs ( Figure 8E ) and fruiting bodies . The inability of darlin - null cells to initiate develop - ment under buffer contrasts with their ability to form normal aggregates on agar . This difference could po - tentially be caused by a defect in the signaling path - way mediated by cAMP ( Parent and Devreotes , 1996 ) . To address this possibility , we ﬁrst performed West - ern analysis to assess the presence of key proteins participating in the activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium . In both wild - type and darlin - null cells , we observed equivalent levels of the cAMP receptor , cAR1 , the adenylyl cyclase , and one of its cytosolic regulators , pianissimo ( our unpublished results ) . We then measured the ability of darlin - null lysates to activate adenylyl cyclase in response to G protein stimulation . This response is known to be mediated by the G protein bg subunits and at least two cytosolic regulators ( Chen et al . , 1997 ) . As shown in Figure 9 , the darlin - null cells displayed robust GTP g S - mediated adenylyl cyclase activity that was comparable with that from wild - type cells or control cells . These results demonstrate that the signaling pathway leading to the activation of adenylyl cyclase in the darlin - null cells is intact . Finally , we explored the developmental properties of the darlin - null cells by plating them on agar plates in the presence of bacteria as a food source . The mu - tant cells were able to ingest bacteria and form colo - nies at the same rate as wild - type controls . Further - more , when the bacteria were depleted , the darlin 2 cells initiated development and formed aggregates and fruiting bodies indistinguishable from those formed by wild - type cells under these conditions ( our unpublished observations ) . DISCUSSION We described the isolation and characterization of darlin , a Dictyostelium small GTPase - binding protein . Cloning of the gene encoding darlin revealed that this protein contains multiple repeats similar to those found in armadillo and related proteins ( Peifer et al . , 1994 ) . The three - dimensional structure of the b - cate - nin region composed of armadillo repeats was deter - mined recently ( Huber et al . , 1997 ) . These studies re - vealed that each armadillo repeat is composed of three a - helices that interact extensively with each other and with helices from adjacent repeats to form an elon - gated superhelical structure . Given the similarity of the darlin and armadillo repeats , it seems likely that this region of darlin folds into a similar elongated structure . Furthermore , because the repeat region of armadillo has been shown to be involved in interac - tions with multiple binding partners , we postulate that the repeat region of darlin will be implicated in a similar function . However , unlike armadillo , the repeat region of darlin is mildly acidic ( pI 4 . 7 vs . 8 . 3 ) . There - fore , it is possible that darlin may interact with pro - teins that are more basic than those that bind to arma - dillo . Among those proteins that contain armadillo repeats , darlin displays the most similarity to the mammalian GEF smgGDS ( Yamamoto et al . , 1990 ) . The repeats of smgGDS are the most divergent among those of other proteins . Thus , it seems that the repeats of darlin and smgGDS may represent a divergent subclass of arma - dillo repeats . Originally identiﬁed in bovine brain as a regulator of Rap1B ( Yamamoto et al . , 1990 ) , smgGDS has subse - quently been shown to modulate nucleotide exchange on the rho family proteins as well as other ras - related proteins ( Kawamura et al . , 1991 ; Hiraoka et al . , 1992 ) . Mammalian smgGDS binds to a series of small GTPases including rhoA , cdc42Hs , rac1 , rap1A , rap1B , and the ras splice variant K - ras4B ( Takai et al . , 1993 ) . Figure 9 . Darlin 2 cells have normal adenylyl cyclase activation in response to G protein activation . Adenylyl cyclase activity was measured in cell lysates under basal conditions or in the presence of 40 m M GTP g S and 1 m M cAMP at room temperature for 2 min . The unregulated intrinsic enzyme activity was measured by adding 5 mM MnSO 4 . The G protein - mediated activation was as robust in the darlin - null cells as in either wild - type or nonrecombinant control cells . In addition , the levels of MnSO 4 activity were similar in each cell line , suggesting that they were expressing comparable levels of adenylate cyclase . Results are presented in picomoles per minute per milligrams protein and represent the average of experiments performed in duplicate . K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3104 SmgGDS does not bind to K - ras4A , H - ras , N - ras , or rab3A ( Takai et al . , 1992 ) . Because darlin shares struc - tural homology with smgGDS , we tested the binding of darlin with various small GTP - binding proteins . We found that darlin bound to GST fusion proteins of racE , racC , cdc42Hs , and TC4 - ran . Furthermore , darlin did not bind to GST – R - ras or GST – rabB . Thus , similar to smgGDS , darlin is also a GTPase binding protein that binds to a broad spectrum of GTPases . The similarity of darlin and smgGDS suggests that darlin may also be a GEF . In support of this possibil - ity , we found that the binding of darlin to racE was nucleotide dependent . Darlin bound preferentially to the GDP - loaded N25racE – GST compared with the GTP - loaded V20racE – GST . This is consistent with the relative afﬁnities of GEFs to GDP - and GTP - bound forms of GTPases ( Chuang et al . , 1994 ; Hart et al . , 1994 ; Hart and Powers , 1995 ) . However , we have not been able to demonstrate an exchange activity in assays using bacterially expressed darlin and racE ( Vithalani , unpublished observations ) . Further studies are aimed at purifying both proteins from Dictyostelium extracts to determine whether darlin does possess a GEF ac - tivity . Alternatively , it is possible that darlin is not a GEF . In fact , smgGDS , unlike other exchange factors such as rasGEF or cdc24 , is a poor exchanger . A large molar excess of smgGDS over small G protein is required to observe an appreciable exchange activity ( Hiraoka et al . , 1992 ) . This may indicate that the primary function of smgGDS and darlin is not to exchange nucleotides but to serve as linkers or adaptors , bringing the small GTPase in contact with a particular effector . In this regard , it is interesting that smgGDS has been shown recently to also bind to the armadillo repeat - containing protein KAP3 , a protein associated with the kinesin KIF3A / B molecule ( Shimizu et al . , 1998 ) . Finally , al - though darlin is most similar to smgGDS , they are quite divergent and could certainly have very different functions in vivo . What then is the role of darlin in vivo ? We isolated this protein in our search for binding partners of racE , a small GTPase required for cytokinesis . However , as we have demonstrated here , darlin - null mutant cells are not defective in cytokinesis . Clearly , the interac - tion of racE and darlin is not essential for cell division . A potential explanation for this result is that other proteins may exist that can substitute for darlin during cytokinesis . In this regard it should be noted that in addition to darlin we also found a Dictyostelium pro - tein that bound to GST – R - ras . This protein , which is the same size as darlin , may be similar enough to darlin that it could potentially replace darlin during cytokinesis . The analysis of darlin - null mutants also demon - strated that darlin is not required for phagocytosis , pinocytosis , or cell movement . Interestingly , the mu - tants were not able to initiate development when placed under a layer of starvation buffer . Furthermore , under less stringent plating conditions , the cells gave rise to very small aggregating centers , suggesting that the darlin - null cells were somehow impaired in cell – cell signaling . However , the darlin - null cells showed no alterations in the signal transduction pathway that activates adenylyl cyclase in response to G protein activation . Thus , darlin might be involved in an alter - nate pathway that couples receptor activation and the motility apparatus . For example , aimless , a RasGEF that was recently cloned in Dictyostelium , was also found to be involved in the regulation of chemotaxis ( Insall et al . , 1996 ) . Aimless and darlin thus seem to be members of a class of proteins that regulates the ac - tivity of small G proteins that are involved in the control of directed cell movement , and depending on their target , these modifying proteins present distinct phenotypes . Additional studies will reveal the link between chemoattractant receptors , these small G pro - tein regulators , and the cell motility apparatus . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge Drs . Daniel Lew , Sally Kornbluth , and Channing Der for their generous contributions of cdc42Hs , TC4 - ran , and R - ras expression vectors . Special thanks to Melinda Maready for excellent technical support . We also thank Drs . Daniel Kiehart , Steven Garrett , Terry O’Halloran , Katherine Swenson , and Margaret Titus , and the members of the De Lozanne and O’Halloran labora - tories for useful comments throughout this work . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants GM - 48745 ( to A . D . ) and GM - 28007 ( to P . N . D . ) . REFERENCES Adachi , H . , Hasebe , T . , Yoshinaga , K . , Ohta , T . , and Sutoh , K . ( 1994 ) . Isolation of Dictyostelium discoideum cytokinesis mutants by restric - tion enzyme - mediated integration of the blasticidin S resistance marker . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 205 , 1808 – 1814 . Adachi , H . , Takahashi , Y . , Hasebe , T . , Shirouzu , M . , Yokoyama , S . , and Sutoh , K . ( 1997 ) . Dictyostelium IQGAP - related protein speciﬁ - cally involved in the completion of cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 891 – 898 . Ausubel , F . M . , Brent , R . , Kingston , R . E . , Moore , D . A . , Seidman , J . G . , Smith , J . A . , and Struhl , K . ( 1994 ) . Current protocols in molecular biology . In : Current Protocols , ed . K . Janssen , New York : John Wiley & Sons . Boguski , M . S . , and McCormick , F . ( 1993 ) . Proteins regulating Ras and its relatives . Nature 366 , 643 – 654 . Chen , M . Y . , Long , Y . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1997 ) . A novel cytosolic regulator , pianissimo , is required for chemoattractant receptor and G protein - mediated activation of the twelve transmembrane do - main adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium . Genes Dev . 11 , 3218 – 3231 . Chuang , T . - H . , Xu , X . , Quilliam , L . A . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 1994 ) . SmgGDS stabilizes nucleotide - bound and - free forms of the Rac1 GTP - binding protein and stimulates GTP / GDP exchange through a substituted enzyme mechanism . Biochem . J . 303 , 761 – 767 . De Lozanne , A . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Disruption of the Dictyo - stelium myosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science 236 , 1086 – 1091 . A Dictyostelium Armadillo - like Protein Vol . 9 , November 1998 3105 Devreotes , P . N . , Fontana , D . , Klein , P . , Sherring , J . , and Theibert , A . ( 1987 ) . Transmembrane signaling in Dictyostelium . Methods Cell Biol . 28 , 299 – 331 . Driscoll , D . M . , Pears , C . J . , and Williams , J . G . ( 1988 ) . Characteriza - tion of two divergently transcribed Dictyostelium gene pairs and identiﬁcation of G - rich sequence element lying between them with the characteristics of a basal promoter element . Dev . Genet . 9 , 455 – 468 . Dunn , M . J . ( 1990 ) . Determination of total protein concentration . In : Protein Puriﬁcation Methods , eds . E . L . V . Harris and S . Angal , New York : Oxford University Press , 10 – 66 . Faix , J . , and Dittrich , W . ( 1996 ) . DGAP1 , a homologue of ras GTPase activating proteins that controls growth , cytokinesis , and develop - ment in Dictyostelium discoideum . FEBS Lett . 394 , 251 – 257 . Gerald , N . , Dai , J . , Ting - Beall , H . P . , and De Lozanne , A . ( 1998 ) . A role for Dictyostelium racE in cortical tension and cleavage furrow progression . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 483 – 492 . Hall , A . ( 1993 ) . Ras - related proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 , 265 – 268 . Hart , M . , and Powers , S . ( 1995 ) . Ras - Cdc25 and Rho - Dbl binding assays : complex formation in vitro . Methods Enzymol . 255 , 129 – 135 . Hart , M . J . , Eva , A . , Zangrilli , D . , Aaronson , S . A . , Evans , T . , Cerione , R . A . , and Zheng , Y . ( 1994 ) . Cellular transformation and guanine nucleotide exchange activity are catalyzed by a common domain on the dbl oncogene product . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 62 – 65 . Hiraoka , K . , et al . ( 1992 ) . Both stimulatory and inhibitory GDP / GTP exchange proteins , smg GDS and rho GDI , are active on multiple small GTP - binding proteins . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 182 , 921 – 930 . Huber , A . H . , Nelson , W . J . , and Weis , W . I . ( 1997 ) . Three - dimensional structure of the armadillo repeat region of beta - catenin . Cell 90 , 871 – 882 . Insall , R . H . , Borleis , J . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1996 ) . The aimless RasGEF is required for processing of chemotactic signals through G - protein - coupled receptors in Dictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 6 , 719 – 729 . Kawamura , S . , Kaibuchi , K . , Hiroyoshi , M . , Hata , Y . , and Takai , Y . ( 1991 ) . Stoichiometric interaction of smg p21 with its GDP / GTP exchange protein and its novel action to regulate the translocation of smg p21 between membrane and cytoplasm . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 174 , 1095 – 1102 . Larochelle , D . A . , Vithalani , K . , and De Lozanne , A . ( 1996 ) . A novel member of the rho family of small GTP - binding proteins is specif - ically required for cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1321 – 1330 . Larochelle , D . A . , Vithalani , K . K . , and De Lozanne , A . ( 1997 ) . The role of Dictyostelium racE in cytokinesis : mutational analysis and localization studies by use of green ﬂuorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 935 – 944 . Lee , S . , Escalante , R . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 1997 ) . A ras GAP is essential for cytokinesis and spatial patterning in Dictyostelium . Development 124 , 983 – 996 . Ludbrook , S . B . , Eccleston , J . F . , and Strom , M . ( 1997 ) . Cloning and characterization of a rhoGAP homolog from Dictyostelium discoi - deum . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 15682 – 15686 . McCrea , P . D . , Turck , C . W . , and Gumbiner , B . ( 1991 ) . A homolog of the armadillo protein in Drosophila ( plakoglobin ) associated with E - cadherin . Science 254 , 1359 – 1361 . Nellen , W . , Datta , S . , Reymond , C . , Siversen , A . , Mann , S . , Crowley , T . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 1987 ) . Molecular biology in Dictyostelium : tools and applications . In : Dictyostelium discoideum : Molecular Ap - proaches to Cell Biology , ed . J . A . Spudich , New York : Academic Press , 67 – 100 . Parent , C . A . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1995 ) . Isolation of inactive and G protein - resistant adenylyl cyclase mutants using random mutagen - esis . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 22693 – 22696 . Parent , C . A . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 1996 ) . Molecular genetics of signal transduction in Dictyostelium . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 65 , 411 – 440 . Peifer , M . , Berg , S . , and Reynolds , A . B . ( 1994 ) . A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles . Cell 76 , 789 – 791 . Peifer , M . , and Wieschaus , E . ( 1990 ) . The segment polarity gene armadillo encodes a functionally modular protein that is the Drosoph - ila homolog of human plakoglobin . Cell 63 , 1167 – 1176 . Sharp , P . M . , and Devine , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Codon usage and gene ex - pression level in Dictyostelium discoideum : highly expressed genes do “prefer” optimal codons . Nucleic Acids Res . 17 , 5029 – 5039 . Shimizu , K . , Kawabe , H . , Minami , S . , Honda , T . , Takaishi , K . , Shirataki , H . , and Takai , Y . ( 1996 ) . SMAP , an smgGDS - associating protein having arm repeats and phosphorylated by src tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 27013 – 27017 . Shimizu , K . , Shirataki , H . , Honda , T . , Minami , S . , and Takai , Y . ( 1998 ) . Complex formation of SMAP / KAP3 , a KIF3A / B ATPase motor - associated protein , with a human chromosome - associated polypeptide . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 6591 – 6594 . Smith , D . B . , and Johnson , K . S . ( 1988 ) . Single - step puriﬁcation of polypeptides expressed in Escherichia coli as fusions with glutathi - one S - transferase . Gene 67 , 31 – 40 . Takai , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , Kikuchi , A . , and Kawata , M . ( 1992 ) . Small GTP - binding proteins . Int . Rev . Cytol . 133 , 187 – 230 . Takai , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , Kikuchi , A . , Sasaki , T . , and Shirataki , H . ( 1993 ) . Regulators of small GTPases . Ciba Found . Symp . 176 , 128 – 138 . Vithalani , K . K . , Shoffner , J . D . , and De Lozanne , A . ( 1996 ) . Isolation and characterization of a novel cytokinesis - deﬁcient mutant in Dic - tyostelium discoideum . J . Cell . Biochem . 62 , 290 – 301 . Yamamoto , T . , Kaibuchi , K . , Mizuno , T . , Hiroyoshi , M . , Shirataki , H . , and Takai , Y . ( 1990 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization from bovine brain cytosol of proteins that regulate the GDP / GTP ex - change reaction of smg p21s , ras p21 - like GTP - binding proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 16626 – 16634 . K . K . Vithalani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3106