Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy  The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2003 / 11 / 583 / 13 $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 163 , Number 3 , November 10 , 2003 583 – 595 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200305010 JCB Article 583 ROCK - generated contractility regulates breast epithelial cell differentiation in response to the physical properties of a three - dimensional collagen matrix Michele A . Wozniak , 1 Radhika Desai , 1 Patricia A . Solski , 2 Channing J . Der , 2 and Patricia J . Keely 1 1 Department of Pharmacology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI 53706 2 Department of Pharmacology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC 27510 reast epithelial cells differentiate into tubules when cultured in ﬂoating three - dimensional ( 3D ) collagen gels , but not when the cells are cultured in the same collagen matrix that is attached to the culture dish . These observations suggest that the biophysical properties of collagenous matrices regulate epithelial differentiation , but the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown . Tubulo - genesis required the contraction of ﬂoating collagen gels through Rho and ROCK - mediated contractility . ROCK - mediated contractility diminished Rho activity in a ﬂoating B 3D collagen gel , and corresponded to a loss of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 localized to 3D matrix adhesions . Increasing the density of ﬂoating 3D collagen gels also disrupted tubulogenesis , promoted FAK phosphorylation , and sustained high Rho activity . These data demonstrate the novel ﬁnding that breast epithelial cells sense the rigidity or density of their environment via ROCK - mediated con - tractility and a subsequent down - regulation of Rho and FAK function , which is necessary for breast epithelial tubu - logenesis to occur . Introduction The interaction between breast epithelial cells and the surrounding ECM is necessary for polarization , differentiation , and growth control . In vitro , breast epithelial cells differentiate into polarized duct - like tubules when cultured in a floating three - dimensional ( 3D ) collagen matrix ( Keely et al . , 1995 ) . Interestingly , we and others observe that this differentiation does not occur when the cells are cultured in the same 3D collagen matrix that is attached to the culture dish , making it more rigid ( Parry et al . , 1985 ) . This implies that a bio - physical component is involved in regulating breast epi - thelial tubulogenesis . This observation is notable because women with dense breast tissue , which is associated with a substantial increase in collagen deposition in the stroma , have a four - to sixfold increased risk of developing breast cancer ( Boyd et al . , 1998 ) . However , the mechanism by which breast epithelial cells sense and respond to the me - chanical properties of their surrounding environment is completely unknown . In nonepithelial cells , relatively more is known about the response to biophysical signals . Because all cells contact the ECM through integrins , which link external environmental cues to the actin cytoskeleton , focal adhesions are poised to transduce responses to mechanical stimuli ( Geiger and Bershadsky , 2002 ) . Specifically , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , a key signaling component in focal adhesions , is emerging as a critical player in mechanosensing , as FAK - null fibroblasts cannot detect soft vs . rigid substrata ( Wang et al . , 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of FAK at its autophosphorylation site , Y397 , seems to be involved in this response because FAK is phosphorylated when mechanical strain is applied to smooth muscle and endothelial cells ( Yano et al . , 1996 ; Tang et al . , 1999 ) . Autophosphorylation of FAK at Y397 is also lost in fibroblasts cultured in cell - derived 3D matrices Address correspondence to Patricia J . Keely , Department of Pharmacology , University of Wisconsin , 3630 MSC , 1300 University Ave . , Madison , WI 53706 . Tel . : ( 608 ) 265 - 2398 . Fax : ( 608 ) 262 - 1257 . email : pjkeely @ facstaff . wisc . edu Key words : contractility ; FAK ; Rho ; ROCK ; breast tubulogenesis Abbreviations used in this paper : 2D , two - dimensional ; 3D , three - dimensional ; FAK , focal adhesion kinase ; FAK pY397 , FAK phosphory - lated on tyrosine 397 ; HGF , hepatocyte growth factor ; MLC , myosin light chain ; MLCK , MLC kinase ; ROCK , Rho kinase . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 584 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 ( Cukierman et al . , 2001 ) . Focal adhesion components in these cells were different from those found in characteristic focal adhesions observed on two - dimensional ( 2D ) sub - strates , supporting the theories that focal adhesions may act as mechanosensors ( Geiger and Bershadsky , 2002 ) and that focal adhesions formed under different mechanical en - vironments have different composition and could therefore transmit different signals . The small GTPase Rho is implicated in generating con - tractility necessary to drive focal adhesion and stress fiber formation ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ; Amano et al . , 1997 ) . Rho can be acti - vated downstream of integrin engagement ( Ren et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Arthur et al . , 2000 ) . Because integrins are needed to maintain breast epithelial differentiation ( Keely et al . , 1995 ) , we hypothesized that Rho may also be an important regula - tor of breast tubulogenesis . The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanism by which breast cells sense and respond to differences in the mechanical properties of a 3D collagen matrix . Here , we show that in vitro breast epithelial tubulogenesis is accompanied by a decrease in focal adhesion formation and a loss of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 local - ized to focal adhesions . Although contractility through Rho and its effector Rho Kinase ( ROCK ) is needed to sense ECM rigidity , Rho activity must then be down - regulated , which is necessary for breast epithelial differentiation into tubules . Results The rigidity of the ECM regulates breast epithelial tubulogenesis To investigate the effects of matrix rigidity on breast tubu - logenesis , well - differentiated T47D breast carcinoma cells were cultured in 3D collagen gels ( 1 . 3 mg / ml collagen ) . Gels were detached from the sides and bottom of the dish , allow - ing them to float in medium ( floating ) , or left attached to the dish ( attached ) . Cells in floating 3D gels were able to form duct - like tubules ( Fig . 1 A , c ) , whereas cells in attached 3D gels did not form tubules ( Fig . 1 A , b ) ; rather , the cells spread , and their morphology was similar to cells plated on a 2D collagen substratum ( Fig . 1 A , a ) . This phenomenon was also observed in other breast cell lines . Noncancerous MCF10A breast epithelial cells do not form differentiated structures when plated on a 2D collagen substratum ( Fig . 1 B , a ) or when cultured in an attached 3D gel ( Fig . 1 B , b ) . However , when cultured in a floating 3D collagen gel , MCF10A cells form differentiated acinar - like structures ( Fig . 1 B , c ) . Addition of hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , a growth factor that induces epithelial branching ( Montesano et al . , 1991 ) , promoted tubule formation in cells cultured in floating 3D gels ( Fig . 1 B , d ) . In addition , pri - mary mouse ( unpublished data ) and rat ( Larsen , M . , and C . Jefcoate , personal communication ) mammary epithelial cells also differentiate only in floating 3D collagen matrices . These data suggest that breast epithelial differentiation in floating 3D collagen gels is not specific to particular breast cell lines . Moreover , these results suggest that the biophysical proper - ties of the ECM regulate breast epithelial differentiation . Breast epithelial cells require the (cid:2) 2 (cid:3) 1 integrin for tubu - logenesis ( Keely et al . , 1995 ) and use this integrin to exert force on collagen gels ( Zutter et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , we determined the ability of breast epithelial cells to contract floating collagen gels . T47D cells in floating 3D gels con - tracted the gels by several millimeters ( Fig . 1 C , control ) . MCF10A cells ( Fig . 1 D ) and primary mouse mammary cells ( unpublished data ) also contracted floating 3D collagen gels , suggesting a correlation between cellular contractility and epithelial tubulogenesis . ROCK - mediated contractility regulates breast tubulogenesis and collagen gel contraction Cellular contraction is mediated by myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphorylation , which regulates actin – myosin in - teractions by increasing myosin ATPase activity . MLC ki - nase ( MLCK ) can phosphorylate MLC on S19 and T18 , leading to increased contractility ( Ikebe and Hartshorne , 1985 ) . In addition , the Rho effector ROCK promotes con - tractility by phosphorylating MLC on S19 and by inactivat - ing MLC phosphatase ( Amano et al . , 1996 ; Kimura et al . , 1996 ; Kureishi et al . , 1997 ) . These pathways were inhibited in order to further investi - gate the relationship between cellular contractility and epi - thelial tubulogenesis . Inhibitors were dissolved in media and added to the gels the day after they were cast , when the gels were detached or left attached to the culture dish . Inhibition of Rho , with C3 exoenzyme , or ROCK , with Y27632 , blocked the tubulogenesis of T47D breast cells in floating 3D collagen gels ( Figs . 1 A , d and e ) . These inhibitors also blocked the contraction of the collagen gels by the cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . Addition of C3 or Y27632 at day 6 , when tubules have already formed , also disrupted tubulogenesis ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that cells continue to require Rho - medi - ated contractility even after tubules have formed . In con - trast , inhibition of MLCK with ML7 did not disrupt tubu - logenesis or contraction of the gels ( Fig . 1 A , f , and C ) . The contraction of collagen gels by MCF10A cells was also sensi - tive to inhibition of Rho and ROCK , but not MLCK ( Fig . 1 D ) . Since both ROCK and MLCK lead to MLC phosphoryla - tion and contractility , it was of interest that we find minimal effect of MLCK inhibition on gel contraction and tubulo - genesis . Differences between ROCK and MLCK have also been demonstrated in fibroblasts , where they differ in spatial localization and regulation ( Totsukawa et al . , 2000 ) . In ad - dition , although ROCK and MLCK both modulate MLC phosphorylation , they do so differently . Therefore , inhibi - tion of either kinase may yield different results if differential phosphorylation of MLC on T18 by MLCK is functionally significant . To confirm that contraction downstream of ROCK is re - quired for tubulogenesis , the general inhibitors of actin – myosin contractility , BDM and H7 , were added to the cells . Addition of BDM or H7 the day after the gels were poured blocked the cells from growing ( unpublished data ) . How - ever , when BDM and H7 were added at day 6 , when tubules were already formed , both inhibitors disrupted the tubulo - genesis of T47D cells ( Figs . 1 A , g and h ) and blocked fur - on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 585 ther 3D gel contraction ( unpublished data ) . This finding demonstrates that tubulogenesis functionally requires actin – myosin contractility . Breast cells in a floating 3D collagen gel down - regulate Rho activity Because tubulogenesis required Rho and ROCK ( Fig . 1 A ) , the role of Rho in tubulogenesis was further examined . Sur - prisingly , stable expression of either constitutively activated Rho ( 63L ) or dominant – negative Rho ( 19N ) disrupted tubu - logenesis of T47D breast cells in floating 3D gels ( Figs . 2 A , b and c ) compared with control cells ( Fig . 2 A , a ) . In addi - tion , the misregulation of Rho by the stable expression of constitutively activated exchange factors specific for Rho , Lsc ( Fig . 2 A , d ) or Lfc ( unpublished data ) ( Glaven et al . , 1996 ) , kept Rho activity high ( Fig . 2 C ) , and also disrupted tubulogenesis in cells cultured in floating 3D collagen gels . These findings suggest that proper regulation of Rho activity is a necessary aspect of breast tubulogenesis in a collagen gel . To determine if Rho is regulated in response to the bio - physical properties of the ECM , Rho activity was analyzed , making use of the Rho - binding domain ( RBD ) of the Rho ef - fector , Rhotekin , fused to GST , to pull down Rho - GTP from cell lysates . T47D cells plated on a rigid 2D collagen substra - Figure 1 . The rigidity of the collagen matrix regulates tubulogenesis through Rho - and ROCK - mediated contractility . ( A ) T47D breast epithelial cells were cultured on collagen - coated plastic ( a ) , for 10 d in 3D collagen gels ( 1 . 3 mg / ml ) that were left attached to the dish ( b ) or floated into the culture medium ( c ) . Inhibition of Rho with C3 exoenzyme ( 10 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( d ) or ROCK with Y27632 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) ( e ) in floating 3D collagen gels blocked tubulogenesis , whereas inhibi - tion of MLCK with ML7 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) did not alter tubulogenesis ( f ) . Inhibition of actin – myosin contractility with BDM ( 20 mM ) ( g ) or H - 7 ( 300 (cid:4) M ) ( h ) also blocked tubulogenesis . ( B ) MCF10A cells do not differentiate when cultured on collagen - coated plastic ( a ) or in attached 3D gels ( b ) , but do form acini in a floating collagen gel ( c ) . Addition of HGF ( 50 ng / ml ) pro - motes the formation of tubules in a float - ing gel ( d ) . Bar : ( A and B ) 100 (cid:4) m . ( C ) Inhibition of Rho with C3 ( 10 (cid:4) g / ml ) or ROCK with Y27632 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) , but not MLCK with ML7 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) , blocks con - traction of floating collagen gels by T47D cells . The diameter of the gel was mea - sured every day for 10 d , and graphed as total change in diameter in millimeters ( left ) . The graph on the right shows the extent of gel contraction on the tenth day , expressed as total change in diameter . Data is expressed (cid:5) SEM for four separate experiments . Inhibition of Rho or ROCK significantly ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) decreased gel contraction . ( D ) Contraction of floating gels by MCF10A cells also shows signifi - cant ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) sensitivity to Rho and ROCK inhibition , but not MLCK inhibition . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 586 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 tum sustained high Rho activity during the 60 - min assay , whereas cells incubated with 3D flexible collagen fibers down - regulated Rho activity by 60 min ( Fig . 2 B ) , suggesting that the physical properties of the ECM can regulate Rho activity . T47D cells were then cultured in 3D collagen gels for 1 or 24 h , and Rho activity was analyzed . In the absence of col - lagen stimulation , Rho activity was high ( Fig . 2 C ) . Cells plated on a rigid 2D collagen substratum or in an attached 3D collagen gel sustained high Rho activity , whereas cells in a floating 3D collagen matrix significantly down - regulated Rho activity by 1 or 24 h ( Figs . 2 , C and D , respectively ) . This effect was specific for Rho , since tyrosine phosphoryla - Figure 2 . Rho activity is regulated by ECM rigidity . ( A ) Compared with control cells ( a ) , stable expression of constitutively activated Rho ( 63L ) ( b ) or dominant – negative Rho ( 19N ) ( c ) disrupted tubulogenesis . Expression of truncated , constitutively activated Lsc , an exchange factor specific for Rho , also disrupted tubule formation ( d ) . Bar , 100 (cid:4) m . ( B ) ECM rigidity regulates Rho activity . T47D cells were stimulated in suspension with collagen fibers ( 3D ) or on a collagen coated plate ( 30 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( 2D ) . At the times indicated , cells were lysed , and 30 (cid:4) g RBD – GST was incubated with the cell lysates to pull down active Rho . Active and total Rho was detected by Western blotting . ( C ) Rho activity is significantly down - regulated in a floating 3D collagen gel by 1 h . Quantitation was performed on five individual experiments , and is shown in the bar graph on the right ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 vs . 2D ) . ( D ) Rho activity significantly ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) remains down - regulated in a floating , but not attached , collagen gel after 24 h . Quantitation was performed on four individual experiments . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 587 Figure 3 . Proper ROCK regulation is required for tubulogenesis , collagen gel contraction , and Rho regulation . ( A ) Control cells ( a ) and cells expressing wild - type ( WT ) ROCK ( b ) form tubules in floating collagen gels . Misregulation of ROCK by the expression of constitutively activated ROCK ( (cid:7) 3 ) ( c ) or kinase - dead ROCK ( KD - IA ) ( d ) alter tubulogenesis . Bar , 100 (cid:4) m . ( B ) Expression of ROCK ( KD - IA ) decreases the contraction of floating 3D gels ( * P (cid:8) 0 . 066 ) compared with control cells . ROCK ( WT ) and ( ROCK (cid:7) 3 ) do not significantly affect contraction ( P (cid:8) 0 . 253 and 0 . 750 , respectively compared with control cells ) . ( C ) The presence of Y27632 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) for 1 h significantly ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) reduced the down - regulation of Rho activity , suggesting a negative feedback loop to Rho from its effector , ROCK . In the example shown , two noncontinuous lanes from the same gel have been moved next to one another to remove intervening lanes treated with other inhibitors . The quantitation shown ( right ) is a representation of four similar experiments . ( D ) Rho - GTP was determined in cells cultured in floating 3D collagen gels in the presence or absence of 20 mM BDM or 300 (cid:4) M H7 for 60 min . Both inhibitors prevented the down - regulation of Rho activity . Quantitation was performed on eight individual experiments ( bar graph ; * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 vs . BDM and H7 ) . ( E ) Expression of ROCK ( WT ) significantly decreases Rho activity in a floating 3D collagen gel , but misregulation of ROCK activity by expression of ROCK ( (cid:7) 3 ) or ( KD ) increases Rho activity , suggesting proper regulation of ROCK is required to down - regulate Rho . The experiment was repeated five times and quantitation performed ( bar graph ; * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 vs . control ) . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 588 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 tion of several proteins was stimulated under these condi - tions ( unpublished data ) . This indicates that the rigidity of the ECM can regulate Rho activity in cells cultured in at - tached vs . floating collagen gels . ROCK - mediated contractility assists in the down - regulation of Rho activity , tubulogenesis , and collagen gel contraction ROCK is an effector of Rho that was necessary for tubulo - genesis ( Fig . 1 A , e ) . Since Rho misregulation disrupted tu - bulogenesis and contraction of floating 3D collagen gels , we reasoned that misregulation of ROCK would also affect these processes . T47D cells stably expressing control vector , wild - type ROCK ( WT ) , kinase - dead ROCK that is also de - fective in Rho binding , ROCK ( KD - IA ) , or a deletion mu - tant that renders ROCK constitutively activated , ROCK ( (cid:7) 3 ) , were cultured in floating 3D collagen gels . Cells ex - pressing ROCK ( WT ) formed tubules , although the tubules were more developed ( Fig . 3 A , b ) when compared with control cells ( Fig . 3 A , a ) . The expression of ROCK ( KD - IA ) disrupted tubulogenesis ; these cells formed large , abnor - mal structures ( Fig . 3 A , d ) . Because we used the ROCK ( KD - IA ) construct that does not bind to Rho , the effect is not likely due to nonspecific sequestration of Rho by ROCK ( KD - IA ) . Cells expressing ROCK ( (cid:7) 3 ) had altered larger tu - bules that often had projections that attached the tubules to one another ( Fig . 3 A , c ) . The ability of these cells to contract floating 3D gels was also examined . Compared with control cells , cells expressing ROCK ( KD - IA ) decreased contraction of the surrounding matrix ( Fig . 3 B ) . These data support the hypothesis that ROCK mediates collagen gel contraction . Finally , Rho activity was analyzed in the presence of the ROCK inhibitor , Y27632 , to determine if ROCK - mediated contractility modulates Rho activity . Inhibition of ROCK significantly reduced the ability of the cells to down - regulate Rho in a floating 3D gel ( Fig . 3 C ) . Furthermore , inhibition of contractility with BDM or H7 in cells in floating gels also kept Rho activity significantly high ( Fig . 3 D ) , indicating that contractility downstream of ROCK helps down - regu - late Rho activity . Because this suggests a ROCK - dependent feedback loop regulating Rho activity , Rho activity was as - sessed in the above cell lines . Cells expressing ROCK ( WT ) had significant decreased Rho activity compared with con - trol cells ( Fig . 3 E ) when cultured in a floating 3D collagen gel for 1 h , again demonstrating that ROCK down - regulates Rho . Cells expressing ROCK ( KD - IA ) retained high Rho activity , confirming the effect of the pharmacological inhibi - tor . Cells expressing ROCK ( (cid:7) 3 ) also retained high Rho ac - tivity , suggesting that , like Rho , ROCK is highly regulated and its misregulation will alter Rho activity , tubulogenesis , and cellular contraction . ECM rigidity and cellular contractility regulate the localization of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 to focal adhesions Because Rho is implicated in focal adhesion formation , and we find that Rho is regulated by ECM rigidity , the structure and composition of focal adhesions were analyzed in T47D cells cultured in attached and floating 3D collagen gels . Cells in 3D gels were immunostained for the focal adhesion com - ponents FAK and vinculin . Cells in floating 3D gels , which form tubules , localized vinculin to cell – cell junctions and to the periphery of cells , but notably not to adhesive structures ( Fig . 4 , insets ) . FAK immunostaining was diffuse in cells in floating collagen gels . This differed from cells in attached gels , in which FAK and vinculin localized to small punctate matrix adhesions located at extensions in the cell periphery ( Fig . 4 ) . Cells cultured in floating 3D gels had subcortical actin at sites of cell – cell junctions , whereas cells in attached 3D gels still formed small actin fibers localized at protruding cell peripheries ( Fig . 4 ) . Cells in floating 3D gels did not form these extensions into the collagen matrix . Because protrusive activity is often associated with Arp2 / 3 activity ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) , cells were also stained for p16 , a component of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cells in floating 3D gels had cytoplasmic p16 staining , which did not localize to ad - hesions at the cell – ECM interface ( Fig . 4 ) . However , cells in attached 3D gels showed punctate p16 staining at the cell periphery and enhanced staining at cell protrusions extend - ing into the ECM ( Fig . 4 ) . Because FAK phosphorylation at Y397 is regulated by the physical properties of the matrix ( Cukierman et al . , 2001 ) , cells in attached or floating collagen gels were analyzed for FAK phosphorylated at Y397 ( pY397 ) . Breast cells cultured on 2D collagen - coated coverslips had prominent FAK pY397 at focal adhesions ( Fig . 5 A , a ) . Cells in attached col - lagen gels also retained FAK pY397 localized to 3D matrix adhesions extending from the cells ( Fig . 5 A , c ) . However , breast cells cultured in floating 3D collagen gels , a condition that promotes tubulogenesis ( Fig . 1 A , c ) , lost the localiza - tion of FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions ( Fig . 5 A , b ) , even though these cells did show diffuse cytoplasmic FAK staining ( Fig . 4 ) . Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of FAK pY397 were not significantly different in cells in attached vs . floating gels ( Fig . 5 C ) , indicating that ECM rigidity is not regulating the phosphorylation of FAK at this site , but rather the localization of FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions . FAK pY397 localization was determined in cells cultured in floating gels that had been treated with the Rho inhibitor , C3 exoenzyme , or the ROCK inhibitor , Y27632 , both of which blocked contraction and tubulogenesis . These cells retained FAK pY397 localized to punctate matrix adhesions ( Fig . 5 A , d and e , respectively ) . In contrast , treatment with the MLCK inhibitor , ML7 , which did not block contraction or tubulo - genesis , did not localize FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions ( Fig . 5 A , f ) . Treatment with the more general contractility inhibi - tors , BDM ( Fig . 5 B , a ) or H7 ( Fig . 5 B , b ) , localized FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions , further suggesting a role for con - traction of the collagen matrix in down - regulation of Rho ac - tivity and matrix adhesions . ECM rigidity regulates breast epithelial cell proliferation The above results suggest that ROCK - mediated cellular contractility regulates the recruitment of FAK pY397 into matrix adhesions , and implicate this event in regulating breast differentiation into tubules . An important aspect of on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 589 epithelial differentiation is controlled cell growth . It has been reported that FAK regulates cell cycle progression into S phase and that this function of FAK is dependent on phos - phorylation on Y397 . Because we see differences in the lo - calization of FAK pY397 in attached vs . floating collagen gels , cell proliferation was examined under these conditions . Cells were cultured in attached or floating 3D gels for 7 d and then stained for Ki67 , a marker of proliferation ( Brown and Gatter , 2002 ) . Cells cultured in an attached gel show a significant increase in proliferation when compared with cells in a floating gel ( Fig . 6 ) . This demonstrates an associa - tion between FAK activity and cell proliferation . Further - more , these data suggest that increased ECM rigidity can increase epithelial proliferation , which will likely disrupt normal tubule structure . Collagen density regulates tubulogenesis , cellular contraction , and FAK phosphorylation at Y397 In vivo , differences in the biophysical properties of the ECM are potentially important . In the breast , an increase in stro - mal density , which corresponds to an increase in collagen and fibronectin deposition and an increase in fibroblasts , is correlated with a significant increased risk of developing breast cancer ( Boyd et al . , 1998 ) . We hypothesize that an in - crease in collagen concentration in vivo causes an increase in the rigidity of the ECM , which may promote tumor forma - tion due to increased FAK and Rho activity , which will dis - rupt differentiation and promote cellular proliferation . To test whether altering collagen density alone , in the ab - sence of other ECM components and fibroblasts , is suffi - cient to alter breast cell behavior , T47D cells were cultured Figure 4 . The rigidity of the matrix regulates 3D matrix adhesion formation in breast epithelial cells . Components of focal adhesions were analyzed by immunostaining T47D cells cultured in collagen gels ( 1 . 3 mg / ml ) . Breast cells in attached , but not floating , 3D gels show FAK , vinculin , and p16 localized to small punctate 3D matrix adhesions ( insets ) . Actin fibers are also localized to these structures ( insets ) . Bar : 50 (cid:4) m ; ( insets ) 10 (cid:4) m . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 590 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 in gels of varying collagen concentrations . Collagen gels composed of higher concentrations of collagen were less translucent than gels made of lower concentrations of col - lagen , correlating with an increase in density ( Demou and McIntire , 2002 ) . Low concentrations of collagen , from 0 . 8 mg / ml up to 1 . 5 mg / ml , promoted tubulogenesis in floating 3D gels ( Fig . 7 A , left panels ) . However , when the collagen concentration was increased over a narrow range , tubulogen - esis was disrupted , even though these cells were in floating gels , which normally promote tubulogenesis ( Fig . 7 A ) . This indicates that an increase in collagen concentration alone is sufficient to disrupt tubulogenesis . We do not think this ef - fect is due to increased integrin ligand binding due to higher concentrations of collagen , since tubulogenesis and localiza - Figure 5 . The rigidity of the matrix and cellular contractility regulates the localization of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 at 3D matrix adhesions . ( A ) FAK phosphorylated at Y397 is localized to focal adhesions when T47D cells are plated on 2D collagen - coated coverslips ( a ) . In a floating 3D gel , FAK phosphorylation at Y397 is minimal ( b ) . Cells cultured in an attached 3D collagen gel localized FAK pY397 to punctate adhesions ( c ) . Cells in floating 3D gels treated with C3 ( 10 (cid:4) g / ml ) ( d ) or Y27632 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) ( e ) localized FAK pY397 to small 3D matrix adhesions ( see arrows ) , whereas cells treated with ML7 ( 10 (cid:4) M ) lost this localization ( f ) . FAK pY397 is shown in red , and nuclei are shown in blue . Bar : ( a ) 25 (cid:4) m ; ( b – f ) 50 (cid:4) m . ( B ) Cells treated with BDM ( 20 mM ) ( a ) or H7 ( 300 (cid:4) M ) ( b ) also localized FAK pY397 to punctuate matrix adhesions . Bar , 50 (cid:4) m . ( C ) The localization , and not phosphorylation , of FAK Y397 is regulated by ECM rigidity . Western blot analysis of FAK pY397 in attached vs . floating collagen gels ( 1 . 3 mg / ml ) show statistically similar ( P (cid:8) 0 . 8014 ) levels of phosphorylation and FAK expression . The quantitation represents four individual experiments ( right ) . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 591 tion of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 were also altered when gels of identical collagen concentrations were compared in attached vs . floating gels ( Figs . 1 A and 5 A ) . This supports the notion that the biophysical properties of the ECM , and not simply its concentration , are determinants for tubulo - genesis and phosphorylation of FAK . Altering the collagen concentration also altered the ability of the cells to contract the gel . T47D breast cells cultured in gels composed of high concentrations of collagen showed a significant decrease in their ability to contract a floating 3D collagen gel ( Fig . 7 B ) . The most straightforward explana - tion is that the increased density created by greater collagen concentrations makes the gel more rigid so that the cells can - not contract the gel , comparable to the situation cells en - counter in an attached 3D collagen gel . Phosphorylation of FAK at Y397 was also analyzed in these cells . Breast cells in 3D gels composed of lower con - centrations of collagen ( (cid:9) 1 . 5 mg / ml ) , which formed tu - bules , had diffuse FAK pY397 throughout the cell ( Fig . 7 A , right panels ) . However , cells cultured in gels composed of higher concentrations of collagen ( (cid:10) 1 . 8 mg / ml ) , in which tubulogenesis was disrupted , localized FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions ( Fig . 7 A ) . Finally , we performed the Rho activity assay on cells cul - tured in floating collagen gels of high concentration ( 1 . 8 mg / ml ) . Cells in floating collagen gels composed of 1 . 3 mg / ml have decreased Rho activity compared with cells in attached gels ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . However , cells cultured in high con - centration collagen significantly sustained high Rho activity at 1 and 24 h ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . Together , these data indicate that an increase in collagen density can promote a phenotype similar to an attached 3D collagen gel : the cells cannot con - tract the gel , Rho activity remains high , FAK pY397 is local - ized to matrix adhesions , and tubulogenesis is disrupted . Discussion It has long been appreciated that breast epithelial cells main - tain differentiated structures and produce milk proteins unique to differentiated cells if they are cultured in a floating , but not an attached , 3D collagen gel ( Emerman and Pitelka , 1977 ; Lee et al . , 1984 ) . Here , we set out to determine how breast cells sense and respond to the rigidity of their ECM , and how this regulates breast epithelial tubulogenesis . We propose that breast cells use ROCK - mediated con - tractility as a sensor to detect the rigidity of the ECM ( Fig . 8 ) . In a flexible ECM ( such as a floating 3D collagen gel ) , cellular contraction on the matrix is met with minimal re - sistance , which then feeds back to diminish Rho activity , focal adhesion formation , and the localization of FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions , resulting in breast tubulogene - sis . In cells encountering a rigid or dense ECM , contractile forces do not contract the matrix , but rather result in ten - sion generated within the cell . In this case , Rho activity re - mains high and matrix adhesions are formed that include FAK pY397 . We hypothesize that formation of 3D matrix adhesions containing FAK pY397 fundamentally alters subsequent signaling events in rigid vs . flexible matrices , leading to an increase in cell proliferation and a disruption of breast epithelial tubulogenesis . The regulation of Rho activity by ECM rigidity Here , we report the novel observation that Rho activity is regulated by the biophysical properties of the ECM . Breast cells in flexible , floating 3D collagen gels down - regulate Rho activity , whereas cells in rigid , attached 3D collagen gels do not . Precise regulation of Rho activity is required for proper breast epithelial differentiation , as misregulation of Rho ac - tivity by expression of either constitutively active or domi - nant – negative Rho disrupts tubulogenesis ( Fig . 2 ) . Surprisingly , the Rho effector , ROCK , mediates down - regulation of Rho in floating 3D matrices . This suggests the presence of a regulatory feedback loop that enhances the re - sponse of cells to matrix rigidity . The mechanism by which this occurs is currently unknown , but likely reflects changes in either Rho GEFs or GAPs in a manner regulated by con - tractility and the biophysical properties of the ECM . It is therefore interesting that down - regulation of Rho through p190RhoGAPB has been implicated in mammary gland de - velopment by regulating terminal end bud formation and ductal morphogenesis by controlling IGF signaling ( Chakra - varty et al . , 2000 , 2003 ) . This suggests that proper forma - tion of in vivo differentiated structures in the breast requires precise regulation of Rho activity , which is consistent with our in vitro observations . There are important implications for these observations . Besides promoting focal adhesion and stress fiber for - mation , Rho has several other effectors that direct sig - naling events leading to cell proliferation , gene expression , cell motility , transformation , and invasion . Differentiated breast epithelium exists in a highly regulated state in which cellular proliferation and motility are diminished to main - tain tissue organization . Therefore , our observation that matrix rigidity regulates Rho activity may clarify how ma - trix rigidity regulates breast epithelial differentiation . If Rho activity remained high to promote proliferation , mo - tility , and focal adhesion formation , it is likely that breast cells would lose their differentiated organization , which is the case in attached gels . Figure 6 . ECM rigidity regulates breast epithelial proliferation . T47D cells were cultured in floating and attached 3D collagen gels and allowed to grow for 7 d . The gels were then fixed and costained for Ki67 , a marker of proliferation , and bisbenzimide , which will stain all nuclei regardless of cell cycle state . Cells in floating collagen gels have significantly ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) decreased proliferation compared with cells in attached gels . The graph is representative of three individual experiments . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 592 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 ROCK - generated contractility is required for breast tubulogenesis in 3D floating gels The Rho effector , ROCK , is implicated in generating actin – myosin contractility , and here we find that this contractility regulates breast tubulogenesis . Although ROCK has several potential effectors , our data suggests a role for ROCK effects on contractility per se , since tubulogenesis ( Fig . 1 A ) and the decrease in Rho activity ( Fig . 3 D ) could be inhibited by the actin – myosin inhibitors , BDM or H7 . Indeed , gel contrac - tion precedes tubulogenesis since contraction is observed within the first 24 h and is greatest through day 6 , followed by tubulogenesis , which is first observed around days 5 or 6 . ROCK has also been shown to regulate tubulogenesis or gel contraction in other systems . Fibroblasts require both ROCK and FAK activity to contract 3D matrices composed of fibronectin and fibrin ( Midwood and Schwarzbauer , 2002 ) , which is consistent with our observations that ROCK is an important regulator of matrix contraction . In MDCK cells cultured in a 3D matrix , inhibition of ROCK disrupts the formation of cysts and causes a striking increase in the number and length of cellular protrusions ( Yu et al . , 2003 ) . This is consistent with our data , where inhibition of ROCK also disrupts normal tubule formation . Together , these data implicate ROCK as an important regulator of ep - ithelial contractility and tubulogenesis . In contrast to these findings , ROCK has been implicated as a negative regulator of adherens junctions in MDCK cells growing as a monolayer ( Sahai and Marshall , 2002 ) . Because tubulogenesis requires adherens junction formation , these results predict that inhibiting ROCK would stabilize junc - tions and enhance tubule formation . However , since we ob - serve the opposite , that inhibition of ROCK disrupts tubule formation , our results suggest a role for ROCK in tubulo - genesis other than on adherens junctions . Alternatively , the difference may relate to the examination by Sahai and Mar - shall ( 2002 ) of junction formation in cell monolayers plated Figure 7 . Collagen density regulates tubulogenesis , the localization of FAK phosphorylation at Y397 , and cellular contraction . ( A ) T47D cells were cultured in floating collagen gels composed of increasing concentrations of collagen , as indicated . Collagen concentrations equal to or above 1 . 8 mg / ml disrupt tubulogenesis ( left panels ) . Bar , 100 (cid:4) m . Increasing collagen concentration also increased FAK pY397 localized to 3D matrix adhesions ( right panels ) . Bar , 50 (cid:4) m . ( B ) Increasingly dense collagen gels significantly ( * P (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) decrease the contraction of floating 3D collagen gels by T47D breast epithelial cells . The data are an average of three experiments . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 593 on a rigid 2D substratum rather than in a 3D matrix . ROCK - mediated contraction may pull adherens junctions apart in cells encountering opposing forces supplied by a rigid matrix , but may help to bring these same junctions to - gether when cells are in a flexible matrix . Focal adhesion formation and the localization of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 is regulated by ECM rigidity Focal adhesions are emerging as mechanosensors that relay biophysical information to the cell through integrins . Sev - eral experiments demonstrate that external force exerted on integrins increases the strength and rigidity of the linkage between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ; Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Balaban et al . , 2001 ; Rive - line et al . , 2001 ; Koo et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , cells within a rigid or dense collagen matrix will encounter a restraining force predicted to increase integrin – cytoskeletal linkages ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ; Balaban et al . , 2001 ; Riveline et al . , 2001 ; Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; Tan et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , cells in a floating 3D gel will encounter an unrestrained ma - trix , with the prediction that integrin attachments to the cy - toskeleton will not be strengthened . Consistent with these observations , we find that matrix adhesions are not seen in flexible 3D gels , but are observed in attached gels . Like breast epithelial cells , MDCK cells also down - regulate focal adhesions in a collagen gel , when compared with cells plated on collagen ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) . Focal adhesion formation is significant because it will likely affect the signaling com - plexes formed , which will regulate subsequent cellular be - havior . The phosphorylation of FAK at Y397 in fibroblasts is reg - ulated by the physical properties of the ECM ( Cukierman et al . , 2001 ) . We now demonstrate that this occurs in epithelial cells , as cells in attached , but not floating , 3D collagen gels localize autophosphorylated FAK to matrix adhesions . This observation has many important implications , and suggests that cells in a floating 3D matrix do not receive the same biochemical signals as cells in an attached 3D matrix . Phos - phorylation of FAK at Y397 is a key signaling event , linking FAK to cell proliferation , survival , and migration ( Chen et al . , 1996 ; Zhao et al . , 1998 ; Han et al . , 2000 ; for review see Schwartz and Assoian , 2001 ) , all of which are regulated when breast cells differentiate . Since FAK autophosphoryla - tion regulates cell cycle control ( Zhao et al . , 1998 ) , this may explain why breast cells cultured in floating 3D gels have de - creased proliferation compared with cells in attached gels ( Fig . 6 ) . We find that inhibition of Rho , ROCK , or actin – myosin contractility promotes the localization of FAK pY397 to 3D matrix adhesions . It is surprising that we still see FAK phos - phorylated at this site , since decreased Rho activity is nor - mally associated with decreased FAK activity , whereas acti - vation of Rho increases FAK phosphorylation ( Kumagai et al . , 1993 ; Clark et al . , 1998 ) . Given the many biochemical and morphological differences we see in breast cells cultured on 2D vs . 3D matrices , it is likely that Rho regulates FAK differently in a 3D matrix . Collagen density and breast carcinoma An increase in stromal density is a risk factor for breast carci - noma and involves an increase in the number of fibroblasts in the stroma , as well as an increase in collagen deposition ( Guo et al . , 2001 ) . However , it is not known which of these factors contributes to the observed increased carcinoma risk associated with dense breast tissue . Our results demonstrate the novel finding that an increase in collagen density alone is sufficient to alter cellular behavior and disrupt tubulogenesis . We also find that Rho activity and the localization of FAK pY397 to matrix adhesions is regulated by collagen density . This result implies that increased collagen density in the breast could enhance signaling through FAK , although this remains to be tested in an in vivo environment . Because phosphorylation at Y397 links FAK to downstream path - ways leading to cell proliferation and migration , an intrigu - ing possibility is that phosphorylation at this site contributes to the effects of breast stromal density on the development of breast carcinoma . The mechanism by which cells sense and respond to the biophysical properties of their environment is physiologi - cally important . Although emerging work places FAK and focal adhesions as key mechanosensors in fibroblasts , almost Figure 8 . Model for regulation of breast epithelial differentiation by the rigidity of 3D matrices . The (cid:2) 2 (cid:3) 1 integrin binds to collagen , leading to Rho activation . Rho activates its effector , ROCK , to promote cellular contractility . If the cells are unable to contract their matrix ; that is , if the matrix is rigid , attached , or dense , tension is generated within the cell . Rho activity remains high and promotes 3D matrix adhesion formation including FAK phosphorylated at Y397 . This phosphorylation event links a rigid matrix to subsequent cell prolifer - ation and the disruption of tubulogenesis . If the cells are able to contract their matrix ( if the matrix is flexible , floating , or composed of low collagen density ) , ROCK down - regulates Rho activity . Matrix adhesions are changed and FAK phosphorylated at Y397 is not local - ized to adhesive structures , fundamentally altering subsequent signaling events and resulting in differentiation into tubules . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy 594 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 163 , Number 3 , 2003 nothing is known about how epithelial cells interpret me - chanical signals from the ECM . This study demonstrates the novel finding that ROCK - mediated contractility is essential for breast epithelial cells to sense the biophysical properties of their environment and to respond by down - regulating Rho and FAK activity and altering focal adhesions . The im - plications of this are significant , as cells that fail to do so , ei - ther due to a rigid matrix or increasing collagen density , can - not correctly differentiate into tubules . Materials and methods Collagen gel culture T47D and MCF10A cells were obtained from American Type Culture Col - lection and maintained as described previously ( Keely et al . , 1995 ) . T47D cells were stably transfected with Rho19N in pZIP , or pZIP vector alone , truncated Lfc and Lsc ( a gift from Dr . Ian Whitehead , New Jersey Medical School , Newark , NJ ) Rho63L , or pCAG - myc - ROCK KD - IA ( a kinase - dead and non - Rho binding mutant ) , - ROCK (cid:7) 3 ( truncated after aa 727 , render - ing ROCK constitutively active ) , - ROCK WT , or pCAG vector alone ( a gift from Dr . Shuh Narumiya , Kyoto University , Kyoto , Japan ) ( Ishizaki et al . , 1997 ) , and expression of constructs verified by immunoblotting , using ap - proaches described previously ( Keely et al . , 1997 ) . Primary mouse mam - mary epithelial cells ( MECs ) were a gift from Dr . Caroline Alexander ( Uni - versity of Wisconsin , Madison , WI ) . T47D and MCF10A breast epithelial cells were cultured in collagen type I gels at a final collagen concentration of 1 . 3 mg / ml as previously de - scribed ( Keely et al . , 1995 ) . The day after the gels were poured , one set of gels was left attached to the dish ( attached ) and one set of gels was de - tached from the sides and bottom of the dish ( floating ) . Media with or with - out inhibitors was added to the gels at this time , unless otherwise specified in the text . The gels were fed ( with inhibitors , if they were used in the ex - periment ) approximately every 5 d . For MCF10A cells , media with or with - out 50 ng / ml HGF ( Calbiochem ) was added to the gels at this time . C3 exoenzyme was purified in bacteria and used at 10 (cid:4) g / ml . Y27632 ( Welfide Corporation ) was used at 10 (cid:4) M , ML7 ( Calbiochem ) was used at 10 (cid:4) M or 20 (cid:4) M , 2 , 3 - Butanedione - Monoxime ( BDM ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was used at 20 mM , and 1 - ( 5 - isoquinolinylsulfonyl ) - 2 - methylpiperazine ( H - 7 ) ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was used at 300 (cid:4) M . The cells were grown for 7 – 10 d , and phase contrast pictures were taken to assess morphology using a Nikon 35 mm camera attached to a TE300 Nikon inverted microscope . For contraction studies , the diameter of the gels was measured and re - corded every day for 10 d . Three to five experiments were performed and statistically analyzed using Prism GraphPad software . For collagen con - centration studies , collagen gels were made composed of increasing con - centrations of collagen ( BD Bioscience ) . Morphology and FAK phosphory - lation ( below ) were assessed after 7 d . Rho activity assays Subconfluent T47D cells were harvested in 0 . 5 mM EDTA in PBS and resus - pended in 5 mg / ml fatty acid – free BSA ( ICN Biomedicals ) in RPMI , and equal numbers of cells were stimulated with collagen . For 3D flexible collagen , collagen was neutralized to form fibers , which were added to the cells in sus - pension . Rigid collagen was created by coating petri plates with 30 (cid:4) g / ml collagen and allowing the cells to adhere to the collagen . For analysis of Rho activity in 3D collagen gels , the gels were made as described above contain - ing (cid:2) 20 million cells . If the gel was to be incubated for 1 h , the gel was made with BSA in RPMI in order to determine the effect of collagen alone on the cells , and without serum stimulation . However , for 24 h time points , the gels were made with full medium , including serum , to prevent cell death . The gels were allowed to polymerize for 1 h and then one gel released and another gel left attached . These gels were then incubated for 1 or 24 h at 37 (cid:11) and then the assay performed . Cells in gels were lysed in TBS buffer containing 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Triton X - 100 , protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and sodium pervanadate . RBD - GST pull - down assays were per - formed as described ( Arthur et al . , 2000 ) . Samples were run on a SDS - PAGE gel , transferred to a PVDF membrane , and the membrane was probed with anti - Rho ( 1 : 250 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) followed by anti – mouse HRP ( 1 : 5000 ; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) . Rho was detected using ECL substrate ( Amersham Biosciences ) . For inhibitor studies , cells were pretreated with 10 (cid:4) M Y27632 , 20 mM BDM , or 300 (cid:4) M H7 for 15 min at 37 (cid:11) C before collagen stimulation , and then Rho - GTP was determined . To quantitate results , the bands from four to eight individual experi - ments ( pairs of active and total Rho ) were quantitated using ImageQuant software ( Molecular Dynamics ) . The quantitation was statistically analyzed using Prism GraphPad software . Immunoblotting for FAK Y397 Lysates were prepared from cells cultured in 3D collagen gels for 1 h as described above . Relative levels of FAK phosphorylated at Y397 were de - termined as previously described ( Kwong et al . , 2003 ) . Immunofluorescence Cells were grown in collagen gels for 7 – 10 d . The gels were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature and washed for 10 min with PBS while shaking , and then 0 . 15 M glycine in PBS was added to the gels to quench the formaldehyde . After washing again with PBS for 10 min , 0 . 02 % Triton X - 100 in PBS was added for 10 min to per - meabilize the cells . The gels were washed with PBS for 10 min and then blocked overnight at 4 (cid:11) with 1 % fatty acid – free BSA , 1 % donkey serum in PBS . The gels were then soaked in 100 (cid:4) l PBS containing primary anti - body diluted in PBS with 1 % donkey serum for 30 min at room tempera - ture or overnight at 4 (cid:11) C . Antibodies used are as follows : anti - FAK Y397 ( 1 : 100 ; Biosource International ) , anti - vinculin ( 1 : 400 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti - FAK ( 1 : 200 ; Upstate Biotechnology ) , anti - Ki67 ( 1 : 80 ; a gift from Dr . An - dreas Friedl , University of Wisconsin ) , and anti - p16 ( 1 : 400 ; a gift from Dr . William Bement , University of Wisconsin ) . After extensive washing in PBS , 100 (cid:4) l anti – rabbit TRITC ( 1 : 100 ; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) or anti – mouse TRITC ( 1 : 100 ; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) with phalloidin - FITC ( 1 : 1000 ; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ) , Bisbenz - imide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 1 % donkey serum in PBS was added for 30 min at room temperature . The gels were washed again twice in PBS for 10 min and in water for 10 min , and mounted on a slide with 30 (cid:4) l Prolong Antifade mounting medium ( Molecular Probes ) . To ensure staining was specific , gels were also stained only for the secondary antibody , which showed no specific staining ( unpublished data ) . For cell proliferation stud - ies , 200 nuclei ( cells ) per experiment were counted along with the number of Ki67 - positive cells . Statistical analysis was performed using Prism GraphPad software . Immunostaining was analyzed by epifluorescence us - ing a TE300 Nikon inverted microscope equipped with a Photometrics CoolSnap fx CCD camera . Images were collected and deconvolution per - formed using Inovision software . The authors are grateful to Dr . Shuh Narumiya for ROCK constructs , to Dr . Ian Whitehead for Lfc and Lsc , to Dr . Deane Mosher for providing C3 ex - oenzyme , to Dr . Caroline Alexander and Bob Liu for providing primary mouse mammary epithelial cells , to Dr . William Bement for providing the p16 antibody , to Dr . Andreas Friedl for providing the Ki67 antibody , to Drs . Keith Burridge and William Arthur for providing the RBD - GST con - struct and technical advice for RhoGTP assays , and to Drs . Caroline Alex - ander and Jeff Hardin for critically reading the manuscript . This work was supported by grant RPG - 00 - 339 from the American Can - cer Society ( to P . J . Keely ) . Submitted : 2 May 2003 Accepted : 17 September 2003 References Amano , M . , K . Chihara , K . Kimura , Y . Fukata , N . Nakamura , Y . Matsuura , and K . Kaibuchi . 1997 . Formation of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions en - hanced by Rho - kinase . Science . 275 : 1308 – 1311 . Amano , M . , M . Ito , K . Kimura , Y . Fukata , K . Chihara , T . Nakano , Y . Matsuura , and K . Kaibuchi . 1996 . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 20246 – 20249 . Arthur , W . T . , L . A . Petch , and K . Burridge . 2000 . Integrin engagement suppresses RhoA activity via a c - Src - dependent mechanism . Curr . Biol . 10 : 719 – 722 . Balaban , N . Q . , U . S . Schwarz , D . Riveline , P . Goichberg , G . Tzur , I . Sabanay , D . Mahalu , S . Safran , A . Bershadsky , L . Addadi , and B . Geiger . 2001 . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micro - patterned substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 466 – 472 . Blanchoin , L . , K . J . Amann , H . N . Higgs , J . B . Marchand , D . A . Kaiser , and T . D . Pollard . 2000 . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nu - cleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature . 404 : 1007 – 1011 . Boyd , N . F . , G . A . Lockwood , J . W . Byng , D . L . Tritchler , and M . J . Yaffe . 1998 . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003 Th e J ou r n a l o f C e ll B i o l o gy ROCK regulates breast differentiation | Wozniak et al . 595 Mammographic densities and breast cancer risk . Cancer Epidemiol . Biomark - ers Prev . 7 : 1133 – 1144 . Brown , D . , and K . Gatter . 2002 . KI67 protein : the immaculate deception ? Histo - pathology . 40 : 2 – 11 . Chakravarty , G . , D . Roy , M . Gonzales , J . Gay , A . Contreras , and J . M . Rosen . 2000 . P190 - B , a Rho - GTPase - activating protein , is differentially expressed in terminal end buds and breast cancer . Cell Growth Differ . 11 : 343 – 354 . Chakravarty , G . , D . Hadsell , W . Buitrago , J . Settleman , and J . Rosen . 2003 . p190 - B RhoGAP regulates mammary ductal morphogenesis . Molec . Endo - crin . 17 : 1054 – 1065 . Chen , H . C . , P . A . Appeddu , H . Isoda , and J . L . Guan . 1996 . Phosphorylation of ty - rosine 397 in focal adhesion kinase is required for binding phosphatidylino - sitol 3 - kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 26329 – 26334 . Choquet , D . , D . P . Felsenfeld , and M . P . Sheetz . 1997 . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell . 88 : 39 – 48 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , and K . Burridge . 1996 . Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 1403 – 1415 . Clark , E . A . , W . G . King , J . S . Brugge , M . Symons , and R . O . Hynes . 1998 . Inte - grin - mediated signals regulated by members of the Rho family of GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 573 – 586 . Cukierman , E . , R . Pankov , D . R . Stevens , and K . M . Yamada . 2001 . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science . 294 : 1708 – 1712 . Demou , Z . N . , and L . V . McIntire . 2002 . Fully automated three - dimensional track - ing of cancer cells in collagen gels : determination of motility phenotypes at the cellular level . Cancer Res . 62 : 5301 – 5307 . Emerman , J . T . , and D . R . Pitelka . 1977 . Maintenance and induction of morpho - logical differentiation in dissociated mammary epithelium on floating col - lagen membranes . In Vitro . 13 : 316 – 328 . Galbraith , C . G . , K . M . Yamada , and M . P . Sheetz . 2002 . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 695 – 705 . Geiger , B . , and A . Bershadsky . 2002 . Exploring the neighborhood : adhesion - cou - pled cell mechanosensors . Cell . 110 : 139 – 142 . Glaven , J . A . , I . P . Whitehead , T . Nomanbhoy , R . Kay , and R . A . Cerione . 1996 . Lfc and Lsc oncoproteins represent two new guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Rho GTP - binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 27374 – 27381 . Guo , Y . P . , L . J . Martin , W . Hanna , D . Banerjee , N . Miller , E . Fishell , R . Khokha , and N . F . Boyd . 2001 . Growth factors and stromal matrix proteins associated with mammographic densities . Cancer Epidemiol . Biomarkers Prev . 10 : 243 – 248 . Han , D . C . , T . L . Shen , and J . L . Guan . 2000 . Role of Grb7 targeting to focal con - tacts and its phosphorylation by focal adhesion kinase in regulation of cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 28911 – 28917 . Ikebe , M . , and D . J . Hartshorne . 1985 . Phosphorylation of smooth muscle myosin at two distinct sites by myosin light chain kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 10027 – 10031 . Ishizaki , T . , M . Naito , K . Fujisawa , M . Maekawa , N . Watanabe , Y . Saito , and S . Narumiya . 1997 . p160ROCK , a Rho - associated coiled - coil forming protein kinase , works downstream of Rho and induces focal adhesions . FEBS Lett . 404 : 118 – 124 . Keely , P . , A . Fong , M . Zutter , and S . Santoro . 1995 . Alteration of collagen - depen - dent adhesion , motility , and morphogenesis by the expression of antisense (cid:2) 2 integrin mRNA in mammary cells . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 595 – 607 . Keely , P . J . , J . K . Westwick , I . P . Whitehead , C . J . Der , and L . V . Parise . 1997 . Cdc42 and Rac1 induce integrin - mediated cell motility and invasiveness through PI ( 3 ) K . Nature . 390 : 632 – 636 . Kimura , K . , M . Ito , M . Amano , K . Chihara , Y . Fukata , M . Nakafuku , B . Yamamori , J . Feng , T . Nakano , K . Okawa , et al . 1996 . Regulation of myo - sin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science . 273 : 245 – 248 . Koo , L . Y . , D . J . Irvine , A . M . Mayes , D . A . Lauffenburger , and L . G . Griffith . 2002 . Co - regulation of cell adhesion by nanoscale RGD organization and mechan - ical stimulus . J . Cell Sci . 115 : 1423 – 1433 . Kumagai , N . , N . Morii , K . Fujisawa , T . Yoshimasa , K . Nakao , and S . Narumiya . 1993 . Lysophosphatidic acid induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activa - tion of MAP - kinase and focal adhesion kinase in cultured Swiss 3T3 cells . FEBS Lett . 329 : 273 – 276 . Kureishi , Y . , S . Kobayashi , M . Amano , K . Kimura , H . Kanaide , T . Nakano , K . Kaibuchi , and M . Ito . 1997 . Rho - associated kinase directly induces smooth muscle contraction through myosin light chain phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 12257 – 12260 . Kwong , L . , M . Wozniak , A . Collins , S . Wilson , and P . Keely . 2003 . R - Ras pro - motes focal adhesion formation through focal adhesion kinase and p130Cas by a novel mechanism that differs from integrins . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 933 – 949 . Lee , E . Y . , G . Parry , and M . J . Bissell . 1984 . Modulation of secreted proteins of mouse mammary epithelial cells by the collagenous substrata . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 146 – 155 . Midwood , K . S . , and J . E . Schwarzbauer . 2002 . Tenascin - C modulates matrix con - traction via focal adhesion kinase - and Rho - mediated signaling pathways . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 3601 – 3613 . Montesano , R . , G . Schaller , and L . Orci . 1991 . Induction of epithelial tubular morphogenesis in vitro by fibroblast - derived soluble factors . Cell . 66 : 697 – 711 . Parry , G . , E . Y . Lee , D . Farson , M . Koval , and M . J . Bissell . 1985 . Collagenous sub - strata regulate the nature and distribution of glycosaminoglycans produced by differentiated cultures of mouse mammary epithelial cells . Exp . Cell Res . 156 : 487 – 499 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr . , and Y . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are reg - ulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . Ren , X . D . , W . B . Kiosses , and M . A . Schwartz . 1999 . Regulation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 18 : 578 – 585 . Ren , X . D . , W . B . Kiosses , D . J . Sieg , C . A . Otey , D . D . Schlaepfer , and M . A . Schwartz . 2000 . Focal adhesion kinase suppresses Rho activity to promote focal adhesion turnover . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 3673 – 3678 . Ridley , A . J . , and A . Hall . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth fac - tors . Cell . 70 : 389 – 399 . Riveline , D . , E . Zamir , N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , T . Ishizaki , S . Narumiya , Z . Kam , B . Geiger , and A . D . Bershadsky . 2001 . Focal contacts as mechanosen - sors . Externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal con - tacts by an mdia1 - dependent and rock - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 1175 – 1186 . Sahai , E . , and C . J . Marshall . 2002 . ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adhe - rens junctions downstream of Rho . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 408 – 415 . Schwartz , M . A . , and R . K . Assoian . 2001 . Integrins and cell proliferation : regula - tion of cyclin - dependent kinases via cytoplasmic signaling pathways . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 2553 – 2560 . Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament ar - ray in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 . Tan , J . L . , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadriraju , and C . S . Chen . 2003 . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 1484 – 1489 . Tang , D . , D . Mehta , and S . Gunst . 1999 . Mechanosensitive tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of paxillin and focal adhesion kinase in tracheal smooth muscle . Am . J . Physiol . 276 : C250 – C258 . Totsukawa , G . , Y . Yamakita , S . Yamashiro , D . J . Hartshorne , Y . Sasaki , and F . Matsumura . 2000 . Distinct roles of ROCK ( Rho - kinase ) and MLCK in spa - tial regulation of MLC phosphorylation for assembly of stress fibers and fo - cal adhesions in 3T3 fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 797 – 806 . Wang , H . B . , M . Dembo , S . K . Hanks , and Y . Wang . 2001 . Focal adhesion kinase is involved in mechanosensing during fibroblast migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 11295 – 11300 . Wang , Y . , Y . Wang , C . Wang , J . Sung , W . Chiu , S . Lin , Y . Chang , and M . Tang . 2003 . Rigidity of collagen fibrils controls collagen gel - induced down - regula - tion of focal adhesion complex proteins mediated by a2b1 integrin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 21886 – 21892 . Yano , Y . , J . Geibel , and B . Sumpio . 1996 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of pp125FAK and paxillin in aortic endothelial cells induced by mechanical strain . Am . J . Physiol . 271 : C635 – C649 Yu , W . , L . E . O’Brien , F . Wang , H . Bourne , K . E . Mostov , and M . M . Zegers . 2003 . Hepatocyte growth factor switches orientation of polarity and mode of movement during morphogenesis of multicellular epithelial structures . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 748 – 763 . Zhao , J . H . , H . Reiske , and J . L . Guan . 1998 . Regulation of the cell cycle by focal adhesion kinase . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1997 – 2008 . Zutter , M . M . , S . A . Santoro , J . E . Wu , T . Wakatsuki , S . K . Dickeson , and E . L . El - son . 1999 . Collagen receptor control of epithelial morphogenesis and cell cy - cle progression . Am . J . Pathol . 155 : 927 – 940 . on A p r il 27 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published November 10 , 2003