Research report Distinction between the literal and intended meanings of sentences : A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of metaphor and sarcasm Hitoshi T . Uchiyama a , b , * , Daisuke N . Saito c , Hiroki C . Tanabe c , Tokiko Harada d , Ayumi Seki a , b , Kousaku Ohno e , Tatsuya Koeda a , b and Norihiro Sadato b , c , f a Department of Education , Faculty of Regional Sciences , Tottori University , Tottori , Japan b Japan Science and Technology Agency ( JST ) / Research Institute of Science and Technology for Society ( RISTEX ) , Tokyo , Japan c Department of Cerebral Research , Division of Cerebral Integration , National Institute for Physiological Sciences ( NIPS ) , Okazaki , Japan d Department of Psychiatry , Nagoya University , Nagoya , Japan e Department of Child Neurology , Institute of Neurological Sciences , Faculty of Medicine , Tottori University , Yonago , Japan f Biomedical Imaging Research Center ( BIRC ) , University of Fukui , Fukui , Japan a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 20 May 2010 Revised 30 July 2010 Accepted 13 January 2011 Action editor Stefano Cappa Published online 26 January 2011 Keywords : Coherence fMRI Mentalizing Metaphor Pragmatics Sarcasm a b s t r a c t To comprehend ﬁgurative utterances such as metaphor or sarcasm , a listener must both judge the literal meaning of the statement and infer the speaker’s intended meaning ( mentalizing ; Amodio and Frith , 2006 ) . To delineate the neural substrates of pragmatic comprehension , we conducted functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) with 20 normal adult volunteers . Participants read short stories followed by a target sentence . Depending on the context provided by the preceding stories , the target sentences were classiﬁed as follows : ( 1 ) metaphor versus literally coherent ; ( 2 ) metaphor versus literally incoherent ; ( 3 ) sarcasm versus literally coherent ; and ( 4 ) sarcasm versus literally inco - herent . For each task pair , we directly compared the activations evoked by the same target sentences in the different contexts . The contrast images were incorporated into a 2 ( metaphor and sarcasm ) (cid:1) 2 ( literal coherency and incoherency ) design . Metaphor - speciﬁc activation was found in the head of the caudate , which might be involved in associating statements with potential meanings , and restricting sentence meanings within a set of possible candidates for what the speaker intended . Sarcasm - speciﬁc activation was found in the left amygdala , which is an important component of the neural substrates of social behavior . Conjunction analysis revealed that both metaphor and sarcasm activated the anterior rostral medial frontal cortex ( arMFC ) , which is a key node of mentalizing . A distinct literal coherency effect was found in the orbital MFC , which is thought to be involved in monitoring . These mesial frontal areas are jointly involved in monitoring literal coherency and mentalizing within social contexts in order to comprehend the pragmatic meanings of utterances . ª 2011 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . * Corresponding author . Department of Cerebral Research , National Institute for Physiological Sciences , 38 Nishigonaka , Myodaiji , Okazaki , Aichi 444 - 8585 , Japan . E - mail address : sadato @ nips . ac . jp ( H . T . Uchiyama ) . Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cortex cortex 48 ( 2012 ) 563 e 583 0010 - 9452 / $ e see front matter ª 2011 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2011 . 01 . 004