1 Tension - induced fusion of bilayer membranes and vesicles - Supplementary Information Julian C . Shillcock and Reinhard Lipowsky Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces 14424 Potsdam , Germany # # URL : http : / / www . mpikg . mpg . de / th / The following pages contain supplementary information about the simulation method , the membrane model , and different aspects of membrane tension . Several time sequences of simulation snapshots , which display adhesion , hemifusion , fusion , and rupture , are also included as well as a table with the data underlying Figure 3 and 4 in the main text . A . Dissipative Particle Dynamics Simulation Method DPD was invented by Hoogerbrugge and Koelman 1 in 1992 and applied first to the calculation of the hydrodynamic drag on an array of cylinders in a moving fluid . The system reproduced the Stoke’s behaviour of the drag coefficient with a few hundred particles . The algorithm was improved by Groot and Warren 2 in 1997 , and their version is now in common use . Because the temperature control of the DPD thermostat is degraded for large time steps , we use a time step of δ t = 0 . 02 , for which the Groot - Warren integrator has been shown 3 to be as accurate as more complicated , self - consistent © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 2 schemes , and for which the temperature drift is less than 1 % for all our simulations , including the 1 . 6 µ s runs . The elementary units in DPD are small volume elements called beads that represent either a number of identical molecules or molecular groups . Beads are considered to have internal degrees of freedom that have been integrated out , and that appear in the equations of motion as a pair of linked random and dissipative forces . These two forces act as a thermostat that keeps the system’s kinetic temperature at a constant average value . Conservative forces between beads give them an identity and represent , for example , the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nature of some molecules . Once the forces are specified , beads evolve according to Newton’s laws , and thermodynamic observables are measured as time averages over the bead coordinates as in Molecular Dynamics . DPD is distinct from MD in that the forces are soft , short - ranged , and represent a coarse - graining of the interactions of microscopic fluid elements rather than the inter - atomic potentials of MD . It is also distinct from Brownian Dynamics , which incorporates random forces between particles , because all forces in DPD conserve momentum . B . Lipid Molecular Architecture and Membrane Physical Properties Both the planar membrane and vesicle are composed of identical molecules . The rest of the simulation box , and vesicle interior , are filled with water particles , which represent clusters of water molecules , to an average density of 3 particles per unit volume . The simulation box size is ( 72a 0 ) 3 , where a 0 is the bead diameter , and contains 1 , 100 , 000 beads of all kinds . A box containing only water particles under these conditions has © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 3 thermodynamic properties appropriate to water at room temperature 2 . The conservative interactions between the various bead types ( hydrophilic lipid head , hydrophobic lipid tail and water ) are described in detail in our previous work 4 . We mention here that the conservative forces are all linear in the bead - bead separation , as is almost universal in DPD simulations , and share the same cut - off distance a 0 that sets the length - scale in the simulations . The maximum repulsion at zero separation , a ij , where the subscripts label the particle types , determines the degree of repulsion between bead types and takes the values aHH = aTT = aWW = 25 , aHT = 50 , aHW = 35 , aTW = 75 . These values are found to give well - ordered bilayers . In Ref . 4 , we measured quantitatively the equilibrium properties of a planar bilayer patch composed of lipids with a single hydrophobic tail . Such lipids do not make good constituents for vesicle simulations because the area stretch modulus is too large for lipids with 5 or more tail beads , and bilayers composed of lipids with 4 or less tail beads exhibit large shape fluctuations . Hence , in this work the vesicle and planar membrane are composed of model lipids containing three hydrophilic head beads , to which are attached two chains of four hydrophobic beads each . The tails are attached to adjacent head beads . Such lipids self - assemble to form a more robust membrane than the single - tailed lipids . A typical fusion event contains around 11 , 000 lipids in the vesicle and planar membrane combined . Although natural membranes contain a multitude of different types of lipid , and their presence may be important for fusion in vivo , artificial vesicles composed of a single type of lipid also fuse . Furthermore , from a conceptual point of view , it is © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 4 desirable to first understand the fusion of single - component membranes before one tackles the fusion of multi - component ones . Comparing the equilibrium area per molecule for a typical lipid vesicle to that obtained in the simulations fixes the simulation length scale so that one bead diameter is a 0 = 0 . 7 nm . This is also the size of the beads in all the images presented . The average membrane thickness is 3 . 3 - 3 . 5 nm , comparable to that for dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine vesicles . The simulation time - scale is 0 . 016 nanoseconds / step , and is obtained by equating the diffusion coefficient of the lipids in the planar membrane to a typical experimental value of 5 µ m 2 / sec . Both the vesicle and planar membrane are in the fluid state , and can be placed under tension by changing the area - to - volume ratio and projected area , respectively . C . Membrane Tension The initial stage of our fusion protocol requires a vesicle and planar membrane to be created in states subject to uniform , global tensions . This is achieved simply by placing the appropriate number of molecules in the aggregates and allowing them to relax . The two aggregates must be placed close together , with a solvent - filled gap of less than 1 . 5 nm between their outer surfaces , in order for fusion to occur ; larger separations result in no contact on the time scale of several microseconds . Indeed , for larger separations , the vesicle must first diffuse towards the membrane patch , a process which we don’t want to study here . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 5 The variation of the initial tensions represent the simplest protocol in order to study the dependence of fusion on tension . It is also possible , using the simulation approach described here , to explore the effects of applied tensions which are localized in space and / or in time ( J . C . Shillcock and R . Lipowsky , in preparation ) . In this supplementary information , we mention some results about a second fusion protocol in which we apply an additional , relatively small tension after the membranes have hemifused . This is accomplished by reducing the conservative interaction between the lipid head beads so that they prefer to pack closer together , thereby increasing the exposure of the hydrophobic tails to the solvent and raising the surface tension . The constitutive relation between the planar membrane’s projected area and tension is shown in Fig . S1 from the relaxed state until the membrane ruptures . We have not explicitly measured the tension in the vesicle , but have used the tension / projected area relation obtained for the planar membrane to estimate the vesicle tension . This provides a lower bound as the vesicle curvature is expected to raise its tension above that of the planar membrane with the same area per molecule . We do not expect this to qualitatively alter our results . The axes in Fig . 3 are labelled with the area per molecule for both the vesicle and planar membrane as this is the more accurately known quantity . It may be converted into a tension using Fig . S1 . A series of collages of typical outcomes ( adhesion , hemifusion , successful fusion and vesicle rupture ) at different points in the morphology diagram are shown in Fig . S2 . The data set of outcomes for each vesicle / planar membrane tension combination used in the preparation of Figures 3 and 4 is given in Table S1 . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 6 C . 1 Regime of Low Initial Tensions In addition to our main aim of studying tension - induced fusion , which we observe only for relatively large initial tensions corresponding to the shaded region of the morphology diagram , Fig . 3 , we have also explored the low - tension regime . Figure S1 shows that the tensionless state of the planar membrane occurs for a projected area A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 . Fig . S2 A shows the evolution of a system composed of a relaxed planar membrane and a relaxed vesicle with the same area per molecule , A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 . It is apparent , in this case , that the vesicle only adheres to the planar membrane which proceeds to partially wrap its surface . Adhesion appears to be the dominant pathway when either , or both , of the vesicle and planar membrane have low tensions . Further collages in Fig S2 show the gradual change from adhesion as the dominant pathway , through hemifusion , in which the proximal leaflets of the vesicle and planar membrane merge while the distal leaflets remain largely discrete , to the fusion regime in which the high tensions lead to either fusion or rupture of one the aggregates . We note that the membranes investigated here , while certainly more extensible than phospholipid bilayer membranes , have comparable critical area expansions to polymersomes composed of diblock copolymers . One surprising result of our simulations , viz . , the absence of any fusion events that take longer than 350 ns , is due to the fact that the hemifused state is stabilized in the membrane geometry considered here . Thus , as the proximal monolayers of the vesicle and planar membrane merge , and a large number of molecules starts to move between the two aggregates , the tension decreases © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 7 continously . After a time , which we find to be of the order of 350 ns , there is no longer sufficient tension in the vesicle / planar membrane system to induce rupture or fusion pore formation and the aggregates stay in the hemifused state . C2 . Time Evolution of Tensions The time evolution of the tensions can be directly deduced from the time evolution of the membrane shapes as shown in Figure 1 and 2 and in Figure S2 . After the vesicle and the membrane patch have come into contact , we can distinguish three different types of membrane segments : the contact zone between vesicle and membrane patch , the outer part of the vesicle membrane which is not in contact with the membrane patch , and the outer part of the membrane patch which is not in contact with the vesicle . In each of these three membrane segments , we can have a different tension , denoted by Σ co , Σ ve , and Σ pa , respectively . If the system is in mechanical equilibrium , these three tensions must be balanced along the contact line , i . e . , along the boundary of the contact zone where the three membrane segments come together ( this terminology is borrowed from the context of wetting phenomena ) . In such a balanced situation , the shape no longer evolves with time and the outer part of the membrane patch is horizontal , i . e . , parallel to the base area of the simulation box . In the latter situation , one can deduce two well - defined contact angles , θ co and θ ve : The contact angle θ co represents the angle between the contact zone segment and a horizontal reference plane whereas the contact angle θ ve represents the angle between this plane and the outer part of the vesicle membrane . The balance of the two © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 8 force components , which are tangential and normal to the horizontal plane , respectively , then leads to the two relations Σ pa = Σ co cos ( θ co ) + Σ ve cos ( θ ve ) and 0 = Σ co sin ( θ co ) + Σ ve sin ( θ ve ) . On the other hand , as long as the system is not in mechanical equilibrium , the tensions and contact angles will change with time . This time evolution is clearly seen in the time sequence shown in Figure S2 . A which corresponds to the adhesion process of two relaxed membranes . Inspection of this figure shows that the contact angle θ ve continuously decreases after about 112 nanoseconds until it reaches a constant value after about 800 nanoseconds . Likewise , Figure 1 shows that the tensions for the hemifused states have relaxed after 640 nanoseconds whereas Figure S2 . B shows another hemifusion event in which the tensions change continuously between 160 and 480 nanosecondes . In general , the time evolution of the tensions will depend both on the intial tension , i . e . , on the initial molecular areas , and on the total membrane areas which are initially stretched . The time evolution of the various tensions may be also estimated , at least in a qualitative fashion , by monitoring the membrane thickness : those membrane segments which experience a larger tension have a smaller thickness . C . 3 Fusion Protocol with Additional Tension We have examined more closely the attempted fusion of a vesicle with a molecular area of A / Na 0 2 = 1 . 3 and a planar membrane with A / Na 0 2 = 1 . 9 ( see Figures S2 B and C for a typical failed fusion outcome and a successful fusion event at this tension combination . ) © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 9 Only two fusion events are observed in 10 independent simulations of 1 . 6 µ s each for these parameter values , but if a small additional tension is imposed on the planar membrane after the vesicle has started to adhere to it , approximately 50 % of the attempts result in successful fusion events . D . Time Sequences of Snapshots Time sequences of snapshots which illustrate the various pathways observed in the simulations are shown in Fig . S2 A ) – E ) . These five simulation runs correspond to different points in the morphology diagram ( Fig . 3 in the main text ) which are characterized by different initial areas per molecule of the planar membrane and the vesicle . The initial molecular area in the planar membrane is denoted by X , the one in the vesicle by Y . Thus , each time sequence corresponds to a point with coordintates ( X , Y ) in the morphology diagram . Solvent particles initially outside the vesicle are invisible for clarity . Note that except in the case of vesicle rupture only a few tens of solvent particles initially inside the vesicle leak out prior to fusion : this is a neglible fraction of the ~ 50 , 000 initially inside . Also note that solvent particles that cross the boundaries of the simulation box reappear on the opposite side due to the periodic boundary conditions . Finally , note the different time scales for the sequences of snapshots . E . Movie The associated movie shows a typical fusion event and represents 320 ns of simulation time . The planar membrane patch and vesicle have initial molecular areas A / N = 1 . 95 © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 10 and 1 . 35 respectively , and contain 5315 and 6105 lipids . For nearby values of the initial molecular areas , the membranes may also rupture as shown in Figure S2 . E . References 1 . Hoogerbrugge , P . J . & Koelman , J . M . V . A . Simulating microscopic hydrodynamic phenomena with dissipative particle dynamics . Europhys . Lett . 19 , 155 - 160 ( 1992 ) . 2 . Groot , R . D . & Warren , P . B . Dissipative particle dynamics : bridging the gap between atomistic and mesoscopic simulation . J . Chem . Phys . 107 , 4423 - 4435 ( 1997 ) . 3 . Nikunen , P . , Karttunen , M . & Vattulainen , I . How would you integrate the equations of motion in dissipative particle dynamics simulations ? Comp . Phys . Comm . 153 , 407 - 423 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Shillcock , J . C . & Lipowsky , R . Equilibrium structure and lateral stress distribution of amphiphilic bilayers from dissipative particle dynamics J . Chem . Phys . 117 , 5048 - 5061 ( 2002 ) . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 11 Figures Fig . S1 : Typical surface tension curve of the planar membrane against its projected area per molecule . The tensionless state occurs near A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 and the membrane ruptures almost immediately above A / Na 02 = 2 . 0 . The surface tension is measured using the procedure described in Ref . 4 . Note that there are two approximately linear regions for A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 – 1 . 4 and 1 . 5 – 2 . 0 . These regions can be used to convert the projected area into a tension value . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 12 Fig . S2 . A ) Adhesion of a relaxed vesicle to a relaxed planar membrane , both of which have A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 ; this corresponds to the lower left corner ( X , Y ) = ( 1 . 26 , 1 . 26 ) of © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 13 the morphology diagram . The first sequence of snapshots shows the initial contact between the vesicle and planar membrane up to 144 ns . The second sequence show the subsequent growth of the adhesion zone , and wrapping of the planar membrane around the vesicle , out to 1440 ns . Note the different time intervals between the snapshots in each panel . Fig . S2 . B ) Hemifusion event with molecular areas ( X , Y ) = ( 1 . 9 , 1 . 3 ) ; this corresponds to the lower right part of the shaded fusion regime within the morphology diagram . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 14 Fig . S2 . C ) Successful fusion event with ( X , Y ) = ( 1 . 9 , 1 . 3 ) ; this corresponds to the same point in the morphology diagram as Fig . S2 B , but only 2 out of 10 independent runs resulted in fusion for this planar membrane / vesicle tension combination . Fig . S2 . D ) Successful fusion event with ( X , Y ) = ( 1 . 8 , 1 . 45 ) ; this corresponds to the upper left part of the shaded fusion regime within the morphology diagram . © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 15 Fig . S2 . E ) Vesicle rupture event with ( X , Y ) = ( 1 . 95 , 1 . 45 ) ; this corresponds to the upper right part of the shaded fusion regime within the morphology diagram © 2005 Nature Publishing Group 16 Table S1 . Fusion times ( in units of 1000 simulation steps or 16 ns ) for successful fusion attempts , and alternative outcomes , organised according to the planar membrane ( abscissa ) and vesicle ( ordinate ) initial areas per molecule . The naming scheme for non - fusion outcomes is as follows : AD = vesicle adheres to the planar membrane ; HF = vesicle and planar membrane hemifuse ; PR = planar membrane ruptures prematurely ; VR = vesicle ruptures prematurely . The numbers in brackets after an outcome are the number of times that outcome occurred at the given point in the morphology diagram . This data forms the basis of Figures 3 and 4 , but note that the vesicle adhesion event for initally tensionless membranes with A / Na 02 = 1 . 26 / 1 . 26 shown in Fig . S2 . A is not included here . A / Na 02 1 . 6 1 . 65 1 . 7 1 . 75 1 . 8 1 . 85 1 . 9 1 . 95 1 . 45 13 , 14 ( 2 ) HF , VR ( 3 ) 15 , 20 14 , VR ( 2 ) 10 ( 2 ) , 13 . 5 , 15 , VR 10 , 11 , 14 , VR 1 . 4 AD , HF AD , HF HF ( 4 ) 20 , HF ( 5 ) 14 , 15 , HF ( 2 ) , VR 10 , 15 , 19 11 , 12 , 15 ( 2 ) 11 , 15 , 17 , 21 1 . 35 AD , HF HF ( 2 ) HF ( 2 ) HF ( 2 ) 13 , 19 , 20 , HF ( 2 ) HF 11 , 14 , 15 , 16 , HF 10 . 5 , 11 ( 2 ) , 12 , 14 , PR 1 . 3 HF HF HF 11 , 13 , PR , HF ( 7 ) 15 , PR , HF ( 2 ) © 2005 Nature Publishing Group