New Trends for Reading Scientiﬁc Documents Hélène de Ribaupierre University of Geneva , CUI , ICLE 7 rte de Drize Carouge , Switzerland helene . deribaupierre @ unige . ch Gilles Falquet University of Geneva , CUI , ICLE 7 rte de Drize Carouge , Switzerland gilles . falquet @ unige . ch ABSTRACT When scientists or engineers are looking for information in document collections , or on the web , they generally have a precise objective in mind . Instead of looking for documents ”about a topic T ” , they rather try to answer speciﬁc needs such as ﬁnding the deﬁnition of a concept , ﬁnding results for a particular problem , checking whether an idea has already been tested , or comparing the scientiﬁc conclusions of two articles . This paper presents an indexing model which in - cludes the decomposition of documents into fragments that will correspond to discourse elements ( deﬁnition , hypothe - sis , method , result , etc . ) . The division of documents into fragments should allow scientists to retrieve more relevant information and to make queries more precise . Each type of discourse element will be modeled by deﬁning speciﬁc char - acteristics . The representation model will allow operations that merge or combine retrieved documents or fragments . We will propose an interface that allows strategic reading such as parallel reading of fragments . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 3 . 3 [ Information Search and Retrieval ] : Retrieval models , Search process ; H . 3 . 7 [ Digital Libraries ] : user Is - sues General Terms Human Factors , Theory , Experimentation Keywords Parallel reading , Semantic scientiﬁc publication , Indexing model , Annotation model 1 . INTRODUCTION Nowadays , scientists are dealing with an extremely large amount of complex information in their domain and in ad - jacent domains . The number of publications increases every Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . BooksOnline’11 , October 24 , 2011 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0961 - 5 / 11 / 10 . . . $ 10 . 00 . year , and the time spent for searching and reading is more important today than 30 years ago . As a consequence , sci - entists have to read articles more rapidly than previously [ 1 ] . Researchers need tools to help them to search , orga - nize and read scientiﬁc papers , and to avoid to waste time looking for and reading articles unnecessarily . Ironically , today researchers have better tools for searching and orga - nizing their personal data ( music , pictures , video ) than for managing their professional data [ 2 ] . In general , systems supporting electronic scientiﬁc publication have introduced some improvements compared to search into the indexes of printed editions , but the revolution announced by electronic publishing has not happened yet . In [ 3 ] , the authors intro - duce the notion of semantic publishing for the enhancing of electronic publications : “We deﬁne the term semantic pub - lishing to include anything that enhances the meaning of a published journal article , facilitates its automated discovery , enables its linking to semantically related articles , provides access to data within the article in actionable form , or facil - itates integration of data between articles . ” Seeking for information that will allow scientists to ﬁnd solution to a precise problem is a complicated task . Dif - ferent factors can inﬂuence the diﬃculty of this task . In [ 4 ] , the authors deﬁne some factors that can render problem solving more diﬃcult : ill - structured problem spaces , low do - main knowledge , unsystematic steps , wide application , data driven , seek and search . Furthermore , scientists are not looking for the same information depending on their objec - tive , on their level of knowledge or their general experience in research . For instance , PhD students are not searching information in the same way as an advanced researcher . In [ 5 ] , the authors show that the information seeking behavior is diﬀerent for professors or for postgraduates . The need for information varies also with the task . When writing a review on a topic or writing a new deﬁnition of a term , for exam - ple , scientists are looking for more exhaustive information , both within and across papers , than when searching for a methodology to apply to a given study . Moreover , scientists are often working in parallel with diﬀerent scientiﬁc papers , in order to search , compare , arrange , link , annotate , and analyze fragments of content ( such as theoretical aspects , methodologies , results , deﬁnitions of concepts , conclusions , etc . ) . In this paper we will term this activity “parallel read - ing” . When users are looking for information , they are gener - ally interested in some parts of a document , but not nec - essarily in the entire document [ 6 ] . It is certainly also the case for scientists when they are comparing , linking , arrang - 19 ing information coming from diﬀerent documents . Scientiﬁc documents are often well structured and follow similar struc - turing rules in each research area . In most cases , structuring rules in a scientiﬁc document are the same independently of the domain of research . The information that scientists are looking for , can be found in the deﬁnition , conclusion , hy - pothesis , methodology , results , etc . We will refer to these parts as fragment in the remainder of the paper . When sci - entists are answering a precise question or need , they will make implicit links between those fragments . For example , in the case of social sciences , if the task is to write a paper that concerns gender studies , it might be necessary ﬁrst to redeﬁne the term gender . To accomplish this task , scien - tists will have to ﬁnd all the deﬁnitions of this term across diﬀerent papers , read them , classify them , compare them , etc . . In the process of comparing and clustering articles , readers introduce relations between articles . Those relations are established for diﬀerent reasons , diﬀerent goals and for achieving certain tasks or resolving problems . In the line of the previous example on gender , readers can make relations between articles that have the same school of thought or were written during the same period of time , and exclude all the deﬁnitions of ’gender’ that do not correspond to those criteria . In the present research , we are not so much interested in the“ﬁrst level”structural parts of the document , such as the introduction , hypothesis , methodology , discussion and con - clusion , as in the elements of discourse contained in those diﬀerent parts . These elements may be deﬁnitions , hypoth - esis , algorithms , techniques , measurements , experimental ﬁndings , etc . They can be found in almost any part of a text . For instance , it is possible to ﬁnd a methodological fragment , or a conclusion fragment or even a result frag - ment in the introduction of an article . It is the reason why we are not only looking for the structural part . To deﬁne our document model , we need to analyze the reading behavior of scientists . Therefore , we launched an on - line survey . In the ﬁrst part of the present article , we present some results of this survey . In the second part , we report the model deﬁned for the annotation of scientiﬁc writing . The third part will be the model proposed for parallel reading . 2 . SURVEY To deﬁne more precisely the reading behavior of scientists in a domain , it is necessary , as mentioned above , to rely on surveys . It is also probable that several surveys will be necessary . We therefore launched a pilot survey on a few hy - potheses about behaviors adopted by scientists for reading scientifc documents . The ﬁrst hypothesis is that scientists are looking for speciﬁc fragments into the document . A sec - ond hypothesis is that they are reading scientiﬁc writing for speciﬁc tasks / needs ( and not for a general purpose ) and the third hypothesis is that scientists are not all looking for the same fragments , depending on their area of research . Our survey contains 15 questions . The sample consisted on 34 female and 57 male , mean age was 39 years old . This survey was meant as a pilot study , and not as a systematic comparison of diﬀerent domains . Consequently , the partici - pants were not evenly distributed among diﬀerent research areas : science ( 28 ) , engineering ( 19 ) , law ( 12 ) , psychology and educational sciences ( 11 ) , medicine ( 7 ) , social science ( 5 ) , economical science ( 1 ) , art ( 1 ) , and other ( 6 ) . Participants to this survey agreed with all the diﬀerent reasons we have proposed for reading an article . Scientists are reading other scientiﬁc writings ﬁrst for ﬁnding other studies in their own domain ( 94 . 5 % ) , and ﬁnding additional sources of references for their own work ( 90 . 1 % ) . They wanted to keep informed ( 83 . 5 % ) , and to compare studies ( 81 . 3 % ) . They also wanted to know how research is con - ducted ( 72 . 5 % ) and they also wanted to ﬁnd additional ideas for their own research ( 71 . 4 % ) . Participants diﬀered in the fragment type they focus on : Results ( 75 % ) , Methodology ( 59 . 7 % ) , Conclusion ( 56 . 6 % ) and Deﬁnition ( 50 . 6 % ) , and ﬁnally Opinion / Critic ( 42 . 1 % ) and Hypothesis ( 40 . 3 % ) . When comparing the three diﬀerent categories of research domains , i . e . , human sciences , experimental science and oth - ers , with respect to the focus on reading speciﬁc fragments ; the methodology fragment was the only fragment that sig - niﬁcantly diﬀered between group ( F ( 5 . 513 ) , p = 0 . 006 ) ) . The group of experimental sciences ( 95 . 5 % ) and others ( 80 % ) agreed to read the methodology fragment more than the group of human sciences ( 67 . 97 % ) . These results are tentative , because this survey is still a work in progress . They nevertheless allow us to draw some interesting assumption on diﬀerent reading behaviors across diﬀerent domains , like the group of experimental sciences read more methodology fragment than the group of human sciences . Also , they show that the diﬀerent parts we have deﬁned are of interest to scientists and this in all the do - mains , with some preference depending on the domain of research . The next step will be to study a larger population and to take into account the experience on the user , to test if it exists any diﬀerence between level of experience and the part that they are interested of . The results will allow us to deﬁne more precisely the annotation model , the request model and the representation model . 3 . MODEL FOR SCIENTIFIC DOCUMENT We can ﬁnd diﬀerent annotation models for scientiﬁc writ - ing . Some authors propose to use rhetorical structure or discursive categories to manually or automatically annotate scientiﬁc writing to improve summarization or information retrieval systems [ 7 , 8 ] . These works focus mainly on the ”hard” sciences like biology where there is relatively little variation in describing the results , hypothesis , conclusions , etc . In [ 9 ] , authors use rhetorical status ( Background , other , own , aim , textual ) to annotate documents for classifying purpose of citations [ 10 ] and improving summarization . In [ 11 ] , authors propose an approach to extract claims and hy - pothesis from scientiﬁc papers in biology . For a more com - plete survey of the literature , see [ 12 ] . In [ 13 ] , the authors use patterns to automatically annotate discursive categories that allow the user to search for deﬁnitions , quotations , causality etc . The model presented here is based on these studies and combines them while also suggesting some new concepts . Models like Dublin Core , TEI , and DTD for Science , Na - ture , Pubmed , etc . , deﬁne metadata to identify scientiﬁc documents according to criteria such as author information , title , year of publication , etc . Additional information as - sociated with metadata , such as relations between authors , research groups they belong to , etc . can contextualize a doc - ument and an author , and it could be criteria for scientist to choose between papers to read . In [ 14 ] , the author uses an ontology to improve search strategic monitoring , in astron - 20 omy , using concepts such as laboratory , aﬃliation , and the authors’ country of residence . In the Inspire Project , a cur - rent CERN project [ 15 ] , metadata associated to the author and aﬃliation are used to summarize the author page . The fragment - based model ( ﬁgure 1 ) will be included into the indexing model . Each fragment will be semantically an - notated and indexed with relevant domain concepts and the role they play in the fragment , as well as metadata . The pro - posed model is intended to annotate the diﬀerent fragments of a document along three characteristics : bibliographic data ( metadata ) , scientiﬁc ( sub ) domain , and discourse type . The only characteristics of this model which are domain depen - dent is the domain ontologie , the rest will be generic . We will use a standard model like DublinCore to represent bib - liographic data ( metadata ) such as author , year , source , ed - itor , publisher , type and title [ 16 ] . Diﬀerent ontologies will be used to deﬁne the ( sub ) domain of the fragment . Each fragment will have a list of concepts speciﬁc to the domain . Based on the results of the survey , a discourse element model will be deﬁned , which is composed of a hierarchy of discourse element types and subtypes ( deﬁnition , hypothesis , result , conclusion , . . . ) and , for each discourse element type , a model , expressed in terms of properties , subproperties , and constraints on the property values . Some discourse elements will have a ﬁner granularity than other , as we will see below . Each fragment will be indexed by one discourse element . Figure 1 : Fragment - based annotation model In this paper , we will explicitly take the case of a deﬁni - tion fragment and of a result fragment . Deﬁning the level of granularity of the document model is a problematic issue . On the one hand , it is interesting to have several informa - tions about a fragment , because the more precise is the infor - mation , the more new information can be inferred . On the other hand , the ﬁner the granularity of the model , the more diﬃcult it will be to use this model to annotate , whether for a manual annotation or for automatic annotation . When the model becomes very complicated , having consistent annota - tions between diﬀerent annotators implies , in the case of a manual annotation , a full understanding of all components of the model by the persons who annotate ; this requires in general a user guide containing a lot of pages . In the case of an automatic annotation , the model becomes almost impos - sible to implement . Using this level of granularity allow us to use some automation , using natural language processing techniques , and to make some inference . A deﬁnition ( ﬁgure 2 ) is composed of two other concepts . The deﬁniens is the sentence or the word that deﬁnes the deﬁniendum . For example , “cat ( Felis catus ) , also known as the domestic cat or housecat to distinguish it from other fe - lines and felids , is a small , furry , domesticated , carnivorous mammal that is valued by humans for its companionship and for its ability to hunt vermin and household pests” 1 . The deﬁniendum is the term cat and the deﬁniens is the sentence that follows this term . In addition to providing a more pre - cise indexing , separating the deﬁniens and the deﬁniendum is a way to solve homonymy and synonymy problems . The deﬁniendum can be associated with several linguistic forms ( synonyms ) and to a precise concept in a domain ontology . Figure 2 : Deﬁnition fragment annotation model A result ( ﬁgure 3 ) is composed of two main elements , the raw result and the interpreted result [ 17 ] . In addition , a re - sult may be related to variables . To enhance the precision of the representation , each element of a result should be as - sociated to one or more concepts in a domain ontology . For example , if we annotate a paper that discusses the diﬀerence between men and women with respect to the time spent do - ing housework , raw results will be the data collected in the study , and interpreted result will be the possible interpre - tations . These two fragments ( raw result and interpreted result ) will also receive information from the domain on - tologies that inform about the diﬀerent variables that were measured and discussed , like gender , housework , question from the survey , etc . With these models it becomes possible to answer very pre - cise user requests such as “ﬁnd all the deﬁnitions of the term gender in a collection of article” , or “ﬁnd all the papers with a result about the concept ’housework’ and ’gender’ ” . Figure 3 : Result fragment annotation model 4 . MODEL FOR PARALLEL READING Using models coming from hyperbook , we will construct a model for parallel reading and an interface that allows scientists to read the result of their query in the form of a new ( virtual ) document that has been generated by logically assembling the retrieved fragments . Hyperbook , or hypertext book , is a term that is used to refer to a hypertext that has some of the characteristics of a printed book , and can be organized as a set of elements that are grouped together to form larger entities such as chapters or sections . Moreover , the content of a hyperbook should be autonomous and have a clearly identiﬁed topic or objective [ 18 ] . 1 http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Cat 21 During the last decade , a number of studies have ad - dressed the problem of generating reading interfaces that are better adapted to the user needs . The virtual docu - ment approach [ 19 , 20 ] has brought particularly interesting results . We started to deﬁne and implement primitive operations that take , as input , documents represented in the scientiﬁc document model and to produce a result document in this same model . The goal here is to deﬁne a set of operations that can be combined to produce sophisticated document generation processes . Typical operations are : ﬁltering ( se - lecting fragments that satisfy a boolean condition ) , merging documents at the fragment level ; computing diﬀerences ; or inferring links . The aim is to provide the user with a way to easily specify the content and structure of the resulting doc - uments . Link inference plays a particularly important role because it corresponds to what readers implicitly do when they read one or more articles . They connect fragments of an article that refer to the same concept or fact ; they cluster fragments of diﬀerent articles that could belong to the same school of thought ; they seek conﬁrmation of a result in other articles , etc . The fragment - based model is well suited to specify link inference operations . In fact , the corpus of annotated doc - uments forms a network of fragments . Those fragments are either directly connected through refers ( ﬁgure 1 ) relation - ships or indirectly connected . Indirect connexions might be induced by describing the same concept , having been written by the same author , containing similar sentences , etc . It is even possible to specify arbitrarily complex paths ( provided they make sense ) to infer links . In the implemented system the speciﬁcation of a link in - ference corresponds to a query expression in the concrete knowledge representation language ( e . g . OWL ) or in a query language ( e . g . SPARQL ) . 5 . IMPLEMENTATION We are currently implementing the proposed model in a prototype system for the indexing , retrieval , and reading of scientiﬁc documents . This implementation is comprised of three main tasks : expressing the fragment - based annota - tion model in a practical knowledge representation language ; creating an annotation environment ; and implementing re - trieval and assembly operations . The annotation model is formalized in an OWL ontol - ogy . The core of this ontology is thus a set of OWL classes , properties and axioms corresponding , among others , to the abstract schema shown in ﬁgures 1 , 2 , and 3 . For the bib - liographic part of the model ( metadata ) , we simply import the Dublin Core ontology . The domain ontologies are also imported from existing ontology repositories that are now emerging on the web . The representation of a particular document , together with its fragments is thus a set of instances of the classes deﬁned in these ontologies , as shown on the following example ( in RDF N3 notation ) . : doc - 1 rdf : type : Document ; : cat - def rdf : type : Fragment ; rdf : type : Definition ; : partOf : doc - 1 ; : definiens " a small , furry , . . . " ; : definiendum animalOnto : Cat ; : result - 1 rdf : type : Fragment ; rdf : type : Result ; : variable [ : name " G " ; : about genderOnto : Gender . ] . . . . The aim of the annotation environment is to produce , or help producing , such representations for scientiﬁc doc - uments . Although the diﬃculty of annotating documents is often underestimated in the literature , an annotation en - vironment can rely on several manual or automated tech - niques . Manual annotation is certainly slow an costly , how - ever recent studies have shown that many reader are ready to spend some time annotating documents , provided they can beneﬁt from annotations made by others . Such crowd sourcing techniques are already in use , for instance at the CERN INSPIRE project [ 15 ] . On the automated side , there exist techniques based on pre - designed rules or patterns [ 13 ] , or techniques based on training material and machine learn - ing [ 9 ] . Finally , the implementation of the retrieval and assembly operations takes advantage of the reasoning and query tools for the OWL and RDF languages . Due to the intrinsic lim - itations of these tools it is necessary to combine them to reach a suﬃcient expressive power . Moreover , in the anno - tation model , fragments may be directly linked to concepts ( e . g . through the deﬁniens property ) . This cannot be han - dled by standard ( ﬁrst order ) description logic reasoners thus we must rely on the SPARQL RDF query language , to deal with this kind of situation . 6 . CONCLUSION In this paper , we presented the ﬁrst results of an online survey for analyzing the behavior of scientists searching and reading scientiﬁc papers . We presented a new model for sci - entiﬁc document annotation , based on discourse fragments We discussed advantages of taking into account discourse elements rather than structural parts such as conclusion , methodology , deﬁnition , hypothesis and results . We also presented the advantage to create a second level of concept for the deﬁnition and result that allow having more precise information about the fragment . This work uses also some techniques of the semantic web , such as OWL , RDF , that allow for inference from the data . In the future , we will continue the on - line survey that al - lows a better understanding of the behavior and objectives of scientists when they are reading scientiﬁc writings . Indeed , we need a larger sample , more evenly distributed across the diﬀerent areas of research . We also want to bring some fur - ther precision to questions that were not suﬃciently clear for users . We will also conduct some interviews , in order to collect more qualitative information . We will , in parallel , constantly improve our scientiﬁc document model with the results of the analysis of the survey and of the interviews . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Tenopir , C . , King , D . , and Edwards , S . Electronic journals and changes in scholarly article seeking and reading patterns . Aslib proceedings ( 2009 ) . [ 2 ] Hannay , T . What can the web do for science ? Computer ( Jan 2010 ) . 22 [ 3 ] Shotton , D . , Portwin , K . , Klyne , G . , and Miles , A . Adventures in semantic publishing : exemplar semantic enhancements of a research article . PLoS Comput Biol 5 , 4 ( 2009 ) . [ 4 ] Palmer , C . , Cragin , M . , and Hogan , T . Weak information work in scientiﬁc discovery . Information Processing & Management 43 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 808 - 820 . [ 5 ] Nicholas , D . , Huntington , P . , Jamali , H . , and Dobrowolski , T . Characterising and evaluating information seeking behaviour in a digital environment : Spotlight on the ’bouncer’ . Information Processing & Management 43 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 1085 - 1102 . [ 6 ] Kazai , G . Search and navigation in structured document retrieval : comparison of user behaviour in search on document passages and XML elements , in Proceedings of The Twelfth Australasian Document Computing Symposium ( ADCS’07 ) , December 2007 [ 7 ] Groza , T . , Muller , K . , Handschuh , S . , Trif , D . and Decker , S . SALT : Weaving the claim web . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 6th International Semantic Web Conference and 2nd Asian Semantic Web Conference ( ISWC / ASWC2007 ) , Busan , South Korea ( Berlin , Heidelberg , 2007 ) . Springer Verlag . [ 8 ] Muller , H . - M . , Kenny , E . E . , and Sternberg , P . W . Textpresso : An ontology - based information retrieval and extraction system for biological literature . PLoS Biol 2 , e309 , ( 2004 ) . [ 9 ] Teufel , S . , and Moens , M . Summarizing scientiﬁc articles : experiments with relevance and rhetorical status . Computational linguistics 28 , 4 ( 2002 ) , 409 - 445 . [ 10 ] Teufel , S . , Siddharthan , A . , and Tidhar , D . An annotation scheme for citation function . In Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue , SigDIAL06 , Association for Computational Linguistics , ( 2006 ) , pp . 80 - 87 . [ 11 ] de Waard , A . , Shum , B . , Carusi , A . , Park , J . , Samwald , M . , and Sandor , A . Hypotheses , evidence and relationships : The hyper approach for representing scientic knowledge claims ( 2006 ) . [ 12 ] Shum , S . B . , Clark , T . , de Waard , A . , Groza , T . , Handschuh , S . , and Sandor , A . Scientiﬁc discourse on the semantic web : A survey of models and enabling technologies . Semantic Web Journal : Interoperability , Usability , Applicability ( Nov 2010 ) , 1 - 34 . [ 13 ] Djioua , B . , and Descles , J . Indexing documents by discourse and semantic contents from automatic annotations of texts . FLAIRS ( 2007 ) . [ 14 ] Hernandez , N . , Mothe J . , Ontologies pour l’aide a l’exploration d’une collection de documents . Veille strat´egique , scientiﬁque et technologique , Toulouse , ( 2005 ) . [ 15 ] Ivanov , R . , and Raae , L . Inspire : a new scientiﬁc information system for hep . Journal of Physics : Conference Series 219 ( 2010 ) . [ 16 ] Ghoula , N . , de Ribaupierre , H . , Tardy , C . , Falquet , G . Op´erations sur des ressources h´et´erog ` enes dans un entrepˆot de donn´ees ` a base d’ontologie , Journ´ees Francophones sur les Ontologies , Montr´eal , ( 2011 ) . [ 17 ] Harmsze , F . A modular structure for scientiﬁc articles in an electronic environment . PhD thesis , Jan 2000 . [ 18 ] Falquet , G . , Nerima , L . , Ziswiler , J . - C . Hyperbooks ( book chapter ) . In Sebastian Ryszard Kruk , Bill McDaniel ( Eds . ) Semantic Digital Libraries . Bringing Digital Libraries to the Next Generation of Internet . Springer , Berlin , Germany , ( 2007 ) . [ 19 ] Ranwez , S . , and Crampes , M . Conceptual documents and hypertext documents are two diﬀerent forms of virtual document . In Proc . Virtual Documents Hypertext Functionality and the Web workshop of the 8th Intl . World Wide Web Conference ( Toronto , Canada , 1999 ) . [ 20 ] Iksal , S . , and Garlatti , S . Sp´eciﬁcation declarative pour les documents virtuels personalisables . In Actes du congr ` es Documents virtuels personalisables ( DVP2002 ) , S . Garlatti and M . Crampes , Eds , ( 2002 ) . 23