38 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION , VOL . 66 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2023 Student Awareness of Models in First - Year Engineering Courses Farshid Marbouti , Kelsey J . Rodgers , Angela K . Thompson , Matthew Verleger , and Nicholas Hawkins Abstract — Contribution : This study assesses more than 800 stu - dents’ awareness of engineering model types before and after taking two ﬁrst - year engineering courses across two semesters and evaluates the effect of each course . Background : All engineers must be able to apply and cre - ate models to be effective problem solvers , critical thinkers , and innovative designers . To help them develop these skills , as a ﬁrst step , it is essential to assess how to increase students’ aware - ness of engineering models . According to Bloom’s taxonomy , the lower remember and understand levels , which encompass aware - ness , are necessary for achieving the higher levels , such as apply , analyze , evaluate , and create . Research Questions : To what extent did student awareness of model types change after taking introductory engineering courses ? To what extent did student awareness of model types differ by course or semester ? Methodology : In this study , a survey was designed and admin - istered at the beginning and end of the semester in two ﬁrst - year engineering courses during two semesters in a mid - sized private school . The survey asked students questions about their deﬁnition of engineering modeling and different types of models . Findings : Overall , student awareness of model types increased from the beginning of the semester toward the end of the semester , across both semesters and courses . There were some differences between course sections , however , the students’ aware - ness of the models at the end of the academic year was similar for both groups . Index Terms —First - year curriculum , modeling , models and modeling perspective , survey . I . I NTRODUCTION T HOUGH it is rarely explicitly taught , modeling is funda - mental for many - core concepts throughout undergraduate Manuscript received 3 September 2021 ; revised 14 February 2022 and 13 April 2022 ; accepted 8 May 2022 . Date of publication 24 May 2022 ; date of current version 3 February 2023 . This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant DUE 1827392 , Grant DUE 1827600 , and Grant DUE 1827406 . ( Corresponding author : Farshid Marbouti . ) This work involved human subjects or animals in its research . Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by IRB under Application No . 19 - 002 . Farshid Marbouti is with the Department of General Engineering , San Jose State University , San Jose , CA 95192 USA ( e - mail : farshid . marbouti @ sjsu . edu ) . Kelsey J . Rodgers and Matthew Verleger are with the Department of Engineering Fundamentals , Embry - Riddle Aeronautical University , Daytona Beach , FL 32114 USA ( e - mail : dr . kelseyjoy @ gmail . com ; matthew . verleger @ erau . edu ) . Angela K . Thompson and Nicholas Hawkins are with the Department of Engineering Fundamentals , University of Louisville , Louisville , KY 40292 USA ( e - mail : angela . thompson @ louisville . edu ; nicholas . hawkins @ louisville . edu ) . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / TE . 2022 . 3175678 engineering education [ 1 ] . Since modeling is essential to solv - ing and designing engineering problems in the workforce , it is imperative engineering students are speciﬁcally taught about different types of models , as well as how to develop and apply them [ 2 ] . There are many beneﬁts to explicitly teaching modeling , particularly in the ﬁrst years of an engineering pro - gram [ 1 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . Although there are some known pedagogi - cal interventions ( e . g . , model - eliciting activities ( MEAs ) [ 4 ] ) , there is still a signiﬁcant need to develop more meaning - ful ways of teaching modeling throughout the engineering curricula , especially for ﬁrst - year engineering students [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . There has been an extensive amount of impactful research around modeling interventions , including development of pedagogical approaches and assessment tools , within the Computational adaptive expertise ( CADEX ) [ 3 ] , [ 5 ] and mod - els and modeling perspective ( M & MP ) [ 6 ] frameworks . For instance , Carberry , McKenna , Linsenmeier , and Cole [ 7 ] con - ducted research within the CADEX framework and found that explicit modeling interventions caused a signiﬁcant shift in the modeling conceptions of senior engineering students . In addition , to gain a greater understanding of modeling con - ceptions , Carberry and McKenna [ 1 ] expanded their research within the CADEX framework , noting that when students were taught a comprehensive mathematical module , they were more likely to discuss mathematical and predictive models . Research efforts within the M & MP have focused around a mathematical modeling intervention called MEAs [ 4 ] . Some of this research has focused on how students develop mathematical model solutions to MEAs ( e . g . , [ 8 ] and [ 9 ] ) , MEA implementation strategies within engineering courses ( e . g . , [ 10 ] and [ 11 ] ) , and the improvement of MEA implementation strategies in large ﬁrst - year engineering ( e . g . , [ 12 ] ) and upper - division courses ( e . g . , [ 13 ] and [ 14 ] ) . There are many concepts currently integrated in engineer - ing curricula that implicitly teach modeling skills , but lack clear instruction around the underlying use of engineering models . This is especially true about many ﬁrst - year engi - neering courses that focus on core concepts , such as problem solving , design , computer - aided design ( CAD ) , and intro - ductory computer programming [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] . Even though all these concepts involve modeling , that involve - ment may not be deﬁnitively discussed or demonstrated . For example , in many CAD courses , the instructional mate - rials focus on the speciﬁcs of how to use different tools and features in the CAD software rather than the ideas of modeling and their applications [ 17 ] . Similarly , teaching stu - dents how to develop an algorithmic solution ( a type of This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 License . For more information , see https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / MARBOUTI et al . : STUDENT AWARENESS OF MODELS IN FIRST - YEAR ENGINEERING COURSES 39 TABLE I P ARTICIPANTS ’ D EMOGRAPHICS ( N UMBER OF S TUDENTS ) model ) is fundamental to programming , although there is often a greater focus on syntax [ 16 ] . Most engineering education studies on computer programming focus on paired program - ming ( e . g . , [ 18 ] ) , extreme programming ( XP ) ( e . g . , [ 19 ] ) , or active learning teaching pedagogies [ 20 ] rather than the integration of modeling . These are examples of potentially missed opportunities for at least raising students’ awareness of types of engineering models and even possibly their abil - ity to develop , reﬁne , and / or apply them . In addition to developing more interventions , tools for assessing students’ awareness of models and acquirement of modeling skills are critical . Some types of engineering models that should be explic - itly taught are : mathematical , computational , physical , engi - neering drawing , CAD , ﬁnancial , and business models . One framework for categorizing the core types of engi - neering models consists of ﬁve categories : 1 ) physical ; 2 ) graphical / virtual ; 3 ) mathematical ; 4 ) computational ; and 5 ) business / ﬁnancial [ 21 ] . Physical models consist of proto - types . Graphical / virtual models consist of engineering draw - ings , hand sketches , and CAD models . Mathematical models are models utilizing mathematics ( e . g . , quantiﬁcation and for - mulas ) . Computational models are computerized models based on mathematical models ( e . g . , simulations ) . Some examples of business models are risk assessment and project manage - ment systems . Financial models focus on ﬁnancial aspects of assessing / predicting ; typically , a context - speciﬁc mathematical model . Student awareness of a model in this study is deﬁned as a student’s ability to recall and describe an engineering model . Based on Bloom’s taxonomy [ 22 ] recalling and describing a concept , which falls into lower levels of Bloom’s taxonomy , is necessary for achieving the higher levels , such as apply , ana - lyze , evaluate , and create . This is supported by Henning and Keune’s [ 23 ] framework for assessing students’ mathematical modeling abilities ; the ﬁrst level focused on their ability to deﬁne , describe , and recognize models . II . R ESEARCH P URPOSE AND Q UESTIONS In this study , explicit instruction in engineering modeling was integrated into two ﬁrst - year engineering courses ( one in CAD and one in programming ) and studied across two semesters . To evaluate how students’ awareness of engineer - ing models changed from the beginning to end of the semester , pre and post surveys were administered in each course . This study aims to answer the following research questions . 1 ) To what extent did student awareness of model types change after taking introductory engineering courses ? 2 ) To what extent did student awareness of model types differ by course ( CAD versus Programming ) or semester ( Fall versus Spring ) ? III . M ETHODS A . Settings and Participants A survey was administered in Fall 2019 and Spring 2020 in two required introductory ﬁrst - year engineering courses at Embry - Riddle Aeronautical University , a medium - sized pri - vate university that only served science , technology , engi - neering , and mathematics ( STEM ) and business students . The two courses , a CAD course and a Programming course , were redesigned to incorporate modeling concepts throughout the course . Students typically take one of these courses in their ﬁrst semester at the university and the other in their second ; only in rare occurrences can they take them at the same time . The order of the courses is not predetermined and normally depends on their scores on placement tests for Calculus and the purdue spatial visualization test : rotations ( PSVT : R ) . Calculus I is a required co - requisite for the Programming course and students must receive a passing score of the PSVT : R to take the CAD course . Fall 2019 classes were face - to - face . While the semester started face - to - face in Spring 2020 , all the stu - dents were transitioned online after the COVID - 19 pandemic interrupted schools . The majority of students in these courses were White and Male ( See Table I ) . 40 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION , VOL . 66 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2023 TABLE II C OURSE I NFORMATION The two courses were taught in small sections of 11 to 27 students per section ( Table II ) . There were 16 to 18 sec - tions of each course in each semester . Six to eight professors taught one to four sections of the CAD course across the two semesters . Six different professors taught one to four sec - tions of the Programming course across the two semesters . There was variation in how each instructor delivered the course content . Both courses had their own set of content , delivery , assignment , and assessment requirements , but each instructor had ﬂexibility in how they implemented these in their sections . The CAD course teaches 3 - D visualization and paramet - ric modeling using a combination of hand sketching and CATIA . Modeling language is a natural part of such a course , in particular the physical and virtual models associated with 3 - D printing and CAD . The course design includes a ﬁnal project to create a virtual model of a self - selected multipart object ( e . g . , stapler , skateboard , and lamp ) , allowing students the opportunity to measure and create virtual models of each part , their corresponding assemblies , and all of the appro - priate engineering drawings for manufacturing . As part of the revised curriculum , language throughout the course was changed to more clearly emphasize that part and assembly design is modeling ( e . g . , “model the part” instead of “create the part” ) . A speciﬁc unit was added to the beginning of the CATIA portion of the course to contextualize modeling and how computational models underly the graphical / virtual mod - els they are creating . It also included that CATIA has tools for applying mathematical models to the parts ( e . g . , computational ﬂuid dynamics and stress / strain analysis ) . The Programming course teaches students fundamental pro - gramming concepts , such as deﬁning variables , understanding data types , logic statements , repetition , creating functions , array manipulation , string functions , and ﬁle input / output . The course also teaches engineering problem solving through a series of steps , including deﬁning the problem , understand - ing assumptions , developing a solution and algorithm , and testing the solution . A signiﬁcant portion of the course is an individual ﬁnal project , where students must develop a program that incorporates all the core coding techniques cov - ered in the course . These were assessed based on a common rubric . As part of the revised curriculum , the course incor - porated concepts about developing a mathematical model , then applying this model and further developing it through a computational model . Each instructor had different levels of modeling concepts incorporated in their course beyond one common modeling problem assignment with four submissions . For an example of these types of problems and the assessment tools used , refer to two previous publications [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] . B . Survey Design and Implementation A modeling survey was developed to investigate students’ awareness of different types of models and how to apply different models to solve engineering problems . The survey prompted students to discuss their concepts of STEM - related models , answer questions about models , and present ideas about types of models they would use to solve two different engineering problems . The full survey is presented in a prior publication [ 21 ] . The survey was developed by the research team and reviewed by four additional model experts . Three open - ended questions related to students’ awareness of types of engineering models were evaluated in this study . 1 ) What is a model in STEM ﬁelds ? 2 ) List different types of models that you can think of . 3 ) Describe each different type of model you listed . These questions were designed based on data collected and analyzed in a previous survey at another university . C . Data Collection The modeling survey was administered online to all stu - dents via Qualtrics . Students’ demographic information was also collected in the survey . The presurvey was administered at the beginning of each semester before student exposure to the modeling materials and the post survey was administered at the end of each semester . Table I shows the number of participants who completed pre and post surveys in each course , as well as the response rates . The survey was given to the students as part of an assignment that was graded based on completion . The response rates were much higher in the Programming courses than the CAD courses because the instructors were expected to use the completion as part of the course grade . CAD instruc - tors were asked to voluntarily participate , but completion was not explicitly expected to be a course grade . D . Data Analysis Student responses to the three questions were analyzed to highlight the types of engineering models that were identiﬁed in students’ responses . The students’ responses were coded by two researchers based on an established coding scheme ( shown in Table III ) . The intercoder reliability for the two researchers was more than 80 % across the ﬁve coding cate - gories ; for more details about development and application of the coding scheme refer to our previous publication about this process [ 21 ] . The resulting codes were then quantiﬁed to determine the number of different types of models that students included in their responses ( i . e . , physical , graphical / virtual , mathematical , computational , or business / ﬁnancial each counted as one type of model ) . To determine whether the number of model types identiﬁed by each student changed from the beginning to the end of the semester ( pre versus post survey ) , and whether there were differences across the two courses ( CAD versus Programming ) or semesters ( Fall versus Spring ) , a mixed - design ANOVA was MARBOUTI et al . : STUDENT AWARENESS OF MODELS IN FIRST - YEAR ENGINEERING COURSES 41 TABLE III D ESCRIPTIONS OF C ODING C ATEGORIES Fig . 1 . Mean number of models identiﬁed in each survey group . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . conducted . The survey ( pre / post ) was a within - subjects factor , while course and semester were between - subjects factors . IV . R ESULTS Out of 867 students , 602 students completed both the pre and post survey in a given course / semester . Fig . 1 shows the mean number of models described by students on pre and post surveys in each course / semester . Overall , students iden - tiﬁed more models at the end of the semester compared to the beginning of the semester ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Across all courses and semesters , the mean number of models increased from 1 . 73 to 2 . 18 or roughly half ( 0 . 45 ) of one model . The high - est gains were in the Fall Programming course . Students also identiﬁed more models in Spring 2020 compared to Fall 2019 ( p < 0 . 001 ) . There was no signiﬁcant difference across the two courses ( p = 0 . 624 ) . Improvements were seen in both courses , and students appeared to remember the model types between the Fall and Spring semesters ( Fall post mean = 1 . 99 and Spring pre mean = 1 . 94 ) with continued increased awareness in the Spring ( Spring post mean = 2 . 38 ) . Since the mean number of models increased in all sec - tions from beginning to the end of the semester , we further Fig . 2 . Percentage of students who identiﬁed each model type . ( a ) Shows the percentage of students who were enrolled in the CAD course in Fall and in the Programming course in Spring . ( b ) Shows the percentage of students who were enrolled in the Programming course in Fall and in the CAD course in Spring . investigated the types of models to understand which models were associated with increased or decreased numbers from pre to post - surveys ( Fig . 2 ) . The ﬁrst group of students , as shown in Fig . 2 ( a ) , were enrolled in the CAD course ﬁrst , in the Fall , and the Programming course in the next Spring semester . These stu - dents mostly identiﬁed physical and graphical models in both pre and post surveys . Identiﬁcation of physical and graphi - cal models decreased in the consequent semester , in which students were enrolled in the Programming course . For the other three models , mathematical , computational , and ﬁnan - cial , there was a gradual increase from beginning of the Fall semester to the end of the Spring semester . As students pro - gressed through the academic year , the percentage of students identifying these three model types increased . The second group of students , as shown in Fig . 2 ( b ) , were enrolled ﬁrst in the Programming course in the Fall semester and CAD course during the following Spring . In the Fall semester , the number of students who identiﬁed physical and graphical models did not change substantially from the begin - ning to the end of the semester . However , more students identiﬁed mathematical and computational models at the end of the semester compared to the beginning of the semester . Unlike the ﬁrst group ( who took CAD in the ﬁrst semester ) , 42 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION , VOL . 66 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2023 these students had a more evenly distributed identiﬁcation of different model types at the end of the Fall semester ; they iden - tiﬁed all model types ( except ﬁnancial ) at similar rates . In the Spring semester—at the beginning of the CAD course , graph - ical models were identiﬁed more than other models followed by physical models . At the end of the semester , the number of students who identiﬁed each type of model increased for all , except graphical models . At the end of the academic year ( in the Spring 2020 post - survey ) more students identiﬁed mathematical models than any other model type for both groups . In contrast , ﬁnancial models were identiﬁed the least compared to other models . Overall , the ﬁrst group [ Fig . 2 ( a ) ] had higher post results for students identifying computational and ﬁnancial models . The second group [ Fig . 2 ( b ) ] had higher post results for students identi - fying physical , graphical , and mathematical models . Based on the data , the Programming course appeared to have the great - est impact in broadening students’ awareness of different types of models . V . D ISCUSSION Many upper - level undergraduate and graduate engineering courses require students to apply and develop various types of models . Sometimes there is an expectation to do this with - out an established foundation . To ensure students are more prepared to apply and build various types of models , it is imperative to establish a common language and awareness of model types as early as possible in the engineering curriculum . There has been a signiﬁcant amount of research that has shown ﬁrst - year engineering students typically only show awareness of prototypical or physical models . This is a very limited view - point of engineering models . It is critical that we broaden engineering students’ awareness of more model types and their purposes ( e . g . , demonstrate and test concepts / designs , interpret data , and make predictions ) to ensure their success in their engineering education and careers . This study takes a ﬁrst step at assessing what ﬁrst - year stu - dents “know” about types of engineering models . To consider something as known according to Bloom’s taxonomy , someone must ﬁrst remember a piece of information then demonstrate understanding [ 22 ] . A demonstration of remembering can be as simple as quoting an idea , but students were required to go beyond this . Within the administered Modeling Survey tool , students had to communicate their ideas about model types , along with descriptions and their purposes , without referring to resources ; this aligns with the understanding level of Bloom’s taxonomy [ 22 ] . In this article , we looked speciﬁcally about awareness of model types , but the survey included questions that assess other aspects of modeling ( purpose of models and how models can be applied in speciﬁc problems ) that will be evaluated in future studies . The survey has broad application for engineering instruc - tors , professors , and administrators seeking a tool to assess their students’ perceptions of engineering models . For exam - ple , instructors implementing MEAs , emphasizing modeling language , or changing a project to utilize modeling in their courses can use this survey to assess how their students’ understandings of model deﬁnitions , purposes , and applica - tions change . This study only focused on the ﬁrst three modeling ques - tions of the survey that were about students’ deﬁnitional knowledge , but the other questions in the survey assess stu - dents’ ideas about how models are used and how to approach two different modeling problems . Rodgers et al . [ 21 ] provided the full survey along with discussion about the implemen - tation of the survey and some initial analysis of the data . Additionally , the authors developed a MATLAB tool for automated analysis of the open - ended responses [ 26 ] . There were some differences in the types of models stu - dents identiﬁed most frequently depending on which course they were in ( CAD versus Programming ) . While the presur - vey was conducted at the beginning of the semester before teaching any modeling content , there appeared to be a bias toward the students’ anticipation of the course content in the survey responses , since the model types that are more closely related to the course were more commonly identiﬁed even in their presurvey responses ( i . e . , physical and graphical mod - els were more frequently identiﬁed in CAD courses compared to Programming , while mathematical and computational mod - els were more frequently identiﬁed in Programming courses compared to CAD courses ) . The students’ ideas of what they should learn appeared to inﬂuence their presurvey responses . Although the students in two different groups started with different proﬁles of models identiﬁed in the ﬁrst semester , they ended up with a similar proﬁle at the end of the academic year ( after completing both courses ) . At the beginning of the Fall semester , all the students referred to physical and graphical models the most—although this was much more prevalent in the CAD course ( presurvey ) . The students in the Programming course also identiﬁed other model types more than the stu - dents in the CAD course . The biggest difference between the two groups was seen at the end of the Fall semester . The results for the Programming course presented a more even distribution across four of the ﬁve types of models versus the CAD course which still saw a more skewed distribution heavily favoring physical and graphical models . At the end of the Spring semester , mathematical models were identiﬁed the most followed by physical , graphical , and computational models . Financial models were identiﬁed the least among all the models since this was not emphasized in the courses . The students were required to build mathematical models to calcu - late costs and analyze stock market data in the Programming course , but there should have been more explicit language embedded throughout these problems about ﬁnancial models . In addition , neither course emphasized risk assessment nor project management ( business - related models ) . These results may imply the order of CAD and Programming courses in ﬁrst - year engineering does not have a signiﬁcant impact on students’ awareness of engineering model types . Overall , there was an increase in the number of models students described over time ( from the beginning to end of the semester and Fall to Spring ) regardless of which course they were in . This shows some success in achieving desired learning outcomes ( that students are able to identify and describe different types of models used in STEM ) through MARBOUTI et al . : STUDENT AWARENESS OF MODELS IN FIRST - YEAR ENGINEERING COURSES 43 these intentional , explicit modeling interventions . Additionally , since the number of models identiﬁed by students in the Spring was higher than the Fall semester , students likely retained some of the knowledge they gained in the ﬁrst course . A . Limitations and Future Work This study had some limitations . First , the focus on the num - ber and type of models is not indicative of whether students understand how these models are created and applied , only their awareness of the model type is assessed . In the statisti - cal analysis , it was assumed that students in different courses were independent groups . However , there was some crossover in students who took both courses ( 18 students , about 2 % , took both courses in either Fall 2019 or Spring 202 ) . Planned future work will assess students longitudinally over multiple courses to see how their understanding of engineering models improves over time . Another limitation of this study is CAD students’ participa - tion was voluntary ; it was encouraged but not graded . This likely contributed to the lower response rate in the CAD courses compared to the Programming courses . In voluntary - based survey participation , there is a possibility that the students who were more self - conﬁdent and performed better in the course be more likely to respond to the survey . There were many struggles across the nation in Spring 2020 with universities transitioning online in the matter of days or weeks . The impact of COVID - 19 may have impacted the results , but this was not investigated . There were fewer responses in the Spring 2020 post - survey , which may have been an impact of the transition to fully online courses . As far as the content of the courses , the CAD course was designed to be a fully face to face course , but the bulk of the modeling intervention was at the front - end of the semester when the instruction was face to face . The Programming course was designed as a hybrid course with lecture materials already cre - ated as online videos , so the transition online did not make a signiﬁcant change to materials delivered . Similarly , the in - class activity materials by the second half of the semester required primarily coding on computers and all required written com - ponents were already completed by this point in the semester . All in - class activities and homework assignments maintained the same building and applying models—no assignments were modiﬁed . COVID - 19 might have exacerbated the impact of some of the out - of - class factors on student learning . Follow - up studies can investigate this impact on students’ understanding of the engineering models . VI . C ONCLUSION The analysis of students’ responses about models in STEM shown the students’ awareness of different types of models improved over time ( beginning to end of semester and Fall to Spring ) . Students’ awareness of model types improved after taking either or both the CAD or / and Programming courses . Overall , the highest demonstrated awareness of types of mod - els was seen in the post - surveys in the second semester ( Spring 2020 ) for both analyzed groups . Although at the beginning of the academic year the students in two different groups started with somewhat different proﬁles in identifying the models , they ended up with a similar proﬁle at the end of the year . Both courses had a positive impact on students . However , the Programming course seemed to have the greatest impact in helping students diversify their awareness of different types of models . A CKNOWLEDGMENT Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or recommenda - tions expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] A . R . Carberry and A . F . McKenna , “Exploring student conceptions of modeling and modeling uses in engineering design , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 103 , no . 1 , pp . 77 – 91 , 2014 . [ 2 ] J . Gainsburg , “Learning to model in engineering , ” Math . Thinking Learn . , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . 259 – 290 , 2013 . [ 3 ] A . McKenna , R . Linsenmeier , and M . Glucksberg , “Characterizing com - putational adaptive expertise , ” in Proc . ASEE Annu . Conf . Exposit . , 2008 , pp . 1 – 11 . [ 4 ] J . S . Zawojewski , H . A . Diefes - Dux , and K . J . Bowman , Models and Modeling in Engineering Education : Designing Experiences for all Students . Rotterdam , The Netherlands : Sense Publ . , 2008 . [ 5 ] A . F . McKenna , “Adaptive expertise and knowledge ﬂuency in design and innovation , ” in Cambridge Handbook of Engineering Education Research . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge Univ . Press , 2015 . [ 6 ] R . Lesh , H . M . Doerr , G . Carmona , and M . Hjalmarson , “Beyond con - structivism , ” Math . Thinking Learn . , vol . 5 , nos . 2 – 3 , pp . 211 – 233 , 2003 . [ 7 ] A . R . Carberry , A . F . McKenna , R . A . Linsenmeier , and J . Cole , “Exploring senior engineering students’ conceptions of modeling , ” in Proc . 118th ASEE Annu . Conf . Exposit . , 2011 , pp . 1 – 7 . [ 8 ] H . A . Diefes - Dux , M . A . Hjalmarson , and J . S . Zawojewski , “Student team solutions to an open - ended mathematical modeling problem : Gaining insights for educational improvement , ” J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 102 , no . 1 , pp . 179 – 216 , 2013 . [ 9 ] H . A . Diefes - Dux , K . Bowman , J . S . Zawojewski , and M . Hjalmarson , “Quantifying aluminum crystal size part 1 : The model - eliciting activity , ” J . STEM Educ . Innov . Res . , vol . 7 , nos . 1 – 2 , p . 51 , 2006 . [ 10 ] H . A . Diefes - Dux , M . A . Hjalmarson , T . K . Miller , and R . Lesh , “Chapter 2 : Model - eliciting activities for engineering education , ” in Models and Modeling in Engineering Education : Designing Experiences for All Students . Rotterdam , The Netherlands : Sense Publ . , 2008 , pp . 17 – 35 . [ 11 ] E . Hamilton , R . Lesh , F . Lester , and M . Brilleslyper , “Model - eliciting activities ( MEAs ) as a bridge between engineering education research and mathematics education research , ” Adv . Eng . Educ . , vol . 1 , no . 2 , p . n2 , 2008 . [ 12 ] H . A . Diefes - Dux and P . Imbrie , “Chapter 4 : Modeling activities in a ﬁrst - year engineering course , ” in Models and Modeling in Engineering Education : Designing Experiences for All Students . Rotterdam , The Netherlands : Sense Publ . , 2008 , pp . 37 – 92 . [ 13 ] R . M . Clark , L . J . Shuman , and M . Besterﬁeld - Sacre , “In - depth use of modeling in engineering coursework to enhance problem solving , ” in Modeling Students’ Mathematical Modeling Competencies . Boston , MA , USA : Springer , 2010 , pp . 173 – 188 . [ 14 ] T . P . Yildirim , L . Shuman , M . Besterﬁeld - Sacre , and T . Yildirim , “Model eliciting activities : Assessing engineering student problem solv - ing and skill integration processes , ” Int . J . Eng . Educ . , vol . 26 , no . 4 , pp . 831 – 845 , 2010 . [ 15 ] A . El - ZEin , T . Langrish , and N . Balaam , “Blended teaching and learning of computer programming skills in engineering curricula , ” Adv . Eng . Educ . , vol . 1 , no . 3 , p . n3 , 2009 . [ 16 ] H . Fangohr , “A comparison of C , MATLAB , and python as teach - ing languages in engineering , ” in Proc . Int . Conf . Comput . Sci . , 2004 , pp . 1210 – 1217 . 44 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION , VOL . 66 , NO . 1 , FEBRUARY 2023 [ 17 ] E . Ozturk , B . Yalvac , X . Peng , L . M . Valverde , P . D . McGary , and M . Johnson , “Analysis of contextual computer - aided design ( CAD ) exer - cises , ” in Proc . ASEE Annu . Conf . Exposit . , Atlanta , GA , USA , 2013 , pp . 1 – 16 . [ 18 ] C . McDowell , L . Werner , H . E . Bullock , and J . Fernald , “The impact of pair programming on student performance , perception and persistence , ” in Proc . 25th Int . Conf . Softw . Eng . , 2003 , pp . 602 – 607 . [ 19 ] L . Williams and R . Upchurch , “Extreme programming for software engi - neering education ? ” in Proc . 31st Annu . Front . Educ . Conf . , vol . 1 , 2001 , p . T2D - 12 . [ 20 ] J . McNeil , A . Thompson , and N . Hawkins , “A comparison of students learning programming with online modules , instruction , and team activ - ities , ” presented at the ASEE Annu . Conf . Exposit . , Salt Lake City , UT , USA , 2018 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / peer . asee . org / 29665 [ 21 ] K . J . Rodgers , A . Thompson , M . A . Verleger , and F . Marbouti , “Types of models identiﬁed by ﬁrst - year engineering students , ” in Proc . 128th Annu . Amer . Soc . Eng . Educ . ( ASEE ) Conf . Exposit . , Long Beach , CA , USA , Jun . 2021 , pp . 1 – 20 . [ 22 ] D . R . Krathwohl , “A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy : An overview , ” Theory Pract . , vol . 41 , no . 4 , pp . 212 – 218 , 2002 . [ 23 ] H . Henning and M . Keune , “Levels of modelling competencies , ” in Modelling and Applications in Mathematics Education ( New ICMI Study Series ) , vol . 10 , W . Blum , P . L . Galbraith , H . W . Henn , and M . Niss , Eds . Boston , MA , USA : Springer , 2007 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 29822 - 1 _ 23 [ 24 ] K . J . Rodgers , M . A . Verleger , and F . Marbouti , “Comparing students’ solutions to an open - ended problem in an introductory programming course with and without explicit modeling interventions , ” in Proc . 127th Annu . Amer . Soc . Eng . Educ . ( ASEE ) Conf . Exposit . , Jun . 2020 , pp . 1 – 25 . [ 25 ] K . J . Rodgers , J . C . McNeil , M . A . Verleger , and F . Marbouti , “Impact of a modeling intervention in an introductory programming course , ” in Proc . 126th Annu . Amer . Soc . Eng . Educ . ( ASEE ) Conf . Exposit . , Tampa , FL , USA , Jun . 2019 , pp . 1 – 23 . [ 26 ] K . J . Rodgers , A . Thompson , N . Hawkins , M . A . Verleger , and F . Marbouti , “Developing a program to assist in qualitative data anal - ysis : How engineering students’ discuss model types , ” in Proc . 129th Annu . Amer . Soc . Eng . Educ . ( ASEE ) Conf . Exposit . , Minneapolis , MN , USA , Jun . 2022 , pp . 1 – 16 . Farshid Marbouti received the Ph . D . degree in engineering education from Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA , in 2016 . Since then , he has been an Assistant Professor with the College of Engineering , San Jose State University , San Jose , CA , USA . He has pub - lished more than 50 peer - reviewed journal and conference papers . His research interests include student success , learning analytics , and design education . Kelsey J . Rodgers received the Ph . D . degree in engineering education from Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA , in 2016 . She was an Assistant Professor with the Engineering Fundamentals Department , Embry - Riddle Aeronautical University , Daytona Beach , FL , USA , from 2016 to 2021 . She was also a Faculty Advisor for the ERAU col - legiate section of Society of Women Engineers . She also disseminates works through her YouTube channel : Engineering with Dr . Kelsey Joy . She has pub - lished more than 30 peer - reviewed journal and conference papers , as well as presented more ten other conferences and workshops . Her main research interests revolve around students’ ability to build and apply mathematical and computational models . Angela K . Thompson received the Ph . D . degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Louisville , Louisville , KY , USA , in 2011 . She is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Engineering Fundamentals , University of Louisville . Her research interests are primarily in injury biomechanics and in engineering education , particularly related to ﬁrst - year engineering instruction . Matthew Verleger received the Ph . D . degree in engineering education from Purdue University , West Lafayette , IN , USA , in 2010 . He is a Professor of Engineering Fundamentals with Embry - Riddle Aeronautical University , Daytona Beach , FL , USA . His research interests include student use of models and modeling , development of educational software , and gamiﬁcation of engineering courses . Nicholas Hawkins received the Ph . D . degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Louisville , Louisville , KY , USA , in 2020 . He is an Assistant Professor with the Engineering Fundamentals Department , University of Louisville . His research interests are in engineering education for ﬁrst - year students and electrical control systems .