326 3rd ICDC The Third International Conference on Design Creativity ( 3rd ICDC ) ISBN 978 - 1 - 904670 - 60 - 5 Bangalore , India , 12th - 14th January 2015 A METHOD OF CREATING NEW SCENES IN WHICH PRODUCTS ARE USED BY FOCUSING ON THEMATIC RELATIONS N . Sumitani 1 , T . Taura 2 and G . V . Georgiev 2 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , Kobe University , Kobe , Japan 2 Organization of Advanced Science and Technology , Kobe University , Kobe , Japan Abstract : This study aims to develop a method that creates new scenes in which a new product may be used . This method is developed by focusing on thematic relations , which are the relations between two concepts through a thematic scene . Thematic relations enable us to represent the functions and structure of a product , as well as the scenes in which the product are used . We propose a specific method for constructing a database of thematic relations and creating a new scene using this database . This method is implemented in a computer system and a case study demonstrates the use of this system . Keywords : design , scene , thematic relations 1 . Introduction In the modern era of manufacturing , the creation of novel and attractive products is expected . The design of new functions plays an important role in the production of such novel and attractive products . There are two primary types of methods for approaching the design of new functions . One type of method approaches function design from inside the product , examining its physical properties and creating new functions based on the mechanisms and structure of the product . An example of this type of method is described in a study on functional reasoning ( Chakrabarti & Bligh , 2001 ) . The second type of method approaches function design from outside the product , investigating and creating the " scenes " ( context ) in which the product may be used . For example , the portable audio player is a product that was designed to satisfy a particular function that was identified by examining the scene , " listening to music while walking outside the house . " In this study , we develop a method in which a new function is generated based on analysis of the context outside a product : a new scene is created based on a user ' s everyday life , and particularly the user’s actions and product usage in the scene . This method focuses on the thematic relations ( the relations between the concepts , Shoben & Gagné , 1997 ) and how they can be applied to create a new scene . Extending our previous studies on the use of thematic relations for design ( Nagai & Taura , 2006 ; Nagai & Taura , 2009 ) , this paper reports a method for constructing a database of thematic 3rd ICDC 327 relations and subsequently for creating a new scene using this database . The idea involved in this method can also be applied to software engineering and HCI scenarios . Furthermore , the discussion of this method involves a general problem that extends beyond the domain of natural language processing and intelligence . It is an ambitious attempt to extend the scope of design research in the pre - design stage that occurs prior to the clarification of specification normally provided as the starting point of the design process . In other words , this study focuses not only on the product itself but also on the situation surrounding the product . 2 . Thematic relations We have previously defined the concept in design as that which refers to the figure of an object along with other representations ( such as attributes or functions of the object ) which have existed , are existing , or might exist in the human mind as well as in the real world ( Taura et al . , 2012 ) . Generally , with respect to the relations between concepts , two types of relations have been identified : taxonomic relations and thematic relations ( Nagai & Taura , 2006 ) . A taxonomic relation is a relation that represents the physical resemblance between two concepts , and it is linked with concept classification based on a superordinate - subordinate relation . In Figure 1 ( a ) , for example , " apple " and " orange” are subordinate concepts included in the superordinate concept " fruit . " They involve many common features , such as being " edible " and " growing on a tree . " This type of relation between concepts is a taxonomic relation . By contrast , a thematic relation represents the relation between two concepts through a thematic scene . In Figure 1 ( b ) , for example , there are few resemblances between " apple " and " knife . " However , we can recognize that " apple " and " knife " are still closely related to each other , because the scene of " cutting an apple with a knife " represents this connection . As this example shows , even when a taxonomic resemblance between concepts cannot be found , a strong relationship may exist ; such a relationship is called a thematic relation . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 . Examples of a taxonomic relation ( a ) and a thematic relation ( b ) 2 . 1 . Classification of thematic relations Thematic relations are expressed by three concepts : two concepts relate to each other in a scene , and one of the three concepts relates the other two to each other , explaining the scene . For example , the three concepts could be described as < car , listen , music > , in which " car " and " music " are related by the concept " listen " or < apple , cut , knife > , in which " apple " and " knife " are related by the concept " cut . " Thematic relations can be classified as follows :  A relation between an object and a place This is a thematic relation between an object and a place where the object exists . Examples are < car , listen , music > and < train , listen , announcement > .  A relation between an object and time This is a thematic relation between an object and the time when the object exists . Examples are < winter , warm up , heater > and < night , switch on , light > .  A relation between the whole of an object and one of its parts This is a thematic relation between a concept and one of the parts which comprise it . Examples are < cow , milking , milk > and < sheep , shear , wool > .  A relation between a product and its material 328 3rd ICDC This is a thematic relation between a product and one of the materials of which it is made . Examples are < bread , made , flour > and < coffee , brew , coffee beans > .  A relation between a subject of usage and its object This thematic relation occurs when a concept is used by a particular subject . Examples are < dog , eat , dog food > and < vacuum cleaner , consume , electricity > .  A relation between causes and effects This thematic relation occurs when one concept causes another . Examples are < fire , yield , burn > and < electricity , supply , heat > .  A relation between a tool or method and its object This thematic relation occurs when an object ( e . g . , a tool or method ) affects another object . An example is < apple , cut , knife > . 2 . 2 . Role of thematic relations in function design In the field of design , the following situations can be expressed by thematic relations :  A scene in which a product is used by a user For example , < train , listen , music > describes a scene in which a portable music player is used .  A user’s interface with a product For example , < screen , scroll , hand ＞ describes the operation method of a touch panel .  The function of a product For example , < engine , rotate , shaft > describes the function of an engine .  The structure of a product For example , < car , run , tire > describes the structure of car . This range of situations that can be represented by thematic relations encompasses almost all the phases of function design . Here , it should be noted that the thematic relations can represent not only the scenes in which a product is used , but also the states ( structure or function ) of a product . 3 . Creation of a new scene using thematic relations We can identify a process for generating a concept for a new product , based on the use of thematic relations to express both the scenes in which a product will potentially be used and the states of the product . First , a new scene is created ; next , a concept for a new product is generated based on analysis of this newly created scene . The above - mentioned example of developing a portable audio player can be explained according to this same process . First , the new scene of " listening to music anywhere outside the house ( e . g . , on a train ) " is created as an extension of the existing scene of " listening to music in a room . " Then , a concept is generated for a new product that is " movable and compact , " and which can realize the newly created scene . The general method of concept generation discussed here can be summarized into the following process : Step 1 : A new scene is created . Step 2 : A concept for a new product is generated based on consideration of this newly created scene , and then the concept is embodied into a product . This paper focuses on Step 1 . We propose two specific methods to achieve Step 1 : a method for creating a new scene by combining two thematic relations , and a method for creating a new scene by replacing one of the words in a thematic relation . Both of these methods follow the method of concept generation ( Taura & Nagai , 2012 ) . 3 . 1 . A method for creating a new scene by combining two thematic relations 3rd ICDC 329 This method is based on creating a new scene by combining two thematic relations . In order to combine thematic relations , some kind of resemblance between them is required . For example , a shared or similar word among these different relations is useful to bring them together . Generally , thematic relations can be combined freely : a thematic relation can be combined with any other thematic relation . However , we focus on combinations in which one thematic relation represents everyday life , because a new scene is thought to have a traditional background or precursor in everyday life , even though the new scene itself is beyond our everyday life . Figure 2 illustrates an example of combining the following thematic relations : " listening to the announcement on the train " < train , listen , announce > and " listening to music on a CD " < music , listen , CD > . In this example , " listen " is the shared concept found in both of the thematic relations . As a result of their combination , the new scene < train , listen , music > is created . < train , listen , music > < train , listen , announcement > < music , listen , CD > commonality combine Figure 2 . Example of combining thematic relations 3 . 2 . A method for creating a new scene by replacing one of the words in a thematic relation This method is based on replacing one of the words in a thematic relation with another word . Figure 3 illustrates an example of creating the scene of " sending a landscape photograph by mobile phone " by replacing the word " mail " with " landscape photograph " in the pre - existing scene , " sending mail by mobile phone . " This method is a type of analogy . < mobile phone , send , mail > < mobile phone , send , landscape photograph > replace Figure 3 . Example of replacing a word in a thematic relation 4 . A method for constructing a database of thematic relations A database in which many different situations are stored is required to enable the creation of a new scene according to the methods described in Section 3 . In this study , we believe that everyday life is expressed in documents that are published in public , and we extracted thematic relations from those documents . The origin of the corpus is a large - scale corpus that consists of 470 million sentences ( Kawahara & Kurohashi , 2006 ) . A set of concepts that can be expressed as a thematic relation can be obtained from the grammatical dependency relations present in the structure of sentences . Figure 4 illustrates examples of two types of grammatical dependency relations , represented in tree structures . Figure 4 ( a ) depicts a structure in which three words are connected to each other by virtue of one word being connected both the other words . Figure 4 ( b ) illustrates a structure in which the three words are connected to each other in a series . These structures can also be represented as thematic relations . The structure presented in Figure 4 ( a ) is described in the form < apple , cut , knife > and the structure presented in Figure 4 ( b ) is described in the form < CD , listen , music > . In this study , these grammatical structures of thematic relations were obtained using " The Stanford Parser " ( Klein & Manning , 2003 ) . The procedure of extracting thematic relations is as follows ( illustrated in Figure 5 ) : 330 3rd ICDC Step 1 : Sentence structures are analyzed using a Parser . The example in Figure 5 shows the process in which a sentence ( " He listens to his favorite music with a CD player " ) is divided into eight words and expressed in a tree structure . Step 2 : Specific words are connected . For example , the specific combination " noun + noun " is connected into one word . In the example presented in Figure 5 , the individual words " CD " and " player " are combined into " CD player . " Step 3 : The structures by which three words are connected to each other ( either one word being connected to the other two words or all three words being connected in series ) are extracted . Figure 5 depicts how the sets " He , music , listen , " " He , CD player , listen , " " music , CD player , listen , " " listen , music , favorite , " " his , favorite , music , " and " listen , music , his " are all extracted from the structure that was obtained in Step 2 . Step 4 : Among the sets of three words that were obtained in Step3 , those which include words that are unnecessary for thematic relations ( e . g . , pronouns or emotional expressions ) are removed . Step 5 : The sets of three words that have been identified as thematic relations are stored in the thematic relation database . In Figure 5 , " music , CD player , listen " is identified as " a relation between a tool or method and its object . " Currently , this identification is performed by a system user . cut knife apple listen music CD ( a ) ( b ) Figure 4 . Examples of modification structures 3rd ICDC 331 He listens to his favorite music with a CD player . He , music , listen He , CD player , listen music , CD player , listen listen , music , favorite his , favorite , music listen , music , his listens He music player his favorite a CD ↙ ↓ ↘ ↙ ↓ ↓ ↘ step1 step3 < music , listen , CD player > He , music , listen He , CD player , listen music , CD player , listen listen , music , favorite his , favorite , music listen , music , his step4 step5 step2 listens He music CD player his favorite a ↙ ↓ ↘ ↙ ↓ ↓ Figure 5 . Process of extracting thematic relations 5 . A system to generate new scenes Figure 6 presents a flow chart illustrating the creation of a new scene by combining thematic relations . The system in which we have implemented this flow chart searches the thematic relation database by referring to the keywords that are input by a user . Currently , the thematic relation database contains nearly three million relations , which have been obtained by following Step 1 to Step 4 of the process proposed in Section 4 ; this means that the relations have not yet been identified as thematic relations , because the procedure involved in Step 5 is still performed manually . Figure 7 shows the interface of a prototype of a computer system that illustrates the situation in which thematic relations are combined . Figure 8 depicts some of the search results obtained by inputting the keyword " car . " In this case , the thematic relations < map , look , car > and < map , look , display > are selected from the displayed list , and buttons that correspond to these thematic relations are pushed . The outcome of the above procedures , the combined thematic relations , is displayed in Figure 9 . Among them , the new thematic relation < car , look , display > can be selected . 332 3rd ICDC start Input keywords for searching thematic relations Display a list of thematic relations Select thematic relations Search the database for the thematic relations Select a suitable new thematic relation Display an outcome of creating new thematic relations end Thematic relations are combined Display a list of combined new thematic relations Figure 6 . Flow chart to create a new scene by combining thematic relations Figure 7 . Interface that illustrates the situation in which the thematic relations are combined 3rd ICDC 333 Figure 8 . Some results of searching thematic relations Figure 9 . Outcome of creating new thematic relations 6 . Conclusion In this study , we have proposed methods for expressing and creating a new scene in which a product may be used by focusing on thematic relations between concepts . We have developed specific methods for operating with thematic relations and constructing a database of thematic relations . We intend to extend the methods developed in this study in order to integrate methods to design new functions , incorporating approaches that work from both inside and outside the product by examining both the internal states ( structure or function ) and external scenes ( context ) . Acknowledgements We would like to express our thanks to Prof . Eiko Yamamoto , Mr . Yoshihiro Kamakura , and Mr . Takehide Takahashi for their efforts as the pioneers developing methods to create a new scene by focusing on thematic relations . This work was supported by KAKEN ( 24603012 ) . References 334 3rd ICDC Chakrabarti , A . , & Bligh , T . P . ( 2001 ) . A scheme for functional reasoning in conceptual design . Design Studies , 22 ( 6 ) , 493 – 517 . Kawahara , D . , & Kurohashi , S . ( 2006 ) . Case frame compilation from the Web using high - performance computing . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC2006 ) ( pp . 1344 - 1347 ) . Klein , D . , & Manning C . D . ( 2003 ) . Accurate unlexicalized parsing . In E . W . Hinrichs & D . Roth . ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics – Volume 1 ( pp . 423 – 430 ) . Stroudsburg , PA : Association for Computational Linguistics . Nagai , Y . , & Taura , T . ( 2006 ) . Formal description of concept - synthesizing process for creative design . In J . Gero ( Ed . ) , Design computing and cognition ( pp . 443 – 460 ) . London : Springer - Verlag . Nagai , Y . , & Taura , T . ( 2009 ) . Concept blending and dissimilarity : Factors for creative concept generation process . Design Studies , 30 ( 6 ) , 648 – 675 . Shoben , E . J . , & Gagné , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Thematic relation and the creation of combined concepts . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 31 – 50 ) . Washington , D . C . : American Psychological Association . Taura , T . , & Nagai , Y . ( 2012 ) . Concept generation for design creativity : A systematized theory and methodology . London : Springer - Verlag .