Knowledge Artefacts : Lessons learned and Stories as a means to transfer knowledge amongst cohorts of high school students working on an inquiry - based project Dhary Abuhimed School of information Studies , McGill University 3661 Peel St . Montreal , Quebec H3A 1X1 dhary . abuhimed @ mail . mcgill . ca Jamshid Beheshti School of information Studies , McGill University 3661 Peel St . Montreal , Quebec H3A 1X1 jamshid . beheshti @ mcgill . ca Charles Cole School of information Studies , McGill University 3661 Peel St . Montreal , Quebec H3A 1X1 charles . cole @ mcgill . ca Mohammed J AlGhamdi School of information Studies , McGill University 3661 Peel St . Montreal , Quebec H3A 1X1 mohammed . alghamdi @ mail . mcgill . ca Isabelle Lamoureux School of information Studies , McGill University 3661 Peel St . Montreal , Quebec H3A 1X1 isabelle . lamoureux1 @ mail . mcgill . ca ABSTRACT This paper briefly outlines the framework of an ongoing exploratory study on knowledge transfer ( KT ) between student cohorts working on an inquiry - based project using knowledge artefacts ( KA ) mediated by a website . Three successive cohorts of grade 8 students completed a history project which led them to build knowledge about an historical topic of interest . While working on their inquiry - based project , the students encountered obstacles and gained experiential knowledge of the research process . The researcher recorded the lessons learned and stories told by the students’ in the form of knowledge artefacts ( KA ) . The goal of this study is to transfer the experiential knowledge from previous cohorts , coded in the form of KAs and mediated by a website , to new students . The research rationale is based on the assumption that the transfer of experiential knowledge may improve the research processes and results of new students working on a similar project . Keywords Knowledge Artefacts , Knowledge Transfer , Inquiry - Based Projects INTRODUCTION When an individual or a team working within an organization completes a project , they generate both substantive knowledge ( Scardamalia & Bereiter , 2006 ; Kuhlthau et al . , 2007 ) about the project and knowledge about the processes involved to achieve successful completion ( Ayas & Zeniuk , 2001 ; Newell et . al . 2006 ; Murray & Summerlee , 2007 ) . A common problem is that when a project is completed , this knowledge is not transferred in order to be reused by others to make future projects more successful ( Prusak , 1997 ; Newell et . al . 2006 ) . The preliminary results of an ongoing study of successive cohorts of grade eight students working on an inquiry based history project show that students generate knowledge ( Cole et al . , 2013 ) . As the same history project is assigned to students of each new cohort , the researcher asks the following question : can the transfer of experiential knowledge from previous student to new students’ working on a similar project improve their research process and their results ? BACKGROUND Inquiry - Based Learning A growing body of research suggests that both project based learning ( Krajcik & Blumenfeld , 1998 ) and inquiry - based learning ( Edelson & Reiser , 2006 ) foster the ASIST 2013 , November 1 - 6 , 2013 , Montreal , Quebec , Canada . development of knowledge . However , due to the fact that the knowledge developed working on an inquiry - based project is personal and context - specific ( Scardamalia & Bereiter , 2006 ) , this type of knowledge often remains with the individual and does not get transferred beyond the timeframe and context of the project . ( Prusak , 1997 ; Von Zedtwitz , 2002 ; Scardamalia & Bereiter , 2006 ) . The Inquiry - Based History Project The objective of the inquiry - based history project is to have grade 8 students select an historical topic of interest , research the topic , organize the information , develop a thesis statement and prepare and present their findings to their teachers , peers and family members . The Research Process A six step research process ( Figure 1 ) was identified by a design team composed of nine students from the first cohort ( 2011 ) and researchers , in keeping with the bonded design approach ( Large et al . , 2006 ) . Based on observation , survey responses and interviews , the two successive student cohorts ( 2012 and 2013 ) followed the research process illustrated by their peers and agreed that it was an adequate representation of their actions within the context of the inquiry - based history project . Knowledge Artefacts The purpose of using a knowledge artefact is to share and transfer knowledge ( Holsapple & Joshi , 2001 ) . According to Newman & Conrad ( 1999 : 301 ) , KAs flow among and form the linkages between the activities and events that comprise knowledge flow . An artefact can be defined as a medium used to represent meaning and understanding . KAs come in a variety of forms and shapes , ranging from tangible items such as documents , files and pictures to intangible such as nods , and thoughts . In the current study , two types of KAs have been collected by the researcher : lessons learned and stories by students working on their inquiry - based history project . Lessons Learned Lessons learned are hard - earned experiences of successful and unsuccessful actions that may be captured and shared to prevent mistakes from being made by a subsequent group ( Secchi , 1999 ; Dalkir , 2005 , p . 338 ) . Students’ Stories Traditionally , stories have been used to share cultural and ancestral knowledge . In recent years , researchers have begun to view stories as a relevant medium for the transfer of knowledge within organizations ( Swap et al . 2001 : 110 ; Sole & Wilson , 2002 ) . The use of students’ stories within an inquiry - based project has been explored by researchers who reported that students appreciated when their inquiry projects were linked to those of their peers in past or present cohorts ( Scardamalia & Bereiter , 2006 ) . The Purpose of the Study The current study is exploring the use of a website to mediate KAs of past student cohorts with the aim of transferring their experiential knowledge to new students . Experiential knowledge has been defined as knowledge acquired by doing and practicing ( Dalkir , 2005 ) . METHODOLOGY Collecting Knowledge Artefacts The KAs have been collected by the researcher from three successive cohorts working on the inquiry - based history project . Data collection methods were weekly classroom observations and face - to - face audio recorded interviews with a selected sample of students ( see Table 1 ) . Moreover , during year 3 of the study , the researcher administered a survey designed specifically to capture lessons learned . Year 2011 2012 2013 Participants 44 48 37 Project Duration / weeks 12 8 10 Observation Sessions 64 32 40 Number of Interviews 40 36 36 - Number of students 10 12 12 - Interview Interval 4 3 3 Table 1 . Data gathering The Knowledge Artefact Website During year 4 of the study , the researcher will design a website that will host the KAs and make them accessible to the 2014 cohort working on the history project . Through the process of codification the KAs of past students will be made explicit in the form of readable documents and accessible to new students via the website . The KAs will be categorized according to the six steps of the research process , taking into consideration findings that they are more useful when linked to a specific process ( Weber et al . , 2000 ) . Hence , the new students will be able to browse and access the KAs associated with the specific step that they are completing in the research process ( see Figure 1 ) . For example , artefacts relating to the brainstorming process will be accessible to the students when they are working on that step of their research . An estimation of 90 grade eight students will have access to the KA Website . Data analysis The researcher will conduct a content analysis on the students’ projects and generate scores to be compared to those of previous cohorts and also to the grades assigned by the teachers ( Cole et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore face - to - face individual interviews with students will provide the researcher with valuable qualitative data about the students’ use of KAs and the transfer of experiential knowledge from previous student cohorts to new students . The selection criteria for interview participants will be based on the website usage and teacher’s recommendations . EXPECTED RESULTS Based on the researcher’s observation of the three previous cohorts , students often encounter similar obstacles at specific steps of the research process . For example , the choice of a topic causes problems as some students may change their topic towards the end of the project . Other common problems experienced by students are identifying when they have enough information and arriving at a thesis statement . Hence , transferring experiential knowledge gained by past student cohorts using the KA Website may help new students overcome common obstacles . Expected results are that the students of the 2014 cohort will benefit from the transfer of experiential knowledge from previous cohorts by using this knowledge to improve their research process and their results . FUTURE STUDIES Future studies could focus on developing a tool to capture , code and store , and transfer experiential knowledge automatically and on a larger scale without necessitating the direct actions of an agent , such as a researcher . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This research is funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada ( SSHRC ) . We would like to thank all the student volunteers and the teachers for participating in this research . Stories Stories Stories Stories Stories Stories LessonsLearned LessonsLearned LessonsLearned LessonsLearned LessonsLearned LessonsLearned Brainstorming Scope Topic Research Thesis Presentation Student C Student B Student A … . . I selected my topic after a museum visit . My topic is ( X ) , . . and it was inspired by the demonstration found at museum ( X ) . Following my visit , I visited this website www . ( X ) . com . . . and asked my parents to elaborate on the topic . I then discussed this idea with my teacher who encouraged me to research this topic . . . Student D Lesson Learned Narrative …I should have consulted my teacher early on about my topic before spending too much time on the research process… . …I even went as far as formulating my thesis statement before seeing my teacher . At that point , my teacher told me to start all over again with a new topic , new research and develop a thesis . . . Lesson Learned ( 1 ) Do not spend too much time researching a topic without consulting your teacher first . Student C Student B Student A … . . I chose this theme ( x ) because it was what clicked to me when I saw it at the museum . This theme of presentation is what attracted me in the first place , I feel that if I present my topic by following this theme my audience will feel attracted to it and interested… . Figure 1 . The six step Research Process identified by the student and researcher design team following the bonded design methodology . This figure illustrates how the lessons learned and stories told by previous students working on the inquiry - based history project will be linked to a specific step in the research process and made available for browsing to new students via the KA Website . REFERENCES Ayas , K . and Zeniuk , N . ( 2001 ) ‘Project - based Learning : Building Communities of Reflective Practitioners’ , Management Learning 32 ( 1 ) : 61 – 76 . Cole , C . , Behesthi , J . , Large , A . , Lamoureux , I . , Abuhimed , D . , & AlGhamdi , M . ( 2013 ) . Seeking information for a middle school history project : The concept of implicit knowledge in the students ' transition from Kuhlthau ' s Stage 3 to Stage 4 . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 64 ( 3 ) , 558 - 573 . Dalkir , K . ( 2005 ) . Knowledge management in theory and practice . Amsterdam / Boston : Elsevier / Butterworth Heinemann Edelson , D . C . , & Reiser , B . J . ( 2006 ) . Making authentic practices accessible to learners : Design challenges and strategies in . K . Sawyer ( Ed . ) , The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences ( pp . 335 - 354 ) . Cambridge University Press Holsapple , C . W . , & Joshi , K . D . ( 2001 ) . Organizational knowledge resources . Decision support systems , 31 ( 1 ) , 39 - 54 . Krajcik , J . S . , Blumenfeld , P . C . , Marx , R . W . , Bass , K . M . , Fredricks , J . , & Soloway , E . ( 1998 ) . Inquiry in project - based science classrooms : Initial attempts by middle school students . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 7 , 313 - 350 . Kuhlthau , C . , Maniotes , L . , & Caspari , A . ( 2007 ) . Guided inquiry : Learning in the 21st century : Libraries Unlimited . Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , & Bowler , L . ( 2006 ) . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library & Information Science Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 64 - 82 . Murray , J . , & Summerlee , A . J . S . ( 2007 ) . The impact of problem - based learning in an interdisciplinary first - year program on student learning behavior . Canadian Journal of Higher Education 37 ( 3 ) , 87 - 107 Newell , S . , Bresnen , M . , Edelman , L . , Scarbrough , H . , & Swan , J . ( 2006 ) . Sharing Knowledge Across Projects Limits to ICT - led Project Review Practices . Management Learning , 37 ( 2 ) , 167 - 185 . Newman , B . , & Conrad , K . W . ( 1999 ) . ‘A framework for characterizing knowledge management methods , practices and technologies ( the knowledge management forum ) . In available at : www . km - forum . org ( accessed February 2002 ) . Prusak , L . ( Ed . ) . ( 1997 ) . Knowledge in organizations . Elsevier Secchi , P . , Ciaschi , R . , & Spence , D . ( 1999 ) . A concept for an ESA lessons learned system . Secchi , P . , Éd . , Alerts and Lessons Learned : An effective way to prevent failures and problems , 57 - 61 . Scardamalia , M . , & Bereiter , C . ( 2006 ) . Knowledge building : Theory , pedagogy , and technology . In K . Sawyer ( Ed . ) , Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences ( pp . 97 - 118 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sole , D . , & Wilson , D . G . ( 2002 ) . Storytelling in organizations : The power and traps of using stories to share knowledge in organizations . LILA , Harvard , Graduate School of Education . Swap , W . , Leonard , D . , Shields , M . , & Abrams , L . ( 2001 ) . Using mentoring and storytelling to transfer knowledge in the workplace . Journal of management information systems , 18 ( 1 ) , 95 - 114 . Von Zedtwitz , M . ( 2002 ) . Organizational learning through post – project reviews in R & D . R & D Management , 32 ( 3 ) , 255 - 268 . Weber , R . , Aha , D . W . , & Becerra - Fernandez , I . ( 2000 ) . Categorizing intelligent lessons learned systems . In Intelligent Lessons Learned Systems : Papers from the AAAI 2000 Workshop ( pp . 63 - 67 ) . Weber , R . , Gunawardena , S . , & Abraham , G . ( 2008 ) . Representing and retrieving knowledge artifacts . In Practical Aspects of Knowledge Management ( pp . 86 - 97 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . .