Coﬁlin phosphatases and regulation of actin dynamics Timothy Y Huang , Ce´line DerMardirossian and Gary M Bokoch 1 Coﬁlin is a ubiquitous actin - binding factor required for the reorganization of actin ﬁlaments in eukaryotes . The dephosphorylation of coﬁlin enables its actin severing and depolymerizing activity and drives directional cell motility , thus providing a simple phosphoregulatory mechanism for actin reorganization . To date , two coﬁlin - speciﬁc phosphatases have been identiﬁed : Slingshot and Chronophin . These coﬁlin phosphatases are unrelated in sequence and regulatory properties , each potentially providing a unique mechanism for coﬁlin activation under varying biological circumstances . Addresses The Scripps Research Institute , Departments of Immunology and Cell Biology , 10550 N . Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , California , 92037 , USA Corresponding author : Bokoch , Gary M ( bokoch @ scripps . edu ) 1 T Huang and C DerMardirossian contributed equally to this review . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 This review comes from a themed issue on Cell structure and dynamics Edited by J Victor Small and Michael Glotzer Available online 7th December 2005 0955 - 0674 / $ – see front matter # 2005 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 11 . 005 Introduction The reorganization of actin at the leading edge of eukar - yotic cells is a fundamental aspect of cell motility , and requires the coordinated function of both actin - polymer - izing and actin - depolymerizing / severing factors . To drive the cell front forward , branched actin ﬁlaments are gen - erated at the leading edge through the action of the Arp2 / 3 complex and / or ﬁlamin A [ 1 , 2 ] . Actin depolymerizing components , including proteins of the coﬁlin / ADF ( actin depolymerizing factor ) family , disassemble F - actin from the rear of the actin network to recycle actin monomers to the leading edge for further rounds of polymerization . There is also growing evidence that coﬁlin - dependent F - actin severing activity is important for actin polymeriza - tion , as coﬁlin - severed F - actin fragments act as preferred substrates from which Arp2 / 3 builds actin networks [ 3 ] . Precise spatial regulation of coﬁlin - dependent actin - depolymerizing / severing activity appears to be crucial to cell motility , since site - speciﬁc activation of caged coﬁlin can determine the direction of cell movement [ 4 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . We discuss here current knowledge of the regulation and biological roles of the coﬁlin phosphatases in actin dynamics . Single - site phosphoregulation of coﬁlin Coﬁlin and related ADF family proteins ( henceforth generically referred to as coﬁlin ) are phosphorylated at a conserved N - terminal serine , Ser3 [ 5 ] . Early studies revealed that in its phosphorylated form coﬁlin is unable to bind actin , and that dephosphorylation of this site reactivated the actin - depolymerizing activity of coﬁlin [ 6 ] . From these studies , it became clear that coﬁlin phosphorylation / dephosphorylation at Ser3 acts as a sim - ple switch for actin assembly and disassembly / severing ( Figure 1 ) . Two kinase families have been shown to phosphorylate and deactivate coﬁlin : the LIM ( Lin - 11 / Isl - 1 / Mec - 3 ) kinases and the TES ( testicular protein ) kinases . Inter - estingly , no other substrates have been identiﬁed for these kinases . The LIM kinases , LIMK1 and LIMK2 , are ubiquitous in their tissue distribution [ 7 , 8 ] , whereas TESK1 is expressed most abundantly in testicular tissue [ 9 , 10 ] . LIM kinases are activated by phosphorylation of Thr 508 / 505 ( LIMK1 / 2 ) within the kinase activation loop through divergent Rho GTPase pathways : Rac / Cdc42 acting through p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) 1 and PAK4 [ 11 , 12 ] , Cdc42 acting through MRCK ( myotonic - dystro - phy - related cdc42 - binding kinase [ 13 ] , and RhoA through ROCK ( Rho - associated coiled - coil - containing kinase ) [ 14 ] . By contrast , TESK activation is dependent on integrin engagement upon cell attachment , and occurs independently of PAK1 / ROCK activation [ 15 ] ) . Func - tionally , the LIM and TES kinases promote F - actin stability through coﬁlin dephosphorylation and deactiva - tion , as their overexpression in cell lines promotes F - actin accumulation [ 15 ] . Clearly , LIMK regulation is a key factor in the coﬁlin phospho - regulatory switch mechanism , but it was not certain whether lack of LIM kinase activity is sufﬁcient to cause the decreases in phosphorylation that result in coﬁlin activation , or whether phosphatase activation is also necessary . In some cell types , cell stimulation induced changes in net phosphocoﬁlin levels , while in other cells ( e . g . 3T3 and A431 ) a signiﬁcant increase in phosphocoﬁlin turnover was observed with no signiﬁcant change in the total phosphocoﬁlin pool [ 16 ] . The latter observations suggested that the activity of both coﬁlin kinases and coﬁlin phosphatases was being regulated by common upstream stimulatory signals . As LIMK and TESK evolved the speciﬁc task of phosphorylating coﬁ - Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 www . sciencedirect . com lin , the possibility was raised that coﬁlin - speciﬁc phos - phatases might also exist . Although earlier studies implicated the involvement of phosphatases with broad substrate speciﬁcities , such as PP1 , PP2A and PP2B , inhibitors active against these phosphatases largely fail to block coﬁlin dephosphoryla - tion [ 5 ] . Such observations suggested that these general phosphatases may not account for the majority of coﬁlin phosphatase activity observed in response to cellular stimuli . Recent observations also indicate that coﬁlin dephosphorylation can be spatially restricted within spe - ciﬁc cellular subcompartments [ 17 , 18 ] and that directed coﬁlin phosphatase activity within these locations may be sufﬁcient to drive processes such as cell protrusion and motility , neurodegenerative stress responses , and even apoptosis . Thus far , two types of coﬁlin - selective phosphatases have been identiﬁed : the Slingshot family of phosphatases , and Chronophin . Slingshot , a conserved family of coﬁlin phosphatases Slingshot was initially identiﬁed as a dedicated coﬁlin phosphatase through genetic studies in Drosophila , where its dysfunction was noted to cause disorganized epidermal cell morphogenesis , including splintered hair bristles ( hence the name Slingshot ) [ 19 ] . A single gene ( D - ssh ) in Drosophila codes for the 125 - kDa Slingshot ( dSSH ) Cofilin phosphatases and regulation of actin dynamics Huang , DerMardirossian and Bokoch 27 Figure 1 Phosphoregulatory cycle of cofilin . Cofilin phosphorylation at serine 3 by LIMK and TESK inhibits cofilin binding to F - actin , leading to F - actin stabilization . Cofilin dephosphorylation by SSH and CIN stimulates F - actin depolymerization and severing . The severing function can promote actin nucleation ( via Arp 2 / 3 ) , initiating additional actin assembly and directional motility . www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 protein . In both human and mouse , the Slingshot phos - phatases are represented by three genes ( SSH - 1 , - 2 , and - 3 ) , each with long and short variants with distinct tissue expression patterns ( Table 1 ) . SSH seems to be widely expressed in various organisms , but is notably absent in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Caenorhabditis elegans and Arabi - dopsis thaliana . In mammalian cells SSH - 1L , along with SSH - 2L and SSH - 3L , dephosphorylates both phospho - ADF and phospho - coﬁlin at the critical Ser3 residue , thereby suppressing actin ﬁlament assembly induced by LIMK1 or TESK1 [ 19 ] . Notably , SSH - 3L was less effective in dephosphorylating these substrates in com - parison with the two other isoforms . SSH phosphatases contain a protein phosphatase domain ( PTP ) with a canonical catalytic HCxxGxxR sequence found within other dual - speciﬁcity and protein tyrosine phosphatases . Although SSH - 1L and SSH - 2L both co - localize with actin ﬁlaments in mammalian cells through a C - terminal F - actin binding region , the three SSH family phospha - tases differ in their subcellular localization , F - actin bind - ing activity , speciﬁc activity and tissue expression patterns ( Table 1 ) [ 20 ] . Biological activities Localized coﬁlin function was previously shown to be of importance during cell division , which suggested that coﬁlin regulators may also be involved in the cell division process . Indeed , SSH - 1L was found to localize at the cleavage furrow and midbody during cytokinesis [ 21 ] . Localization to these sites correlated with elevated SSH - 1L activity during telophase and cytokinesis , and coincided with the temporal pattern of coﬁlin depho - sphorylation during these stages [ 21 ] . Overexpression of phosphatase - inactive SSH1 led to aberrant accumula - tion of F - actin and phosphocoﬁlin during late cytokinesis , accompanied by frequent regression of the cleavage fur - row and formation of multinucleated cells , further sup - porting a role for SSH in cell division . SSH has also been implicated in the control of the motility and morphology of the growth cone and in neurite exten - sion through coﬁlin regulation . SSH induced highly motile growth cones and enhanced neurite extension rates , while antagonizing the repressive effects on growth cone beha - vior of LIMK1 [ 22 ] . SSH may regulate actin dynamics during membrane protrusion , as SSH - 1L is activated in insulin - stimulated MCF7 cells and accumulates in protru - sions where active coﬁlin , but not inactive phosphocoﬁlin , is concentrated [ 23 , 24 (cid:1) ] . These studies reﬂect multiple roles for SSH in various cell types . Localization As site - speciﬁc coﬁlin activation was previously shown to be critical for the regulation of various biological processes , 28 Cell structure and dynamics Table 1 Comparison of SSH and CIN phosphatases . Slingshot Chronophin Isoforms hSSH1 ( 115 . 5 kDa ) hSSH2 ( 158 . 2 kDa ) hSSH3 ( 73 . 0 kDa ) 31 . 7 kDa Tissue distribution ( based on mouse tissues ) Widespread ; brain a , thymus a , heart a , liver a , spleen a , kidney a , small intestine , skeletal muscle and testis examined Widespread ; brain a , thymus a , heart a , liver a , spleen , kidney , small intestine , skeletal muscle and testis a examined Widespread ; brain a , thymus , heart , liver , spleen , kidney a , small intestine a , skeletal muscle and testis a examined Widespread ; abundant in brain , heart , skeletal muscle , liver and kidney Regulatory motifs F - actin binding region ( except for SSH3 ) p85 SH3 binding motif , PLC g binding motif 14 - 3 - 3 binding motifs p85 SH3 binding motif , Akt , PKC consensus phosphorylation motifs Localization F - actin - rich lamellipodia F - actin - rich lamellipodia Membrane protrusions Membrane protrusions Mitosis b : metaphase — cortical actin ; anaphase / telophase — cleavage furrow ; late telophase / cytokinesis — cleavage furrow and midbody Mitosis b : prophase — cytoplasm ; metaphase — cytoplasm ; anaphase / telophase — cell poles ; late telophase / cytokinesis — cleavage furrow , acto - myosin contractile ring and midbody Regulatory proteins 14 - 3 - 3 proteins PtdIns 3 - kinase ? Calcium - regulated protein phosphatase ( Calcineurin ) PLC g ? PtdIns 3 - kinase PAK4 Substrates Coﬁlin , ADF , LIMK Coﬁlin , ADF , Pyridoxal 5 0 - phosphate c Implicated cell functions Mitosis , growth cone motility / morphology , neurite extension , regulation of membrane protrusion Mitosis , membrane protrusion ? , vitamin B6 metabolism c a Most abundant . b As shown in HeLa cells . c Non - protein substrate . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 www . sciencedirect . com the localization of SSH family phosphatases to speciﬁc subcellular sites is also likely to be required for their role in regulating actin dynamics . During cell motility , coﬁlin is an important catalystofactinﬁlament disassemblyrequiredto maintain lamellipodial protrusion . To facilitate actin reor - ganization at the leading edge , it has been reported that SSH becomes activated through its release from 14 - 3 - 3 in the cytoplasm , consequently translocating to the F - actin - rich lamellipodia during cellular stimulation with neure - gulin - 1 [ 24 (cid:1) ] or insulin [ 23 ] . The subcellular distribution of SSH - 1L varies in mitotic HeLa cells , ranging from a uni - form colocalization with cortical F - actin throughout pro - metaphase andmetaphase to a distribution coincident with F - actin staining at the cleavage furrow during telophase [ 21 ] . The extent to which SSH localization is determined by its F - actin binding activity or through its association with other cellular components is still not entirely clear . For example , SSH localization to insulin - induced membrane protrusions was found to be PtdIns - 3 - kinase - dependent [ 23 ] . Whether this was due to a direct regulatory effect of PtdIns - 3 - kinase activity on SSH localization as opposed to an effect on SSH binding to F - actin remains unknown . Moreover , recent evidence indicates that 14 - 3 - 3 proteins associate with coﬁlin and SSH - 1L in a phosphorylation - dependent manner , thereby preventing coﬁlin depho - sphorylation and translocation of SSH to F - actin - rich cortical regions , respectively [ 24 (cid:1) , 25 , 26 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . 14 - 3 - 3 proteins may therefore play a role in the formation of localized regulatory complexes , which include coﬁlin , LIMK and F - actin as well as SSH [ 25 , 26 (cid:1)(cid:1) , 27 ] . Regulation Multiple signaling pathways , including those involving Ca 2 + , cAMP and PtdIns 3 - kinase , have previously been proposed to modulate stimulus - induced coﬁlin depho - sphorylation in many different cell types . Accordingly , several of these coﬁlin - dephosphorylating pathways have now been linked to SSH . Recent studies have shown that the Ca 2 + ionophore A23187 and Ca 2 + - mobilizing agonists , such as ATP and histamine , induced SSH - 1L activation , correlating with coﬁlin dephosphorylation in vivo [ 28 ] . Calcineurin , a calcium - regulated protein phosphatase , was observed to dephosphorylate and activate SSH - 1L , supporting the idea that SSH - 1L is negatively regulated by phosphorylation . Indeed , SSH activity was inhibited by PAK4 - mediated phosphorylation , and dephosphoryla - tion of SSH by l - phosphatase was shown to boost its phosphatase activity [ 26 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . In most systems , there is also evidence for calcium - independent regulatory pathways . The PtdIns 3 - kinase inhibitor wortmannin has been shown to antagonize coﬁlin dephosphorylation induced by several receptor stimuli [ 5 ] . Nishita et al . ( 2004 ) reported that insulin - dependent actin reorganization occurs through PtdIns 3 - kinase and SSH , since insulin - stimulated MCF7 cells exhibit SSH activation and coﬁlin dephosphorylation that is abrogated by PtdIns 3 - kinase inhibition [ 23 ] . Additionally , SSH phosphatase activity appears to be directly stimulated up to 10 - fold by F - actin binding , indicating that existing actin ﬁlaments may participate in promoting additional actin reorganization through SSH / coﬁlin activation [ 24 (cid:1) , 26 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . Interestingly , recent evidence indicates that SSH phos - phatase activity may not be limited to coﬁlin , as SSH appears to dephosphorylate and inactivate LIMK1 [ 26 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . SSH - 1L and LIMK1 form a complex , resulting in depho - sphorylation of both autophosphorylated LIMK1 sites and the critical Thr508 residue in the activation loop of LIMK1 , thereby inactivating its ability to phosphorylate coﬁlin . This ﬁnding probably explains the robust coﬁlin dephosphorylation observed in vivo upon overexpression of SSH - 1L . These observations complicate our under - standing of coﬁlin regulation , as it is difﬁcult to demon - strate whether changes in phosphocoﬁlin levels are due to direct SSH - mediated coﬁlin phosphatase activity , SSH - mediated LIMK inactivation , or a combination of both . Furthermore , it is unclear whether certain signals upstream of SSH can affect its speciﬁcity towards LIMK or coﬁlin , and whether different signals can affect the association of SSH with LIMK . These issues will have to be addressed in any future studies involving the biological effects of SSH - 1L . Chronophin , a unique HAD - family coﬁlin phosphatase Chronophin ( CIN ) has been identiﬁed as a second poten - tial coﬁlin phosphatase through a biochemical screen based on in vitro dephosphorylation of coﬁlin [ 29 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . CIN belongs to the haloacid dehalogenase ( HAD ) family of phosphatases , whose involvement in mammalian signal transduction pathways is poorly characterized . CIN con - tains a highly conserved catalytic domain and three con - served sequence motifs characteristic of the HAD hydrolases . HAD phosphatases use an unconventional catalytic mechanism whereby a transition state phos - pho - aspartate intermediate forms as a result of nucleo - philic attack on the substrate phosphate group [ 30 ] . Mutation of the nucleophilic aspartate ( Asp25 in CIN ) markedly compromises CIN activity in vitro . Interest - ingly , CIN has also been shown to exhibit pyridoxal ( vitamin B6 ) phosphatase activity [ 31 , 32 ] . In addition to its biological activity ( described below ) , CIN exhibits several unique characteristics that suggest it may represent a novel means of regulating coﬁlin - depen - dent actin dynamics . First , HAD family members bearing similarity to CIN can be found in many organisms , including several that lack SSH orthologs ( e . g . yeast and bacteria ) , and is widely distributed in human tissues , being particularly abundant in brain . Second , CIN coﬁlin phosphatase activity is insensitive to classical thiol - based serine / threonine phosphatase inhibitors , as reported for Cofilin phosphatases and regulation of actin dynamics Huang , DerMardirossian and Bokoch 29 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 physiological coﬁlin phosphatase activity [ 5 , 33 ] . Third , CIN exhibits several predicted interaction motifs poten - tially linking CIN to regulation by both PtdIns 3 - kinase and PLC g , both of which have been suggested to be involved in signaling to coﬁlin dephosphorylation in vivo [ 5 ] . Biological activities CIN dephosphorylates a limited number of protein sub - strates in vivo and in vitro ( see supplementary data to [ 29 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] ) , and is active against both coﬁlin and ADF in vivo [ 29 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . As opposed to SSH , CIN fails to exhibit signiﬁcant activity towards LIMK , perhaps accounting for its less dramatic effect on phosphocoﬁlin levels when overex - pressed in cells . However , CIN overexpression does decrease basal phospho - coﬁlin levels , and effectively antagonizes the enhanced coﬁlin phosphorylation stimu - lated by LIMK . By contrast , catalytically inactive CIN or CIN depletion by siRNA induces enhanced cellular phospho - coﬁlin pools . High CIN activity is consistently associated with decreased cellular F - actin content , while decreased CIN activity promotes the accumulation of polymerized actin . CIN localizes to actin - rich rufﬂes and membrane protrusions , and our preliminary studies indicate that CIN function is directly linked to actin dynamics at the leading edge of motile cells ( C DerMar - dirossian , V Delorme and GM Bokoch , unpublished ) . Manipulation of CIN activity produces pronounced effects on cell division . Speciﬁcally , the overexpression of dominant negative forms of CIN ( or downregulation by CIN siRNA treatment ) causes aberrant actin assembly , frequent cleavage furrow regression , and a signiﬁcant population of multinucleated cells , correlating with changes in phosphocoﬁlin levels . Similar defects have been reported when coﬁlin ( Twinstar in Drosophila ) func - tion is disrupted genetically in the fruit ﬂy , and upon the injection of coﬁlin antibodies in dividing Xenopus blas - tomeres , suggesting that CIN and coﬁlin function are linked during cell division [ 34 , 35 ] . The colocalization of CIN with coﬁlin to the ingressing cleavage furrow and to the actomyosin contractile ring at later mitotic stages supports the observation that CIN function is critical during cell division . Interestingly , CIN appeared to loca - lize to membranous regions at the cell poles during telophase , and seemed to have a more cytoplasmic dis - tribution with limited localization to the cleavage furrow at earlier stages of mitosis . This differs from SSH , which strongly localizes to the ingressing furrow at early telo - phase , suggesting that these two coﬁlin phosphatases may play distinct regulatory roles during cell division ( Table 1 ) . Conclusions The identiﬁcation of two unrelated phosphatases , SSH and CIN , that selectively dephosphorylate coﬁlin brings into question whether these phosphatases work redun - dantly or whether they activate coﬁlin in speciﬁc func - tional contexts . Superﬁcially , both phosphatases associate with actin ( CIN through its colocalization with cellular F - actin , and SSH through direct binding ) , and the over - expression or dysfunction of both phosphatases leads to qualitatively similar cellular phenotypes . However , the two phosphatases are not functionally redundant in the context of mitosis , as siRNA - mediated depletion of either protein in the same cell type caused distinct temporal changes in phospho - coﬁlin levels in synchronized mitotic cells , and depletion of both proteins caused enhanced increases in phospho - coﬁlin levels [ 29 (cid:1)(cid:1) ] . Viewed from a reductionist perspective , the lack of any sequence simi - larity between SSH and CIN suggests that the phospha - tases may fundamentally differ in their biochemical nature ( for example , how they are activated and regu - lated ) , and in their regulatory function . Furthermore , associated signaling proteins have been identiﬁed that may form localized regulatory complexes and hence modify the functional properties of these coﬁlin phos - phatases . A challenge for future studies will be to inves - tigate the activities of coﬁlin phosphatases in the context of the normal biological , regulatory , spatial and temporal constraints that control their function in actin dynamics . Acknowledgement The authors acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health , Grant GM44428 ( to GMB ) . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : (cid:1) of special interest (cid:1)(cid:1) of outstanding interest 1 . Stossel TP , Condeelis J , Cooley L , Hartwig JH , Noegel A , Schleicher M , Shapiro SS : Filamins as integrators of cell mechanicsandsignalling . NatRevMolCellBiol 2001 , 2 : 138 - 145 . 2 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG : Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 2003 , 112 : 453 - 465 . 3 . Ichetovkin I , Grant W , Condeelis J : Coﬁlin produces newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 2002 , 12 : 79 - 84 . 4 . (cid:1)(cid:1) GhoshM , SongX , MouneimneG , SidaniM , LawrenceDS , Condeelis JS : Coﬁlin promotes actin polymerization and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 2004 , 304 : 743 - 746 . Using a photoactivatable form of coﬁlin , the authors show that spatially localized activation of coﬁlin will drive cell protrusion and determine the direction of cell migration . 5 . Bamburg JR : Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999 , 15 : 185 - 230 . 6 . Agnew BJ , Minamide LS , Bamburg JR : Reactivation of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identiﬁcation of the regulatory site . J Biol Chem 1995 , 270 : 17582 - 17587 . 7 . Mizuno K , Okano I , Ohashi K , Nunoue K , Kuma K , Miyata T , Nakamura T : Identiﬁcation of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein kinase with two repeats of the LIM / double zinc ﬁnger motif . Oncogene 1994 , 9 : 1605 - 1612 . 8 . Ikebe C , Ohashi K , Fujimori T , Bernard O , Noda T , Robertson EJ , Mizuno K : Mouse LIM - kinase 2 gene : cDNA cloning , genomic organization , and tissue - speciﬁc expression of two alternatively initiated transcripts . Genomics 1997 , 46 : 504 - 508 . 30 Cell structure and dynamics Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31 www . sciencedirect . com 9 . Toshima J , Ohashi K , Okano I , Nunoue K , Kishioka M , Kuma K , Miyata T , Hirai M , Baba T , Mizuno K : Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel protein kinase , TESK1 , speciﬁcally expressed in testicular germ cells . J Biol Chem 1995 , 270 : 31331 - 31337 . 10 . Toshima J , Koji T , Mizuno K : Stage - speciﬁc expression of testis - speciﬁc protein kinase 1 ( TESK1 ) in rat spermatogenic cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998 , 249 : 107 - 112 . 11 . Edwards DC , Sanders LC , Bokoch GM , Gill GN : Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 253 - 259 . 12 . Dan C , Kelly A , Bernard O , Minden A : Cytoskeletal changes regulated by the PAK4 erine / threonine kinase are mediated by LIM kinase 1 and coﬁlin . J Biol Chem 2001 , 276 : 32115 - 32121 . 13 . Sumi T , Matsumoto K , Shibuya A , Nakamura T : Activation of LIM kinases by myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase a . J Biol Chem 2001 , 276 : 23092 - 23096 . 14 . Ohashi K , Nagata K , Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Mizuno K : Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . J Biol Chem 2000 , 275 : 3577 - 3582 . 15 . Toshima J , Toshima JY , Amano T , Yang N , Narumiya S , Mizuno K : Coﬁlin phosphorylation by protein kinase testicular protein kinase 1 and its role in integrin - mediated actin reorganization and focal adhesion formation . Mol Biol Cell 2001 , 12 : 1131 - 1145 . 16 . Meberg PJ , Ono S , Minamide LS , Takahashi M , Bamburg JR : Actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin phosphorylation dynamics : responsetosignalsthatregulate neurite extension . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1998 , 39 : 172 - 190 . 17 . Dawe HR , Minamide LS , Bamburg JR , Cramer LP : ADF / coﬁlin controls cell polarity during ﬁbroblast migration . Curr Biol 2003 , 13 : 252 - 257 . 18 . Chua BT , Volbracht C , Tan KO , Li R , Yu VC , Li P : Mitochondrial translocation of coﬁlin is an early step in apoptosis induction . Nat Cell Biol 2003 , 5 : 1083 - 1089 . 19 . Niwa R , Nagata - Ohashi K , Takeichi M , Mizuno K , Uemura T : Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / coﬁlin . Cell 2002 , 108 : 233 - 246 . 20 . Ohta Y , Kousaka K , Nagata - Ohashi K , Ohashi K , Muramoto A , Shima Y , Niwa R , Uemura T , Mizuno K : Differential activities , subcellular distribution and tissue expression patterns of three members of Slingshot family phosphatases that dephosphorylate coﬁlin . Genes Cells 2003 , 8 : 811 - 824 . 21 . Kaji N , Ohashi K , Shuin M , Niwa R , Uemura T , Mizuno K : Cell cycle - associated changes in Slingshot phosphatase activity and roles in cytokinesis in animal cells . J Biol Chem 2003 , 278 : 33450 - 33455 . 22 . Endo M , Ohashi K , Sasaki Y , Goshima Y , Niwa R , Uemura T , Mizuno K : Control of growth cone motility and morphology by LIM kinase and Slingshot via phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of coﬁlin . J Neurosci 2003 , 23 : 2527 - 2537 . 23 . Nishita M , Wang Y , Tomizawa C , Suzuki A , Niwa R , Uemura T , Mizuno K : Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - mediated activation of coﬁlin phosphatase Slingshot and its role for insulin - induced membrane protrusion . J Biol Chem 2004 , 279 : 7193 - 7198 . 24 . (cid:1) Nagata - Ohashi K , Ohta Y , Goto K , Chiba S , Mori R , Nishita M , Ohashi K , Kousaka K , Iwamatsu A , Niwa R et al . : A pathway of neuregulin - induced activation of coﬁlin - phosphatase Slingshot and coﬁlin in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 2004 , 165 : 465 - 471 . F - actin is found to stimulate slingshot ( SSH ) phosphatase activity in vitro , whereas 14 - 3 - 3 is found to inhibit SSH activity . Neuregulin stimulation induces SSH accumulation in lamellipodia and F - actin - enriched deter - gent fractions , whereas overexpressed 14 - 3 - 3 inhibits this translocation , localizing SSH to the cytoplasm . 25 . Gohla A , Bokoch GM : 14 - 3 - 3 regulates actin dynamics by stabilizing phosphorylated coﬁlin . Curr Biol 2002 , 12 : 1704 - 1710 . 26 . (cid:1)(cid:1) Soosairajah J , Maiti S , Wiggan O , Sarmiere P , Moussi N , Sarcevic B , Sampath R , Bamburg JR , Bernard O : Interplay between components of a novel LIM kinase - slingshot phosphatase complex regulates coﬁlin . EMBO J 2005 , 24 : 473 - 486 . LIMK1 is found to form a complex with slingshot - 1L ( SSH - 1L ) , and SSH - 1Lisobservedto dephosphorylate andinactivateLIMK invitro . Thisstudy shows that SSH can mediate coﬁlin activation not only by direct coﬁlin dephosphorylation , but also by inactivating LIMK1 - mediated phosphor - ylation . SSH - 1L is also shown to be positively regulated by F - actin binding , and negatively regulated by PAK4 - mediated phosphorylation and 14 - 3 - 3 protein binding . 27 . Birkenfeld J , Betz H , Roth D : Identiﬁcation of coﬁlin and LIM - domain - containing protein kinase 1 as novel interaction partners of 14 - 3 - 3 z . Biochem J 2003 , 369 : 45 - 54 . 28 . Wang Y , Shibasaki F , Mizuno K : Calcium signal - induced coﬁlin dephosphorylation is mediated by Slingshot via calcineurin . J Biol Chem 2005 , 280 : 12683 - 12689 . 29 . (cid:1)(cid:1) Gohla A , Birkenfeld J , Bokoch GM : Chronophin , a novel HAD - type serine protein phosphatase , regulates coﬁlin - dependent actin dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 2005 , 7 : 21 - 29 . This article describes the biochemical isolation using a novel in - gel phosphatase assay of chronophin ( CIN ) , an HAD family phosphatase from bovine brain , and its characterization as a functional coﬁlin phos - phatase . CIN overproduction and siRNA downregulation are shown to affect the cellular phosphocoﬁlin pool , particularly in mitotic cells , thereby inducing abnormal cell division and aneuploidy . 30 . Collet JF , Stroobant V , Pirard M , Delpierre G , Van Schaftingen E : A new class of phosphotransferases phosphorylated on an aspartate residue in an amino - terminal DXDX ( T / V ) motif . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 14107 - 14112 . 31 . Fonda ML : Puriﬁcation and characterization of vitamin B6 - phosphate phosphatase from human erythrocytes . J Biol Chem 1992 , 267 : 15978 - 15983 . 32 . JangYM , KimDW , KangTC , WonMH , BaekNI , MoonBJ , ChoiSY , Kwon OS : Human pyridoxal phosphatase . Molecular cloning , functional expression , and tissue distribution . J Biol Chem 2003 , 278 : 50040 - 50046 . 33 . ZhanQ , BamburgJR , Badwey JA : Products ofphosphoinositide speciﬁc phospholipase C can trigger dephosphorylation of coﬁlin in chemoattractant stimulated neutrophils . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2003 , 54 : 1 - 15 . 34 . Gunsalus KC , Bonaccorsi S , Williams E , Verni F , Gatti M , Goldberg ML : Mutations in twinstar , a Drosophila gene encoding a coﬁlin / ADF homologue , result in defects in centrosome migration and cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 1995 , 131 : 1243 - 1259 . 35 . Abe H , Obinata T , Minamide LS , Bamburg JR : Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin : a phosphorylation - regulated protein essential for development . J Cell Biol 1996 , 132 : 871 - 885 . Cofilin phosphatases and regulation of actin dynamics Huang , DerMardirossian and Bokoch 31 www . sciencedirect . com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2006 , 18 : 26 – 31