Psychological Bulletin 1982 , Vol . 91 , No . 3 , 517 - 539 Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0033 - 2909 / 82 / 9103 - 0517S00 . 75 Group Versus Individual Performance : Are TV + 1 Heads Better Than One ? Gayle W . Hill Michigan State University Experimental comparisons of groups and individuals were analyzed on four di - mensions : task , process , individual differences , and methodology . A standardized terminology based on Lorge , Fox , Davitz , and Brenner was developed to preserve operational definitions in the comparisons of ( a ) group versus individual , ( b ) group versus the most competent individual in an aggregate , ( c ) group versus pooled responses of an aggregate , and ( d ) group versus math models of perfor - mance . Research supported Steiner ' s theory of process loss but also suggested evidence for process gain . To avoid confounding of group conditions and subject variables , this review - focused on the results of random assignment of subjects to conditions . Belief in the adage that two heads are better than one can be seen in the acceptance of juries as a basic component of our legal system and in the widespread use of com - mittees . Over the last 60 years variations on this adage have inspired a considerable amount of research comparing individual and group performance ( see reviews by Davis , 1969a ; Dion , Baron , & Miller , 1970 ; Duncan , 1959 ; Hare , 1976 ; Kelley & Thi - baut , 1954 , 1969 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ; Lorge , Fox , Davitz , & Brenner , 1958 ; Ray , 1955 ; Shaw , 1976 ; Vinokur , 1971 ; Za - gona , Willis , & MacKinnon , 1966r ; see also Davis , Laughlin , & Komorita , 1976 ; Helm - reich , Bakeman , & Scherwitz , 1973 ; Zan - der , 1979 ) . The purpose of the present re - view is to establish a delineated but multidimensional base of findings about in - dividual and group performance . Figure 1 presents a summary of the variables to be covered , four types of group versus individ - ual comparisons , and two theoretical impli - cations . Because this review was intended to be exhaustive , several boundaries were defined . Following a model by Hare ( 1976 ) , social I would like to thank George Fairweather , Esther Fergus , Eugene Jacobson , Norbert Kerr , Neal Schmitt , and the reviewers for Psychological Bulletin for their comments on earlier versions of this article . Requests for reprints should be sent to Gayle W . Hill , 910 Abbot Road , East Lansing , Michigan 48823 . climate was dichotomized as individuals in - teracting versus individuals working sepa - rately ; task completion was dichotomized as group product versus individual product . The domain of this review then is those stud - ies where individuals working together on a group product were contrasted with individ - uals working separately on individual prod - ucts . This delineation excluded social facil - itation articles that reported only individual measures , risky shift studies that reported individual measures before and / or after group interaction , studies of mock juries that used individual scores to predict group out - come ( see Davis , 1980 ; Davis , Kerr , Stasser , Meek , & Holt , 1977 ; Penrod & Hastie , 1979 ) , and many articles related to the anal - ysis of task dimensions ( see Davis , 1969a ; Duncan , 1959 ; Guilford , 1956 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ; McGrath & Altaian , 1966 ; Steiner , 1972 ; Zajonc & Taylor , 1963r ) . Psychotherapy research was omitted for lack of a group goal when individual ob - jectives were established for each member ( see Hartman , 1979 ; Lorge et al . , 1958 , p . 340 ) . An adequate discussion of group pro - cess and of complex math models of group performance was beyond the scope of this review ; several major references are cited later in the article . In addition , a conservative methodological position was taken by excluding most studies that did not use random assignment of sub - 517 518 GAYLE W , HILL Process StagesSolutionstrategiesRisk taking Decision making Social loafing Coordination ol effort 1 ProcessInterventions PracticeTrainingFeedbackConsequences IndividualDifferences Ability Sex Affiliation Task Demands LearningConcept mastery BrainstormingProblem solving Methodology SettingSamplingProcedureData manipulation Performance Comparisons Group versus individual Group versus the most competent member of a statistical aggregate Group versus statistically pooled responses Group versus math models Theoretical Implications Productivity loss Productivity gain Figure I . Summary of variables affecting individual and group performances . jects to conditions to minimize confounding from subject variables . Use of random as - signment has been promoted as a basic pro - tection against confounding in applied social research ( Selltiz , Wrightsman , & Cook , 1976 ) , for theoretical research ( Lana , 1969 ) , and for experimental psychology research in general ( Underwood , 1957 ) . ' Many studies comparing individuals and groups , however , did not show this concern . Out of 139 ex - perimental studies examined , only 33 % re - ported randomization , approximately 17 % did not use random assignment , and the re - maining 50 % did not specify . Although group performance may be unrelated to many personality variables ( Heslin , 1964 ; Mann , 1959 ) , it seemed to be related con - sistently to the sociability scale and the first factor of the California Psychological In - ventory ( Bouchard , 1969 ) and to the sub - ject ' s preference to work alone or in a group ( Davis , 1969rb ) . In the present review , re - sults of randomized designs are identified by an " r " following the citation . Results from nonrandomized designs are cited as usual . Theoretical articles and studies that did not report randomization are included according to their heuristic value . Numerous unpub - lished studies and citations from secondary sources have been omitted . Because most studies in the present review have not been conceptually or methodologically replicated , they should be considered preliminary evi - dence for their conclusions . Reference sources for this review included literature reviews , Psychological Abstracts , and the 1970 - 1981 issues of Annual Review of Psychology , Journal of Applied Psy - chology , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Journal of Social Psychology , ' " The policy of some journal editors has grown to be one in which they essentially refuse to accept a state - ment by an investigator that ' subjects were assigned to the various condition on a random basis . ' . . . The ed - itorial policy requires the investigator to state exactly how his subjects were assigned to groups and then the editor decides whether the method could or could not introduce bias . . . . It is the obligation of the investi - gator to convince the reader , by use of supporting data or logical considerations , that his results have a low probability of being biased by the method of forming groups " ( Underwood , 1957 , p . 93 ) . GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 519 Organizational Behavior and Human Per - formance , Psychological Bulletin , and So - dometry . Although a few articles comparing groups and individuals in the classroom may have been omitted , little research has been done in this area ( Johnson & Johnson , 1975 ; Johnson , Johnson , & Scott , 1978r ) . Refer - ence lists from articles and books supplied studies that dated back to 1920 ( i . e . , Allport , 1920 ) and randomized research that dated back to 1932 ( i . e . , Shaw , 1932r ) . This re - view , then , covers 61 years of study and 50 years of randomized research . Terminology Rather than retaining the terms used by cited authors , I have adopted a revision of the terminology of Lorge et al . ( 1958 ) to convey experimental conditions . The classi - fication of conditions is presented in Table 1 . The need for precise terminology can be seen in the history of individual versus group comparisons . In early research on judgment , interacting groups were not distinguished from aggregates : Researchers concluded that the average of judgments made by a group was usually more accurate than a judgment made by an individual ( Bruce , 1935 - 1936 ; Eysenck , 1939 ; Gordon , 1923 , 1924 ; Smith , 1931 ) and that group superiority increased when an unfamiliar object was judged ( Klugman , 1945 ) . Subsequent research showed , however , that combining judgments from 50 individuals was no more accurate than combining 50 judgments from one in - dividual ( Farnsworth & Williams , 1936r ) . The superiority of group judgment had re - sulted from the aggregation of random er - rors and the computation of the mean ( Stroop , 1932r ) . The accuracy of aggregated judgments was actually impaired for objects that were unfamiliar or distorted , insofar as errors of judgment tended to be similar and therefore cumulative . Support for distinguishing coacting from noncoacting aggregates was indicated in the discovery of social facilitation effects ( Za - jonc , 1965r ) and audience effects ( Davis , 1969rb ; Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) . Indi - vidual performance tested in a coacting ag - gregate ( i . e . , in the presence of others ) may Table 1 Classification of Individual and Group Conditions Interpersonalcontext Performancescore Abbreviationfor condition IsolatedCoacting Individual IndividualIndividual ICI Statistical aggregate " Isolated Coacting Best member Pooled responses Complex model Best member Pooled responses Complex model SB SPSM CSBCSPCSM DispersedCoacting Group Group product Group product DGCG a Lorge et al . ( 1958 ) called this a " statisticized group . " be affected by identified interpersonal cues ( explicit coaction ) or by unidentified inter - personal cues ( implicit coaction ; Foot , 1973 ) . Confounding from these effects is eliminated when the individual is tested in an isolated ( i . e . , noncoacting ) setting ( Hare , 1976 ) . The present review , however , has not presented evidence that the differences between coact - ing and noncoacting conditions has consis - tently affected the comparison of groups and individuals or the comparison of groups and statistical models . The distinction is included here for heuristic purposes . The classification presented in Table 1 is accompanied by several qualifiers . First , per - formance of Individuals ( I ) in an isolated setting may have been affected by the pres - ence of an experimenter ( see Bouchard , 1969 ; Kerr & Sullaway , in press ; Madsen & Finger , 1978r ) . Also , the designation I or CI ( Coacting Individual ) may represent an inference from a methodology section that did not directly state whether subjects were in the presence of others . In Dispersed Groups ( DG ) , interaction was limited : Members communicated by telephone ( Howell , Gettys , Martin , Nawrocki , & Johnston , 1970r ) or through written ex - change of information ( Madsen & Finger , 520 GAYLE W . HILL 1978r ) , or they were led to believe their per - formance was being evaluated as a group ( Rettig , 1966r ) . Second , note that coacting groups may have been either practiced groups whose members were accustomed to working together or ad hoc groups whose members were not accustomed to working together . Only one study ( Dunnette , Campbell , & Jaastad , 1963 ) of a practiced group was in - cluded in the present review . Third , many studies tested performance in stages . In the following pages , these are indicated by hyphenated abbreviations ; for example , I - CG4 indicates that subjects par - ticipated individually and then in a coacting group of four members . In a comparison of substages , the last abbreviation indicates the stage in which the comparison measure was taken ; for example , in the second stage of a three - stage experiment ( CI - CG6 - CI vs . CI - CI - CI ) , coacting groups who previously performed as coacting individuals ( CI - CG6 ) may be compared with coacting individuals who previously performed as coacting indi - viduals ( CI - CI ; see Laughlin & Adamopou - lous , 1980r ) . In the following pages , I intend to minimize the reader ' s dependence on ab - breviations while also attempting to avoid repetitious use of the cumbersome phrases that convey experimental conditions . There - fore , coacting groups are called " groups " , isolated individuals are called " individuals " , and conditions that combine individual and group characteristics ( e . g . , coacting individ - uals ) are qualified as such . Abbreviations are included to confirm operational definitions and to indicate group size ( e . g . , CG6 ) . Group size was omitted when the finding applied to more than one study or was the result of combining data from groups of sev - eral sizes . Fourth , note that the members of isolated statistical aggregates ( the most conservative measure of a statistical aggregate ) did not meet or interact and therefore did not rep - resent a psychological entity . Averaging , best member of a statistical aggregate ( SB ) , and statistical pooling ( SP ) were models of group behavior based on combinations of in - dividual performance . In statistical - pooling models , experimenters summed the behavior or best ideas of several individuals who had worked separately . These and more complex models attempted to describe social pro - cesses or social combination schemes that were impossible or inordinately difficult to observe ( Davis , 1969a ) . Are groups superior to aggregates ? Are groups superior to the best individual in an aggregate ? Can group interaction lead to the development of new ideas from existing resources ? Questions such as these are addressed in the following pages . Task Categories Much problem - solving research has indi - cated that performance was affected by the task involved ( Hackman & Morris , 1976 ; Hare , 1976 ; Hoffman , 1965 ) . Task demands often elicited performance strategies that in - teracted with characteristics of the group ( Hoffman , 1965 ; Hoffman & Smith , 1960 ) . Several task categories and taxonomies have been suggested ( e . g . , Davis , 1969a ; Duncan , 1959 ; Guilford , 1956 ; Lamm & Tromms - dorff , 1973 ; McGrath & Altman , 1966 ; Stei - ner , 1972 ) . In the comparision of groups and individ - uals , most experimenters seemed to select a task that illustrated a particular perfor - mance dimension . Some studies reported more than one assessment of performance— for example , quantity of solutions ( e . g . , Laughlin , Kerr , Davis , Halff , & Marciniak , 1975r ) , quality of solutions ( e . g . , Campbell , 1968r ) , trials to solution ( e . g . , Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) , and time to solution ( e . g . , Davis , 1969rb ) —whereas others tested the generality of their findings along a task di - mension—for example , difficulty ( Bray , Kerr , & Atkin , 1978r ) , sensory modality ( Laughlin , Kalowski , Metzler , Ostap , & Venclovas , 1968r ) , or sanction ( Sampson , 1963r ) . Results sometimes depended on the dependent variable used . In the following pages , studies are discussed in six categories that reflect task demands : learning / concept attainment , concept mastery and creativity , abstract problem solving , brainstorming , and complex problem solving . Learning / Concept - Attainment Tasks In learning tasks , group performance was consistently superior to the performance of GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 521 an individual . For example , in a study of concept identification using visual , auditory , and mixed visual - auditory stimuli ( Laugh - lin , Kalowski et al , 1968r ) , groups ( CG2 ) generally required fewer trials to solution than did individuals ( I ) ; superiority was greatest for the task ( visual ) that required the most trials to solution . In a motor learn - ing task ( pursuit rotor ) , groups ( CG2 - CG2 and CG4 - CG4 ) were superior to individuals ( I - I ) for mean percentage of time on target ( Wegner & Zeaman , 1956r ) ; groups bene - fited from multiple sources of random error that counteracted each other . In verbal learning tasks , groups seemed to benefit from error correction when the group pooled its responses . In syllable recall ( Ryack , 1965r ) , pooling of responses in - creased the probability that a syllable would be correctly recalled . Groups ( CG2 ) and sta - tistical pooling ( SP ) produced a similar number of errors to criterion and made fewer errors than did the average individual ( I ) or the best individual ( SB ) in a statistical ag - gregate . In number recall ( Morrissette , Crannell , & Switzer , 1964r ) , groups ( CG5 ) made both fewer errors and fewer correct responses than did statistical pooling ( SP ) , but this may have been caused by time lim - itations ( 6 minutes ) , insofar as group mem - bers contributed sequentially , whereas mem - bers of statistical aggregates contributed simultaneously . In concept attainment , group performance seemed to involve more than pooling re - sponses and correcting errors . Groups and individuals used qualitatively different learn - ing strategies . When presented with form display and sequence display concept - attain - ment tasks , groups ( CG2 ) used a focusing strategy more often than did individuals ( I ) or the best member of a statistical aggregate ( SB ; Laughlin , 1965r ; Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) . Focusing was defined as [ testing ] the relevance of all the possible hypotheses involved in a . particular attribute or attributes by choos - ing a card differing in one ( conservative focusing ) or more ( focus gambling ) attributes from a positive focus card . ( Laughlin , 1965r , p . 323 ) Groups also made fewer repetitions of card choices and hypotheses , made fewer unten - able hypotheses , and required fewer card choices and hypotheses to solution than did individuals , but they required the same num - ber of card choices to solution as did best members of statistical aggregates and re - quired more time to solution than did indi - viduals . In a follow - up , use of a focusing strategy by individuals ( I ) and groups ( CG2 ) was studied for eight concept rules ( Laughlin , McGlynn , Anderson , & Jacobson , 1968r ) . Groups used the focusing strategy more than did individuals for concept rules that re - quired the fewest card choices to solution ( i . e . , for conjunctive absence , exclusion , ex - clusive disjunctive , and biconditional but not for conjunctive , inclusive disjunctive , con - ditional , or disjunctive absence ) . Discussion may have led to adoption of the focusing strategy , but no confirming data were re - ported . Groups again made fewer untenable hypotheses and required fewer card choices to solution than did individuals for all con - cept rules , although superiority declined over successive problems . To see whether perfor - mance was determined by the best member ' s ability , interproblem correlations were com - puted . No group member was consistently " better " than the other : Group superiority seemed to be due to facilitative problem - solving processes beyond the dominance of one problem solver . One problem solver or a subset of the group , however , may have affected others through incidental learning ( Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) . In concept attainment , observers ( I or CI ) of a group ( CG2 ) that used focusing strategies subse - quently required fewer trials to criterion than did those who had observed no one , and the latter required fewer trials to criterion than did those who had observed an individ - ual who failed to use focusing strategies . Groups whose members had observed to - gether ( CI - CG2 ) required fewer trials to criterion than did groups whose members had observed individually ( I - CG2 ) . For math education classes for fifth and sixth graders ( Johnson et al . , 1978r ) , learn - ing scores of groups and individuals showed a narrow transfer of training effect . Reten - tion scores of groups who had learned as a group ( CG4 - CG4 ) were superior to scores of groups who had learned as individuals ( CI - CG4 ) . When the retention test was 522 GAYLE W . HILL taken individually , however , scores for those who had learned as individuals ( CI - CI ) were higher than for those who had learned in a group ( CG4 - CI ) . Individuals who had learned in a group ( CG4 - CI ) showed a more positive attitude toward peers and teachers , a stronger sense of success , and a stronger sense of personal causation than those who learned as individuals ( CI - CI ) . To summarize : In research involving learning and concept - attainment tasks , group performance was usually superior to individ - ual performance because of the group ' s abil - ity to pool their resources , to correct errors , and to use qualitatively different learning strategies . Groups tended to use a focusing strategy more often than did individuals for concept attainment , but group superiority was not found for all concept rules . Inciden - tal learning affected performance in concept attainment and affected both attitudes and performance in a self - instruction program . Concept Mastery and Creativity Tasks Concept mastery and creativity tasks have been used to investigate the effects of mem - ber ability . Steiner ' s ( 1966 ) complementary task model assumed that each group mem - ber possessed abilities unshared by other members and that by combining these abil - ities groups could surpass the performance of persons working independently ( see Laughlin , Branch , & Johnson , 1969r ) . In an investigation of this theory ( Laughlin & Johnson , 1966 ) , group members were first tested as individuals and then retested in homogeneous or heterogeneous groups . In heterogeneous groups , an individual working with a partner of greater ability seemed to perform better than an individual working alone or with a partner of lesser ability . In homogeneous groups , the unshared re - sources contributed by a group member seemed to increase with ability level ( i . e . , in high - ability groups , members had a greater number of unshared resources than did members in low - ability groups ) . The com - plementary task model , then , seemed to be increasingly accurate as the ability level of the group increased . In a more precise test , using Part I ( Syn - onyms and Antonyms ) of the Terman Con - cept Mastery Test ( Laughlin et al , 1969r ) , the complementary task model was sup - ported for high ( H ) levels of ability but not for medium ( M ) or low ( L ) levels . In ho - mogeneous groups , high - ability groups ( CG3 ) made higher scores than did high - ability coacting individuals ( CI ) , that is , HHH > H ; but medium - and low - ability groups did not differ from medium - and low - ability individuals , respectively ( i . e . , MMM > M , LLL > L ) , suggesting a large overlap in ability . In heterogeneous groups , performance was generally proportional to the sum of the represented ability levels ( e . g . , HHM > HML ) , but the relative con - tribution made by medium - ability persons was greater in groups that included a person of high ability than in groups that did not . Similar results were found for four - person groups ( Laughlin & Branch , 1972r ) . Scores of high - and medium - ability homogeneous groups ( CG4 ) were significantly higher on the Terman Concept Mastery Test than scores of high - and medium - ability coacting individuals ( CI ) , respectively ( i . e . , HHHH > H , MMMM > M ) , and scores of low - ability groups did not differ from low - ability indi - viduals ( i . e . , LLLL ~ L ) . In heterogeneous groups , performance of high - ability individ - uals seemed to be detrimentally affected by non - high - ability members . Although groups with three or four high - ability members per - formed significantly better than all other groups and individuals , the performance of groups with only one or two high - ability members was lower than predicted ( e . g . , H > HLLL , H > HHML , HMMM > HHML ) . High - ability individuals per - formed better than any group not containing a high - ability member ( e . g . , H > MMMM ) , but a group with only one high - ability mem - ber did not perform better than a group with no high - ability member ( e . g . , HMMM > MMMM ) . Because the Terman items were not " eureka - type " items , a group member who knew the correct answer may not have been able to persuade other members to ac - cept it ( Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ) . Because " division - of - ability " potential of group members may have been confounded with decision strategies in the Terman Con - GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 523 cept Mastery Test , a subsequent study ( Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ) used the word as - soeiation items of the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) , whose items were believed to be eureka tasks ; that is , solutions would be readily recognized ( truth - wins decision strategy ) . Research supported the prediction that heterogeneous ability levels of group members would be more evident from per - formance on the RAT : Low - , medium - , and high - ability persons contributed to the per - formance of low - , medium - , and high - ability partners , respectively ( e . g . , LL > L , MM > M , HH > H ) . Accuracy of a truth - wins de - cision model was also supported : Low - and medium - ability partners contributed to the performance of persons of medium and high ability , respectively ( e . g . , LM > M , MH > H ) . These results were consistent with an earlier report ( Amaria , Biran , & Leith , 1964r ) that mixed - ability group members learned from each other as well as from a self - instructional program about levers . Scores of high - and low - ability coacting in - dividuals ( CI ) were higher for those who had worked in mixed - ability groups ( CG2 ) rather than in homogeneous groups or as individ - uals ( I ) . In order to investigate decision strategies , the Terman Concept Mastery Test was ad - ministered to see which of nine a priori de - cision schemes 2 were used by high - or low - ability groups ( Laughlin , et al . , 1975r ) , Col - lege students first took the test as coacting individuals to determine ability levels and then took the test again either individually ( - CI - CI ) or in groups ( CI - CG2 , CI - CG3 , CI - CG5 ) . The performance of all group sizes was superior to that of coacting individuals . The best fitting models—for high - ability groups ( CG3 , CG5 ) only—were truth - sup - ported wins and majority if correct , equi - probability otherwise . Surprisingly , groups with one previously correct member seemed to have a lower probability of submitting a correct response than did groups with no previously correct members . When the Visualizing Relations Test ( Laughlin & Adamopoulous , 1980r ) was used , further evidence for the truth - sup - ported wins modelwas found through model fitting and model testing ( see Kerr , Stasser , & Davis , 1979 ) . Group performance ( CI - CG6 ) was superior to coacting individual performance ( CI - CI ) . Groups who had pre - viously worked as individuals ( CI - CG6 ) and individuals who had previously worked in a group ( CI - CG6 - CI ) performed better than individuals who had worked only individu - ally ( CI - CI - CI ) . Two correct group mem - bers had a probability of . 67 of persuading up to four incorrect members to accept the correct answer . Three or more correct mem - bers were " virtually certain to prevail . " An initially incorrect individual who subse - quently performed in a correct group , how - ever , had a probability of . 80 of being correct in the third testing ( CI - CG6 - CI ) , whereas an initially correct individual who subse - quently performed in an incorrect group had a probability of . 36 of being correct . Comparison of the RAT with the Otis Quick - Scoring Mental Ability Test ( Laugh - lin , Kerr , Munch , & Haggarty , 1976r ) later showed that decision strategies were affected by task differences . Groups ( CG4 ) were su - perior to individuals ( I ) , but group perfor - mance on the RAT seemed to be influenced by a truth - wins decision strategy , whereas performance on the Otis seemed to be influ - enced by a more complicated strategy that was similar to truth - supported wins . In sum , research with the Terman Con - cept Mastery Test indicated that there was a greater number of unshared resources among high - ability group members than among low - ability members and that the contribution of medium - ability members was greater when working with a high - abil - ity partner than with a low - ability partner . When sharing of resources was not followed by a truth - wins decision strategy , the level of group performance did not equal the level of the best member . Heterogeneity of re - sources at low ability levels was seen in the Remote Associates Test , indicating that eu - reka tasks were more amenable to a truth - 2 The nine a priori decision schemes were equiprob - ability , proportionality , truth - wins , truth - supported wins , majority ( equiprobability otherwise ) , majority if correct ( equiprobability otherwise ) , majority if incorrect ( equi - probability otherwise ) , error - wins , and error - supported 524 GAYLE W . HILL wins decision strategy and involved less hin - drance from low - ability members than did noneureka tasks . Further research on deci - sion strategies is cited in the discussion of group versus individual process . Problem Solving Abstract problems . Some of the earliest evidence that groups pooled information and corrected errors was found in the study of abstract problems . On the basis of informal observations and subjective interpretation of percentages of groups solving three varia - tions of four types of problems ( the Tartaglia Problem—three versions 3 : a prose comple - tion task , a sonnet completion task , and a school bus route problem ) , Shaw ( 1932r ) concluded that groups ( CG4 ) tended to make their first error at a later stage in the problem - solving process and produced a larger proportion of correct solutions than did coacting individuals ( CI ) . Groups took more time to solution but had more correct solutions than did individuals . Incorrect sug - gestions were more often rejected by another member of the group than by the individual who proposed it . Additional support for error checking in groups was reported when a Twenty Ques - tions Problem was used ( Taylor & Faust , 1952r ) . Participants were allowed 20 ques - tions in which to name an object identified as either animal , vegetable , or mineral . Tet - rads ( CG4 ) made fewer failures per problem and required less time per problem than did dyads ( CG2 ) , which made fewer failures and required less time than did individuals ( I ) , suggesting that a greater number of member contributions reduced the likelihood of per - sisting in a wrong questioning set . Dyads and tetrads also required fewer questions per problem than did individuals , but they did not differ significantly from each other . For tetrads there seemed to be a tendency for the member getting the correct answer to ask more questions than other members of the group ( i . e . , the most competent member seemed to play the largest part in solving the problem ) . A reanalysis and expansion of Shaw ' s ( 1932r ) research ( Marquart , 1955r ) pro - vided further evidence of the influence of the group ' s most competent member . Eight problems were used , four of which were " the same or closely parallel to four of those used by Shaw " ( Marquart , 1955r , p . 104 ) . Groups ( CG3 ) produced more correct solutions than did coacting individuals ( CI ) , but they pro - duced about the same number of solutions as did the best member of statistical aggre - gates ( CSB ) and took approximately the same amount of time to solution . Groups benefited from the aggregation of members , which increased the probability of including at least one exceptionally competent mem - ber , indicating that groups should be com - pared with statistical pooling ( SP ) of the responses of an equal number of individuals or with the best member ( SB ) of a statistical aggregate . These conclusions were partially supported in a study of spatial and anagram tasks ( Faust , 1959r ) : Groups ( CG4 ) solved more spatial and verbal problems than did coacting individuals ( CI ) , but groups and best members of statistical aggregates ( CSB ) solved a similar number of spatial problems . Groups solved significantly more anagram problems than did best member statistical aggregates in one sample of college students but not in another . When the problem was complex or diffi - cult , the most proficient group member seemed to draw on the resources of other members to complete the task . In a com - parison of easy and difficult crossword puz - zles ( Shaw & Ashton , 1976r ) , easy puzzles were completed relatively quickly by a com - petent group member , and solutions were readily adopted by other members . The number of successful groups ( CG3 ) was pro - portional to the number of individuals ( I ) in the sample who could successfully solve the problem . When the puzzle was difficult , however , the proportion of successful groups was greater than the proportion of success - ful individuals , implying that groups pooled their resources when no member could solve the problem alone . Group productivity 3 The task was to move three Cannibals and three Missionaries from side A to side B of a river by means of a boat that can carry only two persons at a time . All of the Missionaries and one Cannibal can row . Never may the Missionaries be outnumbered by the Cannibals except when there are no Missionaries present . GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 525 seemed to be determined by the most com - petent group member , plus " assembly bonus effects , " minus losses due to faulty group process ( process loss ) . Assembly bonus ef - fects were defined as an increase in group effectiveness resulting from efficient group interaction ( see Collins & Guetzkow , 1964 ) . Two kinds of behavior seemed necessary for achieving assembly bonus effects : pooling of pieces of information and integrating these pieces to form a solution . In a study of information processing and code diagnos - ticity ( Howell et al , 1970r ) , group perfor - mance was augmented when information was common to more than one member and when integration of complementary infor - mation was allowed . Individuals ( I ) and dis - persed groups ( DG ) made a greater number of optimal choices and had smaller mean differences between optimal and actual choices than was found in statistical pooling of responses ( SP ) . On both measures , per - formance was better in dispersed groups whose communication network was decen - tralized ( DG2 ) rather than centralized ( DG3 ) , suggesting that method of infor - mation integration could be a source of pro - cess loss . In sum , the superiority - of groups over in - dividuals in abstract tasks seemed to be due mainly to the aggregation of member re - sources . When the task was difficult , group members pooled and integrated their re - sources and corrected each other ' s errors . For easy tasks , performance was often de - termined by one competent member . The group ' s size increased its probability of con - taining at least one member who could solve the problem . For multiple stage problems , groups had a greater probability than did individuals that at least one member would be able to solve each stage . It should be noted , however , that the concept of proba - bility implies that highly competent mem - bers would be uncommon if the distribution of abilities followed a normal curve . Most large groups would include a large propor - tion of medium - and low - ability members who , as we have seen in the discussion of concept mastery and creativity tasks , may hinder performance on complex tasks . Pro - cess loss may result from centralization of the communication network . Brainstorming . Brainstorming tasks dif - fered from learning , concept - mastery , and abstract tasks in that brainstorming pro - duced more than one correct solution . Os - born ( 1963 ) believed that brainstorming groups could stimulate the production of ideas beyond the number that could have been produced by an individual . His idea was supported in a study ( Buchanan & Lind - gren , 1973r ) of fourth - grade students : Coacting individuals who had practiced brainstorming as a group ( CG - CI ) made significantly more responses and demon - strated a higher level of creativity than did those who had practiced individually ( CI - CI ) . A number of imaginative problems have been used . For example , ( a ) what would hap - pen if everyone after 1960 had an extra thumb on each hand ( Thumbs Problem ) , ( b ) what different steps might be taken to ensure that schools will provide effective in - struction in light of increasing enrollment ( Education Problem ) , ( c ) what would be the consequences and what adjustments would be required if the average height of Amer - icans at age 20 had increased to 80 inches and the average weight had almost doubled ( People Problem ) , and ( d ) what steps can you suggest to get more European tourists to come to this country ( Tourist Problem ; Dunnett et al . , 1963 ) ? In several studies , type of problem affected performance . For example , ( a ) the People Problem elicited sig - nificantly fewer ideas than did the Thumbs Problem ( for advertising personnel but not for business researchers from the same cor - poration ; Dunnette et al . , 1963 ) ; ( b ) a sig - nificantly smaller number of ideas was produced on socially relevant problems ( overpopulation and pollution ) than on the unrealistic Thumbs Problem , even though participants were told that all ideas would be used by local agencies ; and ( c ) brain - storming was inhibited on a politically rel - evant problem , namely , what can you as an individual do to influence United States for - eign policy ( Dillon , Graham , & Aidells , 1972r ) . Some inconsistencies may have been caused by differences in instructions ( Dillon et al . , 1972r ; Harari & Graham , 1975r ; Osborn , 1963 ) ; for example , the Thumbs Problem asked for potential consequences of 526 GAYLE W . HILL the problem , whereas the Tourist and Edu - cation Problems asked for solutions . Across all problems , however , scores from statistical pooling ( SP , CSP ) were equal to or greater than those of groups ( e . g . , Dillon et al . , 1972r ; Harari & Graham , 1975r ) . In order to eliminate redundancies in the group product , researchers counted the number of unique ideas produced or the number of unique ideas produced per problem instead of the total number of ideas . For the Thumbs and Tourist Problems , statistical pooling of responses ( SP , CSP ) produced more unique ideas than did groups ( CG ) and more ideas of high quality on three dimensions : effec - tiveness , generality , and feasibility ( Dun - nette et al . , 1963 ; Milton , 1965r ; Taylor , Berry , & Block , 1958r ) . When total number of responses ( including redundancies ) was statistically controlled ( through analysis of covariance ) , however , statistical pooling was superior to group responses in number of unique ideas and in number of high - quality ideas for the Thumbs Problem ( Taylor et al . , 1958r ) and produced a greater number of ideas of high quality on three dimensions : probability , significance , and generality . In each of these cases , statistical pooling had the benefit of simultaneous division of labor ( writing ) , which allowed a larger response rate than did serial division of labor ( ver - balizing ) in groups . If a form of simulta - neous division of labor ( e . g . , writing ) were used in groups , it might reduce time require - ments and production blocking ( member distraction due to group interaction ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) . Production blocking might also be reduced if members were asked to contribute within a category of thought . For example , in naming a tooth - paste , the categories might be sex appeal ( Close - Up ) , hygiene appeal ( Ultrabrite ) , fear of decay ( Aim ) , appetite / palatability ( Pepsodent ) , or symptom relief ( Sensodyne ) . A theme ( e . g . , historical , artistic , outer - space ) introduced by any member could find application in all categories . This type of procedure would allow individuals to follow idiosyncratic lines of thought and would re - duce hindrance by less productive members . An attempt to combine the advantages of statistical pooling and group interaction was made by using a written feedback condition ( individual brainstorming plus exchange of written ideas ) . Dispersed groups ( CI - DG4 ) and statistical pooling ( CSP - CSP ) produced significantly more solutions than did coact - ing groups ( CG4 - CG4 ) when they were asked to propose names for a new toothpaste ( Toothpaste Problem ) , suggesting that it was not the pooling process but other group processes that inhibited brainstorming ( Madsen & Finger , 1978r ) . On the Thumbs Problem , however , no differences were found between conditions . The authors suggested that the results differed because participants responded with " single unscorable general - izations " on the Thumbs Problem but with " variations on a theme " for the Toothpaste Problem . In another programmatic approach ( Van de Ven & Delbecq , 1974r ) , brainstorming , feedback , and decision making were com - bined to produce a job description for part - time student dormitory counselors . The ap - proach was called the " nominal group tech - nique " ( NGT ) : Coacting individual ( CI ) brainstorming was followed by a group ( CG7 ) round - robin procedure for recording ideas , group discussion for clarification and evaluation , and independent voting to arrive at a group decision . NGT was tested against the delphi technique ( Dalkey , 1969 ) in which individuals did not meet face - to - face : A questionnaire was mailed to respondents asking them to generate ideas independently ; the returned responses were summarized and sent back to the respondents with a ques - tionnaire probing more deeply into the ideas ; respondents voted independently on the priority of the summarized ideas and re - turned them and the questionnaire to the experimenters ; a final summary and feed - back report that were developed from these responses was then mailed back to the re - spondent groups . NGT and the delphi pro - cedure did not differ in quantity of unique ideas produced , but both produced signifi - cantly more unique ideas than did coacting groups , again suggesting that interaction rather than information pooling was respon - sible for inhibition of brainstorming perfor - mance . NGT groups expressed significantly greater satisfaction with their group process GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 527 than did either delphi or coacting groups , which did not differ significantly from each other . Two studies raised doubts about the ef - fectiveness of programmatic approaches . In a study using the Tourist and Education Problems ( Rotter & Portugal , 1969r ) , per - sons who were given instructions as an ag - gregate and subsequently brainstormed in - dividually ( CI - I ) produced more solutions than did either groups ( CI - CG4 ) or mixed conditions ( CI - I - CG4 and CI - CG4 - CI ) . Similar results were found in a study of ex - ecutive decision making ( Schoner , Rose , & Hoyt , 1974r ) and a study using the Change of Work Procedure Problem ( Campbell , 1968r ) to be discussed with complex prob - lem - solving tasks . These findings are incon - sistent , however , with findings ( Dunnette et al , 1963 ) that statistical pooling produced more responses when individuals had pre - viously brainstormed as a group ( CG4 - SP ) than when they had not ( SP ) , that is , CI - I > CI - CG4 - CI , but CG4 - SP > SP . In sum , statistical pooling of individual responses frequently produced a greater number of unique ideas than did group in - teraction in brainstorming because of the ability of individuals to produce a greater number of ideas when working separately . More ideas were produced on fanciful tasks than on realistic problems possibly because of the type of instructions received , conse - quences related to the ideas produced , or scoring procedures that counted " variations on a theme " as unique responses . In pro - grammatic approaches to brainstorming , idea production increased when information was pooled in writing but decreased when information was pooled through discussion . Use of a nominal group technique that com - bined individual brainstorming , group dis - cussion of ideas , and a group selection of the best idea resulted in a level of performance equal to that obtained from exchange of written information , but NGT members ex - pressed greater satisfaction with task pro - cess . Neither programmatic approach , how - ever , produced more solutions than did individual performance . Complex problems . Complex problems were similar to brainstorming tasks in that more than one correct or acceptable answer was allowed . Again , group performance tended to be superior to individual perfor - mance but inferior to statistical pooling of responses . Researchers used complex problems to make the task as realistic as possible . For example , a Mined Road Problem was con - structed in an open - country field for the training of Air Force Reserve Officers ( Lorge , Tuckman , Aikman , Spiegel , & Moss , 1955r ) . The task was to formulate a plan for getting five men across a road embedded with su - persensitive enemy mines that could be nei - ther neutralized nor removed . No differ - ences , however , were found between con - ditions that ( a ) presented the field problem but did not allow manipulation of objects in the problem , ( b ) presented the field problem and did allow manipulation short of carrying out the solution , or ( c ) presented the field problem and required carrying out the so - lution . Across all conditions , the quality of group ( CG5 ) solutions was superior to that of individual ( I ) solutions . In a subsequent study ( Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ) , the Mined Road Problem was used in written format only . Air Force Officers first practiced individually ( I ) and then re - solved the problem as individuals ( I ) or in groups ( CG5 ) . Group re - solving perfor - mance ( I - CG5 ) was superior to individual re - solving performance ( I - I ) , but groups did not incorporate some of the best ideas pre - viously produced by their members . Groups adopted solutions of their three best mem - bers but never of their poorest members : 79 % of the re - solving group solutions were as good as or better than their best member ' s score individually ( I ) , but 11 % were poorer than their best member ' s score . In a study involving the Change of Work Procedure ( CWP ) Problem ( Campbell , 1968r ) , similar performance losses were seen : Statistical pooling of responses ( SP ) and the average coacting individual ( CI ) both scored higher than groups ( I - CG4 - CI - CG4 ) . The CWP ( Maier , Solem , & Maier , 1957 ) was a simulated conflict negotiation between supervisor and employees where the supervisor ' s proposal to change the work method is met with resistance from employ - 528 GAYLE W . HILL ees . Second - and third - line managers in an industrial setting ( the subjects ) wrote solu - tions to the problem in response to a mail request ; they discussed solutions in a brain - storming format , again wrote down their in - dividual solutions , and then participated in group selection of a solution ( CI - CG4 - CI - CG4 ) . A control group ( CG4 ) worked on the Circular Assembly Problem ( CAP ; Maier et al . , 1957 ) that was also a conflict nego - tiation problem involving work methods and human relations . A comparison of experi - mental ( CWP ) and control ( CAP ) condi - tions indicated that practice effects were not significant . There was no significant change in the average coacting individual ' s ( CI ) so - lution score after participating in group dis - cussion . Group interaction seemed to be hin - dered in the decision - making stage where the truth - wins decision strategy may have failed . In order to find whether research results reflected the decision strategies inherent in statistical models , the scores of groups ( CG5 ) and coacting individuals ( CI ) were com - pared with scores based on a plurality model ( CSM ) , best member ( CSB ) of a statistical aggregate , or incidence of proficient individ - uals in the population ( probability model , CSM ; Schoner et al . , 1974r ) . Statistical pooling ( SP ) was not tested . Three executive marketing decision tasks were used : ( a ) choosing one of four regions in which to build an assembly plant , ( b ) deciding whether to produce a quantity of paint that may soon be made obsolete by a competitor , and ( c ) deciding whether or not to pay a research firm for information on a competitor ' s prod - uct . Group solutions tended to be superior to solutions of coacting individuals or plu - rality vote groups but inferior to solutions of best - member statistical aggregates and the probability model , implying that groups were not able to use fully the expertise of group members ( posttests were not re - ported ) . In an attempt to improve performance , groups were trained in group dynamics and allowed more time for interaction ( Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) . Students in an Air Force Field Officers ' course were asked for a plan to improve the morale and operating effi - ciency of persons stationed at isolated weather stations in the Arctic . Before train - ing , increasing the time available for solution resulted in a significant increase in the qual - ity of decisions written by groups ( CG6 ) but not by coacting individuals ( CI ) : Individual solutions were superior to group solutions when 50 minutes were allowed but not when 100 minutes were allowed . After training in group process and problem solving , increas - ing the time available resulted in significant increases in the quality of decisions made by both groups and individuals , but groups were superior to individuals . On the average , group solutions before and after training were better than solutions of the worst in - dividuals but not better than solutions of the best individual ( CSB ) in a statistical aggre - gate . The probability that an idea would be in - cluded in a group ' s solution may have been a function of the commonality of the idea , that is , the number of individuals who had the same idea prior to the group meeting ( Lorge , Davitz , Fox , & Harrold , Note 1 ; cf . Lorge et al . , 1958 ) . Lorge et al . ( Note 1 ) found that only 10 % of the ideas possessed by only one person prior to the group meet - ing were ultimately included in the group solution . One - third of the ideas that were included in the group solution , however , had not been evident in prior individual perfor - mance , suggesting that new ideas emerged from group interaction . In the use of an approximation of the del - phi technique ( Dalkey , 1969 ) , an attempt was made to combine individual and group performance strategies ( Gustafson , Shukla , Delbecq , & Walster , 1973r ) . Persons were given anthropometric data ( heights and weights of men and women ) and were asked to make eight logarithmically calibrated likelihood estimates , for example : " The ob - served height of a person is 68 inches . Is the person more likely to be a man or a woman ? How much more likely ? " Significant dif - ferences were found among four condi - tions : Estimate ( CI ) , Estimate - Talk - Esti - mate ( CI - CG - CI ) , Talk - Estimate ( CG - CI ) , and Estimate - Feedback - Estimate ( CI - DG - DG ) . Feedback in the Estimate - Feedback - Estimate condition consisted of exchange of written estimates . The Estimate - Talk - Esti - mate condition produced more accurate es - timates than did the Talk - Estimate condi - GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 529 tion ; The Estimate and Estimate - Feedback - Estimate conditions were the least accurate . ( Posttests were not reported . ) These results were congruent with those found for abstract problems where group interaction was dys - functional during the idea generation phase but was beneficial for integration of com - plementary information ( Howell et al , 1970r ) and for clarification and justification in the evaluation phase ( Dunnette , 1964 ; Vroom , Grant , & Cotton , 1969 ) . Discussion increased solution accuracy ( error correc - tion ) more than did written feedback . In sum , group performance was usually superior to individual performance but did not achieve the potential suggested by sta - tistical pooling models , even though some group members were trained in group dy - namics and problem solving . The result of member interaction was superior to written feedback without discussion . Groups did not always incorporate the best ideas of their members . The following pages look at some phenomena that have led to process loss and process gain . Process and Process Interventions Many studies of individual versus group performance have examined the effects of group process , but few have studied the psy - chological or interpersonal processes them - selves . The studies in this section are divided into these categories : ( a ) indirect study of process through manipulations such as train - ing , practice , and feedback and ( b ) direct study of processes such as learning strategies or decision strategies . There is a great need for multivariate research in these areas ; most studies have tested only one or two main effects . The relation between specific pro - cesses and effects has largely been neglected . Process Interventions Process interventions have shown that practice , training , and task consequences have affected performance . As indicated above , the effects of practice have varied considerably across tasks : ( a ) Groups ( CG2 , CG4 ) benefited more than individuals ( I ) from training in problem solving and group dynamics ( Fox & Lorge , T962r ) and from practice on a pursuit rotor task ( learning ; Wegner & Zeaman , 1956r ) , ( b ) individuals ( I ) benefited more than groups ( CG4 ) from practice in brainstorming ( Dunnette et al . , 1963 ) , ( c ) individuals ( I ) and groups ( CG2 , CG4 ) improved equally after practice on a conceptual task ( Twenty Questions Problem ; Taylor & Faust , 1952r ) , and ( d ) group ( CG2 , CG4 ) practice had no effect on a com - plex problem - solving task ( Campbell , 1968r ; Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ; see also Laughlin & Sweeney , I977r ) . In math education , group ( CG4 ) scores during practice were not maintained when members were tested as coacting individuals ( CI ; Johnson et al . , 1978r ) . Although researchers have used practice trials for warm - up ( Milton , 1965r ) or to equalize performance levels of partic - ipants before introducing the experimental conditions ( Wegner & Zeaman , 1956r ) , the effects of practice were not verified . Several studies indicated the need to dis - tinguish training and practice from transfer : In concept attainment , groups ( CG ) of two or more members attained concepts in less time than did individuals ( I ) during training , but individuals took less time than did groups during transfer ( Lemke , Randle , & Robertshaw , 1969r ) . Incidental learning of poor concept - attainment strategies ( Laugh - lin & Jaccard , 1975r ) suggested that train - ing effects may occur through task feedback or through information obtained from ob - serving others . In brainstorming ( Dillon et al . , 1972r ) the inhibiting effect of training negated the positive effects of practice , pos - sibly because training groups felt over - whelmed and intimidated after watching a videotape of a model group that violated no brainstorming rules ( see also Colleros & Anderson , 1969 ) . Members who did not view the videotape benefited from practice . Task consequences ( e . g . , rewards ) also affected performance , but groups and indi - viduals were affected differently . In a circle drawing task , rewards were more motivating than fines when subjects were evaluated and sanctioned individually ( I - I ) , but fines were more motivating than rewards when the subjects were evaluated and sanctioned as a dispersed group ( DG4 - DG4 ; Sampson , 1963r ) . When subjects were evaluated in - dividually but sanctioned as a group , re - wards and fines were equally motivating . 530 GAYLE W . HILL Those in the reward condition liked their sanctioner ( leader ) better than did those in the fine condition . In sum , process manipulations showed that group problem - solving proficiency could be improved with training , that practice ef - fects varied with training and transfer con - ditions , that transfer was greatest when training and transfer conditions were similar in social milieu , that training and practice effects can counteract each other , and that groups and individuals were not similarly influenced by task consequences ( rewards were more motivating than fines when per - sons were sanctioned as a group ) . Direct Study of Process Because the components of individual and group process were difficult to observe , some researchers attempted to identify them through statistical models ( SM ) that pre - dicted solution time based on hypothesized group processes , number of persons involved , and number of subproblems or problem stages ( Davis , 1969rb ; Restle & Davis , 1962 ) . Two models suggested general sources of variance : ( a ) A pooling - of - contributions model indicated that group members who did not solve a problem nevertheless con - sumed their share of group time ( Restle & Davis , 1962 ) , and ( b ) a parts - process model suggested that individuals did not solve sub - problems in an ordered sequence , but this model was not supported for groups ( Davis , 1969rb ) . Several specific sources of variance were suggested . In a group context , some part of solution time was required for voice com - munication ( Howell et al . , 1970r ) . Some other part of solution time might have been required for task familiarization ( e . g . , gath - ering information about the task , recalling relevant facts or experience , or integrating dimensions of the problem ) . For example , groups ( CG5 ) working on the Mined Road Problem ( Lorge et al . , 1955r ) often required excessive time in laboratory settings where members had little room to gather infor - mation simultaneously , whereas individual ( I ) solution time was not affected by type of task presentation ( verbal description , pho - tographic representation , miniature scale model , or a full - scale field simulation ) . In a subsequent study using the Mined Road Problem ( Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ) , re - solving groups ( I - CG5 ) took less time to solve than groups solving for the first time ( CG5 ) . Another part of solution time might have been required for members to become fa - miliar with each other and to coordinate member input . In Air Force Field Officers ' training ( Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) , groups ( CG6 ) were inferior to coacting individuals ( CI ; when 50 minutes were allowed ) before training in problem - solving and group dy - namics but superior after training . A major part of solution time seemed to be devoted to strategies for task solution . Several studies indicated that individuals and groups used different problem - solving processes , for example , different learning strategies in concept attainment ( Laughlin , 1965r ; Laughlin , McGlynn et al . , 1968r ) . Group discussion even seemed to create ad hoc norms . In a Choice Dilemma task , risk - oriented discussion led to risk taking and pessimism in groups ( CG4 ) but not in coacting individuals ( CI ; Lamm , Tromms - dorff , & Kogan , 1970r ) , For an impossible circle drawing task ( Rettig , 1966r ) , how - ever , discussion unrelated to risk taking was followed by risk taking in dispersed groups ( DG3 ) but not in individuals ( I ) . In a group setting , members seemed willing to involve others in risk taking but unwilling to assume responsibility for the other ( Zaleska & Ko - gan , 1971r ) . When making a decision for another person in a gambling task , groups ( I - CG ) of from three to six members chose high - risk gambling , whereas individuals ( I - I ) tended to choose conservative gambling . In a study of " risky aggression " ( Yinnon , Jaffe , & Feshbach , 1975r ) , where the " Other " agreed to the conditions of partic - ipation and shared in the rewards in a con - cept - attainment task , groups ( CG3 ) showed higher levels of aggression than did individ - uals ( I ) by administering higher levels of electric shock for incorrect learner responses ( 38 out of 45 individuals and 39 out of 42 groups chose electric shock instead of a flashing light as a means of teaching the Other ) . Rewards were higher ( for both de - cision maker and learner ) in the electric GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 531 shock condition , and the payoff increased if the concept was learned in a small number of trials . When asked to advise a bogus learner who was subsequently unsuccessful ( Mynatt & Sherman , 1975r ) , group ( CG5 ) members were less likely than individuals ( I ) to assume responsibility for the result , to believe that the advisee often took their advice , or to believe their advice had much influence on the advisee ' s decisions . This tendency to diffuse responsibility in a group may have been related to a phenom - enon called " social loafing " ( Latane , Wil - liams , & Harkins , 1979r ) . When university students were asked to clap or shout in groups ( CG2 , CG4 , CG6 ) or as coacting in - dividuals ( CI ) , the average sound pressure generated per person in a group was 36 % - 72 % of the sound pressure generated as a coacting individual . This decrease of effort in groups seemed to be caused by members who ( a ) attempted to maintain an equitable division of labor , ( b ) perceived the task as an optimizing task ( attempting to reach an optimal level of sound output ) rather than a maximizing task ( students were actually instructed to yell " as loud as you can " ) , or ( c ) felt that the contingency between their input and the outcome was lessened in the group context ( loss of control over rewards ) . This research confirms an earlier study ( Bray et al . , 1978r ) that concluded that the " functional size " of a group was a subset of its actual size . Groups ( CG2 , CG3 , CG6 , CG10 ) produced more correct solutions on easy and moderate problems than did indi - viduals ( I ) , but groups and individuals pro - duced about the same proportion of correct solutions for difficult problems and did not differ in time to solution regardless of dif - ficulty . Two statistical models ( equalitarian and hierarchical ; SM ) , based on group size , overpredicted group performance . In mea - sures of group atmosphere , members indi - cated that the preferred group size was from three to six members and that satisfaction and involvement were greater in small groups ( CG2 , CG3 ) than in large groups ( CG6 , CG10 ) . Another major part of solution time seemed to be required for decision making , as seen most clearly in problem - solving tasks where only one solution could be submitted by the group . When a task had only one solution , experimenters often assumed that any member of the group who knew the so - lution could convince others to accept it ( truth wins ; Faust , 1959r ; Ryack , 1965r ) . This model seemed accurate for both groups ( CG2 ) and coacting individuals ( CI ) for eu - reka problems where the correct answer was easily identified ( Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ) , but when the problem was complex or sub - ject to interpretation , the correct member was sometimes overruled by an incorrect subgroup ( Faust , 1959r ; Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ; see also Steiner , 1972 ) . The proba - bility of being overruled by incorrect mem - bers was most likely in groups of low ability . For high - ability groups , the solution was usually determined by a correct member supported by at least one other member ( truth - supported wins ) , by a majority ( ma - jority rules ) , or by equiprobability if there was not a majority consensus ( majority rules , equiprobability otherwise ) . In general , the decision seemed to be a function of the probability of a correct response ( i . e . , the proportion of persons capable of solving ) , with an additional increment from the influ - ence of more than one correct advocate ( Laughlin et al , , 1975r ) . The prevailing de - cision scheme , however , could also be influ - enced by the type of task ( Laughlin et al . , 1976r ) . In sum , solution times of groups and in - dividuals seemed to be determined by needs for communication , task familiarization , co - ordination of member input , strategies for task solution , and decision making . The ex - tent to which these processes overlapped was not clear . Groups used a focusing strategy more than did individuals , made riskier de - cisions , less frequently assumed responsibil - ity for another member , and showed signs of " social loafing , " Groups usually used truth - wins and majority - rules decision strat - egies to select the task solution . Individual Differences The comparison of groups and individuals has been affected by three types of individual differences : ability , sex , and affiliation pref - erence . For learning and concept - attainment tasks , groups ( CG ) were generally superior 532 GAYLE W . HILL to individuals ( I ; Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ; Laughlin & Branch , 1972r ; Laughlin et al . , 1969r ; Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ; Morris - sette et al . , 1964r ; Wegner & Zeaman , 1956r ) . In one case ( Terman Concept Mas - tery Test ) , however , a high - ability individual was superior to dyads and quads ( e . g . , H > MMMM and H > HLLL ) . In concept attainment , member ability was inconsistent across trials ( Laughlin , McGlynn et al . , 1968r ) . Only two studies ( Laughlin et al . , 1976r ; Lemke et al . , 1969r ) , however , re - ported tests of significant differences among high , medium , and low scorers . Several instances have shown an interac - tion between sex and size of group . In a study of recall in information processing , there was less improvement for women than for men as individuals ( I ) but more improvement for women than for men in groups ( CG5 ; Mor - rissette et al . , 1964r ) . In concept attainment ( Laughlin , McGlynn et al . , 1968r ) , male groups ( CG2 ) made more use of focusing strategies than did either female groups ( CG2 ) or male / female individuals ( I ) , sug - gesting that men benefited more than women from working with a partner . Significant higher order interactions were found for Sex X Number of Persons X Problem Type and for Sex X Memory Aids X Number of Persons . The effect of affiliation preference was in - dicated in a study ( Davis , 1969rb ) involving a divisible problem ( five simple arithmetic problems ) and an indivisible ( modified water jar ) problem . On the average , groups ( CG5 ) reached a solution significantly faster than did coacting individuals ( CI ) , For the divis - ible problem , however , groups whose mem - bers preferred to work in groups also achieved a greater proportion of correct solutions than did groups whose members preferred to work individually . Preference to work alone may have been related to " self - orientation " as observed in brainstorming tasks ( Campbell , 1968r ) . No significant interaction was found between orientation levels ( self - orientation , interaction orientation , or task orientation ) and group versus individual brainstorming performance on a human relations problem ( Change of Work Procedure ) , but statistical pooling ( SP ) scores were positively related to self - orientation and negatively related to interaction orientation . High self - orientation seemed to contribute to the superiority of statistical pooling ( SP ) over groups ( CG4 ) . In summary , the comparison of groups and individuals may interact with individual differences in ability level , sex , memory , and affiliation preferences . High - ability individ - uals performed better than some mixed - abil - ity groups . Men worked better with a partner on a concept - attainment task than did women , but the reverse was true for an in - formation - processing task . Groups whose members preferred to work in a group per - formed better than groups whose members preferred to work as individuals . Discussion : Four Types of Group - Individual Comparisons Before proceeding , it should be noted that the above research may have been affected by several methodological or procedural variables . These are ( a ) the presence of the experimenter or experimenter - appointed group leader ( s ) ( Bouchard , 1969 ; Bouchard & Hare , 1970 ; Kerr & Sullaway , in press ) , ( b ) the manner of recording group solutions ( written versus tape recording ; Bouchard , 1969 ; Horowitz & Newman , 1964 ; Laugh - lin , McGlynn et al . , 1968r ; Van de Yen & Delbecq , 1974r ) , ( c ) the amount of time al - lowed for solution ( Davis , 1969a ; Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) , ( d ) the type of instructions received by the subject ( Dillon et al . , 1972r ; Weisskopf - Joelson & Eliseo , 1961r ) , ( e ) time of day ( Bouchard , 1969 ) , ( f ) perfor - mance criteria ( Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) , or ( g ) method of computing perfor - mance scores ( Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) . No study reported controlled cross - cultural comparisons , but a few implied cross - cultural replicability ( Kanekar & Neelakantan , 1976 ; Kanekar & Rosen - baum , 1972 ; Lindgren & Lindgren , 1965 ; Zaleska & Kogan , 1971r ) . These points should be kept in mind as we examine four questions that underlie research comparing groups and individuals : ( a ) How does the performance of a group differ from that of an individual ? ( b ) How does the perfor - mance of a group differ from that of the most GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 533 competent member of a statistical aggre - gate ? ( c ) How does the performance of a group differ from statistical pooling of re - sponses ? ( d ) How accurate are math models in describing group processes ? Group ( DG or CG ) Versus Individual ( I of CI ) Research in this area has focused largely on productivity comparisons . Group perfor - mance was often quantitatively superior to the performance of individuals , for example , number of correct solutions ( Marquart , 1955r ; Shaw , I932r ) or card choices to so - lution ( Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) , insofar as groups benefited from pooling of infor - mation , opportunities for one member to cor - rect another ' s errors , and statistical cancel - lation of errors in the computation of average member performance . Groups were also qualitatively superior , for example , in com - plex problem solving ( Schoner et al . , 1974r ; Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ) , but group mem - bers contributed less when they preferred to work as individuals ( Davis , 1969rb ) and when their abilities were low ( Laughlin et al . , 1969r ) . Group superiority declined with practice , for example , in concept attainment ( Laughlin , MeGlynn et al . , 1968r ) and when group learning was transferred to individual performance ( Johnson et al . , 1978r ) . Groups benefited from member aggrega - tion in that the probability of including an exceptionally competent member increased with group size . The best member ' s contri - bution to the group product , however , was obscure . Group ( DG or CG ) Versus the Most Competent Member ( SB or CSB ) of a Statistical Aggregate In order to detect the effect of the most competent member , groups were compared with the best member of a statistical aggre - gate . Although group performance was often quantitatively similar to individual perfor - mance , for example , number completing crossword puzzles ( Shaw & Ashton , 1976r ) , and qualitatively similar , for example , op - timal solutions in an executive decision - mak - ing task ( Schoner et al . , 1974r ) , group per - formance was sometimes better than a best member ' s performance , for example , num - ber of correct solutions on an anagram task ( Faust , 1959r ) , and sometimes worse , for example , scores on weather station morale problem ( Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) . Interprob - lem correlations in a concept - attainment task showed that individual performance was not consistent within a class of problems ( i . e . , most groups did not contain a member who was consistently superior to the others ) . In some cases , the best member was hindered by working with less capable partners , for example , in problem solving ( Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ; Laughlin & Branch , 1972r ; Laughlin et al . , 1969r ) , but hindrance was low when the solution was readily apparent , for example , eureka tasks ( Laughlin & Bitz , 1975r ) . The group ' s performance was simi - lar to that of its best member when working on an indivisible task . Group ( DG or CG ) Versus Statistically Pooled Responses ( SP or CSP ) For learning tasks and abstract problems , for example , syllable recall ( Ryack , 1965r ) and code diagnosticity ( Howell et al . , 1970r ) , group performance was similar to that of statistical pooling , supporting the pooling - of - information hypothesis . In brainstorming ( Dillon et al . , 1972r ) and complex problem solving ( Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ) , how - ever , group performance was inferior to sta - tistical pooling . Process Idss seemed to occur in one or more stages of group process : ( a ) aggregation of information ( Lorge et al . , 1955r ; Tuckman & Lorge , 1962r ) , ( b ) in - tegration of information ( Howell et al . , 1970r ) , ( c ) error checking or decision mak - ing , for example , failure of the truth - wins decision strategy ( Laughlin & Branch , 1972r ; Laughlin et al . , 1969r ; Schoner et al . , 1974r ) , or ( d ) division of labor , for example , pro - duction blocking ( Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) or nonproductive ( self - ) allocation of subtasks ( Steiner , 1972 ) . In general , groups needed more process time than did statistical aggregates , for ex - ample , in number recall ( Morrissette et al . , 1964r ) and in complex problem solving ( Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) , insofar as groups contrib - 534 GAYLE W . HILL uted serially ( verbally ) rather than simul - taneously ( writing ) . Group ( DG or CG ) Versus Math Models ( SM or CSM ) The complex models discussed in this re - view can be divided into two main categories : resource models and process models . One resource model ( i . e . , statistical pooling ) showed that groups benefited from aggre - gation of resources ( Shaw , I932r ) and di - vision of labor ( Marquart , 1955r ) but that they often did not fully use member re - sources . A second model ( Model A , Lorge & Solomon , 1955 ; Probability Model , Lorge & Solomon , 1955 ; Marquart , 1955r ; Schoner et al . , 1974r ; Shaw & Ashton , 1976r ) showed that one of the group ' s aggregated resources might be a highly competent person ( i . e . , its best member ) . Process models were used to hypothesize the means by which individual efforts were combined . Research indicated ( a ) that group members who could not solve the problem nevertheless seemed to consume their share of group time ( Equalitarian Model ; Davis , 1969rb ; Restle & Davis , 1962 ) rather than ( b ) that subjects who were " off the track " were nonfunctioning in their groups ( Hier - archical Model ; Davis , 1969rb ; Restle & Davis , 1962 ) , ( c ) that group superiority over individuals on a problem that involved two or more separate stages was a function of the pooling of abilities of group members across stages ( Model B ; Lorge & Solomon , 1955 ) , ( d ) that the functional size of a group was smaller than the actual size ( Bray et al . , 1978r ; Steiner & Rajaratnam , 1961 ) , ( e ) that subproblems ( parts of a task ) were not necessarily solved in an ordered sequence ( Parts Model ; Davis , 1969rb ) rather than ( f ) that group members each worked on the whole problem with solutions arising freely and independently ( Parts Process Model ; Davis , 1969rb ) , ( g ) that a person working with a partner of greater or comparable abil - ity improved relative to her or his perfor - mance alone , whereas a person working with a partner of less ability did not ( Comple - mentary Task Model ; Laughlin et al . , 1969r ; Laughlin & Johnson , 1966 ; Steiner , 1966 ) , and ( h ) that a correct answer was adopted by the group if and only if a member ad - vocated it and it was supported by at least one other member ( truth - supported wins and eight additional a priori social decision schemes ; Laughlin et al . , 1975r ; see Laugh - lin , in press ) . Other models that combine these pro - cesses may involve networks of variables ( Cartwright & Zander , 1968 ) that may be statistically analyzed by maps of variables ( March & Simon , 1958 ) , structural path equations or path analysis ( Werts & Linn , 1970 ) , cross - lagged panel analysis ( Kenny , 1975 ) , and / or cluster analysis ( Tryon , 1963 ; Tryon & Bailey , 1970 ) . General categories of variables that may make up networks of variables have been suggested in Steiner ' s ( 1972 ) theory of group productivity and pro - cess loss . For further discussion of math models of group performance the reader is referred to Davis ( 1969rb , 1973 , 1980 ) , Davis et al . ( 1977 ) , Davis and Restle ( 1963 ) , Einhorn , Hogarth , and Klempner ( 1977 ) , Feinberg and Larntz ( 1971 ) , Johnson and Davis ( 1972 ) , Laughlin ( 1980 ) , Laughlin et al . ( 1975r ) , Lorge and Solomon ( 1955 ) , Pen - rod and Hastie ( 1979 ) , Restle and Davis ( 1962 ) , Smoke and Zajonc ( 1962 ) , Steiner ( 1966 ) , Steiner and Rajaratnam ( 1961 ) , Stone ( 1963 ) , Thomas & Fink ( 1961 ) , and Zajonc and Smoke ( 1959 ) . Theoretical Implications : Productivity Loss or Gain Much of the present review has supported the concept of process loss in groups as de - scribed in Steiner ' s ( 1972 ) theory of group productivity . Potential group productivity was defined as " the maximum level of pro - ductivity that can occur when an individual or group employs its fund of resources to meet the task demands of a work situation " ( p . 8 ) . Actual productivity was defined as potential productivity minus losses due to faulty process . Both levels of productivity were believed to vary as a function of task demands , member resources , and group pro - cess . These definitions assumed , however , that group resources were static . A proficient member who increased another member ' s motivation or understanding of the task was GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 535 believed to be making the best use of the group ' s or best member ' s resources ( Steiner , 1972 ; see also Kerr & Sullaway , in press ) . This description does not account for the finding that dyads used a focusing strategy in concept attainment ( Laughlin , 1965r ; Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) more often than did individuals . Several authors ( Argyris & Schon , 1974 ; Hackman & Morris , 1976 ; Hoffman , 1965 ; Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ; Osborn , 1963 ; Zagona et al , 1966r ) suggested that group process could lead to process gain ( i . e . , that new ideas , solutions , or efforts could be gen - erated through group interaction ) . Two po - tential sources of process gain were sug - gested : ( a ) member capacity to learn and ( b ) cognitive stimulation . In the present re - view , evidence for member capacity to learn was presented in studies of observational learning ( Davis , 1969rb ) , incidental learning ( Laughlin & Jaccard , 1975r ) , social facili - tation ( Zajonc , 1965r ) , and implicit / explicit coaction ( Foot , 1973 ) . Evidence that groups benefited from training in group process and problem solving was seen in complex prob - lem solving of Air Force Field Officers ( Fox & Lorge , 1962r ) and in improvement in in - dividual performance after group perfor - mance ( Laughlin & Adamopoulous , 1980r ) . Less evidence indicated that cognitive stimulation could lead to process gain . A study by Maier ( 1970 ) , however , suggested that cognitive stimulation in groups may produce novel ideas , a unique combination of subideas , or a complex solution whose to - tal value is " greater than the sum of its parts . " The group product might be im - proved if groups were encouraged to be " problem - minded " rather than " solution - minded " ( Maier & Solem , 1962 ) , that is , if the leader encouraged the group to question its current approach or to consider other aspects of the problem ( Maier , 1950 , 1970 ) , if the group analyzed problem facets as sub - tasks ( Maier , 1952 ; Maier & Hoffman , 1960b ; Maier & Maier , 1957 ) , if members separated and recombined problem - solving strategies ( Maier , 1960 ) , or if groups were encouraged to produce two different solu - tions to a problem so that the better of the two might be adopted ( Maier & Hoffman , 1960a ) . Whether groups using these pro - cesses can surpass the potential suggested by statistical aggregates remains to be seen . This review has shown that group perfor - mance was generally qualitatively and quan - titatively superior to the performance of the average individual . Group performance , however , was often inferior to that of the best individual in a statistical aggregate and often inferior to the potential suggested in a statistical pooling model . This research confirms the belief that the performance of one exceptional individual can be superior to that of a committee ( Davis , 1969rb ) , es - pecially if the committee is trying to solve a complex problem and if the committee contains a number of low - ability members . Further research is needed to describe group process , to examine the variables that affect group process , to examine the relation be - tween group process and the group ' s prod - uct , and to compare group process and pro - ductivity with their potential . Reference Note 1 . Lorge , I . , Davitz , J . , Fox , D . , & Harrold , K . Eval - uation of instruction in staff action and decision - making ( Tech . Rep . No , 16 ) . U . S . Air Force Human Resource Research Institute , 1953 . References Allport , F . H . The influence of the group upon associ - ation and thought . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 1920 , 3 , 159 - 182 . Amaria , R . P . , Biran , L . A . , & Leith , G . O . M . Indi - vidual vs . cooperative learning . Educational Re - search , 1964r , / / , 95 - 103 . Argyris , C . , & Schon , D . Theory in practice . San Fran - cisco , Calif . : Jossey - Bass , 1974 . Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . Personality , problem - solving pro - cedure , and performance in small groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1969 , 53 , 1 - 29 . ( Monograph ) Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . , & Hare , M . Size , performance , and potential in brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1970 , 54 , 51 - 55 . Bray , R . , Kerr , N . , & Atkin , R . Effects of group size , problem difficulty , and sex on group performance and member reactions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1978r , 36 , 1224 - 1240 . Bruce , R . S . Group judgments in the field of lifted weights and visual discrimination . Journal of Psy - chology , 1935 - 1936 , / , 117 - 121 . Buchanan , L . J . , & Lindgren , H . C . Brainstorming in large groups as a facilitator of children ' s creative re - sponses . Journal of Psychology , 1973r , 83 , 117 - 122 . Campbell , J . P . Individual versus group problem solving in an industrial sample . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1968r , 52 , 205 - 210 . 536 GAYLE W . HILL Cartwright , D . , & Zander , A . ( Eds . ) . Group dynamics : Research and theory ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Harper & Row , 1968 . Colleros , P . A . , & Anderson , L . R . Effect of perceived expertness upon creativity of members of brainstorm - ing groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1969 , 53 , 159 - 163 . Collins , E . G . , & Guetzkow , H . A social psychology of group processes for decision - making . New York : Wiley , 1964 . Dalkey , N . C . The delphi method : An experimental study of group opinion . Santa Monica , Calif . : Rand , 1969 . Davis , J . H . Group performance . Reading , Mass . : Ad - dison - Wesley , 1969 . ( a ) Davis , J . H . Individual - group problem solving , subject preference , and problem type . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1969r , 13 , 362 - 374 . ( b ) Davis , J . H . Group decision and social interaction : A theory of social decision schemes . Psychological Re - view , 1973 , SO , 97 - 125 . Davis , J . H . Group decision and procedural justice . In M . Fishbein ( Ed . ) , Progress in social psychology . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1980 . Davis , J . H . , Kerr , N . L . , Stasser , G . , Meek , D . , & Holt , R . Victim consequences , sentence severity , and de - cision process in mock juries . Organizational Behav - ior and Human Performance , 1977 , 18 , 346 - 365 . Davis , J . H . , Laughlin , P . R . , & Komorita , S . The social psychology of small groups : Cooperative and mixed - motive interaction . Annual Review of Psychology , 1976 , 27 , 501 - 541 . Davis , J . H . , & Restle , F . The analysis of problems and prediction of group problem solving . Journal of Ab - normal and Social Psychology , 1963 , 66 , 103 - 116 . Dillon , P . C , Graham , W . K . , & Aidells , A . L . Brain - storming on a " hot " problem : Effects of training and practice on individual and group performance . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 1972r , 56 , 487 - 490 . Dion , K . L . , Baron , R . S . , & Miller , N . Why do groups make riskier decisions than individuals ? In L . Ber - kowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psy - chology ( Vol . 5 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1970 . Duncan , C . P . Recent research on human problem solv - ing . Psychological Bulletin , 1959 , 56 , 397 - 429 . Dunnette , M . D . Are meetings any good for solving problems ? Personnel Administration , 1964 , 27 ( 2 ) , 12 - 29 . Dunnette , M . D . , Campbell , J . , & Jaastad , K . The effect of group participation on brainstorming effectiveness for two industrial samples . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1963 , 47 , 30 - 37 . Einhorn , H . J . , Hogarth , R . M . , & Klempner , E . Quality of group judgment . Psychological Bulletin , 1977 , 84 , 158 - 172 . Eysenck , H . J . The validity of judgments as a function of number of judges . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 1939 , 25 , 650 - 654 . Farnsworth , P . R . , & Williams , M . F . The accuracy of the median and mean of a group of judgments . Jour - nal of Social Psychology , 1936r , 4 , 237 - 239 . Faust , W . L . Group versus individual problem solving . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1959r , 59 , 68 - 72 . Feinberg , S . E . , & Larntz , F . K . Some models for in - dividual - group comparison and group behavior . Psy - chometrika , 1971 , 36 , 349 - 367 . Foot , H . C . Group learning and performance : A re - classification . British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology , 1973 , 12 , 7 - 17 . Fox , D . J . , & Lorge , I . The relative quality of decisions written by individuals and by groups as the available time for problem solving is increased . Journal of So - cial Psychology , 1962r , 57 , 227 - 242 . Gordon , K . A study of aesthetic judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1923 , 6 , 36 - 43 . Gordon , K . Group judgments in the field of lifted weights . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1924 , 7 , 398 - 400 . Guilford , J . P . The structure of intellect . Psychological Bulletin , 1956 , 53 , 267 - 293 . Gustafson , D . H . , Shukla , R . K . , Delbecq , A . , & Wals - ter , G . W . A comparative study of differences in sub - jective likelihood estimates made by individuals , in - teracting groups , Delphi groups , and nominal groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 1973r , 9 , 280 - 291 . Hackman , J . R . , & Morris , C . G . Group tasks , group interaction process and group performance effective - ness : A review and proposed integration . In L . Ber - kowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psy - chology ( Vol . 8 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1976 . Harari , O . , & Graham , W . K . Tasks and task conse - quences as factors in individual and group brainstorm - ing . Journal of Social Psychology , 1975r , 95 , 61 - 65 . Hare , A . P . Handbook of small group research . New York : Free Press , 1976 . Hartman , J . J . Small group methods of personal change . Annual Review of Psychology , 1979 , 30 , 453 - 476 . Helmreich , R . , Bakeman , R . , & Scherwitz , L . The study of small groups . Annual Review of Psychology , 1973 , 24 , 337 - 354 . Heslin , R . Predicting group task effectiveness from member characteristics . Psychological Bulletin , 1964 , 62 , 248 - 256 . Hoffman , L . R . Group problem solving . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 2 ) . New York : Academic Press , 1965 . Hoffman , L . R . , & Smith , C . G . Some factors affecting the behaviors of members of problem - solving groups . Sociometry , 1960 , 23 , 273 - 291 . Horowitz , M . W . , & Newman , J . B . Spoken and written expressions : An experimental analysis . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1964 , 68 , 640 - 647 . Howell , W . C . , Gettys , C . F . , Martin , D . W . , Nawrocki , L . H . , & Johnston , W . A . Evaluation of diagnostic tests by individuals and small groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 1970r , 5 , 211 - 237 . Johnson , C . D . , & Davis , J . H . An equiprobability model of risk - taking . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 1972 , 8 , 159 - 175 . Johnson , D . W . , & Johnson , R . Learning together and alone : Cooperation , competition and individualiza - tion . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1975 . Johnson , D . W . , Johnson , R . T . , & Scott , L . The effects of cooperative and individualized instruction on stu - dent attitudes and achievement . Journal of Social Psychology , 1978r , 104 , 207 - 216 . Kanekar , S . , & Neelakantan , P . Group performance as GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 537 a function of group type and group composition . Eu - ropean Journal of Social Psychology , 1976 , 6 , 381 - 385 . Kanekar , S . , & Rosenbaum , M . E . Group performance on a multiple solution task as a function of available time . Psychonomic Science , 1972 , 27 , 331 - 332 . Kelley , H . H . , & Thibaut , J . W . Experimental studies of group problem solving and process . In G , Lindzey ( Ed . ) , Handbook ofsocial psychology ( Vol . 2 ) . Cam - bridge , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1954 . Kelley , H . H . , & Thibaut , J . W . Group problem solving . In G . Lindzey & E . Aronson ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social psychology ( Vol . 4 ) . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1969 . Kenny , D . A . Cross - lagged panel correlation : A test for spuriousness . Psychological Bulletin , 1975 , 82 , 87 - 93 . Kerr , N . L . , Stasser , G . , & Davis , J . H . Model testing , model fitting , and social decision schemes . Organi - zational Behavior and Human Performance , 1979 , 23 , 399 - 410 . Kerr , N . , & Sullaway , M . E . Group sex composition and member task motivation . Sex Roles , in press . Klugnnan , S . F . Group judgment for familiar and un - familiar materials . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 1945 , 32 , 103 - 110 . Lamm , H . , & Trommsdorff , G . Group versus individual performance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency : A review . European Journal of Social Psychology , 1973 , 3 , 361 - 388 . Lamm , H . , Trommsdorff , G . , & Kogan , N . Pessimism - optimism and risk taking in individual and group con - texts . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1970r , 15 , 366 - 374 . Lana , R . E . Assumptions of social psychology . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts , 1969 . Latane , B . , Williams , K . , & Harkins , S . Many hands make light the work : The causes and consequences of social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1979r , 37 , 822 - 832 . Laughlin , P . R . Selection strategies in concept attain - ment as a function of number of persons and stimulus display . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1965r , 70 , 323 - 327 . Laughlin , P . R . Social combination processes of coop - erative problem - solving groups on verbal intellective tasks . In M . Fishbein ( Ed . ) , Progress in social psy - chology ( Vol . 1 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1980 . Laughlin , P . R . Social decision schemes on intellective tasks . In H . Brandstatter & J . Davis ( Eds . ) , Group decision - making . New York : Academic Press , in press . Laughlin , P . R . , & Adamopoulous , J . Social combi - nation process and individual learning for six - person cooperative groups on an intellective task . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1980r , 38 , 941 - 947 . Laughlin , P . R . , & Bitz , D . S . Individual versus dyadic performance on a disjunctive task as a function of initial ability level . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975r , - 3 / , 487 - 496 . Laughlin , P . R . , & Branch , L . C . Individual versus te - tradic performance on a complementary task as a function of initial ability level . Organizational Be - havior and Human Performance , 1972r , 8 , 201 - 216 . Laughlin , P . R . , Branch , L . G . , & Johnson , H . H . In - dividual versus triadic performance on a unidimen - sional complementary task as a function of initial ability level . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1969r , 12 , 144 - 150 . Laughlin , P . R . , & Jaccard , J . J . Social facilitation and observational learning of individuals and cooperative pairs . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975r , 32 , 873 - 879 . Laughlin , P . R . , & Johnson , H . H . Group and individual performance on a complementary task as a function of initial ability level . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 1966 , 2 , 407 - 414 . Laughlin , P . R . , Kalowski , C . A . , Metzler , M . E . , Ostap , K . M . , & Venclovas , S . M . Concept identification as a function of sensory modality , information , and num - ber of persons . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1968r , 77 , 335 - 340 . Laughlin , P . R . , Kerr , N . L . , Davis , J . H . , Halff , H . M . , & Marciniak , K . A . Group size , member ability , and social decision schemes on an intellective task . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975r , 31 , 522 - 535 . Laughlin , P . R . , Kerr , N . L . , Munch , M . M . , & Hag - garty , C . A . Social decision schemes of the same four - person groups on two different intellective tasks . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1976r , 33 , 80 - 88 . Laughlin , P . R . , McGlynn , R . P . , Anderson , J . A . , & Jacobson , E . S . Concept . attainment by individuals versus cooperative pairs as a function of memory , sex , and concept rules . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1968r , 8 , 410 - 417 . Laughlin , P . R . , & Sweeney , J . D . Individual to group problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Human Learning and Memory , 1977r , 3 , 246 - 254 . Lemke , E . A . , Randle , K . , & Robertshaw , C . S . Effects of degree of initial acquisition , group size , and general mental ability on concept learning and transfer . Jour - nal of Educational Psychology , 1969r , 60 , 75 - 78 . Lindgren , H . C . , & Lindgren , F . Creativity , brainstorm - ing , and orneriness : A cross - cultural study . Journal of Social Psychology , 1965 , 67 , 23 - 30 . Lorge , I . , Fox , D . , Davitz , J . , & Brenner , M . A survey of studies contrasting the quality of group perfor - mance and individual performance . Psychological Bulletin , 1958 , 55 , 337 - 372 . Lorge , L , & Solomon , H . Two models of group behavior in the solution of eureka - type problems . Psychome - trika , 1955 , 20 , 139 - 148 . Lorge , I . , Tuckman , J . , Aikman , L . , Spiegel , J . , & Moss , G . Problem solving by teams and individuals in a field setting . Journal of Educational Psychology , 1955r , 46 , 160 - 166 . Madsen , D . B . , & Finger , J . R . , Jr . Comparison of a written feedback procedure , group brainstorming , and individual brainstorming . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1978r , 63 , 120 - 123 . Maier , N . R . F . The quality of group decisions as in - fluenced by the discussion leader . Human Relations , 1950 , 3 , 155 - 174 . Maier , N . R . F . Principles of human relations . New York : Wiley , 1952 . Maier , N . R . F . Screening solutions to upgrade quality : 538 GAYLE W . HILL A new approach to problem solving under conditions of uncertainty . Journal of Psychology , 1960 , 49 , 217 - 231 . Maier , N . R . F . Problem - solving and creativity in in - dividuals and groups . Belmont , Calif . : Brooks / Cole , 1970 . Maier , N . R . F . , & Hoffman , L . R . Quality of first and second solutions in group problem solving . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1960 , 44 , 278 - 283 . ( a ) Maier , N . R . F . , & Hoffman , L . R . Using trained " de - velopmental " discussion leaders to improve further the quality of group decisions . Journal of Applied Psychology , I960 , 44 , 247 - 251 . ( b ) Maier , N . R . F . , & Maier , R . A . An experimental test of the effects of " developmental " vs . " free " discus - sions on the quality of group decisions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1957 , 41 , 320 - 323 . Maier , N . R . F . , & Solem , A . R . Improving solutions by turning choice situations into problems . Personnel Psychology , 1962 , 15 , 151 - 157 . Maier , N . R . F . , Solem , A . R . , & Maier , A . Supervisory and executive development . New York : Wiley , 1957 . Mann , R . D . A review of the relationship between per - sonality and performance in small groups . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 1959 , 56 , 241 - 270 . March , J . G . , & Simon , H . A . Organizations . New York : Wiley , 1958 . Marquart , D . I . Group problem solving . Journal of Social Psychology , ! 955r , 41 , 102 - 113 . McGrath , J . E . , & Altman , I . Small group research : A synthesis and critique of the field . New York : Holt , 1966 . Milton , G . A . Enthusiasm versus effectiveness in group and individual problem solving . Psychological Re - ports , 1965r , 16 , 1197 - 1201 . Morrissette , J . O . , Crannell , C . W . , & Switzer , S . A . Group performance under various conditions of work load and information redundancy . Journal of General Psychology , 1964r , 71 , 337 - 347 . Mynatt , C . , & Sherman , S . J . Responsibility attribution in groups and individuals : A direct test of the diffusion of responsibility hypothesis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975r , 32 , 111 1 - 1118 . Osborn , A . F . Applied imagination : Principles and pro - cedures of creative problem - solving ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Scribner , 1963 . Penrod , S . , & Hastie , R . Models of jury decision mak - ing : A critical review . Psychological Bulletin , 1979 , 86 , 462 - 492 . Ray , W . S . Complex tasks for use in human problem - solving research . Psychological Bulletin , 1955 , 52 , 134 - 149 . Restle , F . , & Davis , J . H . Success and speed of problem solving by individuals and groups . Psychological Re - view , 1962 , 69 , 520 - 536 . Rettig , S . Ethical risk taking in group and individual conditions . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 1966r , 4 , 648 - 654 . Rotter , G . S . , & Portugal , S . M . Group and individual effects in problem solving . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 1969r , 53 , 338 - 341 . Ryack , B . L . Individuals versus groups . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 1965r , 2 , 296 - 299 . Sampson , E . E . Individual and group performance under reward and fine . Journal of Social Psychology , 1963r , 61 , 111 - 125 . Schoner , B . , Rose , G . R . , & Hoyt , G . C . Quality of decisions : Individual versus real and synthetic groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1974r , 59 , 424 - 432 . Selltiz , C . , Wrightsman , L . S . , & Cook , S . W . Research methods in social relations ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston , 1976 . Shaw , M . E . A comparison of individuals and small groups in the rational solution of complex problems . American Journal of Psychology , 1932r , 44 , 491 - 504 . Shaw , M . E . Group dynamics : The psychology of small group behavior . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1976 . Shaw , M . E . , & Ashton , N . Do assembly affects occur on disjunctive tasks ? Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 1976r , 8 , 469 - 471 . Smith , M . Group judgments in the field of personality traits . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1931 , 14 , 562 - 565 . Smoke , W . H . , & Zajonc , R . B . On the reliability of group judgments and decisions . In J . H . Criswell , H . Solomon , & P . Suppes ( Eds . ) , Mathematical meth - ods in small group process . Stanford , Calif . : Stanford University Press , 1962 . Steiner , I . D . Models for inferring relationships between group size and potential group productivity . Behav - ioral Science , 1966 , / / , 273 - 283 . Steiner , I . D . Group process and productivity . New York : Academic Press , 1972 . Steiner , I . D . , & Rajaratnam , N . A model for the com - parison of individual and group performance scores . Behavioral Science , 1961 , 6 , 142 - 147 . Stone , L . A . Use of multiple regression model with group decision making . Human Relations , 1963 , 16 , 183 - 188 . Stroop , J . R . Is the judgment of the group better than that of the average member of the group ? Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1932r , 15 , 550 - 562 . Taylor , D . W . , Berry , P . C . , & Block , C . H . Does group participation when using brainstorming facilitate or inhibit creative thinking ? Administrative Science Quarterly , 1958r , 3 , 23 - 47 . Taylor , D . W . , & Faust , W . I . Twenty questions : Ef - ficiency in problem solving as a function of size of group . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1952r , 44 , 360 - 368 . Thomas , E . J . , & Fink , C . F . Models of group problem solving . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1961 , 63 , 53 - 63 . Tryon , R . C . Psychology in flux : The academic - profes - sional bipolarity . American Psychologist , 1963 , 18 , 134 - 143 . Tryon , R . C . , & Bailey , D . E . Cluster analysis . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1970 . Tuckman , J . , & Lorge , I . Individual ability as a deter - minant of group superiority . Human Relations , 1962r , 15 , 45 - 51 . Underwood , B . J . Psychological research . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1957 . Van de Ven , A . H . , & Delbecq , A . L . The effectiveness of nominal , delphi , and interacting group decision - making processes . Journal of the Academy of Man - agement , 1974r , 17 , 605 - 621 . GROUP VERSUS INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE 539 Vinokur , A . Review and theoretical analysis of effects of group process on individual and group decisions involving risk . Psychological Bulletin , 1971 , 76 , 231 - 250 . Vroom , V . H . , Grant , L . D . , & Cotton , T . S . The con - sequences of social interaction in group problem solv - ing . Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor - mance , 1969 , 4 , 77 - 95 . Wegner , N . , & Zeaman , D . Team and individual per - formance on a motor learning task . Journal of Gen - eral Psychology , 1956r , 55 , 127 - 142 . Weisskopf - Joelson , E . , & Eliseo , T . S . An experimental study of the effectiveness of brainstorming . Journal of Applied Psychology , 1961r , 45 , 45 - 49 . Werts , C . E . , & Linn , R . L . Path analysis : Psychological examples . Psychological Bulletin , 1970 , 74 , 193 - 212 . Yinnon , Y . , Jaffe , J . , & Feshbach , S . Risky aggression in individuals and groups . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1975r , 31 , 808 - 815 . Zagona , S . V . , Willis , J . E . , & MacKinnon , W . J . Group effectiveness in creative problem - solving tasks : An examination of relevant variables . Journal of Psy - chology , 1966r , 62 , 111 - 137 . Zajonc , R . B . Social facilitation . Science , 1965r , 149 , 269 - 274 . Zajonc , R . B . , & Smoke , W . M . Redundancy in task assignments and group performance . Psychometrika , 1959 , 24 , 361 - 369 . Zajonc , R . B . , & Taylor , J . J , The effect of two methods of varying group task difficulty on individual and group performance . Human Relations , 1963r , 16 , 359 - 368 . Zaleska , M . , & Kogan , N . Level of risk selected by individuals and groups when deciding for self and others . Sociometry , 1971r , 34 , 198 - 213 . Zander , A . The psychology of group process . American Review of Psychology , 1979 , 30 , 417 - 451 . Received August 24 , 1981