Cerebral Cortex December 2009 ; 19 : 2767 - - 2796 doi : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhp055 Advance Access publication March 27 , 2009 FEATURE ARTICLE Where Is the Semantic System ? A Critical Review and Meta - Analysis of 120 Functional Neuroimaging Studies Jeffrey R . Binder , Rutvik H . Desai , William W . Graves and Lisa L . Conant Language Imaging Laboratory , Department of Neurology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI 53226 , USA Semantic memory refers to knowledge about people , objects , actions , relations , self , and culture acquired through experience . The neural systems that store and retrieve this information have been studied for many years , but a consensus regarding their identity has not been reached . Using strict inclusion criteria , we analyzed 120 functional neuroimaging studies focusing on semantic processing . Reliable areas of activation in these studies were identiﬁed using the activation likelihood estimate ( ALE ) technique . These activations formed a distinct , left - lateralized network comprised of 7 regions : posterior inferior parietal lobe , middle temporal gyrus , fusiform and parahippocampal gyri , dorsomedial prefrontal cortex , inferior frontal gyrus , ventromedial prefrontal cortex , and posterior cingulate gyrus . Secondary analyses showed speciﬁc subregions of this network associated with knowledge of actions , manipulable artifacts , abstract concepts , and concrete concepts . The cortical regions involved in semantic processing can be grouped into 3 broad categories : posterior multimodal and heteromodal association cortex , heteromodal prefrontal cortex , and medial limbic regions . The expansion of these regions in the human relative to the nonhuman primate brain may explain uniquely human capacities to use language productively , plan , solve problems , and create cultural and technological artifacts , all of which depend on the ﬂuid and efﬁcient retrieval and manipulation of semantic knowledge . Keywords : brain mapping , fMRI , meta - analysis , positron emission tomography , semantics Introduction The human brain has an enormous capacity to acquire knowledge from experience . The characteristic shapes , colors , textures , movements , sounds , smells , and actions associated with objects in the environment , for example , must all be learned from experience . Much of this knowledge is represented symbolically in language and underlies our understanding of word meanings . These relationships between words and the stores of knowledge they signify are known collectively as the ‘‘semantics’’ of a language ( Bre´al 1897 ) . In this article , we use the more general term ‘‘semantic processing’’ to refer to the cognitive act of accessing stored knowledge about the world . For most languages , semantic properties of words are readily distinguished from their structural properties . For example , words can have both spoken ( phonological ) and written ( orthographic ) forms , but these surface forms are typically related to word meanings only through the arbitrary con - ventions of a particular vocabulary . There is nothing , for example , about the letter sequences DOG or CHIEN that inherently links these sequences to a particular concept . Conversely , it is trivial to construct surface forms ( e . g . , CHOG ) that possess all of the phonological and orthographic proper - ties of words in a particular language , but which have no meaning in that language . In this article , we hold to a simple , operational distinction between 1 ) the processes of analyzing surface form ( phonology , orthography ) , and 2 ) semantic processes , which concern access to knowledge not directly represented in the surface form . Semantic processing is a deﬁning feature of human behavior , central not only to language , but also to our capacity to access acquired knowledge in reasoning , planning , and problem solving . Impairments of semantic processing ﬁgure in a variety of brain disorders such as Alzheimer disease , semantic de - mentia , ﬂuent aphasia , schizophrenia , and autism . The neural basis of semantic processing has been studied extensively by analyzing patterns of brain damage in such patients ( e . g . , Alexander et al . 1989 ; Hart and Gordon 1990 ; Chertkow et al . 1997 ; Tranel et al . 1997 ; Gainotti 2000 ; Mummery et al . 2000 ; Hillis et al . 2001 ; Damasio et al . 2004 ; Dronkers et al . 2004 ) . On the whole , this evidence suggests a broadly distributed neural representation , with particular reliance on inferotemporal and posterior inferior parietal regions . Semantic processing has also been addressed in a large number of functional neuroimaging studies conducted on healthy volunteers , using positron emission tomography ( PET ) and functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) . The aim of the present study is to conduct a meta - analysis of this functional neuroimaging research , which now includes over 500 published studies . Several excellent reviews on neuroimaging studies of semantic processing have been presented previously , which focused mainly on the evidence for organization of object knowledge by taxonomic categories ( Joseph 2001 ; Martin and Chao 2001 ; Bookheimer 2002 ; Thompson - Schill 2003 ; Damasio et al . 2004 ; Gerlach 2007 ) . The present analysis differs from these prior efforts in including a larger number and broader range of studies , in adopting speciﬁc inclusion and exclusion criteria for identify - ing semantic processing experiments , and in the construction of probabilistic maps for summarizing the data . Considered for inclusion were any PET or fMRI studies in which words ( either spoken or written ) were used as stimulus materials . Thus , the goal of the current study is to identify brain systems that access meaning from words . This approach contrasts with several previous reviews that included and even emphasized studies in which object pictures were used to elicit knowledge retrieval ( Joseph 2001 ; Martin and Chao 2001 ; Damasio et al . 2004 ; Gerlach 2007 ) . Our focus on linguistic materials reﬂects our present concern , which is not how objects are recognized , but rather how conceptual knowledge is organized and accessed . Although the knowledge stores un - derlying word comprehension may be activated similarly during (cid:1) The Author 2009 . Published by Oxford University Press . All rights reserved . For permissions , please e - mail : journals . permissions @ oxfordjournals . org D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 word and object recognition tasks , there is also evidence that these 2 semantic access routes are not identical . For example , object recognition engages a complex , hierarchical perceptual stream that encodes progressively more abstract repre - sentations of object features and their spatial relationships ( Marr 1982 ; Tanaka et al . 1991 ; Logothetis and Sheinberg 1996 ; Humphreys and Forde 2001 ) . Certainly not all of these perceptual representations are encoded in language or even available to awareness . At present , it is not clear that comprehension of a word necessarily entails activation of a detailed perceptual representation of the object to which it refers , at least not to the same degree as that evoked by the object itself . In fact , many functional neuroimaging studies suggest different patterns of activation during matched word and picture recognition tasks ( Gorno - Tempini et al . 1998 ; Moore and Price 1999b ; Chee et al . 2000 ; Hasson et al . 2002 ; Bright et al . 2004 ; Gates and Yoon 2005 ; Reinholz and Pollmann 2005 ) . The existence of patients with profound visual object recognition disorders but relatively intact word comprehension also argues against a complete overlap between the knowledge systems underlying word and object recognition ( Warrington 1985 ; Lissauer 1889 ; Farah 1990 ; Davidoff and De Bleser 1994 ) . In the interest of maintaining a clear focus on the processing of concepts rather than percepts , we thus elected to include in this analysis only those experiments that used words as stimuli . Speciﬁc exclusion criteria are a critical feature of the present study . The numerous published neuroimaging studies concern - ing semantic processing address a variety of speciﬁc topics and employ a wide range of tasks and task comparisons ( here referred to as ‘‘contrasts’’ ) . The authors of these studies often began from very different theoretical perspectives and varied in their interpretation of task demands . One approach to selecting material for a meta - analysis would have been to include any study considered by the original authors to have addressed semantic processing , as indicated , for example , by the study title or list of keywords . We found during initial attempts to review these reports , however , that markedly different , largely non - overlapping activation patterns were frequently observed across studies . Furthermore , this discordance was related mainly to variability in task selection and the type of task contrast used . Three problematic features of this literature were of particular interest and were found with some regularity . First , many studies employed contrasting tasks that differed on phonological or orthographic processing demands in addition to semantic processing demands ( see examples in Table 1 ) . It is a general principle of functional neuroimaging studies , and one that warrants strong emphasis , that the ‘‘activations’’ measured using these methods are in fact representations of the relative differences in neural activity between 2 or more brain states . Thus , the pattern of activated brain regions observed in a study putatively targeting semantic processes depends not only on the cognitive processes elicited by the semantic task , but also on the processes elicited , or not elicited , by the comparison task . If the comparison task does not make demands on phonological and orthographic processes that approximate those made by the semantic task ( as is the case , e . g . , with any control task involving unpronounceable or unnameable stimuli ) , then the resulting activation is as likely to reﬂect phonological or orthographic processes as semantic processes . Such contrasts were excluded from the present analysis . A second , more prevalent problem concerns contrasts in which the conditions differed in task difﬁculty . Functional neuroimaging measurements are very sensitive to differences in response time , accuracy , and level of effort between tasks ( see , e . g . , Braver et al . 1997 ; Jonides et al . 1997 ; Honey et al . 2000 ; Adler et al . 2001 ; Braver et al . 2001 ; Ullsperger and von Cramon 2001 ; Gould et al . 2003 ; Binder et al . 2004 ; Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ; Mitchell 2005 ; Sabsevitz et al . 2005 ; Desai et al . 2006 ; Lehmann et al . 2006 ; Tregallas et al . 2006 ) . Such differences pose a problem if there are cognitive systems supporting general task performance functions that are modulated by task difﬁculty . Likely examples of such domain - general systems include a sustained attention network for maintaining arousal , a selective attention system for focusing neural resources on a particular modality or sensory object in the environment ( e . g . , a visual display ) , a working memory system for keeping task instructions and task - relevant sensory representations accessible , a response selection mechanism for mapping the contents of working memory to a response , a response inhibition system for preventing premature or prepotent responses from being made in error , and an error - monitoring system for adjusting response criteria and response time deadlines to minimize such errors . These systems , located mainly in frontal , anterior cingulate , and dorsal parietal cortices ( Corbetta et al . 1998 ; Carter et al . 1999 ; Duncan and Owen 2000 ; Grosbras et al . 2005 ; Owen et al . 2005 ) , are necessary for completing any task . If this is the case , and if the level of activation in these systems depends on general task demands , then it follows that activation can never be attributed with certainty to semantic processing when this activation has resulted from a contrast in which general task demands differ . Such contrasts ( see examples in Table 2 ) were therefore excluded from the present analysis . A ﬁnal issue concerns the interpretation of states in which no overt task is required . Many neuroimaging studies used states described as ‘‘passive’’ or ‘‘resting’’ in which subjects are given either no task , a minimally demanding task such as ﬁxating a point in the visual ﬁeld , or a nominal task for which compliance is uncertain and unknowable ( e . g . , ‘‘clear your mind , ’’ ‘‘focus on the scanner sounds’’ ) . Although such conditions can be useful as a low - level baseline , particularly for sensory stimulation studies , their use in semantic studies is problematic . Most people report experiencing vivid and memorable thoughts and mental images during such conscious , attentive states ( James 1890 ; Antrobus et al . 1966 ; Pope and Table 1 Example contrasts in which the semantic and control conditions are not matched on orthographic or phonological processing demands Semantic condition Control condition Stimulus , forexample Task Stimulus , forexample Task horse Read silently / / / / / View silently horse Read aloud tbcru Say ‘‘OK’’ horse Read silently nbgsj Read silently horse Does it have an ascender ? nbgsj Does it have an ascender ? horse Is it living or nonliving ? nbgsj Does it have more than 4 letters ? horse , zebra Are they related in meaning ? nbgsj , nbqsj Are they identical ? ‘‘horse’’ Listen distorted speech Listen ‘‘horse’’ Is it living or nonliving ? tones Is it high or low in pitch ? ‘‘horse’’ Is it living or nonliving ? distorted speech Is it a male or female voice ? ‘‘horse’’ Is it living or nonliving ? ‘‘ba’’ Is it ‘‘ba’’ or ‘‘pa’’ ? Note : The ‘‘living / nonliving’’ task is intended to represent a variety of similar semantic decision tasks . All examples are from the studies reviewed . 2768 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Singer 1976 ; Singer 1993 ; Giambra 1995 ; Binder et al . 1999 ; McKiernan et al . 2006 ) . We argued previously that the processes supporting such ‘‘task - unrelated thoughts’’ are essentially semantic , because they depend on activation and manipulation of acquired knowledge about the world ( Binder et al . 1999 ; McKiernan et al . 2006 ) . If such states involve semantic processing , their use as a baseline runs the risk of subtracting away any semantic processing elicited by an overt semantic task . Such a contrast ( an active semantic task compared with no task ) also violates the stipulations , discussed above , that task conditions be matched on low - level processing demands and on overall difﬁculty , and would thus be expected to produce ‘‘false positive’’ activation of surface form process - ing and general executive systems . Such contrasts were therefore excluded from the present analysis . Also excluded were contrasts in which 2 conditions that both involve passive stimulation were compared , such as passively listening to words versus pseudowords . In these cases , the processes underlying generation of task - unrelated thoughts , which we consider to be largely semantic in nature , would predominate in both of the conditions being contrasted , resulting in little or no relative activation of semantic systems . In summary , the present meta - analysis represents a critical review in which selection criteria are based on speciﬁc theoretical distinctions between semantic and surface form processing , and between semantic processes and more general processes required for task execution . Our aim is thus to identify brain regions that contribute speciﬁcally to the semantic component of word recognition , that is , the activa - tion of stored conceptual knowledge , apart from the accom - panying analysis of surface form or generation of an overt task response . Materials and Methods Study Identiﬁcation Procedures for identifying candidate studies were designed to be as inclusive as possible . Candidate studies were identiﬁed through searches of the PubMed , Medline , and PsychINFO online databases for the years 1980 through 2007 . This search was conducted using the following Boolean operation applied to title , abstract , and keyword ﬁelds : < ‘‘brain mapping’’ OR ‘‘functional magnetic resonance imaging’’ OR ‘‘fMRI’’ OR ‘‘positron emission tomography’’ OR ‘‘PET’’ OR ‘‘neuro - imaging’’ > AND < ‘‘semantics’’ OR ‘‘semantic memory’’ OR ‘‘category’’ OR ‘‘conceptual knowledge’’ > . This step yielded 2832 unique items . Abstracts from these studies were then initially screened to identify those that used either fMRI or PET and included healthy human participants , yielding 790 articles . Abstracts from these articles were then evaluated in more depth to identify experiments that used word stimuli and included either a general or speciﬁc semantic contrast . If this information could not be determined from the abstract , the article was also included . This second screening step yielded 431 articles . Online tables of contents and abstracts for selected journals focusing on cognition and neuroimaging , including ‘‘Brain and Language , ’’ ‘‘Human Brain Mapping , ’’ ‘‘Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , ’’ and ‘‘Neuro - Image , ’’ and previously published reviews of semantic neuroimaging studies ( Cabeza and Nyberg 2000 ; Joseph 2001 ; Martin and Chao 2001 ; Bookheimer 2002 ; Devlin , Russell , et al . 2002 ; Price and Friston 2002 ; Martin and Caramazza 2003 ; Thompson - Schill 2003 ; Damasio et al . 2004 ; Vigneau et al . 2006 ; Gerlach 2007 ) were then manually searched back to 1995 for relevant articles , yielding an additional 72 items . Finally , any additional relevant articles known to the authors , cited in the initial set of articles , or encountered during the review process were added to the list , resulting in a total of 520 articles that underwent full review . The full review process included a complete reading of each article by 1 of the 4 authors , followed by application of the following inclusion criteria : 1 . fMRI or PET study involving healthy adult human participants , 2 . use of spoken or written word stimuli , 3 . use of one or more semantic contrasts ( see deﬁnition below ) , 4 . incorporation of controls for sensory and word - form ( orthographic and phonological ) processes , 5 . incorporation of controls for general executive and response processes , 6 . use of a control task with overall difﬁculty at least as great as the semantic task , 7 . image data acquired over all or most of the supratentorial brain , 8 . availability of peak activation coordinates from a group activation map . In an effort to be as inclusive as possible , criteria 6 and 7 were not applied in a rigid manner . For example , studies that did not include adequate documentation of task performance were included if the reviewer judged the tasks to be approximately equal in difﬁculty . Studies were also included if the control task was more difﬁcult than the semantic task , following the logic that relative activation during the easier semantic task could not in such cases be due to greater demands on general executive processes . Criterion 7 was applied to avoid sampling bias for particular brain regions , but studies were included if nearly all of the cerebrum was imaged . Cases in which adherence to criteria was ambiguous were reviewed by a second author to reach a consensus view . All studies included after full review by one of the authors were then reviewed by a second author to conﬁrm eligibility . Rare disagreements were resolved by further discussion among the authors . Types of Semantic Contrasts Two types of contrasts are relevant to the goal of identifying activation due to semantic processing . The ﬁrst , which we refer to as a ‘‘general semantics’’ contrast , follows from the operational distinction between word structure and meaning discussed above . A general contrast is one between a condition that elicits high levels of access to word meaning and a condition that elicits lower levels of access to word meaning . The contrast must include controls for processing word structure ( phonology and orthography ) as well as for general executive and response processes . The 3 most common general contrasts were : 1 . Words versus Pseudowords . Pseudowords are spoken or written stimuli with structural properties similar to real words . The task performed on the words and pseudowords is nominally equivalent ( e . g . , an orthographic or phonological matching task , reading aloud , or Table 2 Examples for which the contrasted conditions are not matched on general task difﬁculty due to task set , word frequency , ambiguity , or priming effects Hard word condition Easy word condition Stimulus , forexample Task Stimulus , forexample Task horse Generate associated word horse Read — Generate names of animals — Generate months of the year horse Is it living or nonliving ? horse Read silently impala Is it living or nonliving ? horse Is it living or nonliving ? horse Is it living or nonliving ? horse ( repeated ) Is it living or nonliving ? horse Is it living or nonliving ? zebra Does it contain the letter ‘a’ ? horse , zebra Are they related in meaning ? horse , horse Are they identical ? house , zebra Are they related in meaning ? horse , horse Are they the same font size ? house , zebra Are they related in meaning ? horse , ZEBRA Are they the same case ? bank , river Are they related in meaning ? lake , river Are they related in meaning ? house , zebra Is the second item a word ? horse , zebra Is the second item a word ? Note : All examples are from the studies reviewed . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2769 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 lexical decision ) , such that the main difference emphasized by the contrast is the additional access to meaning in the word condition . 2 . Semantic Task versus Phonological Task . This contrast involves a comparison between different tasks , one of which focuses attention on semantic aspects of the stimuli ( e . g . , a semantic decision task ) and the other on structural ( usually phonological ) attributes of the stimuli ( e . g . , a rhyme decision or phoneme detection task ) . Typically , all the stimuli are words , thus the contrast emphasizes the additional access to word meaning elicited by the task in the semantic condition . Combinations of contrasts 1 ) and 2 ) also occur , in which a semantic task involving words is compared with a phonological task involving pseudowords ( e . g . , De´monet et al . 1992 ; Cappa et al . 1998 ; Binder et al . 1999 ) . 3 . High versus Low Meaningfulness . This contrast is a variation on 1 ) , in which the contrasting stimuli differ in meaningfulness but are not words and pseudowords . Some examples include names of famous versus unknown people , related versus unrelated word pairs , and meaningful versus nonsensical sentences . The other type of semantic contrast , which we designate ‘‘speciﬁc , ’’ entails a comparison between hypothetically distinct types of conceptual knowledge . The aim of such studies is not to delineate the entire semantic processing system , but rather to identify putative functional subdivisions within the semantic system . Many such studies , for example , involve comparisons between concrete objects from different categories ( e . g . , animals vs . tools ) . Such studies are relevant to our aims because they contribute to the identiﬁcation of brain regions involved speciﬁcally in semantic processing . Because we are not concerned here with particular functional subdivisions within the semantic system , activation data from both sides of the contrast ( e . g . , activation for animals > tools and for tools > animals ) were included . As with the general contrasts , several variations can be distinguished based on whether the contrast pertains to stimulus or task manipulations . For example , in experiments involving a stimulus manipulation , a constant task is used ( usually a semantic decision ) with 2 ( or more ) contrasting categories of stimuli . In experiments involving a task manipulation , the attentional focus of the participant is switched to different semantic attributes ( e . g . , color , action , and size ) of the same concepts using changes in task set . We report here results obtained from separate analyses of the general and speciﬁc contrasts as well as a global analysis combining all studies . The speciﬁc foci were classiﬁed according to type of semantic knowledge represented by each contrast , and separate analyses were conducted for each speciﬁc knowledge type for which sufﬁcient data were available . Data Analysis For each study reviewed , all reported contrasts that met inclusion criteria were included in the analysis . For each such contrast , the reviewer recorded the number of participants contributing to the activation map , the imaging modality used , the type of contrast , a brief description of the stimuli and tasks used in the contrast , the standard space to which the data were normalized , all reported coordinate locations for activation peaks , the Z values associated with each peak ( if available ) , and the published table from which the coordinates were copied . All coordinates were converted to a single common stereotaxic space . The studies were evenly divided between those that reported coordinates in the standard space of Talairach and Tournoux ( 1988 ) and those that used a variation of MNI space ( Evans et al . 1993 ) . We converted all MNI coordinates to the Talairach and Tournoux ( 1988 ) system using the ‘‘icbm2tal’’ transform ( Lancaster et al . 2007 ) . This transform reduces the bias associated with reference frame and scale in MNI - - Talairach conversion . Probabilistic maps of the resulting sets of coordinates were constructed using the ‘‘Activation Likelihood Estimate’’ ( ALE ) method ( Turkeltaub et al . 2002 ) , implemented in the GingerALE software package ( Laird et al . 2005 ) ( available at www . brainmap . org ) , using an 8 - mm FWHM 3D Gaussian point spread function and a spatial grid composed of 2 3 2 3 2 mm voxels . This method treats each reported focus as the center of a Gaussian probability distribution . The 3D Gaussian distributions corresponding to all foci included in a given analysis are summed to create a whole - brain map that represents the overlap of activation peaks at each voxel , referred to as the ALE statistic . Subsequent analysis is restricted to a brain volume mask ( Kochunov et al . 2002 ) distributed with the GingerALE software . To determine the null distribution of the ALE statistic for each analysis , a Monte Carlo simulation with 10 000 iterations was performed , in which each iteration consisted of a set of foci equal in number to the observed data , placed at random locations within the analysis volume and convolved with the same point spread function ( Laird et al . 2005 ) . Based on these null distributions , the ALE statistic maps for each analysis are converted to voxelwise probability maps . The probability of chance formation of suprathreshold clusters was then determined by Monte Carlo simulation using in - house software , with 1000 iterations . Each iteration contained randomly located foci equal in number to the observed data and convolved with the same point spread function . The ALE map was then computed for each iteration , and the number and size of voxel clusters were recorded after thresholding each simulated data set at various voxelwise ALE thresh - olds . ALE maps from each of the observed data sets were then thresholded at an ALE value that yielded a corrected mapwise a < 0 . 05 after removing clusters smaller than 1000 l L . For visualization of probability values at each voxel , these corrected ALE maps were applied as masks on the probability maps generated by the GingerALE software . These thresholded probability maps are shown in Figs . 3 - - 6 . Results The initial search and screening procedures identiﬁed 520 articles , which were subsequently reviewed in detail . A total of 120 articles met inclusion criteria and provided 187 semantic contrasts . Figure 1 shows a breakdown of these studies by year published . A list of the included studies is provided in Appendix 1 . Six of the included studies ( Paulesu et al . 2000 ; Giraud and Price 2001 ; Tyler et al . 2001 ; Devlin , Russell , et al . 2002 ; Pilgrim et al . 2002 ; Liu et al . 2006 ) met all criteria , but no activation was observed for the semantic contrasts of interest . Among the 400 excluded studies , 10 used techniques other than fMRI or PET , or studied special subject populations . Six were reviews or reanalyses of previously published data . About 20 % ( 82 ) of the excluded studies did not include any semantic contrasts , 13 % ( 52 ) did not use word stimuli , 9 % ( 37 ) used a resting or passive condition as the only control , 31 % ( 127 ) used active control tasks that were less difﬁcult than the semantic task , and 16 % ( 66 ) used active control tasks that did not control for word - form ( orthographic or phonological ) pro - cessing . In 17 % ( 69 ) of the excluded studies , no group activation data were reported for the semantic contrast of interest , or foci were reported only for a priori regions of interest . Of the 187 contrasts that met all inclusion criteria , 87 were of the general type and 100 of the speciﬁc type ; 126 used fMRI , and Figure 1 . Distribution of the included studies by year published . 2770 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 61 used PET . These studies collectively involved 1642 partic - ipants and yielded 1145 activation foci ( 691 general and 454 speciﬁc ) . ( The number of unique individuals involved in these studies could be smaller than 1642 . We did not count participants more than once if they were involved in more than one contrast from the same publication . However , the same individual could have been included in more than one publication . ) All Semantic Contrasts Figure 2 shows activation foci from all of the included studies projected onto an inﬂated surface model of the cerebral cortex ( see Figs . 1 and 2 in the Supplemental Material online for similar images color coded by type of contrast ) . Of the 1145 published foci , 10 were located in the cerebellum and are therefore not shown . About 68 % ( 771 ) of the foci were in the left cerebral hemisphere ( x < 0 ) and 32 % ( 362 ) in the right hemisphere ( x > 0 ) , indicating moderate left - hemisphere lateralization . Foci were located throughout the brain , but with strong clustering in some regions , particularly the left inferior parietal lobe . Areas with notably few foci included the precentral and postcentral gyri bilaterally , primary and second - ary visual cortices , superior parietal lobules , frontal eye ﬁelds , and dorsal anterior cingulate gyri . There was a clear line of demarcation along the lateral bank of the left intraparietal sulcus , separating a large and dense cluster of foci in the inferior parietal lobe from uninvolved cortex in the intra - parietal sulcus and superior parietal lobe . The thresholded ALE probability map based on all 1145 foci is shown in Figure 3 . Activations were lateralized to the left hemisphere and widely distributed in frontal , temporal , parietal , and paralimbic areas . Seven principal regions showed a high likelihood of activation across studies : 1 ) the angular gyrus ( AG ) and adjacent supramarginal gyrus ( SMG ) ; 2 ) the lateral temporal lobe , including the entire length of the middle temporal gyrus ( MTG ) and posterior portions of the inferior temporal gyrus ( ITG ) ; 3 ) a ventromedial region of the temporal lobe centered on the mid - fusiform gyrus and adjacent parahippocampus ; 4 ) dorsomedial prefrontal cortex ( DMPFC ) in the superior frontal gyrus ( SFG ) and adjacent middle frontal gyrus ( MFG ) ; 5 ) the inferior frontal gyrus ( IFG ) , especially the pars orbitalis ; 6 ) ventromedial and orbital prefrontal cortex ; and 7 ) the posterior cingulate gyrus and adjacent ventral precuneus . Weaker activations occurred at homologous locations in the right hemisphere , principally the AG , posterior MTG , and posterior cingulate gyrus . See Appendix 2 for details regarding activation of each of these regions in each of the included studies . General Contrasts Figure 4 shows the thresholded ALE map for the 691 general semantic foci . This map is very similar to the one derived from all foci , though with generally smaller clusters . Activation in the IFG is more clearly localized to the pars orbitalis . Activation in the left fusiform gyrus extends somewhat farther anteriorly , and there is more extensive involvement of the left ventrome - dial prefrontal region . Speciﬁc Contrasts The speciﬁc contrasts were further categorized as to the putative type of semantic knowledge examined by each . Many of these types ( e . g . , auditory , gustatory , olfactory , tactile , visual motion , characteristic object location , emotion , causation , and self knowledge ) were examined in only a few studies and thus had too few activation foci to examine separately by meta - analysis . There were 10 studies that examined contrasts between living things ( usually animals ) and manipulable artifacts ( usually tools ) ( Mummery et al . 1996 , 1998 ; Cappa et al . 1998 ; Perani et al . 1999 ; Grossman et al . 2002a ; Laine et al . 2002 ; Kounios et al . 2003 ; Thioux et al . 2005 ; Wheatley et al . 2005 ; Goldberg et al . 2006 ) , providing 41 ‘‘living’’ and 29 ‘‘artifact’’ foci . ‘‘Living’’ foci showed no signiﬁcant overlap in the ALE analysis . As shown in Figure 5 , ‘‘artifact’’ foci showed signiﬁcant overlap at the left lateral temporal - - occipital junction , where posterior MTG and ITG meet anterior occipital cortex ( roughly BA 37 ) , and in the ventral left SMG ( BA 40 ) near the junction with the superior temporal gyrus ( STG ) . There were 10 studies that examined action knowledge relative to other types ( Martin et al . 1995 ; Noppeney and Price 2003 ; Tyler , Stamatakis , et al . 2003 ; Davis et al . 2004 ; Boronat et al . 2005 ; Noppeney et al . 2005 ; Baumgaertner et al . 2007 ; Eschen et al . 2007 ; Ruschmeyer et al . 2007 ; Tomasino et al . 2007 ) , providing 40 ‘‘action’’ foci . Signiﬁcant overlap for these foci occurred in the ventral left SMG and posterior left MTG ( BA 37 ) . As shown in Figure 5 , the SMG focus overlaps the SMG region observed in the ‘‘artifact’’ studies . The posterior MTG cluster associated with action knowledge was slightly dorsal and lateral to the temporal - - occipital cluster of ‘‘artifact’’ foci . Figure 2 . One thousand one hundred and thirty - ﬁve published activation foci from the included studies projected onto an inﬂated cortical surface . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2771 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 There were 17 studies that examined the distinction between perceptually encoded knowledge ( i . e . , knowledge of concrete objects derived from sensory - motor experience ) and verbally encoded knowledge ( i . e . , knowledge acquired through language ) ( Paivio 1986 ) . The majority of these studies used contrasts between concrete and abstract concepts ( Jessen et al . 2000 ; Wise et al . 2000 ; Grossman et al . 2002b ; Fiebach and Friederici 2003 ; Giesbrecht et al . 2004 ; Noppeney and Price 2004 ; Whatmough et al . 2004 ; Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ; Binder , Westbury , et al . 2005 ; Sabsevitz et al . 2005 ; Wallentin , Østergaard , et al . 2005 ; Bedny and Thompson - Schill 2006 ; Fliessbach et al . 2006 ) , whereas a few others examined this distinction using tasks that required explicit knowledge of perceptual versus verbal facts ( Fletcher et al . 1995 ; Noppeney and Price 2003 ; Lee and Dapretto 2006 ; Ebisch et al . 2007 ) . Signiﬁcant overlap for the 113 ‘‘perceptual’’ foci occurred in the AG bilaterally , left mid - fusiform gyrus , left DMPFC , and left posterior cingulate ( Fig . 6 ) . Signiﬁcant overlap for the 34 ‘‘verbal’’ foci occurred in the left IFG ( mainly pars orbitalis ) and left anterior superior temporal sulcus ( STS ) . Discussion PET and fMRI activation studies are based , directly or indirectly , on differences between 2 or more brain activity states . The ‘‘activation maps’’ produced by these methods represent relative changes in brain activity , not absolute activity levels . Interpretation of such activations , therefore , cannot be based solely on the processing demands of one of the task states , but rather requires a joint analysis of the processing demands elicited by each of the task states and the degree to which they differ . The goal of the present meta - analysis was to clarify the Figure 3 . ALE map of all semantic foci , thresholded at whole - brain corrected P \ 0 . 05 . Activations are displayed on serial sagittal sections through the stereotaxic space of Talairach and Tournoux ( 1988 ) at 4 - mm intervals , with slice locations given at the lower left of each image . Green lines indicate the stereotaxic y and z axes . Tick marks indicate 10 - mm intervals . The color scale indicates voxelwise probability values of P \ 0 . 01 ( red ) , P \ 0 . 001 ( orange ) , and P \ 0 . 0001 ( yellow ) . 2772 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 brain regions speciﬁcally involved in semantic processing , a topic that has been the source of much debate ( for a sample of conﬂicting views , see Wernicke 1874 ; Head 1926 ; Petersen et al . 1988 ; De´monet et al . 1993 ; Thompson - Schill et al . 1997 ; Tranel et al . 1997 ; Hillis et al . 2001 ; Martin and Caramazza 2003 ; Patterson et al . 2007 ) . In contrast to previous meta - analyses on this topic , we used explicit criteria to deﬁne activation representing semantic processing ; these criteria referred to differences between the stimuli and tasks used to generate each activation map . To be considered for inclusion , a contrast had to involve a difference in either the degree to which stored knowledge was accessed ( ‘‘general’’ contrast ) or the speciﬁc type of knowledge accessed ( ‘‘speciﬁc’’ contrast ) . These differ - ences in stored knowledge access could be elicited through manipulation of stimulus characteristics ( e . g . , words vs . pseudo - words , meaningful vs . meaningless sentences , famous vs . un - familiar names , and animals vs . tools ) , through manipulation of the subject’s attention via task instructions ( e . g . , semantic vs . phonological decisions , color vs . action decisions ) , or both . Another central feature of the present study that distin - guishes it from previous reviews was the application of strict exclusion criteria . To minimize contamination of the results by nonsemantic processes , studies were excluded if the semantic condition of interest also made greater demands on low - level sensory , orthographic , phonological , syntactic , working mem - ory , attentional , response selection , or motor processes . ( Note that studies were excluded only when the semantic condition of interest made greater demands on these processes , not when the comparison condition made greater demands . ) The 2 most common reasons for exclusion were inadequate controls for phonological processing due to use of unpronounceable or nonlinguistic stimuli in the comparison condition , and in - adequate controls for general task performance processes . The latter type of exclusion was the most common and warrants Figure 4 . ALE map of 691 foci resulting from general semantic contrasts ( see Methods for details ) . Formatting and thresholding as in Figure 3 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2773 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 further discussion , because in our view many prior studies have not clearly distinguished knowledge access processes from more general cognitive processes that are not speciﬁc to semantic tasks . The critical point we wish to make is that all consciously executed , goal - directed tasks require at minimum a set of domain - general processes that include maintenance of attention , direction of attention to relevant information ( external or internal ) , maintenance of this relevant information in a short - term memory store , maintenance of the task goal and task procedures in working memory , decision , response selection , and error monitoring . These processes are necessary for all goal - directed cognitive tasks , including semantic tasks ; however , our aim here was to identify brain regions engaged speciﬁcally in semantic processes . Thus , it was critical to exclude activation contrasts in which the semantic condition of interest engaged these processes to a greater degree than the comparison condition , including all contrasts in which the semantic task was more difﬁcult than the comparison task . In addition to the examples given in the introduction , another illustrative case are the many studies involving either semantic priming or repetition suppression , in which unprimed or new words are compared with primed or repeated words ( e . g . , Mummery et al . 1999 ; Wagner et al . 2000 ; Yasuno et al . 2000 ; Rossell et al . 2001 ; Copland et al . 2003 ; Rossell et al . 2003 ; Matsumoto et al . 2005 ; Wible et al . 2006 ) . One underlying hypothesis of these studies is that unprimed or new words require more semantic processing than primed or repeated words that have already been processed , and behavioral data uniformly support this hypothesis by showing longer response times for the unprimed / new items . Though it is likely that unprimed / new items elicit more extensive semantic process - ing , it is also an inescapable fact , in our view , that they also require greater attentional and executive resources . Exclusion of these studies from the present meta - analysis was therefore necessary to isolate the semantic processes of interest , even though the activation maps from these contrasts probably do reﬂect , at least in part , semantic processes . The Semantic System of the Human Brain The meta - analysis links the following 7 brain regions with semantic processes : 1 ) posterior inferior parietal lobe ( AG and portions of SMG ) , 2 ) lateral temporal cortex ( MTG and portions of ITG ) , 3 ) ventral temporal cortex ( mid - fusiform and adjacent parahippocampal gyrus ) , 4 ) DMPFC , 5 ) IFG , 6 ) ventromedial prefrontal cortex ( VMPFC ) , and 7 ) posterior cingulate gyrus . One common attribute of these regions is their likely role in high - level integrative processes . All are known to receive extensively processed , multimodal and supramodal input . Recent studies show that even cortical regions formerly considered ‘‘unimodal’’ receive multisensory inputs ( Schroeder and Foxe 2004 ; Cappe and Barone 2005 ) , blurring the traditional distinction between unimodal and heteromodal cortex ( Mesulam 1985 ) . A useful qualitative distinction can still be drawn , however , between ‘‘modal’’ cortex , where processing reﬂects a dominant sensory or motor modality , and ‘‘amodal’’ cortex , where input from multiple modalities is more nearly balanced and highly convergent . For continuity with previous work , we refer to these latter regions as heteromodal , though alternative terms such as supramodal or amodal are perhaps equally valid . The human semantic system thus corresponds in large measure to the network of parietal , temporal , and prefrontal heteromodal association areas , which are greatly expanded in the human relative to the nonhuman primate brain ( von Bonin 1962 ; Geschwind 1965 ; Brodmann 1994 / 1909 ) . Evidence supports the subdivision of this network into posterior ( temporal / parietal ) and frontal components corresponding to storage and retrieval aspects of semantic processing ( see discussion below ) . A second general feature of the semantic system is that it is lateralized to the left hemisphere , though with some bilateral representation ( par - ticularly in the AG and posterior cingulate gyrus ) . The following discussion reviews each of the nodes in this network in greater detail , examining their anatomical characteristics and likely functional roles based on imaging and neuropsycholog - ical data . Angular Gyrus The most dense concentration of activation foci was in the posterior aspect of the left inferior parietal lobule , a region known historically as the angular gyrus or ‘‘pli courbe’’ ( French : ‘‘curved gyrus’’ ) ( De´jerine 1895 ) . The AG consists of cortex surrounding the parietal extension of the STS ; it is formed essentially by the continuation of the superior and middle temporal gyri into the inferior parietal lobe . Its medial boundary is the intraparietal sulcus , which separates it from the superior Figure 5 . ALE map of 29 foci resulting from contrasts targeting knowledge of manipulable artifacts ( top ) and ALE map of 40 foci from contrasts targeting knowledge of actions ( bottom ) . Formatting and thresholding as in previous ﬁgures . 2774 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 parietal lobule . The anterior boundary with the SMG is deﬁned by the ﬁrst intermediate sulcus of Jensen , though this landmark is not always present . Its posterior boundary with the occipital lobe is not well deﬁned . The AG corresponds approximately to BA 39 and in recent cytoarchitectonic studies to PGa and PGp ( Caspers et al . 2006 ) . This region is practically nonexistent in lower primates ( Brodmann 1994 / 1909 ) and is greatly expanded in the human brain relative to its probable homolog in the macaque monkey , area PG / 7a ( von Bonin and Bailey 1947 ; Hyvarinen 1982 ) . It is anatomically connected almost entirely with other association regions and receives little or no direct input from primary sensory areas ( Mesulam et al . 1977 ; Hyvarinen 1982 ; Seltzer and Pandya 1984 ; Cavada and Gold - man - Rakic 1989a , 1989b ; Andersen et al . 1990 ) . Though we use the term angular gyrus , a variety of other labels for activations in this region were encountered in the studies reviewed . Despite its location in the parietal lobe , many refer to it erroneously as the middle temporal gyrus . Others use the terms temporoparietal junction or temporal - - parietal - - occipital cortex . These concatenated terms strike us as unnecessarily imprecise in this context and should probably be reserved for describing large activations that straddle the boundaries between lobes or extend beyond the parietal lobe . AG activations were also not infrequently mislabeled with BA numbers 40 and 19 . ( Some of this confusion may be a historical accident stemming from Brodmann’s famous illustration , which shows area 39 shrunken to a fraction of its true size relative to surrounding structures [ Brodmann 1994 / 1909 ] . Other cytoarchitectonic studies have portrayed this region as much more extensive [ von Economo and Koskinas 1925 ; Sarkissov et al . 1955 ] . Brodmann’s intent seems to have been to show both lateral and dorsal brain regions in a single lateral view . Figure 6 . ALE maps derived from contrasts comparing perceptual ( i . e . , pertaining to sensory attributes of concrete objects ) with verbal ( i . e . , abstract or encyclopedic ) knowledge . The 113 foci representing perceptual knowledge are shown in warm colors , and the 34 foci representing verbal knowledge are shown in cool colors . Formatting and thresholding as in previous ﬁgures . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2775 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 This required that the inferior parietal lobule on the lateral surface be reduced in size to accommodate areas on the superior parietal lobule , which are normally not well seen from a lateral view . ) On the other hand , some of the activation foci in this large cluster probably lie outside the AG . Several are just posterior , in what is likely BA 19 . Given this evidence from functional imaging , it is possible that at least some cortex in the anterior occipital lobe classically identiﬁed as BA 19 may serve a semantic rather than a modal visual associative function . Alternatively , BA 39 may extend farther posteriorly than is typically portrayed . Several other foci in this large cluster were in the SMG ( BA 40 ) just anterior to the AG . Lesions of the left AG produce a variety of cognitive deﬁcits , including alexia and agraphia ( De´jerine 1892 ; Benson 1979 ; Cipolotti et al . 1991 ) , anomia ( Benson 1979 ) , transcortical sensory aphasia ( Damasio 1981 ; Kertesz et al . 1982 ; Rapcsak and Rubens 1994 ) , sentence comprehension impairment ( Dronkers et al . 2004 ) , acalculia ( Gerstmann 1940 ; Benton 1961 ; Cipolotti et al . 1991 ; Dehaene and Cohen 1997 ) , visual - spatial and body schema disorders ( Gerstmann 1940 ; Critchley 1953 ) , ideomotor apraxia ( Haaland et al . 2000 ; Buxbaum et al . 2005 ; Jax et al . 2006 ) , and dementia ( Benson et al . 1982 ) . Perhaps the main conclusion to be drawn from this evidence is that the AG likely plays a role in complex information integration and knowledge retrieval . Given its anatomical location adjoining visual , spatial , auditory , and somatosensory association areas , the AG may be the single best candidate for a high - level , supramodal integration area in the human brain ( Geschwind 1965 ) . Several functional imaging studies have shown that the AG is activated in response to semantically anomalous words embedded in sentences , suggesting that it plays a role in integrating individual concepts into a larger whole ( Ni et al . 2000 ; Friederici et al . 2003 ; Newman et al . 2003 ) . One recent fMRI study found that during auditory sentence comprehension , the AG , alone among the regions activated , showed a late activation relative to baseline that began at the end of the sentence and occurred only when the constituent words could be integrated into a coherent meaning ( Humphries et al . 2007 ) . Three studies comparing processing of connected discourse to processing of unrelated sentences or phrases have also shown activation of the AG ( Fletcher et al . 1995 ; Homae et al . 2003 ; Xu et al . 2005 ) Considering these various lines of evidence , we propose that the AG occupies a position at the top of a processing hierarchy underlying concept retrieval and conceptual integration . Though it is involved in all aspects of semantic processing , it may play a particular role in behaviors requiring ﬂuent conceptual combination , such as sentence comprehension , discourse , problem solving , and planning . Lateral and Ventral Temporal Cortex The meta - analysis identiﬁed several regions in the lateral and ventral left temporal lobe , including most of the MTG and portions of the ITG , fusiform gyrus , and parahippocampus . MTG , ITG , and ventral temporal lobe have often been considered modal visual association cortex by analogy with lateral and ventral temporal cortex in the macaque monkey ( von Bonin and Bailey 1947 ; Mesulam 1985 ) ; however , the present analysis argues against such an interpretation in the human brain . In fact , many functional imaging studies have demonstrated activation of these regions by auditory stimuli , particularly during language tasks ( e . g . , De´monet et al . 1992 ; Binder et al . 1997 ; Wise et al . 2000 ; Noppeney et al . 2003 ; Rissman et al . 2003 ; von Kriegstein et al . 2003 ; Xiao et al . 2005 ; Humphries et al . 2006 ; Orfanidou et al . 2006 ; Spitsyna et al . 2006 ; Baumgaertner et al . 2007 ) . Thus , these regions in the human brain are likely heteromodal cortex involved in supra - modal integration and concept retrieval . As in the inferior parietal lobe , the relative expansion of this high - level in - tegrative cortex in the temporal lobe has resulted in modal visual cortex being ‘‘pushed’’ posteriorly and reduced in relative surface area ( Orban et al . 2004 ) . Focal damage to the MTG , though somewhat rare , is strongly associated with language comprehension and semantic deﬁcits ( e . g . , Hart and Gordon 1990 ; Hillis and Caramazza 1991 ; Kertesz et al . 1993 ; Chertkow et al . 1997 ; Dronkers et al . 2004 ) . The anterior ventral temporal lobe , including anterior MTG , ITG , and fusiform gyrus , is frequently damaged ( usually bilaterally ) in herpes simplex encephalitis , often resulting in profound semantic deﬁcits ( Warrington and Shallice 1984 ; Kapur , Barker , et al . 1994 ; Gitelman et al . 2001 ; Lambon Ralph et al . 2007 ; Noppeney et al . 2007 ) . Semantic dementia , the temporal lobe variant of frontotemporal dementia , is characterized by pro - gressive degeneration of the anterior ventrolateral temporal lobes and gradual loss of semantic knowledge ( Warrington 1975 ; Snowden et al . 1989 ; Hodges et al . 1992 , 1995 ; Mummery et al . 2000 ; Jefferies and Lambon Ralph 2006 ; Lambon Ralph et al . 2007 ; Noppeney et al . 2007 ) . Large lesions of the ventral left temporal lobe have been associated with transcortical sensory aphasia ( Damasio 1981 ; Kertesz et al . 1982 ; Alexander et al . 1989 ; Berthier 1999 ) . A striking aspect of many of these temporal lobe injuries is a dissociation in performance across object categories . Patients with anterior temporal damage , for example , occasionally show greater impairment in processing concepts related to living things compared with artifacts ( Warrington and Shallice 1984 ; Warrington and McCarthy 1987 ; Forde and Humphreys 1999 ; Gainotti 2000 ; Lambon Ralph et al . 2007 ) , and the opposite pattern has been reported in patients with posterior temporal and parietal lesions ( Warrington and McCarthy 1987 , 1994 ; Hillis and Caramazza 1991 ; Gainotti 2000 ) . These category - related deﬁcits suggest that the temporal lobe may be a principal site for storage of perceptual information about objects and their attributes . A large number of functional imaging studies provide support for this hypothesis by showing selective activation of the posterior lateral temporal lobe by tool and action concepts ( Martin et al . 1995 , 1996 ; Cappa et al . 1998 ; Chao et al . 1999 , 2002 ; Moore and Price 1999a ; Perani et al . 1999 ; Grossman et al . 2002a ; Kable et al . 2002 ; Phillips et al . 2002 ; Noppeney et al . 2003 ; Tyler , Stamatakis , et al . 2003 ; Davis et al . 2004 ; Kable et al . 2005 ; Noppeney et al . 2005 ; Wallentin , Lund et al . 2005 ) . Semantic foci in the fusiform and parahippocampal gyri were concentrated in a relatively focal region near the mid - point of these gyri , centered at y = – 35 in the Talairach - - Tournoux system . The speciﬁc role of this region is unknown . It may correspond to the ‘‘basal temporal language area’’ described in electrocortical stimulation mapping studies ( Lu¨ders et al . 1991 ) . It is anterior to activation sites observed in functional imaging studies comparing different categories of object pictures ( e . g . , Perani et al . 1995 ; Martin et al . 1996 ; Kanwisher et al . 1997 ; Epstein and Kanwisher 1998 ; Chao et al . 1999 ; Ishai et al . 1999 ; Moore and Price 1999a ; Gorno - Tempini et al . 2000 ; Okada et al . 2000 ; Haxby et al . 2001 ; Chao et al . 2002 ; Whatmough et al . 2002 ; Tyler , Bright , et al . 2003 ; Gerlach et al . 2776 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 2004 ; Gerlach 2007 ) . These more posterior activations ( typically y < – 50 ) are rarely observed in studies using words , suggesting that they arise from systematic differences between object categories in their constituent visual attributes , which are in turn processed by somewhat different visual perceptual mechanisms ( Humphreys and Forde 2001 ; Hasson et al . 2002 ) . Given its close proximity to these object perception areas , however , several authors have proposed that the mid - fusiform gyrus plays a particular role in retrieving knowledge about the visual attributes of concrete objects ( D’Esposito et al . 1997 ; Chao and Martin 1999 ; Thompson - Schill , Aguirre , et al . 1999 ; Wise et al . 2000 ; Kan et al . 2003 ; Vandenbulcke et al . 2006 ; Simmons et al . 2007 ) . This region is also near the hippocampus and massive cortical afferent pathways to the hippocampal formation via parahippocampal and entorhinal cortex ( Van Hoesen 1982 ; Insausti et al . 1987 ; Suzuki and Amaral 1994 ) . It is thus possible that the parahippocampal component of this cluster acts an interface between lateral semantic memory and medial episodic memory encoding networks ( Levy et al . 2004 ) . The present analysis provides little evidence for involvement of the STG in semantic processing . The STG has long been considered to play a central role in language comprehension ( e . g . , Wernicke 1874 ; Geschwind 1971 ; Bogen and Bogen 1976 ; Hillis et al . 2001 ) , but anatomical and functional data suggest that it contains mainly modal auditory cortex ( von Economo and Koskinas 1925 ; Galaburda and Sanides 1980 ; Baylis et al . 1987 ; Kaas and Hackett 2000 ; Poremba et al . 2003 ) . Its role in language relates primarily to speech perception and phono - logical processing rather than to retrieval of word meaning ( Henschen 1918 - - 1919 ; Binder et al . 2000 ; Wise et al . 2001 ; Binder 2002 ; Hickok et al . 2003 ; Scott and Johnsrude 2003 ; Indefrey and Levelt 2004 ; Liebenthal et al . 2005 ; Buchsbaum and D’Esposito 2008 ; Graves et al . 2008 ) . Several studies , however , suggest that portions of the left superior temporal sulcus , which includes ventral STG , play a role in processing abstract concepts ( see below ) . Left DMPFC We draw particular attention to this region , which has been largely overlooked in reviews on semantic processing despite its consistent activation . It forms a distinctive , diagonally oriented band extending from the posterior - - medial aspect of the MFG , across the superior frontal sulcus and dorsal SFG , and onto the medial surface of the SFG . It corresponds roughly to BA 8 , extending into BA 9 medially . We use the term ‘‘dorsomedial’’ to distinguish this region from ‘‘dorsolateral prefrontal cortex’’ located lateral and ventral to it in the lateral MFG and inferior frontal sulcus . Lesions of the left dorsal and medial frontal lobe cause transcortical motor aphasia , a syndrome characterized by sparse speech output but otherwise normal phonological abilities ( Luria and Tsvetkova 1968 ; Freedman et al . 1984 ; Alexander and Benson 1993 ) . There is typically a striking disparity between cued and uncued speech production in this syndrome . Patients can repeat words and name objects relatively normally , but are unable to generate lists of words within a category or invent nonformulaic responses in conversation . In other words , patients perform well when a simple response is fully speciﬁed by the stimulus ( a word to be repeated or object to be named ) but poorly when a large set of responses is possible ( Robinson et al . 1998 ) . This pattern suggests a deﬁcit speciﬁcally affecting self - guided , goal - directed retrieval of semantic information . The location of the DMPFC , adjacent to motivation and sustained attention networks in the anterior cingulate gyrus and just anterior to premotor cortex , makes this region a likely candidate for this semantic retrieval role . The left DMPFC has not been delineated in previous discussions of the prefrontal cortex and semantic retrieval processes . Analysis of medial frontal lesions in transcortical motor aphasia has usually centered on the supplementary motor area ( SMA ) , a region of medial premotor cortex ( BA 6 ) posterior to the DMPFC , perhaps because of the attention drawn to this region in earlier stimulation mapping studies ( Penﬁeld and Roberts 1959 ) . Some authors , citing the involvement of SMA and anterior cingulate cortex in motor planning , attention , and motivation processes , dismissed the deﬁcits in patients with left medial frontal lesions as nonlinguistic in nature ( Damasio 1981 ) . Others have recognized the linguistic nature of the retrieval deﬁcit while attributing this to SMA damage ( Masdeu et al . 1978 ; Freedman et al . 1984 ; Goldberg 1985 ) . The DMPFC and SMA have a common arterial supply ( the callosomarginal branch of the anterior cerebral artery ) and for this reason are usually damaged together in ischemic lesions . Although we agree that focal SMA damage is unlikely to produce a linguistic deﬁcit , we propose that the speciﬁc linguistic deﬁcit affecting ﬂuent semantic retrieval in many of these patients is due to DMPFC damage anterior to the SMA . Left IFG The left IFG was implicated in several early imaging studies of semantic processing ( Petersen et al . 1988 ; Frith et al . 1991 ; Kapur , Rose , et al . 1994 ) , and much subsequent discussion has focused on this region ( e . g . , De´monet et al . 1993 ; Buckner et al . 1995 ; Fiez 1997 ; Thompson - Schill et al . 1997 ; Gabrieli et al . 1998 ; Poldrack et al . 1999 ; Thompson - Schill et al . 1999 ; Wagner et al . 2000 ; Roskies et al . 2001 ; Wagner et al . 2001 ; Bookheimer 2002 ; Chee et al . 2002 ; Gold and Buckner 2002 ; Devlin et al . 2003 ; Nyberg et al . 2003 ; Simmons et al . 2005 ; Goldberg et al . 2007 ) . Consistent with prior reviews ( Fiez 1997 ; Bookheimer 2002 ) , the meta - analysis shows clear involvement of the anterior - - ventral left IFG in semantic processing . This region corresponds to the ‘‘pars orbitalis’’ ( BA 47 ) . More posterior and dorsal parts of the IFG were also activated , though less consistently . Imaging studies have also frequently implicated the left IFG in phonological , working memory , and syntactic processes ( e . g . , De´monet et al . 1992 ; Zatorre et al . 1992 ; Paulesu et al . 1993 ; Buckner et al . 1995 ; Fiez 1997 ; Smith et al . 1998 ; Fiez et al . 1999 ; Poldrack et al . 1999 ; Burton et al . 2000 ; Embick et al . 2000 ; Poldrack et al . 2001 ; Gold and Buckner 2002 ; Friederici et al . 2003 ; Nyberg et al . 2003 ; Davis et al . 2004 ; Indefrey and Levelt 2004 ; Fiebach et al . 2005 ; Owen et al . 2005 ; Tan et al . 2005 ; Grodzinsky and Friederici 2006 ) . Many studies have also shown increased BOLD responses in the IFG as task difﬁculty increases , possibly due to increased working memory or phonological processing demands ( e . g . , Braver et al . 1997 , 2001 ; Jonides et al . 1997 ; Honey et al . 2000 ; Adler et al . 2001 ; Ullsperger and von Cramon 2001 ; Gould et al . 2003 ; Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ; Mitchell 2005 ; Sabsevitz et al . 2005 ; Desai et al . 2006 ; Lehmann et al . 2006 ; Tregallas et al . 2006 ) . Though we attempted to remove contrasts in which semantic process - ing was confounded with phonological processing or overall Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2777 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 difﬁculty , these screening efforts were likely imperfect due to the absence of appropriate behavioral data in many published studies . It is thus possible that some of the IFG activation foci , particularly those outside the pars orbitalis , are the result of residual phonological or working memory confounds . As is well known , IFG lesions typically impair phonological , articulatory planning , and syntactic rather than semantic pro - cesses ( Broca 1861 ; Mohr 1976 ; Caramazza et al . 1981 ; Alexander and Benson 1993 ) , though a few cases of transcortical sensory aphasia have been reported ( Otsuki et al . 1998 ; Maeshima et al . 1999 , 2004 ; Sethi et al . 2007 ) . Strokes affect the posterior aspect of the IFG more commonly than the anterior region ; isolated lesions of the pars orbitalis are practically unknown . Devlin et al . ( 2003 ) applied transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) to the anterior IFG in 8 healthy participants during performance of semantic decision and perceptual ( size ) decision tasks . TMS slowed participants’ reaction time on the semantic but not on the control task , supporting a role for this region in semantic processing . Accuracy on the semantic task , however , was not affected by TMS . It may be that the anterior - - ventral IFG contributes to semantic processing in the healthy brain but is not absolutely necessary for task completion ( Price et al . 1999 ) . Damage to this region thus impairs processing ‘‘efﬁcienc y , ’’ resulting in slowing of responses without actual errors . Left VMPFC Thisgroupoffocioccupycortexinthecingulategyrus andmedial SFG anterior to the genu of the corpus callosum , the subgenual cingulate gyrus , gyrus rectus , and medial orbital frontal cortex . The involved region of anterior cingulate cortex is anterior and ventral to the more dorsal region of anterior cingulate cortex implicatedinmanystudies of workingmemory , responseconﬂict , error detection , and executive control functions ( e . g . , Carter et al . 1999 ; Duncan and Owen 2000 ; Barch et al . 2001 ; van Veen and Carter 2002 ; Owen etal . 2005 ) . We use the term‘‘rostral cingulate gyrus’’ to emphasize this distinction . The VMPFC corresponds to portions of BA 10 , 11 , 24 , 25 , and 32 . This region has been linked with motivation , emotion , and reward processing and probably plays a central role in processing the affective signiﬁcance of concepts ( Damasio 1994 ; Drevets et al . 1997 ; Mayberg et al . 1999 ; Becharaetal . 2000 ; Phillipsetal . 2003 ) . Ithasalsobeenactivatedin many general semantic contrasts , however , possibly due to incidental processing of the emotional attributes of words ( Kuchinke et al . 2005 ) . Posterior Cingulate Gyrus This region , which corresponds to BA 23 , BA 31 , and the retrosplenial region ( BA 26 , 29 , and 30 ) , was one of the most consistently activated . Activation peaks occurred in both hemispheres but more often on the left . A few foci in this cluster were located in the ventral aspect of the precuneus just dorsal to the posterior cingulate , in the region of the subparietal sulcus separating these gyri , or in the ventral parieto - occipital sulcus , which separates the posterior cingu - late gyrus from the occipital lobe . This general region has been linked with episodic and visuospatial memory functions ( Valenstein et al . 1987 ; Rudge and Warrington 1991 ; Gainotti et al . 1998 ; Aggleton and Pearce 2001 ; Vincent et al . 2006 ; Epstein et al . 2007 ) , emotion processing ( Maddock 1999 ) , spatial attention ( Mesulam 1990 ; Small et al . 2003 ) , visual imagery ( Hassabis et al . 2007 ; Johnson et al . 2007 ; Burgess 2008 ) , and other processes ( Vogt et al . 2006 ) . Of these , the association with episodic memory may be most likely . Posterior cingulate and adjacent retrosplenial cortex have strong reciprocal connections with the hippocam - pal complex via the cingulum bundle ( Morris et al . 1999 ; Kobayashi and Amaral 2003 , 2007 ) . A number of patients with focal lesions to this region have presented with amnestic syndromes ( Valenstein et al . 1987 ; Heilman et al . 1990 ; Rudge and Warrington 1991 ; Takayama et al . 1991 ; Katai et al . 1992 ; Gainotti et al . 1998 ; McDonald et al . 2001 ) . Retrosplenial and surrounding posterior cingulate cortex are affected early in the course of Alzheimer disease , which typically presents as an episodic memory encoding deﬁcit ( Desgranges et al . 2002 ; Nestor et al . 2003 ) . If posterior cingulate cortex is involved primarily in encoding episodic memories , why is it consistently activated in contrasts that emphasize semantic processing ? The likely answer has to do with the nature of episodic memory , the presumed evolutionary purpose of which is to form a record of past experience for use in guiding future behavior . Not all experiences are equally useful in this regard ; thus , the brain has evolved a strategy of preferentially recording highly meaningful experiences , that is , experiences that evoke associations and concepts . Familiar examples of this phenomenon include the enhanced learning of words encoded during semantic relative to perceptual tasks , imageable relative to abstract words , and emotional relative to neutral words ( Paivio 1968 ; Craik 1972 # 762 ; Bock 1986 ) . In each case , the enhanced retrieval of conceptual information ( semantic retrieval ) leads to enhanced episodic encoding . Several related theories of this phenomenon have been pro - posed ( Cohen and Eichenbaum 1993 ; McClelland et al . 1995 ; O’Reilly and Rudy 2001 ) , all of which postulate that episodic memory encoding involves the formation of large - scale repre - sentations through interactions between neocortex and the hippocampal system . The role of the neocortex is to compute ongoing perceptual , semantic , affective , and motor representa - tions during the episode , while the hippocampal system binds these spatiotemporal cortical events into a unique event conﬁguration . The important point is that the amount of episodic encoding that occurs is highly correlated with the degree of semantic processing evoked by the episode . We propose that the posterior cingulate gyrus , by virtue of its strong connections with the hippocampus , acts as an interface between the semantic retrieval and episodic encoding systems , similar to the role postulated above for the parahippocampal gyrus . Homologues of the Human Semantic System in the Macaque Monkey Brain The posterior inferior parietal lobe of the macaque monkey , variously designated 7a ( Vogt and Vogt 1919 ) or PG ( von Bonin and Bailey 1947 ) , and more recently subdivided into 2 subregions , PG and Opt ( Pandya and Seltzer 1982 ; Gregoriou et al . 2006 ) , is a likely homologue of the human AG with similar heteromodal functional characteristics ( Hyvarinen 1982 ) . Its principal connections are with visual and ‘‘polysensory’’ regions in the upper bank and fundus of the STS ( areas TPO , STP , MST , and IPa ) , the parahippocampal gyrus ( areas TF and TH ) , dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( mainly area 46 ) , rostrolateral orbitofrontal cortex ( area 11 ) , and posterior cingulate gyrus ( Jones and Powell 1970 ; Mesulam et al . 1977 ; Leichnitz 1980 ; Petrides and Pandya 1984 ; Seltzer and Pandya 1984 , 1994 ; 2778 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Selemon and Goldman - Rakic 1988 ; Cavada and Goldman - Rakic 1989a , 1989b ; Andersen et al . 1990 ) . Notably , the same STS , parahippocampal , prefrontal , and posterior cingulate regions with which PG / 7a is connected are themselves all strongly interconnected ( Jones and Powell 1970 ; Seltzer and Pandya 1976 , 1978 , 1989 , 1994 ; Baleydier and Mauguiere 1980 ; Vogt and Pandya 1987 ; Selemon and Goldman - Rakic 1988 ; Morris et al . 1999 ; Blatt et al . 2003 ; Kobayashi and Amaral 2003 , 2007 ; Padberg et al . 2003 ; Parvizi et al . 2006 ) . These 6 regions thus form a distinct , large - scale cortical network that is strikingly similar in location and function to the human semantic system ( Fig . 7 ) . The other chief component of the human system , VMPFC , is roughly homologous to the medial orbitofrontal ( BA 10 , 14 , 25 , 32 ) region of the macaque . Although this region has no connection with PG / 7a , it is strongly connected to middle and anterior STS , posterior cingulate and retrosplenial cortex , parahippocampus , and hippocampus ( Seltzer and Pandya 1989 ; Barbas 1993 ; Cavada 2000 ; Blatt et al . 2003 ; Kobayashi and Amaral 2003 ; Saleem et al . 2007 ) . Thus , the macaque brain contains a well - deﬁned network of polysensory , heteromodal , and paralimbic areas that are several processing stages removed from primary sensory and motor regions and likely to be involved in computation of complex , nonperceptual information . We propose that this network is a nonhuman primate homologue of the human semantic system , respon - sible for storage of abstract knowledge about conspeciﬁcs , food sources , objects , actions , and emotions . Anatomical differences between the human and macaque systems are consistent with the known expansion of prefrontal , parietal , and temporal heteromodal cortex in the human brain , which has enabled in humans further abstraction of knowledge from perceptual events , ultimately culminating in the development of formal symbol systems to represent and communicate this knowledge . The macaque parietal / frontal / STS network illustrated in Figure 7 has often been interpreted as playing a central role in visuospatial processing and spatial allocation of attention ( Mesulam 1981 ; Hyvarinen 1982 ; Seltzer and Pandya 1984 ; Selemon and Goldman - Rakic 1988 ) . This view is supported by a large number of studies showing cells in the posterior inferior parietal lobe of the macaque that respond to oculomotor , limb movement , and spatial attention tasks ( Mountcastle et al . 1975 ; Hyvarinen 1982 ; Andersen et al . 1997 ) . This model is clearly at odds , however , with our proposal Figure 7 . Summary diagrams comparing ( A ) the large - scale semantic network of the human brain and ( B ) a probable homologous network in the macaque monkey brain , comprised of posterior inferior parietal cortex ( PG / 7a ) , STS , parahippocampal cortex ( TF , TH ) , dorsolateral prefrontal cortex , posterior cingulate and retrosplenial cortex , lateral orbital frontal cortex , and VMPFC . Green lines indicate the principal cortical connections of these regions in the monkey , based on studies using anterograde and retrograde tracer techniques ( Jones and Powell 1970 ; Seltzer and Pandya 1976 , 1978 , 1984 , 1989 , 1994 ; Mesulam et al . 1977 ; Baleydier and Mauguiere 1980 ; Leichnitz 1980 ; Petrides and Pandya 1984 ; Vogt and Pandya 1987 ; Selemon and Goldman - Rakic 1988 ; Cavada and Goldman - Rakic 1989a , 1989b ; Andersen et al . 1990 ; Barbas 1993 ; Morris et al . 1999 ; Cavada 2000 ; Blatt et al . 2003 ; Kobayashi and Amaral 2003 , 2007 ; Padberg et al . 2003 ; Parvizi et al . 2006 ; Saleem et al . 2007 ) . All connections indicated are monosynaptic and reciprocal . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2779 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 that these regions are involved in long - term storage and retrieval of object and action knowledge . In our view , the characteriza - tion of this network as visuospatial / attentional does not account for the prominent connections of these frontoparietal areas with polysensory and paralimbic areas . We believe these models can be reconciled by a consideration of known subdivisions of the macaque posterior parietal lobe . Research over the past 20 years has clariﬁed the connectivity and functional properties of several areas immediately anteromedial to PG / 7a in the macaque intraparietal sulcus ( LIP , VIP , and MIP ) , which appear to play a greater role in visuospatial and attention processes than PG / 7a ( Andersen et al . 1990 , 1997 ; Rushworth et al . 1997 ; Chafee and Goldman - Rakic 1998 ; Duhamel et al . 1998 ) . Unlike PG / 7a , these IPS regions have little or no connectivity with the temporal lobe or paralimbic regions ( Seltzer and Pandya 1984 ; Cavada and Goldman - Rakic 1989a ; Suzuki and Amaral 1994 ) . They are connected strongly to the frontal eye ﬁelds and premotor cortex , whereas PG / 7a is connected to more anterior and dorsal prefrontal regions ( area 46 ) ( Cavada and Goldman - Rakic 1989b ; Andersen et al . 1990 ) . Numerous functional imaging studies have also clearly linked the IPS and frontal eye ﬁelds in humans with visuospatial and attention functions ( Corbetta et al . 1998 ; Grefkes and Fink 2005 ; Grosbras et al . 2005 ) . Thus , we propose that the posterior parietal spatial attention system in both the human and macaque is conﬁned mainly to cortex in the IPS and superior parietal lobule , and that there is a distinct functional and anatomical boundary between this IPS system and adjacent inferior parietal cortex involved in semantic knowledge repre - sentation . This boundary line appears to correspond in both species to the superior margin of the lateral ( posterior ) bank of the IPS ( see Fig . 2 ) . Evidence for Distinct Semantic Subsystems In addition to brain networks supporting semantic processing in general , particular regions may be relatively specialized for processing speciﬁc object categories , attributes , or types of knowledge . Prior reviews on this topic have included studies that used object pictures as stimuli , whereas the present meta - analysis was conﬁned to studies using words . The number of such studies that examined speciﬁc types of semantic knowledge was relatively small , and activation peaks from these studies showed little overlap . The clearest pattern emerged from the 10 studies examining action knowledge ( Fig . 5 ) . Two distinct activation clusters were observed in left SMG and posterior MTG . Lesions in these areas have been associated with impairments of action knowledge and ideo - motor apraxia in many neuropsychological studies ( Tranel et al . 1997 , 2003 ; Haaland et al . 2000 ; Buxbaum et al . 2005 ; Jax et al . 2006 ) . The SMG focus lies just posterior to somatosensory association cortex ; thus , it seems likely that this region stores abstract somatosensory ( e . g . , proprioceptive ) knowledge ac - quired during learning and performance of complex motor sequences . The likely homologue of this region in the macaque monkey is area PF in the anterior inferior parietal lobe , a region known to contain mirror neurons responsive to both action observation and performance ( Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004 ) . Activation of this region in humans by words , which merely refer conceptually to actions , lends support to the idea that the information stored there is semantic in nature , coding complex actions performed on objects for a speciﬁc purpose ( Rothi et al . 1991 ; Buxbaum 2001 ; Buxbaum et al . 2005 , 2006 ; Fogassi et al . 2005 ) . The posterior MTG focus is just anterior to visual motion processing areas in the MT complex ( Tootell et al . 1995 ) , suggesting that this region stores knowledge about the visual attributes of actions . As previously suggested ( Martin et al . 2000 ) , this specialization of posterior MTG for processing action knowledge may explain the frequently observed preferential activation of this region by pictures of tools ( Martin et al . 1996 ; Mummery et al . 1996 ; Cappa et al . 1998 ; Chao et al . 1999 , 2002 ; Moore and Price 1999a ; Perani et al . 1999 ; Devlin , Moore , et al . 2002 ; Phillips et al . 2002 ; Damasio et al . 2004 ) . Indeed , the studies examining knowledge of manipulable artifacts ( relative to living things ) produced areas of overlap at very similar sites in the SMG and near the junction of posterior MTG , ITG , and lateral occipital lobe . In contrast , the studies examining knowledge of living things ( usually animals ) relative to other categories produced no signiﬁcant areas of overlap , consistent with several prior reviews ( Devlin , Russell , et al . 2002 ; Gerlach 2007 ) . Given the presence of mirror neurons in premotor cortex ( Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004 ) and prior imaging evidence that the inferior frontal region responds to pictures of manipulable objects ( Martin et al . 1996 ; Binkofski et al . 1999 ; Perani et al . 1999 ; Chao and Martin 2000 ; Gerlach et al . 2002 ; Kellenbach et al . 2003 ; Buxbaum et al . 2006 ) , it is somewhat surprising that frontal cortex did not show consistent activation in studies of action or artifact words . Several of the included action and artifact studies did report activation in this general region ( Martin et al . 1995 ; Kounios et al . 2003 ; Tyler , Statamatakis , et al . 2003 ; Wheatley et al . 2005 ; Ruschmeyer et al . 2007 ) , yet these foci did not cluster sufﬁciently to produce an activation in the ALE analysis . Evidence suggests that inferior frontal and inferior parietal cortices play some - what different roles in action processing , with the parietal system more closely associated with knowledge of speciﬁc object - related actions ( Buxbaum 2001 ; Buxbaum et al . 2005 ; Creem - Regehr and Lee 2005 ; Fogassi et al . 2005 ) . Consistent with this distinction , patients with inferior parietal lesions may have impaired recognition of object - related pantomimes performed by others ( ‘‘representational ideomotor apraxia’’ ) , whereas patients with inferior frontal lesions apparently do not ( Varney and Damasio 1987 ; Rothi et al . 1991 ; Buxbaum et al . 2005 ) . Thus , it is possible that action and artifact words , which in any case do not seem to activate motor representa - tions as readily as pictures do ( Rumiati and Humphreys 1998 ) , engage inferior frontal systems only weakly compared with inferior parietal areas concerned with object - related action knowledge . Some theorists have emphasized a distinction between perceptual ( ‘‘image - based’’ ) and verbal representations in semantic memory ( Paivio 1986 ) , exempliﬁed by the contrast between concrete and abstract words . A number of functional imaging studies have examined this distinction ( see Binder 2007 for a review ) . Thirteen studies included in the present meta - analysis showed areas of stronger activation for concrete compared with abstract words , with overlap in bilateral AG , left mid - fusiform gyrus , left DMPFC , and left posterior cingulate cortex ( Fig . 6 ) . This pattern is very similar to the network observed in the general semantic meta - analysis ( Fig . 4 ) . Eight studies showed areas of stronger activation for verbal com - pared with perceptual knowledge . These included compar - isons between abstract and concrete words , abstract and concrete stories , and encyclopedic ( i . e . , verbal factual ) versus 2780 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 perceptual knowledge . Abstract concepts are generally more difﬁcult to process than concrete concepts , and several other studies had to be excluded from the meta - analysis because of this confound . Areas associated with verbal semantic process - ing included the left IFG ( mainly pars orbitalis ) and left anterior STS . These dissociations support a distinction between perceptually based knowledge , stored in heteromodal associ - ation areas such as the AG and ventral temporal lobe , and verbally encoded knowledge , which places greater demands on left anterior perisylvian regions . This dissociation is supported by a range of neuropsychological studies showing relative impairment of abstract word processing in patients with perisylvian lesions ( Goodglass et al . 1969 ; Coltheart et al . 1980 ; Roeltgen et al . 1983 ; Katz and Goodglass 1990 ; Franklin et al . 1995 ) and relative impairment of concrete word processing in patients with extrasylvian ( mainly ventral temporal lobe ) lesions ( Warrington 1975 , 1981 ; Warrington and Shallice 1984 ; Breedin et al . 1995 ; Marshall et al . 1998 ) . Semantic Processing and Autobiographical Memory Retrieval The semantic system identiﬁed here is virtually identical to the large - scale network identiﬁed in recent studies of autobio - graphical memory retrieval ( Maguire 2001 ; Svoboda et al . 2006 ) . ( In their comprehensive review of the autobiographical memory literature , Svoboda et al . [ 2006 ] refer to the AG as ‘‘temporoparietal junction , ’’ though all of the foci they report in this region are in the inferior parietal lobe . ) There are cogent theoretical and empirical reasons to distinguish general semantic from autobiographical memory ( Tulving 1972 ; De Renzi et al . 1987 ; Yasuda et al . 1997 ) , yet this nearly complete overlap observed in functional imaging studies is striking . Autobiographical memory refers to knowledge about one’s own past , including both remembered events , known as episodic autobiographical memory ( e . g . , ‘‘I remember playing tennis last weekend’’ ) , and static facts about the self , known as semantic autobiographical memory ( e . g . , ‘‘I like to play tennis’’ ) . Most autobiographical memory begins as detailed knowledge about recently experienced events ( i . e . , episodic memories ) . With time , these speciﬁc memories lose their perceptual detail and come to more closely resemble semantic knowledge ( Johnson et al . 1988 ; Levine et al . 2002 ; Addis et al . 2004 ) . There are several reasons to expect overlap between the general semantic and autobiographical memory retrieval sys - tems . First , semantic autobiographical memories , though they differ from general semantic knowledge in referring to the self , are essentially learned facts and therefore might be supported by the same system that stores and retrieves other learned facts . Second , several theorists have proposed that retrieval of general concepts , such as particular temporal and spatial locations , people , objects , and emotions , is an early processing stage in the retrieval of autobiographical memories and serves to cue the retrieval of these more personal memories ( Barsalou 1998 ; Conway and Pleydell - Pearce 2000 ) . Finally , it is worth empha - sizing the perhaps obvious point that autobiographical memories are necessarily composed of concepts and that there could be no retrieval of an autobiographical memory without retrieval of concepts . To recall , for example , that ‘‘I played tennis last weekend’’ logically entails retrieval of the concepts ‘‘tennis , ’’ ‘‘play , ’’ and ‘‘weekend . ’’ Thus , the essential distinction between general semantic retrieval and autobiographical memory re - trieval lies in the self - referential aspect of the latter , which may be a relatively minor component of the overall process , at least from a neural standpoint . A few neuroimaging studies have directly compared autobiographical and general semantic retrieval and reported greater activation in the semantic network during the autobiographical condition , particularly in the medial pre - frontal cortex , AG , and posterior cingulate region ( Graham et al . 2003 ; Maguire and Frith 2003 ; Addis et al . 2004 ; Levine et al . 2004 ) . Rather than indicating a specialization for autobiographical memory processing in these regions , we believe these data reﬂect the fact that semantic autobiograph - ical memories are typically more perceptually vivid , detailed , contextualized , and emotionally meaningful than general semantic memories . Thus , we propose that semantic autobio - graphical and general semantic memory processing are supported by largely identical neural networks , but that retrieval of richer and more detailed memories ( such as autobiographical memories ) engages this network to a greater degree than retrieval of less detailed knowledge . Semantic Processing and the ‘‘Default Network’’ As illustrated in Figure 8 , the semantic system identiﬁed here is also strikingly similar to the human brain ‘‘default network’’ Figure 8 . Comparison of the left - hemisphere general semantic network indicated in the present ALE meta - analysis ( top ) and the ‘‘default network’’ ( bottom ) . The latter map represents brain areas that showed task - induced deactivation during performance of a tone discrimination task , that is , higher BOLD signal during a conscious resting baseline compared with the tone task ( see Binder et al . 2008 for details ) . In both types of studies , effects are observed in the AG , posterior cingulate gyrus , DMPFC , VMPFC , ventral temporal lobe , anterior MTG , and ventral IFG . Although effects are stronger in the left hemisphere for both kinds of studies , task - induced deactivation is typically more symmetrical in posterior cingulate and medial prefrontal regions ( Shulman et al . 1997 ; Binder et al . 1999 ; Mazoyer et al . 2001 ; Raichle et al . 2001 ; McKiernan et al . 2003 ) . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2781 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 thought to be active during the conscious resting state ( Binder et al . 1999 ; Raichle et al . 2001 ) . This network was originally deﬁned as a set of brain areas that consistently show ‘‘task - induced deactivation’’ in functional imaging studies ( Shulman et al . 1997 ; Binder et al . 1999 ; Mazoyer et al . 2001 ; Raichle et al . 2001 ; McKiernan et al . 2003 ) . Task - induced deactivation refers to decreases in blood ﬂow or BOLD signal during effortful tasks compared with more passive states such as resting , ﬁxation , and passive sensory stimulation . There is now a general consensus that task - induced de - activation occurs because certain types of neural processes active during passive states are ‘‘interrupted’’ when subjects are engaged in effortful tasks ( Binder et al . 1999 ; Raichle 2006 ) , though the precise nature of these default neural processes remains a topic of debate . Evidence suggests that high levels of ongoing ‘‘spontaneous’’ neural activity are necessary for maxi - mizing responsiveness of the cortex to changes in input ( Ho and Destexhe 2000 ; Salinas and Sejnowski 2001 ; Chance et al . 2002 ) , and this ongoing activity seems to account for much of the high resting metabolic needs of the cortex ( Attwell and Laughlin 2001 ) . The mere fact that there are high levels of neural activity in the resting state does not explain , however , why this activity decreases in particular brain regions during active task states . Such an explanation would seem to depend on an account of resting state activity in terms of the cognitive and affective processes in which subjects preferentially engage during passive states , such as episodic memory encoding and retrieval , monitoring and evaluating the internal and external environ - ment , visual imagery , emotion processing , and working memory ( Andreasen et al . 1995 ; Shulman et al . 1997 ; Mazoyer et al . 2001 ; Raichle et al . 2001 ; Simpson et al . 2001 ; Stark and Squire 2001 ) . Binder et al . ( 1999 ) proposed that semantic processing constitutes a large component of the cognitive activity occurring during passive states . This proposal was based ﬁrst on phenomenological considerations . The everyday experience of spontaneous thoughts , mental narratives , and imagery that James referred to as the ‘‘stream of consciousness’’ ( James 1890 ) is ubiquitous and undeniable . Participants in controlled laboratory conditions reliably report such ‘‘task - unrelated thinking , ’’ the content of which includes concepts , emotions , and images ( Antrobus et al . 1966 ; Antrobus 1968 ; Horowitz 1975 ; Pope and Singer 1976 ; Teasdale et al . 1993 , 1995 ; Giambra 1995 ; McKiernan et al . 2003 ) . Performance of effortful perceptual and short - term memory tasks reliably suppresses task - unrelated thoughts , suggesting a direct competition between exogenous and endogenous signals for attentional and executive resources . ‘‘Interrupting the stream of consciousness’’ thus provides a straightforward explanation for task - induced deactivation . The second consideration emphasized by Binder et al . was the potential adaptive advantage of systems that allow ‘‘ongoing’’ retrieval of conceptual knowledge . In contrast to the sensory , spatial attention , and motor processes engaged when an external stimulus requires a response , ongoing conceptual processes operate primarily on internal stores of knowledge built from past experience . They are not random or ‘‘spontaneous’’ but rather play a profoundly important role in human behavior . Their purpose is to ‘‘make sense’’ of prior experience , solve problems that require computation over long periods of time , and create effective plans governing behavior in the future . This uniquely human capability to perform high - level computations ‘‘off - line’’ is surely the principal explanation for our ability to adapt , create culture , and invent technology . The ﬁnal evidence offered by Binder et al . was an fMRI study in which participants were scanned while resting , while performing a perceptual task with no semantic content , and while making semantic decisions about words . Relative to the resting state , the perceptual task produced deactivation in the usual default network ( AG , posterior cingulate gyrus , VMPFC , and DMPFC ) . Critically , however , the semantic decision task did not deactivate these regions . Finally , the same regions were activated when contrasting the semantic decision task with a phonological task that controlled for sensory and executive processes . These results show not only that the semantic network ( as deﬁned by the semantic - - phonological task contrast ) is virtually identical to the default state network , but also that task - induced deactivation in these regions can be modulated by task content . Deactivation occurs when the task or stimuli make little or no demands on semantic processing . When the task itself engages the semantic system , however , deactivation does not occur . This pattern indicates that the default network itself is engaged in semantic processing , both during passive states and when presented with a semantic task . This pattern has since been replicated in a number of studies comparing word tasks , pseudoword tasks , and passive or resting conditions . Pseudo - words reliably deactivate the default network relative to the resting state , whereas words do not ( Baumgaertner et al . 2002 ; Henson et al . 2002 ; Mechelli et al . 2003 ; Rissman et al . 2003 ; Ischebeck et al . 2004 ; Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ; Xiao et al . 2005 ; Humphries et al . 2007 ) . This result is fully consistent with the model just proposed , because pseudowords have little meaning and thus do not engage the semantic system . Conceptual versus Perceptual Processing The observation that semantic processing engages a network of heteromodal association areas distinct from modal sensory and motor systems provides support for the traditional distinction between conceptual and perceptual processes ( Fodor 1983 ) . Under this view , conceptual processes operate on ‘‘internal’’ sources of information , such as semantic and episodic memory , which can be retrieved and manipulated at any time , in - dependent of ongoing external events . In contrast , perceptual processes operate on ‘‘external’’ information derived from immediate , ongoing sensory and motor processes that co - ordinate interactions with the external environment . Many tasks , of course , require simultaneous processing of both internal and external information , including , for example , any behavior involving recognition of a familiar stimulus such as a word or picture . In such instances , external sensory informa - tion is given meaning by activation of associated internal information ( Neisser 1967 ; Aurell 1979 ) . Functional imaging evidence for such a distinction is illus - trated dramatically in Figure 9 , which shows areas identiﬁed with semantic processing in the present meta - analysis in red . Yellow areas in the ﬁgure were activated during a task in which subjects read pseudowords aloud , thereby engaging ventral visual form perception , dorsal visual and spatial attention , motor articulation , and auditory perceptual systems bilaterally ( Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ) . Apart from a few areas of overlap in the anterior ventral visual stream , STS , and IFG , these large - scale networks are largely distinct and complementary , together covering much of the cortical surface . Similar imaging evidence supporting a general distinction between large - scale ‘‘intrinsic’’ and ‘‘extrinsic’’ networks has been reported recently by other researchers ( Fox et al . 2005 ; Fransson 2005 ; Golland et al . 2007 ) . 2782 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Although these observations conﬁrm a general distinction between conceptual and perceptual systems in the brain , other evidence suggests that this distinction is not absolute ( Gallese and Lakoff 2005 ) . For example , several studies have shown involvement of primary motor and premotor cortex in the comprehension of action verbs ( Hauk et al . 2004 ; Pulvermuller et al . 2005 ; Tettamanti et al . 2005 ) . Similarly , there is evidence that high - level visual cortex participates in the processing of object nouns ( Martin et al . 1995 ; James and Gauthier 2003 ; Kan et al . 2003 ; Simmons et al . 2007 ) . Word - related activation of these motor and sensory areas is likely to be somewhat subtle compared with activation of heteromodal conceptual regions and to depend to a greater extent on the speciﬁc sensorimotor attributes of the word concept . Furthermore , there are as yet few published studies that have focused on such speciﬁc attributes . Thus , the present meta - analysis may underrepresent the involvement of sensory and motor systems in comprehen - sion of word stimuli . Deﬁning the extent of this involvement is an important topic for future research . Comparison with Previous Large - Scale Reviews of Semantic Processing The current results differ somewhat from conclusions reached in previous reviews . Cabeza and Nyberg ( 2000 ) reviewed functional imaging studies published prior to 1999 . From an initial sample of 275 studies in a range of cognitive domains , they found 31 involving semantic memory retrieval tasks . Activation foci from these studies clustered mainly in the left IFG , with a few additional foci in the left MTG . The authors provided a brief description of the task contrasts used in each study and drew attention to the importance of control tasks , but made no attempt to exclude studies with word - form or task difﬁculty confounds . Of these 31 studies , only 4 passed our criteria for inclusion , with the remainder excluded mainly for phonological or task difﬁculty confounds . Vigneau et al . ( 2006 ) collected 65 studies published prior to 2005 that concerned semantic processing . The authors did not report how the studies were identiﬁed but indicated that they excluded contrasts that used visual ﬁxation or resting controls . Both object and word studies were included . No attempt was made to identify phonological or task difﬁculty confounds . Only activation peaks in the lateral temporal , lateral frontal , and inferior parietal lobes were included in the analysis . Foci were found throughout these regions , including the STG , MTG , IFG , and premotor cortex . The ﬁndings of Vigneau et al . thus differ from the current results in showing numerous foci in the STG ( due to inclusion of studies comparing speech with non - - speech sounds ) and in the posterior IFG and premotor cortex ( likely due to phonological and working memory confounds ) , and in the a priori exclusion of data from ventral temporal , dorsomedial prefrontal , posterior cingulate , and ventromedial frontal areas . Of the 65 studies selected by Vigneau et al . , only 17 passed our criteria for inclusion ; most were excluded because of task confounds or use of object stimuli . Another 53 studies that passed our criteria and were published prior to 2005 were not identiﬁed by Vigneau et al . Future meta - analyses of cognitive imaging studies would beneﬁt from the establishment of a more formal ontological system for deﬁning the cognitive processes represented by an ‘‘activation . ’’ The aim of such meta - analyses is to identify the neural correlates of a speciﬁc cognitive process or related set of processes , but this enterprise cannot logically succeed without an objective means of deﬁning the cognitive components represented by an activation . The ‘‘objects’’ in such an ontology would correspond to particular experimen - tal conditions ( i . e . , cognitive processing states ) , speciﬁed by sets of operationally - deﬁned stimulus and task attributes . Contrasts between experimental conditions would constitute ‘‘relations’’ deﬁning the cognitive processes that differ between conditions . The system would rest on a set of agreed - upon axioms concerning stimuli , tasks , and their attributes ( e . g . , ‘‘words are familiar symbols , ’’ ‘‘familiar symbols have associations , ’’ ‘‘associations are stored in semantic memory , ’’ etc . ) . The interpretive power of such an ontology would be invaluable not only for retrospective meta - analysis but also for designing and interpreting future studies within a common theoretical framework . Conclusions The neural systems specialized for storage and retrieval of semantic knowledge are widespread and occupy a large proportion of the cortex in the human brain . The areas Figure 9 . Composite map of complementary human brain networks for processing internal and external sources of information . Red areas indicate the general semantic network identiﬁed in the current meta - analysis . Yellow indicates areas activated in 24 healthy adults during oral reading of visually presented pseudowords ( pronounceable but meaningless letter strings ) compared with a resting baseline ( Binder , Medler , et al . 2005 ) . The latter task activates unimodal visual and auditory areas bilaterally , dorsal attention systems in the IPS and FEF bilaterally , and bilateral motor , premotor , dorsal anterior cingulate , and dorsolateral prefrontal systems involved in response production . Overlap between these 2 major networks is minimal . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2783 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 implicated in these processes can be grouped into 3 broad categories : posterior heteromodal association cortex ( AG , MTG , and fusiform gyrus ) , speciﬁc subregions of heteromodal prefrontal cortex ( dorsal , ventromedial , and inferior prefrontal cortex ) , and medial paralimbic regions with strong connections to the hippocampal formation ( parahippocampus and posterior cingulate gyrus ) . The widespread involvement of heteromodal cortex is notable in that these regions are greatly expanded in the human relative to the nonhuman primate brain . This evolutionary expansion of neural systems supporting concep - tual processing probably accounts for uniquely human capaci - ties to use language productively , plan the future , solve problems , and create cultural and technological artifacts , all of which depend on the ﬂuid and efﬁcient retrieval and manipulation of conceptual knowledge . Funding National Institutes of Health ( grants R01 NS33576 , R01 NS35929 , R01 DC006287 , R03 DC008416 , T32 MH019992 , and F32 HD056767 ) . Supplementary Material Supplementary material can be found at : http : / / www . cercor . oxfordjournals . org / Notes The authors thank B . Douglas Ward for invaluable technical assistance . Conﬂict of Interest : None declared . Address correspondence to Jeffrey R . Binder . Email : jbinder @ mcw . edu . Appendix 1 : List of Included Studies 1 . Assaf M , Calhoun VD , Kuzu CH , Kraut MA , Rivkin PR , Hart J , et al . Neural correlates of the object - recall process in semantic memory . Psychiatry Research : Neuroimaging 2006 ; 147 : 115 - - 126 . 2 . BaumgaertnerA , BuccinoG , LangeR , McNamaraA , BinkofskiF . Polymodal conceptual processing of human biological actions in the left inferior frontal lobe . European Journal of Neuroscience 2007 ; 25 : 881 - - 889 . 3 . Baumgaertner A , Weiller C , Buchel C . Event - related fMRI reveals cortical sites involved in contextual sentence integration . Neuro - image 2002 ; 16 : 736 - - 745 . 4 . Bedny M , Thompson - Schill SL . Neuroanatomically separable effects of imageability and grammatical class during single - word compre - hension . Brain and Language 2006 ; 98 : 127 - - 139 . 5 . Binder JR , Frost JA , Hammeke TA , Bellgowan PSF , Rao SM , Cox RW . Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state : a func - tional MRI study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1999 ; 11 : 80 - - 93 . 6 . Binder JR , McKiernan KA , Parsons M , Westbury CF , Possing ET , Kaufman JN , et al . Neural correlates of lexical access during visual word recognition . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2003 ; 15 : 372 - - 393 . 7 . Binder JR , Medler DA , Desai R , Conant LL , Liebenthal E . Some neurophysiological constraints on models of word naming . Neuro - image 2005a ; 27 : 677 - - 693 . 8 . Binder JR , Westbury CF , Possing ET , McKiernan KA , Medler DA . Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2005b ; 17 : 905 - - 917 . 9 . Blaxton TA , Bookheimer SY , Zefﬁro TA , Figlozzi CM , Gaillard WD , Theodore WH . Functional mapping of human memory using PET : comparisons of conceptual and perceptual tasks . Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology 1996 ; 50 : 42 - - 56 . 10 . Booth JR , Lu D , Burman DD , Chou TL , Jin Z , Peng DL , et al . Specialization of phonological and semantic processing in Chinese word reading . Brain Research 2006 ; 1071 : 197 - - 207 . 11 . Boronat CB , Buxbaum LJ , Coslett HB , Tang K , Saffran EM , Kimberg DY , et al . Distinctions between manipulation and function knowledge of objects : evidence from functional magnetic reso - nance imaging . Cogn Brain Research 2005 ; 23 : 361 - - 373 . 12 . Cai C , Kochiyama T , Osaka K , Wu J . Lexical / semantic processing in dorsal left inferior frontal gyrus . Neuroreport 2007 ; 18 : 1147 - - 1151 . 13 . Cappa SF , Perani D , Schnur T , Tettamanti M , Fazio F . The effects of semantic category and knowledge type on lexical - semantic access : A PET study . Neuroimage 1998 ; 8 : 350 - - 359 . 14 . Cato MA , Crosson B , Gokcay D , Soltysik D , Wierenga C , Gopinath K , et al . Processing words with emotional connotation : an FMRI study of time course and laterality in rostral frontal and retrosplenial cortices . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004 ; 16 : 167 - - 177 . 15 . Clark D , Wagner AD . Assembling and encoding word representa - tions : fMRI subsequent memory effects implicate a role for phonological control . Neuropsychologia 2003 ; 41 : 304 - - 317 . 16 . Collette F , Majerus S , Van der Linden M , Dabe P , Degueldre C , Delﬁore G , et al . Contribution of lexico - semantic processes to verbal short - term memory tasks : A PET activation study . Memory 2001 ; 9 : 249 - - 259 . 17 . Copland DA , de Zubicaray GI , McMahon K , Eastburn M . Neural correlates of semantic priming for ambiguous words : An event - related fMRI study . Brain Research 2007 ; 1131 : 163 - - 172 . 18 . Craik FIM , Moroz TM , Moscovitch M , Stuss DT , Winocur G , Tulving E , et al . In search of the self : A positron emission tomography study . Psychological Science 1999 ; 10 : 26 - - 34 . 19 . Crosson B , Radonovich K , Sadek JR , Gokcay D , Bauer RM , Fischler IS , et al . Left - hemisphere processing of emotional connotation during word generation . Neuroreport 1999 ; 10 : 2449 - - 2455 . 20 . D’Arcy RCN , Ryner L , Richter W , Service E , Connolly JF . The fan effect in fMRI : Left hemisphere specialization in verbal working memory . Neuroreport 2004 ; 15 : 1851 - - 1855 . 21 . DaprettoM , BookheimerSY . Formandcontent : Dissociatingsyntaxand semantics in sentence comprehension . Neuron 1999 ; 24 : 427 - - 432 . 22 . Daselaar SM , Veltman DJ , Rombouts ARB , Raaijmakers JGW , Lazeron RHC , Jonker C . Medial temporal lobe activity during semantic classiﬁcation using a ﬂexible fMRI design . Behavioural Brain Research 2002 ; 136 : 399 - - 404 . 23 . Davis MH , Meunier F , Marslen - Wilson WD . Neural responses to morphological , syntactic , and semantic properties of single words : An fMRI study . Brain and Language 2004 ; 89 : 439 - - 449 . 24 . De´monet J - F , Chollet F , Ramsay S , Cardebat D , Nespoulous J - L , Wise R , et al . The anatomy of phonological and semantic processing in normal subjects . Brain 1992 ; 115 : 1753 - - 1768 . 25 . Devlin JT , Matthews PM , Rushworth MFS . Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex : A combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2003 ; 15 : 71 - - 84 . 26 . Devlin JT , Russell RP , Davis MH , Price CJ , Moss HE , Jalal Fadili M , et al . Is there an anatomical basis for category - speciﬁcity ? Semantic memory studies with PET and fMRI . Neuropsychologia 2002 ; 40 : 54 - - 75 . 27 . Ebisch SJH , Babiloni C , Del Gratta C , Ferretti A , Perrucci MG , Caulo M , et al . Human neural systems for conceptual knowledge of proper object use : A functional magnetic resonance imaging study . Cerebral Cortex 2007 ; 17 : 2744 - - 2751 . 28 . Eschen A , Freeman J , Dietrich T , Martin M , Ellis J , Martin E , et al . Motor brain regions are involved in the encoding of delayed intentions : A fMRI study . International Journal of Psychophysiology 2007 ; 64 : 259 - - 268 . 29 . Fiebach CJ , Friederici AD . Processing concrete words : fMRI evidence against a speciﬁc right - hemisphere involvement . Neuro - psychologia 2003 ; 42 : 62 - - 70 . 30 . Fiebach CJ , Friederici AD , Muller K , von Cramon DY . FMRI evidence for dual routes to the mental lexicon in visual word recognition . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2002 ; 14 : 11 - - 23 . 2784 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 31 . Fletcher PC , Happe´ F , Frith U , Baker SC , Dolan RJ , Frackowiak RSJ , et al . Other minds in the brain : a functional imaging study of ‘‘theory of mind’’ in story comprehension . Cognition 1995 ; 57 : 109 - - 128 . 32 . Fliessbach K , Wesi S , Klaver P , Elger CE , Weber B . The effect of word concreteness on recognition memory . Neuroimage 2006 ; 32 : 1413 - - 1421 . 33 . Giesbrecht B , Camblin CC , Swaab TY . Separable effects of semantic priming and imageability on word processing in human cortex . Cerebral Cortex 2004 ; 14 : 521 - - 529 . 34 . Giraud AL , Price CJ . The constraints functional neuroimaging places on classical models of auditory word processing . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2001 ; 13 : 754 - - 765 . 35 . Gitelman DR , Nobre AC , Sonty S , Parrish TB , Mesulam MM . Language network specializations : An analysis with parallel task designs and functional magnetic resonance imaging . Neuroimage 2005 ; 26 : 975 - - 985 . 36 . Goldberg RF , Perfetti CA , Schneider W . Distinct and common cortical activations for multimodal semantic categories . Cognitive , Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 2006a ; 6 : 214 - - 222 . 37 . Goldberg RF , Perfetti CA , Schneider W . Perceptual knowledge retrieval activates sensory brain regions . Journal of Neuroscience 2006b ; 26 : 4917 - - 4921 . 38 . Gorno - Tempini ML , Price CJ , Josephs O , Vandenberghe R , Cappa SF , Kapur N , et al . The neural systems sustaining face and proper - name processing . Brain 1998 ; 121 : 2103 - - 2118 . 39 . Gourovitch ML , Kirkby BS , Goldberg TE , Weinberger DR , Gold JM , Esposito G , et al . A comparison of rCBF patterns during letter and semantic ﬂuency . Neuropsychology 2000 ; 14 : 353 - - 360 . 40 . Grossman M , Koenig P , DeVita C , Glosser G , Alsop D , Detre J , et al . The neural basis for category - speciﬁc knowledge : an fMRI study . Neuroimage 2002a ; 15 : 936 - - 948 . 41 . Grossman M , Koenig P , DeVita C , Glosser G , Alsop D , Detre J , et al . Neural representation of verb meaning : An fMRI study . Human Brain Mapping 2002b ; 15 : 124 - - 134 . 42 . Hagoort P , Indefrey P , Brown C , Herzog H , Steinmetz H , Seitz RJ . The neural circuitry involved in the reading of German words and pseudowords : A PET study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1999 ; 11 : 383 - - 398 . 43 . Henke K , Weber B , Kneifel S , Wieser HG , Buck A . Human hippocampus associates information in memory . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 1999 ; 96 : 5884 - - 5889 . 44 . Henson RNA . Repetition effects for words and nonwords as indexed by event - related fMRI : a preliminary study . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology 2001 ; 42 : 179 - - 186 . 45 . Henson RNA , Price CJ , Rugg MD , Turner R , Friston KJ . Detecting latency differences in event - related BOLD responses : Application to words versus nonwords and initial versus repeated face presenta - tions . Neuroimage 2002 ; 15 : 83 - - 97 . 46 . Herbster AN , Mintun MA , Nebes RD , Becker JT . Regional cerebral blood ﬂow during word and nonword reading . Human Brain Mapping 1997 ; 5 : 84 - - 92 . 47 . Homae F , Hashimoto R , Nakajima K , Miyashita Y , Sakai KL . From perception to sentence comprehension : the convergence of auditory and visual information of language in the left inferior frontal cortex . Neuroimage 2002 ; 16 : 883 - - 900 . 48 . Homae F , Yahata N , Sakai KL . Selective enhancement of functional connectivity in the left prefrontal cortex during sentence process - ing . Neuroimage 2003 ; 20 : 578 - - 586 . 49 . Humphries C , Binder JR , Medler DA , Liebenthal E . Syntactic and semantic modulation of neural activity during auditory sentence comprehension . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2006 ; 18 : 665 - - 679 . 50 . Ischebeck A , Indefrey P , Usui N , Nose I , Hellwig F , Taira M . Reading in a regular orthography : An fMRI study investigating the role of visual familiarity . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004 ; 16 : 727 - - 741 . 51 . Jessen F , Heun R , Erb M , Granath DO , Klose U , Papassotiropoulos A , et al . The concreteness effect : Evidence for dual - coding and context availability . Brain and Language 2000 ; 74 : 103 - - 112 . 52 . Joubert SA , Beauregard M , Walter N , Bourgouin P , Beaudoin G , Leroux J - M , et al . Neural correlates of lexical and sublexical processes in reading . Brain and Language 2004 ; 89 : 9 - - 20 . 53 . Kellenbach ML , Brett M , Patterson K . Large , colourful or noisy ? Attribute - and modality - speciﬁc activations during retrieval of perceptual attribute knowledge . Cognitive , Affective , and Behav - ioral Neuroscience 2001 ; 1 : 207 - - 221 . 54 . Kelley WM , Macrae CN , Wyland CL , Caglar S , Inati S , Heatherton TF . Finding the self ? An event - related fMRI study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2002 ; 14 : 785 - - 794 . 55 . Kosslyn SM , Alpert NM , Thompson WL . Identifying objects at different levels of hierarchy : A positron emission tomography study . Human Brain Mapping 1995 ; 3 : 107 - - 132 . 56 . Kotz SA , Cappa SF , von Cramon DY , Friederici AD . Modulation of the lexical - semantic network by auditory semantic priming : An event - related functional MRI study . Neuroimage 2002 ; 17 : 1761 - - 1772 . 57 . Kounios J , Koenig P , Glosser G , DeVita C , Dennis K , Moore P , et al . Category - speciﬁc medial temporal lobe activation and the consoli - dation of semantic memory . Cogn Brain Research 2003 ; 17 : 484 - - 494 . 58 . Kuchinke L , Jacobs AM , Grubich C , Vo MLH , Conrad M , Herrmann M . Incidental effects of emotional valence in single word processing : An fMRI study . Neuroimage 2005 ; 28 : 1022 - - 1032 . 59 . Kuperberg GR , Lakshmanan BM , Caplan DN , Holcomb PJ . Making sense of discourse : An fMRI study of causal inferencing across sentences . Neuroimage 2006 ; 33 : 343 - - 361 . 60 . Kuperberg GR , McGuire PK , Bullmore ET , Brammer MJ , Rabe - Hesketh S , Wright I , et al . Common and distinct neural substrates for pragmatic , semantic , and syntactic processing of spoken sentences : an fMRI study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2000 ; 12 : 321 - - 341 . 61 . Laine M , Rinne JO , Hiltunen J , Kaasinen V , Sipila H . Different brain activation patterns during production of animals versus artefacts : a PET activation study on category - speciﬁc processing . Cogn Brain Research 2002 ; 13 : 95 - - 99 . 62 . Lee AC , Graham KS , Simons JS , Hodges JR , Owen AM , Patterson K . Regional brain activations differ for semantic features but not categories . Neuroreport 2002a ; 13 : 1497 - - 1501 . 63 . Lee ACH , Robbins TW , Graham KS , Owen AM . ‘‘Pray or prey ? ’’ Dissociation of semantic memory retrieval from epiesodic memory processes using positron emission tomography and a novel homophone task . Neuroimage 2002b ; 16 : 724 - - 735 . 64 . Lee SS , Dapretto M . Metaphorical vs . literal word meanings : fMRI evidence against a selective role of the right hemisphere . Neuro - image 2006 ; 29 : 536 - - 544 . 65 . Liu C , Hue C , Chen C , Chuang K , Liang K , Wang Y , et al . Dissociated roles of the middle frontal gyri in the processing of Chinese characters . Neuroreport 2006 ; 17 : 1397 - - 1401 . 66 . Luo J , Niki K . Role of medial temporal lobe in extensive retrieval of task - related knowledge . Hippocampus 2002 ; 12 : 487 - - 494 . 67 . Majerus S , Van der Linden M , Collette F , Laureys S , Poncelet M , Degueldre C , et al . Modulation of brain activity during phonological familiarization . Brain and Language 2005 ; 92 : 320 - - 331 . 68 . Maril A , Wagner AD , Schacter DL . On the tip of the tongue : An event - related fMRI study of semantic retrieval failure and cognitive conﬂict . Neuron 2001 ; 31 : 653 - - 660 . 69 . Martin A , Haxby JV , Lalonde FM , Wiggs CL , Ungerleider LG . Discrete cortical regions associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of action . Science 1995 ; 270 : 102 - - 105 . 70 . Mashal N , Faust M , Hendler T , Jung - Beeman M . An fMRI investigation of the neural correlates underlying the processing of novel meta - phoric expressions . Brain and Language 2007 ; 100 : 115 - - 126 . 71 . Mechelli A , Josephs O , Lambon Ralph MA , McClelland JL , Price CJ . Dissociating stimulus - driven semantic and phonological effect during reading and naming . Human Brain Mapping 2007 ; 28 : 205 - - 217 . 72 . Meyer M , Alter K , Friederici AD , Lohmann G , von Cramon DY . FMRI reveals brain regions mediating slow prosodic modulations in spoken sentences . Human Brain Mapping 2002 ; 17 : 73 - - 88 . 73 . Miceli G , Turriziani P , Caltagirone C , Capasso R , Tomaiuolo F , Caramazza A . The neural correlates of grammatical gender : An fMRI investigation . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2002 ; 14 : 618 - - 628 . 74 . Mummery CJ , Patterson K , Hodges JR , Price CJ . Functional neuroanatomy of the semantic system : divisible by what ? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1998 ; 10 : 766 - - 777 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2785 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 75 . Mummery CJ , Patterson K , Hodges JR , Wise RJS . Generating ‘tiger’ as an animalnameorawordbeginningwithT : differencesinbrainactivation . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 1996 ; 263 : 989 - - 995 . 76 . Nakic M , Smith BW , Busis S , Vythilingam M , Blair RJR . The impact of affect and frequency on lexical decision : The role of the amygdala and inferior frontal cortex . Neuroimage 2006 ; 31 : 1752 - - 1761 . 77 . Nichelli P , Grafman J , Pietrini P , Clark K , Lee KY , Miletich R . Where the brainappreciatesthemoralofastory . Neuroreport1995 ; 6 : 2309 - - 2313 . 78 . Noppeney U , Friston KJ , Price CJ . Effects of visual deprivation on the organization of the semantic system . Brain 2003 ; 126 : 1620 - - 1627 . 79 . Noppeney U , Josephs O , Kiebel S , Friston KJ , Price CJ . Action selectivity in parietal and temporal cortex . Cogn Brain Research 2005 ; 25 : 641 - - 649 . 80 . Noppeney U , Price CJ . Retrieval of visual , auditory , and abstract semantics . Neuroimage 2002 ; 15 : 917 - - 926 . 81 . Noppeney U , Price CJ . Functional imaging of the semantic system : Retrieval of sensory - experienced and verbally learned knowledge . Brain and Language 2003 ; 84 : 120 - - 133 . 82 . Noppeney U , Price CJ . Retrieval of abstract semantics . Neuroimage 2004 ; 22 : 164 - - 170 . 83 . Obleser J , Wise RJS , Dresner MA , Scott SK . Functional integration across brain regions improves speech perception under adverse listening conditions . Journal of Neuroscience 2007 ; 27 : 2283 - - 2289 . 84 . Orfanidou E , Marslen - Wilson WD , Davis MH . Neural response suppression predicts repetition priming of spoken words and pseudowords . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2006 ; 18 : 1237 - - 1252 . 85 . Otten LJ , Rugg MD . Task - dependency of the neural correlates of episodic encoding as measured by fMRI . Cerebral Cortex 2001 ; 11 : 1150 - - 1160 . 86 . Paulesu E , McCrory E , Fazio F , Menoncello L , Brunswick N , Cappa SF , et al . A cultural effect on brain function . Nature Neuroscience 2000 ; 3 : 91 - - 96 . 87 . Perani D , Dehaene S , Grassi F , Cohen L , Cappa SF , Dupoux E , et al . Brain processing of native and foreign languages . Neuroreport 1996 ; 7 : 2439 - - 2444 . 88 . Perani D , Schnur T , Tettamanti M , Gorno - Tempini M , Cappa SF , Fazio F . Word and picture matching : A PET study of semantic category effects . Neuropsychologia 1999 ; 37 : 293 - - 306 . 89 . Pilgrim LK , Fadili J , Fletcher P , Tyler LK . Overcoming confounds of stimulus blocking : An event - related fMRI design of semantic processing . Neuroimage 2002 ; 16 : 713 - - 723 . 90 . Price CJ , Moore CJ , Humphreys GW , Wise RJS . Segregating semantic from phonological processes during reading . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1997 ; 9 : 727 - - 733 . 91 . Price CJ , Wise RSJ , Frackowiak RSJ . Demonstrating the implicit processing of visually presented words and pseudowords . Cerebral Cortex 1996 ; 6 : 62 - - 70 . 92 . Prince SE , Tsukiura T , Cabeza R . Distinguishing the neural correlates of episodic memory encoding and semantic memory retrieval . Psychological Science 2007 ; 18 : 144 - - 151 . 93 . Rajah MN , McIntosh AM . Overlap in the functional neural systems involved in semantic and episodic memory retrieval . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2005 ; 17 : 470 - - 482 . 94 . Raposo A , Moss HE , Stamatakis EA , Tyler LK . Repetition suppression and semantic enhancement : An investigation of the neural correlates of priming . Neuropsychologia 2006 ; 44 : 2284 - - 2295 . 95 . Rissman J , Eliassen JC , Blumstein SE . An event - related fMRI investigation of implicit semantic priming . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2003 ; 15 : 1160 - - 1175 . 96 . Robertson DA , Gernsbacher MA , Guidotti SJ , Robertson RRW , Irwin W , Mock BJ , et al . Functional neuroanatomy of the cognitive process of mapping during discourse comprehension . Psycholog - ical Science 2000 ; 11 : 255 - - 260 . 97 . Rogers TT , Hocking J , Noppeney U , Mechelli A , Gorno - Tempini ML , Patterson K , et al . Anterior temporal cortex and semantic memory : reconciling ﬁndings from neuropsychology and functional imaging . Cognitive , Affective and Behavioral Neuroscience 2006 ; 6 : 201 - - 213 . 98 . Roskies AL , Fiez JA , Balota DA , Raichle ME , Petersen SE . Task - dependent modulation of regions in the left inferior frontal cortex during semantic processing . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2001 ; 13 : 829 - - 843 . 99 . Ruschmeyer S - A , Brass M , Friederici AD . Comprehending prehend - ing : Neural correlates of processing verbs with motor stems . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2007 ; 19 : 855 - - 865 . 100 . Sabsevitz DS , Medler DA , Seidenberg M , Binder JR . Modulation of the semantic system by word imageability . Neuroimage 2005 ; 27 : 188 - - 200 . 101 . Satpute AB , Fenker DB , Waldmann MR , Tabibnia G , Holyoak KJ , Lieberman MD . An fMRI study of causal judgments . European Journal of Neuroscience 2005 ; 22 : 1233 - - 1238 . 102 . Scott SK , Leff AP , Wise RJS . Going beyond the information given : a neural system supporting semantic interpretation . Neuroimage 2003 ; 19 : 870 - - 876 . 103 . Stringaris AK , Medford NC , Giampietro V , Brammer MJ , David AS . Deriving meaning : Distinct neural mechanisms for metaphoric , literal , and non - meaningful sentences . Brain and Language 2007 ; 100 : 150 - - 162 . 104 . Stringaris AK , Medford NC , Giora R , Giampietro VC , Brammer MJ , DavidAS . Howmetaphorsinﬂuencesemanticrelatednessjudgments : The role of the right frontal cortex . Neuroimage 2006 ; 33 : 784 - - 793 . 105 . Sugiura M , Sassa Y , Watanabe J , Akitsuki Y , Maeda Y , Matsue Y , et al . Corticalmechanismsofpersonrepresentation : recognitionoffamous and personally familiar names . Neuroimage 2006 ; 31 : 853 - - 860 . 106 . Thioux M , Pesenti M , Costes N , De Volder A , Seron X . Task - independent semantic activation for numbers and animals . Cogn Brain Research 2005 ; 24 : 284 - - 290 . 107 . Thompson CK , Bonakdarpour B , Fix SC , Blumenfeld HK , Parrish TB , Gitelman DR , et al . Neural correlates of verb argument structure processing . JournalofCognitive Neuroscience2007 ; 19 : 1753 - - 1767 . 108 . Tomasino B , Werner C , Weiss PH , Fink GR . Stimulus properties mattermorethanperspective : AnfMRIstudyofmentalimageryand silent reading of action phrases . Neuroimage 2007 ; 36 : T128 - - 141 . 109 . Tyler LK , Russell R , Fadili J , Moss HE . The neural representation of nouns and verbs : PET studies . Brain 2001 ; 124 : 1619 - - 1634 . 110 . Tyler LK , Stamatakis EA , Dick E , Bright P , Fletcher P , Moss HE . Objects and their actions : evidence for a neurally distributed semantic system . Neuroimage 2003 ; 18 : 542 - - 557 . 111 . Vandenberghe R , Nobre AC , Price CJ . The response of left temporal cortex to sentences . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2002 ; 14 : 550 - - 560 . 112 . von Kriegstein K , Eger E , Kleinschmidt A , Giraud AL . Modulation of neural responses to speech by directing attention to voices or verbal content . Cogn Brain Research 2003 ; 17 : 48 - - 55 . 113 . Wagner AD , Pare - Blagoev EJ , Clark J , Poldrack RA . Recovering meaning : left prefrontal cortex guides semantic retrieval . Neuron 2001 ; 31 : 329 - - 338 . 114 . Wallentin M , Østergaarda S , Lund TE , Østergaard L , Roepstorff A . Concrete spatial language : See what I mean ? Brain and Language 2005 ; 92 : 221 - - 233 . 115 . Whatmough C , Verret L , Fung D , Chertkow H . Common and contrasting areas of activation for abstract and concrete concepts : An H2 15O PET study . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004 ; 16 : 1211 - - 1226 . 116 . WheatleyT , WeisbergJ , BeauchampMS , MartinA . Automaticpriming of semantically related words reduces activity in the fusiform gyrus . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2005 ; 17 : 1871 - - 1885 . 117 . Wise RJS , Howard D , Mummery CJ , Fletcher P , Leff A , Bu¨chel C , et al . Noun imageability and the temporal lobes . Neuropsychologia 2000 ; 38 : 985 - - 994 . 118 . Woodard JL , Seidenberg M , Nielson KA , Miller SK , Franczak M , Antuono P , et al . Temporally graded activation of neocortical regions in response to memories of different ages . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2007 ; 19 : 1 - - 12 . 119 . Xiao Z , Zhang JX , Wang X , Wu R , Hu X , Weng X , et al . Differential activity in left inferior frontal gyrus for pseudowords and real words : an event - related fMRI study on auditory lexical decision . Human Brain Mapping 2005 ; 25 : 212 - - 221 . 120 . Xu J , Kemeny S , Park G , Frattali C , Braun A . Language in context : emergent features of word , sentence , and narrative comprehen - sion . Neuroimage 2005 ; 25 : 1002 - - 1015 . 2786 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Appendix 2 . Individual Study Details No . 1st Author N Method Type Contrast Activation in brain regions of interest IPL MTG FG / PH DMPFC IFG VMPFC PC 1 Assaf 18 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 2 Baumgaertner 19 fMRI Spec Action - - Motion ( SD ) þ þ þ þ 3 Baumgaertner 9 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ 4 Bedny 13 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ 5 Binder 30 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - N ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 6 Binder 24 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ 7 Binder 24 fMRI Gen W - - N ( Read ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ Spec Conc - - Abst ( Read ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 8 Binder 24 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ Spec Conc - - Abst ( LD ) þ þ þ 9 Blaxton 14 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - N ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 10 Booth 13 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ 11 Boronat 15 fMRI Spec Action - - Function ( SD ) þ 12 Cai 15 fMRI Gen W - - N ( PD ) þ 13 Cappa 13 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - N ( PD ) þ þ þ Spec Tool - - Animal ( SD ) þ þ 14 Cato 26 fMRI Spec Emotion - - Neutral ( cWG ) þ þ þ þ þ 15 Clark 20 fMRI Gen W - - N ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ 16 Collette 12 PET Gen W - - N ( Rep ) þ 17 Copland 14 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( LD ) þ 18 Craik 8 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ 19 Crosson 17 fMRI Spec Emotion - - Neutral ( cWG ) þ 20 D’Arcy 10 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) 21 Dapretto 8 fMRI Gen SemSP - - SynSP ( SD ) þ 22 Daselaar 6 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 23 Davis 12 fMRI Spec Action - - Other ( SD ) þ 24 De´monet 9 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - N ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 25 Devlin 12 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ 26 Devlin 26 Both Spec Artifact - - Natural ( SD ) 27 Ebisch 17 fMRI Spec Function - - Size ( SD ) þ þ þ þ 28 Eschen 10 fMRI Spec Action - - Abst ( Mem ) 29 Fiebach 12 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( LD ) 30 Fiebach 11 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ 31 Fletcher 6 PET Spec Story - - UnrelSent ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Spec ThM - - Story ( SD ) þ þ þ 32 Fliessbach 21 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( Rec ) þ 33 Giesbrecht 10 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ þ 34 Giraud 12 PET Gen W - - N ( Rep ) 35 Gitelman 14 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 36 Goldberg 13 fMRI Spec Natural - - Other ( SD ) þ þ þ 37 Goldberg 14 fMRI Spec Color / Taste / etc . - - Other ( SD ) þ þ þ þ 38 Gorno - Tempini 6 PET Spec Person - - Object ( Match ) þ 39 Gourovitch 18 PET Gen W ( SWG ) - - W ( PWG ) þ þ þ þ 40 Grossman 16 fMRI Spec Tool - - Animal ( SD ) þ þ þ 41 Grossman 16 fMRI Spec Motion - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ 42 Hagoort 11 PET Gen W - - N ( Read ) þ þ 43 Henke 12 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ 44 Henson 6 fMRI Gen W - - N ( OD ) þ þ þ 45 Henson 12 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ 46 Herbster 10 PET Gen W - - N ( cRead ) þ 47 Homae 9 fMRI Gen W / N ( LD ) - - N ( Match ) þ þ þ þ þ Gen Sent ( SD ) - - W / N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ 48 Homae 10 fMRI Spec Story ( SD ) - - UnrelSent ( LD ) þ þ þ 49 Humphries 21 fMRI Gen HighM - - LowM ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ Gen HighM - - N ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Gen LowM - - N ( SD ) þ þ þ 50 Ischebeck 10 fMRI Gen W - - N ( cRead ) þ þ þ þ 7 Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ 51 Jessen 14 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( Mem ) þ þ þ þ 52 Joubert 10 fMRI Gen W - - N ( cRead ) þ þ 53 Kellenbach 10 PET Spec Auditory - - Visual ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Spec Size - - Color ( SD ) þ 54 Kelley 21 fMRI Spec Self - - Other ( SD ) þ þ 55 Kosslyn 12 PET Spec Category - - Other ( SD ) þ þ 56 Kotz 13 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ Gen Rel - - Unrel ( LD ) þ Spec Category - - Association ( LD ) þ þ 57 Kounios 16 fMRI Spec Animal - - Tool ( SD ) þ þ Spec Animal - - Abst ( SD ) þ Spec Tool - - Abst ( SD ) þ 58 Kuchinke 20 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ þ Spec Emotion - - Other ( LD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 59 Kuperberg 15 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ 60 Kuperberg 9 fMRI Gen HighM - - LowM ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ 61 Laine 7 PET Spec Animal - - Artifact ( SWG ) þ þ 62 Lee , A 10 PET Spec Perceptual - - Verbal ( SWG ) þ þ 63 Lee , A 7 PET Gen W - - N ( Mem ) þ þ þ 64 Lee , S 12 fMRI Spec Figurative - - Literal ( SD ) þ þ þ 65 Liu 12 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2787 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Appendix 2 Continued No . 1st Author N Method Type Contrast Activation in brain regions of interest IPL MTG FG / PH DMPFC IFG VMPFC PC 66 Luo 12 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ 67 Majerus 12 PET Gen W - - N ( Rep ) þ þ 68 Maril 14 fMRI Gen Fam - - Unfam ( SD ) þ 69 Martin 12 PET Spec Action - - Color ( SWG ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 70 Mashal 15 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ Spec Figurative - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Spec Figurative - - Literal ( SD ) þ þ 71 Mechelli 20 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( Read ) þ þ þ þ 72 Meyer 14 fMRI Gen W - - N ( GJ ) þ 73 Miceli 9 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 74 Mummery 10 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ Spec Location - - Color ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Spec Natural - - Artifact ( SD ) þ 75 Mummery 6 PET Gen W ( SWG ) - - W ( PWG ) þ þ Spec Natural - - Artifact ( SWG ) þ þ 76 Nakic 13 fMRI Spec Emotion - - Other ( LD ) þ þ þ þ 77 Nichelli 9 PET Gen Story ( SD ) - - Story ( OD ) þ þ þ 78 Noppeney 23 fMRI Spec Action - - Other ( SD ) þ Spec Visual - - Other ( SD ) þ 79 Noppeney 27 fMRI Spec Action - - Other ( SD ) 80 Noppeney 12 PET Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) 81 Noppeney 9 PET Spec Verbal - - Perceptual ( SD ) þ þ 82 Noppeney 15 fMRI Spec Abst - - Conc ( SD ) þ þ 83 Obleser 16 fMRI Gen HighM - - LowM ( Mem ) þ þ þ þ 84 Orfanidou 13 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ 85 Otten 16 fMRI Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ 86 Paulesu 12 PET Gen W - - N ( Read ) 87 Perani 9 PET Gen HighM - - LowM ( Mem ) þ þ 88 Perani 8 PET Spec Animal - - Artifact ( Match ) þ þ 89 Pilgrim 15 fMRI Spec Natural - - Artifact ( SD ) 90 Price 6 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ 91 Price 6 PET Gen W ( OD ) - - N ( OD ) þ 92 Prince 12 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ 93 Rajah 11 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( Rec ) þ þ þ þ þ 94 Raposo 15 fMRI Gen Rel - - Unrel ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ 95 Rissman 15 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ þ 96 Robertson 8 fMRI Spec Story - - UnrelSent ( cRead ) þ 97 Rogers 12 PET Spec Speciﬁc - - General ( SD ) þ 98 Roskies 20 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ 99 Ruschmeyer 20 fMRI Spec Action - - Abst ( LD ) þ þ 100 Sabsevitz 28 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ 101 Satpute 11 fMRI Spec Causation - - Association ( SD ) þ 102 Scott 9 PET Gen W ( SD ) - - W ( PD ) þ þ þ þ 103 Stringaris 11 fMRI Gen HighM - - LowM ( SD ) þ þ þ Spec Figurative - - Literal ( SD ) þ þ þ þ 104 Stringaris 12 fMRI Spec Figurative - - Literal ( SD ) þ þ þ þ 105 Sugiura 16 fMRI Gen Fam - - Unfam ( SD ) þ þ þ þ Spec Self - - Other ( SD ) þ þ þ 106 Thioux 6 PET Spec Animal - - Number ( SD ) þ þ þ 107 Thompson 14 fMRI Spec Verb2 - - Verb1 ( LD ) þ 108 Tomasino 15 fMRI Spec Action - - Other ( SD ) þ 109 Tyler 9 PET Spec Conc - - Abst ( LD ) 110 Tyler 12 fMRI Spec Action - - Animal ( SD ) þ þ Spec Action - - Tool ( SD ) 111 Vandenberghe 10 PET Gen LowM - - HighM ( Match ) þ 112 von Kriegstein 14 fMRI Gen Sent ( VTarg ) - - Sent ( NVTarg ) þ 113 Wagner 13 fMRI Gen LowA - - HighA ( SD ) þ 114 Wallentin 18 fMRI Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ 115 Whatmough 15 PET Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ þ 116 Wheatley 18 fMRI Spec Animal - - Artifact ( cRead ) þ þ þ þ þ þ 117 Wise 18 PET Spec Conc - - Abst ( SD ) þ 118 Woodard 15 fMRI Gen Fam - - Unfam ( SD ) þ þ þ þ þ þ þ 119 Xiao 14 fMRI Gen W - - N ( LD ) þ þ þ 120 Xu 22 fMRI Spec Story - - UnrelSent ( Mem ) þ þ þ þ þ Note : The Contrast column provides a code indicating the contrast used , with tasks indicated in parentheses after stimuli . The terms Action , Animal , Artifact , Association , Auditory , Category , Causation , Color , Emotion , Figurative , Function , General , Literal , Location , Motion , Natural , Number , Perceptual , Self , Size , Speciﬁc , Taste , Tool , Verbal , and Visual refer to the object category or knowledge domain emphasized by the stimulus or task . ‘‘Other’’ indicates a miscellaneous combination of categories or domains . Abbreviations used for stimuli : Abst 5 abstract words , Conc 5 concrete words , Fam 5 familiar concepts , Unfam 5 unfamiliar concepts , N 5 nonwords ( i . e . , pseudowords ) , W 5 words , HighM 5 sentences or words with high meaningfulness , LowM 5 sentences or words with low meaningfulness , HighA 5 highly associated word pairs , LowA 5 weakly associated word pairs , Rel 5 semantically related words , Unrel 5 semantically unrelated words , Sent 5 sentences , Story 5 connected narrative or discourse , UnrelSent 5 unrelated sentences , SemSP 5 semantically distinct sentence pairs , SynSP 5 syntactically distinct sentence pairs , ThM 5 theory - of - mind narrative , Verb1 5 single - argument verb , Verb2 5 2 - argument verb . Abbreviations for tasks : GJ 5 grammaticality judgment , LD 5 lexical decision , Match 5 identity matching , Mem 5 memorization , OD 5 orthographic decision , PD 5 phonological decision , cRead 5 covert reading , Read 5 oral reading , Rep 5 oral repetition , Rec 5 recognition , SD 5 semantic decision , PWG 5 phonological word generation , SWG 5 semantic word generation , cSWG 5 covert semantic word generation , VTarg 5 detect a target word or phrase , NVTarg 5 detect a target nonverbal feature . Examples : W ( SD ) - - N ( PD ) indicates a semantic decision task on words contrasted with a phonological decision on pseudowords ; Conc - - Abst ( LD ) indicates a contrast between concrete and abstract words presented during a lexical decision task . Speciﬁc contrasts were almost always performed in both directions ( e . g . , Animal - - Tool and Tool - - Animal ) ; for simplicity such complementary contrasts are collapsed into a single row in the table . Other abbreviations : N 5 number of subjects in study ; Gen 5 general contrast ; Spec 5 speciﬁc contrast ; IPL 5 inferior parietal lobe ( angular and supramarginal gyri ) ; MTG 5 middle temporal gyrus ; FG / PH 5 fusiform and parahippocampal gyri ; DMPFC 5 dorsomedial prefrontal cortex ; IFG 5 inferior frontal gyrus ; VMPFC 5 ventromedial prefrontal cortex ; PC 5 posterior cingulate gyrus . 2788 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 References Addis DR , Moscovitch M , Crawley AP , McAndrews MP . 2004 . Recollective qualities modulate hippocampal activation during autobiographical memory retrieval . Hippocampus . 14 : 752 - - 762 . Adler CM , Sax KW , Holland SK , Schmithorst V , Rosenberg L , Strakowski SM . 2001 . Changes in neuronal activation with in - creasing attention demand in healthy volunteers : an fMRI study . Synapse . 42 : 266 - - 272 . Aggleton JP , Pearce JM . 2001 . Neural systems underlying episodic memory : insights from animal research . Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B . 356 : 1467 - - 1482 . Alexander MP , Benson DF . 1993 . The aphasias and related disturbances . In : Joynt RJ , editor . Clinical Neurology . Philadelphia ( PA ) : J . B . Lipincott . p . 1 - - 58 . Alexander MP , Hiltbrunner B , Fischer RS . 1989 . Distributed anatomy of transcortical sensory aphasia . Arch Neurol . 46 : 885 - - 892 . Andersen RA , Asanuma C , Essick G , Siegel RM . 1990 . Corticocortical connections of anatomically and physiologically deﬁned subdivi - sions within the inferior parietal lobule . J Comp Neurol . 296 : 65 - - 113 . Andersen RA , Snyder LH , Bradley DC , Xing J . 1997 . Multimodal representation of space in the posterior parietal cortex and its use in planning movements . Annual Rev Neurosci . 20 : 303 - - 330 . Andreasen NC , O’Leary DS , Cizadlo T , Arndt S , Rezai K , Watkins GL , Boles Ponto LL , Hichwa RD . 1995 . Remembering the past : two facets of episodic memory explored with positron emission tomography . Am J Psychiatry . 152 : 1576 - - 1585 . Antrobus JS . 1968 . Information theory and stimulus - independent thought . Br J Psychol . 59 : 423 - - 430 . Antrobus JS , Singer JL , Greenberg S . 1966 . Studies in the stream of consciousness : experimental enhancement and suppression of spontaneous cognitive processes . Perceptual Motor Skills . 23 : 399 - - 417 . Attwell D , Laughlin SB . 2001 . An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of the brain . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab . 21 : 1133 - - 1145 . Aurell CG . 1979 . Perception : a model comprising two modes of consciousness . Percept Motor Skills . 49 : 431 - - 444 . Baleydier C , Mauguiere F . 1980 . The duality of the cingulate gyrus in the monkey . Neuroanatomical study and functional hypothesis . Brain . 103 : 525 - - 554 . Barbas H . 1993 . Organization of cortical afferent input to orbitofrontal areas in the rhesus monkey . Neuroscience . 56 : 841 - - 864 . Barch DM , Braver TS , Akbudak E , Conturo T , Ollinger J , Snyder A . 2001 . Anterior cingulate cortex and response conﬂict : effects of response modality and processing domain . Cereb Cortex . 11 : 837 - - 848 . Barsalou LW . 1998 . The content and organization of autobiographical memories . In : Neisser U , Winograd E , editors . Remembering reconsidered : ecological and traditional approaches to the study of memory . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . p . 193 - - 243 . Baumgaertner A , Buccino G , Lange R , McNamara A , Binkofski F . 2007 . Polymodal conceptual processing of human biological actions in the left inferior frontal lobe . Eur J Neurosci . 25 : 881 - - 889 . Baumgaertner A , Weiller C , Buchel C . 2002 . Event - related fMRI reveals cortical sites involved in contextual sentence integration . Neuro - image . 16 : 736 - - 745 . Baylis GC , Rolls ET , Leonard CM . 1987 . Functional subdivisions of the temporal lobe neocortex . J Neurosci . 7 : 330 - - 342 . Bechara A , Damasio H , Damasio AR . 2000 . Emotion , decision making and the orbitofrontal cortex . Cereb Cortex . 10 : 295 - - 307 . Bedny M , Thompson - Schill SL . 2006 . Neuroanatomically separable effects of imageability and grammatical class during single - word comprehension . Brain Lang . 98 : 127 - - 139 . Benson DF . 1979 . Aphasia , alexia and agraphia . New York : Churchill Livingstone . Benson DF , Cummings JL , Tsai SY . 1982 . Angular gyrus syndrome simulating Alzheimer’s disease . Arch Neurol . 38 : 616 - - 620 . Benton AL . 1961 . The ﬁction of the ‘‘Gerstmann syndrome’’ . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 24 : 176 - - 181 . Berthier ML . 1999 . Transcortical aphasias . Hove : Psychology Press . Binder JR . 2002 . Wernicke aphasia : a disorder of central language processing . In : D’Esposito ME , editor . Neurological foundations of cognitive neuroscience . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . p . 175 - - 238 . Binder JR . 2007 . Effects of word imageability on semantic access : neuroimaging studies . In : Hart J , Kraut MA , editors . Neural basis of semantic memory . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . p . 149 - - 181 . Binder JR , Frost JA , Hammeke TA , Bellgowan PSF , Rao SM , Cox RW . 1999 . Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state : a functional MRI study . J Cogn Neurosci . 11 : 80 - - 93 . Binder JR , Frost JA , Hammeke TA , Bellgowan PSF , Springer JA , Kaufman JN , Possing ET . 2000 . Human temporal lobe activation by speech and nonspeech sounds . Cereb Cortex . 10 : 512 - - 528 . Binder JR , Frost JA , Hammeke TA , Cox RW , Rao SM , Prieto T . 1997 . Human brain language areas identiﬁed by functional MRI . J Neurosci . 17 : 353 - - 362 . Binder JR , Liebenthal E , Possing ET , Medler DA , Ward BD . 2004 . Neural correlates of sensory and decision processes in auditory object identiﬁcation . Nature Neurosci . 7 : 295 - - 301 . Binder JR , Medler DA , Desai R , Conant LL , Liebenthal E . 2005 . Some neurophysiological constraints on models of word naming . Neuro - image . 27 : 677 - - 693 . Binder JR , Swanson SJ , Hammeke TA , Sabsevitz DS . 2008 . A comparison of ﬁve fMRI protocols for mapping speech comprehension systems . Epilepsia . 49 : 1980 - - 1997 . Binder JR , Westbury CF , Possing ET , McKiernan KA , Medler DA . 2005 . Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts . J Cogn Neurosci . 17 : 905 - - 917 . Binkofski F , Buccino G , Posse S , Seitz RJ , Rizzolatti G , Freund HJ . 1999 . A fronto - parietal circuit for object manipulation in man : evidence from an fMRI study . Eur J Neurosci . 11 : 3276 - - 3286 . Blatt GJ , Pandya DN , Rosene DL . 2003 . Parcellation of cortical afferents to three distinct sectors in the parahippocampal gyrus of the rhesus monkey : an anatomical and neurophysiological study . J Comp Neurol . 466 : 161 - - 179 . Bock M . 1986 . The inﬂuence of emotional meaning on the recall of words processed for form or self - reference . Psychol Res . 48 : 107 - - 112 . Bogen JE , Bogen GM . 1976 . Wernicke’s region—where is it ? Ann NY Acad Sci . 290 : 834 - - 843 . Bookheimer SY . 2002 . Functional MRI of language : new approaches to understanding the cortical organization of semantic processing . Annu Rev Neurosci . 25 : 151 - - 188 . Boronat CB , Buxbaum LJ , Coslett HB , Tang K , Saffran EM , Kimberg DY , Detre JA . 2005 . Distinctions between manipulation and function knowledge of objects : evidence from functional magnetic reso - nance imaging . Cogn Brain Res . 23 : 361 - - 373 . Braver TS , Barch DM , Gray JR , Molfese DL , Snyder A . 2001 . Anterior cingulate cortex and response conﬂict : effects of frequency , inhibition and errors . Cereb Cortex . 11 : 825 - - 836 . Braver TS , Cohen JD , Nystrom LE , Jonides J , Smith EE , Noll DC . 1997 . A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory . Neuroimage . 5 : 49 - - 62 . Bre´al M . 1897 . Essai de se´mantique ( science des signiﬁcations ) . Paris : Librairie Hachette . Breedin SD , Saffran EM , Coslett HB . 1995 . Reversal of a concreteness effect in a patient with semantic dementia . Cogn Neuropsychol . 11 : 617 - - 660 . Bright P , Moss HE , Tyler LK . 2004 . Unitary vs . multiple semantics : PET studies of word and picture processing . Brain Lang . 89 : 417 - - 432 . Broca P . 1861 . Remarques sur le sie ` ge de la faculte´ du langage articule´ ; suivies d’une observation d’aphemie . Bull Soc Anat Paris . 6 : 330 - - 357 . Brodmann K . 1994 / 1909 . Localisation in the cerebral cortex . London : Smith - Gordon . Buchsbaum BR , D’Esposito M . 2008 . The search for the phonological store : from loop to convolution . J Cogn Neurosci . 20 : 762 - - 778 . Buckner RL , Raichle ME , Petersen SE . 1995 . Dissociation of human prefrontal cortical areas across different speech production tasks and gender groups . J Neurosci . 74 : 2163 - - 2173 . Burgess N . 2008 . Spatial cognition and the brain . Ann NY Acad Sci . 1124 : 77 - - 97 . Burton MW , Small S , Blumstein SE . 2000 . The role of segmentation in phonological processing : an fMRI investigation . J Cogn Neurosci . 12 : 679 - - 690 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2789 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Buxbaum LJ . 2001 . Ideomotor apraxia : a call to action . Neurocase . 7 : 445 - - 458 . Buxbaum LJ , Kyle KM , Menon R . 2005 . On beyond mirror neurons : internal representations subserving imitation and recognition of skilled object - related actions in humans . Cogn Brain Res . 25 : 226 - - 239 . Buxbaum LJ , Kyle KM , Tang K , Detre JA . 2006 . Neural substrates of knowledge of hand postures for object grasping and functional onject use : evidence from fMRI . Brain Res . 1117 : 175 - - 185 . Cabeza R , Nyberg L . 2000 . Imaging cognition II : an empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies . J Cogn Neurosci . 12 : 1 - - 47 . Cappa SF , Perani D , Schnur T , Tettamanti M , Fazio F . 1998 . The effects of semantic category and knowledge type on lexical - - semantic access : a PET study . Neuroimage . 8 : 350 - - 359 . Cappe C , Barone P . 2005 . Heteromodal connections supporting multisensory integration at low levels of cortical processing in the monkey . Eur J Neurosci . 22 : 2886 - - 2902 . Caramazza A , Berndt RS , Basili AG , Koller JJ . 1981 . Syntactic processing deﬁcits in aphasia . Cortex . 17 : 333 - - 348 . Carter CS , Botvinick MM , Cohen JD . 1999 . The contribution of the anterior cingulate cortex to executive processes in cognition . Rev Neurosci . 10 : 49 - - 57 . Caspers S , Geyer S , Schleicher A , Mohlberg H , Amunts K , Zilles K . 2006 . The human inferior parietal cortex : cytoarchitectonic parcellation and interindividual variability . Neuroimage . 33 : 430 - - 448 . Cavada C . 2000 . The anatomical connections of the macaque monkey orbitofrontal cortex . A review . Cereb Cortex . 10 : 220 - - 242 . Cavada C , Goldman - Rakic PS . 1989a . Posterior parietal cortex in rhesus monkey : i . Parcellation of areas based on distinctive limbic and sensory corticocortical connections . J Comp Neurol . 287 : 393 - - 421 . Cavada C , Goldman - Rakic PS . 1989b . Posterior parietal cortex in the rhesus monkey : iI . Evidence for segregated corticocortical networks linking sensory and limbic areas with the frontal lobe . J Comp Neurol . 287 : 422 - - 445 . Chafee M , Goldman - Rakic PS . 1998 . Matching patterns of activity in primate prefrontal area 8a and parietal area 7ip neurons during a spatial working memory task . J Neurophysiol . 79 : 2919 - - 2940 . Chance FS , Abbott LF , Reyes AD . 2002 . Gain modulation from background synaptic input . Neuron . 35 : 773 - - 782 . Chao LL , Haxby JV , Martin A . 1999 . Attribute - based neural substrates in temporal cortex for perceiving and knowing about objects . Nature Neurosci . 2 : 913 - - 919 . Chao LL , Martin A . 1999 . Cortical regions associated with perceiving , naming , and knowing about colors . J Cogn Neurosci . 11 : 25 - - 35 . Chao LL , Martin A . 2000 . Representation of manipulable man - made objects in the dorsal stream . Neuroimage . 12 : 478 - - 484 . Chao LL , Weisberg J , Martin A . 2002 . Experience - dependent modulation of category - related cortical activity . Cereb Cortex . 12 : 545 - - 551 . Chee MW , Hon NHH , Caplan D , Lee HL , Goh J . 2002 . Frequency of concrete words modulates prefrontal activation during semantic judgments . Neuroimage . 16 : 259 - - 268 . Chee MW , Weekes B , Lee KM , Soon CS , Schreiber A , Hoon JJ , Chee M . 2000 . Overlap and dissociation of semantic processing of Chinese characters , English words , and pictures . Neuroimage . 12 : 392 - - 403 . Chertkow H , Bub D , Deaudon C , Whitehead V . 1997 . On the status of object concepts in aphasia . Brain Lang . 58 : 203 - - 232 . Cipolotti L , Butterworth B , Denes G . 1991 . A speciﬁc deﬁcit for numbers in a case of dense acalculia . Brain . 114 : 2619 - - 2637 . Cohen NJ , Eichenbaum H . 1993 . Memory , amnesia , and the hippocam - pal system . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . Coltheart M , Patterson K , Marshall J . 1980 . Deep dyslexia . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Conway MA , Pleydell - Pearce CW . 2000 . The construction of autobio - graphical memories in the self - memory system . Psychol Rev . 107 : 261 - - 288 . Copland DA , de Zubicaray GI , McMahon K , Wilson SJ , Eastburn M , Chenery HJ . 2003 . Brain activity during automatic semantic priming revealed by event - related functional magnetic resonance imaging . Neuroimage . 20 : 302 - - 310 . Corbetta M , Akbudak E , Conturo T , Snyder AZ , Ollinger JM , Drury HA , Linenweber MR , Petersen SE , Raichle ME , Van Essen DC , et al . 1998 . A common network of functional areas for attention and eye movements . Neuron . 21 : 761 - - 773 . Craik FIM , Lockhart RS . 1992 . Levels of processing : a framework for memory research . J Verb Learn Verb Behav . 11 : 671 - - 684 . Creem - Regehr S , Lee J . 2005 . Neural representation of graspable objects : are tools special ? Cogn Brain Res . 22 : 457 - - 469 . Critchley M . 1953 . The parietal lobes . New York : Hafner . D’Esposito M , Detre JA , Aguirre GK , Stallcup M , Alsop DC , Tippet LJ , Farah MJ . 1997 . A functional MRI study of mental image generation . Neuropsychologia . 35 : 725 - - 730 . Damasio AR . 1994 . Descarte’s error : emotion , reason , and the human brain . New York : Putnam . Damasio H . 1981 . Cerebral localization of the aphasias . In : Sarno MT , editor . Acquired aphasia . Orlando : Academic Press . p . 27 - - 50 . Damasio H , Tranel D , Grabowski T , Adolphs R , Damasio A . 2004 . Neural systems behind word and concept retrieval . Cognition . 92 : 179 - - 229 . Davidoff J , De Bleser R . 1994 . Impaired picture recognition with preserved object naming and reading . Brain Cogn . 24 : 1 - - 23 . Davis MH , Meunier F , Marslen - Wilson WD . 2004 . Neural responses to morphological , syntactic , and semantic properties of single words : an fMRI study . Brain Lang . 89 : 439 - - 449 . De Renzi E , Liotti M , Nichelli P . 1987 . Semantic amnesia with preservation of autobiographical memory : a case report . Cortex . 23 : 575 - - 597 . Dehaene S , Cohen L . 1997 . Cerebral pathways for calculation : double dissociation between rote verbal and quantitative knowledge of arithmetic . Cortex . 33 : 219 - - 250 . De´jerine J . 1895 . Anatomie des centres nerveux . Paris : Rueff . De´jerine J . 1892 . Contribution a ` l’e´tude anatomo - pathologique et clinique des diffe´rentes varie´te´s de ce´cite´ verbale . Comptes Rend Se´ances Soc Biol . 44 : 61 - - 90 . De´monet J - F , Chollet F , Ramsay S , Cardebat D , Nespoulous J - L , Wise R , Rascol A , Frackowiak R . 1992 . The anatomy of phonological and semantic processing in normal subjects . Brain . 115 : 1753 - - 1768 . De´monet JF , Wise R , Frackowiak RSJ . 1993 . Language functions explored in normal subjects by positron emission tomography : a critical review . Hum Brain Mapp . 1 : 39 - - 47 . Desai R , Conant LL , Waldron E , Binder JR . 2006 . FMRI of past tense processing : the effects of phonological complexity and task difﬁculty . J Cogn Neurosci . 18 : 278 - - 297 . Desgranges B , Baron JC , Lalevee C , Giffard B , Viader F , de La Sayette V , Eustache F . 2002 . The neural substrates of episodic memory impairment in Alzheimer’s disease as revealed by FDG - PET : relation - ship to degree of deterioration . Brain . 125 : 1116 - - 1124 . Devlin JT , Matthews PM , Rushworth MFS . 2003 . Semantic processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex : a combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation study . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 71 - - 84 . Devlin JT , Moore CJ , Mummery CJ , Gorno - Tempini ML , Phillips JA , Noppeney U , Frackowiak RSJ , Price CJ . 2002 . Anatomic constraints on cognitive theories of category speciﬁcity . Neuroimage . 15 : 675 - - 685 . Devlin JT , Russell RP , Davis MH , Price CJ , Moss HE , Jalal Fadili M , Tyler LK . 2002 . Is there an anatomical basis for category - speciﬁcity ? Semantic memory studies with PET and fMRI . Neuropsychologia . 40 : 54 - - 75 . Drevets WC , Price JL , Simpson JR , Todd RD , Reich T , Vannier M , Raichle ME . 1997 . Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in mood disorders . Nature . 386 : 824 - - 827 . Dronkers NF , Wilkins DP , Van Valin RD , Redfern BB , Jaeger JJ . 2004 . Lesion analysis of the brain areas involved in language comprehen - sion . Cognition . 92 : 145 - - 177 . Duhamel JR , Colby CL , Goldberg ME . 1998 . Ventral intraparietal area of the macaque : congruent visual and somatic response properties . J Neurophysiol . 79 : 126 - - 136 . Duncan J , Owen AM . 2000 . Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruitedby diversecognitivedemands . TrendsNeurosci . 23 : 475 - - 483 . Ebisch SJH , Babiloni C , Del Gratta C , Ferretti A , Perrucci MG , Caulo M , Sitskoorn MM , Romani GL . 2007 . Human neural systems for conceptual knowledge of proper object use : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study . Cereb Cortex . 17 : 2744 - - 2751 . 2790 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Embick D , Marantz A , Miyashita Y , O’Neil W , Sakai KL . 2000 . A syntactic specialization for Broca’s area . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 97 : 6150 - - 6154 . Epstein R , Kanwisher N . 1998 . A cortical representation of the local visual environment . Nature . 392 : 598 - - 601 . Epstein RA , Parker WE , Feiler AM . 2007 . Where am I now ? Distinct roles for parahippocampal and retrosplenial cortices in place recognition . J Neurosci . 27 : 6141 - - 6149 . Eschen A , Freeman J , Dietrich T , Martin M , Ellis J , Martin E , Kliegel M . 2007 . Motor brain regions are involved in the encoding of delayed intentions : a fMRI study . Int J Psychophysiol . 64 : 259 - - 268 . Evans AC , Collins DL , Mills SR , Brown ED , Kelly RL , Peters TM . 1993 . 3D statistical neuroanatomical models from 305 MRI volumes . IEEE nuclear science symposium and medical imaging conference . 1813 - - 1817 . Farah MJ . 1990 . Visual agnosia . Disorders of object recognition and what they tell us about normal vision . Cambridge : MIT Press . Fiebach CJ , Friederici AD . 2003 . Processing concrete words : fMRI evidence against a speciﬁc right - hemisphere involvement . Neuro - psychologia . 42 : 62 - - 70 . Fiebach CJ , Schlesewsky M , Lohmann G . 2005 . Revisiting the role of Broca’s area in sentence processing : syntactic integration versus syntactic working memory . Hum Brain Mapp . 24 : 79 - - 91 . Fiez JA . 1997 . Phonology , semantics and the role of the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Hum Brain Mapp . 5 : 79 - - 83 . Fiez JA , Balota DA , Raichle ME , Petersen SE . 1999 . Effects of lexicality , frequency , and spelling - to - sound consistency on the functional anatomy of reading . Neuron . 24 : 205 - - 218 . Fletcher PC , Happe´ F , Frith U , Baker SC , Dolan RJ , Frackowiak RSJ , Frith CD . 1995 . Other minds in the brain : a functional imaging study of ‘‘theory of mind’’ in story comprehension . Cognition . 57 : 109 - - 128 . Fliessbach K , Wesi S , Klaver P , Elger CE , Weber B . 2006 . The effectofword concreteness on recognition memory . Neuroimage . 32 : 1413 - - 1421 . Fodor JA . 1983 . The modularity of mind : an essay on faculty psychology . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . Fogassi L , Ferrari PF , Gesierich B , Rozzi S , Chersi F , Rizzolatti G . 2005 . Parietal lobe : from action organization to intention understanding . Science . 29 : 662 - - 667 . Forde EME , Humphreys GW . 1999 . Category - speciﬁc recognition impairments : a review of important case studies and inﬂuential theories . Aphasiol . 13 : 169 - - 193 . Fox MD , Snyder AZ , Vincent JL , Corbetta M , Van Essen DC , Raichle ME . 2005 . The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic , anticorrelated functional networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 102 : 9673 - - 9678 . Franklin S , Howard D , Patterson K . 1995 . Abstract word anomia . Cogn Neuropsychol . 12 : 549 - - 566 . Fransson P . 2005 . Spontaneous low - frequency BOLD signal ﬂuctuations : an fMRI investigation of the resting - state default mode of brain function hypothesis . Hum Brain Mapp . 26 : 15 - - 29 . Freedman M , Alexander MP , Naeser MA . 1984 . Anatomic basis of transcortical motor aphasia . Neurology . 40 : 409 - - 417 . Friederici AD , Ru¨schemeyer S - A , Hahne A , Fiebach CJ . 2003 . The role of left inferior frontal gyrus and superior temporal cortex in sentence comprehension : localizing syntactic and semantic processes . Cereb Cortex . 13 : 170 - - 177 . Frith CD , Friston KJ , Liddle PF , Frackowiak RSJ . 1991 . A PET study of word ﬁnding . Neuropsychologia . 29 : 1137 - - 1148 . Gabrieli JDE , Poldrack RA , Desmond JE . 1998 . The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and memory . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 95 : 906 - - 913 . Gainotti G . 2000 . What the locus of brain lesion tells us about the nature of the cognitive defect underlying category - speciﬁc disor - ders : a review . Cortex . 36 : 539 - - 559 . GainottiG , AlmontiS , DiBettaAM , SilveriMC . 1998 . Retrogradeamnesiain a patient with retrosplenial tumour . Neurocase . 4 : 519 - - 526 . Galaburda A , Sanides F . 1980 . Cytoarchitectonic organization of the human auditory cortex . J Comp Neurol . 190 : 597 - - 610 . Gallese V , Lakoff G . 2005 . The brain’s concepts : the role of the sensory - motor system in conceptual knowledge . Cogn Neuropsychol . 22 : 455 - - 479 . Gates L , Yoon MG . 2005 . Distinct and shared cortical regions of the human brain activated by pictorial depictions versus verbal descriptions : an fMRI study . Neuroimage . 24 : 473 - - 486 . Gerlach C . 2007 . A review of functional imaging studies on category speciﬁcity . J Cogn Neurosci . 19 : 296 - - 314 . Gerlach C , Law I , Paulson O . 2002 . When action turns into words . Activation of motor - based knowledge during categorization of manipulable objects . J Cogn Neurosci . 14 : 1230 - - 1239 . Gerlach C , Law I , Paulson OB . 2004 . Structural similarity and category - speciﬁcity : a reﬁned account . Neuropsychologia . 42 : 1543 - - 1553 . Gerstmann J . 1940 . Syndrome of ﬁnger agnosia , disorientation for right and left , agraphia and acalculia . Arch Neurol Psychiat . 44 : 398 - - 408 . Geschwind N . 1971 . Aphasia . New Engl J Med . 284 : 654 - - 656 . Geschwind N . 1965 . Disconnection syndromes in animals and man . Brain . 88 : 237 - - 294 , 585 - - 644 . Giambra LM . 1995 . A laboratory method for investigating inﬂuences on switching attention to task - unrelated imagery and thought . Con - scious Cogn . 4 : 1 - - 21 . Giesbrecht B , Camblin CC , Swaab TY . 2004 . Separable effects of semantic priming and imageability on word processing in human cortex . Cereb Cortex . 14 : 521 - - 529 . Giraud AL , Price CJ . 2001 . The constraints functional neuroimaging places on classical models of auditory word processing . J Cogn Neurosci . 13 : 754 - - 765 . Gitelman DR , Ashburner J , Friston KJ , Tyler LK , Price CJ . 2001 . Voxel - based morphometry of herpes simplex encephalitis . Neuroimage . 13 : 623 - - 631 . Gold BT , Buckner RL . 2002 . Common prefrontal regions coactivate with dissociable posterior regions during controlled semantic and phonological tasks . Neuron . 35 : 803 - - 812 . Goldberg G . 1985 . Supplementary motor area structure and function : review and hypothesis . Behav Brain Sci . 8 : 567 - - 616 . Goldberg RF , Perfetti CA , Fiez JA , Schneider W . 2007 . Selective retrieval of abstract semantic knowledge in left prefrontal cortex . J Neurosci . 27 : 3790 - - 3798 . Goldberg RF , Perfetti CA , Schneider W . 2006 . Perceptual knowledge retrieval activates sensory brain regions . J Neurosci . 26 : 4917 - - 4921 . Golland Y , Bentin S , Gelbard H , Benjamini Y , Heller R , Nir Y , Hasson U , Malach R . 2007 . Extrinsic and intrinsic systems in the posterior cortex of the human brain revealed during natural sensory stimulation . Cereb Cortex . 17 : 766 - - 777 . Goodglass H , Hyde MR , Blumstein S . 1969 . Frequency , picturability and availability of nouns in aphasia . Cortex . 5 : 104 - - 119 . Gorno - Tempini ML , Cipolotti L , Price CJ . 2000 . Category differences in brain activation studies : where do they come from ? Proc Roy Soc London B . 267 : 1253 - - 1258 . Gorno - Tempini ML , Price CJ , Josephs O , Vandenberghe R , Cappa SF , Kapur N , Frackowiak RS . 1998 . The neural systems sustaining face and proper - name processing . Brain . 121 : 2103 - - 2118 . Gould RL , Brown RG , Owen AM , Ffytche DH , Howard RJ . 2003 . FMRI BOLD response to increasing task difﬁculty during successful paired associates learning . Neuroimage . 20 : 1006 - - 1019 . Graham KS , Lee AC , Brett M , Patterson K . 2003 . The neural basis of autobiographical and semantic memory : new evidence from three PET studies . Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci . 3 : 234 - - 254 . Graves WW , Grabowski TJ , Mehta S , Gupta P . 2008 . The left posterior superior temporal gyrus participates speciﬁcally in accessing lexical phonology . J Cogn Neurosci . 20 : 1698 - - 1710 . Grefkes C , Fink GR . 2005 . The functional organization of the intraparietal sulcus in humans and monkeys . J Anat . 207 : 3 - - 17 . Gregoriou GG , Borra E , Matelli M , Luppino G . 2006 . Architectonic organization of the inferior parietal convexity of the macaque monkey . J Comp Neurol . 496 : 422 - - 451 . Grodzinsky Y , Friederici AD . 2006 . Neuroimaging of syntax and syntactic processing . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 16 : 240 - - 246 . Grosbras M - H , Laird AR , Paus T . 2005 . Cortical regions involved in eye movements , shifts of attention , and gaze perception . Hum Brain Mapp . 25 : 140 - - 154 . Grossman M , Koenig P , DeVita C , Glosser G , Alsop D , Detre J , Gee J . 2002a . The neural basis for category - speciﬁc knowledge : an fMRI study . Neuroimage . 15 : 936 - - 948 . Grossman M , Koenig P , DeVita C , Glosser G , Alsop D , Detre J , Gee J . 2002b . Neural representation of verb meaning : an fMRI study . Hum Brain Mapp . 15 : 124 - - 134 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2791 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Haaland KY , Harrington DL , Knight RT . 2000 . Neural representations of skilled movement . Brain . 123 : 2306 - - 2313 . HartJ , GordonB . 1990 . Delineationofsingle - wordsemanticcomprehension deﬁcits in aphasia , with anatomic correlation . Ann Neurol . 27 : 226 - - 231 . Hassabis D , Kumaran D , Maguire EA . 2007 . Using imagination to understand the neural basis of episodic memory . J Neurosci . 27 : 14365 - - 14374 . Hasson U , Levy I , Behrmann M , Hendler T , Malach R . 2002 . Eccentricity bias as an organizing principle for human high - order object areas . Neuron . 34 : 490 - - 497 . Hauk O , Johnsrude I , Pulvermuller F . 2004 . Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor and premotor cortex . Neuron . 41 : 301 - - 307 . Haxby JV , Gobbini MI , Furey ML , Ishai A , Schouten JL , Pietrini P . 2001 . Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex . Science . 293 : 2425 - - 2430 . Head H . 1926 . Aphasia and kindred disorders of speech . New York : MacMillan . Heilman KM , Bowers D , Watson RT , Day A , Valenstein E , Hammond E , Duara R . 1990 . Frontal hypermetabolism and thalamic hypometab - olism in a patient with abnormal orienting and retrosplenial amnesia . Neuropsychologia . 28 : 161 - - 169 . Henschen SE . 1918 - - 1919 . On the hearing sphere . Acta Otolaryngol ( Stockh ) . 1 : 423 - - 486 . Henson RNA , Price CJ , Rugg MD , Turner R , Friston KJ . 2002 . Detecting latency differences in event - related BOLD responses : application to words versus nonwords and initial versus repeated face presenta - tions . Neuroimage . 15 : 83 - - 97 . Hickok G , Buchsbaum B , Humphries C , Muftuler T . 2003 . Auditory - motor interaction revealed by fMRI : speech , music , and working memory in area Spt . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 673 - - 682 . Hillis AE , Caramazza A . 1991 . Category - speciﬁc naming and compre - hension impairment : a double dissociation . Brain . 114 : 2081 - - 2094 . Hillis AE , Wityk RJ , Tufﬁash E , Beauchamp NJ , Jacobs MA , Barker PB , Selnes OA . 2001 . Hypoperfusion of Wernicke’s area predicts severity of semantic deﬁcit in acute stroke . Ann Neurol . 50 : 561 - - 566 . Ho N , Destexhe A . 2000 . Synaptic background activity enhances the responsiveness of neocortical pyramidal neurons . J Neurophysiol . 84 : 1488 - - 1496 . Hodges JR , Graham N , Patterson K . 1995 . Charting the progression in semantic dementia : implications for the organisation of semantic memory . Memory . 3 : 463 - - 495 . Hodges JR , Patterson K , Oxbury S , Funnell E . 1992 . Semantic dementia : progressive ﬂuent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy . Brain . 115 : 1783 - - 1806 . Homae F , Yahata N , Sakai KL . 2003 . Selective enhancement of functional connectivity in the left prefrontal cortex during sentence processing . Neuroimage . 20 : 578 - - 586 . Honey GD , Bullmore ET , Sharma T . 2000 . Prolonged reaction time to a verbal working memory task predicts increased power of posterior parietal cortical activation . Neuroimage . 12 : 495 - - 503 . Horowitz M . 1975 . Intrusive and repetitive thought after experimental stress . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 32 : 1457 - - 1463 . Humphreys GW , Forde EM . 2001 . Hierarchies , similarity and inter - activity in object recognition : ‘category speciﬁc’ neuropsychological deﬁcits . Behav Brain Sci . 24 : 453 - - 509 . Humphries C , Binder JR , Medler DA , Liebenthal E . 2006 . Syntactic and semantic modulation of neural activity during auditory sentence comprehension . J Cogn Neurosci . 18 : 665 - - 679 . Humphries C , Binder JR , Medler DA , Liebenthal E . 2007 . Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension : an fMRI study . Neuroimage . 36 : 924 - - 932 . Hyvarinen J . 1982 . Posterior parietal lobe of the primate brain . Physiol Rev . 62 : 1060 - - 1129 . Indefrey P , Levelt WJM . 2004 . The spatial and temporal signatures of word production components . Cognition . 92 : 101 - - 144 . Insausti R , Amaral DG , Cowan WM . 1987 . The entorhinal cortex of the monkey : iI . Cortical afferents . J Comp Neurol . 264 : 356 - - 395 . Ischebeck A , Indefrey P , Usui N , Nose I , Hellwig F , Taira M . 2004 . Reading in a regular orthography : an fMRI study investigating the role of visual familiarity . J Cogn Neurosci . 16 : 727 - - 741 . Ishai A , Ungerleider LG , Martin A , Schouten JL , Haxby JV . 1999 . Distributed representation of objects in the human ventral visual pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 96 : 9379 - - 9384 . James TW , Gauthier I . 2003 . Auditory and action semantic features activate sensory - speciﬁc perceptual brain regions . Curr Biol . 13 : 1792 - - 1796 . James W . 1890 . The stream of consciousness . In : Principles of psychology . Vol . 1 . New York : Dover Publications . p . 224 - - 290 . Jax SA , Buxbaum LJ , Moll AD . 2006 . Deﬁcits in movement planning and intrinsic coordinate control in ideomotor apraxia . J Cogn Neurosci . 18 : 2063 - - 2076 . Jefferies E , Lambon Ralph MA . 2006 . Semantic impairment in stroke aphasia versus semantic dementia : a case - series comparison . Brain . 129 : 2132 - - 2147 . Jessen F , Heun R , Erb M , Granath DO , Klose U , Papassotiropoulos A , Grodd W . 2000 . The concreteness effect : evidence for dual - coding and context availability . Brain Lang . 74 : 103 - - 112 . Johnson MK , Foley MA , Suengas AG , Raye CL . 1988 . Phenomenal characteristics of memories for perceived and imagined autobio - graphical events . J Exp Psychol Gen . 117 : 371 - - 376 . Johnson MR , Mitchell KJ , Raye CL , D’Esposito M , Johnson MK . 2007 . A brief thought can modulate activity in extrastriate visual areas : top - down effects of refreshing just - seen visual stimuli . Neuroimage . 37 : 290 - - 299 . Jones EG , Powell TSP . 1970 . An anatomical study of converging sensory pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey . Brain . 93 : 793 - - 820 . Jonides J , Schumacher EH , Smith EE , Lauber E , Awh E , Minoshima S , Koeppe RA . 1997 . The task - load of verbal working memory affects regional brain activation as measured by PET . J Cogn Neurosci . 9 : 462 - - 475 . Joseph JE . 2001 . Functional neuroimaging studies of category speciﬁc - ity in object recognition : a critical review and meta - analysis . Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci . 1 : 119 - - 136 . Kaas JH , Hackett TA . 2000 . Subdivisions of auditory cortex and processing streams in primates . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 97 : 11793 - - 11799 . Kable JW , Kan IP , Wilson A , Thompson - Schill SL , Chatterjee A . 2005 . Conceptual representations of action in the lateral temporal cortex . J Cogn Neurosci . 17 : 1855 - - 1870 . Kable JW , Lease - Spellmeyer J , Chatterjee A . 2002 . Neural substrates for action event knowledge . J Cogn Neurosci . 14 : 795 - - 805 . Kan IP , Barsalou LW , Solomon KO , Minor JK , Thompson - Schill SL . 2003 . Role of mental imagery in a property veriﬁcation task : fMRI evidence for perceptual representations of conceptual knowledge . Cogn Neuropsychol . 20 : 525 - - 540 . Kanwisher N , McDermott J , Chun MM . 1997 . The fusiform face area : a module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception . J Neurosci . 17 : 4302 - - 4311 . Kapur N , Barker S , Burrows EH , Ellison D , Brice J , Illis LS , Scholey K , ColbournC , WilsonB , LoatesM . 1994 . Herpessimplexencephalitis— long - term magnetic resonance imaging and neuropsychological proﬁle . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 57 : 1334 - - 1342 . Kapur S , Rose R , Liddle PF , Zipursky RB , Brown GM , Stuss D , Houle S , Tulving E . 1994 . The role of the left prefrontal cortex in verbal processing : semantic processing or willed action ? Neuroreport . 5 : 2193 - - 2196 . Katai S , Maruyama T , Hashimoto T , Yanagisawa N . 1992 . A case of cerebral infarction presenting as retrosplenial amnesia . Clin Neurol . 32 : 1281 - - 1287 . Katz RB , Goodglass H . 1990 . Deep dysphasia : analysis of a rare form of repetition disorder . Brain Lang . 39 : 153 - - 185 . Kellenbach ML , Brett M , Patterson K . 2003 . Actions speak louder than functions : the importance of manipulability and action in tool representation . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 30 - - 46 . Kertesz A , Lau WK , Polk M . 1993 . The structural determinants of recovery in Wernicke’s aphasia . Brain Lang . 44 : 153 - - 164 . Kertesz A , Sheppard A , MacKenzie R . 1982 . Localization in transcortical sensory aphasia . Arch Neurol . 39 : 475 - - 478 . Kobayashi Y , Amaral DG . 2003 . Macaque monkey retrosplenial cortex . II . Cortical afferents . J Comp Neurol . 466 : 48 - - 79 . 2792 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Kobayashi Y , Amaral DG . 2007 . Macaque monkey retrosplenial cortex : III . Cortical efferents . J Comp Neurol . 502 : 810 - - 833 . Kochunov P , Lancaster JL , Thompson P , Toga AW , Brewer P , Hardies J , Fox P . 2002 . An optimized individual target brain in the Talairach coordinate system . Neuroimage . 17 : 922 - - 927 . Kounios J , Koenig P , Glosser G , DeVita C , Dennis K , Moore P , GrossmanM . 2003 . Category - speciﬁc medial temporal lobe activation and the consolidation of semantic memory . Cogn Brain Res . 17 : 484 - - 494 . Kuchinke L , Jacobs AM , Grubich C , Vo MLH , Conrad M , Herrmann M . 2005 . Incidental effects of emotional valence in single word processing : an fMRI study . Neuroimage . 28 : 1022 - - 1032 . Laine M , Rinne JO , Hiltunen J , Kaasinen V , Sipila H . 2002 . Different brain activation patterns during production of animals versus artefacts : a PET activation study on category - speciﬁc processing . Cogn Brain Res . 13 : 95 - - 99 . Laird AR , Fox PM , Price CJ , Glahn DC , Uecker AM , Lancaster JL , Turkeltaub PE , Kochunov P , Fox PT . 2005 . ALE meta - analysis : controlling the false discovery rate and performing statistical contrasts . Hum Brain Mapp . 25 : 155 - - 164 . Lambon Ralph MA , Lowe C , Rogers TT . 2007 . Neural basis of category - speciﬁc semantic deﬁcits for living things : evidence from semantic dementia , HSVE and a neural network model . Brain . 130 : 1127 - - 1137 . Lancaster JL , Tordesillas - Gutierrez D , Martinez M , Salinas F , Evans AC , Zilles K , Mazziotta JC , Fox PT . 2007 . Bias between MNI and Talairach coordinates analyzed using the ICBM - 152 brain template . Hum Brain Mapp . 28 : 1194 - - 1205 . Lee SS , Dapretto M . 2006 . Metaphorical vs . literal word meanings : fMRI evidence against a selective role of the right hemisphere . Neuroimage . 29 : 536 - - 544 . Lehmann C , Vannini P , Wahlund L , Almkvist O , Dierks T . 2006 . Increased sensitivity in mapping task demand in visuospatial processing using reaction - time - dependent hemodynamic response predictors in rapid event - related fMRI . Neuroimage . 31 : 505 - - 512 . Leichnitz GR . 1980 . An intrahemispheric columnar projection between two cortical multisensory convergence areas ( inferior parietal lobule and prefrontal cortex ) : an anterograde study in macaque using HRP gel . Neurosci Lett . 18 : 119 - - 124 . Levine B , Svoboda E , Hay JF , Winocur G , Moscovitch M . 2002 . Aging and autobiographical memory : dissociating episodic from semantic retrieval . Psychol Aging . 17 : 677 - - 689 . Levine B , Turner GR , Tisserand DJ , Hevenor SJ , Graham SJ , McIntosh AR . 2004 . The functional neuroanatomy of episodic and semantic autobiographical remembering : a prospective functional MRI study . J Cogn Neurosci . 16 : 1633 - - 1646 . Levy DA , Bayley PJ , Squire LR . 2004 . The anatomy of semantic knowledge : medial vs . lateral temporal lobe . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 101 : 6710 - - 6715 . Liebenthal E , Binder JR , Spitzer SM , Possing ET , Medler DA . 2005 . Neural substrates of phonetic perception . Cereb Cortex . 15 : 1621 - - 1631 . Lissauer H . 1889 . Ein fall von Seelenblindheit nebst einem Beitrage zur Theorie derselben . Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr . 21 : 2 - - 50 . Liu C , Hue C , Chen C , Chuang K , Liang K , Wang Y , Wu C , Chen J . 2006 . Dissociated roles of the middle frontal gyri in the processing of Chinese characters . Neuroreport . 17 : 1397 - - 1401 . Logothetis NK , Sheinberg DL . 1996 . Visual object recognition . Annu Rev Neurosci . 19 : 577 - - 621 . Lu¨ders H , Lesser RP , Hahn J , Dinner DS , Morris HH , Wyllie E , Godoy J . 1991 . Basal temporal language area . Brain . 114 : 743 - - 754 . Luria AR , Tsvetkova LS . 1968 . The mechanism of ‘‘dynamic aphasia’’ . Found Lang . 4 : 296 - - 307 . Maddock RJ . 1999 . The retrosplenial cortex and emotion : new insights from functional neuroimaging of the human brain . Trends Neurosci . 22 : 310 - - 316 . Maeshima S , Kuwata T , Masuo O , Yamaga H , Okita R , Ozaki F , Moriwaki H , Roger P . 1999 . Transcortical sensory aphasia due to a left frontal subcortical hemorrhage . Brain Inj . 13 : 927 - - 933 . Maeshima S , Osawa A , Nakayama Y , Miki J . 2004 . Transcortical sensory aphasia following infarction in the left frontal lobe . Eur Neurol . 52 : 125 - - 128 . Maguire EA . 2001 . Neuroimaging studies of autobiographical event memory . Phil Trans Royal Soc Lond B . 356 : 1441 - - 1451 . Maguire EA , Frith CD . 2003 . Lateral asymmetry in the hippocampal response to the remoteness of autobiographical memories . J Neurosci . 23 : 5302 - - 5307 . Marr D . 1982 . Vision . San Francisco : Freeman . Marshall J , Pring T , Robson J , Chiat S . 1998 . When ottoman is easier than chair : aninversefrequencyeffectinjargonaphasia . BrainLang . 65 : 78 - - 81 . Martin A , Caramazza A . 2003 . Neuropsychological and neuroimaging perspectives on conceptual knowledge : an introduction . Cogn Neuropsychol . 20 : 195 - - 212 . Martin A , Chao LL . 2001 . Semantic memory in the brain : structure and processes . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 11 : 194 - - 201 . Martin A , Haxby JV , Lalonde FM , Wiggs CL , Ungerleider LG . 1995 . Discrete cortical regions associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of action . Science . 270 : 102 - - 105 . Martin A , Ungerleider LG , Haxby JV . 2000 . Category - speciﬁcity and the brain : the sensory - motor model of semantic representations of objects . In : Gazzaniga MS , editor . The new cognitive neurosciences . 2nd ed . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . p . 1023 - - 1036 . Martin A , Wiggs CL , Ungerleider LG , Haxby JV . 1996 . Neural correlates of category - speciﬁc knowledge . Nature . 379 : 649 - - 652 . Masdeu JC , Schoene WC , Funkenstein H . 1978 . Aphasia following infarction of the left supplementary motor area . Neurology . 28 : 1220 - - 1223 . Matsumoto A , Iidaka T , Haneda K , Okada T , Sadato N . 2005 . Linking semantic priming effect in functional MRI and event - related potentials . Neuroimage . 24 : 624 - - 634 . Mayberg HS , Liotti M , Brannan SK , McGinnis S , Mahurin RK , Jerabek PA , Silva JA , Tekell JL , Martin CC . 1999 . Reciprocal limbic - cortical function and negative mood : converging PET ﬁndings in depression and normal sadness . Am J Psychiatry . 156 : 675 - - 682 . Mazoyer B , Zago L , Mellet E , Bricogne S , Etard O , Houde´ O , Crivello F , Joliot M , Petit L , Tzourio - Mazoyer N . 2001 . Cortical networks for working memory and executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man . Brain Res Bull . 54 : 287 - - 298 . McClelland JL , McNaughton BL , O’Reilly RC . 1995 . Why are there complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neo - cortex : insights from the success and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory . Psychol Rev . 102 : 409 - - 457 . McDonald CR , Crosson B , Valenstein E , Bowers D . 2001 . Verbal encoding deﬁcits in a patient with a left retrosplenial lesion . Neurocase . 7 : 407 - - 417 . McKiernan KA , D’Angelo BR , Kaufman JN , Binder JR . 2006 . Interrupting the ‘‘stream of consciousness’’ : an fMRI investigation . Neuroimage . 29 : 1185 - - 1191 . McKiernan KA , Kaufman JN , Kucera - Thompson J , Binder JR . 2003 . A parametric manipulation of factors affecting task - induced deactiva - tion in functional neuroimaging . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 394 - - 408 . Mechelli A , Gorno - Tempini ML , Price CJ . 2003 . Neuroimaging studies of word and pseudoword reading : consistencies , inconsistencies , and limitations . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 260 - - 271 . Mesulam M . 1985 . Patterns in behavioral neuroanatomy : association areas , the limbic system , and hemispheric specialization . In : Mesulam M , editor . Principles of behavioral neurology . Philadelphia ( PA ) : F . A . Davis . p . 1 - - 70 . Mesulam MM . 1981 . A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral neglect . Ann Neurol . 10 : 309 - - 325 . Mesulam MM . 1990 . Large - scale neurocognitive networks and distrib - uted processing for attention , language , and memory . Ann Neurol . 28 : 597 - - 613 . Mesulam MM , Van Hoesen GW , Pandya DN , Geschwind N . 1977 . Limbic and sensory connections of the inferior parietal lobule ( Area PG ) in the rhesus monkey : a study with a new method for horseradish peroxidase histochemistry . Brain Res . 136 : 393 - - 414 . Mitchell RL . 2005 . The BOLD response during Stroop task - like inhibition paradigms : effects of task difﬁculty and task - relevant modality . Brain Cogn . 59 : 23 - - 37 . Mohr JP . 1976 . Broca’s area and Broca’s aphasia . In : Whitaker H , editor . Studies in neurolinguistics . New York : Academic Press . p . 201 - - 236 . Moore CJ , Price CJ . 1999a . A functional neuroimaging study of the variables that generate category speciﬁc object processing differ - ences . Brain . 122 : 943 - - 962 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2793 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Moore CJ , Price CJ . 1999b . Three distinct posterior basal temporal lobe regions for reading and object naming . Neuroimage . 10 : 181 - - 192 . Morris R , Petrides M , Pandya DN . 1999 . Architecture and connections of retrosplenial area 30 in the rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ) . Eur J Neurosci . 11 : 2506 - - 2518 . Mountcastle VB , Lynch JC , Georgopoulos A , Sakata H , Acuna C . 1975 . Posterior parietal association cortex of the monkey : command functions for operations within extrapersonal space . J Neurophysiol . 38 : 871 - - 908 . Mummery CJ , Patterson K , Hodges JR , Price CJ . 1998 . Functional neuroanatomy of the semantic system : divisible by what ? J Cogn Neurosci . 10 : 766 - - 777 . Mummery CJ , Patterson K , Hodges JR , Wise RJS . 1996 . Generating ‘tiger’ as an animal name or a word beginning with T : differences in brain activation . Proc Roy Soc Lond B . 263 : 989 - - 995 . Mummery CJ , Patterson K , Price CJ , Ashburner J , Frackowiak RS , Hodges JR . 2000 . A voxel - based morphometry study of semantic dementia : relationship between temporal lobe atrophy and seman - tic memory . Ann Neurol . 47 : 36 - - 45 . Mummery CJ , Shallice T , Price CJ . 1999 . Dual - process model in semantic priming : a functional imaging perspective . Neuroimage . 9 : 516 - - 525 . Neisser U . 1967 . Cognitive psychology . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . Nestor PJ , Fryer TD , Ikeda M , Hodges JR . 2003 . Retrosplenial cortex ( BA 29 / 30 ) hypometabolism in mild cognitive impairment ( prodromal Alzheimer’s disease ) . Eur J Neurosci . 18 : 2663 - - 2667 . Newman SD , Just MA , Keller TA , Roth J , Carpenter PA . 2003 . Differential effects of syntactic and semantic processing on the subregions of Broca’s area . Cogn Brain Res . 16 : 297 - - 307 . Ni W , Constable RT , Mencl WE , Pugh KR , Fullbright RK , Shaywitz SE , Shaywitz BA , Gore JC . 2000 . An event - related neuroimaging study distinguishing form and content in sentence processing . J Cogn Neurosci . 12 : 120 - - 133 . Noppeney U , Friston KJ , Price CJ . 2003 . Effects of visual deprivation on the organization of the semantic system . Brain . 126 : 1620 - - 1627 . Noppeney U , Josephs O , Kiebel S , Friston KJ , Price CJ . 2005 . Action selectivity in parietal and temporal cortex . Cogn Brain Res . 25 : 641 - - 649 . Noppeney U , Patterson K , Tyler LK , Moss HE , Stamatakis EA , Bright P , Mummery CJ , Price CJ . 2007 . Temporal lobe lesions and semantic impairment : a comparison of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and semantic dementia . Brain . 130 : 1138 - - 1147 . Noppeney U , Price CJ . 2003 . Functional imaging of the semantic system : retrieval of sensory - experienced and verbally learned knowledge . Brain Lang . 84 : 120 - - 133 . NoppeneyU , PriceCJ . 2004 . Retrievalofabstractsemantics . Neuroimage . 22 : 164 - - 170 . Nyberg L , Marklund P , Persson J , Cabeza R , Forkstam C , Petersson K , Ingvar M . 2003 . Common prefrontal activations during working memory , episodicmemory , andsemanticmemory . Neuropsychologia . 41 : 371 - - 377 . Okada T , Tanaka S , Nakai T , Nishizawa S , Inui T , Sadato N , Yonekura Y , Konishi J . 2000 . Naming of animals and tools : a functional magnetic resonance imaging study of categorical differences in the human brain areas commonly used for naming visually presented objects . Neurosci Lett . 296 : 33 - - 36 . O’Reilly RC , Rudy JW . 2001 . Conjunctive representations in learning and memory : principles of cortical and hippocampal function . Psychol Rev . 108 : 311 - - 345 . Orban GA , Van Essen DC , Vanduffel W . 2004 . Comparative mapping of highervisualareasinmonkeysandhumans . TrendsCognSci . 8 : 315 - - 324 . Orfanidou E , Marslen - Wilson WD , Davis MH . 2006 . Neural response suppression predicts repetition priming of spoken words and pseudowords . J Cogn Neurosci . 18 : 1237 - - 1252 . Otsuki M , Soma Y , Koyama A , Yoshimura N , Furukawa H , Tsuji S . 1998 . Transcortical sensory aphasia following left frontal infarction . J Neurol . 245 : 69 - - 76 . Owen AM , McMillan KM , Laird AR , Bullmore ET . 2005 . N - back working memory paradigm : a meta - analysis of normative functional neuro - imaging studies . Hum Brain Mapp . 25 : 46 - - 59 . Padberg J , Seltzer B , Cusick CG . 2003 . Architectonics and cortical connections of the upper bank of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey : an analysis in the tangential plane . J Comp Neurol . 467 : 418 - - 434 . Paivio A . 1968 . A factor - analytic study of word attributes and verbal learning . J Verb Learn Verb Behav . 7 : 41 - - 49 . Paivio A . 1986 . Mental representations : a dual - coding approach . New York : Oxford University Press . Pandya DN , Seltzer B . 1982 . Intrinsic connections and architectonics of the posterior parietal cortex in the rhesus monkey . J Comp Neurol . 204 : 204 - - 210 . Parvizi J , Van Hoesen GW , Buckwalter J , Damasio A . 2006 . Neural connections of the posteromedial cortex in the macaque . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 103 : 1563 - - 1568 . Patterson K , Nestor PJ , Rogers TT . 2007 . Where do you know what you know ? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain . Nature Rev Neurosci . 8 : 976 - - 987 . Paulesu E , Frith CD , Frackowiak RSJ . 1993 . The neural correlates of the verbal component of working memory . Nature . 362 : 342 - - 345 . Paulesu E , McCrory E , Fazio F , Menoncello L , Brunswick N , Cappa SF , Cotelli M , Cossu G , Corte F , Lorusso M , et al . 2000 . A cultural effect on brain function . Nature Neurosci . 3 : 91 - - 96 . Penﬁeld W , Roberts L . 1959 . Speech and brain - mechanisms . New York : Atheneum . PeraniD , CappaSF , BettinardiV , BressiS , Gorno - TempiniM , MatarreseM , Fazio F . 1995 . Different neural systems for the recognition of animals and man - made tools . Neuroreport . 6 : 1637 - - 1641 . Perani D , Schnur T , Tettamanti M , Gorno - Tempini M , Cappa SF , Fazio F . 1999 . Word and picture matching : a PET study of semantic category effects . Neuropsychologia . 37 : 293 - - 306 . Petersen SE , Fox PT , Posner MI , Mintun M , Raichle ME . 1988 . Positron emission tomographic studies of the cortical anatomy of single - word processing . Nature . 331 : 585 - - 589 . Petrides M , Pandya DN . 1984 . Projections to the frontal cortex from the posterior parietal region in the rhesus monkey . J Comp Neurol . 228 : 105 - - 116 . Phillips JA , Noppeney U , Humphreys GW , Price CJ . 2002 . Can segregation within the semantic system account for category - speciﬁc deﬁcits ? Brain . 125 : 2067 - - 2080 . Phillips ML , Drevets WC , Rauch SL , Lane R . 2003 . Neurobiology of emotion perception II : implications for major psychiatric disorders . Biol Psychiatry . 54 : 515 - - 528 . Pilgrim LK , Fadili J , Fletcher P , Tyler LK . 2002 . Overcoming confounds of stimulus blocking : an event - related fMRI design of semantic processing . Neuroimage . 16 : 713 - - 723 . Poldrack RA , Temple E , Protopapas A , Nagarajan S , Tallal P , Merzenich MM , Gabrieli JDE . 2001 . Relations between the neural basis of dynamic auditory processing and phonological processing : evidence from fMRI . J Cogn Neurosci . 13 : 687 - - 697 . Poldrack RA , Wagner AD , Prull MW , Desmond JE , Glover GH , Gabrieli JDE . 1999 . Functional specialization for semantic and phonological processing in the left inferior prefrontal cortex . Neuroimage . 10 : 15 - - 35 . Pope KS , Singer JL . 1976 . Regulation of the stream of consciousness : toward a theory of ongoing thought . In : Schwartz GE , Shapiro D , editors . Consciousness and self - regulation . New York : Plenum Press . p . 101 - - 135 . Poremba A , Saunders RC , Sokoloff L , Crane A , Cook M , Mishkin M . 2003 . Functional mapping of the primate auditory system . Science . 299 : 568 - - 572 . Price CJ , Friston KJ . 2002 . Functional imaging studies of category - speciﬁcity . In : Forde EME , Humphreys G , editors . Category spec - iﬁcity in brain and mind . Hove , UK : Psychology Press . Price CJ , Mummery CJ , Moore CJ , Frackowiak RS , Friston KJ . 1999 . Delineating necessary and sufﬁcient neural systems with functional imaging studies of neuropsychological patients . J Cogn Neurosci . 11 : 371 - - 382 . Pulvermuller F , Hauk O , Nikulin VV , Ilmoniemi RJ . 2005 . Functional links between motor and language systems . Eur J Neurosci . 21 : 793 - - 797 . Raichle ME . 2006 . Neuroscience : the brain’s dark energy . Science . 314 : 1249 - - 1250 . 2794 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Raichle ME , McLeod AM , Snyder AZ , Powers WJ , Gusnard DA , Shulman GL . 2001 . A default mode of brain function . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 98 : 676 - - 682 . Rapcsak SZ , Rubens AB . 1994 . Localization of lesions in transcortical aphasia . In : Kertesz A , editor . Localization and neuroimaging in neuropsychology . San Diego : Academic Press . p . 297 - - 329 . Reinholz J , Pollmann S . 2005 . Differential activation of object - selective visual areas by passive viewing of pictures and words . Cogn Brain Res . 24 : 702 - - 714 . Rissman J , Eliassen JC , Blumstein SE . 2003 . An event - related fMRI investigation of implicit semantic priming . J Cogn Neurosci . 15 : 1160 - - 1175 . Rizzolatti G , Craighero L . 2004 . The mirror - - neuron system . Annu Rev Neurosci . 27 : 169 - - 192 . Robinson G , Blair J , Cipolotti L . 1998 . Dynamic aphasia : an inability to select between competing verbal responses ? Brain . 121 : 77 - - 89 . Roeltgen DP , Sevush S , Heilman KM . 1983 . Phonological agraphia : writing by the lexical - semantic route . Neurology . 33 : 755 - - 765 . Roskies AL , Fiez JA , Balota DA , Raichle ME , Petersen SE . 2001 . Task - dependent modulation of regions in the left inferior frontal cortex during semantic processing . J Cogn Neurosci . 13 : 829 - - 843 . Rossell SL , Bullmore ET , Williams SCR , David AS . 2001 . Brain activation during automatic and controlled processing of semantic relations : a priming experiment using lexical - decision . Neuropsychologia . 39 : 1167 - - 1176 . Rossell SL , Price CJ , Nobre AC . 2003 . The anatomy and time course of semantic priming investigated by fMRI and ERPs . Neuropsychologia . 41 : 550 - - 564 . Rothi LJG , Ochipa C , Heilman KM . 1991 . A cogn neuropsycholological model of limb praxis . Cogn Neuropsychol . 8 : 443 - - 458 . Rudge P , Warrington EK . 1991 . Selective impairment of memory and visual perception in splenial tumours . Brain . 114 : 349 - - 360 . Rumiati RI , Humphreys GW . 1998 . Recognition by action : dissociating visual and semantic routes to action in normal observers . J Exp Psychol Human Percep Perform . 24 : 631 - - 647 . Ruschmeyer S - A , Brass M , Friederici AD . 2007 . Comprehending prehending : neural correlates of processing verbs with motor stems . J Cogn Neurosci . 19 : 855 - - 865 . Rushworth MFS , Nixon PD , Passingham RE . 1997 . Parietal cortex and movement I . Movement selection and reaching . Exp Brain Res . 117 : 292 - - 310 . Sabsevitz DS , Medler DA , Seidenberg M , Binder JR . 2005 . Modulation of the semantic system by word imageability . Neuroimage . 27 : 188 - - 200 . Saleem KS , Kondo H , Price JL . 2007 . Complementary circuits connect - ing the orbital and medial prefrontal networks with the temporal , insular , and opercular cortex in the macaque monkey . J Comp Neurol . 506 : 659 - - 693 . Salinas E , Sejnowski TJ . 2001 . Correlated neuronal activity and the ﬂow of neural information . Nature Rev Neurosci . 2 : 539 - - 550 . Sarkissov SA , Filimonoff IN , Kononowa EP , Preobraschenskaja IS , Kukuew LA . 1955 . Atlas of the cytoarchitectonics of the human cerebral cortex . Moscow : Medgiz . Schroeder CE , Foxe JJ . 2004 . Multisensory convergence in early cortical processing . In : Calvert G , Spence C , Stein BE , editors . The handbook of multisensory processes . Cambridge ( MA ) : MIT Press . p . 295 - - 309 . Scott SK , Johnsrude IS . 2003 . The neuroanatomical and functional organization of speech perception . Trends Neurosci . 26 : 100 - - 107 . Selemon LD , Goldman - Rakic PS . 1988 . Common cortical and subcortical targets of the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices in the rhesus monkey : evidence for a distributed neural network subserving spatially guided behavior . J Neurosci . 8 : 4049 - - 4068 . Seltzer B , Pandya DN . 1976 . Some cortical projections to the para - hippocampal gyrus in the rhesus monkey . Exp Neurol . 50 : 146 - - 160 . Seltzer B , Pandya DN . 1978 . Afferent cortical connections and architectonics of the superior temporal sulcus and surrounding cortex in the rhesus monkey . Brain Res . 149 : 1 - - 24 . Seltzer B , Pandya DN . 1984 . Further observations on parieto - temporal connections in the rhesus monkey . Exp Brain Res . 55 : 301 - - 312 . Seltzer B , Pandya DN . 1989 . Frontal lobe connections of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey . J Comp Neurol . 281 : 97 - - 113 . Seltzer B , Pandya DN . 1994 . Parietal , temporal , and occipital projections to cortex of the superior temporal sulcus in the rhesus monkey : a retrograde tracer study . J Comp Neurol . 343 : 445 - - 463 . Sethi NK , Burke L , Torgovnick J , Arsura E . 2007 . Transcortical sensory aphasia as a result of left frontal cortical - - subcortical infarction . A case report . Eur Neurol . 57 : 52 - - 53 . Shulman GL , Fiez JA , Corbetta M , Buckner RL , Meizin FM , Raichle ME , Petersen SE . 1997 . Common blood ﬂow changes across visual tasks : II . Decreases in cerebral cortex . J Cogn Neurosci . 9 : 648 - - 663 . Simmons A , Miller D , Feinstein JS , Goldberg TE , Paulus MP . 2005 . Left inferior prefrontal cortex activation during a semantic decision - making task predicts the degree of semantic organization . Neuroimage . 28 : 30 - - 38 . Simmons WK , Ramjee V , Beauchamp MS , McRae K , Martin A , Barsalou LW . 2007 . A common neural substrate for perceiving and knowing about color . Neuropsychologia . 45 : 2802 - - 2810 . Simpson JR , Snyder AZ , Gusnard DA , Raichle ME . 2001 . Emotion - induced changes in human medial prefrontal cortex : I . During cognitive task performance . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 98 : 683 - - 687 . Singer JL . 1993 . Experimental studies of ongoing conscious experience . Experimental and theoretical studies of consciousness . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons . p . 100 - - 122 . Small DM , Gitelman DR , Gregory MD , Nobre AC , Parrish TB , Mesulam MM . 2003 . The posterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex mediate the anticipatory allocation of spatial attention . Neuroimage . 18 : 633 - - 641 . Smith EE , Jonides J , Marshuetz C , Koeppe RA . 1998 . Components of verbal working memory : evidence from neuroimaging . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 95 : 876 - - 882 . Snowden JS , Goulding PJ , Neary D . 1989 . Semantic dementia : a form of circumscribed temporal atrophy . Behav Neurol . 2 : 167 - - 182 . Spitsyna G , Warren JE , Scott SK , Turkheimer FE , Wise RJS . 2006 . Converging language streams in the human temporal lobe . J Neurosci . 26 : 7328 - - 7336 . Stark CE , Squire LR . 2001 . When zero is not zero : the problem of ambiguous baseline conditions in fMRI . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 98 : 12760 - - 12766 . Suzuki WA , Amaral DG . 1994 . Perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices of the macaque monkey : cortical afferents . J Comp Neurol . 350 : 497 - - 533 . Svoboda E , McKinnon MC , Levine B . 2006 . Thefunctionalneuroanatomy of autobiographical memory : a meta - analysis . Neuropsychologia . 44 : 2189 - - 2208 . Takayama Y , Kamo H , Ohkawa Y , Akiguchi I , Kimura J . 1991 . A case of retrosplenial amnesia . Brain . 110 : 331 - - 333 . Talairach J , Tournoux P . 1988 . Co - planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain . New York : Thieme Medical Publishers . Tan LH , Laird AR , Li K , Fox PT . 2005 . Neuroanatomical correlates of phonological processing of Chinese characters and alphabetic words : a meta - analysis . Hum Brain Mapp . 25 : 83 - - 91 . Tanaka K , Saito H , Fukada Y , Moriya M . 1991 . Coding visual images of objects in the inferotemporal cortex of the macaque monkey . J Neurophysiol . 66 : 170 - - 189 . Teasdale JD , Dritschel BH , Taylor MJ , Proctor L , Lloyd CA , Nimmo - Smith I , Baddeley AD . 1995 . Stimulus - independent thought depends on central executive resources . Mem Cognit . 23 : 551 - - 559 . Teasdale JD , Proctor L , Lloyd CA , Baddeley AD . 1993 . Working memory and stimulus - independent thought : effects of memory load and presentation rate . Eur J Cogn Psychol . 5 : 417 - - 433 . Tettamanti M , Buccino G , Saccuman MC , Gallese V , Danna M , Scifo P , Fazio F , Rizzolatti G , Cappa SF , Perani D . 2005 . Listening to action - related sentences activates fronto - parietal motor circuits . J Cogn Neurosci . 17 : 273 - - 281 . Thioux M , Pesenti M , Costes N , De Volder A , Seron X . 2005 . Task - independent semantic activation for numbers and animals . Cogn Brain Res . 24 : 284 - - 290 . Thompson - Schill SL . 2003 . Neuroimaging studies of semantic memory : inferring ‘‘how’’ from ‘‘where’’ . Neuropsychologia . 41 : 280 - - 292 . Thompson - Schill SL , Aguirre GK , D’Esposito M , Farah MJ . 1999 . A neural basis for category and modality speciﬁcity of semantic knowledge . Neuropsychologia . 37 : 671 - - 676 . Cerebral Cortex December 2009 , V 19 N 12 2795 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019 Thompson - Schill SL , D’Esposito M , Aguirre GK , Farah MJ . 1997 . Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in retrieval of semantic knowledge : a reevaluation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 94 : 14792 - - 14797 . Thompson - Schill SL , D’Esposito M , Kan IP . 1999 . Effects of repetition and competition on activity in left prefrontal cortex during word generation . Neuron . 23 : 513 - - 522 . Tomasino B , Werner C , Weiss PH , Fink GR . 2007 . Stimulus properties matter more than perspective : an fMRI study of mental imagery and silent reading of action phrases . Neuroimage . 36 : T128 - - T141 . Tootell RB , Reppas JB , Kwong KK , Malach R , Born RT , Brady TJ , Rosen BR , Belliveau JW . 1995 . Functional analysis of human MT and related visual cortical areas using magnetic resonance imaging . J Neurosci . 15 : 3215 - - 3230 . Tranel D , Damasio H , Damasio AR . 1997 . A neural basis for the retrieval of conceptual knowledge . Neuropsychologia . 35 : 1319 - - 1327 . Tranel D , Kemmerer D , Adolphs R , Damasio H , Damasio AR . 2003 . Neural correlates of conceptual knowledge for actions . Cogn Neuropsychol . 20 : 409 - - 432 . Tregallas JR , Davalos DB , Rojas DC . 2006 . Effect of task difﬁculty on the functional anatomy of temporal processing . Neuroimage . 32 : 307 - - 315 . Tulving E . 1972 . Episodic and semantic memory . In : Tulving E , Donaldson W , editors . Organizationofmemory . NewYork : Academic Press . p . 381 - - 403 . Turkeltaub PE , Eden GF , Jones KM , Zefﬁro TA . 2002 . Meta - analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of single - word reading : method and validation . Neuroimage . 16 : 765 - - 780 . Tyler LK , Bright P , Dick P , Tavares P , Pilgrim LK , Fletcher P . 2003 . Do semantic categories activate distinct cortical regions ? Evidence for a distributed neural semantic system . Cogn Neuropsychol . 20 : 541 - - 559 . Tyler LK , Russell R , Fadili J , Moss HE . 2001 . The neural representation of nouns and verbs : PET studies . Brain . 124 : 1619 - - 1634 . Tyler LK , Stamatakis EA , Dick E , Bright P , Fletcher P , Moss HE . 2003 . Objects and their actions : evidence for a neurally distributed semantic system . Neuroimage . 18 : 542 - - 557 . Ullsperger M , von Cramon DY . 2001 . Subprocesses of performance monitoring : a dissociation of error processing and response competition revealed by event - related fMRI and ERPs . Neuroimage . 14 : 1387 - - 1401 . Valenstein E , Bowers D , Verfaellie M , Heilman KM , Day A , Watson RT . 1987 . Retrosplenial amnesia . Brain . 110 : 1631 - - 1646 . Van Hoesen GW . 1982 . The parahippocampal gyrus : new observations regarding its cortical connections in the monkey . Trends Neurosci . 5 : 345 - - 350 . van Veen V , Carter CS . 2002 . The anterior cingulate as a conﬂict monitor : fMRI and ERP studies . Physiol Behav . 77 : 477 - - 482 . Vandenbulcke M , Peeters R , Fannes K , Vandenberghe R . 2006 . Knowledge of visual attributes in the right hemisphere . Nature Neurosci . 9 : 964 - - 970 . Varney NR , Damasio H . 1987 . Locus of lesion in impaired pantomime recognition . Cortex . 23 : 699 - - 703 . Vigneau M , Beaucousin V , Herve PY , Duffau H , Crivello F , Houde O , Mazoyer B , Tzourio - Mazoyer N . 2006 . Meta - analyzing left hemi - sphere language areas : phonology , semantics , and sentence pro - cessing . Neuroimage . 30 : 1414 - - 1432 . Vincent JL , Snyder AZ , Fox MD , Shannon BJ , Andrews JR , Raichle ME , Buckner RL . 2006 . Coherent spontaneous activity identiﬁes a hippocampal - - parietal memory network . J Neurophysiol . 96 : 3517 - - 3531 . Vogt BA , Pandya DN . 1987 . Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey : II . Cortical afferents . J Comp Neurol . 262 : 271 - - 289 . Vogt BA , Vogt L , Laureys S . 2006 . Cytology and functionally correlated circuitsofhumanposteriorcingulateareas . Neuroimage . 29 : 452 - - 466 . Vogt C , Vogt O . 1919 . Allgemeinere Erg ebrisse unserer Hirnforschung . J Psychol Neurol . 25 : 279 - - 461 . von Bonin G . 1962 . The evolution of the human brain . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . von Bonin G , Bailey P . 1947 . The neocortex of macaca mulatta . Urbana ( IL ) : University of Illinois Press . von Economo K , Koskinas G . 1925 . Die Cytoarchitektonik der Hirnrinde des erwachsenen Menschen . Vienna : Springer . von Kriegstein K , Eger E , Kleinschmidt A , Giraud AL . 2003 . Modulation of neural responses to speech by directing attention to voices or verbal content . Cogn Brain Res . 17 : 48 - - 55 . Wagner AD , Koutstaal W , Maril A , Schacter DL , Buckner RL . 2000 . Task - speciﬁc repetition priming in left inferior prefrontal cortex . Cereb Cortex . 10 : 1176 - - 1184 . Wagner AD , Pare - Blagoev EJ , Clark J , Poldrack RA . 2001 . Recovering meaning : left prefrontal cortex guides semantic retrieval . Neuron . 31 : 329 - - 338 . Wallentin M , Lund TE , Ostergaard S , Ostergaard L , Roepstorff A . 2005 . Motion verb sentences activate left posterior middle temporal cortex despite static context . Neuroreport . 16 : 649 - - 652 . Wallentin M , Østergaarda S , Lund TE , Østergaard L , Roepstorff A . 2005 . Concrete spatial language : see what I mean ? Brain Lang . 92 : 221 - - 233 . Warrington EK . 1985 . Agnosia : the impairment of object recognition . In : Frederiks JAM , editor . Handbook of clinical neurology . New York : Elsevier . p . 333 - - 349 . Warrington EK . 1981 . Concrete word dyslexia . Br J Psychol . 72 : 175 - - 196 . Warrington EK . 1975 . The selective impairment of semantic memory . Q J Exp Psychol . 27 : 635 - - 657 . Warrington EK , McCarthy RA . 1987 . Categories of knowledge . Further fractionations and an attempted integration . Brain . 110 : 1273 - - 1296 . Warrington EK , McCarthy RA . 1994 . Multiple meaning systems in the brain : a case for visual semantics . Neuropsychologia . 32 : 1465 - - 1473 . Warrington EK , Shallice T . 1984 . Category speciﬁc semantic impair - ments . Brain . 107 : 829 - - 854 . Wernicke C . 1874 . Der aphasische Symptomenkomplex . Breslau : Cohn & Weigert . Whatmough C , Chertkow H , Murtha S , Hanratty K . 2002 . Dissociable brain regions process object meaning and object structure during picture naming . Neuropsychologia . 40 : 174 - - 186 . Whatmough C , Verret L , Fung D , Chertkow H . 2004 . Common and contrasting areas of activation for abstract and concrete concepts : an H2 15O PET study . J Cogn Neurosci . 16 : 1211 - - 1226 . Wheatley T , Weisberg J , Beauchamp MS , Martin A . 2005 . Automatic priming of semantically related words reduces activity in the fusiform gyrus . J Cogn Neurosci . 17 : 1871 - - 1885 . Wible CG , Han SD , Spencer MH , Kubicki M , Niznikiewicz MH , Jolesz FA , McCarley RW , Nestor P . 2006 . Connectivity among semantic associates : anfMRIstudyofsemanticpriming . BrainLang . 97 : 294 - - 305 . Wise RJS , Howard D , Mummery CJ , Fletcher P , Leff A , Bu¨chel C , Scott SK . 2000 . Noun imageability and the temporal lobes . Neuropsychologia . 38 : 985 - - 994 . Wise RSJ , Scott SK , Blank SC , Mummery CJ , Murphy K , Warburton EA . 2001 . Separate neural subsystems within ‘Wernicke’s area’ . Brain . 124 : 83 - - 95 . Xiao Z , Zhang JX , Wang X , Wu R , Hu X , Weng X , Tan LH . 2005 . Differential activity in left inferior frontal gyrus for pseudowords and real words : an event - related fMRI study on auditory lexical decision . Hum Brain Mapp . 25 : 212 - - 221 . Xu J , Kemeny S , Park G , Frattali C , Braun A . 2005 . Language in context : emergent features of word , sentence , and narrative comprehension . Neuroimage . 25 : 1002 - - 1015 . Yasuda K , Wattanabe O , Ono Y . 1997 . Dissociation between semantic and autobiographical memory : a case report . Cortex . 33 : 623 - - 638 . Yasuno F , Nishikawa T , Tokunaga H , Yoshiyama K , Nakagawa Y , Ikejiri Y , Oku N , Hashikawa K , Tanabe H , Shinozaki K , et al . 2000 . The neural basis of perceptual and conceptual word priming - - a PET study . Cortex . 36 : 59 - - 69 . Zatorre RJ , Evans AC , Meyer E , Gjedde A . 1992 . Lateralization of phonetic and pitch discrimination in speech processing . Science . 256 : 846 - - 849 . 2796 Semantic Neuroimaging Meta - Analysis d Binder et al . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / c e r c o r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 19 / 12 / 2767 / 376348 b y gue s t on 09 J anua r y 2019