Design Challenges in Supporting Distributed Knowledge : An Examination of Organizing Elections Nina Boulus - Rødje IT University of Copenhagen Denmark nbou @ itu . dk Pernille Bjørn IT University of Copenhagen Denmark pbra @ itu . dk ABSTRACT This paper identifies the design challenges for creating collaborative technologies supporting the practices of organizing elections . We ethnographically investigate the distributed nature of knowledge as enacted between heterogeneous groups over the course of three elections in Denmark . We 1 ) identify fundamental characteristics of elections , 2 ) provide a comprehensive account of the distributed nature of knowledge in organizing and executing elections , and 3 ) point to new challenging areas for human - computer interaction ( HCI ) design supporting distributed collaborative knowledge practices . We found that organizational pattern of elections complicates the embodiment of nomadic knowledge , which is crucial for managing the effective organization of an election . Thus , one of the relevant design challenges is finding out how to support the timely distribution of large amounts of information , while still ensuring it is appropriately divided and delivered to various groups participating in planning and executing elections . Author Keywords Organizing election ; Nomadic knowledge ; Voting ; Denmark ; Knowledge practice ; Embodiment ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces [ Computer - supported cooperative work ] INTRODUCTION The majority of CHI research investigating election focuses on comparing paper - based voting to different types of electronic voting machines , such as direct - recording electronic voting machines , or Internet voting systems [ 4 , 8 , 9 , 12 ] . Results include new technologies for casting and counting ballots , and concerns of usability [ 5 ] , mostly within the USA with only few exceptions [ 8 ] . Research includes the role of social media in elections , campaigning , and voters decisions [ 6 , 15 ] . However , there are , yet , no studies in CHI of the collaborative work involved in planning and executing elections ; behind the scenes work of election officials . The few studies of election officials [ 4 ] examine the influence of officials on voters . We provide an ethnographic account of the knowledge practices of election officials when planning and executing elections , with the aim of informing design of collaborative systems supporting temporary electoral management bodies . It is crucial to investigate the distributed nature of the knowledge sharing practices involved in organizing an election , as well as the practices by which knowledge is created , produced , and transformed . An election is a transient event and up to two years may pass between each one . A key challenge is the creation of relationships that support knowledge practices across diverse communities from various organizations over long and interrupted periods of time . Knowledge practices have been fundamental for the CHI community [ 3 , 20 ] , and previous research has investigated routine work and the practice of experts in different domains , such as healthcare and aircraft repair [ 18 , 20 , 24 ] . Organizing elections involves practices that require a high degree of knowledge . Nonetheless , temporary electoral management bodies depend heavily on novices with only few experts , whose expertise may not remain consistent over time . This makes the knowledge sharing practices in elections uniquely interesting . In this paper , we focus on knowledge practices involved in organizing elections . We examine the enactment of knowledge in planning and executing elections , and the means by which knowledge is shared and distributed during elections . Thus , our interest lies in how the distributed nature of knowledge matters for the collaborations involved in election work – spanning organizational , geographic , and cultural boundaries , and temporal patterns . Our research question is : What are the ways in which the distributed knowledge used in organizing elections is enacted , and which channels are used for sharing knowledge ? Investigating this research question , we present empirical data from a longitudinal ethnographic study of the organization and execution of elections in Denmark . The first author conducted extensive fieldwork during three elections : a 2011 parliamentary election , a 2013 municipal and regional election , and 2014 European Union election Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 – 23 , 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea . Copyright 2015 © ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702458 Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3137 and referendum . Our focus has been on understanding the users : the election officials ( i . e . , municipal workers and volunteers ) collaborating to make elections happen . We unpack the user practices by analyzing each election , focusing on various knowledge sharing practices involved , and artefacts used for organizing and executing elections . We conduct a cross - case analysis [ 7 ] by comparing and contrasting knowledge practices involved in all three elections , and unpacking how the use of technologies changed over time . A fundamental characteristic of elections is their transient nature . Organizing elections never truly become routine work since more than two years can pass between each election . This makes it challenging to recollect knowledge and experiences from past elections . Also various types of elections exist , each based upon different legal frameworks providing different complexities . Our data show that a key challenge in organizing elections is managing the efficient and timely distribution of a large amount of information , ensuring the appropriate knowledge is delegated to a large number of people in a relatively short time . The intermittent pattern of elections requires intensive periods of collaboration followed by long breaks . We argue that this organizational pattern complicates the practice of embodiment of nomadic knowledge , which is crucial for managing an effective organization of an election . The paper is structured as follows : First , we present relevant literature on knowledge practices in collaborative settings . Second , we present our empirical case , followed by an analysis of our results and an identification of the different knowledge sharing practices in each election . Finally , we discuss the knowledge practices in elections and the relevant design challenges . THE DISTRIBUTED NATURE OF KNOWLEDGE Within CHI , election research focus on political campaigning and predicting election outcomes through social media [ 11 ] , informing voters decisions [ 22 ] , and following political agendas [ 13 ] . Our study shift the focus from what is happening front - stage when there are elections , to the collaborative work that takes place behind the scenes before , during and after elections . Thus , we are not focusing on activities related to participating in elections ( e . g . , following political debates , casting a ballot , etc . ) , but on planning and executing elections ( e . g . , ordering ballots , placing polling booth ) . We , therefore , shift the user - focus from voters and politicians , to municipal workers who hold legal responsibility and accountability for elections and have to collect and communicate information to volunteers and political representatives participating in executing elections . Our aim is to provide an ethnographic account of knowledge practices informing the design of collaborative technologies supporting the work of temporary electoral management body . The distributed nature of knowledge is fundamental for CHI and CSCW research ; both of which aim to design systems that can support collaborative practices . When mutually interdependent participants are engaged in collaborative work , the knowledge and expertise required becomes part of a shared activity [ 3 ] . The distributed nature of cooperative work has been unpacked in various domains , such as navigation [ 16 ] . Research on knowledge in CHI typically follows a technological orientation and has a micro - empirical focus on knowledge practices . The focus is to unpack the complex nature of knowledge practices , while keeping in mind that knowledge and work are closely intertwined [ 3 ] . We emphasize that “knowledge is situated in people and in locations , and that the social is an essential part of using any knowledge” [ 3 , p . 532 ] . While computational repositories play an important role , the use of technologies for knowledge sharing is not merely about externalization of knowledge in the form of information technology artefacts . Instead , the capability to get the work done and solve problems is primarily based on discussions among knowledgeable actors [ 1 , 20 ] . To investigate the enactment of knowledge practices , we use the notion of nomadic knowledge as an analytical lens to better understand the dispersed interdisciplinary activities of the heterogeneous groups organizing elections . Nomadic knowledge refers to “knowledge that mainly travels as it is used frequently on different occasions , but rarely used by the same set of actors again” [ 23 , p . 537 ] . This notion drives our investigation of knowledge as community - bound , without being dependent upon specific individuals . Consequently , investigating knowledge includes examining how knowledge practices are integral part of organizing elections . The notion of nomadic knowledge directs our research towards investigating the complexity in “mastering” the organization of elections , since this requires the full attention of many actors , who are involved in time - critical decisions . The nature of “mastering” such a task can result in later complication in how the knowledge is collected for later use , in new situations , and by a different set of actors [ 23 ] . The notion ‘nomadic knowledge’ was originally introduced in the context of studying knowledge practices related to organizing a social forum of political activist organizations [ 16 ] . One of the main differences between our work and previous work is the legal framework in which the election officials operate within . These special conditions provide a high level of responsibility to which all election officials must adhere . The legal framework includes formal documents , protocols , artefacts , procedures , and subjective material , all of which are necessary for organizing , executing and documenting the process . Thus , the accountability of the election work introduces new challenges ( e . g . documenting decisions ) , but also new opportunities ( e . g . , access to additional materials from past events for sensemaking processes ) . When identifying and analyzing the specific characteristics of knowledge practices in organizing elections , a key Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3138 challenge concerns the reliability and authoritativeness of the information . Since it is rarely exactly the same group of people who organize and execute each election , re - contextualization of information becomes immensely critical [ 14 ] . It is , therefore , important to investigate the critical activities involved in transferring responsibility and information from previous elections . This includes studying how participants assess the information , and how they situate it within its original institutional context . It requires paying attention to how traces are de - contextualized and re - contextualized across elections . Thus , understanding the reuse of information becomes critical [ 2 ] . Furthermore , in order to find the appropriate context for reuse of information , the embeddedness of previously held knowledge must be considered . It is critical to consider how connections across the distributed nomadic knowledge network are re - configured to become relevant and actionable within the context of the current election . Empirical Case Despite the high level of expertise necessary for organizing an election , Denmark does not have a permanent , central , and independent electoral management body . Instead , there is a decentralized electoral structure operating under the supervision of the Ministry of Economic Affairs . For each election , the local authorities have an electoral secretariat responsible for delegating and coordinating electoral activities , such as determining who is eligible to vote , coordinating advance voting , counting votes , procuring electoral material , aggregating voting results , and recruiting participants . These tasks are delegated to several administrative units who regularly report to the electoral secretariat . This delegation of electoral responsibilities to local authorities causes various organizational challenges , making it difficult to maintain electoral consistency . Data Sources The first author did a four - year ethnography on elections in Denmark . Data sources comprise extensive fieldwork of three elections in Copenhagen Municipality ( the largest municipality in Denmark ) , focusing on the tasks of municipal workers , volunteers , and representatives from political parties . The elections were a 2011 parliamentary election ; a 2013 municipal and regional election ; and a combined 2014 referendum and European Union election . A variety of data collection methods were used , including observations , shadowing , interviews , participation in formal and informal meetings with various groups , attendance in two election courses ( 14 hours total ) , and gathering documents from the ministry , municipality , and the media . In total , the first author spent 220 hours of observation sessions before , during , and after Election Day throughout three different elections . In addition , seven formal interviews ( one to two hours each ) were conducted with key municipal employees , and 15 informal conversations ( lasting 15 – 35 minutes each ) were conducted with municipal employees , volunteers , and representatives from political parties . All interviews and informal conversations were either fully or partially transcribed . Data Analysis The data analysis focused on how the distributed knowledge required in executing elections was organized by the diverse set of participants . Particularly , we identified situations where complexities in collecting and using information were encountered . We first synthesized the data through thick descriptions [ 21 ] for each election , focusing on the various knowledge sharing practices of those involved in organizing and executing elections . Then , we conducted a cross - case analysis [ 7 ] , comparing and contrasting knowledge practices across the three elections . We found gradual changes in the knowledge practices across the elections . These changes resulted in distributing the knowledge from one person to several people , enabling information to be accessible from different locations . Finally , we applied the notion of nomadic knowledge [ 23 ] in order to identify the unique characteristics of the knowledge practices enacted in elections . RESULTS The process of organizing elections is complex caused by external pressure to reduce cost , adopt new technologies , and produce election results rapidly . Finding effective ways to better plan , monitor , and control elections is very topical . Copenhagen Municipality has experimented over the years with different strategies for gathering information about election management and execution . Below we analyze the different strategies , and identify the practices , technologies , and artefacts deployed . But first , we provide a description of the fundamental characteristics of organizing elections . The Key Characteristics of Organizing Elections Elections are fundamental to democracy and have specific characteristics . These characteristics are related to an election as an event , an election as an organizational entity , and an election as a knowledge practices . An Event of Uniqueness , Urgency & Celebration While similarities exist between elections , each election is a novel event with unique challenges . These challenges can take different forms . In the 2013 municipal and regional election , one of the challenges was related to the size of the ballots , which were very long as there were many different parties and candidates running . Due to the long list of parties and candidates on the ballots , voters tended to spend more time searching for their candidate on the list , and election officials spent relatively longer time sorting and counting these long and heavy ballots . Thus , the size and weight of the ballots increased the time and effort involved in casting , sorting , and counting the ballots . The material properties of the ballots also increased the effort required for packing and transporting them . In the 2013 election it was not the ballot size , which was a challenge , instead several computers crashed in one of the polling stations , and in the 2011 parliamentary election , many ballot boxes stored in a school were damaged in a flood . Therefore , Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3139 election officials spend a considerable amount of time trying to manage these unexpected hurdles . Despite unexpected challenges , there is always a high level of urgency and pressure to organize and execute quickly . A key person in organizing elections described it as “ having one shot left in the gun , so you better get it right . [ … ] There is no time…for mistakes and the deadlines are very tight . You know how important [ the election event ] is , and we must make it work . You cannot miss or fail in an election . ” There is no space for error during the ramp up to an election . This is why backup procedures and control mechanisms are crucial for the election apparatus , in an attempt to avoid and minimize the likelihood for mistakes . Furthermore , ideally , nothing should be postponed or cancelled . Over the course of organizing elections , the urgency in solving problems quickly gradually increases . The pressure reaches its peak a day after Election Day , when final results are announced . Election officials often describe Election Day as a solemn day when democracy is celebrated . Municipal employees display high dedication to the task of organizing elections , in spite of the many extra hours they spend working during these periods . Some municipal workers perceive working on elections as a prestigious obligation . There are even small competitions between some of the polling stations , such as competing for the fastest results of the rough count . The high level of time pressure in election and the demanding extra hours of intensive work create immense personal challenges . Two municipal workers said that they miss having a proper dinner at home , and seeing their families and kids . One of the municipal employees explained that some people decline repeated participation because of the demanding nature of the work . A key person in organizing elections described the election atmosphere in the following way : “ [ An election resembles situations with ] outside pressure , such as the downsizing of an organization , creating enormous internal pressure , which then causes [ employees ] to stand closely together and support one another . ” Organizing an election is compared to a crisis type event at work , during which co - workers must put other duties aside to support each other during tense and critical periods . Organizational entity : Sub - groups of distributed people Elections in Denmark depend increasingly on volunteers who collaborate with representatives from political parties to complete the various tasks for Election Day . The municipality is responsible for providing information to these heterogeneous groups from different organizational backgrounds , consisting mostly of non - experts . The collaboration is coordinated through the division of tasks into various sub - processes for particular sub - groups . This strategy and structure requires a careful orchestration of all individual processes and their relations . The coordination strategy of task division and standardization allows for the management of a large number of sub - processes by a large number of sub - groups . To accommodate this strategy , a hierarchical organizational structure is created , where lines of command are explicitly articulated in order to be able to trace back to all the small details involved in each process . The ability to trace all sub - processes is crucial in elections since this visibility ensures the trustworthiness of the results . Knowledge and responsibilities are distributed across the organizational structure , making it difficult to “hack” elections . Few individuals have a completed overview of the entire chain of processes . Most people involved only know few small and highly specified sub - processes . A key election official described organizing and executing elections as : “ a complicated coordinative process with a large number of small gears and cogwheels , which need to fall in place and where everyone is responsible for solving their own small task ” . Coordinating all the cogwheels involves managing inter - organizational coordination across several institutions and organizations : schools , police departments , taxi companies , postal services , Statistics Denmark , and others . All of these organizations play important roles in making an election a reality . Each of the organizations mentioned are not part of one single entity and the impact of their work is not confined to one location . For example , the postal service in Denmark is responsible for ensuring that all advanced votes sent via letters are distributed to the appropriate municipality . Similarly , a complex chain of coordination mechanisms is required to ensure that all polling stations ( e . g . , libraries and schools ) are set up for Election Day . This organizational structure means that all participants involved cannot gather in one room to learn their assigned tasks . Also , many election officials – particularly volunteers – do not participate in recurrent elections . Due to the temporal pattern of elections and the large time lapse between elections , it is impossible for the new volunteer to “observe” and gain skills from experienced volunteers . Therefore organizing elections is characterized by discontinuous collaboration between distributed yet interdependent actors engaged in articulation work directed at connecting the temporal , geographical and organizational discontinuities . This setup complicates the development of routine practices . Once an activity develops into a routine , the task is completed and put aside until next election . During the election period municipal employees normally continue to attend to their other responsibilities . Thus , tasks related to organizing an election are added to the list of their daily tasks . Such structure causes “ordinary tasks” to pile up . Therefore , as soon as an election is completed , most employees discontinue with tasks related to the election in order to catch up with their routine duties . This structure leaves no space for reflecting on the election experience , nor for offering suggestions for improvements in the future . Furthermore , the period of time between elections makes it difficult for participants to remember in detail their past experiences . Many municipal workers say Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3140 they feel the need to start from scratch each time . The temporal staffing complicates the execution of election . Still , previous experience is extremely valuable in organizing elections , thus they try to recruit municipal workers with previous election experience . Recruiting experienced people allows for the use of personal networks , which is critical because certain tasks depend on other people from other organizations . Networking also eases communication across organizations . For instance , the coordination of various election tasks is much easier if an election secretary ( responsible for administrating an election in a polling station ) is already familiar with the local school and election officials . Distributed Knowledge in Elections Capturing all the information required in one place in impossible . It is also difficult to map all the sub - groups and sub - processes taking place during elections . The knowledge required to conduct elections is complex , scattered , and distributed . We learned that there are only two people in the municipality who know the entire organizational apparatus that elections require . Thus , identifying best practices for knowledge sharing is an immense challenge . The challenge is that a large amount of information needs to be communicated within a short time frame to different groups of people , in a range of organizations , and with diverse backgrounds . Knowledge sharing for elections requires distributing manageable and digestible information to volunteers , since many are also working their regular day jobs and do not have the time or resources to process large volumes of information . Furthermore , information must be organized in a comprehensive way so that first - time participants can understand their instructions . Finally , participants are under time pressure and must quickly learn their tasks . Therefore , information regarding sub - tasks is typically divided into smaller , dedicated entities , ensuring that each group is not required to know all details about elections but only what is relevant to their tasks . Expertise becomes distributed according to specific delegated tasks . The process of organizing elections depends on diverse sets of experts ( e . g . , legal experts , elections experts , and technology experts ) , who are working from within various government institutions and locations . Knowledge of organizing elections is dispersed and distributed . Therefore , translating and tracing information , while making it useful across expertise and practices , is an important yet complex task when organizing elections . Texts describing election processes tend to be encumbered by legal language , due to the various laws and regulations that apply . This jargon needs to be translated into everyday terminology . In the process of transcending across divides in the election hierarchy , information also acquires different states of urgency . Critical information at one point in time can be considered completely irrelevant later . For example , on the morning of Election Day , an election committee’s focus is on providing information to election officials on how to instruct and assist voters on processes such as receiving a ballot , scanning election cards , managing or responding to journalists , and using the digital voter machines . Such information , provided by the election secretary on the morning of Election Day , is completely irrelevant by the end of the day . Then , the focus shifts to methods of sorting and counting in - person votes and advance votes , as well as handling invalid votes . Organizing elections can be generally divided into three main phases : pre - election , Election Day , and post - election . Each phase has particular aims and processes . Key tasks in the pre - election phase include ordering election material ( e . g . , ballots and election books ) , organizing advance voting ( e . g . , organizing home visits for those unable to attend elections , providing technical training , organizing the process of checking whether advance votes are valid , and updating election books to signal who voted in advance and prevent from double voting ) . Key tasks relevant to Election Day include identifying polling stations , recruiting volunteers and representatives from political parties , assigning election officials to polling stations ( ensuring a mixture of representatives from various political parties and volunteers ) , setting up polling stations ( e . g . , the technical infrastructure and the ballot booths ) , arranging meals for all polling stations , and more . Finally , tasks relevant to the post - election phase include processes related to orchestrating the fine count , which takes place a day after Election Day . In Denmark , ballots are first counted the evening of Election Day by volunteers and representatives from political parties . This is called a “rough count , ” meaning counting votes by parties . The fine count is conducted the following day by municipal workers , who recount the ballots for parties and for candidates . Therefore , all election material need to be packed and transported into one central place where it is unpacked to be ready for the fine count . Municipal employees have to be assigned to the fine count , and meal , equipment , and supply arrangements must be made . 2011 Parliamentary Election As a new initiative in 2011 , the Center for Public Expertise Development ( COK ) organized a course led by two experienced employees from another municipality to prepare Danish municipal employees for the parliamentary election . The intention was to ensure that all employees were familiar with recent laws and regulations . The course also encouraged employees at the different municipalities to exchange knowledge and discuss their own experiences . This initiative was deemed highly useful by the employees , because the course exposed them to various local inspiring practices and traditions across the different municipalities . Parliamentary elections are the most complicated elections in terms of organizational logistics . While many Western countries are suffering from declining participation in parliamentary elections , Denmark continues to maintain stable and relatively high election participation rates . Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3141 Furthermore , while in other countries , parliamentary elections take place within a pre - defined time frame ( e . g . , every four years ) , this is not the case in Denmark . Here the prime minister can announce a parliamentary election at any point in time , up to a maximum of four years from the previous election . This practice makes it difficult to plan ahead . In 2011 , the prime minister’s announcement of a parliamentarian election allowed the municipalities only three weeks to prepare . Thus , the election allotted an exceptionally short amount of time for planning and preparation . This presented additional challenges in coordinating the large number of voters , election officials , volunteers , polling stations , and election material . Technologies for Knowledge Sharing in 2011 During the parliamentary election , various collaborative artefacts were used for sharing information . This included local guidelines and instructions created by the municipality and given to different groups . Some guidelines were printed and handed out during various meetings ; others were distributed via email . The sheer volume of emails sent to election workers was enormous : 11 emails with 28 attachments in total were sent during the pre - election phase . Other important communication tools used were dedicated cell phones provided to key election officials , e . g . election secretaries and technical support staff . An intensive series of meetings was held over the course of the three weeks leading up to Election Day . Meetings among election team members and meetings with representatives from different teams were conducted to ensure information was communicated both within and across the teams . For example , there were several meetings with the election secretaries , who hold administrative responsibility for their assigned polling station . There were also several meetings to rehearse for the fine count day that follows Election Day ( including separate meetings with specific teams assigned to conduct the fine count ) . As well , there was a special meeting with election secretaries and city hall employees responsible for packing and unpacking election material . Finally , one last meeting was held two days before Election Day to discuss the election in general . The election in 2011 also presented an unusual situation because the head of elections – responsible for organization elections in Copenhagen – was retiring . There was a concern that all her knowledge and expertise would be lost . This inspired the municipality to – using their words – “collect and capture” her knowledge about organizing elections in a more systematic and comprehensive manner . At the time , there were incomplete bits and pieces of information scattered across various repositories in a range of formats and communicated via different channels . The information was not written in any comprehensive or extensive way that could help in specifying the tasks and practices of various groups . Thus , the newly appointed head of elections began gradually collecting the information while , striving to familiarize herself with the new tasks . Collecting information while simultaneously developing an understanding of how to orchestrate election was an enormous challenge . 2013 Municipal and Regional Election The 2013 Municipal and Regional election brought about several unexpected challenges . This includes , a surprisingly high level of voters attendance , which was a result of various national and local campaigns organized by different organizations to encourage more people , particularly youth , to vote for the municipal and regional election . In addition , the high number of candidates resulted in very large and heavy ballots . Moreover , the design of the ballots was newly revised , thus a new small box was added next to every candidate’s name and the voters were expected to mark their cross in the little box . These changes led long queues at the voting booths and increased complications for sorting and counting the ballots . This meant that some large polling stations in Copenhagen were unable to complete their rough count during the evening of Election Day . During this election , the municipality strived to have different teams working more independently of each other . The centralization of the advanced - votes process was a major change . The day before the election , the election officials at the various polling stations opened the envelopes containing advanced votes . Advance votes arrive with cover envelopes , and the letters are examined . The advance vote identifiers are checked against the electoral register . If a voter does not appear on the register ( e . g . , if they had passed away after casting a vote ) , the vote would not be included . Other reasons for the rejection of advance votes include incorrect completion of the cover letter . Centralizing this process required all election officials to gather in one location and execute the process of examining advance votes together . Previously , various sub - teams conducted the task independently and without coordination . Since the municipality knew well in advance the date of the election , preparation began early . Reducing time pressure and ensure better planning , meetings were held a few months in advance of Election Day . Technologies for Knowledge Sharing in 2013 Due to the challenges encountered with the information and communications strategies of the 2011 election , Copenhagen Municipality acknowledged that new initiatives were required to organize information in a more systematic way . Therefore , the municipality created a new position solely dedicated to the task of collecting information from the various experts with the aim of creating more detailed guidelines organized in knowledge repository . The person hired for this position did not have previous experience with running elections , and took this opportunity to familiarize herself with required election tasks during the 2013 municipal and regional election . To avoid the previous situation of drowning in emails , the municipality had purposefully strived to send fewer emails Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3142 with attachments to election officials , attempting instead to gather the information in one place . The newly hired election consultant , together with key officials from the municipality , began gathering information and updating the various guidelines well ahead of Election Day . Since new information continued to pour in from various channels ( e . g . , updates from the ministry ) , the team creating these guidelines waited until the last possible days to compile all the information into a 60 - page binder . The binder was given to the election secretaries responsible for the polling stations . The election secretaries were left with only a short time to familiarize themselves with the tasks and regulations outlined in the binders . During separate interviews , two highly experienced municipal election secretaries said they normally read through the guidelines and summarize important items in handwritten notes . This process of summarizing and synthesizing the most important information was viewed as an immensely crucial analytical process in facilitating navigation through the huge amount of information received , which officials were required to remember in a short time . The summaries were critical for election officials and were useful in how personally tailored they were . Such summaries cannot be easily formalized and standardized as their content depends on the election secretary’s particular experience and knowledge . Currently , the standardized guidelines embed a hierarchal structure , reflecting the chronological order in which the tasks occur . An experienced election secretary proposed redesigning these guidelines to process - oriented structure , reflecting upon how often a process is used . The secretary explained that there were a large number of details that had to be memorized ; thus , it would be easier to navigate through the information by way of the most pertinent and recurrent activities . In other words , certain information is more important and / or used more often , thereby it needs to be more easily and quickly retrievable . For example , it is important for an election secretary to know what to do in situations where a voter behaves inappropriately ( e . g . , displaying violent behavior ) . However , this information can be included towards the end of the guideline , since the likelihood of occurrence is very low . The municipal employee also pointed out that including the rationales behind the various tedious and mundane tasks could help clarify election officials of their importance , and encourage them to avoid workarounds . Typically , during elections , officials become so immersed in their election work , gathering a wealth of knowledge and experience , that they tend to come up with various ways to improve current practices . These suggestions often “disappear” after elections because these are quickly forgotten as election officials are busy going back to their daily jobs . These suggestions and this knowledge is contextual and temporal . Therefore , to “capture” these unique embodied experiences , Copenhagen Municipality began organizing evaluation meetings right after Election Day to ask for feedback from officials . 2014 Referendum and EU Elections The 2014 referendum and European Union ( EU ) elections presented the challenge of organizing two elections in one polling location . These elections were two separate events , since not all voters are eligible to vote in both elections . Unlike other types of elections , referendums and EU elections do not usually have high voter turnout , nor do they involve lengthy ballots . However , organizing double elections brought organizational and logistical challenges . During the evaluation meeting , a new strategy was proposed , to help support knowledge sharing in elections . Accordingly , it was suggested to allow volunteers to observe an election as this could provide them with a better understanding of their upcoming roles and duties . In a previous election , some volunteers had left before the final completion of the fine count , not fully carrying out their duties . Volunteers are required even after the polling stations close , as this is when the rough count begins . Technologies for Knowledge Sharing in 2014 The municipality began developing a common digital repository in the form of an intranet application , which was meant to contain all the guidelines well in advance of Election Day . This should provide more time for election officials to familiarize themselves with the regulations , tasks , and responsibilities . The digital repository marks a clear change in knowledge sharing practices , away from a centralized approach ( in which information is located only in the hands of a few municipal workers ) and towards a distributed approach ( in which knowledge is accessible directly through the common repository ) . Thus , the responsibility of accessing information is shared among election officials and volunteers . Paper - based guidelines are still printed and binders are still assembled before an election , to ensure crucial information reaches the correct individuals . DISCUSSION Our cross - case analysis ( Table 1 ) demonstrate the different attempts to manage nomadic knowledge in the three cases , each providing different fundamental structures ( centralized , semi - centralized , or distributed ) , imposing different design challenges for IT systems supporting election officials work practices , in terms of information sources , authorships , and interpretations . Also , we identified predictable ( long ballots are common in municipal elections ) and emergent ( damaged ballot box ) challenges across the elections . IT systems supporting the election officials must take both into account by minimizing the predictable challenges while leaving space for the emergent challenges . Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3143 Election 2011 Parliamentary 2013 Municipal and Regional 2014 Referendum and EU Voter turnout 87 . 7 % 69 . 1 % 55 . 85 % ( Ref ) 56 . 32 % ( EU ) Time 3 weeks 3 - 6 months 3 - 6 months Knowledge practices Centralized approach Many meetings , emails , guidelines Semi - centralized approach Centralized binder Fewer meetings held over a longer period of time Evaluation meeting Distributed approach Centralized binder Fewer meetings held over a longer period of time Gradual use of Intranet Challenges Damaged ballot boxes Head of election retiring High voter turnout Long ballots Long waiting lines New head of election Ballot redesigned Orchestrating two elections in one polling station Table 1 . Cross case analysis across the three elections . Close examination of our data reveals that no - single person has all the required expertise . Rather , know - how is distributed across participants with different backgrounds and areas of responsibility . Expertise is delegated and distributed , causing knowledge to become nomadic [ 23 ] . The process of organizing elections depends upon various governing authorities . Thus , information communicated to the various actors needs to be readable and digestible to a wide range of users , without mutual understanding of the entire election apparatus . Few have a complete insight into the practices of elections , making it difficult to design technologies that support the reuse of information across elections . Instead of completeness , election practices emerge in transient situations , where various participants gather and connect their practices . The complexity increases when examining elections as recurrent events and investigating how knowledge travels across these disparate events . Thus , the practices of assessing the reliability and authoritative of information is critical . When reusing decontextualized material from previous election , it is important to determine the original institutional context and whether the material was officially sanctioned [ 14 ] . Likewise , in recurrent elections , the practices of de - contextualizing and re - contextualizing [ 2 ] information from previous elections becomes critically important to the organization of updated election practices . The creation of new knowledge in election practices is not a matter of “processing” objective information [ 19 ] . Rather , knowledge practices depend on connecting the tacit and often highly subjective insights gained from the embodied experiences and practices of election work participants . Thus , creating new knowledge repositories is about mobilizing commitment and embodied knowledge in actual technology . The question is : how can this embodied and nomadic knowledge be assembled and put into practice when most participants are volunteers and do not participate in recurrent events ? Designing technology for organizing elections is also complicated by the lack of routine work and standardization . Clearly , the nature of knowledge in organizing elections is nomadic [ 23 ] , as it transcends locations , time , and people . Furthermore , the same groups of people rarely use the same information , which creates a challenge in localizing the exchange of information to meet different needs at different times . Also the nature of nomadic knowledge means that most participants have little interest in retaining it once the election is over . Participants tend to forget their specific practices and embodied experiences , which also implies that this knowledge often “disappears . ” Disparity exists between the need for specified knowledge and practices , and the general interest in documenting these for later use . This imbalance is important if we are to design for collaborative technologies supporting this work . Finally , to make the information about organizing elections useful , it is critical to address the reuse of information . Extraneous information details are removed to support different and specific local needs , thus re - contextualization concerns creating new relevant links ; thus , embedding the knowledge within their local contexts . We heard several key election officials explain how they synthesized and de - contextualized information gathered from the weighty guidelines they received . They summarized the most relevant segments into short handwritten notes , re - embedded into the guidebooks . This analytical process of first synthesizing and then re - embedding the information was viewed as important for these highly experienced election secretaries , as it allowed them to become familiar with this information in a short period of time and to navigate through the vast amount of information . This process is not only about embedding information , but also a process of re - embodying the knowledge and practices relevant to organizing and executing elections . In a discussion with one of the key municipal employees , he used the metaphor of giving birth to illustrate the immense embodied challenge that participating in election work entails . He explains that elections is like giving birth : One can read a lot about it to try to gain familiarity with the processes and procedures , but one does not really know what it is actually like until experiencing it in practice . This Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3144 statement reflects upon how the aspect of embodiment of knowledge and practice are seen as highly important . Previous election research investigate the role of blogs , fundraising tools , the use of social media in political campaigning , and whether new tools make elections more transparent to voters [ 11 ] . Others , examine what kind of information systems could facilitate voters in collective information gathering , sharing , and filtering , supporting decision making [ 22 ] . Furthermore , social media use has been explored in relation to interactions between voters with political disagreements [ 13 ] and in crowd - sourced fact - finding support for public dialogue in democratic societies [ 17 ] . Thus , previous studies focus on the collaborative practices and use of technologies among candidates , voters , and elected officials . Our work addresses a different set of participants ( users ) ; namely election officials and how they organize elections . Thus , while previous research focus on the collaboration between voters , our research focus on election officials . Secondly , while previous research on knowledge management [ 22 ] in elections also point to the challenges of collecting and re - using information across elections , they focus on a different group of users , different type of information used for a different purpose . These knowledge management studies [ 22 ] focus on voters sharing information about the different political parties and supporting voters in making an informed decision when casting their ballot [ 17 ] . Our study focuses on election officials sharing information across elections about how to organize , plan and execute an election while ensuring legal framework and correct conduct are adhered to . It is exactly the legal framework and the level of responsibility in organizing the nomadic knowledge which distinguish our work from previous work on nomadic knowledge in political activist organizations [ 23 ] . The special conditions identified in our cases demonstrate the high level of responsibility to which election officials must adhere . The legal framework includes formal documents , protocols , artefacts , procedures , and subjective material , all of which are necessary for organizing , executing and documenting the process . Accountability introduces certain constraints for design of systems supporting due processes , but also opportunities for sharing and reusing information through access to materials from past events supporting sensemaking . Designing for Distributed Knowledge in Elections Similarly to Robertson et al [ 22 ] , we adopt a user - centered perspective on the larger context of planning and executing elections , which includes the activities of the non - political participants when coordinating administrative practices ensuring that elections follow due processes demanded by the legal framework . Our users are the municipal workers in Copenhagen who currently explore new opportunities for a digital repository supporting knowledge exchange in elections . It supports sharing information to a diverse group of people quickly and has potential to standardize information and practices allowing for easier navigation . However , common repository does not support knowledge sharing practices by default ; it is not simply about “capturing” and “displaying” information . The repository must address the challenges of informal knowledge , embodied knowledge , emergent and contextual knowledge , improvisations , and other crucial skills that are used when organizing elections . Strategies of standardization risk stripping away the embodied knowledge of experienced election officials . This acquired knowledge is crucial for dealing with the unexpected contingencies that inevitably occur in every election . When designing collaborative technologies to support nomadic knowledge in elections , it must support the collective and dynamic process of active remembering , interpretations , re - contextualization , and internalization of knowledge as it emerges across professions , geography , and temporal disruptive patterns . Through the first author’s engagement with the field site , these concerns were included in the discussions about design strategies for the repository . It was concluded that instead of written textual descriptions of efficient method to sort and count ballots , a short video could possibly more easily convey this information enabling information sharing across organizational actors during elections , and across temporal discontinuities between election periods . Previous research on political campaigning discusses whether new technologies can level the field between amateurs and the professionals [ 10 ] . In our case , introducing a new technology is not about leveling the field , because the hierarchy in knowledge sharing is critical for the coordination and interpretation of information , which must persistent in new design . The challenge persists that the type of information material required to organize and execute elections remains somewhat absent , or rather , not so easily available . Municipal employees carry out different tasks before , during , and after Election Day , thus they are often bound to particular locations where these tasks take place . This means that municipal employees rarely have the possibility to observe the various tasks taking place across different geographical locations . The first author produced large amount of video and audio material documenting the various activities scattered across different locations . This material is currently being incorporated into the design of the digital repository , aiming to ease the communication of the large amount of information to election officials . This is the first step towards the creation of a common knowledge repository . While building such a repository is promising , it does not solve all the organizational challenges that elections present . It is important to also acknowledge elements of embodiedness of knowledge and practice required for the election process to function . FINAL REMARKS We investigated the distributed knowledge practices and artefacts used in organizing elections . We found that the orchestration of elections is of a distributed nature spanning Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3145 organizational and geographical boundaries . Retaining the consistency and continuity of knowledge practices is difficult . Elections are a standardized part of democracy ; still organizing elections vary causing the exchange and reuse of information across elections in Denmark to be challenging . Each election is characterized by new groups of volunteers , municipal employees etc . These findings unpack the design implications for collaborative technologies that support the elections management . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funded by DemTech grant 10 - 092309 : Danish Council for Strategic Research , Programme Commission on Strategic Growth Technologies . We thank Copenhagen Municipality . REFERENCES 1 . Ackerman , M . , Pipek , V . and Wulf , V . Sharing Expertise : Beyond - Knowledge Management . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2002 . 2 . Ackerman , M . and Halverson , C . Organizational Memory : Processes , Boundary Objects , and Trajectories . Comput Support Coop Work 13 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 155 – 189 . 3 . Ackerman , M . , Dachtera , J . , Pipek , V . and Wulf , V . Sharing Knowledge and Expertise : The CSCW View of Knowledge Management . Comput Support Coop Work , 22 ( 2013 ) , 531 – 573 . 4 . Alvarez , R . , Hall , T . and Llewellyn , M . Are Americans confident their ballots are counted ? Journal of Politics 70 ( 2008 ) , 754 – 766 . 5 . Bederson , B . , Lee , B . , Sherman , R . , Herrnson , P . and Niemi , R . Electronic voting system usability issues . In Proc . CHI 2003 , ACM Press ( 2003 ) . 6 . Bouillot , F . , Poncelet , P . and Roche , M . Frence presidential elections : What are the most efficient measures for tweets ? In Proc . PLEAD 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) 7 . Boulus , N . and Bjørn , P . A cross - case analysis of technology - in - use practices : EPR - adaptation in Canada and Norway . Int J Med Inform , 79 , 6 ( 2008 ) , 97 - 108 . 8 . Boulus - Rødje , N . Mapping the Literature : socio - cultural , organizational and technological dimensions of e - voting technologies . Lecture Notes in Informatics ( 2012 ) , 205ff . 9 . Byrne , M . , Greene , K . and Everett , S . Usability of voting systems : Baseline data for paper , punch cards , and lever machines . In Proc . CHI 2007 , ACM Press ( 2007 ) . 10 . Carpenter , K . , Nardi , B . , Moore , J . , Roberson , S . , Foot , K . , Drezner , D . , Benson , I . and Jett , Q . Online political organizing : Lessons from the field : Panel . In Proc . CSCW 2004 , ACM Press ( 2004 ) . 11 . Carpenter , K . , Roberson , S . , Foot , K . , Nardi , B . , Drezner , D . , Jett , Q . , Moore , J . and Benson , I . Online political organizing : Lessons from the field : Panel . In Proc . CSCW 2004 , ACM Press ( 2004 ) . 12 . Everett , S . , Greene , K . , Byrne , M . , Wallach , D . , Derr , K . , Sandler , D . and Torous , T . Electronic voting machines versus traditional methods : Improved preference , similar performance . In Proc . CHI 2008 , ACM Press ( 2008 ) . 13 . Grevet , C . , Terveen , L . and Gilbert , E . Managing political differences in social media . In Proc . CSCW 2014 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) . 14 . Heath , C . and Luff , P . Documents and Professional Practice : “Bad” Organizational Reasons for ”Good” Clinical Records . In Proc . CSCW 1996 , ACM Press ( 1996 ) 15 . Hellström , J . and Karefelt , A . Participation through mobile phones : A study of SMS use during the Ugandan general elections 2011 . In Proc . ICTD 2012 , ACM Press . 16 . Hutchins , E . Cognition in the wild . MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , 1995 . 17 . Kriplean , T . , Bonnar , C . , Borning , A . , Kinney , B . and Gill , B . Integrating On - demand Fact - checking with Public Dialogue . In Proc . CSCW 2014 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) . 18 . Lutters , W . and Ackerman , M . Beyond Boundary Objects : Collaborative Reuse in Aircraft Technical Support . Comput Support Coop Work , 16 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 341 - 372 . 19 . Nonaka , I . The knowledge - creating company Harvard Business Review , 85 , 7 / 8 ( 2007 ) , 162 . 20 . Pipek , V . , Wulf , V . and Johri , A . Bridging Artifacts and Actors : Expertise Sharing in Organizational Ecosystems . Comput Support Coop Work 21 ( 2011 ) , 261 – 282 . 21 . Randall , D . , Harper , R . and Rouncefield , M . Fieldwork for design : Theory and practice . Springer , London , 2007 . 22 . Robertson , S . Voter - Centered Design : Towards a voter decision support system . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 12 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 263 - 291 . 23 . Saeed , S . , Pipek , V . , Rohde , M . and Wulf , V . Managing nomadic knowledge : a case study of the European social forum . In Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) . 24 . Spence , P . and Reddy , M . Beyond Expertise Seeking : A Field Study of the Informal Knowledge Practices of Healthcare IT Teams . Comput Support Coop Work , 21 ( 2011 ) , 283 – 315 . Voting & Volunteerism CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3146