Folkbiology of freshwater ﬁsh Douglas L . Medin a , * , Norbert O . Ross b , Scott Atran c , Douglas Cox d , John Coley e , Julia B . Profﬁtt f , Sergey Blok g a Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , 220 Swift Hall , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA b Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN , USA c Centre National pour la Re ´ cherche Scientiﬁque ( France ) , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA d Hilary J . Waukau Environmental Resources Center , Keshena , WI , USA e Northeastern University , Boston , MA , USA f Northwestern University , Evanston , IL , USA g University of Texas , Austin , TX , USA Received 20 June 2003 ; accepted 15 December 2003 Abstract Cross - cultural comparisons of categorization often confound cultural factors with expertise . This paper reports four experiments on the conceptual behavior of Native American and majority - culture ﬁsh experts . The two groups live in the same general area and engage in essentially the same set of ﬁshing - related behaviors . Nonetheless , cultural differences were consistently observed . Majority - culture ﬁsh experts tended to sort ﬁsh into taxonomic and goal - related categories . They also showed an inﬂuence of goals on probes of ecological relations , tending to answer in terms of relations involving adult ﬁsh . Native American ﬁsh experts , in contrast , were more likely to sort ecologically . They were also more likely to see positive and reciprocal ecological relations , tending to answer in terms of relations involving the full life cycle of ﬁsh . Further experiments support the view that the cultural differences do not reﬂect different knowledge bases but rather differences in the organization and accessibility of knowledge . At a minimum the results suggest that similar activities within a well - structured domain do not necessarily lead to common conceptualizations . q 2005 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Taxonomic ; Native American ; Folkbiology ; Ecology Cognition 99 ( 2006 ) 237 – 273 www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT 0022 - 2860 / $ - see front matter q 2005 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2003 . 12 . 005 * Corresponding author . E - mail address : medin @ northwestern . edu ( D . L . Medin ) .