Cultural Evolution Entails ( Creativity Entails ( Concept Combination Entails Quantum Structure ) ) Liane Gabora University of British Columbia Okanagan campus , 3333 University Way Kelowna BC , V1V 1V7 , CANADA liane . gabora @ ubc . ca Abstract The theory of natural selection cannot describe how early life evolved , in part because acquired characteristics are passed on through horizontal exchange . It has been proposed that culture , like life , began with the emergence of autopoietic form , thus its evolution too cannot be described by natural selection . The evolution of autopoietic form can be described using a framework referred to as Context - driven Actualization of Potential ( CAP ) , which grew out of a generalization of the formalisms of quantum mechanics , and encompasses nondeterministic as well as deterministic change of state . The autopoietic structure that evolves through culture is the mind , or more accurately the conceptual network that yields an individual’s internal model of the world . A branch of CAP research referred to as the state - context - property ( SCOP ) formalism provides a mathematical framework for reconciling the stability of conceptual structure with its susceptibility to context - driven change . The combination of two or more concepts ( an extreme case of contextual influence ) , as occurs in insight , is modeled as a state of entanglement . Theoretical and empirical findings are presented that challenge assumptions underlying virtually all of cognitive science , such as the notion of spreading activation and the assumption that cognitive processes can be described with a Kolmogorovian probability model . Introduction In what sense can ideas be said to evolve ? That is , in what sense does the concept of evolution apply to human culture ? That is the question that I began my research trying to answer . I was led to the conclusion that in order to understand how culture evolves one must understand creativity , the process by which cultural novelty born . From there I reached the conclusion that at the heart of the creative process is a new way of conceptualizing something . Thus to understand creativity , one must understand what concepts are , and how they influence one another when they act as contexts for one another . And from there I reached the most surprising conclusion of all : to understand how concepts interact requires formalisms originally developed for quantum mechanics . This paper summarizes this intellectual journey , with its recurring theme that knowledge obtained in one of these interrelated domains constrains what constitutes a promising research direction in other domains . Evolution Does Not Begin with Natural Selection It is generally assumed that to prove that culture constitutes a genuine evolutionary process one must prove that it evolves through natural selection ( e . g . Fracchia and Lewontin 1999 ) . This follows naturally from the assumption that there is just one process by which entities evolve : natural selection . Indeed theories about how culture evolves generally assume that cultural evolution is Darwinian ( e . g . Aunger 2000 ; Cziko 1997 , 1998 ; Cavalli - Sforza and Feldman 1981 ; Durham 1991 ; Mesoudi et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) . But natural selection does not take us far toward an explanation of the emergence of new forms with new dynamics , nor can it account for the origin of life itself . Examining the earliest stages in the evolution of biological life can constrain the development of a realistic theory of how cultural evolution began . Present day life replicates using a template , a coded set of instructions encoded in DNA or RNA for how to make a copy of itself . The probability of such a structure arising spontaneously is exceedingly small ; Hoyle infamously compared it to the probability that a tornado blowing through a junkyard would assemble a Boeing 747 ( Hoyle 1981 ) . The implausibility of the spontaneous appearance of a self - assembly code has led to the wide - spread acceptance of metabolism first theories , according to which life began with an ensemble of simple , collectively replicating molecules , such as an autocatalytically closed i1 set of polymers ( Bollobas 2001 ; Bollobas and Rasmussen 1989 ; Dyson 1982 , 1985 ; Kauffman 1993 ; Morowitz 1992 ; Wäechtershäeuser 1992 ; Weber 1998 , 2000 ; Williams and Frausto da Silva 1999 , 2002 , 2003 ) . Self - replication is not all - at - once using a self - assembly code , but piecemeal . Although no one molecule replicates itself , the whole is regenerated through the interactions and transformations of its parts . The ensemble can therefore be said to be autopoietic ( Maturana and Varela 1980 ) . Genetically mediated template replication emerged subsequently from the dynamics of these molecular systems ( Gabora 2006 ; Kauffman 1993 ; Vetsigian , Woese , and Goldenfeld 2006 ; 1 Closure is used in the mathematical sense , not in the sense that nothing can get in or out . Depew and Weber 1996 ) . Thus we have ( at least ) two means by which entities evolve . The one that came later , and with which we are more familiar , is the highly constrained process of natural selection , which makes use of a self - assembly code ( i . e . the genetic code ) . The one that preceded it , and which has only recently been recognized as a viable means by which to evolve , is a more haphazard process involving autopoiesis . Given that life itself has exhibited over the course of history two different forms of evolution , what basis is there for assuming that culture evolves through a process more akin to that of present day life than that of early life ? Does not Hoyle’s 747 argument apply also to culture ? What necessitated the theory of natural selection , a rather intricate theory of population - level change , is that acquired traits are not inherited from parent to offspring at the individual level in biological lineages . If a cat bites off a rat’s tail , it is not the case that the rat’s offspring are tail - less . What then does it take for change to stick around generation after generation ? That was the paradox that Darwin faced , and the paradox for which natural selection provided a solution . But there is no such paradox for early life , nor for culture . The periodic ‘backtracking’ to a previous state when one member of a lineages gives birth to another arises because they are von Neumann self - replicating automata . Self - replicating automata use a self - assembly code that is both actively transcribed to produce a new individual , and passively copied to ensure that the new individual can itself reproduce . The new individual may change , but the passively copied code within does not . But cultural traits do not possess such a code , and are not self - replicating automata . Indeed in culture , as in all domains other than biology , explanation of change is straightforward . When an entity undergoes a change of state , say from p ( 0 ) to p ( 1 ) , the change is retained . One could say it is ‘inherited’ by the future states of the entity , p ( 2 ) , p ( 3 ) and so forth . The entity does not spontaneously revert back to p ( 0 ) . For example , if a billiard ball gets dented , it generally stays dented . Cultural theorists wish to apply natural selection to culture on the grounds that culture exhibits phenomena observed in biology such as adaptation , inheritance , and drift . But it was not adaptation , inheritance , drift , and so forth , that fueled the theory of natural selection . It was that these phenomena occur despite the loss of acquired characteristics ; i . e . despite ( one could say ) the malfunctioning of the normal mechanism of change . Thus if culture exhibits adaptation , inheritance , and drift , it does not follow that it does so because it is Darwinian . A more parsimonious explanation is that these phenomena arise not just through natural selection occurring at the population level , but also through processes occurring at the level of the individual or artifact where change is straightforwardly retained . Thus the rationale for arguing that culture is Darwinian is faulty . It is hypothesized that life and culture both began with the emergence of autopoietic form , and this is no coincidence but reflects constraints on what it takes to bootstrap an evolutionary process . Evolution through Context - driven Actualization of Potential ( CAP ) For natural selection to be applicable to a process there must be no inheritance of acquired characteristics ( or at least it must be negligible compared to change due to differential replication of individuals with heritable variation competing for scarce resources ) . Since autopoietic form does not use a self - assembly code to replicate , acquired characteristics are not obliterated each generation but passed on through horizontal 2 ( Lamarckian ) exchange . Thus its evolution cannot be described by natural selection as mathematically formulated by population geneticists ( Gabora 2004 , 2006 ; Vetsigian , Woese , and Goldenfeld 2006 ) . Furthermore , to the extent that the horizontal exchange involves interaction with an incompletely specified context , thus nondeterminism , it entails a non - Kolmogorovian probability model ( Gabora 2006 ) and cannot be described by , not just natural selection , but any mathematics that assumes a Kolmogorovian probability model ( Pitowsky 1989 ) . If natural selection is inapplicable when , as is the case for early life and culture , replication occurs without a self - assembly code , what theory can describe the evolutionary process entailed ? This is the question that prompted the attempt to formulate a cross - disciplinary framework for contextually mediated change of state referred to as Context - driven Actualization of Potential , or CAP ( Gabora and Aerts 2005 ) . What unites physical , chemical , biological , psychological , and cultural processes in CAP is the actualization of potential form through re - iterated interaction with a context . These processes differ with respect to the degree to which they ( i ) depend upon a particular internal or external environment or context , ( ii ) internalize context , ( iii ) are sensitive to context , and most importantly ( iv ) exhibit non - determinism . Since we do not always have perfect knowledge of the state of the entity , the context , and the interaction between them , a general description of an evolutionary process must be able to cope with nondeterminism . Processes differ with respect to the degree of determinism involved in the changes of state that the entity undergoes . Consider an entity—whether it be physical , biological , mental , or some other sort—in a state p ( t i ) at an instant of time t i . If it is under the influence of a context e ( t i ) , and we know with certainty that p ( t i ) changes to state p ( t i + 1 ) at time t i + 1 , we refer to the change of state as deterministic . Newtonian physics provides the classic example of deterministic change of state . Knowing the 2 This stands in contrast to the vertical ( parent to offspring ) transmission in modern day organisms . speed and position of a ball , one can predict its speed and position at some time in the future . In many situations , however , an entity in a state p ( t i ) at time t i under the influence of a context e ( t i ) may change to any state in the set { p 1 ( t i + 1 ) , p 2 ( t i + 1 ) , … , p n ( t i + 1 ) , … } . When more than one change of state is possible , the process is nondeterministic . Nondeterministic change can be divided into two kinds . In the first , the nondeterminism originates from a lack of knowledge concerning the state of the entity p ( t i ) itself . This means that deep down the change is deterministic , but since we lack knowledge about what happens at this deeper level , and since we want to make a model of what we know , the model we make is nondeterministic . This kind of nondeterminism is modeled by a stochastic theory that makes use of a probability structure that satisfies Kolmogorov’s axioms . Another possibility is that the nondeterminism arises through lack of knowledge concerning the context e ( t i ) , or how that context interacts with the entity . 3 It has been proven that in this case the stochastic model to describe this situation necessitates a non - Kolmogorovian probability model . A Kolmogorovian probability model ( such as is used in population genetics ) cannot be used ( Aerts 1986 ; Accardi and Fedullo 1982 ; Pitowsky , 1989 ; Randall and Foulis 1976 ) . It is only possible to ignore the problem of incomplete knowledge of context if all contexts are equally likely , or if context has a temporary or limited effect . Because the entity has the potential to change to many different states ( given the various possible states the context could be in , since we lack precise knowledge of it ) , we say that it is in a potentiality state with respect to context . Note that a potentiality state is not predetermined , just waiting for its time to come along , at least not insofar as our models can discern , possibly because we cannot precisely specify the context that will come along and actualize it . Note also that a state is only a potentiality state in relation to a certain ( incompletely specified ) context . It is possible for a state to be a potentiality state with respect to one context , and a deterministic state with respect to another . More precisely , a state that is deterministic with respect to a context can be considered a limit case of a potentiality state , with zero potentiality . In reality the universe is so complex that we can never describe with complete certainty and accuracy the context to which an entity is exposed , and how it interacts with the entity . There is always some possibility of even very unlikely outcomes . However , there are situations in which 3 Another possibility is that the nondeterminism is ontological i . e . the universe is at bottom intrinsically nondeterministic . In this case the mathematical structure needed to model the situation is equivalent to that needed to model the situation where the nondeterminism arises through lack of knowledge of the context ( Aerts 1994 ) . This means that ontological indeterminism is also described by the CAP framework . we can predict the values of relevant variables with sufficient accuracy that we may consider the entity to be in a particular state , and other situations in which there is enough uncertainty to necessitate the concept of potentiality . Thus a formalism for describing the evolution of these entities must take into account the degree of knowledge we as observers have about the context . We have seen that a description of the evolutionary trajectory of an entity may involve nondeterminism with respect to the state of the entity , the context , or how they interact . An important step toward the development of a complete theory of change of state incorporating biological and cultural evolution is to find a mathematical structure that can incorporate all these possibilities . 4 There exists an elaborate mathematical framework for describing the change and actualization of potentiality through contextual interaction that was developed for quantum mechanics . However it has several limitations , including the linearity of the Hilbert space , and the fact that one can only describe the extreme case where change of state is maximally contextual . Other mathematical theories lift the quantum formalism out of its specific structural limitations , making it possible to describe nondeterministic effects of context in other domains ( Aerts 1993 ; Aerts and Durt 1994 ; Foulis and Randall 1981 ; Foulis , Piron , and Randall 1983 ; Jauch 1968 ; Mackey 1963 ; Piron 1976 , 1989 , 1990 ; Pitowsky 1989 ; Randall and Foulis 1976 , 1978 ) . The algebraic structure of the state space may be given by the set of atoms of a complete lattice ( they play the role of the rays of a complex Hilbert space in quantum mechanics ) . Measurements are described by Boolean morphisms on the lattice ( they play the role of the self - adjoint operators in quantum mechanics ) . The original motivation for these generalized formalisms was theoretical ( as opposed to the need to describe the reality revealed by experiments ) . With these formalisms it is possible to describe situations with any degree of contextuality . In fact , classical and quantum come out as special cases : quantum at one extreme of complete contextuality , and classical at the other extreme , complete lack of contextuality ( Piron 1976 ; Aerts 1983 ) . This is why it lends itself to the description of context - driven evolution . For example , let us say an entity undergoes a change of state from to p 0 ( t 0 ) to p 1 ( t 1 ) . The change of state of the entity may evoke a change in its context ( or in the sort of context it is subsequently 4 This story has a precedent . The same problem arose in physics in the last century . Classical mechanics could describe situations where the effect of the measurement was negligible , but not situations where the measurement intrinsically influenced the evolution of an entity . This is because it does not provide a way of coping with contextuality ( except in the initial conditions or in an ad hoc way , by introducing an additional model of perturbation ) . Modern classical theories , such as chaos and complexity , though they provide a means of transcending reductionism , still have this limitation . susceptible to ) , or the context may change of its own accord . Under the influence of this ( possibly new ) context , which we call e ( t 1 ) , there may be many potential states it could change to . We denote this set of states { p 1 ( t 2 ) , p 2 ( t 2 ) , … , p n ( t 2 ) , … } . At time t 2 , one of these states , for example p 3 ( t 2 ) , may actualize . And so forth , recursively . The states p ( t 0 ) , p ( t 1 ) , p ( t 2 ) , … , p ( t i ) , … constitute the trajectory of the entity through state space , and describe its evolution in time . Thus , the general evolution process is broadly construed as the incremental change that results from recursive , context - driven change . A model of an evolutionary process may consist of both deterministic segments , where the entity changes state in a way that follows predictably given its previous state and / or the context to which it is exposed , and / or nondeterministic segments , where this is not the case . Having examined a non - Darwinian means by which an entity can accumulate change we now hypothesize that culture , like early life , evolves not through natural selection , but through a reiterated process of context - driven actualization of potential ( or CAP ) in which interaction with a context changes not just the state of an entity but its potentiality for further change . The Unit of Replication In biological evolution the unit of replication is the organism . It replicates to produce another individual and its lineage thereby continues even after it is deceased . Because of mutation and sexual recombination this replication event introduces variation into the lineage ; offspring are not identical to parent . Thus self - replication does not merely perpetuate the lineage ; it is necessary for the open - ended accumulation of adaptive biological novelty . If culture evolves then what is the unit of replication ? Theories of cultural evolution generally start with isolated units of cultural information such as stories or artifacts as the basic evolving entity ( Aunger 2000 ; Cziko 1997 , 1998 ; Cavalli - Sforza and Feldman 1981 ; Durham 1991 ; Mesoudi et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) . But it was shown that such units of cultural information are not self - replicating ( Gabora 2004 ) . I propose that the unit of self - replication in cultural evolution is the mind , or more accurately the conceptual network that yields an internal model of the world , or worldview ( Gabora 1998 , 2000 ) . In this approach , stories and artifacts are merely observables ; the entity evolving is the conceptual network that gives rise to them . A worldview is conceptually closed when for any item in memory there exists a way of reinterpreting or redescribing it in terms of others ( e . g . X is like Y except for Z ) . Just as polymers catalyze reactions that generate other polymers , retrieval of one item evokes retrieval of another . As the diversity of items in memory increases , the number of associative paths increases even faster , and graph theory tells us that the probability they organize into a connected closure space increases sharply ( Cohen 1988 ; Erdös and Rényi 1960 ) . At this point there exists a potential chain of associations from any one item encoded in memory to any other . The capacity of a conceptual network to capture meaningful regularity in the world is facilitated by the disposition to group related items into concepts , which themselves form hierarchies , bestowing the network with the sparse connectivity , short average path lengths , and strong local clustering characteristic of small world structure ( Watts and Strogatz 1998 ) . With sparse connectivity , associations are strong enough that one thought can lead to another , but weak enough that everything does not remind one of everything else . Thus a worldview emerges , the structure of which corresponds somewhat to that of individuals ( e . g . parents ) who kickstarted the process by sharing knowledge and attitudes . As in metabolism - first origin of life theories , the integrity of this communal entity is continually challenged and stimulated by horizontally transmitted inputs . It is self - mending and self - maintaining to the extent that it is inclined to resolve any threat this imposes to its continuation as an integrated whole . It replicates to the extent that it in turn passes its views to others . The child can now go well beyond cued retrieval of fixed responses because he / she has an integrated conceptual structure at his / her disposal to interpret and generate cultural novelty , tailoring responses to the specifics of situations . The more fine - grained the memory , the more features encoded per item , and thus more routes for associative recall . Thus the above hypothesis is elaborated : cumulative culture arose when human memory became sufficiently fine - grained to be predisposed to achieve conceptual closure . The Ephemeral Nature of Conceptual Structure It would appear that the structure of a conceptual network inheres in its hierarchies of concepts and their relations . However , empirical work on concepts shows that they have neither defining attributes nor definite boundaries , and exhibit gradients of membership ( Rosch 1973 , 1978 ) . A concept does not represent something in the world in a predefined manner . The applicability of properties of a concept , as well as the typicality of exemplars , shift depending on the frame or context in which it arises ( Barsalou 1982 ) . For example under the context ‘Christmas’ , a typical exemplar of TREE is FIR and a typical property is ‘needles’ , but not so under the context ‘desert island’ . Other studies show that a word’s implicitly activated associative structure is clearly linked to and dependent upon context ( Nelson , Goodmon , and Ceo , in press ) . The ease with which concepts shift under the influence of context implies that the pattern of connectivity of a conceptual network is transient , and therefore that conceptual closure is not a once - and - for - all affair . Thus it is hypothesized that one does not establish closure just once but re - establishes it with respect to each change - of - context one encounters . This is postulated to be the mechanism by which culture accumulates and conceptual networks evolve . Each interaction with a context actualizes some aspect of what was previously immediately potential for it , and this interaction changes what is now immediately potential for it . The view that change to a conceptual network modifies its potentiality for further change is incompatible with the pervasive notion that thought functions as a search algorithm . Proponents of the constraint satisfaction theory of concept combination , for example , claim that one “performs a constrained search of the space of possible interpretations” and “selects” predicates ( Costello and Keane 2001 ) . Elsewhere it is explicitly stated that thought is Darwinian ( Calvin 1996a , b ; Calvin and Bickerton 2000 ; Campbell 1965 , Simonton 1998a , b ) . But in algorithmic search the relevant variables are defined in advance , thus the search space is generally fixed . Creative problem solving , however , proceeds through honing ; each thought affects how one will proceed from there . It effectively alters the problem space , sometimes imperceptibly , sometimes dramatically ( Boden 1993 ; Gabora 2005 ) . This alteration of the problem space is reflected in that creative ideas often combine concepts such that the combination exhibits emergent properties not in either of the constituents ( e . g . ‘spout’ for the concept combination TEA POT ) or loss of typical properties ( e . g . ‘surrounded by water’ for ISLAND in the combination KITCHEN ISLAND ) . Moreover , studies of the creative process suggest that one often knows one has found an idea prior to being able to express it ( Feinstein 2005 ) , suggesting that during creative thought ideas need not yet be in a form in which they could compete or get selected amongst or be manipulated as semantic primitives . Thus another hypothesis is that when conceptual closure is disrupted it can be re - established through contemplation , which does not occur through search but through honing . The SCOP Theory of Concepts A first step toward understanding how a conceptual network evolves and how ideas are honed is to break thought down into transitions from one cognitive state to another , and model how context affects this transition . This is accomplished using an application of CAP to concepts referred to as the State - COntext - Property theory or SCOP ( Gabora and Aerts 2002a , b ; Aerts and Gabora 2005a , b ) . A similar approach is being used by others to model contextual effects on word meanings ( Bruza and Cole 2005 ; Widdows 2003 ; Widdows and Peters 2003 ) . Like geometrical ( Gardenfors 2000 ) and dual theory ( Wisniewski 1997 ) approaches to concepts , the SCOP approach is concerned with conceptual structure , but in SCOP the structure of a concept ( or combination of them ) is probabilistic and influenced by context . Two concepts can be said to be ‘connected’ to the extent that they are likely to act as contexts for one another and thereby evoke one another in some form . A SCOP model of a concept consists of a set of states , each of which is elicited by a context . Each context - specific state is associated with unique sets of weighted properties , exemplar typicalities , and transition probabilities , the last of which give the likelihood that , under a given context , it will undergo a change of state . If a state of a concept is not affected by a particular context it is said to be an eigenstate for this context . Otherwise it is a potentiality ( superposition - like ) state for this context , reflecting its susceptibility to change . When one is not thinking of a concept it is in its ground state . A concept is always evoked in some context ; one never experiences it in its raw or undisturbed ground state . In the ground state typical properties ( e . g . ‘surrounded by water’ for the concept ISLAND ) have a weight close to 1 , while atypical properties ( e . g . ‘square’ for ISLAND ) have a weight close to 0 . From the ground state it is possible to transition to any other state under the influence of some context , and this new state has differently weighted properties . For example , applying the context KITCHEN transforms the ground state of ISLAND to a state where weight or applicability of ‘surrounded by water’ is ( hopefully ) low . The structure of a SCOP is derived by determining the natural relations for sets of states , contexts , and properties . If context e is more constrained than context f ( e . g . ‘in the big box’ is more constrained than ‘in the box’ ) we say e ‘is stronger than or equal to’ f , thereby introducing a partial order relation in the set of contexts M . By introducing ‘and’ and ‘or’ contexts , M obtains the structure of a lattice . By introducing the ‘not’ context , an orthocomplemented lattice is derived for M . The same is done for the set of properties L , making it possible to construct a topological representation of a SCOP in a closure space . To obtain not just qualitative but numerical results , and to model the combination of concepts , the SCOP is embedded in a less abstract , more constrained mathematical structure , complex Hilbert space . A state is described by a unit vector or a density operator , and a context or property by an orthogonal projection . The formalism determines the formulas that describe the transition probabilities between states , and the formulas for calculating the weights of properties , allowing us to predict typicality of exemplars and applicability of properties . The typicalities of exemplars and applicabilities of properties yielded by the calculation matched those obtained in the experiments with human subjects . For example , given a list of questions such as ( a ) Given context C1 , ‘The pet is being taught to talk’ , rate the applicability of the property ‘furry’ , or ( b ) Given context C2 , ‘The pet is chewing a bone’ , rate the typicality of the exemplar ‘dog’ . Note that we test the prediction that the applicability of each single property varies for each context , as does the typicality of each exemplar , by an amount that can be calculated from the structure of states and contexts . Conceptual Entanglement The SCOP formalism is able to model combinations of concepts as entangled states by taking the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the concept and the context ( which may itself be another concept or conglomeration of them ) . This yields a new state space with states that may exhibit a gain or loss of properties compared to its constituents . The tensor product procedure generates two kinds of vectors : ( 1 ) product states , for which a change of context can affect one component of the combination and not the other , and ( 2 ) non - product states , for which a change of context cannot affect one component without affecting the other . Non - product states are the states of entanglement . The definitive test for entanglement ( and nonlocality ; thus for nonclassical logical structure ) is the violation of Bell’s inequalities ( Bell 1964 ) . To prove that entanglement is present one performs four experiments , each with two possible outcomes , which can be performed together ( two experiments at the same time ) as coincidence experiments . The outcomes are plugged into Bell’s inequalities to see whether they are violated . A procedure for demonstrating the violation of Bell’s inequalities in cognition has been published ( Aerts et al . 2000 ) . The experiments entail asking a subject to think about a particular concept and observing how the subject responds to simultaneous manipulations ( coincidence experiments ) that cause the subject to think of one of two instances of that concept . Plugging the results into Bell’s equations demonstrates in theory at least entanglement amongst instances of a concept . Experimental support for the notion that concepts , their combinations , and the relationships between various instances of a concept or a group of related concept can be accurately described as entanglement comes from findings that an ‘action at a distance’ hypothesis ( synchronous activation of a word’s associates ) supported the results of cued recall experiments better than the ‘spreading activation’ hypothesis ( Nelson , McEvoy , and Pointer 2003 ) . Significance and Future Work There is currently no broadly accepted answer to the question of how culture evolves ( or even whether another form of evolution , other than biological evolution , is possible ) . The theory put forth here is that culture is a genuine form of evolution , with the mind the unit of self - replication , and it evolves , as did early life prior to the emergence of the genetic code , through a non - Darwinian process involving reiterated actualization of potential through interaction with a context . Psychological experiments as well as mathematical and computer models are being used to generate findings that support , refute , or refine the hypothesis that autopoietic , conceptually closed structure emerges in the mind , evolves through context - driven actualization of potential ( CAP ) , and requires formalisms from quantum mechanics for its description . Further work is to be done on the application of quantum formalisms to creative thought , specifically to how cognitive states described as states of entanglement are disambiguated through honing . The modeling of concept combination using formalisms originally developed to model entangled quantum systems holds promise as a model of insight . Theoretical and empirical work is converging toward support a new framework for understanding what is arguably the most uniquely human characteristic : the capacity to invent , and the propensity to put our own spin on others’ inventions such that novelty accumulates . If the research supports the existence of entangled states and structure that necessitates a non - Kolmogorovian probability model in cognition , then this will amount to demonstrating that the vast majority of models in cognitive science ( e . g . neural / Bayesian networks ) use a mathematics that a priori cannot capture a class of cognitive states . References Accardi , L . and Fedullo A . 1982 . On the statistical meaning of complex numbers in quantum mechanics . Nuovo Cimento 34 ( 7 ) : 161 – 172 . Aerts , D . 1983 . Classical theories and nonclassical theories as a special case of a more general theory . Journal of Mathematical Physics 24 , 2441 – 2454 . Aerts , D . 1986 . A possible explanation for the probabilities of quantum mechanics . Journal of Mathematical Physics 27 : 202 – 210 . Aerts , D . 1993 . Quantum structures due to fluctuations of the measurement situations . International Journal of Theoretical Physics 32 : 2207 – 2220 . Aerts , D . , Aerts , S . , Broekaert , J . , & Gabora , L . ( 2000 ) . The violation of Bell inequalities in the macroworld . Foundations of Physics 30 ( 9 ) : 1387 – 1414 . Aerts , D . and Durt , T . 1994 . Quantum , classical , and intermediate , an illustrative example . Foundations of Physic 24 : 1353 – 1368 . Aerts , D . and Gabora , L . 2005 . A state - context - property model of concepts and their combinations I : The structure of the sets of contexts and properties . Kybernetes , 34 ( 1 & 2 ) : 151 – 175 . Aerts , D . and Gabora , L . 2005 . A state - context - property model of concepts and their combinations II : A Hilbert space representation . Kybernetes 34 ( 1 & 2 ) : 176 – 205 . Aunger , R . 2000 . Darwinizing Culture . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Bachmann , P . A . , Luisi , P . I . , and Schatz , D . G . 1992 . Autocatalytic self - replicating micelles as models for prebiotic structures . Nature 357 : 57 − 59 . Barsalou , L . W . 1982 . Context - independent and context - dependent information in concepts . Memory & Cognition 10 : 82 − 93 . Bell , J . S . 1964 . On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox . Physics 1 : 195 − 200 . Boden , M . 1993 . The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms . London : Routeledge . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , and Mermigis , L . 1995 . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . M . Ward , and R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach ( pp . 27 − 52 ) . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . Bruza , P . and Cole , R . 2005 . Quantum logic of semantic space : An exploratory investigation of context effects in practical reasoning . In S . Artemov , H . Barringer , A . S . d ' Avila Garcez , L . C . Lamb and J . Woods ( Eds . ) We Will Show Them : Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay . College Publications , 1 , pp . 339 - 361 . Calvin , W . H . , and Bickerton , D . 2000 . Lingua ex Machina : Reconciling Darwin and Chomsky with the Human Brain . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Campbell , D . T . 1960 . Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review 67 : 380 − 400 . Cavalli - Sforza , L . L . , and Feldman , M . W . 1981 . Cultural Transmission and Evolution : A Quantitative Approach , Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Cohen , J . E . 1988 . Threshold phenomena in random structures . Descrete Applied Mathematics 75 : 55 − 68 . Costello , F . J . , Keane , M . T . 2000 . Efficient creativity : Constraint guided conceptual combination . Cognitive Science 24 ( 2 ) : 299 − 349 . Cziko , G . 1997 . Without miracles : Universal selection theory and the second Darwinian revolution . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . Cziko , G . 1998 . From blind to creative : In defense of Donald Campbell’s selectionist theory of human creativity . Journal of Creative Behavior 32 ( 3 ) : 192 - 212 . Depew , D . J . , and Weber , B . H . 1995 . Darwinism Evolving . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Durham , W . 1991 . Coevolution : Genes , Culture , and Human Diversity . Stanford : Stanford Press . Dyson , F . 1982 . A model for the origin of life . Journal of Molecular Evolution 18 : 344 − 350 . Dyson , F . 1985 / 1999 . Origins of Life . Cambridge : Cambridge Univ . Press . Edelman , G . 1987 . Neural Darwinism : The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection . New York : Basic . Erdös , P . , and Rényi , A . , 1960 . On the evolution of random graphs . Publication of the Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences 5 : 17 − 61 . Feinstein , J . S . 2006 . The Nature of Creative Development . Stanford : Stanford Business Books . Foulis , D . , Piron C . and Randall , C . 1983 . Realism , operationalism , and quantum mechanics . Foundations of Phys ics 13 , p . 813 . Foulis , D . and Randall , C . 1981 . What are quantum logics and what ought they to be ? In ( E . Beltrametti & B . van Fraassen , eds . ) Current Issues in Quantum Logic 35 , New York : Plenum Press . Fracchia J . , and Lewontin , R . C . ( 1999 ) Does culture evolve ? History and Theory 38 : 52 − 78 . Gabora L . 1995 . In L . Nadel , D . L . Stein , Eds , SFI Studies in the Sciences of Complexity , Lectures Vol . VI . Redwood City , CA : Addison - Wesley . Gabora , L . 1998 . A tentative scenario for the origin of culture . Psycoloquy 9 ( 67 ) . Gabora , L . 2004 . Ideas are not replicators but minds are . Biology & Philosophy 19 ( 1 ) : 127 – 143 . Gabora , L . 2005 . Creative thought as a non - Darwinian evolutionary process . Journal of Creative Behavior 39 ( 4 ) : 65 – 87 . Gabora , L . 2006 . Self - other organization : Why early life did not evolve through natural selection . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 241 ( 3 ) , 443 – 250 . Gabora , L . and Aerts , D . 2005 . Evolution as context - driven actualization of potential : Toward an interdisciplinary theory of change of state . Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 30 ( 1 ) : 69 – 88 . Gardenfors , P . 2000 . Conceptual Spaces : The Geometry of Thought . Cambridge MA : MIT Press . Gentner D . 1983 . Cognitive Science 7 ( 2 ) : 155 − 170 . Hoyle , F . 1981 . Hoyle on Evolution . Nature 294 , p . 105 . Jauch , J . 1968 . Foundations of Quantum Mechanics . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Kauffman , S . 1993 . Origins of Order . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . Mackey , G . 1963 . Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics . Reading , MA : John Benjamin . Martindale , C . 1995 . Creativity and connectionism . In Smith , Ward & Finke ( Eds . ) The Creative Cognition Approach , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Maturana , H . R . , and Varela F . J . 1980 . Autopoiesis and Cognition : Realization of the Living . Boston : Reidel . Mesoudi , A . , Whiten , A . , and Laland , K . 2004 . Toward a unified science of cultural evolution . Evolution 58 ( 1 ) : 1 − 11 . Morowitz H . J . 2002 . The Emergence of Everything . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . Neisser U . 1963 . The multiplicity of thought . British Journal of Psychology 54 : 1 − 14 . Nelson , D . L . , Goodmon , L . B . , and Ceo , D . ( in press . ) How does delayed testing reduce effects of implicit memory : context infusion or cuing with context ? Nelson , D . L . , McEvoy , C . L . , and Pointer , L . ( 2003 ) . Spreading activation or spooky action at a distance . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 29 : 42 − 51 . Piron , C . 1976 . Foundations of Quantum Physics . Reading , MA : W . A . Benjamin . Piron , C . 1989 . Recent developments in quantum mechanics . Helvetica Physica Acta , 62 : 439 - 468 . Piron , C . 1990 . Mecanique Quantique : Bases et Applications . Lausanne , Switzerland : Press Polytechnique de Lausanne . Pitowsky , I . 1989 . Quantum probability—Quantum logic : Lecture notes in physics 321 , Springer , Berlin . Randall , C . , and Foulis , D . 1976 . A mathematical setting for inductive reasoning . In : C . Hooker ( Ed . ) Foundations of Probability Theory , Statistical Inference , and Statistical Theories of Science III , Reidel . Randall , C . and Foulis , D . 1978 . The operational approach to quantum mechanics . In C . Hooker ( ed . ) , Physical Theories as Logico - Operational Structures , 167 . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Reidel . Rosch , E . 1973 . Natural Categories . Cognitive Psychology 4 : 328 − 350 . Rosch , E . 1978 . Principles of categorization . In Cognition and Categorization . E . Rosch , B . Lloyd , Eds . Hillsdale : Lawrence Erlbaum . Piaget , J . 1926 . The Language and Thought of the Child . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Simonton , D . K . 1999b . Creativity as blind variation and selective retention : Is the creative process Darwinian ? Psychological Inquiry 10 : 309 − 328 . Sloman , S . 1996 . The empirical case for two systems of Reasoning . Psychological Bulletin 9 ( 1 ) : 3 − 22 . Vetsigian , K . , Woese , C . , and Goldenfeld , N . 2006 . Collective evolution and the genetic code . Proceedings of the National Academy Science USA 103 : 10696 − 10701 . Wächtershäuser , G . 1992 . Groundwork for an evolutionary biochemistry : the iron - sulfur world . Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 58 : 85 − 201 . Watts , D . J . , and Strogatz , S . H . 1998 . Collective dynamics of ' small - world ' networks . Nature 393 ( 6684 ) : 409 − 10 . Weber B . H . , and Depew D . J . 1996 . Natural selection and self - organization : Dynamical models as clues to a new evolutionary synthesis . Biology and Philosophy 11 : 33 − 65 . Weber , B . H . , 2000 . Closure in the emergence and evolution of life : Multiple discourses or one ? In : J . L . R . Chandler & G . Van de Vijver ( Eds . ) Closure : Emergent Organizations and their Dynamics , Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 901 , pp . 132 − 138 . Widdows , D . S . 2003 . Orthogonal negation in vector spaces for modeling word meanings and document retrieval . In Proceedings of the 41 st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( p . 136 - 143 ) , Sapporo Japan , July 7 − 12 . Widdows , D . and Peters , S . 2003 . Word vectors and quantum logic : experiments with negation and disjunction . In Mathematics in Language 8 ( p . 141 - 154 ) , Bloomington IN . Williams , R . J . P . , and Frausto da Silva , J . J . R . , 1999 . Bringing Chemistry to Life : From Matter to Man . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Williams , R . J . P . , and Frausto da Silva , J . J . R . , 2002 . The systems approach to evolution . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 297 : 689 − 699 . Williams , R . J . P . , and Frausto da Silva , J . J . R . , 2003 . Evolution was chemically constrained . Journal of Theoretical Biology 220 : 323 − 343 . Wisniewski E . J . 1997 . When concepts combine . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 4 ( 2 ) : 167 − 183 . Wright S . 1945 . Tempo and mode in evolution : A critical review . Ecology 26 : 415 − 419 .