Allosteric Regulation of Human Plastins Christopher L . Schwebach 1 , Elena Kudryashova 1 , Richa Agrawal 1 , † , Weili Zheng 2 , ‡ , Edward H . Egelman 2 , Dmitri S . Kudryashov 1 , * 1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH 43210 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA 22908 † Present address : Biochemistry , Molecular , and Cell Biology ( BMCB ) program , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 ‡ Present address : NanoImaging Services , San Diego , CA 92121 * Correspondence to : kudryashov . 1 @ osu . edu 2 ABSTRACT Plastins / fimbrins are conserved actin - bundling proteins contributing to motility , cytokinesis , and other cellular processes by organizing actin assemblies of strikingly different geometries as in aligned bundles and branched networks . We propose that this unique ability stems from an allosteric communication between plastins’ two actin - binding domains ( ABD1 / 2 ) engaged in a tight spatial association . We found that although ABD1 binds actin first , ABD2 can bind to actin three orders of magnitude stronger if not inhibited by an equally strong allosteric engagement with ABD1 . Binding of ABD1 to actin lessened the inhibition , enabling weak bundling within aligned bundles . A mutation mimicking physiologically relevant phosphorylation at the ABD1 - ABD2 interface strongly reduced their association , dramatically potentiating actin cross - linking . Cryo - EM reconstruction revealed the ABD1 - actin interface and enabled modeling of the plastin bridge to confirm domain separation in parallel bundles . The characteristic domain organization with a strong allosteric inhibition imposed by ABD1 on ABD2 allows plastins to tune cross - linking , contributing to the assembly and remodeling of actin assemblies with different morphological and functional properties defining the unique place of plastins in actin organization . 3 INTRODUCTION Plastins , also known as fimbrins , are a family of actin - bundling proteins conserved throughout eukaryotic life and involved in cell migration , cytokinesis , and endocytosis 1 , 2 . Vertebrates express three tissue - specific plastin isoforms . Plastin 1 ( PLS1 ; a . k . a . I - plastin ) is primarily found in microvilli in the epithelial brush border of the intestine and kidneys 3 , 4 , and in the microvilli - like stereocilia of the inner ear hair cells 5 , 6 . Genetic defects in PLS1 gene are linked to hearing loss 7 , 8 . Plastin 2 ( PLS2 ; a . k . a . L - plastin , LCP1 , LPL ) is expressed in hematopoietic cells contributing to immune cell activation , migration , and invasion 9 - 15 . Congenital diseases associated with PLS2 mutations are not known , but , intriguingly , PLS2 is ectopically expressed in ~ 70 % of epithelial cancers , where it localizes to the leading edge and invadopodia contributing to metastatic capabilities of these cells 16 - 20 . Plastin 3 ( PLS3 ; a . k . a . T - plastin ) is the most ubiquitous of the three human isoforms expressed by most solid tissues , where it is enriched at the cell edge , specialized adhesion contacts 21 , distal parts of filopodia 22 , sites of endocytosis 23 , and in the contractile actin cortex formed upon membrane blebbing repair 24 . Mutations in PLS3 lead to severe X - linked hereditary osteoporosis with bone fragility 25 - 35 . Congenital osteoporosis develops upon deletion and truncations in PLS3 gene ( reviewed in 36 ) , but also due to point mutations resulting in PLS3 variants , which either lose the ability to bundle F - actin or display perturbed sensitivity to Ca 2 + 37 . By contributing to endocytosis 38 and migration , PLS3 plays neuroprotective roles by lessening the toxicity of pathogenic poly - glutamine - containing proteins 39 , alleviating symptoms of spinal muscular atrophy 40 , 41 , and coordinating neuronal cell migration in embryogenesis 42 . Furthermore , PLS3 is also recognized as an oncogene , whose ectopic expression in hematopoietic cells 43 , 44 and overexpression in cells of solid tissues promote cancer cell proliferation , motility , survival , and drug resistance 45 , 46 . Plastins belong to a superfamily of calponin - homology ( CH ) - domain - containing actin cytoskeleton organizers , which also include filamins , spectrins , α - actinins , IQGAP , and other actin - binding proteins 47 . Most members of the superfamily contain only one actin - binding domain ( ABD ) and must form dimers or higher - order oligomers to tether actin filaments into bundles and meshwork . Plastins are unique in having 4 two ABDs within the same polypeptide chain ( Fig . 1a ) . Each ABD consists of two CH - domains . In addition , all plastins contain an N - terminal regulatory domain ( RD ) comprised of two EF - hands followed by an EF - hand - binding motif [ EBM ; 48 , 49 ] and a long , disordered linker connecting the regulatory domain to the ABD1 - ABD2 core ( Fig . 1a ) . In mammalian plastins , the actin - bundling activity is inhibited upon Ca 2 + binding to EF - hands 4 , 40 , 50 , albeit some non - mammalian fimbrins are insensitive to Ca 2 + 51 - 53 . The current understanding of the plastin organization is based on crystal structures of the ABD1 - ABD2 cores of yeast and plant fimbrins 30 . For vertebrate plastins , only structures of individual ABD1 54 and CH4 of ABD2 ( PDB : 1WJO , 2D85 ) were resolved by X - ray crystallography and solution NMR , respectively , and the interaction of ABD2 ( but not ABD1 ) with actin was revealed by cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) reconstructions 37 , 55 . EM of negatively stained two - dimensional actin arrays assembled on lipid surfaces 56 revealed the overall architecture , spacing , and polarity of plastin - tethered bundles . It was found that actin filaments in the arrays are assembled in tight parallel bindles with 120 - Å spacing between centers of neighboring filaments . Unfortunately , the resolution of the reconstruction ( ~ 37 Å ) did not allow for unambiguously defining the domain orientation and the interaction mode of ABDs with actin . Structures of the EF - hand domain with and without Ca 2 + were determined by solution NMR 49 , but the RD location relative to the ABD1 - ABD2 core has not been revealed by high - resolution structural methods . Analysis of PLS3 pathogenic variants linked to hereditary osteoporosis revealed their aberrant sensitivity to Ca 2 + and pointed to the localization of RD at the interface between ABD1 and ABD2 , in the region enriched by several disordered loops 37 . Accordingly , the mechanism of plastins ' regulation was proposed : while binding of ABD1 to actin remains unaffected by Ca 2 + 48 , the RD in the Ca 2 + - bound state locks ABD2 in the inhibited conformation preventing the transition of the CH4 subdomain into a position where it does not clash with actin . In the proposed model , it remained unclear whether the inhibitory effect on ABD2 is imposed strictly by the RD or the inhibition originates from ABD1 and only is regulated by the RD . Here , we report an overarching mechanism of plastin regulation that is mediated by a strong allosteric inhibition imposed by ABD1 on ABD2 . We employed covalent cross - linking to stabilize an 5 otherwise insufficiently stable complex of ABD1 with F - actin and obtained F - actin filaments decorated by ABD1 . Cryo - EM reconstruction revealed that binding of ABD1 to actin roughly recapitulates that of ABD2 , although with a smaller footprint area of CH1 on actin compared to CH3 of ABD2 , and CH2 separated from actin further away than CH4 of ABD2 . Superposition of the actin - bound ABD1 structure with that of unbound ABD1 - ABD2 core confirmed that moderate reorientation of ABD2 is needed to avoid clashes with actin . Accordingly , we found that the ABD2 inhibition by ABD1 is slightly attenuated upon binding of ABD1 to F - actin , allowing engagement of ABD2 in weak actin bundling . The extent of the inhibitory allosteric engagement between ABD1 and ABD2 can be further weakened by a mutational mimicking of physiologically relevant phosphorylation of the Ser406 residue at the ABD1 - ABD2 interface . As a result , the reduced allosteric engagement between ABDs strongly increased the bundling potential of the protein . Ca 2 + did not affect the interaction between ABD1 and ABD2 , suggesting that it regulates actin bundling independently of the allosteric mechanism . Accordingly , Ca 2 + retained the ability to attenuate actin bundling by the S406E plastin mutant , but to a lesser degree than bundling by WT protein . We propose that the discovered allosteric inhibition mechanism enables regulating the strength of actin cross - linking by plastins in a broad range contributing to the assembly and remodeling of various high - order actin structures with different morphological and functional properties . We suggest that this ability is a key feature of plastins that distinguishes them from other CH - domain actin organizers and defines their unique place in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . RESULTS ABD2 binds to F - actin orders of magnitude stronger than the full - length protein ABD1 of human PLS3 ( ABD1 PLS3 ) binds F - actin with a K d in a low - micromolar range , similar to that of full - length ( FL ) PLS3 ( FL PLS3 ) 48 . Similarly , co - sedimentation assays revealed that ABD1 PLS2 binds to F - actin only slightly better than FL PLS2 ( K d of 2 . 6 ± 1 . 0 µM and 5 . 7 ± 1 . 0 µM , respectively ; Fig . 1b ) . To evaluate the contribution of both domains to actin binding , we attempted to produce recombinant ABD2 6 of the human plastin isoforms . Of all three , only ABD2 PLS2 was soluble , stable , and existed in solution as a monomeric protein as confirmed by gel filtration chromatography and analytical sedimentation ( Supplementary Fig . 1a - c ) . In contrast , ABD2 from PLS1 and PLS3 could not be purified due to their intrinsically low stability either alone or as a fusion with a folding - promoting maltose - binding protein 57 . To our surprise , isolated ABD2 PLS2 bound F - actin much stronger than ABD1 PLS2 or the FL PLS2 . Since the affinity was too high to be accurately assessed by F - actin co - sedimentation assays , fluorescence anisotropy ( FA ) experiments were employed to reveal that fluorescein - labeled ABD2 PLS2 ( FM - ABD2 ) binds F - actin with a K d in the nanomolar range ( 9 . 9 ± 3 . 7 nM ; Fig . 1b ) , while unlabeled ABD2 PLS2 binds even tighter ( K d = 3 . 6 ± 0 . 3 nM ; Fig . 1c ) . Therefore , the affinity of isolated ABD2 to actin is ~ 1 , 500 times stronger than that of full - length PLS2 . Given that ABD2 binds F - actin at the interface between two long - pitch actin subunits 37 , we hypothesized that such a strong binding might stabilize the longitudinal dimer and promote nucleation . Indeed , in pyrenyl - actin polymerization assays , low - nanomolar concentrations of ABD2 PLS2 potently increased bulk actin polymerization rate ( Fig . 1d ) . A drastically increased number of filaments in the presence of ABD2 PLS2 , but neither ABD1 PLS2 nor FL PLS2 , observed by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ; Fig . 1e ) confirmed that faster polymerization is indeed due to actin nucleation . Polymerization of actins with perturbed filament - forming interfaces can be rescued by filament interface - stabilizing factors 58 , 59 . Intermolecular covalent cross - linking of actin monomers by actin cross - linking domain ( ACD ) toxin brings actin subunits into oligomers that do not polymerize as their longitudinal contacts are disturbed by artificial covalent bonds 60 . The polymerization of ACD - cross - linked actin oligomers can be rescued , however , if the perturbed contacts are compensated by enforcing the remaining contacts by phalloidin or reshaping the contacts by cofilin 60 , 61 . Accordingly , in agreement with its ability to staple adjacent subunits 37 by the strong ABD2 - actin contacts , ABD2 PLS2 effectively rescued polymerization of ACD - cross - linked actin oligomers ( Supplementary Fig . 1d ) . The above results demonstrate that ABD2 in isolation can bind to F - actin with very high affinity and potently nucleate actin , i . e . , possesses abilities suppressed in the full - length protein context . 7 Figure 1 . ABD2 of PLS2 binds to F - actin with nanomolar affinity and nucleates actin ( a ) A schematic representation of plastin domain organization . Regulatory domain ( RD ) consisting of two EF - hand motifs ( EF1 and 2 ) is connected through a flexible linker to the PLS2 core comprising two actin - binding domains ( ABD1 and 2 ) , each consisting of two calponin - homology motifs ( CH1 - 4 ) . Numbers represent amino acid numbering in the PLS2 sequence . Relevant mutations are indicated . ( b ) F - actin binding affinities of the full - length PLS2 ( FL PLS2 ) and ABD1 PLS2 were assessed by F - actin co - sedimentation assays ; F - actin binding affinity of ABD2 PLS2 was measured by FA . The inset zooms in the data range 0 – 5 µM of actin . Error bars represent SD of the mean ; number of repetitions for each group ( n ) is indicated in the figure . ( c ) F - actin binding affinity of unlabeled ABD2 PLS2 was assessed by FA competition assays . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 3 . ( d ) Bulk pyrene - actin polymerization was monitored in the absence or presence of increasing concentrations of ABD2 ; representative normalized fluorescence traces are shown . ( e ) Actin nucleation activities of FL PLS2 and its individual ABDs ( 50 nM final concentration ) were tested by TIRFM . Representative micrographs at 90 and 180 s after the initiation of actin polymerization are shown ; scale bars are 10 µm . The graph shows the number of actin filaments present in a field of view at 90 - s time point . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 5 . ANOVA followed by multiple comparison tests with Bonferroni correction was applied : asterisk indicates statistically significant difference ( * p < 0 . 0167 ) ; individual p - values are 0 . 58 ( FL PLS2 ( FL ) ) , 0 . 18 ( ABD1 PLS2 ( A1 ) ) , and * 4 . 6x10 - 7 ( ABD2 PLS2 ( A2 ) ) , each compared to the actin control ( - ) . 8 ABD1 and ABD2 of plastins interact in trans with nanomolar K d The potent nucleating ability of ABD2 PLS2 was not reproduced by full - length plastin ( Fig . 1e ) , suggesting the suppression of the nucleation capacity of ABD2 in the full - length protein context , potentially due to its interaction with ABD1 . Accordingly , added in trans , ABD1 PLS2 inhibited the nucleating ability of ABD2 PLS2 in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 2a ) . In FA experiments , ABD1 PLS2 bound to ABD2 PLS2 with a high affinity ( K d = 11 . 4 ± 0 . 7 nM in FA competition assays ; Fig . 2b ) , whereas the ABD1 construct with the regulatory domain ( RD - ABD1 PLS2 ) bound ABD2 PLS2 even stronger , irrespective of the presence of Ca 2 + ( K d = 3 . 0 ± 0 . 9 nM in EGTA vs K d = 2 . 9 ± 0 . 5 nM in Ca 2 + ; Fig . 2c ) . Therefore , RD contributes to the interaction between the actin - binding domains , in agreement with its recent mapping to the loop - rich region at the ABD1 - ABD2 interface 37 . The ABD1 - ABD2 affinity was nearly identical in 30 and 130 mM KCl ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) , suggesting a dominant role of hydrophobic surfaces in this interaction . Increase in thermostability often accompanies formation of protein complexes and can be detected by differential scanning fluorimetry ( DSF ) 62 . Accordingly , the in trans ABD1 - ABD2 complexes were more stable than individual domains ( Fig . 2b , c ) , not however reaching the stability of FL PLS2 ( T m = 65 o C ; Figs . 3 and 5b ) . Due to reduced stability and prompt degradation , neither ABD2 PLS1 nor ABD2 PLS3 could be characterized . Yet , ABD1 PLS3 and RD - ABD1 PLS3 bound to ABD2 PLS2 with high affinities similar to those of ABD1 PLS2 and RD - ABD1 PLS2 , respectively ( Fig . 2d , e ) , suggesting that the RD - ABD1 / ABD2 interface is highly preserved in plastin isoforms . Therefore , ABD1 and ABD2 of plastins interact with each other with high affinity comparable to that of isolated ABD2 to F - actin , suggesting that ABD1 / ABD2 interaction suppresses the ABD2 high - affinity binding to F - actin . 9 Figure 2 . ABD1 of PLS2 interacts with and suppresses ABD2 ( a ) Effects of increasing concentrations of ABD1 PLS2 on the ABD2 PLS2 - mediated acceleration of actin polymerization was monitored by bulk pyrene - actin polymerization assays ; representative normalized fluorescence traces are shown . ( b - e ) Binding affinities of the individual ABDs of PLS2 and PLS3 to each other in trans were measured by fluorescence anisotropy using FM - ABD2 PLS2 ( left panels ) and confirmed in FA competition assays using unlabeled ABD2 PLS2 ( middle panels ) . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; number of repetitions ( n ) is indicated in the figures . Melting temperatures ( T m s ) of the individual ABDs and upon mixing with each other were tested by DSF ( right panels ) : the graphs show the first derivatives ( - dF / dT ) of melting curves ( average of n = 3 ) . 10 F - actin binding weakens ABD1 - imposed inhibition of ABD2 A strong inhibitory influence of ABD1 on ABD2 reconciles the apparent paradox that the domain with a much higher affinity to actin ( i . e . , ABD2 ) binds actin only after the lower - affinity ABD1 domain is bound 48 . Given that , even in trans , the strength of the inhibitory ABD1 / ABD2 interaction is nearly matching that of the bundling - conferring ABD2 / F - actin interaction ( Figs . 2b , c and 1b , c ) , the inhibitory component must be prevailing when ABD1 and ABD2 are parts of the same protein . We hypothesized , therefore , that for bundling to happen , the inhibition must be weakened by a mechanism universally applicable to all plastins . Since binding of ABD1 to actin precedes that of ABD2 48 , we tested whether the interaction of ABD1 with actin may contribute to the inhibition release . Since separated ABD1 and ABD2 ( T m = 48 . 5 - 51 . 3 o C ; Fig . 2b , c ) are less stable than the FL PLS2 ( T m = 65 o C ; Figs . 3 and 5b ) , we should expect destabilization of PLS2 upon binding to F - actin due to the anticipated ABD1 - ABD2 disentanglement . To distinguish the effects of the domain separation caused by binding via ABD1 from those resulting from binding via both domains , we reproduced the osteoporosis L478P PLS3 mutation that blocks ABD2 binding to actin 37 in PLS2 ( L475P PLS2 ) . We confirmed that , similarly to L478P PLS3 , L475P PLS2 was able to bind ( presumably through intact ABD1 ) but unable to bundle F - actin effectively regardless of the presence of Ca 2 + ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . In agreement with our hypothesis , the T m of L475P PLS2 decreased by ~ 3 o C upon binding to F - actin ( Fig . 3 ) , suggesting a modest disengagement of the domains . In contrast , wild - type ( WT ) PLS2 ( PLS2 WT ) and S5D PLS2 mutant ( PLS2 S5D ) mimicking the Ser5 phosphorylation 19 , 20 , both of which can bind actin via both ABD1 and ABD2 domains , were destabilized by F - actin to a notably greater extent ( by ~ 10 o C ; Fig . 3 ) . We propose that the initial mild disengagement of ABD1 - ABD2 upon ABD1 binding to F - actin ( as observed in L475P PLS2 ) is followed by a stronger domain separation in PLS2 WT and PLS2 S5D due to a competitive binding of ABD2 to F - actin resulting in bundling . The L475P mutation at the actin - binding interface of ABD2 prevents its binding to F - actin , limiting the ABD1 - ABD2 separation in L475P PLS2 . 11 Figure 3 . F - actin binding releases the ABD1 - imposed suppression of ABD2 Melting temperatures ( T m s ) of bundling - competent ( WT and S5D ) and bundling - incompetent ( L475P ) full - length PLS2 constructs were assessed by DSF in the absence or presence of F - actin . The normalized first derivative melting curves ( - dF / dT ) represent the average data of n = 3 . The arrows indicate the direction / magnitude of the shifts of PLS2 melting peaks upon F - actin binding . ABD1 binds F - actin in a similar to ABD2 mode but with a smaller footprint While the structure of ABD2 bound to F - actin is available 37 , the attempts to solve the structure of ABD1 in complex with F - actin were unsuccessful 55 . This is likely due to a much lower affinity of ABD1 for F - actin . To overcome these challenges , we mapped the ABD1 / F - actin interface by mutagenesis to identify regions that can be used for cross - linking to F - actin using thiol - reactive reagents . Since the Cys - null construct of PLS2 does not bundle F - actin while the corresponding PLS3 construct is correctly folded and fully functional 48 , the latter was used to generate single - Cys mutants of human plastin RD - ABD1 . Human β - actin was mutated to remove the most reactive cysteine ( Cys374 ) while introducing a cysteine in subdomain 2 ( K50C ) near the anticipated ABD1 binding site . The mutated actin was expressed and purified from Pichia pastoris 63 . Several PLS3 constructs with single cysteines introduced at the ABD1 surface were tested for cross - linking with KC50 , 374CA F - actin via N , N′ - 1 , 2 - phenylenedimaleimide ( oPDM ) , N , N′ - 1 , 4 - phenylenedimaleimide ( pPDM ) , and 3 , 6 - dioxaoctane - 1 , 8 - diyl bismethanethiosulfonate ( MTS - 8 - MTS ) homobifunctional thiol - reactive cross - linking reagents ( Supplementary Fig . 4a - d ) . Of all the combinations of constructs and reagents , cross - linking of Q194C RD - ABD1 to K50C on actin by MTS - 8 - MTS provided the highest yield of the sought product ( Supplementary Fig . 4a - d ) and as such was selected for reconstruction by cryo - EM . 12 Figure 4 . Cryo - EM reconstruction of ABD1 - decorated F - actin ( a ) Cryo - EM density map of actin filament decorated by ABD1 PLS3 is shown as a grey transparent surface . The model built by fitting a cryo - EM structure of F - actin ( PDB : 6ANU ) and crystal structure of ABD1 of PLS3 ( PDB : 1AOA ) is shown as colored ribbons . ( b ) Close - up view of the boxed area in a ( ABD1 is shown as rainbow - colored ribbon from N - terminus in blue to C - terminus in red ; actin is in grey ) . Chemically cross - linked residues in ABD1 ( Q194C ) and actin ( K50C ) are shown as magenta spheres . ( c ) Superposition of ABD1 ( CH1 in light blue , CH2 in dark blue ; present study : EMD - 25371 ) and ABD2 ( CH3 in light red , CH4 in dark red ; PDB : 6VEC ) in the F - actin - bound states . ( d ) Alignment of the cryo - EM ABD1 / F - actin model with the AlphaFold - generated model of human PLS3 core ( https : / / alphafold . ebi . ac . uk / entry / P13797 ) revealed clashes between ABD2 and F - actin ( indicated by arrowheads ) : 521 - 535 ABD2 helix ( numeration as in full - length PLS2 ) clashes with 359 - 365 actin helix ( magenta arrowhead ) ; 553 - 562 ABD2 helix clashes with 356 - 358 actin loop and 359 - 365 actin helix ( yellow arrowhead ) . Color scheme as in c . Analysis of 155 , 939 256 - px - long segments of decorated actin filaments yielded a model of ABD1 bound to F - actin at an overall 5 . 1 - Å resolution ( Fig . 4a , b ) . However , the resolution for actin was higher , and the resolution of ABD1 became progressively worse the farther from the actin ( Supplementary Fig . 4e ) . In the reconstruction , RD was not detected , pointing to its high flexibility when not stabilized by its second binding site in ABD2 48 . The binding interface of CH1 is oriented towards actin similarly to that of 13 CH3 of ABD2 PLS2 37 and spectrin 64 ( Fig . 4c ) . Specifically , the loop 184 - 189 and the first five residues of the helix 190 - 206 of CH1 are sufficiently close to make contacts at both sides ( subdomains 1 and 3 ) of the hydrophobic cleft of the “i” actin subunit but also with the 44 - 48 segment of the D - loop ( subdomain 2 ) of the longitudinally adjacent subunit “i + 2” . Also , in subdomain 1 of the “i + 2” subunit , the tip of 79 - 95 helix is in proximity to residues Gln118 , Asn213 , and His225 of plastin’s CH1 . With the exception of Asn213 , all these PLS3 residues are different from those determined in a previous model based on a ~ 30 - Å resolution reconstruction of ABD1 - decorated actin filaments 65 . Alignment of the cryo - EM ABD1 structure with an AlphaFold - generated model 66 of the PLS3 core ( Fig . 4d ) and the X - ray structures of yeast and plant fimbrin cores 30 revealed clashes between ABD2 and the actin filament . The reorientation of the ABD2 relative to ABD1 required to eliminate the clash is the likely trigger of the experimentally detected ( Fig . 3 ) mild disengagement of ABD1 from ABD2 , enabling the initial priming of ABD2 for bundling . A mutation at the ABD1 - ABD2 interface mimicking physiologically relevant PLS2 phosphorylation reduces the relative affinity of the actin - binding domains and potentiates F - actin bundling Since ABD1 - actin affinity is relatively low ( K d = 2 . 6 µM ) , only a thermodynamically equivalent portion of the potent ABD1 - imposed inhibition can be released upon binding to actin , bestowing a weak to moderate bundling strength . A more effective uncoupling can result in a more active protein with different properties . We sought to determine whether such modulation can be achieved by physiological means . To this end , we focused on physiologically relevant post - translational modifications of PLS2 . Phosphorylation of PLS2 residues Ser5 , Ser7 , and Thr89 has been characterized to various degrees 9 , 13 , 67 , 68 , while the effects of phosphorylation at several other sites identified by high - throughput methods ( PhosphoSitePlus 69 ) have not been examined . In particular , phosphorylation of Ser406 in PLS2 has been identified in several high - throughput mass - spectrometry studies in both mice and humans 70 - 78 . S406 resides at the interface between the ABDs , i . e . , in a strategic position for a plausible regulation of ABD1 / ABD2 crosstalk ( Fig . 5a ) . 14 Figure 5 . S406E PLS2 mutation mimicking physiologically relevant phosphorylation of S406 releases the inhibition of ABD2 by uncoupling it from ABD1 ( a ) An AlphaFold - generated model of PLS2 - core . The location of S406E mutation is highlighted in green . ( b ) The T m s of WT and S406E PLS2 were assessed by DSF . The first derivative ( dF / dT ) traces represent the average data of n = 3 . ( c , d ) The binding affinity of ABD1 WT and ABD2 S406E to each other were measured by fluorescence anisotropy ( c ) and confirmed by FA competition using unlabeled ABD2 S406E ( d ) . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 3 . ( e , f ) The F - actin binding ( e ; n = 3 ) and bundling ( f ; n = 2 ) activities of PLS2 WT and PLS2 S406E were tested in high - and low - speed co - sedimentation assays , respectively . Error bars represent the SD of the mean . ( g ) F - actin bundling by WT , S5D , L475P , and S406E PLS2 was monitored by light scattering . Red arrows indicate two time points , at which the plastin constructs ( 2 µM final concentration ) were added to F - actin . ( h ) Representative TEM micrograph images show actin bundles formed in the presence of PLS2 WT and PLS2 S406E . Scale bars are 100 nm . 15 We produced and characterized a phospho - mimetic PLS2 S406E construct , which was significantly less thermostable as compared to PLS2 WT ( T m = 56 ± 0 . 2 °C and 65 ± 0 . 3 °C , respectively ; Fig . 5b ) , tentatively reflecting a disengagement of ABD1 from the stabilizing and inhibitory interaction with ABD2 . Indeed , the in trans affinity between the ABD1 WT and ABD2 S406E was decreased more than two orders of magnitude as compared to ABD2 WT ( K d = 2 µM vs K d = 11 . 4 nM ; Figs . 5c , d and 2b , respectively ) . In agreement with the inhibition hypothesis , full - length PLS2 S406E showed moderately improved F - actin binding and dramatically reinforced bundling efficiencies ( Fig . 5e , f ) . Although bundling of actin by PLS2 S406E was inhibited by Ca 2 + , it was still stronger than bundling by PLS2 WT in the absence of Ca 2 + ( Fig . 5f ) . Therefore , Ca 2 + binding to EF - hands cannot compensate for the phosphorylation - dependent attenuation of the allosteric cooperation between ABD1 and ABD2 . The mutation strongly accelerated the rate of bundling and size of bundles as detected by light scattering and transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) , respectively ( Fig . 5g , h ) . The release of the inhibition from ABD2 was not , however , complete , as under the conditions when isolated ABD2 was highly potent ( i . e . , at 50 - nM concentration ( Fig . 1e ) ) , PLS2 S406E showed no nucleation ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) , and it displayed only moderately increased nucleation activity at high ( 1 - µM ) concentration in TIRFM assays ( Supplementary Fig . 5b ) . Interestingly , phosphorylation analogous to that of PLS2 at S406 was not reported for either PLS1 or PLS3 . In our hands , the respective recombinantly produced phospho - mimetic PLS1 S407E and PLS3 S409E constructs aggregated upon purification . Since ABD2 PLS1 and ABD2 PLS3 are unstable when expressed as individual domains , the observed aggregation of the phospho - mimetic mutants is likely due to the reduced stabilization of the ABD2 domains by ABD1 in these isoforms . These data strongly support the hypothesis that ABD2 in the normal mode of plastins is potently inhibited by ABD1 . This inhibition can be tuned down upon binding of ABD1 to F - actin and weakened further by physiological modifications ( e . g . , PLS2 S406 phosphorylation ) . Uncoupling of the domains releases the inhibition of ABD2 , resulting in its higher affinity for actin and higher bundling capacity of the protein . 16 Figure 6 . Intracellular localization of human plastins ( a , b ) XTC cells transiently co - transfected with the indicated mEmerald - tagged plastin constructs , mCherry - F - tractin ( to visualize actin ) and a focal adhesion marker mCardinal - paxillin were imaged using TIRFM ( a ) . Fluorescence intensity profiles ( b ) for all three channels were generated along the white arrows shown in a , which also serve as scale bars ( 20 µm ) . LP is lamellipodia . ( c ) SiMS TIRF microscopy of XTC cells transiently transfected with mEmerald - tagged WT plastins : average intensity projections and kymographs are shown to demonstrate retrograde flow ( see also Supplementary Video 1 ) . Velocities are calculated by dividing the distance ( d ) by the time ( t ) using bounding rectangles for the lines drawn to trace the tracks of interest on the kymographs . Scale bars are 5 µm . 17 Release of ABD2 inhibition alters cellular localization of plastins To better understand the role of the allosteric inhibition , we examined the effects of uncoupling of the ABD1 / ABD2 interaction by mutations in a cellular context . Similar to WT PLS3 37 , WT PLS1 and PLS2 ( all C - terminally tagged with mEmerald ) were enriched at the cell leading edge , where they localized to actin - rich structures in the lamellipodia , filopodia , focal adhesions , and , to a lesser degree , stress fibers in Xenopus laevis XTC fibroblasts and human U2OS osteosarcoma cells ( Fig . 6a , b and Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . When tracked by single - molecule speckle ( SiMS ) TIRFM 79 , 80 , all plastin isoforms undergo retrograde flow in the lamellipodia in a similar to actin mode ( rates ~ 0 . 025 nm / s ; Fig . 6c and Supplementary Video 1 ) . In contrast , the PLS2 S406E construct was depleted from the lamellipodia but highly enriched at focal adhesions and stress fibers , whose morphology was enhanced and perturbed ( Fig . 6a , b and Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . Recycling of plastin from focal adhesions to the lamellipodial branched actin network requires unperturbed Ca 2 + sensitivity 37 . The localization of PLS2 S406E at the focal adhesions , therefore , is logically explained by its enhanced bundling capacities even in the presence of Ca 2 + notably exceeding those of PLS2 WT under no Ca 2 + conditions ( Fig . 5f ) . Since PLS2 S406E cannot be adequately inhibited by Ca 2 + , it likely gets depleted from the lamellipodial branched actin networks via the retrograde flow leading to a concomitant accumulation at the focal adhesions and stress fibers in the lamella . Weakening the actin - binding surface of ABD2 PLS2 by charge - inversing KK542 , 545EE mutations ( KKEE ) , leading to actin - bundling deficiency in vitro 48 , resulted in a diffuse localization of the mutated PLS2 and PLS3 proteins ( Fig . 6a , b ) . Such localization is similar and consistent with that of a PLS3 congenital osteoporosis variant with the actin - binding interface of ABD2 impaired by the L478P mutation 37 , corroborating that binding via both domains ( i . e . , the bundling ability ) is essential for plastin localization to actin - rich structures in the cell . Introduction of the ABD1 - ABD2 disengaging mutation S406E on the KK542 , 545EE background ( S406E - KKEE ) restored normal localization of PLS2 to F - actin - rich structures in XTC fibroblasts ( Fig . 6a , b ) , suggesting that a weakened ABD2 interface can be compensated by attenuating the inhibition from ABD1 . In human U2OS cells , this same PLS2 construct 18 was enriched stronger than PLS2 WT at focal adhesions ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) , pointing to cell - specific and likely tissue - specific aspects of plastin physiology . Curiously , while being unstable upon expression in E . coli , PLS3 S409E localized to stress fibers in eukaryotic cells similarly to PLS2 S406E ( Fig . 6 and Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . This result suggests that the mutation - caused destabilization of ABD2 PLS3 is compensated in the cell either by the presence of actin or other cellular factors . DISCUSSION In a large family of CH - domain actin organizers , plastins are unique in containing two ABDs in the same polypeptide chain in intimate association with each other 30 . Although several studies have reported that the two ABDs are not identical in their properties 48 , 55 , 56 , 81 , a comprehensive understanding of the domains’ mutual influence , their contribution to the function of plastins , as well as the overall logic and capacities of the molecule design have not been achieved . In this report , we addressed these deficiencies by characterizing the interaction of full - length human plastins and their individual domains with actin and with each other . While the ability of plastins to organize aligned bundles ( e . g . , in microvilli , cochlear stereocilia , and filopodia ) is understandable and shared with other compact actin bundlers ( e . g . , fascin ) , their affinity towards complex networks of poorly aligned actin filaments ( e . g . , at the leading edge , in podosomes , immune synapses , and cuticular plates of hair cells ) is puzzling . Indeed , filaments in such meshes are typically short , and the concentration of overlapping and properly oriented filaments suitable for cross - linking in such areas is low . In the present study , we discovered an allosteric inhibition between ABDs and mechanisms of its physiological attenuation resulting in dramatic changes in properties of plastins demonstrated at the molecular and cellular levels . We propose that the allosteric autoinhibition is the key feature of plastins / fimbrins underlying their versatile involvement in various cellular processes and association with both well and poorly aligned filament bundles ( Fig . 7a , b ) . 19 Figure 7 . Hypothetical experimental model of actin bundling by plastins ( a , b ) In a regular operation mode of human plastins ( yellow arrows ) , ABD2 is strongly inhibited by ABD1 . Binding of ABD1 to F - actin favors slight release of the inhibition and allows ABD2 to get engaged in weak interaction with actin ( 1 ) . Due to a high affinity of ABD1 to ABD2 , the inhibition is not fully released upon ABD1 binding to actin , resulting in a weak bundling mode optimal for organized bundles , where many plastin molecules are engaged in cumulative weak interactions in the F - actin bundle ( 1 ) . Binding of Ca 2 + to the regulatory domain ( RD ) disfavors further release of ABD2 inhibition but does not interfere with actin binding via ABD1 . PTMs ( e . g . , phosphorylation of S406 ) and possibly binding of unknown cellular factors weaken the ABD1 - ABD2 contacts more dramatically , allowing much stronger interaction of ABD2 with actin ( green arrows ) . This strong - bundling mode enables both , individual cross - linking events essential for strengthening branched meshes ( 2 ) and stronger , Ca 2 + - hypo - sensitive organized bundles ( 3 ) . Plastins undergo retrograde flow with actin in the lamellipodia ( present study ) , and their recycling from focal adhesions ( FA ) to lamellipodial branched networks is controlled by Ca 2 + 37 . In the absence of finely tuned regulation ( e . g . , constitutively active phospho - mimicking PLS2 S406E and PLS3 S409E ) this eventually leads to plastin depletion from the lamellipodial branched actin networks with concomitant accumulation at the focal adhesions ( FA ) and stress fibers ( SF ) in the lamella ( b ) . Under normal physiological conditions , however , delicate PTM and Ca 2 + regulation restores the balance and allows prompt recycling of plastins from the FA / SF to the lamellipodia . ( c , d ) Model of actin bundle cross - linked by plastin based on cryo - EM reconstructions of ABD1 ( EMD - 25371 ) and ABD2 ( PDB : 6VEC ) . The domain reorientation required for parallel , in - register actin bundle is illustrated in d with alternative positions of CH3 - CH4 depicted by dashed circles ( see also Supplementary Video 2 ) . All human plastins bind actin with similar affinities in a micromolar range 48 . Despite the low affinity of full - length plastins to actin , we found that ABD2 of PLS2 alone binds actin tightly with a low - nanomolar K d ( Fig . 1b , c ) . This high affinity , however , is balanced by an equally strong inhibitory interaction with ABD1 ( Fig . 2 ) . We confirmed our prior finding 48 that binding of the domains to actin is sequential , and that the engagement is primed by binding of ABD1 to actin . This binding attenuates , 20 albeit slightly , the allosteric inhibition ( Fig . 3 ) , allowing weak binding of ABD2 to an adjacent filament providing such is available in proximity . Under these conditions , ABD2 remains largely inhibited by a still very strong interaction with ABD1 . We propose that this weak bundling mode is optimal for bundling of highly organized parallel actin arrays ( e . g . , in microvilli and filopodia ) where the adequate bundling strength is achieved through avidity . In this mode , plastins are highly sensitive to the inhibition and dissociation by Ca 2 + , enabling effective control of their localization 37 via respective signaling . Such weak binding is not effective , however , for the organization of less ordered bundles such as those found in the branched networks associated with the lamellipodia or endocytic machinery . Additional attenuation of the allosteric auto - inhibition required in this case can be bestowed by a post - translational modification ( PTM ) such as PLS2 S406 phosphorylation . Since PLS2 S406E is a notably better bundler ( Fig . 5f - h ) , it can cross - link poorly aligned filaments in single nodes essential for organization of meshed networks . Alternatively , attenuation can be achieved via interaction with proteins or other molecules that bind at the ABD1 - ABD2 interface , i . e . , at a cryptic site obscured by this strong interaction . As the plastin bridges progress with retrograde actin flow towards lamella ( Supplementary Video 1 ) , their recycling to the lamellipodial leading edge is orchestrated by Ca 2 + 37 , which reaches the highest concentration at the interface between lamella and lamellipodium 82 . Ca 2 + , however , is unable to recycle phosphorylation - mimicking PLS2 S406E and PLS3 S409E with the attenuated ABD1 - ABD2 inhibition , leading to their depletion from the lamellipodia and accumulation in aligned bundles of focal adhesions and stress fibers ( Fig . 6 and Supplementary Fig . 6 ) in agreement with a low Ca 2 + - sensitivity of PLS2 S406E in vitro ( Fig . 5f ) . Therefore , our model suggests that the attenuation must be released by either removal of the PTM or dissociation from a hypothetical lamellipodial partner . In differentiated cells ( e . g . , enterocytes and inner ear hair cells ) similar mechanisms can be employed to produce stable actin bundles of microvilli and stereocilia resistant to the presence of Ca 2 + . Interestingly , although S406 and the surrounding residues are highly conserved in all human plastins , their phosphorylation has been experimentally detected thus far only in PLS2 . A cancer - centered focus of the proteomic studies detecting the S406 phosphorylation may explain this discrimination , as 21 PLS2 was linked to carcinogenesis more than other isoforms . Alternatively , other modifications and / or interactions with protein partners may play a similar auto - inhibition attenuating role for PLS1 / 3 . In the latter case , the localization of the partners , rather than PTM enzymes , would define the localization of plastins . Among likely candidates for such partners are coronin and mitotic spindle positioning ( MISP ) . Indeed , coronin , which is known to be enriched at the Arp2 / 3 complex organized actin networks , has been reported to interact with PLS3 38 and , therefore , may mediate its recruitment to lamellipodia and endocytic sites . MISP , on the other hand , has been recently shown to localize to microvilli rootlets in differentiating enterocytes and specifically recruit PLS1 to this area 83 . The cooperativity between MISP and PLS1 facilitates cross - linking of the proximal ends of core bundles in the terminal web of brush border microvilli . Is the extent of domain separation in plastins proposed here supported by literature data ? In physiological bundles , where the role of plastin / fimbrin is unambiguously established ( e . g . , inner ear stereocilia and intestinal microvilli ) , actin filaments are found in the parallel alignment . Accordingly , 2D - actin arrays assembled in the presence of plastins are also parallel 56 . By constraining the experimentally determined distance between centers of actin filaments at 12 nm 56 , 84 and using our cryo - EM reconstructions of actin decorated by ABD1 ( Fig . 4 ) and ABD2 37 , we modeled how ABDs of plastin are expected to separate in a parallel , in - register actin bundle ( Fig . 7c , d ) . As illustrated in Supplementary Video 2 , the domain reorientation required for such assembly is rather dramatic , which , however , is in agreement with a substantial loss of thermal stability by plastins in the bundling mode ( Fig . 3 ) . Such strong separation of the domains supports a possibility for plastins to be engaged in the organization of various types of actin assemblies , including antiparallel bundles ( as found in the contractile ring ) and actin networks with angled filament orientations ( as present in lamellipodia and endocytic patches ) . Experimentally , plastins / fimbrins has been found associated with both types of structures 37 , 51 , 81 , 85 . Furthermore , in vitro , at least Saccharomyces pombe yeast fimbrin can form actin bundles in both parallel and antiparallel orientations with a similar likelihood 81 . 22 The postulated dramatic conformational changes in plastins accompanied by domain separation are consistent with recognized mechanisms of mechanosensing that operate via i ) dynamic “catch” and “slip” bonds 86 and ii ) exposure of cryptic sites in cytoskeletal proteins 87 , 88 . Indeed , several indirect but strong lines of evidence support plastin’s role in mechanotransduction . Thus , lamellipodia , endocytic patches , focal adhesions , and the contractile ring ( i . e . , structures associated with plastins / fimbrins ) are the elements whose functionality critically depends on a dynamic response to mechanical forces . Furthermore , PLS3 in mature osteocytes is highly enriched in the bifurcation sites in the osteocyte processes 89 , i . e . , in regions thought to be critical for the shear - stress mediated bone remodeling . It is tempting to speculate that the anticipated sensitivity to mechanical forces underlies the important role of PLS3 as one of the main cross - linkers in microvilli and inner ear stereocilia as it may actively participate in tuning the well - recognized mechanotransduction properties of these membrane protrusions 90 . At the molecular level , plastins have been implied in direct regulation of the transition between active and inactive forms of integrins 9 , 91 , 92 , key mediators of mechanotransduction from the extracellular matrix to the cell cytoskeleton . On the other hand , it should also be noted that the proposed model of the postulated domain rearrangements is based upon separate reconstructions of individual ABD1 and ABD2 bound to actin . In these reconstructions , both CH2 and CH4 make minimal if any contacts with actin . Thus , their positions when full - length plastin is cross - linking two parallel actin filaments could be different . Thus , further experimental verification of the proposed states is required . Since ABD2 nucleates new actin filaments ( Fig . 1d , e and 81 ) , the allosteric inhibition of ABD2 may also serve to prevent undesirable ABD2 - induced nucleation of actin filaments . The inhibitory influence of ABD1 effectively prevents this risky outcome ( Fig . 2a ) , and the effect sustains even when the allosteric influence is attenuated by the S406E mutation , in which case moderate nucleation can be observed only at high PLS2 S406E concentrations ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . Regardless , ABD2 - imposed nucleation on the side of existing filaments is an intriguing possibility that deserves a separate investigation . Such nucleation can be used by the cells to strengthen the meshwork of branched filaments and reinforce membrane protrusions necessary to cover matrix gaps 93 . Future studies should clarify that . 23 Ca 2 + binding to EF - hands of RD is essential for plastin regulation , and altering plastin sensitivity to Ca 2 + leads to congenital osteoporosis 37 . Since Ca 2 + inhibits binding of ABD2 but not ABD1 to actin 48 , we could expect that Ca 2 + works by strengthening the ABD1 - ABD2 inhibition or by interfering with the inhibition attenuation . This hypothesis is in accordance with the predicted location of RD at the interface between ABD1 and ABD2 37 , 48 and with a higher affinity of RD - containing ABD1 constructs of PSL2 and PLS3 to ABD2 ( Fig . 2b - e ) . Yet , surprisingly , Ca 2 + showed no effect on the interactions between the actin - binding domains in trans ( Fig . 2c , e ) , and only moderately affected the phosphorylation - dependent attenuation of the allosteric cooperation ( Fig . 5f ) . These observations tentatively imply that the Ca 2 + - dependent regulation may be independent of the allosteric mechanism described here . Given the unique properties bestowed by the tight , allosterically controlled protein design , we would expect that the unique features conferred by this distinctive domain organization are shared by all or most plastins and fimbrins . That supposition , however , is yet to be confirmed experimentally . We could not determine the affinities of ABD2 of PLS1 and PLS3 as both are not stable when expressed in isolation . However , at least in PLS3 , the inhibitory influence of ABD1 on ABD2 is likely to be just as strong given the equally high affinity of ABD2 PLS2 to ABD1 PLS3 ( Fig . 2b - e ) . The overall similar bundling properties of both plastins 48 suggest a similarly high affinity of ABD2 PLS3 to actin . This conclusion is further supported by the similar localization of all three plastin isoforms to the leading edge of fibroblast cells ( Fig . 6 ) , and similar phenotypes of the phospho - mimicking PLS2 and PLS3 constructs ( Fig . 6 and Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . The only other plastin family member characterized to a comparable level of detail as human PLS2 is S . pombe fimbrin Fim1 81 . Although overall Fim1 is a stronger bundler , its isolated ABD2 has much lower affinity to actin ( K d ~ 650 nM ) than ABD2 PLS2 ( K d ~ 4 nM ; Fig . 1c ) . Another difference is that although ABD1 of Fim1 binds to actin similar to that of PLS2 ( K d ~ 3 µM ) , RD - ABD1 Fim1 binds much tighter ( K d ~ 220 nM 81 ) than RD - ABD1 PLS3 ( K d ~ 4 - 5 µM 48 ) . None of the Fim1 domains has an affinity in the low - nanomolar range . Yet , considering that ~ 200 - nM K d is near the detection limit for co - sedimentation experiments , it would be interesting to reassess the affinities of the ABDs of this and other 24 fimbrins by more sensitive approaches . If the ability to tune the cross - linking strength is an essential property of the family , we anticipate that ABD1 and ABD2 in most plastins should interact with each other with a strength comparable to that of the stronger binding domain with actin . The identity of the strongest binding domain and the sequence with which the domains interact with actin may vary . In summary , we have characterized a novel mode of plastin regulation wherein ABD1 is always available to bind F - actin , while binding of ABD2 is secondary and a subject of regulation by the inhibitory influence of ABD1 , PTMs , and Ca 2 + . We found that this regulation can be tuned by phospho - mimicking PLS2 S406E , where S406 is a physiological PLS2 phosphorylation site . This result is of particular interest as the phosphorylation of S406 was detected in cancers 72 , 73 , 75 , 78 . In the context of the recognized link of PLS2 to cancer metastasis , enforced actin bundling upon S406 phosphorylation may prove to contribute to the malignant phenotype of cancer cells and thus deserves careful investigation . Future studies should clarify whether all members of the plastin family are similarly controlled by the allosteric inhibition , validate whether plastin partners ( e . g . , coronin and MISP ) can regulate plastin function and localization by tuning the engagement between ABD1 and ABD2 , and test the hypothesis that exposure of cryptic sites upon bundling / domain separation is responsible for the implied mechano - sensing abilities of plastins / fimbrins . 25 METHODS Protein expression and purification Actin was purified from skeletal muscle acetone powder from rabbit ( Pel - Freez Biologicals , Rogers , AR ) or chicken ( prepared in - house from flash - frozen chicken breasts ( Trader Joe’s , USA ) ) as previously described 94 and stored on ice in G - buffer : 5 mM tris ( hydroxymethyl ) aminomethane hydrochloride ( TRIS - HCl ) , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 5 mM β - mercaptoethanol ( β - ME ) . Actin was used within one month with dialysis against fresh G - buffer after two weeks of storage . All plastin constructs used in this study are described in Supplementary Table 1 . To produce recombinant plastin constructs , they were cloned into pColdI vector ( Takara Bio USA , Mountain View , CA ) modified to include a tobacco etch virus ( TEV ) protease recognition site following the N - terminal 6xHis - tag 48 . Multi - site - directed mutagenesis was carried out using the QuikChange Lightning Multi - Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Agilent Technologies , Santa Clara , CA ) . Proteins were expressed in and purified from BL21 - CodonPlus ( DE3 ) pLysS Escherichia coli ( Agilent Technologies , Santa Clara , CA ) as described 48 and dialyzed against PLS buffer : 10 mM 2 - [ 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) piperazin - 1 - yl ] ethanesulfonic acid ( HEPES ) , pH 7 . 0 , 30 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ethylene glycol - bis ( β - aminoethyl ether ) - N , N , N′ , N′ - tetraacetic acid ( EGTA ) , 2 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , and 0 . 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) . Purified proteins were flash - frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80 °C . Labeling proteins with fluorescent probes Alexa - 488 - actin was prepared by labeling 2 mg / ml G - actin in G - buffer devoid of reducing agents with 1 . 2 - molar excess of Alexa Fluor 488 - maleimide ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) for 4 h at 4 o C , followed by dilution to 1 mg / ml and polymerization with 2 mM MgCl 2 and 100 mM KCl overnight at 4 o C . To prepare pyrene - actin , 2 mg / ml G - actin was first polymerized in G - buffer devoid of reducing agents supplemented with 2 mM MgCl 2 and 100 mM KCl at 25 o C for 30 min and then diluted to 1 mg / ml in F - buffer : 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 100 mM KCl . N - ( 1 - pyrene ) iodoacetamide ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) was added to a final concentration of 40 26 µM , and the labeling was carried out overnight with mixing at 4 o C . Both labeling reactions were quenched with 10 mM β - ME , and labeled F - actins were pelleted at 45 , 000 rpm in a Ti - 70 rotor in an Optima XPN 90 ultracentrifuge ( Beckman Coulter , Brea , CA ) for 90 min followed by three rounds of dialysis of the resulted pellets against G - buffer . All labeled and unlabeled G - actins were further purified by size - exclusion chromatography on Sephacryl S200 - HR ( GE Healthcare , Chicago , IL ) , stored on ice in G - buffer , and used within 4 weeks with dialysis to G - buffer after two weeks of storage . ABD2 PLS2 was labeled with fluorescein - 5 - maleimide ( FM ; Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) . Before labeling , the protein was incubated for 1 h on ice in the presence of 10 mM DTT . The reducing agent was removed by passing twice through a NAP - 5 desalting column ( GE Healthcare , Chicago , IL ) equilibrated with G - buffer lacking β - ME . FM was added at a 1 . 5 - molar excess to protein and incubated overnight on ice . FM - ABD2 was passed through a NAP - 5 column equilibrated with G - buffer to remove excess dye . Fluorescent anisotropy ( FA ) binding assays G - actin was switched from Ca 2 + - to Mg 2 + - bound state by the addition of 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 0 . 5 mM EGTA and 10 min incubation on ice . Polymerization was induced by adding 2 mM MgCl 2 , 30 mM KCl , and 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 0 and incubating for 30 min at room temperature . F - actin was stabilized by a 1 . 2 - molar excess of phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . All reactions were carried out in PLS buffer supplemented with 0 . 2 mM ATP . For actin binding experiments , FM - ABD2 was used at 100 nM , and F - actin was added at concentrations from 0 to 2500 nM . Reactions were incubated for 30 min at 25 °C before measurement . Parallel ( | | ) and perpendicular ( | ) intensities were measured on an Infinite M1000 Pro plate reader ( Tecan US Inc , Morrisville , NC ) with λ ex = 470 nm and λ em = 519 nm . Anisotropy was calculated as : 𝐴𝑛𝑖𝑠𝑜𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦 = ∥−⊥ ∥ + ( 2⊥ ) ( 1 ) . Binding affinities were determined by fitting the data to the binding isotherm equation : 27 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑃𝐿𝑆 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 = 𝑃 + 𝐴 + 𝐾 𝑑 −√ ( 𝑃 + 𝐴 + 𝐾 𝑑 ) 2 −4𝑃𝐴 2𝑃 ( 2 ) , where K d is the dissociation constant , P is the concentration of plastin , and A is the concentration of F - actin . Competition anisotropy experiments were carried out with 100 nM FM - ABD2 and 500 nM F - actin . Unlabeled ABD2 was added from 0 to 3000 nM . The dissociation constant of the unlabeled protein was determined by fitting the data to the following equation 95 : 𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐹𝑀𝐴𝐵𝐷2 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 = −𝐾 𝑑2 𝐾 𝑑1 −2𝐾 𝑑2 𝐴−𝐾 𝑑1 𝑃 + 𝐾 𝑑1 𝐴 + √𝐾 𝑑22 𝐾 𝑑12 + 2𝐾 𝑑2 𝐾 𝑑12 𝑃 + 2𝐾 𝑑2 𝐾 𝑑12 𝐴 + 𝐾 𝑑12 𝑃 2 −2𝐾 𝑑12 𝑃𝐴 + 𝐾 𝑑12 𝐴 2 2 ( 𝐾 𝑑2 𝐾 𝑑1 −𝐾 𝑑2 𝐴−𝐾 𝑑1 𝑃 + 𝐾 𝑑12 + 𝐾 𝑑1 𝐴 ) ( 3 ) , where A is the concentration of F - actin , P is the concentration of ABD2 , K d1 is the dissociation constant for FM - ABD2 binding to actin , and K d2 is the dissociation constant for unlabeled ABD2 binding to actin . Data fitting analysis was done using Origin software ( OriginLab Corporation , Northampton , MA ) . Anisotropy experiments for ABD binding in trans were carried out similarly . The concentration of FM - ABD2 was 50 nM , and ABD1 constructs were added at concentrations from 0 to 2500 nM . In the trans - ABD competition assays , FM - ABD2 was at 50 nM , and ABD1 was kept at 250 nM . The concentration of unlabeled ABD2 varied from 0 to 5000 nM . F - actin binding and bundling co - sedimentation assays In F - actin binding experiments carried out in PLS buffer supplemented with 0 . 2 mM ATP , plastin constructs were used at a final concentration of 5 μM and F - actin ( polymerized as above without the addition of phalloidin ) was added from 0 to 50 μM . Actin - bundling experiments contained 2 μM F - actin and plastin concentrations from 0 to 1 μM . Reactions were incubated overnight at 4 °C followed by 1 h at room temperature . Binding reactions were spun at 300 , 000 g for 30 min at 25 °C using Optima MAX - TL ultracentrifuge ( Beckman Coulter , Brea , CA ) . Bundling reactions were spun at 17 , 000 g for 15 min at 25 °C . Supernatants and pellets were separated and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) . Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue , and band intensities were 28 quantified by densitometry using ImageJ software 96 , 97 . Dissociation constants were determined by fitting to the binding isotherm equation ( 2 ) . Bundling efficiency was quantified by fitting the data to the Hill equation : % 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑛 𝐵𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑙𝑒𝑑 = [ 𝑃𝐿𝑆 ] 𝑛 𝐾 𝐴𝑛 + [ 𝑃𝐿𝑆 ] 𝑛 ( 4 ) , where n is the Hill coefficient , and K An is the concentration of plastin at 50 % actin bundled . Bulk pyrenyl - actin polymerization assays Ca 2 + - ATP G - actin was added to a black nonbinding 384 - well plate ( Corning Inc , Corning , NY ) to a final concentration of 2 . 5 μM ( 5 % pyrenyl - labeled ) . Next , F - actin was switched from Ca 2 + - bound to Mg 2 + - bound state by adding EGTA and MgCl 2 to final concentrations of 0 . 5 and 1 mM , respectively . Following incubation for 1 min at room temperature , polymerization was initiated by adding 0 . 33 volumes of 3x initiation buffer : 30 mM MOPS , pH 7 . 0 , 0 . 6 mM ATP , 1 . 5 mM DTT , 3 mM MgCl 2 , and 90 mM KCl . At the same time , PLS constructs were added to the desired final concentrations indicated in the figures . In inhibition experiments , ABD2 was maintained at 250 nM , and increasing concentrations of ABD1 were added . Pyrene fluorescence was monitored on an Infinite M1000 Pro plate reader ( Tecan US Inc , Morrisville , NC ) with λ ex = 365 nm and λ em = 407 nm . Reconstituted actin polymerization by TIRFM For in vitro reconstituted TIRFM experiments , Ca 2 + - ATP G - actin ( final concentration 0 . 9 μM , 33 % Alexa - 488 - labeled ) was switched to Mg 2 + - ATP G - actin by 2 min incubation in 0 . 05 mM MgCl 2 and 0 . 2 mM EGTA . Actin was mixed with 50 nM or 1 µM of PLS constructs in the final reaction buffer : 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 , 110 mM KCl , 50 mM DTT , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 05 mM CaCl 2 , 15 mM glucose , 20 μg / mL catalase , 100 μg / mL glucose oxidase , 3 % glycerol , and 05 % methylcellulose - 400cP ( Sigma Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . Immediately upon mixing , reactions were transferred to a N - ethylmaleimide - myosin - treated flow chamber as described previously 98 and imaged 29 using Nikon Eclipse Ti - E microscope equipped with a TIRF illumination module and a perfect focus system ( Nikon Inc , Melville , NY ) . Differential scanning fluorimetry ( DSF ) Heat - induced protein denaturation curves were obtained using a CFX Connect Real - Time PCR system ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA ) as described previously 99 , 100 . Reactions were carried out in PLS buffer supplemented with 0 . 2 mM ATP ( when actin was present ) and SYPRO Orange dye ( 1x final concentration ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Plastin constructs were added to a final concentration of 5 μM , while actin was added at 20 μM stabilized by phalloidin at equimolar concentration . Reactions containing actin were incubated overnight at 4 °C prior to measurement . Reactions containing ABD mixtures were incubated for 30 min at 4 °C before measurement . Melting temperatures ( T m s ) were determined by calculating the max of the first derivative ( - dF / dT ) of the fluorescence traces ( fluorescence vs temperature ) . Light scattering assays Light scattering assays were conducted as described previously 48 . Transmission electron microscopy TEM was performed as described in 61 . Sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation ( SV - AUC ) SV - AUC was conducted as described previously 101 . In vitro actin cross - linking by ACD toxin ACD - catalyzed actin cross - linking was performed as described in 61 . Cell culture , transfection , and microscopy XTC cells were cultured in 70 % Leibovitz’s L - 15 medium ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , L - glutamine , and penicillin - streptomycin at 23 30 °C and ambient CO 2 . U2OS cells were cultured at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 in a humidified incubator and were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , L - glutamine , and penicillin - streptomycin . XTC cells were obtained from Dr . Watanabe ( Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine , Kyoto , Japan ) and were not further authenticated . The identity of U2OS cells was verified by STR profiling . All cells were mycoplasma - negative as determined by PCR per published protocol 102 . Plastin constructs ( Supplemenatary Table 1 ) were cloned using NEBuilder ( New England Biolabs , Ipswich , MA ) into pcDNA3 . 1 with mEmerald fused at the C - termini . The plasmids pmCherry -  - actin ( Addgene # 54967 , RRID : Addgene _ 54967 ) and pmCardinal - paxillin ( Addgene # 56171 , RRID : Addgene _ 56171 ) were gifts from Michael Davidson 103 , 104 . Transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 3000 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) . Transfected XTC cells were plated on polylysine - coated coverslips ( Neuvitro Corporation , Vancouver , WA ) in Attofluor chambers ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) in serum - free L - 15 medium and imaged 30 min post - plating . TIRFM images were obtained using a Nikon Eclipse Ti - E inverted microscope ( Nikon Instruments Inc . , Melville , NY , USA ) equipped with a TIRF module , a perfect focus system , Nikon CFI Plan Apochromat λ 100x oil objective ( NA 1 . 45 ) , and an iXon Ultra 897 EMCCD camera ( Andor Technology , Belfast , United Kingdom ) . For SiMS TIRFM , cells expressing low levels of plastins were selected , and time - lapse imaging ( with 2 - s intervals ) was performed on small cell areas using a field diaphragm to avoid photodamage of the nucleus 80 , 105 , 106 . Average intensity projections and kymographs were generated using ImageJ software . Retrograde flow of PLS constructs was estimated by kymograph analysis in ImageJ using Measure tool ( bounding rectangle option ) : velocities were calculated by dividing the traveled distance ( d ) by the time ( t ) using the bounding rectangle for the line drawn to trace the tracks of interest on the kymographs ( Fig . 6c ) . U2OS cells were transfected as described above , fixed / permeabilized for 15 min in phosphate - buffered saline containing 4 % formaldehyde and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , counter - stained with TRITC – phalloidin and Hoechst dye ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and imaged using wide - field epifluorescence , 31 Nikon CFI Plan Apochromat λ 60x oil objective ( NA 1 . 40 ) , and DS - QiMc camera on Eclipse Ti - E microscope ( Nikon Instruments Inc ) . Immunoblotting MTS - 8 - MTS - cross - linked RD - ABD1 / F - actin samples were resolved on 9 % SDS - PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose . Western blotting was performed using anti - actin ( 1 : 2000 ; # MA5 - 11869 , ThermoFisher Scientific ) and anti - PLS3 ( 1 : 1000 ; # SAB2700266 , Millipore - Sigma , Burlington , MA ) primary antibodies followed by anti - mouse ( # A4416 ) and anti - rabbit ( # A0545 ) secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase ( both are from Millipore - Sigma and used at 1 : 10 , 000 ) . WesternBright Sirius chemiluminescent horseradish peroxidase substrate ( Advansta , San Jose , CA ) was used for signal detection in Omega Lum G imaging system ( Aplegen , Pleasanton , CA ) . Cryo - EM reconstruction Cys - null PLS3 RD - ABD1 ( Supplementary Table 1 ) was mutated to introduce a single Cys residue at positions 194 ( Q194C ) , 216 ( A216C ) , 226 ( A226C ) , or 229 ( A229C ) using QuikChange Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Agilent Technologies , Santa Clara , CA ) . The mutated constructs were purified as described above . Pichia pastoris expression vector pPICZc carrying human  - actin fused with thymosin  4 and 6xHis - tag was a gift from Mohan Balasubramanian ( Addgene # 111146 , RRID : Addgene _ 111146 ) .  - Actin cDNA was mutated to introduce K50C and C374A for labeling with a cross - linking reagent . The Cys - mutant actin was purified as previously described 63 . In order to cross - link PLS3 RD - ABD1 to actin , each protein was reduced in the presence of 10 mM DTT for 1 h on ice before being passed twice through a NAP - 5 column equilibrated with G - buffer lacking β - ME . Actin was polymerized at 3 μM as described above in the absence of DTT for 1 h at room temperature . Polymerized actin was treated with a 1 . 2 - fold excess of a cross - linking reagent , either N , N′ - 1 , 2 - phenylenedimaleimide ( oPDM ) , N , N′ - 1 , 4 - phenylenedimaleimide ( pPDM ) , or 3 , 6 - dioxaoctane - 1 , 8 - diyl bismethanethiosulfonate ( MTS - 8 - MTS ) ( 32 Toronto Research Chemicals , North York , ON , Canada ) for 15 min before addition of 25 μM PLS3 RD - ABD1 and incubated overnight on ice . The cross - linking efficiency was verified by SDS - PAGE . A 1 . 5 - μL sample of cross - linked RD - ABD1 / F - actin was applied to discharged lacey carbon grids and frozen with a Leica EM GP plunge freezer . Movies were collected in a Titan Krios at 300 keV equipped with a Falcon III direct electron detector , sampling at 1 . 4 Å / pixel . The defocus range was set to 1 . 5 – 2 . 5 μm , with a total dose of ∼ 55 electrons / Å 2 . MotionCor2 was used to motion - correct and dose - weight all the movies , followed by constant transfer function ( CTF ) estimation of the aligned images using the CTFFIND3 program 107 . Images with sparse CTF estimation were eliminated . The e2helixboxer program in the EMAN2 108 software package was used for boxing 256 - px - long filaments ( total 155 , 939 boxed segments ) . Relion was used for the following helical reconstruction procedure . The overall resolution of the final reconstruction was determined by the Fourier shell correlation ( FSC ) between two independent half maps , which was 5 . 1 Å at FSC = 0 . 143 . The model of F - actin ( PDB : 6ANU ) and ABD1 of PLS3 ( PDB : 1AOA ) were fit into the cryo - EM map , followed by examination and adjustment in COOT 109 . The manually curated model was then real - space refined in PHENIX 110 . The cryo - EM map was deposited with accession code EMD - 25371 in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( EMDB ) . Statistical analysis All graph data is presented as mean  standard deviation ( SD ) or standard error ( SE ) as indicated in the figure legends . Number of repetitions ( n ) is indicated in the figures / figure legends . ANOVA followed by multiple comparison tests ( Student’s t - tests with a two - tailed distribution ) with Bonferroni correction was applied to determine statistically significant differences ; individual p - values are indicated in the figure legends , where appropriate . 33 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Fenbin ( Jerry ) Wang ( University of Virginia ) for the assistance in modeling parallel actin filaments linked by a plastin bridge . This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the NIH under award numbers R01GM114666 ( to DSK ) and R35GM122510 ( to EHE ) and a 2018 Pelotonia Graduate Fellowship Award at The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center ( to CLS ) . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization – DSK ; Funding acquisition – DSK , EHE , CLS ; Supervision – DSK , EHE ; Investigation – CLS , EK , RA , WZ ; Formal analysis – CLS , EK , WZ ; Visualization – EK , CLS , WZ ; Writing – original draft CLS , DSK , EK ; Writing – review & editing – all authors . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . DATA AVAILABILITY The cryo - EM map of ABD1 PLS3 / F - actin complex was deposited with accession code EMD - 25371 in the EMDB . 34 REFERENCES 1 Shinomiya , H . Plastin family of actin - bundling proteins : its functions in leukocytes , neurons , intestines , and cancer . International journal of cell biology 2012 , 1 - 8 , doi : 10 . 1155 / 2012 / 213492 ( 2012 ) . 2 Delanote , V . , Vandekerckhove , J . & Gettemans , J . Plastins : versatile modulators of actin organization in ( patho ) physiological cellular processes . Acta pharmacologica Sinica 26 , 769 - 779 , doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1745 - 7254 . 2005 . 00145 . x ( 2005 ) . 3 Grimm - Günter , E . M . et al . Plastin 1 binds to keratin and is required for terminal web assembly in the intestinal epithelium . Molecular Biology of the Cell 20 , 2549 - 2562 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 10 - 1030 ( 2009 ) . 4 Lin , C . S . , Shen , W . , Chen , Z . P . , Tu , Y . H . & Matsudaira , P . Identification of I - plastin , a human fimbrin isoform expressed in intestine and kidney . Molecular and Cellular Biology 14 , 2457 - 2467 , doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 14 . 4 . 2457 ( 1994 ) . 5 Drenckhahan , D . et al . Three different actin filament assemblies occur in every hair cell : each contains a specific actin crosslinking protein . Journal of Cell Biology 112 , 641 - 651 ( 1991 ) . 6 Sobin , A . & Flock , A . Immunohistochemical identification and localization of actin and fimbrin in vestibular hair cells in the normal guinea pig and in a strain of the waltzing guinea pig . Acta Oto - Laryngologica 96 , 407 - 412 ( 1983 ) . 7 Diaz - Horta , O . et al . Novel variant p . E269K confirms causative role of PLS1 mutations in autosomal dominant hearing loss . Clin Genet 96 , 575 - 578 , doi : 10 . 1111 / cge . 13626 ( 2019 ) . 8 Morgan , A . et al . Mutations in PLS1 , encoding fimbrin , cause autosomal dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss . Hum Mutat 40 , 2286 - 2295 , doi : 10 . 1002 / humu . 23891 ( 2019 ) . 9 Jones , S . L . , Wang , J . , Turck , C . W . & Brown , E . J . A role for the actin - bundling protein L - plastin in the regulation of leukocyte integrin function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 95 , 9331 - 9336 ( 1998 ) . 10 Ma , T . , Sadashivaiah , K . , Madayiputhiya , N . & Chellaiah , M . A . Regulation of sealing ring formation by L - plastin and cortactin in osteoclasts . Journal of Biological Chemistry 285 , 29911 - 29924 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 099697 ( 2010 ) . 11 Morley , S . C . The actin - bundling protein L - plastin : a critical regulator of immune cell function . International journal of cell biology 2012 , 1 - 10 , doi : 10 . 1155 / 2012 / 935173 ( 2012 ) . 12 Morley , S . C . et al . The actin - bundling protein L - plastin dissociates CCR7 proximal signaling from CCR7 - induced motility . Journal of Immunology 184 , 3628 - 3638 , doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0903851 ( 2010 ) . 13 Todd , E . M . , Deady , L . E . & Morley , S . C . The actin - bundling protein L - plastin is essential for marginal zone B cell development . Journal of Immunology 187 , 3015 - 3025 , doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1101033 ( 2011 ) . 14 Wabnitz , G . H . et al . Costimulation induced phosphorylation of L - plastin facilitates surface transport of the T cell activation molecules CD69 and CD25 . European journal of immunology 37 , 649 - 662 , doi : 10 . 1002 / eji . 200636320 ( 2007 ) . 15 Wabnitz , G . H . et al . Sustained LFA - 1 cluster formation in the immune synapse requires the combined activities of L - plastin and calmodulin . European journal of immunology 40 , 2437 - 2449 , doi : 10 . 1002 / eji . 201040345 ( 2010 ) . 35 16 Lin , C . S . , Park , T . , Chen , Z . P . & Leavitt , J . Human Plastin Genes : comparative gene structure , chromosome location , and differential expression in normal and neoplastic cells . Journal of Biological Chemistry 268 , 2781 - 2792 ( 1993 ) . 17 Chaijan , S . , Roytrakul , S . , Mutirangura , A . & Leelawat , K . Matrigel induces L - plastin expression and promotes L - plastin - dependent invasion in human cholangiocarcinoma cells . Oncology letters 8 , 993 - 1000 , doi : 10 . 3892 / ol . 2014 . 2239 ( 2014 ) . 18 Foran , E . , McWilliam , P . , Kelleher , D . , Croke , D . T . & Long , A . The leukocyte protein L - plastin induces proliferation , invasion and loss of E - cadherin expression in colon cancer cells . International Journal of Cancer 118 , 2098 - 2104 , doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 21593 ( 2006 ) . 19 Klemke , M . et al . Phosphorylation of ectopically expressed L - plastin enhances invasiveness of human melanoma cells . International Journal of Cancer 120 , 2590 - 2599 , doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 22589 ( 2007 ) . 20 Riplinger , S . M . et al . Metastasis of prostate cancer and melanoma cells in a preclinical in vivo mouse model is enhanced by L - plastin expression and phosphorylation . Molecular Cancer 13 , 1 - 12 ( 2014 ) . 21 Li , N . et al . Actin - bundling protein plastin 3 is a regulator of ectoplasmic specialization dynamics during spermatogenesis in the rat testis . FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology 29 , 3788 - 3805 , doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 14 - 267997 ( 2015 ) . 22 Xue , F . , Janzen , D . M . & Knecht , D . A . Contribution of Filopodia to Cell Migration : A Mechanical Link between Protrusion and Contraction . Int J Cell Biol 2010 , 507821 , doi : 10 . 1155 / 2010 / 507821 ( 2010 ) . 23 Hagiwara , M . et al . Interaction of activated Rab5 with actin - bundling proteins , L - and T - plastin and its relevance to endocytic functions in mammalian cells . Biochemical and biophysical research communications 407 , 615 - 619 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2011 . 03 . 082 ( 2011 ) . 24 Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . & Mitchison , T . J . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . The Journal of cell biology 175 , 477 - 490 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200602085 ( 2006 ) . 25 Balasubramanian , M . et al . Novel PLS3 variants in X - linked osteoporosis : Exploring bone material properties . American journal of medical genetics . Part A 176 , 1578 - 1586 , doi : 10 . 1002 / ajmg . a . 38830 ( 2018 ) . 26 Costantini , A . et al . A novel frameshift deletion in PLS3 causing severe primary osteoporosis . Journal of human genetics 63 , 923 - 926 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s10038 - 018 - 0472 - 5 ( 2018 ) . 27 Fahiminiya , S . et al . Osteoporosis caused by mutations in PLS3 : clinical and bone tissue characteristics . Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 29 , 1805 - 1814 , doi : 10 . 1002 / jbmr . 2208 ( 2014 ) . 28 Kampe , A . J . et al . PLS3 Deletions Lead to Severe Spinal Osteoporosis and Disturbed Bone Matrix Mineralization . Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 32 , 2394 - 2404 , doi : 10 . 1002 / jbmr . 3233 ( 2017 ) . 29 Kannu , P . , Mahjoub , A . , Babul - Hirji , R . , Carter , M . T . & Harrington , J . PLS3 Mutations in X - Linked Osteoporosis : Clinical and Bone Characteristics of Two Novel Mutations . Hormone research in paediatrics 88 , 298 - 304 , doi : 10 . 1159 / 000477242 ( 2017 ) . 30 Klein , M . G . et al . Structure of the actin crosslinking core of fimbrin . Structure 12 , 999 - 1013 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2004 . 04 . 010 ( 2004 ) . 31 Lv , F . et al . A novel large fragment deletion in PLS3 causes rare X - linked early - onset osteoporosis and response to zoledronic acid . Osteoporosis international : a journal established as result of 36 cooperation between the European Foundation for Osteoporosis and the National Osteoporosis Foundation of the USA 28 , 2691 - 2700 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00198 - 017 - 4094 - 0 ( 2017 ) . 32 Nishi , E . et al . Exome sequencing - based identification of mutations in non - syndromic genes among individuals with apparently syndromic features . American journal of medical genetics . Part A 170 , 2889 - 2894 , doi : 10 . 1002 / ajmg . a . 37826 ( 2016 ) . 33 van Dijk , F . S . et al . PLS3 mutations in X - linked osteoporosis with fractures . The New England journal of medicine 369 , 1529 - 1536 , doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMoa1308223 ( 2013 ) . 34 Wang , L . et al . Functional analysis of p . Ala253 _ Leu254insAsn mutation in PLS3 responsible for X - linked osteoporosis . Clin Genet 93 , 178 - 181 , doi : 10 . 1111 / cge . 13081 ( 2018 ) . 35 Wesseling - Perry , K . et al . Osteocyte Protein Expression Is Altered in Low - Turnover Osteoporosis Caused by Mutations in WNT1 and PLS3 . The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 102 , 2340 - 2348 , doi : 10 . 1210 / jc . 2017 - 00099 ( 2017 ) . 36 Schwebach , C . L . , Kudryashova , E . & Kudryashov , D . S . Plastin 3 in X - Linked Osteoporosis : Imbalance of Ca ( 2 + ) - Dependent Regulation Is Equivalent to Protein Loss . Front Cell Dev Biol 8 , 635783 , doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 635783 ( 2020 ) . 37 Schwebach , C . L . et al . Osteogenesis imperfecta mutations in plastin 3 lead to impaired calcium regulation of actin bundling . Bone research 8 , 21 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41413 - 020 - 0095 - 2 ( 2020 ) . 38 Hosseinibarkooie , S . et al . The Power of Human Protective Modifiers : PLS3 and CORO1C Unravel Impaired Endocytosis in Spinal Muscular Atrophy and Rescue SMA Phenotype . Am J Hum Genet 99 , 647 - 665 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ajhg . 2016 . 07 . 014 ( 2016 ) . 39 Ralser , M . et al . Ataxin - 2 and huntingtin interact with endophilin - A complexes to function in plastin - associated pathways . Human molecular genetics 14 , 2893 - 2909 , doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddi321 ( 2005 ) . 40 Lyon , A . N . et al . Calcium binding is essential for plastin 3 function in Smn - deficient motoneurons . Human molecular genetics 23 , 1990 - 2004 , doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddt595 ( 2014 ) . 41 Oprea , G . E . et al . Plastin 3 is a protective modifier of autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy . Science 320 , 524 - 527 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1155085 ( 2008 ) . 42 Morandell , J . et al . Cul3 regulates cytoskeleton protein homeostasis and cell migration during a critical window of brain development . Nat Commun 12 , 3058 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 23123 - x ( 2021 ) . 43 Begue , E . et al . Inducible expression and pathophysiologic functions of T - plastin in cutaneous T - cell lymphoma . Blood 120 , 143 - 154 , doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 09 - 379156 ( 2012 ) . 44 Velthaus , A . et al . The Actin Binding Protein Plastin - 3 Is Involved in the Pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia . Cancers ( Basel ) 11 , 1663 , doi : 10 . 3390 / cancers11111663 ( 2019 ) . 45 Xin , Z . et al . PLS3 predicts poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer and promotes cancer cell proliferation via PI3K / AKT signaling . J Cell Physiol 235 , 8416 - 8423 , doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 29685 ( 2020 ) . 46 Ma , Y . et al . Plastin 3 down - regulation augments the sensitivity of MDA - MB - 231 cells to paclitaxel via the p38 MAPK signalling pathway . Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 47 , 685 - 695 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 21691401 . 2019 . 1576707 ( 2019 ) . 47 Korenbaum , E . & Rivero , F . Calponin homology domains at a glance . J Cell Sci 115 , 3543 - 3545 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00003 ( 2002 ) . 48 Schwebach , C . L . , Agrawal , R . , Lindert , S . , Kudryashova , E . & Kudryashov , D . S . The Roles of Actin - Binding Domains 1 and 2 in the Calcium - Dependent Regulation of Actin Filament Bundling 37 by Human Plastins . Journal of Molecular Biology 429 , 2490 - 2508 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2017 . 06 . 021 ( 2017 ) . 49 Ishida , H . , Jensen , K . V . , Woodman , A . G . , Hyndman , M . E . & Vogel , H . J . The Calcium - Dependent Switch Helix of L - Plastin Regulates Actin Bundling . Sci Rep 7 , 40662 , doi : 10 . 1038 / srep40662 ( 2017 ) . 50 Namba , Y . , Ito , M . , Zu , Y . , Shigesada , K . & Maruyama , K . Human T Cell L - Plastin Bundles Actin Filaments in a Calcium Dependent Manner . Journal of Biochemistry 112 , 503 - 507 ( 1992 ) . 51 Shirayama , S . & Numata , O . Tetrahymena fimbrin localized in the division furrow bundles actin filaments in a calcium - independent manner . J Biochem 134 , 591 - 598 , doi : 10 . 1093 / jb / mvg183 ( 2003 ) . 52 Kovar , D . R . , Staiger , C . J . , Weaver , E . A . & McCurdy , D . W . AtFim1 is an actin filament crosslinking protein from Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J 24 , 625 - 636 , doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 313x . 2000 . 00907 . x ( 2000 ) . 53 Nakano , K . , Satoh , K . , Morimatsu , A . , Ohnuma , M . & Mabuchi , I . Interactions among a fimbrin , a capping protein , and an actin - depolymerizing factor in organization of the fission yeast actin cytoskeleton . Mol Biol Cell 12 , 3515 - 3526 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 12 . 11 . 3515 ( 2001 ) . 54 Goldsmith , S . C . et al . The structure of an actin - crosslinking domain from human fimbrin . Nat Struct Biol 4 , 708 - 712 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nsb0997 - 708 ( 1997 ) . 55 Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Cherepanova , O . , Lebart , M . C . & Egelman , E . H . High - resolution cryo - EM structure of the F - actin - fimbrin / plastin ABD2 complex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 105 , 1494 - 1498 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0708667105 ( 2008 ) . 56 Volkmann , N . , DeRosier , D . , Matsudaira , P . & Hanein , D . An Atomic Model of Actin Filaments Cross - linked by Fimbrin and Its Implications for Bundle Assembly and Function . Journal of Cell Biology 153 , 947 - 956 ( 2001 ) . 57 Dyson , M . R . , Shadbolt , S . P . , Vincent , K . J . , Perera , R . L . & McCafferty , J . Production of soluble mammalian proteins in Escherichia coli : identification of protein features that correlate with successful expression . BMC Biotechnol 4 , 32 , doi : 10 . 1186 / 1472 - 6750 - 4 - 32 ( 2004 ) . 58 Kudryashov , D . S . et al . Cofilin cross - bridges adjacent actin protomers and replaces part of the longitudinal F - actin interface . J Mol Biol 358 , 785 - 797 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 02 . 029 ( 2006 ) . 59 Kudryashov , D . S . , Phillips , M . & Reisler , E . Formation and destabilization of actin filaments with tetramethylrhodamine - modified actin . Biophys J 87 , 1136 - 1145 , doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 104 . 042242 ( 2004 ) . 60 Kudryashov , D . S . et al . Connecting actin monomers by iso - peptide bond is a toxicity mechanism of the Vibrio cholerae MARTX toxin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 , 18537 - 18542 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0808082105 ( 2008 ) . 61 Smith , H . et al . Rounding Out the Understanding of ACD Toxicity with the Discovery of Cyclic Forms of Actin Oligomers . Int J Mol Sci 22 , 718 , doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms22020718 ( 2021 ) . 62 Niesen , F . H . , Berglund , H . & Vedadi , M . The use of differential scanning fluorimetry to detect ligand interactions that promote protein stability . Nature protocols 2 , 2212 - 2221 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 321 ( 2007 ) . 63 Hatano , T . et al . Rapid production of pure recombinant actin isoforms in Pichia pastoris . Journal of Cell Science 131 , jcs213827 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 213827 ( 2018 ) . 64 Avery , A . W . et al . Structural basis for high - affinity actin binding revealed by a beta - III - spectrin SCA5 missense mutation . Nat Commun 8 , 1350 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01367 - w ( 2017 ) . 38 65 Hanein , D . et al . An atomic model of fimbrin binding to F - actin and its implications for filament crosslinking and regulation . Nat Struct Biol 5 , 787 - 792 , doi : 10 . 1038 / 1828 ( 1998 ) . 66 Jumper , J . et al . Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold . Nature 596 , 583 - 589 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 021 - 03819 - 2 ( 2021 ) . 67 Xu , X . et al . Mst1 Kinase Regulates the Actin - Bundling Protein L - Plastin To Promote T Cell Migration . J Immunol 197 , 1683 - 1691 , doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1600874 ( 2016 ) . 68 Lin , C . S . , Lau , A . & Lue , T . F . Analysis and mapping of plastin phosphorylation . DNA Cell Biol 17 , 1041 - 1046 , doi : 10 . 1089 / dna . 1998 . 17 . 1041 ( 1998 ) . 69 Hornbeck , P . V . et al . PhosphoSitePlus : a comprehensive resource for investigating the structure and function of experimentally determined post - translational modifications in man and mouse . Nucleic Acids Research 40 , D261 - 270 , doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkr1122 ( 2012 ) . 70 Bian , Y . et al . An enzyme assisted RP - RPLC approach for in - depth analysis of human liver phosphoproteome . Journal of Proteomics 96 , 253 - 262 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jprot . 2013 . 11 . 014 ( 2014 ) . 71 Choudhary , C . et al . Mislocalized activation of oncogenic RTKs switches downstream signaling outcomes . Molecular Cell 36 , 326 - 339 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 09 . 019 ( 2009 ) . 72 Klammer , M . et al . Phosphosignature Predicts Dasatinib Response in Non - small Cell Lung Cancer . Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 11 , 651 - 668 , doi : 10 . 1074 / ( 2012 ) . 73 Mertins , P . et al . Proteogenomics connects somatic mutations to signalling in breast cancer . Nature 534 , 55 - 62 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nature18003 ( 2016 ) . 74 Mertins , P . et al . Integrated proteomic analysis of post - translational modifications by serial enrichment . Nature Methods 10 , 634 - 637 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2518 ( 2013 ) . 75 Mertins , P . et al . Ischemia in Tumors Induces Early and Sustained Phosphorylation Changes in Stress Kinase Pathways but Does not Affect Global Protein Levels . Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 13 , 1690 - 1704 , doi : 10 . 1074 / ( 2014 ) . 76 Pinto , S . M . et al . Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of IL - 33 - mediated signaling . Proteomics 15 , 532 - 544 , doi : 10 . 1002 / pmic . 201400303 ( 2015 ) . 77 Weintz , G . et al . The phosphoproteome of toll - like receptor - activated macrophages . Molecular Systems Biology 6 , 371 , doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2010 . 29 ( 2010 ) . 78 Zhou , H . et al . Toward a comprehensive characterization of a human cancer cell phosphoproteome . J Proteome Res 12 , 260 - 271 , doi : 10 . 1021 / pr300630k ( 2013 ) . 79 Watanabe , N . & Mitchison , T . J . Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 , 1083 - 1086 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1067470 ( 2002 ) . 80 Kudryashova , E . et al . Actin Cross - Linking Toxin Is a Universal Inhibitor of Tandem - Organized and Oligomeric G - Actin Binding Proteins . Curr Biol 28 , 1536 - 1547 e1539 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2018 . 03 . 065 ( 2018 ) . 81 Skau , C . T . et al . Actin filament bundling by fimbrin is important for endocytosis , cytokinesis , and polarization in fission yeast . Journal of Biological Chemistry 286 , 26964 - 26977 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 239004 ( 2011 ) . 82 Tsai , F . C . & Meyer , T . Ca2 + pulses control local cycles of lamellipodia retraction and adhesion along the front of migrating cells . Curr Biol 22 , 837 - 842 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 03 . 037 ( 2012 ) . 83 Angelo Morales , E . , Arnaiz , C . , Krystofiak , E . S . , Zanic , M . & Tyska , M . J . Mitotic Spindle Positioning ( MISP ) is an actin bundler that selectively stabilizes the rootlets of epithelial microvilli . bioRxiv , 2021 . 2008 . 2002 . 454661 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 08 . 02 . 454661 ( 2021 ) . 39 84 Song , J . et al . A cryo - tomography - based volumetric model of the actin core of mouse vestibular hair cell stereocilia lacking plastin 1 . J Struct Biol 210 , 107461 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2020 . 107461 ( 2020 ) . 85 Leite , J . et al . Equatorial Non - muscle Myosin II and Plastin Cooperate to Align and Compact F - actin Bundles in the Cytokinetic Ring . Front Cell Dev Biol 8 , 573393 , doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 573393 ( 2020 ) . 86 Zhu , C . , Chen , Y . & Ju , L . A . Dynamic bonds and their roles in mechanosensing . Curr Opin Chem Biol 53 , 88 - 97 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cbpa . 2019 . 08 . 005 ( 2019 ) . 87 Martino , F . , Perestrelo , A . R . , Vinarsky , V . , Pagliari , S . & Forte , G . Cellular Mechanotransduction : From Tension to Function . Front Physiol 9 , 824 , doi : 10 . 3389 / fphys . 2018 . 00824 ( 2018 ) . 88 Anderson , C . A . , Kovar , D . R . , Gardel , M . L . & Winkelman , J . D . LIM domain proteins in cell mechanobiology . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 78 , 303 - 311 , doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21677 ( 2021 ) . 89 Kamioka , H . , Sugawara , Y . , Honjo , T . , Yamashiro , T . & Takano - Yamamoto , T . Terminal differentiation of osteoblasts to osteocytes is accompanied by dramatic changes in the distribution of actin - binding proteins . Journal of bone and mineral research : the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 19 , 471 - 478 , doi : 10 . 1359 / JBMR . 040128 ( 2004 ) . 90 Weinbaum , S . , Duan , Y . , Satlin , L . M . , Wang , T . & Weinstein , A . M . Mechanotransduction in the renal tubule . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 299 , F1220 - 1236 , doi : 10 . 1152 / ajprenal . 00453 . 2010 ( 2010 ) . 91 Tseng , H . Y . et al . LCP1 preferentially binds clasped alphaMbeta2 integrin and attenuates leukocyte adhesion under flow . J Cell Sci 131 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 218214 ( 2018 ) . 92 Wabnitz , G . H . et al . LFA - 1 cluster formation in T - cells depends on L - plastin phosphorylation regulated by P90 ( RSK ) and PP2A . Cell Mol Life Sci 78 , 3543 - 3564 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 020 - 03744 - z ( 2021 ) . 93 Garbett , D . et al . T - Plastin reinforces membrane protrusions to bridge matrix gaps during cell migration . Nat Commun 11 , 4818 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 18586 - 3 ( 2020 ) . 94 Spudich , J . A . & Watt , S . The Regulation of Rabbit Skeletal Muscle Contraction . Journal of Biological Chemistry 246 , 4866 - 4871 ( 1971 ) . 95 Nolen , B . J . & Pollard , T . D . Structure and biochemical properties of fission yeast Arp2 / 3 complex lacking the Arp2 subunit . Journal of Biological Chemistry 283 , 26490 - 26498 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M802607200 ( 2008 ) . 96 Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nature Methods 9 , 676 - 682 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 ( 2012 ) . 97 Schindelin , J . , Rueden , C . T . , Hiner , M . C . & Eliceiri , K . W . The ImageJ ecosystem : An open platform for biomedical image analysis . Molecular Reproduction and Development 82 , 518 - 529 , doi : 10 . 1002 / mrd . 22489 ( 2015 ) . 98 Kovar , D . R . & Pollard , T . D . Insertional assembly of actin filament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 101 , 14725 - 14730 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0405902101 ( 2004 ) . 99 Kudryashova , E . , Heisler , D . , Zywiec , A . & Kudryashov , D . S . Thermodynamic properties of the effector domains of MARTX toxins suggest their unfolding for translocation across the host membrane . Mol Microbiol 92 , 1056 - 1071 , doi : 10 . 1111 / mmi . 12615 ( 2014 ) . 100 Kudryashova , E . et al . Human defensins facilitate local unfolding of thermodynamically unstable regions of bacterial protein toxins . Immunity 41 , 709 - 721 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2014 . 10 . 018 ( 2014 ) . 40 101 Purde , V . , Busch , F . , Kudryashova , E . , Wysocki , V . H . & Kudryashov , D . S . Oligomerization Affects the Ability of Human Cyclase - Associated Proteins 1 and 2 to Promote Actin Severing by Cofilins . Int J Mol Sci 20 , 5647 , doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms20225647 ( 2019 ) . 102 Uphoff , C . C . & Drexler , H . G . Detection of Mycoplasma contamination in cell cultures . Curr Protoc Mol Biol 106 , 28 24 21 - 14 , doi : 10 . 1002 / 0471142727 . mb2804s106 ( 2014 ) . 103 Chu , J . et al . Non - invasive intravital imaging of cellular differentiation with a bright red - excitable fluorescent protein . Nat Methods 11 , 572 - 578 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2888 ( 2014 ) . 104 Rizzo , M . A . , Davidson , M . W . & Piston , D . W . Fluorescent protein tracking and detection : fluorescent protein structure and color variants . Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2009 , pdb top63 , doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . top63 ( 2009 ) . 105 Heisler , D . B . et al . ACTIN - DIRECTED TOXIN . ACD toxin - produced actin oligomers poison formin - controlled actin polymerization . Science 349 , 535 - 539 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aab4090 ( 2015 ) . 106 Watanabe , N . Fluorescence single - molecule imaging of actin turnover and regulatory mechanisms . Methods Enzymol 505 , 219 - 232 , doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 388448 - 0 . 00020 - 6 ( 2012 ) . 107 Mindell , J . A . & Grigorieff , N . Accurate determination of local defocus and specimen tilt in electron microscopy . Journal of Structural Biology 142 , 334 - 347 , doi : 10 . 1016 / s1047 - 8477 ( 03 ) 00069 - 8 ( 2003 ) . 108 Tang , G . et al . EMAN2 : an extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy . Journal of Structural Biology 157 , 38 - 46 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 05 . 009 ( 2007 ) . 109 Emsley , P . & Cowtan , K . Coot : model - building tools for molecular graphics . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 60 , 2126 - 2132 , doi : 10 . 1107 / S0907444904019158 ( 2004 ) . 110 Adams , P . D . et al . PHENIX : a comprehensive Python - based system for macromolecular structure solution . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66 , 213 - 221 , doi : 10 . 1107 / S0907444909052925 ( 2010 ) . 41 FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 . ABD2 of PLS2 binds to F - actin with nanomolar affinity and nucleates actin ( a ) A schematic representation of plastin domain organization . Regulatory domain ( RD ) consisting of two EF - hand motifs ( EF1 and 2 ) is connected through a flexible linker to the PLS2 core comprising two actin - binding domains ( ABD1 and 2 ) , each consisting of two calponin - homology motifs ( CH1 - 4 ) . Numbers represent amino acid numbering in the PLS2 sequence . Relevant mutations are indicated . ( b ) F - actin binding affinities of the full - length PLS2 ( FL PLS2 ) and ABD1 PLS2 were assessed by F - actin co - sedimentation assays ; F - actin binding affinity of ABD2 PLS2 was measured by FA . The inset zooms in the data range 0 – 5 µM of actin . Error bars represent SD of the mean ; number of repetitions for each group ( n ) is indicated in the figure . ( c ) F - actin binding affinity of unlabeled ABD2 PLS2 was assessed by FA competition assays . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 3 . ( d ) Bulk pyrene - actin polymerization was monitored in the absence or presence of increasing concentrations of ABD2 ; representative normalized fluorescence traces are shown . ( e ) Actin nucleation activities of FL PLS2 and its individual ABDs ( 50 nM final concentration ) were tested by TIRFM . Representative micrographs at 90 and 180 s after the initiation of actin polymerization are shown ; scale bars are 10 µm . The graph shows the number of actin filaments present in a field of view at 90 - s time point . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 5 . ANOVA followed by multiple comparison tests with Bonferroni correction was applied : asterisk indicates statistically significant difference ( * p < 0 . 0167 ) ; individual p - values are 0 . 58 ( FL PLS2 ( FL ) ) , 0 . 18 ( ABD1 PLS2 ( A1 ) ) , and * 4 . 6x10 - 7 ( ABD2 PLS2 ( A2 ) ) , each compared to the actin control ( - ) . Figure 2 . ABD1 of PLS2 interacts with and suppresses ABD2 ( a ) Effects of increasing concentrations of ABD1 PLS2 on the ABD2 PLS2 - mediated acceleration of actin polymerization was monitored by bulk pyrene - actin polymerization assays ; representative normalized fluorescence traces are shown . 42 ( b - e ) Binding affinities of the individual ABDs of PLS2 and PLS3 to each other in trans were measured by fluorescence anisotropy using FM - ABD2 PLS2 ( left panels ) and confirmed in FA competition assays using unlabeled ABD2 PLS2 ( middle panels ) . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; number of repetitions ( n ) is indicated in the figures . Melting temperatures ( T m s ) of the individual ABDs and upon mixing with each other were tested by DSF ( right panels ) : the graphs show the first derivatives ( - dF / dT ) of melting curves ( average of n = 3 ) . Figure 3 . F - actin binding releases the ABD1 - imposed suppression of ABD2 Melting temperatures ( T m s ) of bundling - competent ( WT and S5D ) and bundling - incompetent ( L475P ) full - length PLS2 constructs were assessed by DSF in the absence or presence of F - actin . The normalized first derivative melting curves ( - dF / dT ) represent the average data of n = 3 . The arrows indicate the direction / magnitude of the shifts of PLS2 melting peaks upon F - actin binding . Figure 4 . Cryo - EM reconstruction of ABD1 - decorated F - actin ( a ) Cryo - EM density map of actin filament decorated by ABD1 PLS3 is shown as a grey transparent surface . The model built by fitting a cryo - EM structure of F - actin ( PDB : 6ANU ) and crystal structure of ABD1 of PLS3 ( PDB : 1AOA ) is shown as colored ribbons . ( b ) Close - up view of the boxed area in a ( ABD1 is shown as rainbow - colored ribbon from N - terminus in blue to C - terminus in red ; actin is in grey ) . Chemically cross - linked residues in ABD1 ( Q194C ) and actin ( K50C ) are shown as magenta spheres . ( c ) Superposition of ABD1 ( CH1 in light blue , CH2 in dark blue ; present study : EMD - 25371 ) and ABD2 ( CH3 in light red , CH4 in dark red ; PDB : 6VEC ) in the F - actin - bound states . ( d ) Alignment of the cryo - EM ABD1 / F - actin model with the AlphaFold - generated model of human PLS3 core ( https : / / alphafold . ebi . ac . uk / entry / P13797 ) revealed clashes between ABD2 and F - actin ( indicated by arrowheads ) : 521 - 535 ABD2 helix ( numeration as in full - length PLS2 ) clashes with 359 - 365 actin helix ( magenta arrowhead ) ; 553 - 562 ABD2 helix clashes with 356 - 358 actin loop and 359 - 365 actin helix ( yellow arrowhead ) . Color scheme as in c . 43 Figure 5 . S406E PLS2 mutation mimicking physiologically relevant phosphorylation of S406 releases the inhibition of ABD2 by uncoupling it from ABD1 ( a ) An AlphaFold - generated model of PLS2 - core . The location of S406E mutation is highlighted in green . ( b ) The T m s of WT and S406E PLS2 were assessed by DSF . The first derivative ( dF / dT ) traces represent the average data of n = 3 . ( c , d ) The binding affinity of ABD1 WT and ABD2 S406E to each other were measured by fluorescence anisotropy ( c ) and confirmed by FA competition using unlabeled ABD2 S406E ( d ) . Error bars represent the SD of the mean ; n = 3 . ( e , f ) The F - actin binding ( e ; n = 3 ) and bundling ( f ; n = 2 ) activities of PLS2 WT and PLS2 S406E were tested in high - and low - speed co - sedimentation assays , respectively . Error bars represent the SD of the mean . ( g ) F - actin bundling by WT , S5D , L475P , and S406E PLS2 was monitored by light scattering . Red arrows indicate two time points , at which the plastin constructs ( 2 µM final concentration ) were added to F - actin . ( h ) Representative TEM micrograph images show actin bundles formed in the presence of PLS2 WT and PLS2 S406E . Scale bars are 100 nm . Figure 6 . Intracellular localization of human plastins ( a , b ) XTC cells transiently co - transfected with the indicated mEmerald - tagged plastin constructs , mCherry - F - tractin ( to visualize actin ) and a focal adhesion marker mCardinal - paxillin were imaged using TIRFM ( a ) . Fluorescence intensity profiles ( b ) for all three channels were generated along the white arrows shown in a , which also serve as scale bars ( 20 µm ) . LP is lamellipodia . ( c ) SiMS TIRF microscopy of XTC cells transiently transfected with mEmerald - tagged WT plastins : average intensity projections and kymographs are shown to demonstrate retrograde flow ( see also Supplementary Video 1 ) . Velocities are calculated by dividing the distance ( d ) by the time ( t ) using 44 bounding rectangles for the lines drawn to trace the tracks of interest on the kymographs . Scale bars are 5 µm . Figure 7 . Hypothetical experimental model of actin bundling by plastins ( a , b ) In a regular operation mode of human plastins ( yellow arrows ) , ABD2 is strongly inhibited by ABD1 . Binding of ABD1 to F - actin favors slight release of the inhibition and allows ABD2 to get engaged in weak interaction with actin ( 1 ) . Due to a high affinity of ABD1 to ABD2 , the inhibition is not fully released upon ABD1 binding to actin , resulting in a weak bundling mode optimal for organized bundles , where many plastin molecules are engaged in cumulative weak interactions in the F - actin bundle ( 1 ) . Binding of Ca 2 + to the regulatory domain ( RD ) disfavors further release of ABD2 inhibition but does not interfere with actin binding via ABD1 . PTMs ( e . g . , phosphorylation of S406 ) and possibly binding of unknown cellular factors weaken the ABD1 - ABD2 contacts more dramatically , allowing much stronger interaction of ABD2 with actin ( green arrows ) . This strong - bundling mode enables both , individual cross - linking events essential for strengthening branched meshes ( 2 ) and stronger , Ca 2 + - hypo - sensitive organized bundles ( 3 ) . Plastins undergo retrograde flow with actin in the lamellipodia ( present study ) , and their recycling from focal adhesions ( FA ) to lamellipodial branched networks is controlled by Ca 2 + 37 . In the absence of finely tuned regulation ( e . g . , constitutively active phospho - mimicking PLS2 S406E and PLS3 S409E ) this eventually leads to plastin depletion from the lamellipodial branched actin networks with concomitant accumulation at the focal adhesions ( FA ) and stress fibers ( SF ) in the lamella ( b ) . Under normal physiological conditions , however , delicate PTM and Ca 2 + regulation restores the balance and allows prompt recycling of plastins from the FA / SF to the lamellipodia . ( c , d ) Model of actin bundle cross - linked by plastin based on cryo - EM reconstructions of ABD1 ( EMD - 25371 ) and ABD2 ( PDB : 6VEC ) . The domain reorientation required for parallel , in - register actin bundle is illustrated in d with alternative positions of CH3 - CH4 depicted by dashed circles ( see also Supplementary Video 2 ) .