ORIGINAL ARTICLE Emily S . Patterson Æ Michelle L . Rogers Marta L . Render A simulation - based embedded probe technique for human - computer interaction evaluation Received : 19 February 2003 / Accepted : 19 January 2004 / Published online : 20 April 2004 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag London Limited 2004 Abstract There is growing interest in developing video - based methods to evaluate the usefulness and usability of computerised tools in healthcare . In this paper , we propose a human - computer interaction evaluation method that protects the conﬁdentiality of patient information and reduces litigation risks for participants by embedding and analysing performance on ‘‘probes’’ in complex scenarios with high face validity in a simu - lated setting . We describe the application of the method to a series of three studies of bar code medication administration ( BCMA ) software , used to reduce med - ication errors in the Veteran’s Administration . Keywords Bar coding Æ Human factors Æ Medication errors Æ Patient safety Æ Usability testing 1 Simulating the use of medical software As in most complex , socio - technical settings , comput - erised tools in healthcare are increasingly sophisticated . These tools , upon which healthcare practitioners depend in life - critical situations , contain new features , modes and machine - initiated actions . At the same time , reductions in organisational resources and hospital lengths of stay have increased workload , the frequency of interruptions and the number of practitioners who need to coordinate to provide care . Unfortunately , scant attention in comparison with other settings , such as aviation , has been directed at designing and evaluating the usefulness and usability of these tools ( although see Ash et al . 2003 ; Cimino et al . 2001 ) . The recent sus - pension of use of the patient care expert ( PCX ) program at Cedars - Sinai Medical Center highlights the magni - tude of the costs of implementing a system that is not viewed as useful and usable by end users ( Stablein et al . 2003 ) . As evidenced by this special issue , there is growing interest in developing methods to evaluate the eﬀec - tiveness of computerised tools in supporting practitio - ners in accomplishing their work . One approach is to capture on video people interacting with medical arte - facts while providing patient care ‘‘in situ . ’’ Some of the beneﬁts of this approach include the ability to capture details such as how people are physically oriented , including where their gaze is focused , where they are pointing , contextual factors such as background activity , others waiting to interrupt and the interaction with ar - tefacts , such as writing a note or typing in a command ( Heath and Hindmarsh 2002 ; Jordan and Henderson 1995 ) . Although these details provide potentially critical insight during data analysis , they are impossible to col - lect in realtime using traditional ethnographic observa - tional techniques ( Hutchins 1995 ) . An additional beneﬁt is that video data can be viewed multiple times by the same or diﬀerent analysts with diﬀerent conceptual frameworks , thereby increasing the robustness , inspect - ability and validity of the ﬁndings . On the other hand , two signiﬁcant challenges with collecting video data of healthcare practitioners in their actual work context are : ( 1 ) the need to protect the conﬁdentiality of patient information and ( 2 ) litigation risks for healthcare workers if there are adverse patient outcomes that could be argued to be due to suboptimal performance . In addition , in any domain , videotaping in the workplace may adversely aﬀect performance due to behavioural changes resulting from the knowledge that actions are being permanently recorded , potentially increasing the likelihood of adverse outcomes . In this paper , we describe a method that has many of the ben - eﬁts of capturing video ‘‘in the wild’’ while addressing E . S . Patterson ( & ) VA Getting at Patient Safety ( GAPS ) Center , The Ohio State University , 3200 , Vine Street , MC111 , Cincinnati , OH 45220 , USA E - mail : Patterson . 150 @ osu . edu M . L . Rogers Æ M . L . Render VA Getting at Patient Safety ( GAPS ) Center , Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care , University of Cincinnati College of Medicine , 3200 , Vine Street , MC111 , Cincinnati , OH 45220 , USA Cogn Tech Work ( 2004 ) 6 : 197 – 205 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10111 - 004 - 0161 - 3 these two challenges . Additional beneﬁts of the pro - posed approach include that there is more control over the stimuli , tools and study participants , multiple study participants can be analysed simulating the use of soft - ware for the same scenarios , and it is possible to study the eﬀects of changes prior to implementation in actual operations . With the described method , high face validity scenarios are generated collaboratively with medical and human factors experts that include embedded probes and interruptions . Performance on the embedded probes unambiguously reveals how well the software supports representative end users in meeting challenging domain demands . In addition , a video of think - aloud verbalisations during typical tasks is col - lected to enable traditional analysis techniques to iden - tify aspects of the software that are diﬃcult to use or learn ( Ericsson and Simon 1993 ) . The medical software that was evaluated using the described approach is bar code medication administra - tion ( BCMA ) , the ﬁrst version of which was imple - mented in all 163 medical centres in the Veteran’s Administration ( VA ) in 1999 , an extension of a proto - type developed and ﬁrst implemented at the Colmery - O’Neil Medical Center . The primary goal of BCMA is to reduce medication errors , which were judged to be contributors to 19 % of the adverse events analysed in the Harvard Medical Practice study ( Leape et al . 1991 ) . BCMA reduces errors by verifying the patient identity as well as by verifying that the medications to be admin - istered by a nurse are what has been ordered for a patient . When there is a mismatch between a scanned medication’s name , dose , form , or time and the medi - cation order for a patient who has been identiﬁed by scanning a wristband , an alert box pops up . In this paper , we introduce the domain of medication administration , describe the application of the simula - tion - based embedded probe technique to a series of three studies and discuss the role of video data collection and analysis in the method . 2 Medication administration with BCMA In most VA hospitals , the canonical medication administration sequence is as follows : 1 . A physician orders medications in a computerised provider entry software package , a computerised patient record system ( CPRS ) . 2 . A pharmacist checks that there are no allergies or drug interactions and dispenses barcoded medica - tions to a patient’s drawer on a medication cart . When necessary , the pharmacist modiﬁes the order , such as by transferring free text orders into BCMA commands . 3 . A nurse logs into BCMA with a unique identiﬁer and scans a patient wristband or types in a social security number to access the list of active patient medication orders . The nurse takes the appropriate medications out of the patient’s drawer , scans them , opens and pours them into a plastic cup , and immediately administers them . There are many ways that this canonical sequence can break down ( Allan and Barker 1990 ) . It is estimated that there is approximately one medication administration error per patient per day , excluding administrations gi - ven at the incorrect time ( Dean et al . 1995 ) . Physicians can forget to order or co - sign medications or to continue expired medications . ‘‘Sound - alike’’ medications ( e . g . , Losec , an antacid preparation for stomach ulcers , and Lasix , a diuretic for excess ﬂuid in heart failure and renal impairment , Cohen 1999 ) can be substituted for each other . There could be translation errors in converting from a brand name of a medication to a generic name ( e . g . the generic medication Ritonavir has a brand name NORVIR and could be confused with the brand name RETROVIR , which is a brand of Zidovudine ) . Medications could be administered to the wrong patient . The medications could be administered at an incorrect dose , particularly intravenous ( IV ) medications that are administered by a pump or medications that need to be cut prior to administration . The correct medication could be given in the wrong form ( e . g . sustained release rather than immediate release ) or by the wrong route ( IV push rather than IV piggyback ) . The medications could fail to be administered if they are not dispensed to the nurse , put in the wrong medica - tion drawer , or if the medication administration is forgotten . Medications could be given twice if they were not previously documented when given . Finally , medications might be administered too late or too early to be eﬀective at maintaining the required level in the bloodstream . 3 The methodology The objective of a series of three iterative test - redesign - retest studies using the simulation - based embedded probe technique was to identify usefulness and usability issues with the ﬁrst version of BCMA and two proto - types of version 2 prior to implementation . To this end , video data was collected of nurses using a prototype of the BCMA system to simulate medication administra - tion to six patients in an acute care ward during a busy medication pass . Speciﬁcally , the target situation was simulated by having : • Nurses with varied nursing experience and familiarity with the software . • A taped shift change report at the beginning of the session , followed by scanning bar coded wristbands and medications while talking out loud and interact - ing with an investigator who role - played the patient and other healthcare professionals and who inter - rupted the nurse while passing the medications in person and by phone ( Table 1 ) . 198 • Multiple ‘‘test patients’’ in a video - taped 2 - h session with administration data automatically captured in BCMA . • Complex scenarios with embedded probes that en - abled unambiguous judgments of performance qual - ity , such as ordered medications for which a patient was allergic . The following data was collected for each study participant : age , gender , nursing degree , years of nursing experience , nursing specialisation , place of employment , prior experience with BCMA software , prior training on BCMA software , and ‘‘computer savviness . ’’ Although the risks for the study participants are much less for a simulation study than for video collected in the actual workplace , the data was treated as if it was from a performance in real settings , including only reporting data that might be used to identify participants in summary format . In addition to the general need to protect the conﬁdentiality of study participant identity , nurses were observed to make ‘‘medication errors , ’’ albeit to simulated patients , and statements were cap - tured on the video about deviations from prescribed practice using BCMA in the actual workplace . For all three studies , nursing experience was cate - gorised as high if the nurse had greater than 15 years of experience , moderate if they had more than two but less than 15 years , and low if they had less than 2 years of experience . The means and standard deviations ( SDs ) of the nursing expertise were 20 . 4 , 5 . 8 for high expertise , 8 . 7 , 2 . 1 for moderate and 1 . 0 , 0 . 0 for low . For age , the means and SD were 44 . 5 , 6 . 5 for high expertise , 32 . 0 , 7 . 1 for moderate and 26 . 2 , 2 . 4 for low . All but two nurses were female , and all but one nurse were registered nurses ( RNs ) . All but three nurses were VA employees . For the ﬁrst study , training data was not collected because the software product had already been ﬁelded . For the sec - ond and third study , participants were asked to describe how much training they had received on the second version of the software . Most had no training , with the exception of two who had been completely trained and one who had received some training . Computer savvi - ness was self - reported by circling low , moderate , or high on a written form . Most respondents circled moderate , with one high and two low . Each study participant was scheduled and paid for 2 h . During the session , the purpose of the study was described to each participant , informed consents for video and audio taping were signed , the participants practiced thinking aloud with standard practice exam - ples ( e . g . multiply 24 times 34 ) , and then a taped shift change report was played , which is the standard practice in the VA on acute care wards for shift changes . As an example , here is the transcript of the shift change report for one of the patients : Room 11 - 1 , Mr . B is a 49 - year - old male with endo - carditis and diabetes . He is alert and oriented times three . I took care of him a couple of months ago for an amputation of his right leg . He has a fever in spite of being on Vancomycin . He is day three status post valve replacement . I gave him 7 . 5 units of regular since his blood sugar was 260 . The doctor wants us to call if he has low urine output and has ordered blood cultures . He has a PICC line in his left arm . He’ll be discharged back to the nursing home , probably tomorrow . He’s pretty depressed and needy . He didn’t sleep much last night . After playing the shift change update , which the study participants could play multiple times while taking notes , they were encouraged to pass medications for their six patients . A medication cart , including an at - tached laptop and scanner identical to what is used on the wards , was provided . Barcoded wristbands and medication barcodes on empty medication packages were provided that input to the software when scanned . A hard copy was provided of physician orders and Table 1 Interruptions during the simulation Minutes Role of interrupter Script 7 Call from cath lab Mr . B is coming to the ward 15 Transportation person from the cath lab Mr . B is here 25 Nursing aide Here is vital sign information . Mr . C has a pulse of 52 , BP is 101 / 57 , and temperature of 99 . 8 , Mr . F has a pulse of 127 , BP of 104 / 62 , and temperature of 98 . 6 ; Mr . A has a temp of 99 . 8 , BP of 120 / 70 , and pulse of 114 28 Resident physician Mr . B has chest pain . You need to give nitroglycerine STAT 35 Nurse manager Can you work an extra shift today ? 40 IV pump in room 34 - 1 Beep beep 41 RN on ward What are you bringing for the baby shower ? 45 Wife of Mr . A My husband wants ice water . Can you get him some ? [ logout if agrees ] 47 Call from resident physician I am returning a previous page . You want me to increase the dose of Acetaminophen for Mr . D ? 50 Nurse manager Are you sure that you can ( or can’t ) work an extra shift today ? 51 Wife of Mr . D My husband is in a lot of pain . He said to tell you that it’s a 10 on a 1 – 10 scale . Can you give him something ? [ logout if agrees ] 55 Call from resident physician Has Mr . B been given gentamicin yet ? 199 historical patient information , but this information was not used by most of the study participants . The partic - ipants were required to answer the phone and simulated requests by personnel who interrupted them because interruptions , which are frequent in the healthcare setting , have been shown to disrupt primary task per - formance ( Gillie and Broadbent 1989 ) . Much of the role - playing interactions diﬀered based on how the scenario unfolded , but for every participant , the interruptions in Table 1 were conducted . At the end of the session , a debrieﬁng interview was conducted to better understand activities during the simulation and a short usability questionnaire ( Lewis 1995 ) was completed by the par - ticipant . Embedded probes ( Table 2 ) were created within the scenarios with the goal of creating situations where performance could be unambiguously interpreted and compared across study participants without relying on verbal protocol data , which can be highly variable for each participant and for levels of scenario complexity , both in quantity and quality . Most of these probes were generated by direct observation of problems with BCMA use in three hospitals and critical decision method interviews of adverse events ( Patterson et al . 2002 ) . Note that probes cannot be embedded when stimuli cannot be controlled , such as during ﬁeld observations , and that it requires signiﬁcant collabora - tion between a cognitive engineer and one or more do - main experts to create scenarios with high face validity to domain practitioners that also include conceptually targeted probes with unambiguous potential responses . In addition to the embedded probes , complicating factors more targeted to the speciﬁc evaluation of BCMA during a medication pass were employed to further stress the system in order to reveal vulnerabilities ( Table 3 ) . To illustrate how the embedded probes and compli - cating factors ﬁt into an overall scenario , consider one of the six patients under the care of the study participant , Mr . B ( Fig . 1 ) . Mr . B is a 49 - year - old male with heart problems ( subacute bactierial endocarditis and diabe - tes ) . Several months ago , his right leg was amputated and three days ago his heart valve was replaced . As per hospital policy , his antibiotics were automatically dis - continued after seven days , even though the antibiotic treatment course was planned for six weeks . The resi - dent physician erroneously let the antibiotic medication remain discontinued rather than renewing the order . The patient subsequently had a high temperature . In order to diagnose the high temperature , a physician ordered blood cultures and asked to be paged if the urine output was low . During the shift change report , the nurse stated that the patient slept poorly during the night . During the simulation , the study participant was told that the Table 2 Embedded probes and predicted responses Embedded probe Abstract description Predicted responses A : Vancomycin automatically discontinued and failed to be renewed by physician Missing information I ( Incorrect ) : No action or verbal remark C ( Correct ) : Verbal remark that the medication is missing from the list B : Mineral oil is ordered ‘‘as needed’’ ( PRN ) and shift change report that the patient has not had a bowel movement for two days Information ‘‘hidden’’ in secondary display I : No action or verbal remark C : Ask patient about bowel movements and / or ask if patient would like medication C : Physician order to call if heart rate is above 120 and report from nurses’ aide that heart rate is 127 Need for action based on a triggering eventwithout highlighting the triggering event or the need for action for the user I : No action or verbal remark C : Call physician or verbal remark about need to call physician D : Order not to take anything by mouth ( NPO ) mentioned during shift change but medication orders are still active Ambiguous and misleading information I : No action or verbal remark while administering ordered medications C : Verbal remarks about why particular medications are administered despite NPO order E : Metformin ordered even though patient is diabetic and NPO Ordered action that might not be the best for the situation I : No action or verbal remark while administering metformin C : Verbal remarks demonstrating knowledge of trade - oﬀs regarding administering metformin to a diabetic , NPO patient F : Amoxycillin ordered despite displayed allergy to penicillin on the primary interface Ordered action that is inappropriate for the patient I : No action or verbal remark while administering medication C : Verbal remarks demonstrating knowledge of allergy ; Response that illustrates the issue was considered in debrief interview G : Furosemide ordered to be given 30 min after metolazone Ordered action that increases working memory load I : Simultaneous administration of furosemide and metolazone C : Administration of furosemide approximately 30 min after metolazone 200 patient would soon be returning to the ward . Soon after that , a transporter announced that help was required to place the patient in bed . Several minutes later , the nurse was informed that the patient had chest pain and was ordered to give nitroglycerine STAT ( even though the medication was not ordered yet and so not listed on the display ) . In addition , as part of the medication pass , the study participant was required to administer medi - cations to this patient . When this activity occurred was unscripted , but embedded in the activity was the missing antibiotic ( Vancomycin ) medication . Gentamicin , a companion medication to Vancomycin , was on the list , however , and so could serve as a cue that an accompa - nying medication should have been on the list . In addition , a call by a resident physician late in the sim - ulation was designed to bring the attention of the study participant to the missing gentamicin medication . Re - sponses to this embedded probe were labelled as incor - rect if the study participant never made an indication that he or she realised that Vancomycin was missing and correct if a comment was made regarding it . In addition to the analysis of responses to the embedded probes , protocols were created for each study participant for each patient that included physical user Table 3 Complicating factors Complicating factors Commentary Wristband missing Need to type in social security number from paperwork Medication missing from patient drawer Need to order medication through interface or ‘‘borrow’’ from another patient Wrong EIN code Need to type in alternate code 60 mg dose in computer , 20 mg packets in patient drawer Need to call pharmacy to change the order ; in the meantime double - bind as to whether or not to give now STAT order of nitroglycerine not in BCMA yet Need to give the order and remember to document it later ( if forgotten to document , could easily be given again by another user ) Pastor talking with patient ; nurse asked to come back another time Need to either negotiate to give medications now , change time that medications were given in the database , or have erroneous administration time data in patient record Default set to not see PRN or one - time orders Need to explicitly click a checkbox to see PRN and one - time orders Ordered medication ( lasix IV push ) not displayed because inaccurately entered in BCMA by physician Need to recognise that an ordered medication is missing from the display A patient refuses a medication that has already been scanned Need to ﬁgure out how to change the status of a medication that has already been scanned and documented as given Taper dose order ( 80 mg for two days , 60 mg for two days , 40 mg for two days , etc . ) entered as individual medication orders for each day Need to understand that multiple medication orders are related 1 / 4 tablet of metoprolol ordered Need to cut pill prior to administration An ordered IV med ( Gentamicin ) is not on the list at this time because somebody selected a . m instead of p . m when they documented the medication Need to recognise a missing medication Change the site for an insulin shot after a diﬀerent site has been documented Need to ﬁgure out how to change the database information regarding the site Non - standard heparin dose Need to verify that the dose makes sense for the patient and is not erroneously ordered Fig . 1 Scenario elements for Mr . B including the embedded probe 201 actions , both in the software and otherwise , think - aloud verbalisations , verbal interactions with roleplaying practitioners , and medication administration times automatically recorded by the software . The protocols were analysed for confusion , whether or not there was diﬃculty meeting task goals and the accuracy and the eﬃciency of medication administration . As with any protocol - based analysis using video , analysis can be quite lengthy . We reduced analysis time by ﬁrst creating an Excel - based summary of actual vs . expected medi - cation administrations . During the analysis of the video , we speciﬁcally targeted the video of instances where the medication administration was diﬀerent than expected for the most detailed analysis . Other aspects of the protocol were not created in as detailed a fashion . To exemplify , an excerpt of a protocol is : While I’m in here and with you , I might as well go ahead and give you your other medications too , which is going to help { Nursing aide interrupts : blood sugar for Mr . H is 275 } . Mr . H Hold on and let me write that down . It was what ? { Nursing aide : 275 } (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) These medications are really , I’ll just keep typing late [ types ‘‘late’’ into pop - up dialog box as reason for late medication administration ] , are just slowing me down tremendously (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) I wish I had several options to click on . It goes so much faster than constantly typing . I have to lay down my scanner in order to type in a comment (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) Lasix . Wants him to have 160 . Wrong code , wrong dose . I wonder I have to call them back about Mr . H anyway . This is 45 , 80 mg . [ picks up phone ] Pharmacy , hi , this is ( nurse ) again . I have not heard about Mr . H with Venﬂaxine , I have another situation . Furosemide . I have an 80 mg tablet . Code is 6377 and EIN code is 6377 in computer as well , but when I scan it , this scans as already given (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 4 Findings As intended , the embedded probes were quite challeng - ing for the study participants ( Table 4 ) . With the exception of ( D ) , where a patient had active medications but was under another order not to take anything by mouth ( NPO ) , the performance was quite poor with regard to these probes . This ‘‘ﬂoor eﬀect’’ for the embedded probes facilitated an exploration of how the stressed nurse - BCMA system responded in unusual , unanticipated circumstances . In addition , it sets up cri - teria for future investigations of how alternative systems might better support meeting challenging task demands in nursing medication administration . Note that not every study participant experienced all of the embedded probes due to variability in how the scenarios played out . For example , the time in the BCMA software could not be manipulated because it was running on the hospital clock , so participants at 3 p . m . could not pass medications for the 9 a . m . time . In these cases , they simulated a diﬀerent medication pass , for which some of the medications were not ordered for face validity reasons . The interruptions had variable eﬀects on performance , partly because some were de - signed to occur at speciﬁc times rather than during particular tasks , and partly because there was variation in how the study participants responded to the inter - ruptions . For example , only some of the nurses stopped administering medications when the pastor asked the nurse to leave the room so that he and the patient could discuss some private matters . One of the nurses who did leave the room later ran a ‘‘double - check’’ to make sure that all her patients received all their medications , but was interrupted by a telephone call immediately prior to the double - check for the patient who was previously interrupted by the pastor . When she ﬁnished the tele - phone call , she closed the patient record without ever looking at it and so conducted double - checks on all the patients except that one . Following each study , design recommendations were presented to the design team . Summing all of the changes made to the ﬁrst , second and third versions of the BCMA software , 5 / 10 high priority , 2 / 9 medium priority , and 1 / 8 low priority recommendations to improve usefulness and usability were incorporated ( Table 5 ) . Some of these recommended changes were considered important enough to delay the implementa - tion of the second version of BCMA for several months , in particular the ﬁnding that the change from a single tab to a multi - tabbed display was associated with an increase in missed medications when the medication was not on the primary tab . All but the ﬁrst design change is still incorporated into the software . This design change Table 4 Correct responses to the embedded probes Probe Study 1 participants Study 2 participants Study 3 participants Total correct P 1 2 3 4 P 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 A – · 1 / 14 B · · 2 / 14 C – · · · · 4 / 14 D · · · · · · · · · – – 9 / 12 E – · · · · · – – 5 / 11 F – – – – 0 / 12 G · – – – – 1 / 10 202 was recently modiﬁed so that only three of four medi - cation types display as a default . This change was made in response to user feedback that the safety beneﬁts of displaying PRN ( ‘‘whenever necessary’’ ) medications that are only administered under certain circumstances , such as if a patient is in pain or constipated , came at too large of an eﬃciency cost from scrolling through the additional medications . Although several of these changes were made prior to the second and third usability tests , no statistically sig - niﬁcant change was detected from the usability ques - tionnaires . The questionnaire results from each of the studies for ‘‘Overall , I am satisﬁed with how easy it is to use this system’’ on a 1 - 7 Likert scale where 7 = ‘‘strongly agree’’ were 4 . 6 , SD = 1 . 52 , 4 . 6 , SD = 1 . 82 , and 5 . 3 , SD = 1 . 71 . Note that the small number of study participants for each study ( four for each test ) made it diﬃcult to detect diﬀerences with the questionnaires . In addition to the prioritised recommendations to improve the usability of the software following each test , we highlighted three suggestions to improve the useful - ness of the software at a meeting with the design team . The primary suggestion was to create an overview dis - play that would enable nurses to better plan when to administer medications to what patients and more easily detect when medications were missed or when there were medication errors such as ‘‘double doses . ’’ An overview screen prototyped in VisualBasic by a member of the research team and several members of the design team is under consideration for future versions of the software . Our second suggestion was to review every interaction sequence for opportunities to improve eﬃciency , which we anticipated would reduce the perceived need for nurses to employ ‘‘workarounds’’ such as typing in ra - ther than scanning wristband barcode information . Third , we recommended expanding the mechanisms for communication , similar to a popular feature where nurses can request missing medications from pharmacy with a single click on the interface . 5 Discussion The method described in this paper and applied in a series of three iterative test - redesign - retest studies was used to identify usefulness and usability problems with successive prototypes of BCMA software . We now dis - cuss issues speciﬁc to the collection and analysis of video data with this method . It is possible to use the simulation - based embedded probe technique without collecting and analysing video data . However , we feel that the video data were important in that : • It was necessary to review the video in order to understand why some medications were administered erroneously . It was only after the electronically cap - tured data from BCMA was reviewed that some of the erroneous administrations were identiﬁed , and so the observer did not focus on those administrations in real time . In addition , during the debrieﬁng interviews , in some cases the study participants used the software to illustrate their point , which introduced some admin - istration data that were not related to the simulation run . In the absence of video data , these types of interactions would need to be carefully noted real time in order to avoid erroneous interpretations during data analysis . • The video data served as a check on the ‘‘real - time’’ analysis of what display elements were confusing to study participants . In several cases , reviews multiple times by investigators modiﬁed the interpretation of the human - machine interactions . For example , a study participant failed to administer an IV medica - tion , Unasyn , that was displayed on a background tab Table 5 Implemented design recommendations Problem Recommendation Priority Missed doses when one - time and PRN orders were not defaulted to display Default for all medication types to display ( rather than to the last setting for the last patient ) High Nurses delayed and sometimes omitted documentation of ‘‘refused’’ medications ( after scanned as given ) because of the need to use a diﬀerent software package Enable ‘‘Mark refused’’ menu option after medication is scanned to be selected High 6 / 6 nurses missed medications not on the primary tab for at least one patient Default to the unit dose tab High 2 / 4 nurses did not read the ‘‘Are you sure ? ’’ warning regarding potentially missed medications Reorganise the information order in the dialog box and reword High 3 / 4 nurses were confused by needing to scan a currently hanging IV bag prior to scanning a new bag Eliminate the requirement to scan a hanging IV bag prior to scanning a new bag High Unable to document reasons other than in pick lists for held medications Have local sites include ‘‘other’’ as a pick list option Medium 10 / 10 administered amoxycillin despite a displayed patient allergy to penicillin Move allergy information to primary screen and display in red font ; add allergy information to the ‘‘Are you sure that this is the correct patient ? ’’ dialog box Medium Novices confused by how to document PRN eﬀectiveness Enable ‘‘one - click’’ access to PRN documentation on planned overview tab Low 203 and it was only during a review of the video data that we noticed that the participant pointed to the upper right portion of the primary screen to verify that all medication types were checked prior to exiting the patient record , a strategy that would have ensured that all medications had been viewed with the single - tab interface of the prior version of the software with which she had signiﬁcant experience . • Playing video clips to BCMA design team members aided in motivating them to implement recommended changes to the software . With video collected in the actual workplace , there are legal issues for study participants and concerns about the ability to protect the conﬁdentiality of patient data . Through simulation of the work setting , these concerns were mitigated . Nevertheless , we employed several tactics to further reduce these concerns . Speciﬁ - cally , we : • Used logins to a test account that did not identify the participant . • Only reported aggregated data about the study par - ticipants . • Did not show video clips to audiences without par - ticipant consent . • Did not use actual patient records as the basis for the simulated patients . As with any detailed analysis of video data , we feel that it is critical to employ techniques to increase eﬃ - ciency of analysis for tractability purposes . In these studies , we : • Used the common structure of the scenarios , including the ordered medications , interruptions and embedded probes to structure the analysis and enable compari - son across study participants . • Restricted detailed analysis which required multiple viewings of video data to fragments around errone - ously administered medications and the embedded probes . • Captured on video a single perspective ( a view of the back of the user and some of the screen ) . With this view , it was not possible to always obtain a clear picture of the interface , but data analysis was more tractable in that multiple perspectives did not need to be synchronised and viewed simultaneously . With access to the simulated patients in BCMA , interaction sequences could be replayed in order to see the details of what was displayed which was not captured on video . • Conducted the data analysis as soon as possible fol - lowing the data collection . In this way , details from the simulation run were easier to remember , and so fewer viewings were required to accurately depict the interactions in the protocol format . Our described methodology has several limitations . Firstly , it does not easily support a quantitative comparison of performance with alternatives to the evaluated software because , although as many elements of the environment were controlled as possible to reduce variability and enable comparisons across study participants , inherent in the method is the opportunity to use the software in unexpected ways and to deviate from predictable action sequences . In addition , we opportunistically interjected interview questions in real time to better understand the observed behaviour , which reduced the value of time as a metric . Next , although scenarios can be repeated multiple times with diﬀerent study participants , they cannot be repeated multiple times with the same study participants due to learning eﬀects . Finally , this method requires prior extensive knowledge in order to create embedded probes that challenge practitioners . Without a large amount of prior domain knowledge , the simulation is less eﬀective because the scenarios have lower face validity . In addi - tion , the knowledge is required to create elements that adequately challenge the human - software system in or - der to reveal opportunities to improve usefulness and usability . Acknowledgments We thank the nurses and facilitators , Kim Zip - per , Linda Fischetti , Ginny Creasman and Amanda Eisenlohr for donating their valuable time and expertise . We thank Roger Chapman and the BCMA development team , in particular Chris Tucker , Russ Carlson , Connie Johnson , Eddie Urso , and David Honeycut for working with us to improve the software . Patricia Ebright helped to develop the scenarios . We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions for improvement . This re - search was supported by the Department of Veterans Aﬀairs , Veterans Health Administration , Health Services Research and Development Service ( Project no . SAF 20 - 049 ) . A VA HSR & D Merit Review Entry Program Award supported Emily Patterson . The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the view of the Department of Veterans Aﬀairs . References Allan EL , Barker KN ( 1990 ) Fundamentals of medication error research . Am J Hosp Pharm 47 ( 3 ) : 555 – 571 Ash JS , Gorman PN , Lavelle M , Payne TH , Massaro TA , Frantz GL , Lyman JA ( 2003 ) A cross - site qualitative study of physi - cian order entry . J Am Med Inform Assoc 10 ( 2 ) : 188 – 200 Cimino JJ , Patel VL , Kushniruk AW ( 2001 ) Studying the human – computer - terminology interface . J Am Med Inform Assoc 8 ( 2 ) : 163 – 173 Cohen MR ( ed ) ( 1999 ) Medication errors : causes , prevention , and risk management . Jones and Bartlett Publishers , Boston , MA Dean BS , Allan EL , Barber ND , Barker KN ( 1995 ) Comparison of medication errors in an American and a British hospital . Am J Health Syst Pharm 52 ( 22 ) : 2543 – 2549 Ericsson K , Simon H ( 1993 ) Protocol analysis : verbal reports as data . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Gillie T , Broadbent DE ( 1989 ) What makes interruptions disrup - tive ? A study of length , similarity , and complexity . Psychol Res 50 : 243 – 250 Heath C , Hindmarsh J ( 2002 ) Analysing interaction : video , eth - nography , and situated conduct . In May T ( ed ) Qualitative research in action : an international guide to issues in practice . Sage , London pp 99 – 121 Hutchins E ( 1995 ) Cognition in the wild . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA 204 Jordan B , Henderson A ( 1995 ) Interaction analysis : foundations and practice . J Learn Sci 4 ( 1 ) : 39 – 103 Landauer TK ( 1995 ) The trouble with computers : usefulness , usability , and productivity . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Leape LL , Brennan TA , Laird NM , Lawthers AG , Localio AR , Barnes BA , Hebert L , Newhouse JP , Weiler PC , Hiatt HH ( 1991 ) The nature of adverse events in hospitalized patients : results from the Harvard Medical Practice Study II . N Engl J Med 324 ( 6 ) : 377 – 384 Lewis JR ( 1995 ) IBM computer usability satisfaction question - naires : psychometric evaluation and instructions for use . Int J Hum Comput Interact 7 ( 1 ) : 57 – 78 Patterson ES , Cook RI , Render ML ( 2002 ) Improving patient safety by identifying side eﬀects from introducing bar coding in medication administration . J Am Med Inform Assoc 9 ( 5 ) : 540 – 553 Patterson ES , Render ML , Ebright PL ( 2003 ) Repeating human performance themes in ﬁve health care adverse events . In : Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , Baltimore , MD , 30 September – 4 October 2003 , pp 1418 – 1422 Stablein D , Welebob E , Johnson E , Metzger J , Burgess R , Classen DC ( 2003 ) Understanding hospital readiness for computerized physician order entry . Jt Comm J Qual Saf 29 ( 7 ) : 336 – 344 205