Why It Works ( When It Works ) : Success Factors in Online Creative Collaboration Kurt Luther , ¹ Kelly Caine , ² Kevin Ziegler , ¹ Amy Bruckman¹ 1 School of Interactive Computing & GVU Center Georgia Institute of Technology 85 5 th St . NW Atlanta , GA 30332 USA luther , asb { @ cc . gatech . edu } , kevin . ziegler @ gatech . edu 2 School of Informatics and Computing Indiana University 901 E . 10 th St . Bloomington , IN 47408 USA caine @ indiana . edu ABSTRACT Online creative collaboration ( peer production ) has enabled the creation of Wikipedia and open source software ( OSS ) , and is rapidly expanding to encompass new domains , such as video , music , and animation . But what are the underlying principles allowing online creative collaboration to succeed , and how well do they transfer from one domain to another ? In this paper , we address these questions by comparing and contrasting online , collaborative animated movies , called collabs , with OSS projects . First , we use qualitative methods to solicit potential success factors from collab participants . Then , we test these predictions by quantitatively analyzing a data set of nearly 900 collabs . Finally , we compare and contrast our results with the literature on OSS development and propose broader theoretical implications . Our findings offer a starting point for a systematic research agenda seeking to unlock the potential of online creative collaboration . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 3 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Group and Organizational Interfaces – collaborative computing , computer - supported cooperative work , web - based interaction General Terms Management , Human Factors , Theory Keywords Leadership , online creative collaboration , social computing , success , online community , open source , peer production 1 . INTRODUCTION New forms of information technologies and increasingly widespread access have brought about the phenomenon of online creative collaboration , also called peer production [ 4 ] . These projects challenge almost every reasonable assumption about how and why work gets done . Most are run by volunteers , not salaried employees . Some volunteers have months or years of effort to contribute ; others have only a few moments . They live in different countries , cultures , and time zones . Their backgrounds and experience levels range from novice to expert , amateur to professional . Most have not met in person and never will . Instead , they meet , communicate , and coordinate primarily over the Web . Somehow , despite these many differences from traditional organizations and modes of work , and all the new difficulties they bring with them , online creative collaboration has demonstrated remarkable success . Perhaps the two most famous—and most - researched—examples are Wikipedia and the open - source software ( OSS ) movement . Through online creative collaboration , volunteer editors have pieced together the largest encyclopedia in history—over 10 million articles in more than 250 languages . OSS developers have built some of the world’s best and most - used software applications , including Linux , Apache , and Firefox . All of these creations are free for anyone to use and modify . The success of online creative collaboration seems impossible for anyone to have predicted . But now that the moment has arrived , researchers have embraced the opportunity to understand how it happened . Scholars have been empirically studying OSS development since the late 1990s . Their work has been joined by a growing body of research focused on Wikipedia , beginning in the mid - 2000s . This impressive effort has greatly enriched our understanding of these canonical examples of successful online creative collaboration . However , two important issues remain relatively unexplored . First , what do these studies reveal about the bigger picture of online creative collaboration as a general phenomenon ? Second , what can be learned about online creative collaboration from examples outside of encyclopedia writing and software development ? This paper attempts to address these issues by exploring an example of online creative collaboration that has seen little research attention : animated movie - making . While it could be argued that this example is interesting to explore in its own right , our primary goal in selecting it for this study is to broaden the space of research on online creative collaboration . To this end , we focus our analysis on success , one of the most - studied topics in online creative collaboration research , and contrast our findings with the literature on OSS . Contrasts with other examples ( e . g . , Wikipedia , music remixing ) are intriguing topics for future work . The rest of this paper is organized as follows : First , we provide background information on the online community of animators we studied , and related work on success in OSS . We describe a qualitative study to generate an initial set of success factors . We also use a quantitative study to further explore the validity of these success factors . Next , we discuss these findings with respect to OSS research . Finally , we suggest some broader theoretical implications for online creative collaboration . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . GROUP’10 , November 7 – 10 , 2010 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0387 - 3 / 10 / 11 . . . $ 10 . 00 . 1 2 . BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Newgrounds We selected Newgrounds 1 as the site of our empirical investigation . Newgrounds , founded by Tom Fulp in 1995 , is the oldest and largest online host of Adobe Flash - animated movies and games . As of August 2010 , Newgrounds is among the 1 , 000 most - visited websites , according to Alexa . com . Its membership base , comprised of over 2 , 200 , 000 registered user accounts , has created and uploaded over 180 , 000 animated movies and games . Most of these are single - author , individually - made animations known as solo projects . However , many others are multi - author , collaboratively - made animations called collabs . In previous work , we studied collabs on Newgrounds using primarily interviews and participant observation [ 17 , 18 ] . These earlier studies focused on describing the collab production process and challenges for leaders . They also revealed a key distinction between collabs and OSS projects regarding definitions of success . These findings partly motivated the current work and are reviewed below . This paper draws on the same interviews , but contributes an entirely new analysis focused on success factors . We also contribute a substantial quantitative component to complement and extend the qualitative results . 2 . 2 Collab Production Process Hundreds of collabs each year are organized on the Newgrounds discussion forums . To start a collab , one member posts a new collab thread describing the project and inviting community members to join . The thread creator typically assumes the role of “leader , ” while every other participant takes on the role of “artist” ( or a variation of these terms ) . Two to 50 or more artists may join a given collab , depending on the leader’s goals . If a thread attracts enough interest , it becomes the locus of activity for the collab’s duration , attracting dozens to thousands of replies . If not , the thread is soon buried beneath more popular ones and forgotten . Professional animation studios , like film sets , typically embrace a specialized division of labor [ 3 ] . Each person has expertise in a specific area , such as modeling , animating , or lighting . Therefore , each scene requires the efforts of many contributors with unique skills . Collabs , however , operate more like Wikipedia and OSS projects , in that their division of labor is modularized [ 17 ] . Most collabs are structured so that artists can claim a module , such as a chapter of a story , and have near - total control , answerable only to the leader . It is common for a single artist to handle backgrounds , characters , story , dialogue , and music for each scene . The leader is responsible for the initial modularization , the final integration , and all the motivation and management that happens in between . When a collab is completed , the leader typically submits the completed animation to Newgrounds for judgment by other members . If accepted , the collab is hosted on Newgrounds and receives ratings and reviews from a web - based viewing audience . Successful collabs , such as “Street Fighter Collab” ( 2009 ) or “Blamformers ! ” ( 2007 ) , can attract 800 , 000 to one million views or more . Newgrounds features a multi - author system , where up to ten people can be formally credited as “co - authors” of the completed animation . Often , the collab leader takes the first co - author slot . If more artists worked on a collab than there are available co - author slots , the leader typically distributes them to a subset of artists he or she deems most deserving [ 18 ] . 1 http : / / www . newgrounds . com / 2 . 3 Success in Collabs 2 . 3 . 1 Success Definitions For most collab participants , success is defined as completing a collab [ 17 ] . Unlike OSS projects and Wikipedia articles , collabs are not constantly improved and re - released many times . Rather , they are typically released to the public just once , much like an independent film debut , and almost never changed again . Newgrounds members refer to completed collabs as “successful , ” whereas incomplete collab are “failed” or “dead . ” Other potential success metrics , such as the ratings and popularity of completed collabs , were typically viewed as secondary . Completed collabs offer several benefits to their creators . First , only completed collabs are hosted on Newgrounds for audiences to watch ; otherwise , the work goes mostly unnoticed . Second , the ratings assigned to completed collabs by audiences contribute to each creator’s Batting Average ( BA ) , the average score of all of his or her Newgrounds submissions . The BA is used to determine member rankings , thus affecting creators’ exposure and reputation within the community . Third , completed collabs may generate income for creators , through Newgrounds’ ad - based revenue sharing program ( tied to percentages specified in the multi - author system ) , cash prizes awarded by the Newgrounds staff for highly rated submissions , or sponsorship from third parties . 2 . 4 Success in Open - Source Software 2 . 4 . 1 Success Definitions Defining OSS success is complicated because of its ongoing , evolutionary nature . OSS projects are never truly completed , only abandoned . Success metrics that may have worked well in traditional software development contexts often prove inappropriate for OSS development [ 9 ] . For example , successful traditional projects may end with a public release , while many OSS projects begin with a public release , contributed by the leader to attract co - developers . Attempts to generate new metrics for OSS success have generally embraced a multi - dimensional conceptualization of success . They also tend to be informed by a combination of theory and multiple empirical data sources . We review two recent attempts here . English and Schweik [ 13 ] produced a six - part classification , based on phone interviews with OSS developers , manual coding of a sample of OSS projects from SourceForge . net , and theoretical insights from Hardin’s “Tragedy of the Commons” [ 15 ] . In this system , OSS projects can be successful , abandoned , or indeterminate at two key stages in their life cycle , Initiation and Growth . A successful Initiation stage is defined as OSS developers achieving a first release , and a successful Growth stage is defined as achieving three subsequent releases . English and Schweik operationalized these definitions and tested them on 110 , 933 SourceForge projects , with low error rates . Wiggins and Crowston [ 22 ] validated a refined version with another SourceForge data set , also with good results . Of 117 , 733 projects , they classified 31 % as abandoned at the Initiation stage , 28 % as abandoned at the Growth stage , and 14 % as successful at both the Initiation and Growth stages . Crowston and colleagues [ 9 ] developed a set of 18 measures of OSS success , organized into four system process phases : creation and maintenance , quality , use , and consequences . These measures were based on DeLone and McLean’s process model for information systems [ 11 ] , a literature review of success measures in OSS research , and a survey of OSS developers on 2 SlashDot . org . The authors validated their model by operationalizing three of the 18 measures—number of developers , bug - fixing time , and popularity—and testing them on a sample of 120 SourceForge projects . The resulting correlations between measures suggested high convergent validity . 2 . 4 . 2 Success Factors A somewhat distinct body of work has sought to understand how and why OSS projects succeed , especially in comparison to traditional software development . Answers to this question , developed by scholars of business , computer science , economics , sociology , and many other disciplines , have been as diverse and multi - dimensional as the definitions of success themselves . Some themes that can be distilled from this broad literature include : • intrinsic motivation and self - selection for tasks [ 4 , 19 , 21 ] ; • a charismatic , capable leader [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] ; • a meritocratic , rational culture [ 19 , 21 , 23 ] ; • a modular , granular division of labor [ 4 , 21 ] ; and • use of collaborative technologies , such as CVS , TODO lists , and mailing lists [ 14 , 23 ] . As argued by Weber [ 21 ] , the success of OSS is likely best explained by a confluence of these factors , although the relative importance of each is a topic of ongoing investigation . Our goal here is simply to introduce these themes before presenting the current work ; for a comprehensive overview , see [ 10 ] . In section 5 , we return to these themes and discuss a subset in detail to enable comparisons and contrasts with collabs . 3 . QUALITATIVE STUDY Following the examples of English and Schweik [ 13 ] and Crowston and colleagues [ 9 ] reviewed above , our exploration of success in the Newgrounds community takes a mixed - methods approach . First , we use interviews and participant observation to generate an initial set of success factors for collabs , described in this section . From these results , we derive a set of predictions that we explore more deeply in a second , quantitative study , described in the next section . 3 . 1 Methods We conducted semi - structured interviews with 17 animators who had experience working on collabs . Of these interviews , 14 were voice interviews ( audio - recorded and fully transcribed ) and three were email interviews . The interviews lasted approximately an hour each and focused on participants’ experiences with collabs . For this paper , we performed a bottom - up analysis of the responses to our questions about successful collabs , e . g . , “What makes a collab likely to succeed ? ” and “What does a successful collab look like ? ” Other results focused on the collab production process more generally are detailed elsewhere [ 17 , 18 ] . Participants ranged in skill and experience from novice to expert , and included amateurs , students , and professional animators . Ten of the 17 participants had collab leader experience . They lived in six countries : the U . S . ( nine ) , Australia ( three ) , the U . K . ( two ) , Estonia ( one ) , the Netherlands ( one ) , and Spain ( one ) . Participants ranged in age from 16 to 29 , and all were male . We recruited participants through messages posted on the Newgrounds forums , private messages sent to members with collab experience , and snowball sampling ( recommendations from participants ) . We gave all participants the option of being referred to by their real names in our publications because they may prefer to be credited when their work is discussed [ 6 ] . All but two participants preferred this option ; we will refer to these exceptions as “Anonymous . ” In addition to these interviews , one of the authors studied the Newgrounds community as a participant - observer for a three - year period , beginning in the fall of 2006 . This author also worked with , observed , and interviewed the Newgrounds staff at their Northeast U . S . office for a three - month period in 2009 . The notes from these experiences were used as secondary corroborating evidence for the interview data described above . 3 . 2 Results In our interviews , participants identified a number of potential success factors , which we organize into three themes : planning & structure , reputation & experience , and communication & dedication . We present each of these themes , illustrated with participant quotes , in the following section . 3 . 2 . 1 Planning & Structure Participants frequently mentioned the amount of planning and structure that leaders had invested in a collab thread as a strong indicator of success . Plans and structure not only offer logistical benefits , but also create a favorable impression of the leader : Collaborations fail because people get an idea in their head and they can’t accurately convey their vision to the people they want to participate . And the collaboration doesn’t appear very appealing because the person doesn’t seem organized . ( Joseph Rooks ) Participants singled out technical constraints , or “specs” ( e . g . , frame rates , dimensions , and file size ) as especially important to a successful collab . These details are crucial to communicate early on in order to prevent serious compatibility problems in the collab’s future : You have to give people really concrete boundaries in terms of how to put their movie together—not the creative part , but the technical aspects of it—in order for it to succeed to begin with . ( Luis Castanon ) One thing that’s important is laying down the ground rules for everyone… You have to let them know what frame rate they’re working with and what the size of the movie’s going to be . It’s really easy to forget—it’s really easy to start one and forget the little details that you need from people… You’ll get people submitting things that aren’t the right size , or they aren’t the right frame rate , or they have other problems with them . ( Tom Fulp ) 3 . 2 . 2 Reputation & Experience For other participants , familiarity with the people involved in a collab is at least as important as the idea itself and how well it is organized . Often , the first thing artists look for in a collab thread is a “familiar face” ; i . e . , the name of a friend or past collaborator : If I was going to join a collaboration , I’d probably like to stick with the crowd that I know . ( Ross O’Donovan ) If it’s somebody that you know and trust—I mean just to submit decent Flash—then , yeah , it’s a good idea to join that collab . ( Michael Frank ) Artists who lack this familiarity may view the user profiles of the collab thread’s supporters to get a sense of their reputation in the community . On Newgrounds , user profiles display a complete history of a user’s submitted animations as well as their ratings . 3 The average rating of a user’s submissions , a single 0 - 5 score , comprises his or her Batting Average or BA . Artists with high BAs or lengthy histories of submitted animations are thought to be competent , bolstering the collab’s chances of success : You check if people have done them before . If they’ve done them before , they’re most likely to be able to do them . Or if they’ve got their own solo projects , then they’re more likely to follow through on their projects . ( James Hole ) A collab leader’s reputation , in particular , must endure considerable scrutiny by artists : It definitely helps when the leader is someone who already has the respect of the other users… When a popular artist asks people to get involved , they already assume it’s going to have a certain level of quality to it . If it’s some unknown person who wants you to be involved in a collab , you don’t know how they’re—what the quality is going to be like . You don’t really want to work alongside crap . ( Tom Fulp ) If collab leaders are not well known , artists may resort to looking through their previous work to get a sense for their competency . For example : I think it also is important that people have a substantial amount of experience on their own with Flash and animation before they take the leadership role in a project of that nature . Just because it leads to a lot of frustration when you know more than the person who’s essentially going to be giving you orders , in a way . ( Luis Castanon ) I definitely think your library of your own Flash submissions is probably your best collateral for getting people involved in your collab . It’s all about what you’ve done . ( Tom Fulp ) 3 . 2 . 3 Communication & Dedication Some potential success factors , such as communication and dedication , are brought into relief only after a collab has started . As artists drop out and join the collab in progress , new waves of replacements benefits from additional information about the collab’s progress up to that time . Participants suggested that more activity in a thread , indicated by the number and frequency of replies , often corresponds to a greater likelihood of success . More active threads get increased exposure on the first few pages of the forum , inviting still more replies , in a beneficent cycle : The thing about collabs , it’s all about community . If only one person’s interested , they’ll just regularly bump up the thread , but after awhile they’ll just give up or somebody just comes along and tells them , “No , this is rubbish . ” But if it’s a really good idea , loads of people will take part and the thread will just keep being bumped and bumped up to the top page . ( Robert Westgate ) Measures of reply counts may only partly explain why highly active threads seem to offer more success potential . The nature of that activity is also important . Participants told us that frequent communication between a collab leader and non - leader collab participants is essential to the success of any collab : A collaboration can’t succeed without [ communication ] . At least , not a complex one . A movie director doesn’t walk onto the set and say , “I want you to do this , this , and this . I’ll be back in a few hours to check on you . ” A movie director is constantly there giving his guidance . ( Joseph Rooks ) Joseph’s conviction that leaders must be in constant contact with collab participants speaks to a broader notion of dedication that participants sought out . Collabs with dedicated leaders , participants explained to us , are more likely to succeed because the leaders are personally invested in their outcomes : [ A good leader is ] someone with the dedication to actually , you know , see a project through to [ success ] and make sure everyone’s doing their own stuff . It’s just incredibly important if you want to get a collaboration off the ground . ( Ross O’Donovan ) 3 . 3 Discussion Participants shared with us well - developed strategies for identifying collabs with high potential to succeed . These strategies can be grouped into three sets of criteria : planning & structure ( determined mostly by the thread first post ) , reputation & experience ( determined mostly by leader attributes ) , and communication & dedication ( determined mostly by thread activity dynamics ) . Analysis of these results led us to derive the following five predictions : 3 . 3 . 1 Planning & Structure • P1 : Collabs with initial planning and structure , especially technical specifications , are more likely to be successful . Our measure of “initial planning and structure” is the quantity of planning / structural elements provided by the leader in the first post of a collab thread . We describe the process and rationale for identifying these elements in detail below . 3 . 3 . 2 Reputation & Experience • P2 : Animators who are well - known in the community are more likely to lead successful collabs . Many factors may contribute to a Newgrounds member’s online reputation . For the purposes of this paper , we define a “well - known” member as one who posts frequently in the discussion forums , has won many awards for his or her submissions , and has achieved a high Batting Average ( thus appearing near the top of the Newgrounds leaderboard ) . • P3 : Animators who have experience with Flash and past collabs are more likely to lead successful collabs . Our proxy for “experience with Flash” is the number of solo animation projects accepted by Newgrounds . 3 . 3 . 3 Communication & Dedication • P4 : Collabs whose members frequently communicate are more likely to be successful . • P5 : Collabs whose leaders frequently communicate are more likely to be successful . To measure communication frequency , we examine the number and frequency of replies made by each member or leader in a collab thread . While other predictions are possible to generate from our interviews , we present this list as a subset to explore more deeply with a second study . 4 . QUANTITATIVE STUDY Our goal with this second study is to leverage participants’ domain knowledge and expertise as a starting point for a complementary , quantitative investigation of success factors in 4 online creative collaboration . In the following sections , we describe the methods and results of this second study . 4 . 1 Methods 4 . 1 . 1 Data Collection and Cleanup The target of our data collection was the Newgrounds discussion forums . Using a web scraping tool we built using the BeautifulSoup library for Python and a MySQL database , we scraped all threads in the Flash forum ( the only forum where collab threads are permitted ) whose last reply was posted before January 1 , 2008 , for a total of 137 , 328 forum threads . The scraping took place in September 2008 , nine months after the latest reply of the most recently active threads in our initial corpus . This delay was intended to provide sufficient time for collab threads to reach an outcome ( either success or failure ) . For each thread , we collected the title , reply count , date posted and author of the first and last posts , and the unique ID . From this initial corpus of 137 , 328 threads , we then sought to separate collab threads for further analysis . Most thread creators use the word “collab” in their titles to signal that the thread is a collab thread . Our solution was to separate threads with the word “collab” in their titles , resulting in a collection of 2 , 797 probable collab threads . We then purposefully sampled 892 collab threads from this collection in three bins : low ( < 10 replies , N = 300 ) , medium ( 10 - 50 replies , N = 300 ) , and high activity 3 ( > 50 replies , N = 292 ) . Two factors motivated this decision . First , collab threads generate a highly variable amount of activity , ranging from zero replies to thousands ; most generate only a few replies . A random sample would likely comprise almost entirely low activity threads . Second , activity within threads is likely to correspond to success ; a thread with a high reply count has attracted many participants and much interest , whereas a thread with few or no replies suggests that the community ignored it . We chose the cutoff point of 50 because it was the mean reply count for our pilot data set . For each collab thread , we then collected the author , date posted , and message content for every reply , supplementing the data scraped for every thread in the initial corpus . We also collected data about the creator , i . e . , first poster , of each collab thread . For each thread creator , we scraped the total number of forum posts , completed solo animations , participation in completed collabs , awards won , and Batting Average ( BA ) . We adjusted these data to match the thread creator’s contribution history at the time he or she started each collab thread . This adjustment was needed to reflect the thread creator’s reputation at the time the community was deciding whether or not to join his or her collab thread . We also removed the data for two creators with abnormally high participation in completed collabs , after determining them to be outliers using Grubbs’ test ( z = 43 . 04 and 49 . 97 ) . Finally , Newgrounds requires at least one accepted submission to calculate a member’s BA . For analyses related to BAs , we excluded 283 collab threads whose leaders had no accepted submissions , and therefore did not have BAs . A portion of these collab threads resulted in a completed animation hosted on Newgrounds . For these threads , we used content analysis ( see next section ) to find the unique ID for the associated completed animation on Newgrounds . We then collected the date each animation was published on Newgrounds . 3 Only 292 high activity threads had “collab” in the title . 4 . 1 . 2 Data Analysis We performed five types of analysis on these data : ( 1 ) a content analysis of the first posts in collab threads , ( 2 ) a categorization of the outcome of threads as either success ( meaning completion of an animation ) , or failure , ( 3 ) t - tests comparing first post attributes in successful vs . failed collab threads , ( 4 ) t - tests comparing activity dynamics in successful vs . failed collab threads , and ( 5 ) t - tests comparing attributes of leaders of completed vs . failed collabs . Each of these will be described in the following section . First , we performed a content analysis by manually coding the first post of each collab thread for structural elements . Two judges , both authors of this paper , performed the content analysis . First , the judges developed a coding scheme by independently analyzing the same set of 50 collab thread first posts . The judges then met to discuss their analyses and merge them to produce a single coding scheme . Next , the judges used the merged coding scheme to independently code another set of 50 first posts . The judges then met a second time to compare codes , reconcile any disagreements or confusions , and finalize the coding scheme . We assessed intercoder reliability for each item in the coding scheme using ReCal , with satisfactory results ( average intercoder agreement per item : 94 % ; average Cohen’s κ per item : 0 . 70 ) . Each judge then claimed half of the 892 first posts and independently coded them . The final coding scheme contained 44 items , grouped into six broad categories : • Themes are content guidelines for the project , e . g . , music video , single narrative , comedy sketches . ( 12 codes ) • Specs are technical specifications for the project , e . g . , dimensions , frame rate , audio streaming . ( 11 codes ) • Authorship criteria determine which artists get “co - author” ' credit , e . g . , best submissions , most helpful , voting . ( 6 codes ) • Restrictions identify prohibited content types for the project , e . g . , violence , nudity , profanity . ( 5 codes ) • Gatekeeping rules govern who can join the project , e . g . , leader’s pick , experience baselines , tryouts . ( 5 codes ) • Communication preferences provide instructions for contacting the leader , e . g . , email , IM , phone / voice . ( 5 codes ) Following this content analysis , the judges independently categorized the outcome of each thread using three triangulation criteria : ( 1 ) the nature of the most recent replies , ( 2 ) the list of completed animations in the profile of the leader , and ( 3 ) a search of Newgrounds for completed animations matching the title of the thread . If a judge found that the thread led to a completed animation , the judge categorized the thread as a success and recorded the unique ID of the resulting completed animation . If not , the judge categorized the thread as a failure . Next , we compared first post attributes in successful vs . failed collab threads using two - tailed independent samples t - tests . We ran a t - test for each of the six categories derived from the content analysis , described above . For example , one t - test compared the number of specs in the first posts of successful vs . failed collab threads . Last , we compared the activity dynamics and attributes of leaders in successful vs . failed threads using two sets of two - tailed independent samples t - tests . “Activity dynamics” refers to the posting frequency of leaders and all posters in each thread . We limited the analysis of activity dynamics to the high activity bin to enable more nuanced comparisons . Leader attributes are described 5 in the previous section . All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS . 4 . 2 Results Our results show that out of a total of 892 collab threads , 112 were categorized as successful , while 780 , or 87 . 4 % , were categorized as failed . In a previous study , we reported that over 80 % of collab threads fail [ 17 ] . Our new result is consistent with this earlier work . However , because we oversampled medium and high activity threads , the real failure percentage is likely even higher . Collab success may be even more challenging than we originally believed . In the remainder of this section , we describe our results with respect to the three categories of success factors identified in our qualitative study : planning & structure ( collab thread first posts ) , reputation & experience ( collab leader attributes ) , and communication & dedication ( collab thread activity dynamics ) . 4 . 2 . 1 Planning & Structure Table 1 shows the results of the two - tailed independent samples t - tests comparing six categories of planning / structural elements in the first posts of successful vs . failed collab threads . Overall , the results of these six t - tests show that first posts of successful collab threads have , on average , more planning / structural elements than failed ones . Specifically , successful first posts are more likely to have a theme than failed ones , t ( 237 ) = 7 . 569 , p < 0 . 01 . Successful first posts have more specs than failed ones ( on average , 3 . 74 specs vs . 2 . 03 specs ) , t ( 159 ) = 9 . 718 , p < 0 . 01 . They also have , on average , more authorship criteria , t ( 131 ) = 3 . 381 , p < 0 . 01 , more communication preferences , t ( 137 ) = 3 . 432 , p < 0 . 01 , more restrictions , t ( 133 ) = 2 . 436 , p < 0 . 05 , and more gatekeeping rules , t ( 137 ) = 2 . 345 , p < 0 . 05 . To distinguish whether the sheer amount of text or the type of content in the first post predicted success , we ran a two - tailed independent samples t - test comparing the word count in the first posts of successful vs . failed high activity collab threads . The results showed that the posts were not significantly different , t ( 233 ) = 0 . 713 , p = ns . 4 . 2 . 2 Reputation & Experience In Table 2 , we summarize the results of a comparison between leaders of completed collabs and leaders of failed collabs . Five leader attributes were compared with two - tailed independent samples t - tests . First , our results show that leaders of completed collabs had previously participated in , on average , more collabs than leaders of failed collabs , t ( 143 ) = 2 . 945 , p < 0 . 01 . In this case , “participated” means being listed as a co - author—but not necessarily leading—a completed collab . Second , leaders of completed collabs had previously completed , on average , more solo projects than leaders of failed collabs , t ( 142 ) = 3 . 474 , p < 0 . 01 . Third , leaders of completed collabs had won , on average , more awards than leaders of failed collabs , t ( 119 ) = 2 . 679 , p < 0 . 01 . Fourth , leaders of completed collabs had made , on average , almost twice as many total forum posts than leaders of failed collabs , t ( 133 ) = 2 . 496 , p < 0 . 05 . Finally , leaders of completed collabs had , on average , a higher Batting Average than leaders of failed collabs , t ( 153 ) = 4 . 749 , p < 0 . 01 . To summarize these results , leaders of completed collabs , on average , had completed more collabs and solo projects , won more awards , had posted more on the discussion forums , and had higher rated Newgrounds submissions than leaders of failed collabs . 4 . 2 . 3 Communication & Dedication Figure 1 illustrates the results of our analysis of activity dynamics in successful and failed collab threads with high activity ( > 50 replies ) . To create this graph , we first determined a “completion time” for each collab thread . If a thread was successful , the completion time was the elapsed time between the date the thread was started and the date the completed animation was posted on Newgrounds . If a thread failed , the completion time was the elapsed time between the date the thread was started and the date of the most recent reply in that thread . Next , for threads with completion times of at least ten days , we divided the completion time into ten equal units , or time intervals , each corresponding to 10 % of the total completion time . This time interval comprises the x - axis on Figure 1 . Then , we calculated the percentage of the total number of replies in a thread posted by all collab members ( including leaders ) during each time interval . We divided these percentages into two groups , completed collabs and failed collabs , and averaged them , again for each time interval . These values are displayed on the y - axis in Figure 1 . We then repeated this process for only leaders’ replies ; the resulting graph closely mirrored Figure 1 . Failed collab thread activity , for leaders only and all members , was highest in the first ( 10 % ) interval and subsequently declined . About half of all replies made to a failed collab thread are made in the first time interval , compared to about a third of all replies in successful collab threads . By the second time interval , this pattern has reversed ; a greater proportion of total thread activity happens for successful threads , and this trend continues until completion Completed Collabs Failed Collabs Variable M SD N M SD N Past collabs * * 2 . 80 3 . 71 112 1 . 70 3 . 61 778 Past solo projects * * 5 . 42 5 . 93 112 3 . 35 5 . 70 780 Awards won * * 1 . 60 3 . 88 112 0 . 60 1 . 93 780 Forum posts * 986 1623 112 586 1320 780 Batting Average * * 3 . 17 0 . 43 91 2 . 92 0 . 57 518 Table 2 . Comparison of leader attributes for completed vs . failed collabs , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Completed Collabs Failed Collabs Variable M SD N M SD N Theme * * 0 . 94 0 . 24 112 0 . 73 0 . 45 780 Specs * * 3 . 74 1 . 70 112 2 . 03 2 . 02 780 Authorship * * 0 . 29 0 . 53 112 0 . 11 0 . 41 780 Restrictions * 0 . 63 0 . 99 112 0 . 40 0 . 81 780 Gatekeeping * 0 . 39 0 . 61 112 0 . 25 0 . 54 780 Communication * * 0 . 83 0 . 90 112 0 . 52 0 . 79 780 Table 1 . Comparison of first post attributes for completed vs . failed collabs , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . 6 time for both successful and failed threads . By the time collab threads are half finished , failed threads wind down , with a smaller proportion of total thread activity happening in the final time interval than in the middle one . In contrast , successful threads see increased total thread activity as the thread approaches completion time . By the final time interval , successful threads see twice the proportion of total thread activity that they see at the midpoint in the thread’s lifespan . Table 3 depicts the results of two - tailed independent samples t - tests comparing the mean and standard deviation for replies per day in successful and failed collab threads , separated into two groups : replies by everyone in the collab , and replies by just the collab leader . The results suggest that successful threads see substantially more replies , by everyone and by leaders in particular , than failed collab threads . Specifically , members of successful collab threads post an average of 333 % more replies , t ( 126 ) = 5 . 571 , p < 0 . 01 . Leaders make an average of 228 % more posts , t ( 158 ) = 4 . 551 , p < 0 . 01 . Although Figure 1 shows similar posting trends among leaders and all members of collabs , these results reveal that all members collectively post nearly three times more often than leaders alone , suggesting that leaders do not dominate the discussion . 4 . 3 Discussion Earlier in this paper , we derived a list of five predictions by interviewing collab participants about success . We now revisit these predictions with the results of our quantitative study in mind . 4 . 3 . 1 Planning & Structure • P1 : Collabs with initial planning and structure , especially technical specifications , are more likely to be successful . Our results support this prediction . As shown in Table 1 , the first posts in completed collabs had more planning / structural elements across each of the six categories than first posts in failed collabs . The most prominent of these elements were technical specifications or “specs , ” such as dimensions or frame rates . On average , completed collabs had 3 . 74 specs in their first posts , compared to 2 . 03 in the first posts of failed collabs . The other planning / structural elements were less common , with an average of less than one of each in the first posts of both completed and failed collabs . Thus , while all types of planning / structural elements are more common in successful collabs , specs are the most numerous . In contrast , authorship criteria , determining which artists are credited as “co - authors , ” were the least common planning / structural elements . We also found that word counts in first posts were similar in completed vs . failed collabs . Put another way , successful first posts were not longer ( or shorter ) than failed ones , but they contained more planning / structural elements , potentially making better use of the space . These results underscore the importance of leaders providing particular types of information in a first post , rather than simply writing a lengthy first post , or providing many irrelevant details . 4 . 3 . 2 Reputation & Experience • P2 : Animators who are well - known in the community are more likely to lead successful collabs . We found evidence to support this prediction . Table 2 shows that leaders of completed collabs had , on average , more completed solo projects , more forum posts , more awards won , and a higher Batting Average than leaders of failed collabs . In a study of Usenet newsgroups , Arguello et al . found that newcomers’ posts attracted fewer replies than people who had posted previously [ 2 ] . Our results suggest that this finding may generalize to online creative collaboration . • P3 : Animators who have prior experience with Flash and completed collabs are more likely to lead successful collabs . This prediction is supported by our results . Table 2 shows that leaders of completed collabs were more experienced in Flash , having completed , on average , 5 . 42 solo projects prior to starting a collab . In contrast , leaders of failed collabs had completed , on average , 3 . 35 solo projects . The results are similar for leaders’ prior experience with completed collabs . Leaders of successful collabs had , on average , previously participated in 2 . 80 completed collabs , compared to 1 . 70 for leaders of failed collabs . In general , leaders had about twice as much prior experience with solo projects as collabs , reflecting a general trend on Newgrounds . For example , as of May 2010 , 19 out of 50 animations on the Newgrounds Flash Portal’s “Best of All Time” list were collabs ; the rest were solo projects . 4 . 3 . 3 Communication & Dedication • P4 : Collabs whose members frequently communicate are more likely to be successful . Table 3 and Figure 1 summarize the evidence in support of this prediction . Members of completed collabs collectively post , on average , about three times more than members of failed collabs ( 24 . 22 vs . 7 . 28 posts per day ) . In addition , Figure 1 shows that successful collab threads see a marked increase in posting Completed Collabs Failed Collabs Variable M SD N M SD N Posts per day * * ( all members ) 24 . 22 30 . 51 109 7 . 28 11 . 3 182 Posts per day * * ( only leaders ) 4 . 24 4 . 92 109 1 . 86 3 . 04 182 Figure 1 . Binned thread activity ( posts per day by all members ) for completed vs . failed high activity collabs . Each time interval represents 10 % of the collab’s lifespan . Table 3 . Comparison of activity dynamics in completed vs . failed collab threads , * * p < 0 . 01 . 7 “momentum” after the midpoint in the collab’s lifespan , whereas in failed collabs , thread activity decreases over time , picking up only slightly in the last time interval . Thus , successful collab threads not only see more thread activity in general , but also a more consistent distribution of activity over time . • P5 : Collabs whose leaders frequently communicate are more likely to be successful . We find this last prediction to be supported by our results , as well . Table 3 suggests that leaders of completed collabs are more active and communicative than leaders of failed ones . Successful collab leaders post , on average , about three times as much as leaders of failed collabs . This difference amounts to slightly over four posts per day versus slightly less than two . Although both successful and failed collab leaders post throughout the collab thread’s lifespan , leaders of completed collabs post more regularly than failed collab leaders , who do almost half of their replying during the thread’s first time interval . 4 . 3 . 4 Limitations and Future Work There are some sampling biases in our data . By selecting only collab threads that explicitly contain the word “collab” in the title , we may have skewed the results towards collabs that followed the community’s conventions . We also treated each collab thread as the unit of analysis and , therefore , statistically independent ; however , we acknowledge that there are likely to be leaders and artists who contributed to multiple collabs in our data . More generally , this study is preliminary in nature . Rather than testing a priori hypotheses , we generated a list of qualitative predictions and pursued them more deeply with exploratory quantitative analyses . We worked with archival rather than experimental data , so our results can only suggest correlations , not causation . While we found meaningful differences , more work is needed to validate our results with focused studies . For example , principal components analysis or hierarchical regression could determine how much variance is accounted for by each of the variables we discovered and mitigate potential issues with statistical independence . Also , specifically examining leaders of both successful and failed collabs could help validate our results . 5 . COMPARISONS AND CONTRASTS 5 . 1 Planning & Structure Our interview participants stressed the importance of leaders providing planning and structure early in a collab’s lifespan . They argued that substantial planning up front , such as listing technical specifications , reduces confusion and conflict later on . Our quantitative analysis offered support for these perceptions : more planning / structural elements in collab first posts were associated with success . Participants also suggested that leaders who have carefully thought through the process appear more trustworthy and reliable . In contrast , organization in OSS projects is often viewed as more of a distributed , evolutionary process , rather than an immutable set of plans conceived and enforced by a project leader . Benkler emphasizes self - identification for tasks , the idea that people choose their work in a bottom - up fashion , reducing the need for centralized delegation [ 4 ] . Raymond explicitly contrasts a traditional software project manager to an OSS project leader , arguing that the former’s role as an organizer can seem “strangely irrelevant” because OSS developers organize themselves [ 19 ] . What , then , is the leader’s role in the organization of an OSS project ? Weber quotes Danny Hillis : “There are only two ways we know of to make extremely complicated things . One is by engineering , and the other is by evolution” [ 21 ] . Most OSS projects evolve . Weber explains , “In some cases , but not all , a project leader does set the effective definition of the problem that needs to be solved” [ 21 ] . If the leader’s problem definition is not sufficient , new experiments are tried , and new definitions evolve beyond the leader’s original idea . In contrast , collab participants tend to stick to the leader’s plan . In Hillis’s terms , most collabs are created through engineering—a single architect’s carefully plotted conceptual course—rather than evolution . To summarize , successful collabs tend to embrace up - front , centralized planning over the evolution and iteration typical of OSS projects . 5 . 2 Reputation & Experience In our interviews , participants told us that successful collab leaders have solid reputations within the community and substantial previous experience with collabs and solo projects . Some participants preferred to work with leaders they already know . Others assess the ability of unfamiliar leaders by exploring their history of past submissions to Newgrounds . The Batting Average , a score representing the average quality of a Newgrounds member’s submissions , facilitates this decision - making process . Our quantitative study showed that all of these criteria were more pronounced in successful collabs . These results align with those found by scholars of OSS projects , where a leader’s reputation and experience are also held in high regard . However , members of these projects seem to place special emphasis on “soft skills” like charisma and charm . To this point , Raymond observes , “A certain base level of design and coding skill is required…but it’s far from the whole story” [ 19 ] . Perhaps even more important , Raymond argues , is a leader’s personality and people skills . “It is not a coincidence , ” he suggests , “that Linus [ Torvalds , founder of Linux ] is a nice guy who makes people like him and want to help him” [ 19 ] . Reagle extends this reasoning to a theory of “authorial leadership” that applies to open content communities more generally [ 20 ] . According to one key component of his theory , “Leaders often convince by persuasion and example though they also retain charismatic authority accumulated from their merit” [ 20 ] . Merit helps a leader step into that role , but persuasion and example , mediated by humor , help him or her keep it . In summary , both successful collabs and successful OSS projects tend to be run by leaders who have proven technical competency and a record of past successes in their respective communities . In addition , OSS developers emphasize the importance of leaders’ soft skills , such as personality and charm . 5 . 3 Communication & Dedication Successful collabs , according to our participants , are characterized by frequent communication among all members , especially the leader . This interview data was supported by our quantitative findings . Participants argued that the best leaders seem dedicated to the success of the project . This dedication manifests not only as regular and active communication in the collab thread , but also as longevity—a willingness to lead from start to finish . Similar practices are found in successful OSS projects . Frequent communication is often seen as an essential property of a healthy OSS project [ 14 , 23 ] . One of Weber’s eight principles of the open 8 source process is “talk a lot , ” and developers’ often - contentious discussions can cover a range of topics far beyond the project itself [ 21 ] . Adhering to this principle is among a project leader’s primary responsibilities , as exemplified by Linus Torvalds . Weber observes , “Torvalds seems intuitively to understand that , given his presumptive claim on leadership as founder of the Linux project , he could fail his followers in only one way—by being unresponsive to them” [ 21 ] . Raymond , attempting to emulate Torvalds’s successful leadership of the Linux project , sent “chatty announcements” to the email list of his OSS project , fetchmail , often multiple times per week [ 19 ] . An OSS project leader’s dedication is threatened by “forking . ” In most of these projects , it is widely believed that if members disagree with the direction a project is taking , they are always permitted to “fork” it : “a dissatisfied community , or some constituency thereof , can always leave and start again under new leadership” [ 20 ] . Licensing schemes such as the GPL and Creative Commons ShareAlike allow code and content to be legally copied and modified at any time , without seeking permission . As a result , leaders’ authority is “eternally contingent” ; even the most dedicated leaders rely on the approval of the community [ 20 ] . In practice , there is “strong social pressure against forking projects , ” partly because it divides the community and duplicates efforts [ 19 ] . At the same time , forking “is not always a bad thing , nor does the open source community always perceive it as bad” [ 21 ] . For example , forking can provide a means for innovative ideas to be explored , not just escape from an incompetent project leader [ 21 ] . A collab leader’s concern is not forking , but quitting . Leaders maintain control of their collabs , partly for philosophical reasons—many leaders feel a strong sense of ownership over their idea—and partly for practical reasons—most project files are passed to , and held by , the leader , not a digital commons . In addition , open source content licenses have not been embraced by Newgrounds members . If collab participants grow disillusioned with the leadership , their best and only recourse is simply to quit , leaving their work behind [ 18 ] . Unlike forking , collab dropouts are almost always undesirable [ 17 ] . To summarize , frequent communication among leaders and members is shown to be good practice in both collabs and OSS projects . However , collab leaders hold their positions for the duration of the collab , whereas OSS project leaders’ authority is vulnerable to forking . 6 . IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS Online creative collaboration may be one of the most important and surprising consequences of increased access to information technology . Its most prominent examples , Wikipedia and open - source software , offer compelling evidence of a third model of production , alongside the familiar firm - and market - based models [ 4 ] . We are beginning to see new examples emerge in other domains , such as video [ 12 ] , music [ 7 , 8 ] , and animation [ 1 , 16 ] , suggesting that online creative collaboration is a much broader phenomenon than just software development and encyclopedia writing . This breadth raises a number of new questions . What effect , if any , does the domain have on the collaboration ? Do the lessons learned from successful Wikipedia and OSS projects transfer to these new domains ? If not , which principles don’t always apply , and why not ? Answers to these questions are essential to deepening our theoretical understanding of online creative collaboration . More practically , they will help us design appropriate support tools and communities to foster online creative collaboration in a growing number of domains . This paper has taken initial steps to address these questions by comparing and contrasting two examples of online creative collaboration in seemingly very different domains : animated movie - making and software development . We focused on success as a unifying concept that spans both types of projects . The results surprised us . Even among these two seemingly disparate examples , we found notable similarities and differences in how they operate and what makes them successful . The similarities between successful collabs and OSS projects suggest broader principles of online creative collaboration . One potential principle is the importance of leaders with particular characteristics . We found that across collabs and OSS , successful projects were managed by leaders with solid reputations and respect in their communities . They had both technical competence and soft skills . They had knowledge of the domain and experience running successful group efforts . Collabs and OSS projects differed in the tenure of these leaders , but in both cases , it was important that whoever was leading a project at the moment possessed these attributes . A second potential principle centers around communication . In both collabs and OSS , successful projects boast frequent communication and high activity , by project members and their leaders alike . Weber’s principle , “talk a lot” [ 21 ] , appears to extent to collabs , but less clear is what should be talked about . Although our analysis of communication in collabs did not examine the content of those conversations in detail , the research on communication in OSS projects suggests some possibilities : sharing information to improve group awareness , motivating members to complete their tasks , and resolving conflicts through debate [ 14 , 19 , 21 ] . Another open question in this area is the relationship between the leader’s communication and the group’s overall communication—perhaps groups are talkative because their leaders are talkative , or vice - versa . Although the applicability of these principles to OSS and collabs is promising , more work is needed to test them in still other domains . Otherwise , we risk making the potentially false assumptions questioned in the introduction of this paper : that research in just one or two domains ( e . g . , Wikipedia and OSS ) is sufficient to identify general rules of online creative collaboration . While finding these commonalities is of critical importance , we must be cautious of premature generalization in a research area that has yet to see many cross - domain empirical studies . The differences we noticed between the early organization of collabs and OSS projects provides a salient example . We found that for collabs , a key success factor seems to be planning and structure in the first post of a collab thread—the more , the better . Moreover , these plans—like their authors , the project leaders— rarely change throughout the collab’s life span . In contrast , the literature on OSS suggests that plans are of secondary importance . The project leader’s original idea may be quickly abandoned in favor of a better one . More generally , the emphasis is on evolution and self - organization , as opposed to adherence to one person’s grand vision . But why this difference ? What about collabs makes engineering , not evolution , the more successful strategy ? This type of question will also benefit from more research . Lacking other examples of online creative collaboration in which early planning and structure are important , we can only theorize . One possibility is that the difference is complexity . Weber notes 9 that “there are inherent limits to software that can be built by one or two people” [ 21 ] . Large software projects , like an operating system or web browser , require many skill sets and , therefore , many people . They have what Fred Brooks famously called essential complexity [ 5 ] . They are also the type of OSS projects that see the most research attention , perhaps because they exemplify the OSS development process’s success at managing this complexity . In contrast , collabs are almost always simpler , less ambitious projects . As mentioned above , most submissions on Newgrounds are solo projects , not collabs . It is quite possible for one person to complete a five - minute animated movie . Creating the same movie with ten people , for example , becomes a matter of dividing up the work and minimizing interdependencies—in Benkler’s terms , creating modular , granular tasks [ 4 ] . From this perspective , it is not difficult to imagine why a clear plan and structure would work well . However , if the collab was a feature - length movie , a level of complexity more comparable to many high - profile OSS projects , then this simple division of labor and organizational strategy may not hold up . Instead , an OSS - inspired , evolutionary style might be more successful . As with the other principles we propose , this one requires additional research to confirm . Finally , we note that success rates for both OSS projects and collabs were low—less than 20 % [ 13 , 22 ] . To some extent , given the many challenges to distributed work and the inherent complexity of the projects that are attempted , failures are inevitable . However , we suggest that understanding success factors in online creative collaboration , such as those identified in this paper , may help improve these success rates . Lessons learned from the most successful examples of online creative collaboration , like OSS and Wikipedia , may transfer to other domains , and vice - versa . As researchers , we can investigate where these lessons hold up and where they break down , and begin to identify broader principles . This paper , contrasting collabs and OSS projects , takes an early step towards these goals , but many more efforts are needed to fully explore the potential of online creative collaboration . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank the participants in this study , the Newgrounds staff , and the reviewers of previous versions of this paper . This research is supported by NSF CreativeIT Award # 0855952 . 8 . REFERENCES 1 . Aragon , C . R . , Poon , S . S . , Monroy - Hernández , A . , and Aragon , D . A tale of two online communities : fostering collaboration and creativity in scientists and children . Proc . C & C 2009 , ACM ( 2009 ) , 9 - 18 . 2 . Arguello , J . , Butler , B . S . , Joyce , E . , Kraut , R . , Ling , K . S . , and Wang , X . Talk to me : foundations for successful individual - group interactions in online communities . Proc . CHI 2006 , ACM ( 2006 ) , 959 - 968 . 3 . Becker , H . S . Art Worlds . University of California Press , 1984 . 4 . Benkler , Y . The Wealth of Networks . Yale University Press , 2006 . 5 . Brooks , F . P . No silver bullet : Essence and accidents of software engineering . Computer 20 , 4 ( 1987 ) , 10 - 19 . 6 . Bruckman , A . Studying the amateur artist : A perspective on disguising data collected in human subjects research on the Internet . Ethics and Inf . Technol . 4 , 3 ( 2002 ) , 217 - 231 . 7 . Cheliotis , G . and Yew , J . An analysis of the social structure of remix culture . Proc . C & T 2009 , ACM ( 2009 ) , 165 - 174 . 8 . Cook , E . C . , Teasley , S . D . , and Ackerman , M . S . Contribution , Commercialization & audience : Understanding participation in an online creative community . Proc . GROUP 2009 , ACM ( 2009 ) , 41 - 50 . 9 . Crowston , K . , Howison , J . , and Annabi , H . Information systems success in free and open source software development : theory and measures . Softw . Process Improve . Pract . 11 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 123 - 148 . 10 . Crowston , K . , Wei , K . , Howison , J . , and Wiggins , A . Free / libre open source software development : What we know and what we do not know . ACM Comput . Surv . ( in submission ) . 11 . DeLone , W . H . and McLean , E . R . Information systems success : The quest for the dependent variable . Information Systems Research 3 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 60 - 95 . 12 . Diakopoulos , N . , Luther , K . , Medynskiy , Y . ( E . ) , and Essa , I . The evolution of authorship in a remix society . Proc . Hypertext 2007 , ACM ( 2007 ) , 133 - 136 . 13 . English , R . and Schweik , C . M . Identifying success and abandonment of FLOSS commons : A classification of Sourceforge . net projects . Upgrade : The European Journal for the Informatics Professional VIII , 6 ( 2007 ) . 14 . Gutwin , C . , Penner , R . , and Schneider , K . Group awareness in distributed software development . Proc . CSCW 2004 , ACM ( 2004 ) , 72 - 81 . 15 . Hardin , G . The tragedy of the commons . Science 162 , 3859 ( 1968 ) , 1243 - 1248 . 16 . Hill , B . M . , Monroy - Hernández , A . , and Olson , K . Responses to remixing on a social media sharing website . Proc . ICWSM 2010 , AAAI ( 2010 ) , 74 - 81 . 17 . Luther , K . and Bruckman , A . Leadership in online creative collaboration . Proc . CSCW 2008 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 343 - 352 . 18 . Luther , K . , Diakopoulos , N . , and Bruckman , A . Edits & credits : exploring integration and attribution in online creative collaboration . alt . chi 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 2823 - 2832 . 19 . Raymond , E . S . The Cathedral & the Bazaar . O ' Reilly Media , Inc . , 2001 . 20 . Reagle , J . M . Do as I do : authorial leadership in Wikipedia . Proc . WikiSym 2007 , ACM ( 2007 ) , 143 - 156 . 21 . Weber , S . The Success of Open Source . Harvard University Press , 2004 . 22 . Wiggins , A . and Crowston , K . Reclassifying success and tragedy in FLOSS projects . Proc . OSS 2010 . 23 . Yamauchi , Y . , Yokozawa , M . , Shinohara , T . , and Ishida , T . Collaboration with lean media : how open - source software succeeds . Proc . CSCW 2000 , ACM ( 2000 ) , 329 - 338 . 10