Understanding the Earth Geology 10113 - Summer 2008 Class : Monday through Friday , 9 : 00 AM to 10 : 50 AM Labs : Monday through Friday 1 to 2 : 50 . Instructor : Dr . Arthur B . Busbey , AIM : abusbey , ( http : / / geo1 . tcu . edu / faculty / busbey . html ) Ofﬁce : SWR 254 , TCU Phone : 257 - 7301 , Home : 370 - 6006 , E - MAIL : a . busbey @ tcu . edu Ofﬁce Hours : M - R 11 : 00 - 11 : 30 PM or by appointment The required text may be purchased at the TCU bookstore . Required text for lecture : Lutgens and Tarbuck 8th Ed . Required text for lab : You will receive a lab workbook in lab . You MUST always bring this to lab . Lecture Web Site : http : / / geo1 . tcu . edu / busbey / geo10113 / - All of the lecture presentations are avail - able online as PDF ﬁles and should be available the day before the lecture . COURSE DESCRIPTION GEOL 10113 Understanding the Earth . Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per day ( summer ) . A study of the physical environment of the planet Earth , its makeup , the processes that mold its surface features and an introduction to the resources that it provides . PURPOSE OF COURSE This course meets the core requirement for a Core science course . COURSE OBJECTIVES By the end of this course , students will : Understand the internal structure of the earth and its history . Understand the building blocks of the earth , including minerals and rocks . Understand how various processes shape the surface of the earth . Understand the signiﬁcance of geologic time . Better understand the potential environmental impact that geology has on the global society . Be evaluated on their grasp and comprehension of the material through a series of exams . TEACHING PHILOSOPHY Many of the students who have matriculated in the United States educational system know little about the earth , i . e . of the substances with which it is built , how the dynamic earth system changes through time , how time ampliﬁes small changes and the effects that geology has on civilization . Therefore , I believe that a basic geology class should involve more lecture - type in - struction that round - robin discussion ( it is very difﬁcult to discuss what you don’t know ) . Thus , the lecture portion of this course is indeed , as the title implies , built of a series of lecture pres - Geology 10113 Syllabus - Summer 2008 - Dr . Busbey Page 1 entations . Questions are always appreciated and encouraged , but it is hoped that instruction in the classroom will lead students to further expand their knowledge of the subject through as - signed reading . The lab portion exposes students to more ‘hands - on’ approaches in geology , where students are given an opportunity to gain a practical experience with minerals , rocks , maps and ‘ﬁeld geology’ . Course Policies DISABILITY SERVICES AT TCU : Texas Christian University complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 regarding students with disabilities . Eligible students seeking accom - modations should contact the Coordinator for Students with Disabilities in the Center for Aca - demic Services located in Sadler Hall , 11 . Accommodations are not retroactive , therefore , stu - dents should contact the Coordinator as soon as possible in the term for which they are seek - ing accommodations . Further information can be obtained from the Center for Academic Serv - ices , TCU Box 297710 , Fort Worth , TX 76129 , or at ( 817 ) 257 - 7486 . ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT ( Sec . 3 . 4 from the Student Handbook ) Any act that violates the academic integrity of the institution is considered academic misconduct . The procedures used to resolve suspected acts of academic misconduct are available in the ofﬁces of Academic Deans and the Ofﬁce of Campus Life . Speciﬁc examples include , but are not limited to : • Cheating : Copying from another student ' s test paper , laboratory report , other report , or computer ﬁles and listings ; Using , during any academic exercise , material and / or devices not authorized by the person in charge of the test ; Collaborating with or seeking aid from another student during a test or laboratory without permission ; Knowingly using , buying , selling , stealing , transporting , or soliciting in its entirety or in part , the contents of a test or other assignment unauthorized for release ; Substituting for another student or permitting another student to substitute for oneself ; • Plagiarism : The appropriation , theft , purchase or obtaining by any means another ' s work , and the unacknowledged submission or incorporation of that work as one ' s own offered for credit . Appropriation includes the quoting or paraphrasing of another ' s work without giving credit therefore . • Collusion : The unauthorized collaboration with another in preparing work offered for credit . Should academic misconduct be detected , the action to be taken is at the discretion of the instruc - tor . If you are caught cheating on an exam in Geology 10113 ( lecture or lab ) at the very least you will be given a zero on that exam . TCU CAMPUS RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS Many resources exist on the TCU campus that may be helpful to students : Mary Couts Burnet Li - brary ( 257 - 7117 ) ; Center for Academic Services ( 257 - 7486 , Sadler Hall . 11 ) ; the William L . Ad - ams Writing Center ( 257 - 7221 , Rickel Bldg . 244 ) ; Student Development Services ( 257 - 7855 , Student Center Rm . 220 ) ; and University Ministries ( 257 - 7830 , Student Center Rm . 111 ) . E - MAIL NOTIFICATION : Only the ofﬁcial TCU student e - mail address will be used for all course notiﬁcation . It is your re - sponsibility to check your TCU e - mail on a regular basis . Page 2 Geology 10113 Syllabus - Summer 2008 - Dr . Busbey Course Requirements GRADING Your grade will be based on the results of three lecture exams ( 25 % each ) and lab ( 25 % ) . Letter grades are assigned only at the end of the course approximately as follows : A = 90 - 100 % , B = 80 - 89 % , C = 70 - 79 % , D = 60 - 69 % , F = 0 - 59 % . The ﬁnal letter grade will be based on the ad - justed average of your course performance . On any particular exam you will be able to exam - ine the grade distribution which should provide some idea of your test performance compared to the rest of the class . There is no extra credit . Please note that your class grade is based on exam performance , and NOT on effort . Text readings supplement the material discussed in lecture ; frequently lecture topics represent re - cent developments and may not be discussed at all in the text . Therefore the reading does not substitute for attending lectures and exam content is entirely based on lecture content . EXAMSThere are no make - up exams unless you missed an exam and have a valid , veriﬁable excuse . Stu - dents who have University excuses to miss labs or exams must notify me in advance of the ab - sence . Make - up exams may be different from the exam that was given and may have an essay or oral format . CLASS ATTENDANCE Attendance will be taken . Any absences may seriously effect your ability to perform well in the course . Remember that a day in summer school is equal to a week in a regular semester . I will assume that you have done the proper reading assignment prior to each lecture and that you are acquainted with the basic terminology and concepts . PDF versions of the presentations are available on the class website as an aid to taking class notes . Tardiness and disruption of the class are not appreciated and may affect your ﬁnal grade . You are in the classroom to learn - do not eat , drink , smoke , read newspapers or talk with other students during lectures , as this is extremely inconsiderate . Cell phones should be turned off or turned to vibrate during class and in any case you should not use a cell phone in class ( it is entirely possible that if a cell phone goes off during lecture that the class may then have a pop quiz ) . You are encouraged to ask questions during class or to obtain help outside of class . Although read - ing your text book should answer most questions , I am here to explain any of the more seem - ingly obscure points . If you do not understand something in lecture then raise your hand and ask about it - the odds are that other students are also in a quandary . See me during my ofﬁce hours if you have problems in lecture or lab that require more intensive discussion . If you can - not make my ofﬁce hours then contact me for an appointment at some other time . DROPPING You have until May 23rd to drop the class . After that time you must consult a Dean about dropping a class . LABORATORY EXERCISES Laboratory exercises may be only loosely coordinated with lecture topics . It is crucial that you are on time for lab and that you conduct yourself in lab as you would in any course . Two lab exams ( see the syllabus ) will be given during the course . These exams will test your knowledge of ma - Geology 10113 Syllabus - Summer 2008 - Dr . Busbey Page 3 terial covered in the lab . The average of these two exams will count 25 % toward your ﬁnal grade in the course . No food , drinks or tobacco products are permitted in lab . You should always bring your lab work - book to lab and you should have already looked over the lab exercise . Coming to lab without materials is inexcusable and may have repercussions on your lab grade . A good pencil and eraser will be handy in lab ( ink is usually difﬁcult to erase ) . Most of the lab exercises are very practical or ' hands on ' . You are encouraged to ask questions and to solve geologic problems in study groups . However , each student should complete the required lab exercises in order to prepare for lab exams and on the exams you are on your own . Defacing lab facilities , equipment , or the lab computers , will adversely effect both your lab and course grades . LAB MAKE - UP POLICY No unexcused , unmade - up labs are allowed . You will be allowed to make up labs if you are cov - ered by a University notice or have another valid excuse . You can only make up labs prior to the next lab exam . Page 4 Geology 10113 Syllabus - Summer 2008 - Dr . Busbey May Lecture - 9 : 00 to 10 : 50 Lab - 1 : 00 to 2 : 50 12 Intro - Matter & Minerals Igneous Rocks & Volcanos ( Lect ) 13 Weathering & Sedimentary Rocks Minerals & Igneous Rocks 14 Sedimentary & Metamorphic Rocks Igneous & Sedimentary Rocks 15 No Class 16 Exam # 1 Start at 2PM - Metamorphic Rocks 17 18 19 Geologic Time Lab Exam # 1 20 Mass Wasting & Surface Water Reading & Making Maps 21 Surface & Ground Water Contour Maps 22 Glaciers & Deserts Planetary Geology 23 Exam # 2 Fieldtrip 24 25 26 Memorial Day - No Class 27 Shorelines & Stress & Strain Geologic Maps 28 Earthquakes & Earth Interior Sequencing Events 29 Continental Drift & Plate Tectonics 30 Exam # 3 Lab Exam # 2 Suggested Study Hints for Geology 10113 The following suggestions , if heeded , may improve your chances of getting the most out of the course and making a good grade . I base these suggestions on the experiences of students who have gone before you ( those who passed and those who weren’t so lucky ) and on my own expe - riences in classes that were hard for me . Some , or all , of these suggestions may not ﬁt your life or study styles , but they may come in handy if you want to do well in this course ( or any college course ) . Many ﬁnd it easier to start off on a good foot than to play makeup later . 1 . Before you come to class the assigned book chapter ( s ) and download and review the presen - tations to be given a particular day . If you run across a term that is unfamiliar look it up in the glossary in the back of the text . If the word is not in the text then ask the instructor . I do not care if you use a tape recorder to record my lectures - but be aware , however , that I use pres - entations and may draw diagrams which you will miss in a tape recording : i . e . , tape recordings are not a substitute for taking notes during the lecture ! Likewise , I lecture about topics that may not be in the textbook and about recent developments - merely reading the text is no substi - tute for attending lecture and taking notes . I ﬁrmly believe the following credo : “ Anything impor - tant enough for me to mention in lecture may show up on a test . ” Don’t assume that anything I mention in class isn’t part of the course material . 2 . After lecture , review the assigned reading . and lecture notes . If something wasn ' t clear in lecture perhaps the illustrations or discussion in the book might help to clarify . There may be sections of your book that cover material I have not discussed in lecture - if so then do not spend time on them ( unless they interest you ) since you will not be asked about them on a test . 3 . At some time on the same day as a lecture , review your notes and see if they make sense . You have a better chance of remembering my lecture comments the same day I made them then later just before an exam ( a well known function of short - term memory ) . 4 . It may help to recopy your notes into another notebook or to type them up . This reinforces the material and , if you take sloppy notes , results in a legible set of notes . Merely highlighting sec - tions of your textbook or notes does not constitute studying - you should understand and comprehend what you are studying ! Memorizing lists of terms doesn’t give you an integrated conceptual model of how those terms are interrelated . Make sure you understand how the terms are related across topics . 5 . It always helps to study with friends . You may think you know the material but the best way to ﬁnd out is to have a friend quiz you without an open textbook or notes . 6 . Ask questions in class - never be afraid to raise your hand and ask questions . If something isn’t clear it may not be clear to your classmates either . If my answer is unclear then come and visit me in my ofﬁce ( SWR 254 ) . Geology 10113 Syllabus - Summer 2008 - Dr . Busbey Page 5