Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Correspondence Submissions should be made via our electronic submission system at http : / / ees . elsevier . com / thelancet / www . thelancet . com Published online May 15 , 2020 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 20 ) 31145 - 4 1 Health inequity during the COVID - 19 pandemic : a cry for ethical global leadership Widespread reports of dispropor­ tionate impact of the COVID­19 pandemic among already vulnerable communities worldwide , from New York City to New Orleans and Chicago , to the shocking pictures of bodies lying in the streets in Ecuador , represent a prelude of the impact in low­income and middle­income countries , home to more than 80 % of the world’s population . Disadvantaged people are at higher risk of infection and death from COVID­19 , and they have less access to care due to systems that treat health as a commodity and not a human right . Furthermore , most health­care systems are not prepared to handle a pandemic of this magnitude . Overwhelmed European and US systems are ominous reminders of the challenges faced in poor countries . Despite widespread acts of solidarity , we are witnessing unconscionable stockpiling by wealthy countries and attempts by many to extract profits from the crisis . Hoarding and speculation should be condemned in the strongest terms and measures taken globally to ensure equitable access for countries with fewer resources . On April 21 , 2020 , we submitted an open letter to the UN calling for ethical global leadership to mitigate the unfair additional health and socioeconomic burden of this pandemic on disadvantaged populations . We proposed to create a multisector Global Health Equity Task Force , housed within WHO , charged with taking necessary steps for a comprehensive , equity­focused response . This Task Force would develop strategies for fair allocation of resources ; including legislation to trigger coordinated production of and access to quality generic diagnostics , medicines , vaccines , supplies , and equipment , abolishing any pandemic­ related patents . It would also sup­ port the development of enhanced recommendations on preparedness and response for our most vulnerable populations , and tailored , secure de­ confinement strategies . Additionally , it would promote steps to strength­ en universal health­care systems globally and to address the economic disparities that have led to this appalling inequity . The open letter to the UN has been cosigned by more than 120 diverse entities , representing more than 5 million public health practitioners , scientists , academics , health­care profession als , and advocates , including the World Federation of Public Health Associations , Latin American Alliance for Global Health , InterAcademy Partnership , World Federation of Critical Care Nurses , and American Academy of Pediatrics . The letter has also been endorsed by former heads of state and ministers , as well as an array of advocates for the right to health from more than 50 countries and a wide spectrum of cultures , contexts , and ideologies , echoing the plea for an equitable response to the pandemic . We declare no competing interests . DC is Former Minister of Health of Ecuador and former pro tempore president of the Council of Health Ministers of South America . PB is a full member of the Brazilian National Academy of Medicine . RSM is president of the Latin American Alliance for Global Health and former Minister of Health of Costa Rica . LCR is president of the World Federation of Public Health Associations . * David Chiriboga , Juan Garay , Paulo Buss , Rocío Sáenz Madrigal , Laetitia Charmaine Rispel david . chiriboga @ umassmed . edu University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01655 , USA ( DC ) ; National School of Public Health of Spain , Madrid , Spain ( JG ) ; The Oswaldo Cruz Foundation , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil ( PB ) ; University of Costa Rica School of Public Health , San José , Costa Rica ( RSM ) ; and Witwatersrand University School of Public Health , Johannesburg , South Africa ( LCR ) Published Online May 15 , 2020 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0140­6736 ( 20 ) 31145­4 For the open letter to the UN and lists of institutional and individual endorsements see https : / / www . sustainable­ healthequity . org /