This article was downloaded by : [ Muñoz - Doyague , María F . ] On : 13 February 2008 Access Details : [ subscription number 790514555 ] Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Creativity Research Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . informaworld . com / smpp / title ~ content = t775653635 An Examination of Individual Factors and Employees ' Creativity : The Case of Spain María F . Muñoz - Doyague a ; Nuria González - Álvarez a ; Mariano Nieto a a University of León , Spain Online Publication Date : 01 January 2008 To cite this Article : Muñoz - Doyague , María F . , González - Álvarez , Nuria and Nieto , Mariano ( 2008 ) ' An Examination of Individual Factors and Employees ' Creativity : The Case of Spain ' , Creativity Research Journal , 20 : 1 , 21 - 33 To link to this article : DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10400410701841716 URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400410701841716 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . informaworld . com / terms - and - conditions - of - access . pdf This article maybe used for research , teaching and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , re - distribution , re - selling , loan or sub - licensing , systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 An Examination of Individual Factors and Employees’ Creativity : The Case of Spain Marı´a F . Mu ~ nnoz - Doyague , Nuria Gonz (cid:1) aalez - A´lvarez , and Mariano Nieto University of Le (cid:1) oon , Spain The objective of this investigation was to identify and analyze the individual attributes responsible for creative performance among employees of a Spanish firm . Drawing from the existing literature on intrinsic motivation , expertise , cognitive style , and individual creativity , research was conducted to test a creativity model of employee characteristics in Spain . Results confirmed that innovative style and intrinsic motivation were related to employee creativity , as measured by self - ratings . Moreover , results suggested that the accumulation of individual attributes that were hypothesized to have a positive relation - ship with creativity had a greater effect in creativity than when considering separately . A cluster analysis was carried out in order to procure a taxonomy of employees depending on their individual characteristics . Three groups were defined . Their behavior differed significantly in terms of their creativity performance . Recommendations for enhancing creativity in work settings are proposed . There is a consensus that creativity is a key aspect in the success of the innovation process . Furthermore , it appears that , rather than innovation , creativity is the real source of competitive advantage for organizations , as it is the basis of their innovative potential ( Amabile , 1983 , 1988 , 1996 ; Amabile , Conti , Coon , Lazenby , & Herron , 1996 ; Ford , 1996 ; Cummings & Oldham , 1997 ; Woodman , Sawyer , & Griffin , 1993 ) . Given the lack of academic research about this topic in Spain and the role of employees’ creative contribu - tions , the objective of this investigation was to analyze which individual attributes enhance the generation of creative ideas , focusing on the Spanish firm . In addition , this study tested the idea that creativity is more affected by an accumulation of these attributes , rather than their individual contributions . This belief served as the basis for an employee classification and a subsequent empiri - cal verification . The ultimate objective was to identify what type of human resource strategies can stimulate creativity . CREATIVITY DEFINED Creativity is a complex concept that has been defined in various ways ( Mumford & Gustafson , 1988 ; Shalley , 1995 ) . It can be identified with the tangible characteris - tics of products ( e . g . , Amabile , 1982 ; Shalley , 1991 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ; Oldham & Cummings , 1996 ; Zaltman , Duncan , & Holbeck , 1973 ) , persons ( e . g . , Guilford , 1950 ; McKinnon , 1962 ; Torrance , 1974 ) , thought processes ( e . g . , Koestler , 1964 ; Newell , Shaw , & Simon , 1962 ; M . I . Stein , 1974 ; Wallas , 1926 ; Weisberg , 1986 , 1993 ; Wertheimer , 1945 ) , or the situ - ation in which it takes place ( e . g . , Csikszentmihalyi , 1988 , 1990 ; Gruber , 1988 ) . There is consensus that creativity refers to something that is novel and useful ( Ford , 1995 ) . The inception of a strategy or creative solution will vary according to the area of activity or related task , but in some way all creative behavior implies the identification of original formats and improvements in attaining some goal ( Shalley , 1995 ) . Most of the research in organizations has defined creativity in terms of the product or engendered idea . This research was funded by a grant from the Executive Agency of Education and Culture of the Castilla and Le (cid:1) oon Autonomous Region Board . Correspondence should be addressed to Marı´a F . Mu ~ nnoz - Doyague , Faculty of Economics and Business Management , Business Manage - ment Department , Campus de Vegazana , s = n , 24071 Le (cid:1) oon , Spain . E - mail : ddefmd @ unileon . es CREATIVITY RESEARCH JOURNAL , 20 ( 1 ) , 21 – 33 , 2008 Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group , LLC ISSN : 1040 - 0419 print = 1532 - 6934 online DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10400410701841716 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 Amabile ( 1988 ) defined creativity as the ‘‘production of novel and useful ideas’’ ( p . 126 ) . This definition has been cited in later conceptual models ( Ford , 1996 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ) and in various recent studies ( Amabile et al . , 1996 ; Oldham & Cummings , 1996 ; Taggar , 2002 ; Tierney , Farmer , & Graen , 1999 ) . To be consistent with the literature , creativity in the present research was defined as the generation of novel and useful ideas for the organization . An idea or pro - duct is considered novel if it implies either a significant recombination of existing materials or the introduction of completely new materials ( Oldham & Cummings , 1996 ) . In addition , this contribution must offer some - thing original and unique relative to what is already available in the current repertoire of products or com - pany procedures ( Cummings & Oldham , 1997 ) . An idea or product is useful when it can solve a problem , meet the requirements of a given situation , or reach a recog - nized target ( MacKinnon , 1978 ) . This implies that it must be directly relevant to the organization’s goals and be something from which , in the short or long term , some value could be obtained ( Cummings & Oldham , 1997 ) . Individual Characteristics and Creativity Amabile ( 1983 , 1996 ) , Woodman et al . ( 1993 ) , and Ford ( 1996 ) showed that four individual attributes determine level of creativity : personality , intrinsic motivation , expertise , and cognitive style . In reference to person - ality , it is evident that whether a person is more or less creative will be determined by his or her idiosyncrasies . In fact , traditionally , it was thought that for a person to be creative , the personality characteristics were fun - damental ( Guilford , 1950 ; Nicholls , 1972 ; Torrance , 1974 ) . Oldham and Cummings ( 1996 ) demonstrated empirically that an individual is likely to have a high cre - ative output if he or she has the personality traits of a creative person . Nevertheless , personality characteristics are not sufficient . Individuals with normal aptitudes are at least capable of producing moderately creative work and the social environment can cause creative behavior both in degree and frequency ( Amabile , 1997 ; West & Farr , 1990 ) , which , of course , would leave personality as the principal deciding factor . Because personality is a given and incontrollable vari - able , only the other three mentioned factors and their relation with the creative individual will be considered in the present research . All of these interact with person - ality but they can be stimulated if adequate policies are put into practice by the management . Intrinsic Motivation and Creativity When individuals look for pleasure , interest , satisfaction of curiosity , self - expression , or personal challenges at work , they are said to be intrinsically motivated ( Amabile , 1993 , 1997 ) . If creative work is desired , this is one of the most important components that must be present , up to the point that a high degree of motiv - ation can compensate for the deficiency in abilities ( Amabile , 1993 ) . In effect , although abilities determine what a person is capable of doing in his or her work , intrinsic motiv - ation is the cause of what he or she really does . It determines the degree in which an individual commits abilities and expertise to achieve a creative result ( Dweck , 1986 ) . This is due to the fact that intrinsic motivation affects the employee’s decision to start and maintain the effort needed to be creative through the course of time ( Tierney et al . , 1999 ) . With respect to this , Csikszentmihalyi ( 1988 ) noted that ‘‘it doesn’t matter how original one is , if one gets bored in their work , it will be difficult that one will become suffi - ciently interested in it to make a creative contribution’’ ( p . 337 ) . Certainly , creative efforts are sometimes extrinsically motivated ( Rubenson & Runco , 1992 , 1995 ) , and there is empirical research that demonstrates how certain kind of extrinsic factor could inhibit creative thinking ( Amabile , 1993 ) . However , intrinsic motivation is con - sidered as a core characteristic of creative persons ( Runco , 2004 ) , and it does make sense that creative per - sons tend to follow intrinsic interests , and that tasks that are intrinsically motivated tend to be free from the extrinsic factors that can constrain creativity . Many theories describe how intrinsic motivation benefits creativity ( Amabile , 1996 ; Ford , 1996 ; Gardner , 1993 , Gruber & Davis , 1988 ; Mainemelis , 2001 ; Mumford , 2000 ; Runco , 2004 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1991 , 1996 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ; Woodman & Schoenfeldt , 1990 ) . Additionally , empirical work that relates intrinsic motivation with individual creativ - ity in organizational environments supports these theoretical propositions ( Amabile , 1988 ; Amabile , Hill , Hennessey , & Tighe , 1994 ; Ford , 1999 ; Ruscio , Whitney , & Amabile , 1998 ; Taggar , 2002 ; Tierney et al . , 1999 ) . On the other hand , it seems that creativity is supported by the recognition and rewards that accredit the individual’s ability or the actual job’s value , and through rewards that permit one to pursue an intrinsically interesting job ( Amabile et al . , 1996 ; Amabile & Gryskiewicz , 1989 ) . In order to test how intrinsic motivation relates to creativity specifically in a Spanish firm , this hypothesis was tested : H1 : The degree to with an individual is intrinsically motivated is positively related to his or her creativity . 22 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 Expertise and Creativity Everything people know and do in their work amounts to expertise . In a word , expertise is knowledge : techni - cal , procedural , and intellectual . To carry out one’s work , an individual includes his or her factual knowl - edge , technical abilities , and special aptitudes ( Amabile , 1988 ) . Expertise is the foundation of creative work . Thus , for a creative output , a person’s prior knowledge of his function is critical ( Amabile , 1988 , 1997 ) and is a prerequisite for creative action ( Amabile , 1988 ; Ford , 1996 ; Simon , 1986 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1991 , 1996 ; Weisberg , 1999 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ; Woodman & Schoendfeldt , 1990 ) . Expertise can be viewed as a set of cognitive path - ways that can be followed by an individual in order to resolve a problem or carry out a given task ( Amabile , 1988 ) , what Newell and Simon ( 1972 ) described as a problem solvers’ network of possible digressions . The bigger the set , the greater will be the number of available alternatives to produce something new , to develop a new combination of steps in carrying out a job or in problem solving ( Amabile , 1988 , 1996 , 1997 ) ; in other words , there will be a greater probability that individual be creative . Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) described how an indivi - dual’s prior knowledge increases his or her capacity to acquire more knowledge and use it in a creative sense , thus allowing types of associations and links that may have never been considered before . It is difficult to imagine any creative behavior that is free of previous expertise ( B . S . Stein , 1989 ) . Creative individuals do not produce new ideas from a vacuum , ‘‘but rather those ideas must arise from a large set of well - developed skills and a rich body of domain - relevant knowledge’’ ( Simonton , 2000 , p . 152 ) , so it is not surprising that expertise influences the problem solving process ( Mumford , 2000 ) . Various works ( Baer , 1998 ; Kulkarni & Simon , 1990 ; Weisberg , 1986 ) show that a person’s ability to generate viable and original solutions to problems is influenced by expertise , or the knowledge obtained through expertise . After an exhaustive review of the works that relate knowledge with creativity , Weisberg ( 1999 ) reached the conclusion that there exists empirical consistency about creative individuals needing , from their initial exposure to the field in which they are going to develop their work until the production of their first significant creative work , the passing of a considerable amount of time . This supports the importance of expertise in the gener - ation of creative work . Nevertheless , it should be pointed out that most of the works carried out in this sense are case - studies of eminent creators ( e . g . , Gardner , 1993 ; Weisberg , 1986 , 1993 , 1995 ) who have excelled in various fields of endeavor such as music , painting , or poetry . Although the influence of expertise in creativity as a study variable in a theoretical context has been shown to be an important factor in the creative output ( Amabile , 1983 , 1988 , 1996 , 1997 ; Ford , 1996 ; Runco & Chand , 1995 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ; Woodman & Schoendfeldt , 1990 ) , empirical studies that analyze the relationship between expertise and creativity an organi - zational setting are scarce . On the other hand , although it was not carried out in the heart of a company , an empirical study was found that uncovered a positive and significant correlation between expertise and creativity ( Taggar , 2002 ) . This supports the premise that it is necessary to have experi - ence in a function to generate creative work , at least when dealing with heuristic tasks . Tierney and Farmer ( 2000 ) found that the length of service in a job position negatively contributes to the employees’ belief of creative efficiency , yet in the case of blue - collar workers , education level did the opposite . Nevertheless , evidence that shows that these two ele - ments influence the beliefs of creative efficiency of the white - collar workers seems to be unavailable . Tierney and Farmer argued that , given that knowledge is a stable characteristic that makes up the value of efficiency itself and creative output , it is reasonable to expect an association between work related knowledge and creative self - efficiency . Although it is generally recognized that if novelty is to be found in a field , one must be knowledgeable in it ( Amabile , 1983 , 1988 ; Bailin , 1988 ; Hayes , 1989 ; Weisberg , 1986 , 1995 ) , there are those that consider that too much expertise could cause the individual to fall into monotonous habits ( Frensch & Sternberg , 1989 ; Lunchins & Lunchins , 1959 ) , given that familiarity with a task could induce it to be carried out in a routine manner ( Ford , 1996 ) . In general , it is assumed that the relation between expertise and creativity is in the form of an inverted U ( Simonton , 1984 ) , in that very high levels of expertise could possibly have a negative effect on creativity . As Runco ( 1996 ) argued , individuals may lose their abilities to generate creative ideas if they rely completely on their past experience as , with too much expertise , actions become rigid and automatized . Thus , although expertise , by bringing about the attainment of knowledge faster ( Chi , Glaser , & Farr , 1989 ) , can have a series of positive effects on problem resolution , equally it could provoke the use of system - atic solutions in opposition to the use of trial and error in problem solving ( Kaizer & Shore , 1995 ) , which could decrease an individual’s creativity . In this research , it is assumed that expertise in the field of activity is fundamental in order to generate some kind of new response opposed to what already exists , given INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 23 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 that one cannot develop new ideas without prior knowl - edge of the field of activity . As Woodman et al . ( 1993 ) remarked , although expertise in a given field could lead to ‘‘functional fixedness’’ ( p . 301 ) , preventing individuals to generate creative solutions , it is difficult to imagine any creative behavior that is , in any sense , ‘‘knowledge free . ’’ That is , to a certain extent , creativity demands a comparable level of systematic training and practice ( Simonton , 2000 ) . On this basis , the following hypothesis is presented to be verified in the analytical model : H2 : The degree to which an individual has expertise in his or her domain is positively related to his or her creativity . Cognitive Style and Creativity Cognitive style refers to how people address problems and their solutions , and their capacity in bringing together existing ideas and forming new combinations ( Kirton , 1989 ) . It determines the degree of flexibility and imagination that people have to face up to their problems . Following Kirton ( 1976 ) , this natural orientation , or an individual’s preferred forms of problem resolution , can stem from the skill of doing things better to the skill of doing things in a different way , being two extreme opposites of the same continuum , which Kirton called , respectively , adaptor and innovator . Thus , an adaptor ( someone with an adaptive cognitive style ) will tend to use data within a consolidated domain , will accept pro - blems as they have been defined and will generate ideas consistent with the accepted norm . On the contrary , an innovator ( someone with an innovative cognitive style ) will search for and integrate diverse information , rede - fine the problems presented , and generate ideas , possibly digressing from the norm . In essence , the cognitive style most conducive to creativity is characterized by the facility to understand complex problems and the ability to break away from mental schemes while resolving a problem ( Amabile , 1988 ; Ford , 1996 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ) . Assuming that an individual has some incentive to carry out an activity , the performance will be good or adequate or acceptable , technically , if , as previously noted , the required expertise is present . Nevertheless , despite hav - ing a good deal of expertise , without creative abilities , an individual will not produce creative work . These cre - ative abilities include a cognitive style that favors the adoption of new perspectives when resolving problems , thanks to the deductive capacity in the search for new cognitive paths ( Amabile , 1983 , 1988 , 1996 ) . Therefore , for creative production , it is necessary that an individual has a cognitive style oriented towards the achievement of ‘‘new cognitive paths’’ ( Amabile , 1988 , p . 131 ) , or divergent thinking ( Ford , 1996 ; Guilford , 1950 ; Runco , 1991 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ) . This orien - tation is consistent with Kirton’s ( 1976 ) definition of the innovative cognitive style , and illustrates what Amabile ( 1983 , 1988 ) qualified as creativity - relevant skills . Some specific aspects of this way of thinking include ‘‘ ( i ) break from perception schemes , ( ii ) break cognitive schemes or explore new cognitive paths , ( iii ) for as much time as is necessary , keep the response options open , ( iv ) delay judgement , ( v ) when storing information use many categories , ( vi ) log with precision , and ( vii ) escape from performance scripts’’ ( Amabile , 1988 , p . 131 ) . Equally , Ford ( 1996 ) noted that diverse thinking skills ‘‘help an individual to generate many alternative solutions to a problem’’ ( p . 1125 ) , being a requisite that enables cre - ative action . Also , recent work illustrated the influence of models of divergent thinking on studies of creativity ( Runco et al . , 2000 ) . In this sense , the qualities that Rogers ( 1954 ) attribu - ted to a creative person relate more to the innovator than the adaptor . According to Rogers , the creative person is characterized by having little respect for traditional knowledge or practice , compulsively plays with ideas , and needs a high level of social recognition for his ideas . If the conceptual work that proposes the relationship between cognitive style and creativity is in abundance ( e . g . , Amabile , 1983 , 1996 ; Basadur , Graen , & Green , 1982 ; Ford , 1996 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ) , the studies that demonstrate empirically this relation are relatively scarce ( Baer , 1994 ; Buttner , Gryskiewicz , & Hidore , 1999 ; Cummings & Oldham , 1997 ; Ettlie & O’Keefe , 1982 ; Payne , Lane , & Jabri , 1990 ; Scott & Bruce , 1994 ; Taggar , 2002 ; Tierney et al . , 1999 ) . All of them support the premise that those individuals having a cog - nitive style described as innovator or intuitive show high levels of creativity , and those that show a more adaptor style are less creative . Scott and Bruce’s work shows an exception in that , although a systematic cognitive style negatively affects creativity , in order to develop an inno - vative behavior it is not necessary to be a highly intuitive problem solver , thus partially supporting this last hypothesis . Given that , in general , those individuals who have an innovative cognitive style will have a superior creative performance than those with an adaptor style , so that the former will be nurturing for creativity whereas the latter will have the opposite effect , the following hypoth - eses were considered : H3 : The degree to with an individual’s cognitive style is innovative is positively related to his or her creativity . 24 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 H4 : The degree to with an individual’s cognitive style is adaptive is positively related to his or her creativity . Effect of the Accumulation of the Individual Factors Considered in Creativity Having analyzed the three individual factors that influence creativity , it is necessary to point out that there are those who consider that these elements by them - selves are not sufficient , so that an individual works in a creative manner ( e . g . Amabile , 1988 , 1996 ; Ford , 1996 ; Woodman et al . , 1993 ) , but that the integral effect of all the components will lead to a greater creativity than if they are taken separately . In other words , each component is necessary but none sufficient alone , such that , in order to achieve creativity in the work place , all of them must be present . In this sense , Amabile’s ( 1983 , 1996 ) componential theory suggested that creativity has a greater chance to occur when people’s creative abilities and expertise over - lap with their strongest intrinsic interests and that the greater the level of each one of the components the greater will be the creativity . This is called the ‘‘creativ - ity intersection’’ ( Amabile , 1988 , p . 156 ) , so that an indi - vidual possessing the three components will have a higher probability for being creative . Besides , the levels of each one of his joint components determine the final level of creativity reached by an individual . For example , a person can have a great deal of experience in his chosen ield , but if his cognitive style is inappropri - ate , his performance will be ‘‘technically good , or adequate or acceptable’’ ( Amabile , 1988 , p . 131 ) , but he or she will not produce work that can be classified as creative . In addition , if this person has both these requisites but lacks the appropriate motivation , the possible effect on creativity will not be so notable . These ideas give rise to the formulation of the following hypothesis that brings together the above - mentioned effects : H5 : The accumulation of intrinsic motivation , expert - ise , and innovative cognitive style in an individual is positively related to his or her creativity , that is , the more of this attributes the individual possess , the more will be his = her creativity . METHOD Sample The study was carried out among 110 employees of a company in the automotive sector whose principal activity consists of the manufacture of two - wheeled vehicles . To this end , in the pursuit of excellence , the company employs the just - in - time production philo - sophy , in which the generation of creative ideas for continual improvement is fundamental . Workers from the administration , production , and sales divisions formed the population under study ; the members of the strategic apex and the assembly line operatives were excluded . A questionnaire was sent to all these participants in which a series of questions were posed with the objective to measure and verify the mod - el’s variables . In order to increase the number of replies , the questionnaire was sent out twice : the first with the March 2003 payslips , and the second in the following month . A total of 53 valid questionnaires were received , which implied a 48 . 1 % return , with even representation from all the analyzed divisions and their corresponding departments . The sample is essentially composed of employees with a fairly high average length of service in the company and an average educational level corresponding to sec - ondary school , high school education , or technical school , which indicates that the employees have a good expertise level based on an apprenticeship in their activi - ties during a long period of time . Measures Formed from 11 items obtained from Ettlie and O’Keefe ( 1982 ) , Oldham and Cummings ( 1996 ) , and Zhou and George ( 2001 ) , a 7 - point scale was made in order to measure creativity . The scale measured the concept’s two fundamental aspects , namely novelty and utility . The items were averaged out and a high score repre - sented an employee with a highly creative value . Intrinsic motivation was measured by averaging out five items extracted from Amabile et al . ( 1994 ) and Tierney et al . ( 1999 ) . A seven - point scale posed ques - tions on the degree of interest , passion , and enjoyment felt by the employee in his work place . A high score implied that the employee was highly intrinsically motivated . The expertise variable was measured by averaging out the replies provided to a 7 - point Likert - type scale made up of four items made from Amabile ( 1988 ) , Amabile and Gryskiewicz ( 1989 ) , and Szulanski ( 1996 ) . The items made reference to the degree of knowledge that the employee had and used to carry out his job , where scores of around 1 indicated no knowledge or previous expertise , and scores of 7 suggested a high level of professional expertise . The cognitive style was measured using a measure - ment derived from Kirton’s ( 1976 ) Adaptation – Inno - vation Inventory , but reducing the tool’s original 32 items to 17 . To make the variable operative , a factorial analysis was carried out using the principal components INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 25 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 method . Because it was desired to synthesise the two extreme styles included in the model , the priority criteria was used to obtain these two factors . The final solution , once rotated , explained 66 % of the total variance . The 10 items of the scale that corre - sponded to the innovative cognitive style explained the first factor . As shown in Table 1 , the seven remaining items that characterized the adaptor cognitive style gave rise to significant and high factor loadings in the second component . The scores of all the employees in these components were saved for subsequent use using the regression method . RESULTS Cronbach’s alphas for all the measures were higher than . 80 . Removal of any item or set of items in any measure did not appreciably improve estimates of internal con - sistency . So all the measures used in this research were internally consistent . Individual Effect A stepwise linear regression analysis was used to analyze the relationship of the individual factors on creativity . The null hypothesis of the parameters was rejected , according to the F - test ( p < . 01 ) Thus , the model fits the data . On the other hand , in the final model , as shown by the value of the determination coefficient ( R 2 ¼ 0 . 66 ) , the adjustment integrity is good , which means that 66 % of the behavior of the dependant variable was explained through the predictor variables . In addition , the relevance of the variables finally chosen in the equation was demonstrated by the evolution experi - enced by the adjustment of the determination coefficient while adding new variables to the regression analysis . Table 2 reports the regression coefficients associated with each of the independent variables considered in the final regression equation . Observing the results , given that on applying Stu - dent’s t contrast , the results of the associated b coeffi - cients are significant and with the adequate sign , it can be said that the innovative cognitive style ( a ¼ 0 . 93 ) and intrinsic motivation exerted a positive and impor - tant influence on an individual’s creativity . Hypotheses H1 and H3 were confirmed respectively by this fact . The same did not occur with the adaptor cognitive style ( a ¼ 0 . 93 ) and expertise ( a ¼ 0 . 89 ) variables . In both cases , the regression coefficients results , although were in the right direction , were not significant , so both variables were finally excluded from the model . For this reason , the H4 and H2 hypothesis could not be confirmed . Accumulative Effect of Individual Factors on Creativity Having studied the effect of each individual factor on creativity , with the objective to test the hypothesis H5 , the combined effect was then considered . In order to carry out the analysis , a new variable that adopted four possible values , based on each employee’s number of individual characteristics , was created . In order to distinguish whether a worker displayed a parti - cular characteristic or not , a criterion was established that compared the points awarded for that characteristic to the average points of the same corresponding to the 53 employees of the sample population . The intended purpose was to test a positive relationship between this TABLE 1 Factor Structure of Cognitive Style Measure Factor Loadings Factor 1 Factor 2 CS1 (cid:1) . 119 . 851 . 738 CS2 (cid:1) 6 . 340E – 02 . 840 . 709 CS3 5 . 898E – 02 . 776 . 606 CS4 1 . 444E – 02 . 880 . 774 CS5 (cid:1) . 113 . 790 . 637 CS6 (cid:1) . 242 . 768 . 648 CS7 (cid:1) . 277 . 690 . 552 CS8 . 797 (cid:1) . 146 . 656 CS9 . 816 (cid:1) . 110 . 678 CS10 . 703 . 122 . 509 CS11 . 784 (cid:1) . 112 . 627 CS12 . 819 . 174 . 702 CS13 . 831 (cid:1) 7 . 662E – 02 . 696 CS14 . 902 (cid:1) . 165 . 840 CS15 . 694 (cid:1) . 312 . 579 CS16 . 770 (cid:1) . 220 . 641 CS17 . 664 (cid:1) . 367 . 575 % Variance accum . 36 . 876 65 . 697 Eigenvalues 7 . 206 3 . 962 Note . Boldface indicates loadings over . 50 . Associated items were retained in the subscales of the cognitive style measure . Extraction : Principal Components . Rotation Method : Varimax Normalized . CS ¼ cognitive style . TABLE 2 Summary of Regression Analysis for Variables Predicting Creativity Predictive Variables B SE B ß Step 1 Innovative CS 0 . 874 . 102 . 768 (cid:2)(cid:2) Step 2 Innovative CS 0 . 534 . 141 . 469 (cid:2)(cid:2) Motivation 0 . 425 . 132 . 399 (cid:2)(cid:2) Note . R 2 ¼ . 77 for Step 1 ; D R 2 ¼ . 044 for Step 2 ( ps < . 05 ) . Expert - ise and Adaptor Style were excluded from the regression equation . (cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 01 . 26 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 new variable and creativity in order to be able to test the proposed hypothesis . The variable as defined , which measures the accumu - lation of the individual characteristics in the employees , establishes in function of the number of characteristics they have , a total of four employee categories . Starting from these four groups , it will be necessary to check among them the existence of homogeneity or heterogen - eity with respect to the creativity variable . To do this , a 1 - way ANOVA was carried out , having first checked that the necessary requirements for its application were in compliance , where creativity was the dependant vari - able and the variable defined to measure the accumu - lation of the individual characteristics in the employees was the factor of analysis . The results displayed in Table 3 show that the aver - age between groups quadratic is well above the same within groups value that , in fact , is a very small value . Consequently , a high F value was obtained ( p < . 01 ) , thus rejecting the null hypothesis . Therefore , it can be confirmed that creativity differs from one individual to another in function of their individual characteristics . On the other hand , the model was well adjusted ( g 2 ¼ 1 . 179 ) . In other words , the amount of increase of creativity is due to the fact that an individual has the greatest possible number of characteristics that posi - tively influence his creative performance . Having confirmed that there exists a relationship between the individual characteristics of all the people and the resulting creativity , its significance was ana - lyzed . Agreeing with the presumption of the H5 hypoth - esis , those individuals that have the three characteristics will be more creative than those with only one or two or none of them . Therefore , creativity should increase as the value of the variable that accumulates these attri - butes increases . Using Spearman’s rho contrast , and given the categories nominal order , a bivariate partial correlation test was undertaken to make a check . Spear - man Correlation Coefficient was positive and signifi - cant , q ¼ . 659 ( p < . 01 ) , which confirmed the idea that , in line with the possession of individual character - istics that have been deemed necessary for creativity , an individual’s creativity increases . That is , and in confirming the H5 hypothesis , those individuals that are intrinsically motivated , have an innovative cognitive style , and also have sufficient experience to carry out their work , were more creative than those that do not simultaneously have these characteristics . Confirmatory Analysis Additionally , it was considered timely and interesting to check for the existence of homogeneous groups of indi - viduals in function of their individual characteristics , with the aim to analyze if their behavior , in a creative sense , follows what has been said before . To do this , using the four individual characteristics as classification elements , a cluster analysis was applied to the employee sample . In the first place , the existence of three conglomerates was found by carrying out a hier - archy conglomerates analysis following Ward’s method and the squared Euclidean distance between individuals . This hierarchical procedure produced the mean values of each one of the variables in each identified group , which were used as an initial seed center in an analysis of k - median conglomerates , in which it was specified that the identified groups were exactly three . Table 4 reports the final number of individuals that belonged to each group and the mean values adopted by each one of the variables in each group . Next , in function of the individual characteristics , a significance contrast of the differences between the con - glomerates centers was carried out . For this , a variance TABLE 3 Analysis of Variance for Creativity SS df MS F Between groups 36 . 435 3 12 . 145 19 . 270 (cid:2)(cid:2) Within groups 30 . 883 49 0 . 630 Total 67 . 318 52 Note . Creativity in groups of individuals defined on the basis of the accumulation of individual attributes . (cid:2)(cid:2) p < 0 . 01 . TABLE 4 Centers and Sizes of Nonhierarchical Clusters for Individual Attributes Variable Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Motivation (cid:1) 0 . 14 0 . 61 (cid:1) 2 . 28 Innovative CS (cid:1) 0 . 26 0 . 68 (cid:1) 2 . 04 Adaptor CS (cid:1) 0 . 63 0 . 32 0 . 85 Expertise (cid:1) 0 . 49 0 . 85 (cid:1) 1 . 55 Number of individuals 24 24 5 TABLE 5 Significance Test of the Differences between Nonhierarchical Cluster Centers in Relation to the Variables Used in Their Formation Cluster Error MS df MS Df Motivation 17 . 660 2 . 334 50 52 . 943 (cid:2)(cid:2) Innovative CS 16 . 798 2 . 368 50 45 . 635 (cid:2)(cid:2) Adaptor CS 9 . 132 2 . 675 50 13 . 535 (cid:2)(cid:2) Expertise 17 . 904 2 . 324 50 55 . 285 (cid:2)(cid:2) Note . (cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 01 . INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 27 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 analysis was made , which allowed an examination of the variability between the different clusters and within each one of them . As can be seen ( see Table 5 ) all the F values were significant ( p < 0 . 1 ) , which suggests that the con - glomerates obtained variables differed significantly in the three groups under consideration . Following on , in order to check the reliability of the results obtained with the two conglomerate analyses , a discriminate analysis was carried out using the stepwise method , in which the cluster membership was used as the dependent variable and the individual characteristics as the independent variables . In Table 6 are shown the results of the equality tests of group means . Looking at the data , the results obtained are confirmed with the cluster analysis ; i . e . , there exist significant differences in the averages of the different groups for each inde - pendent variable . Therefore , it’s heterogeneous groups dealing with each other . Table 7 shows the eigenvalues and the canonical cor - relation obtained for the discriminant functions . As can be seen , the first characteristic root is the larger and more important in explanatory power than the second one . This indicates the relative discriminant power of the discriminant functions . Also , Rc value means that nearly all the variance in the discriminant scores can be attributed to group differences . So we can affirm that the three groups come from a population in which the individual characteristics show different values depend - ing to which group each individual belongs , which really means that the discriminate functions are well separated between each group . Last , from the comparison of the classification derived from the cluster analysis and that obtained from the discriminate function , we could verify that all of the cases originally grouped together were classified correctly , which showed that there was internal hom - ogeneity and heterogeneity within the groups . The next stage proceeds with the interpretation of the groups . For this , the mean values of the independent variables in each of the conglomerates were examined ( see Table 4 ) , extracting the following conclusions in relative terms on the cluster characterization : 1 . Cluster number 1 is made up of individuals who show below mean values in the four variables . Specifically , the average values of intrinsic motiv - ation and innovative cognitive style are slightly below the sample mean , and that of expertise is a little less and that of cognitive style severely more . For this reason , and given the characteris - tics shown , we consider that these are employees who possibly could show some creativity but not at a high level . This group is defined as appren - tices . These are employees with a high potential for improvement in their creative performance . In this sense , it could be convenient to especially introduce policies that increase their motivation to suggest new ideas , from improving their job post , awarding them more autonomy and a greater degree of responsibility in such a way that the job becomes more interesting , to setting up mechanisms to recognize and reward creativity . In addition , it would be convenient to provide adequate training to improve their creative abili - ties , stimulating their potential innovative cogni - tive style , and increase their degree of knowledge so that they orientate them to generate new and useful ideas for the organization . 2 . The second group unites individuals characterized by a high degree of intrinsic motivation , a clearly innovative cognitive style and a high degree of professional skill , given that these three variables are well above the sample average . Equally , they show a slight disposition towards systematic think - ing , given that the adaptor cognitive style yields an average value slightly above the average . In accordance with this , it could be thought that they are workers with a high creativity level , because it is reasonable to speculate that they would put their expertise to this end , given the high level of intrin - sic motivation shown , reinforced by their innova - tive style in exposing and solving problems . For this reason , this group is defined as innovators . These employees are a basic resource for the organization , for which one must try to maintain their level of intrinsic motivation , continually giv - ing them challenging tasks , such that they do not lose the interest that they have for their work , and put into practice their abilities and expertise using their innovative style to resolve problems . TABLE 6 Tests of Equality of Group Means Variable K F df1 df2 Expertise . 311 55 . 285 (cid:2)(cid:2) 2 50 Motivation . 321 52 . 943 (cid:2)(cid:2) 2 50 Adaptor CS . 649 13 . 535 (cid:2)(cid:2) 2 50 Innovative CS . 354 45 . 635 (cid:2)(cid:2) 2 50 Note . (cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 01 . TABLE 7 Eigenvalues and Canonical Correlation for Discriminating Canonical Functions Function Eigenvalue % Variance Rc 1 4 . 786 83 . 8 . 909 2 0 . 926 16 . 2 . 693 Note . K ¼ . 090 for Function test 1 through 2 ; ¼ . 519 for Function Test 2 ( p < . 01 ) . 28 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 3 . Finally , individuals whose qualities are not the most appropriate to be creative make up the third conglomerate . Being employees with an above average adaptor cognitive style gives reason for this conclusion , a situation that is further aggra - vated by the fact that , given that the values of these two variables are slightly below that of the sample , they show a total lack of intrinsic motiv - ation nor the slightest sign of intuitive thought . Thus , the possibilities of contributing new ideas are practically nil , if not maybe an idea of improvement inspired by learning through prac - tice , reasons enough to define this group as con - formists . It’s advisable that this type of group is assigned the more mechanical and systematic tasks in which they could reach an efficient level of out - put , without expecting that they contribute novel ideas in their work that they could only achieve outside of their routine . At this point , it would be interesting to introduce the creative variable with the purpose to determine the existence of significant differences between the groups obtained in relation to this variable . The objective is none other than to check the adequacy of the interpret - ation of the clusters , in other words , that the most creative group is the innovators , followed by the appren - tices , and in last places the conformists . To do this , and having checked the compliance of the necessary requirements , a 1 - way ANOVA was carried out , where creativity was the dependant variable and the obtained community mix was the factor of analysis . The results of the analysis appear in Table 8 . As can be seen , besides being a very small value , the average intergroup quadratic is much higher than the average intragroup quadratic . Consequently , a high F value is obtained , significant to a level of 0 . 05 , thus rejecting the nullity hypothesis . This indicates that creativity dif - fers , in function of the individual characteristics shown , from some individuals to others . In addition , the coefficient 2 is very close to 1 ( 1 . 036 ) , which is indicative of a well - adjusted model , for which it can be concluded that the factor explains the totality or an important part of the total variance . This means that the fact that an individual has certain individual characteristics that are more or less in evidence will determine whether he is more or less creative . Using Spearman’s rho contrast , and given the cate - gories nominal order , a bivariate partial correlation test was undertaken to make a check . Spearman Correlation Coefficient was positive and significant , q ¼ . 659 ( p < . 01 ) , which confirms the idea that , in line with the possession of individual characteristics that have been deemed necessary for creativity , an individual’s creativ - ity increases . Once the existence of a relationship between the com - munity group and creativity is confirmed , the next step is to analyze its sense . To do this , using Spearman’s rho contrast , a bivariated correlation test was underta - ken . Spearman Correlation Coefficient was positive and significant , q ¼ . 619 ( p < . 01 ) , which confirms what was predicted , that the most creative group of employ - ees are the innovators , followed by the apprentices , with the least creative being the conformists . DISCUSSION That the individual factors are clearly related to the indi - vidual creativity is effectively shown by the results obtained . On the other hand , the obtained coefficient of determination indicates that 66 % of the dependant variable is explained by the variables included within these factors , which implies that there could be other factors , not contemplated in this study , which equally have a bearing on an individual’s creativity . Neverthe - less , it has already been mentioned that personality was considered as a determinant aspect of creativity , but was not included in the model , given that it was deemed a noncontrollable variable by the company except in the recruitment and selection processes , in which case it is assumed that the those candidates whose personality characteristics that met the requirements of the post to be filled would be selected . Therefore , it’s not considered an attribute that can be improved or influenced by any management practice applied to the organization’s members . Among the individual factors considered , it can be concluded that the innovative cognitive style and intrin - sic motivation , in this order of importance , positively and significantly influence the individual’s creativity . In this way , this new empirical evidence has contributed to supporting the relevance of the influence of both characteristics on individual creativity . This is an out - standing conclusion for the Spanish case , as there are no empirical researches that address this topic in the Spanish academic literature . In truth , these two relationships are those that have been most studied in the literature and of which most empirical corroboration found , thus the results of this TABLE 8 ANOVA . Creativity in Groups of Individuals Defined on the Basis of their Individual Attributes SS df MS F Between groups 34 . 266 2 17 . 133 25 . 919 (cid:2)(cid:2) Within groups 33 . 052 50 0 . 661 Total 67 . 318 52 Note . (cid:2)(cid:2) p < . 01 . INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 29 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 study confirm or support those obtained from research undertaken up to today . So we can extend them to the Spanish case . So , in the case of intrinsic motivation , and inde - pendent of the sample group being company managers ( Ford , 1999 ) , employees of various departments ( Amabile , 1998 ; Tierney et al . , 1999 ) or postgraduate students ( Ruscio et al . , 1998 ; Taggar , 2002 ) , the positive influence of this variable on creativity is supported by all the researches . Equally , and also independent of the sample group being managers ( Buttner et al . , 1999 ) , departmental employees ( Payne et al . , 1990 ; Tierney et al . , 1999 ) or students ( Baer , 1994 ; Ettlie & O’Keefe , 1982 ; Taggar , 2002 ) , the works that analyzed the relationship between the innovative cognitive style with creativity coincide in the positive influence of this variable . Only the work carried out by Scott and Bruce ( 1994 ) in a research and development department of an industrial corpor - ation showed that for individuals to develop an innova - tive behavior , it was not necessary for them to have a high innovative cognitive style . Nevertheless , these authors used innovative behavior as an independent variable , which covered not just creativity but all the phases of the innovative process . On the other hand , the effects that expertise and adaptor cognitive style could have on creativity were not demonstrated for the case of a Spanish firm . A nega - tive relationship , but with significant results , between adaptor cognitive style and innovative behavior was also found by Scott and Bruce ( 1994 ) . Cummings and Oldham ( 1997 ) also found low scores in creativity obtained by employees with an adaptor cognitive style . This indicates the need to investigate further this relationship , one that is hardly tested in the academic literature . Also , it is necessary to comment on the lack of this result to find an explanation . In the first place , the innovative and adaptive cogni - tive styles were treated separately , as suggested in the literature ( Jabri , 1991 ; Kirton , 1976 ) , and as mentioned , finding a positive and significant relationship between the former and creativity . In this sense , the studies found in the literature that relate the innovative versus the adaptive cognitive style with creativity do show the opposing influence that they cause on an individual’s creativity . Equally , the positive association of the inno - vative cognitive style in relation to creativity has been supported by the studies that only analyzed this case . Nevertheless , in this investigation , a definite conclusion cannot be reached , because the result of the relationship of the adaptor cognitive style with creativity was nega - tive , but not significantly so . Along these lines , it can be thought that individuals can indistinctly use one or another style , depending on the situation they are in and the task to be undertaken , because it is possible that a person with an extreme inno - vative style , at any point in their life , although only for necessity , could show a more systematic way of thinking . Thus , in the first stages of the innovative process , in which the generation of novel and useful ideas is funda - mental for its subsequent success , the possession of an innovative cognitive style seems important in order to carry out the task satisfactorily . In fact , it’s precisely this individual attribute that is shown to be the most signifi - cant of all those analyzed , based on this study’s results . On the other hand , it is shown that the development of creativity is not influenced in any sense by the fact that an individual has or develops a certain cognitive style with a more adaptive character . As Scott and Bruce ( 1994 ) noted , it could be that those who are capable of using a style appropriate to the stage of the innovative cycle in which they are involved are the true innovators . It is certain , that in their research , these authors reached the conclusion that individuals , in order to develop an innovative beha - vior—both those that carry out routine tasks as well as those involved in more complex tasks—do not need to be highly intuitive problem solvers ( innovators ) , and a systematic problem solver style ( adaptors ) signifi - cantly inhibits the display of high levels of innovative behaviour . Nevertheless , the measure used for the inno - vative behavior included activities of a more general nat - ure related with the complete innovative process and not just exclusively with creativity as is in this research work . All this suggests the need to analyze this relationship in greater depth . With reference to expertise , the regression coefficient obtained , although positive , was not a significant result . The sample characteristics could be the reason for this lack of importance , which showed an average length of service of 18 years and an average to low education level , which point toward employees having a high level of expertise thanks to the continued and prolonged practice of their work . This fact could result in the employees becoming very familiar with their tasks , caus - ing them to fall into routine procedures while carrying them out . Thus , it’s possible that they find themselves at the point in Simonton’s ( 2000 ) inverted U where crea - tivity has reached a stalemate as a consequence of this long - acquired expertise and stereotyped behavior taking place . One can look also for an explanation basing on Rubenson and Runco’s ( 1992 ) psycoeconomic approach to creativity , according to which ‘‘major contributions are more likely to be made by younger creators , and older creators are more likely to extend existing princi - ples with minor contributions’’ ( p . 141 ) . The psychoeco - nomic justification lies on the individual’s knowledge in some area , and on the implicit risks derived from speculating with a creative idea . From Rubenson and Runco assertions , we can state that those employees 30 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 with tenure and greater length of service will , in general , possess more domain - relevant knowledge , so that they will produce minor contributions because of ‘‘a major contribution is likely to reduce the value of much exist - ing knowledge , imposing a large cost on those with sub - stantial investments in that knowledge’’ ( p . 141 ) . So employees with less expertise will be more ready to gam - ble on a major contribution ; experienced ones will not . However , as has been mentioned , the relationship between expertise and creativity , despite provoking interest , has hardly been tested empirically in organiza - tional settings , which makes it appropriate to carry out new studies using diverse type of employees from differ - ent fields , and with different education and length of service levels , which confirm or deny this proposition . Also , it will be interesting to determine the optimal level of expertise that an employee needs in order to maximize his or her creative potential . In addition , the accumulation of individual charac - teristics that positively affect creativity has an even greater effect on this . Therefore , it can be concluded that those individuals that do not have any of these charac - teristics show a minimum level of creativity , which is to be expected because anybody with normal character - istics could produce at least a modest amount of creative work if the environmental conditions are favorable ( Amabile , 1996 ; Shalley , 1955 ) . At the moment that those individuals have one of the necessary characteris - tics for creativity , their level of creativity considerably increases and will keep on increasing as they continue to acquire them . This means that to develop an opti - mum creative behavior , it is not sufficient to have the necessary conditions of sufficient expertise or innovative cognitive style or be intrinsically motivated . Besides this , it is necessary that they are jointly present in an individ - ual such that he can maximize the development of his creative potential . Equally , the cluster analysis carried out also confirms this idea , given the obtained classification of the employ - ees . Important conclusions for management can be derived based on the interpretation of the three given mixes . In this manner , companies should take into account the type of employees they are dealing with in order to achieve , in the case of the apprentices , the maximum stimulation of their potential creative output , the minimum time that the creative level of the innova - tors can be maintained and , to assign to the conformists those tasks that do not require the use of creative thought abilities . PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS Given the lack of academic studies in Spain that analyze the aspects considered here , it’s particularly relevant that the conclusions from this investigation make a con - tribution of empirical evidence in the case of a company located in that country . In addition , the importance is highlighted of having an adequate human resource management in order to achieve the maximum creative performance and , conse - quently , obtain a greater supply of novel and useful ideas for their subsequent development or introduction for any company . In the first place , the relevance of the recruitment and selection processes to contract workers who have adequate attributes in order to generate the greatest number of creative ideas is observed . They must be indi - viduals with special abilities for creative thinking , as well as ones who have a high internal motivation . Once inside the company , it is necessary to make an emphasis on their training , with the objective to increase their employees’ knowledge base , as well as to teach them to think in an innovative way . Also , a key element to keep up the intrinsic motiv - ation , very important for creativity , is the provision of challenging tasks in which the employee has to put into practice his capabilities and skills . In this sense , it is important that the different types of employees that are counted on are identified in function of their individual characteristics , with the aim of max - imizing the use of their creative potential . In this way , those workers characterized by high levels of intrinsic motivation and expertise and having an innovative cog - nitive style , are essential to the company , given their demonstrated high level of creativity . On the other hand , those employees that show these attributes in a lesser form have a high creative potential that must be stimulated using policies that increase their motivation to suggest new ideas , or recognize those ideas when they are contributed . Equally , it’s necessary to recognize those employees without these characteristics , in order to assign them tasks of a more systematic nature that they could carry out very efficiently , avoiding the demand of results that are not appropriate to their way of being and working , with the consequent intrinsic sanctions , that usually accompany this , such as the sensation of incompetence or failure . REFERENCES Amabile , T . M . ( 1982 ) . Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 43 , 997 – 1013 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity . New York : Springer - Verlag . Amabile , T . M . ( 1988 ) . A model of creativity and innovation in orga - nizations . Research in Organizational Behavior , 10 , 23 – 167 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1993 ) . Motivational synergy : Toward new conceptua - lizations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in the workplace . Human Resource Management Review , 3 , 185 – 201 . INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 31 D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context . Boulder , CO : Westview . Amabile , T . M . ( 1997 ) Motivating creativity in organizations : On doing what you love and loving what you do . California Manage - ment Review , 40 , 39 – 58 . Amabile , T . M . , Conti , R . , Coon , H . , Lazenby , J . , & Herron , M . ( 1996 ) . Assessing the work environment for creativity . Academy of Management Journal , 39 , 1154 – 1184 . Amabile , T . M . , & Gryskiewicz , N . ( 1989 ) . The creative environment scales : The work environment inventory . Creative Research Journal , 2 , 231 – 254 . Amabile , T . M . , Hill , K . G . , Hennessey , B . A . , & Tighe , E . ( 1994 ) . The work preference inventory : Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic motiva - tional orientations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 950 – 967 . Baer , J . ( 1994 ) . Divergent thinking is not a general trait : A multido - main training experiment . Creativity Research Journal , 7 , 35 – 46 . Baer , J . ( 1998 ) . The case for domain specificity of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 173 – 178 . Bailin , S . ( 1988 ) . Achieving extraordinary ends : An essay on creativity . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer Academic . Basadur , M . , Graen , G . B . , & Green , S . G . ( 1982 ) . Training in creative problem solving : Effects on ideation and problem finding in an applied research organization . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 30 , 41 – 70 . Bower , G . H . , & Hilgard , E . ( 1981 ) . Theories of learning ( 5th ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Buttner , E . H . , Gryskiewicz , N . , & Hidore , S . C . ( 1999 ) . The relation - ship between styles of creativity and managerial skills assessment . British Journal of Management , 10 , 228 – 238 . Chi , M . , Glaser , R . , & Farr , M . ( Eds . ) ( 1989 ) . The nature of expertise . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 , 128 – 152 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 325 – 339 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990 ) . The domain of creativity . In M . A . Runco & R . S . Albert ( Eds . ) , Theories of creativity ( pp . 190 – 212 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Cummings , A . , & Oldham , G . R . ( 1997 ) . Enhancing creativity : Man - aging work contexts for the high potential employee . California Management Review , 40 , 23 – 38 . Dweck , C . E . ( 1986 ) . Motivational processes affecting learning . American Psychologist , 41 , 1040 – 1048 . Ettlie , J . E . , & O’Keefe , R . D . ( 1982 ) . Innovative attitudes , values , and intentions in organizations . Journal of Management Studies , 19 , 163 – 182 . Ford , C . M . ( 1995 ) . Creativity is a mystery : Clues from the investiga - tors’ notebooks . In C . M . Ford & D . A . Gioia ( Eds . ) , Creative action in organizations : Ivory tower visions and real world voices ( pp . 12 – 49 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Ford , C . M . ( 1996 ) . A theory of individual creative action in multiple social domains . Academy of Management Review , 21 , 1112 – 1142 . Ford , C . M . ( 1999 ) . Interpretive style , motivation , ability and context as predictor of executives’ performance . Creativity and Innovation Management , 8 , 188 – 196 . Frensch , P . A . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1989 ) . Expertise and intelligent thinking : When is it worse to know better ? In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( pp . 157 – 188 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Creating minds : An anatomy of creativity seen through the lives of Freud , Einstein , Picasso , Stravinsky , Eliot , Graham , Gandhi . New York : Wiley . Gruber , H . E . ( 1988 ) . The evolving systems approach to creative work . Creativity Research Journal , 1 , 27 – 51 . Gruber , H . E . , & Davis , S . N . ( 1988 ) . Inching our way up Mount Olympus : The evolving - systems approach to creative thinking . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity ( pp . 143 – 169 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . American Psychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . Hayes , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Cognitive processes in creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 135 – 145 ) . New York : Plenum Press . Jabri , M . ( 1991 ) . The development of conceptually independent sub - scales in the measurement of modes of problem solving . Educational and Psychological Measurement , 54 , 975 – 983 . Kaizer , C . , & Shore , B . M . ( 1995 ) . Strategy flexibility in more and less competent students on mathematical norm problems . Creativity Research Journal , 8 , 77 – 82 . Kirton , M . J . ( 1976 ) . Adaptors and innovators : A description and measure . Journal of Applied Psychology , 61 , 622 – 629 . Kirton , M . J . ( 1989 ) . Adaptors and innovators at work . In M . J . Kirton ( Ed . ) , Adaptors and innovators : Styles of creativity , and problem solving ( pp . 1 – 36 ) . New York : Routledge . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . London : Hutchinson . Kulkarni , D . , & Simon , H . ( 1990 ) . The process of scientific discovery : The strategy of experimentation . Cognitive Science , 12 , 129 – 175 . Lindsay , P . H . , & Norman , D . A . ( 1977 ) . Human information proces - sing ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Academic Press . Lunchins , A . S . , & Lunchins , E . H . ( 1959 ) . Rigidity of behaviour . Eugene : University of Oregon Press . Mainemelis , C . ( 2001 ) . When the muse takes it all : A model for the experience of timelessness in organizations . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 26 , 548 – 565 . MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1962 ) . The nature and nurture of creativity talent . American Psychologist , 17 , 484 – 495 . MacKinnon , D . W . ( 1978 ) . In search of human effectiveness : identifying and developing creativity . Buffalo , NY : Creative Education Foundation . Mumford , M . D . ( 2000 ) . Managing creative people : Strategies and tactics for innovation . Human Resource Management Review , 10 , 313 – 351 . Mumford , M . D . , & Gustafson , S . B . ( 1988 ) . Creativity syndrome : Integration , application and innovation . Psychological Bulletin , 103 , 27 – 43 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1962 ) . The processes of creative thinking . In H . Gruber , G . Terrell , & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contem - porary approaches to creative thinking ( pp . 63 – 119 ) . New York : Atherton Press . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human information processing . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Nicholls , J . G . ( 1972 ) . Creativity in the person who never produce anything original and useful : The concept of creativity as a normal distributed trait . American Psychologist , 27 , 717 – 727 . Oldham , A . , & Cummings , G . R . ( 1996 ) . Employee creativity : Personal and contextual factors at work . Academy of Management Review , 39 , 607 – 634 . Payne , R . ( 1990 ) . The effectiveness of research teams : A review . In M . A . West & J . L Farr ( Eds . ) , Innovation and creativity at work ( pp . 101 – 122 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Payne , R . , Lane , D . , & Jabri , M . ( 1990 ) . A two dimensional person – environment fit analysis of the performance , effort , and satisfaction of research scientists . British Journal of Management , 1 , 45 – 57 . Pelz , D . C . , & Andrews , F . M ( 1966 ) . Autonomy , coordination , and stimulation in relation to scientific achievement . Behavioral Science , 11 , 89 – 97 . Rhodes , M . ( 1987 ) . An analysis of creativity . In S . C . Isaksen ( Ed . ) , Frontiers of creativity research ( pp . 216 – 222 ) . Buffalo : Bearly Ltd . 32 MUN˜OZ - DOYAGUE , GONZA´LEZ - A´LVAREZ , NIETO D o w n l oaded B y : [ M uño z - D o y ague , M a r í a F . ] A t : 11 : 04 13 F eb r ua r y 2008 Rogers , C . ( 1954 ) . Toward a theory of creativity . Review of General Semantics , 11 , 249 – 260 . Rubenson , D . L . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1992 ) . The psychoeconomic approach to creativity . New ideas in Psychology , 10 , 131 – 147 . Rubenson , D . L . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1995 ) . The psychoeconomic view of creative work in groups and organizations . Creativity and Innovation Management , 4 , 232 – 241 . Runco , M . A . ( 1991 ) : Divergent thinking . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Runco , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Personal creativity : Definitions and developmen - tal issues . Developmental Review , 12 , 233 – 264 . Runco , M . A . ( 2004 ) : Creativity . Annual Review of Psychology , 55 , 657 – 687 . Runco , M . A . , & Chand , I . ( 1995 ) . Cognition and creativity . Edu - cational Psychology Review . 7 , 243 – 267 . Runco , M . A . , Dow , G . , & Smith , W . ( 2006 ) . Information , experience , and divergent thinking : An empirical test . Creativity Research Jour - nal , 18 , 269 – 277 . Ruscio , J . , Whitney , D . M . , & Amabile , T . M . ( 1998 ) . The fishbowl of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 243 – 263 . Scott , S . G . , & Bruce , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Determinants of innovative behav - iour : A path model of individual innovation in the work place . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 37 , 580 – 607 . Shalley , C . E . ( 1991 ) . Effects of productivity goals , creativity goals , and personal discretion on individual creativity . Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 , 179 – 185 . Shalley , C . E . ( 1995 ) . Effects of coaction , expected evaluation , and goal setting on creativity and productivity . Academy of Management Journal , 38 , 483 – 503 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1984 ) . Generational time - series analysis : A paradigm for studying sociocultural influences . In K . Gergen & M . Gergen ( Eds . ) , Historical social psychology , ( pp . 141 – 155 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Simon , H . A . ( 1985 ) . What we know about the creative process . In R . L . Kuhn , ( Eds . ) , Frontiers in creative and innovative management ( pp . 3 – 20 ) . Cambridge , MA : Ballinger . Staw , B . M . ( 1990 ) . An evolutionary approach to creativity and inno - vation . In M . A . West & J . L . Farr ( Eds . ) , Innovation and creativity at work ( pp . 287 – 306 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Stein , B . S . ( 1989 ) . Memory and creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 163 – 176 ) . New York : Plenum Press . Stein , M . I . ( 1974 ) . Stimulating creativity , Vol . 1 . New York : Academic Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1991 ) . An investment theory of crea - tivity , and its development . Human Development , 34 , 1 – 31 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1996 ) . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist , 51 , 677 – 688 . Szulanski , G . ( 1996 ) . Exploring internal stickiness : Impediments to the transfer of best practice within the firm . Strategic Management Journal , 17 , 27 – 43 . Taggar , S . ( 2002 ) . Individual creativity and group ability to utilize indi - vidual creative resources : A multi - level model . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 45 , 315 – 321 . Tierney , P . , & Farmer , S . M . ( 2002 ) . Creative self - efficacy : Potential antecedents and relationship to creative performance . Academy of Management Journal , 45 , 1137 – 1148 . Tierney , P . , Farmer , S . M . , & Graen , G . B . ( 1999 ) . An examination of leadership and employee creativity : The relevance of traits and relationships . Personnel Psychology , 52 , 591 – 620 . Torrance , E . P . ( 1974 ) . Torrance Test of Creative Thinking : Norms - technical manual . Lexington , MA : Ginn . Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The art of thought . New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Creativity , genius and other myths . New York : Freeman . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1992 ) . Metacognition , and insight during problem - solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 426 – 431 . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Creativity : Beyond the myth of genius . New York : Freeman . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995 ) . Case studies of creative thinking : Repro - duction versus restructuring in the real world . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 53 – 72 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1999 ) . Creativity and knowledge : A challenge to the - ories . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 226 – 250 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Wertheimer , M . ( 1945 ) . Productive thinking . New York : Harper . West , M . A . , & Farr , J . L . ( 1990 ) . Innovation at work . In M . A . West , & J . L . Farr ( Eds . ) , Innovation and creativity at work ( pp . 1 – 13 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . Woodman , R . W . , Sawyer , J . E . , & Griffin , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Toward a theory of organizational creativity . Academy of Management Review , 18 , 293 – 321 . Woodman , R . W . , & Schoenfeldt , L . F . ( 1990 ) . An interactionist model of creative behaviour . Journal of Creative Behavior , 24 , 279 – 290 . Zaltman , G . , Duncan , R . , & Holbeck , J . ( 1973 ) . Innovations and orga - nizations . London : Wiley . Zhou , J . , & George , J . M . ( 2001 ) . When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity : Encouraging the expression of voice . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 44 , 682 – 697 . APPENDIX Creativity Measure ( Self - Report ) 1 . Among my colleagues and co - workers , I will be the first or nearly the first to try our a new idea or method . a 2 . I solve problems which has caused others great difficulty . a 3 . I investigate and secure funds needed to implement new ideas . b 4 . I usually find new uses for existing methods or existing equipment . a 5 . I develop adequate plans and schedules for the implementation of new ideas . b 6 . I suggest new and better ways to achieve goal or objectives . d 7 . I usually search out new technologies , processes , techniques and = or product ideas . b 8 . I use existing information or materials to develop ideas , methods , or products that are useful to the organization . c 9 . I develop ideas , methods , processes , or products that are both original and especially useful to the organization . c 10 . Quite frequently , the ideas I develop are imple - mented by the organization . 11 . On the whole , the ideas I generate are relevant for organizational success . a Adapted from Ettlie and O’Keefe ( 1982 ) . b Adapted from Scott and Bruce ( 1994 ) . c Adapted from Oldham and Cummings ( 1997 ) . d Adapted from Zhou and George ( 2001 ) . INDIVIDUAL FACTORS AND EMPLOYEES’ CREATIVITY 33