A Functional Study of AUXILIN - LIKE1 and 2 , Two Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factors in Arabidopsis OPEN Maciek Adamowski , a Madhumitha Narasimhan , a Urszula Kania , a , b , c , 1 Matou (cid:1) s Glanc , a , d Geert De Jaeger , b , c and Ji (cid:1) rí Friml a , 2 a IST Austria , 3400 Klosterneuburg , Austria b Ghent University , Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics , 9052 Ghent , Belgium c VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology , 9052 Ghent , Belgium d Department of Experimental Plant Biology , Faculty of Science , Charles University , 12844 Prague , Czech Republic ORCID IDs : 0000 - 0002 - 8600 - 0671 ( M . N . ) ; 0000 - 0003 - 0619 - 7783 ( M . G . ) ; 0000 - 0001 - 6558 - 5669 ( G . D . J . ) ; 0000 - 0002 - 8302 - 7596 ( J . F . ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a cellular traf ﬁ cking process in which cargoes and lipids are internalized from the plasma membrane into vesicles coated with clathrin and adaptor proteins . CME is essential for many developmental and physiological processes in plants , but its underlying mechanism is not well characterized compared with that in yeast and animal systems . Here , we searched for new factors involved in CME in Arabidopsis thaliana by performing tandem af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation of proteins that interact with clathrin light chain , a principal component of the clathrin coat . Among the con ﬁ rmed interactors , we found two putative homologs of the clathrin - coat uncoating factor auxilin previously described in non - plant systems . Overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 in Arabidopsis caused an arrest of seedling growth and development . This was concomitant with inhibited endocytosis due to blocking of clathrin recruitment after the initial step of adaptor protein binding to the plasma membrane . By contrast , auxilin - like1 / 2 loss - of - function lines did not present endocytosis - related developmental or cellular phenotypes under normal growth conditions . This work contributes to the ongoing characterization of the endocytotic machinery in plants and provides a robust tool for conditionally and speci ﬁ cally interfering with CME in Arabidopsis . INTRODUCTION Theendomembranesystemprovidesaspatialorganizationforplant cell activities by compartmentalizing distinct biochemical pro - cesses . The endomembrane system compartments , including the plasmamembrane ( PM ) , endoplasmicreticulum , Golgistacks , trans - Golgi network / early endosome , multivesicular body , and vacuole perform distinct , specialized functions . At the cell periphery , en - docytosisinternalizesPM - localizedproteins , lipids , andextracellular material . The best - characterized endocytic mechanism in plants depends on the coat protein clathrin . More than 20 years ago , clathrin - coated pits and vesicles were observed in plant cells by electron microscopy and vesicles were puri ﬁ ed from plant tissues ( Tanchak et al . , 1984 ; Mersey et al . , 1985 ; Emons and Traas , 1986 ; Galway et al . , 1993 ) . With the advent of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system and the availability of mutants and live imaging techniques in recent times , CME has been further investigated ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ; Kitakura et al . , 2011 ; Wang et al . , 2013a ; Konopkaetal . , 2008 ) . Despitetheseadvances , detaileddescriptions of the events that comprise CME in plants are still often based on the more advanced studies of CME in animal and yeast systems ( reviewed in McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . In non - plant systems , the endocytic process is initiated by the adaptor protein complex AP - 2 , which acts by interacting with speci ﬁ c PM lipids and endocytotic cargoes and through clathrin recruitment . Proteins of the FCH domain only ( FCHo ) family were alsoproposedtobeinitiationfactors ( Henneetal . , 2010 ) . Inplants , two candidates for initiation factors are the conserved AP - 2 complex ( Di Rubbo et al . , 2013 ; Kim et al . , 2013 ; Yamaoka et al . , 2013 ; Bashline et al . , 2013 ; Fan et al . , 2013 ) and the recently identi ﬁ ed TPLATE adaptor protein complex ( Gadeyne et al . , 2014 ; Zhangetal . , 2015 ) . Afamilyofgenesencodingmonomericadaptors of the AP180 N - Terminal Homology and Epsin N - Terminal Ho - mology ( ANTH / ENTH ) type is present in plant genomes as well ( reviewedinZouharandSauer , 2014 ) . Clathrin - coatedpitsgrowvia the recruitment , by adaptors , of clathrin triskelions . These three - leggedunitsoftheclathrincoatareeachcomposedofthreeclathrin light chains and three clathrin heavy chains ( CLCs and CHCs , re - spectively ) . Clathrin triskelions assemble into a regularly shaped lattice surrounding the forming lipid vesicle . The scission ( sepa - ration ) ofacompletedvesiclefromthePMismediatedbydynamins , i . e . , molecular scissors that mechanically constrict the neck between the clathrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) and the PM . In non - plant systems , upon scission , the CCV recruits uncoating factors , which are the molecular chaperone Hsc70 and its cochaperones auxilin / cyclin G - associated kinase ( GAK ) ( Gao et al . , 1991 ; Ahle and Ungewickell , 1990 ; Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ; Massol et al . , 2006 ; Xing et al . , 2010 ) . The uncoating step releases the vesicle for its subsequent fusion with endosomal compartments and allows the CME machinery components to be recycled for further rounds of endocytosis . The CCV - uncoating process is virtuallyuncharacterized in plants , although an auxilin - like 1 Current address : The Sainsbury Laboratory Cambridge University , Cambridge CB2 1NN , UK . 2 Address correspondence to jiri . friml @ ist . ac . at . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Ji (cid:1) rí Friml ( jiri . friml @ ist . ac . at ) . OPEN Articles can be viewed without a subscription . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 17 . 00785 The Plant Cell , Vol . 30 : 700 – 716 , March 2018 , www . plantcell . org ã 2018 ASPB . proteinof Arabidopsisisthoughtto haveanuncoating function ( Lam et al . , 2001 ) . So far , endocytosis has been manipulated in plants through the use of clathrin mutants and a dominant negative version of CHC ( Kitakura et al . , 2011 ; Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) , lines with down - regulated expression of the endocytic adaptors ( Gadeyne et al . , 2014 , Di Rubbo et al . , 2013 ; Kim et al . , 2013 ; Bashline et al . , 2013 ; Fan et al . , 2013 ) , and mutants defective in dynamins ( Yoshinari et al . , 2016 ; Collings et al . , 2008 ) and early endosomal compo - nents ( Tanaka et al . , 2013 ) . These and similar tools allowed characterization of roles of CME in processes such as plant im - munity ( reviewed in Ben Khaled et al . , 2015 ) , establishment of polarauxintransportthroughthepolarizedsubcellularlocalization ofPIN - FORMED ( PIN ) auxintransporters ( reviewed inAdamowski and Friml , 2015 ; Ł angowski et al . , 2016 ) , and brassinosteroid signaling ( Irani et al . , 2012 ; Di Rubbo et al . , 2013 ) . Here , our aimwas to search for new proteins involved in CME in plants . To this end , we screened for proteins that bind to CLC , a fundamental component of the clathrin coat , in Arabidopsis . Basedonseveralcon ﬁ rmedinteractors , thisstudyfocusedontwo putative homologs of the uncoating factor auxilin . We found that overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 caused an arrest of growth and development and inhibition of endocytosis , likely by preventing clathrin recruitment to endocytic pits initiated by the adaptor proteins . In contrast , loss of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 functiondidnotvisiblyinterferewithdevelopment , orendocytosis , under optimal growth conditions . RESULTS Identi ﬁ cation of CLC1 - Associated Proteins TosearchfornewproteinsinvolvedinCME , weemployedtandem af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation coupled with mass spectrometry ( TAP - MS ; VanLeeneetal . , 2014 ) usingCLATHRINLIGHTCHAIN1 ( CLC1 ) as bait . We ﬁ rst expressed C - and N - terminal CLC1 - TAP tag fusions in Arabidopsis cell suspensions , which was followed by protein isolation , af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation , and identi ﬁ cation of clathrin - bound proteins by mass spectrometry . Using this technique , we iden - ti ﬁ ed a small number of clathrin binding proteins with sequence features indicating possible endocytic functions ( Figure 1A ) . The ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed were two highly homologous proteins con - taining DNAJ domains at their C termini . As such , they bear limited similaritytoauxilinsandGAKs , whichalsocontainC - terminalDNAJ domains that are needed for Hsc70 recruitment and activation leading to clathrin uncoating ( Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ) . We named the putative auxilin homologs AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( AT4G12780 ) and AUXILIN - LIKE2 ( AT4G12770 ) . Thesetwoproteinsbelongtoafamily of seven proteins in Arabidopsis with C - terminal DNAJ domains , which can all therefore be called auxilin - likes . AUXILIN - LIKE1 is identicaltotheauxilin - likeproteinidenti ﬁ edpreviouslyasaputative uncoating factor in Arabidopsis ( Lam et al . , 2001 ) . Second , we found CAP1 , a monomeric adaptor protein that , together with its closest homolog ECA4 ( Song et al . , 2012 ) , was identi ﬁ ed based on interactions with the TPLATE endocytic adaptor protein complex ( Gadeyne et al . , 2014 ) . CAP1 and ECA4 are part of a family of ANTH / ENTH adaptors that may be involved in the generation of coated vesicles at various sites of the en - domembrane system ( Zouhar and Sauer , 2014 ) Third , we found SH3P2 , a protein consisting of a central BAR domain and a C - terminal SH3 domain , the ﬁ rst of which acts in membrane curvature generation , while the second functions in protein - proteininteractions . Inanimals , proteinswithasimilarBAR - SH3 domain composition are called endophilins and have been showntoactinaclathrin - independentendocyticpathway ( Boucrot etal . , 2014 ; Renardetal . , 2014 ) . SH3P2 belongstoa familyofthree proteins in Arabidopsis , the other two being SH3P1 and SH3P3 ( Lam et al . , 2001 ) . SH3P2 has been implicated in the autophagy pathway ( Zhuangetal . , 2013 , 2015 ) , cell plateformation ( Ahn etal . , 2017 ) , as well as vacuolar traf ﬁ cking of ubiquitinated cargoes ( Kolb etal . , 2015 ; Nageletal . , 2017 ) . ApartfromAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , CAP1 , and SH3P2 , our TAP approach also identi ﬁ ed the thioesterase DHNAT2 , a peroxisome - localized enzyme ( Widhalm et al . , 2012 ) , butwedidnotfollowuponthis ﬁ nding . Finally , andasexpected , we alsoidenti ﬁ edbothCHChomologsofArabidopsisaswellastwoof the three homologs of CLC . To con ﬁ rm the interactions of the two auxilin - likes , CAP1 , and SH3P2 with clathrin , we used bimolecular ﬂ uorescence com - plementation ( BiFC ) , alsoknownasthesplit - GFPassay ( Kerppola , 2009 ) . In this approach , two proteins of interest are fused to two complementary fragments of the GFP molecule and transiently coexpressed in wild tobacco ( Nicotiana benthamiana ) leaves via Agrobacterium tumefaciens injection . The physical proximity , or a direct interaction , of the two assayed proteins results in re - constitution of the GFP molecule and ﬂ uorescence , which is captured by confocal laser scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) . Using this method , we con ﬁ rmed the interactions of AUXILIN - LIKE1 , AUXILIN - LIKE2 , CAP1 , and SH3P2 with CLC1 ( Figure 1B ) . As a negative control , we probed for interactions of all these proteins with PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 4 , 5 - BISPHOSPHATE KINASE1 ( PIP5K1 ; Tejos et al . , 2014 ; Ischebeck et al . , 2013 ) , a peripheral PM - localized protein , and found no reconstituted GFP ﬂ uores - cence ( Supplemental Figure 1A ) . We also tested for interactions between our CLC - interacting proteins and observed interactions of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 with SH3P2 and CAP1 , but no interaction between SH3P2 and CAP1 ( Supplemental Figure 1B ) . A summary of all BiFC interactions is presented in Figure 1C . The localization of the interacting pairs in wild tobacco cells appeared to be cy - tosolic . However , this is expected for soluble proteins , and we think it may not be indicative of the real interaction site of these proteins , as it is likely that reconstitution of a GFP molecule in the BiFC assay binds the two partners into stable dimers that sub - sequently don ’ t exhibit normal localization and activity . Finally , SH3P2 was recently shown to interact with CHC ( Nagel et al . , 2017 ) , while AUXILIN - LIKE1 was reported to interact with clathrin and with SH3P1 , an SH3P2 homolog ( Lam et al . , 2001 ) . These additional observations clearly support our interaction data . In conclusion , our TAP and split - GFP data demonstrate inter - actions between clathrin , AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , CAP1 , and SH3P2 , suggesting a common function of these proteins . Subcellular Localization of Clathrin - Associated Proteins Next , we addressed the subcellular localization of the newly identi ﬁ ed clathrin interactors ( Figure 2 ; Supplemental Figure 2 ) . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 701 WeusedCLSMon ﬂ uorescentproteinfusionsexpressedinstable transgeniclinesofArabidopsis . Weusedacommonmodelsystem for endomembrane traf ﬁ cking studies , the epidermis of the seedlingrootapicalmeristem ( RAM ) . TodetectCAP1localization , we cloned CAP1 pro : CAP1 - mCherry and 35S pro : CAP1 - RFP con - structs and in both cases observed PM and cell plate binding ( Figures 2A and 2B ; Supplemental Figure 2A ) . Rarely , in ; 10 % of seedlings , CAP1 also showed binding to endosomal compart - ments ( SupplementalFigure 2A ) . ForSH3P2 localization , weused the previously published UBQ pro : SH3P2 - GFP line and cloned a 35S pro : SH3P2 - GFP construct . Here too we observed PM and cell plate binding , as well as endosomal - like intracellular signals , Figure 1 . Identi ﬁ cation of CLC - Interacting Proteins . ( A ) TAP - MS - based isolation of proteins associated with clathrin . CLC1 in C - and N - terminal fusions with TAP tags was used as bait . Two repetitions with each construct were performed . ( B ) BiFC - based interactions between CLC1 and selected interactors identi ﬁ ed with TAP - MS . Pairs of proteins of interest fused with halves of the GFP molecule were transiently expressed in wildtobacco leaves andreconstituted GFP ﬂ uorescence wasimaged in epidermison theabaxial leafside . PIP5K1 did not interact with any of the proteins tested and was used as a negative control . ( C ) Schematic representation of all interactions detected with BiFC . Additional interactions are presented in Supplemental Figure 1 . 702 The Plant Cell which were larger and more pronounced upon strong over - expression driven by the 35S promoter ( Figures 2A and 2B ; Supplemental Figure 2A ) . Our observations of SH3P2 localization are consistent with other recent reports ( Ahn et al . , 2017 ; Kolb et al . , 2015 ; Nagel et al . , 2017 ) . We failed to clone the AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 locus promoter region and instead prepared UBQ10 pro : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 as well as 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 and 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE2 constructs . Both auxilin - likes local - ized to the PM and cell plates , like CAP1 and SH3P2 ( Figures 2A and 2B ) . Furthermore , all proteins of interest showed background cytosolic staining , while SH3P2 and CAP1 additionally weakly stained the nucleus . In summary , the localization patterns are consistentwithafunctionofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , CAP1 , andSH3P2 inCMEatthePMaswellasclathrin - mediatedprocessesatthecell plate . Additionally , SH3P2 functions at the endosomes , as has been demonstrated ( Nagel et al . , 2017 ) , and the rarely observed endosomal localization of CAP1 suggests it may function there as well . In animal cells , auxilins and GAKs are brie ﬂ y recruited to clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) at the end of their lifetimes on the PM during the transition to vesicle budding ( Massol et al . , 2006 ; Lee et al . , 2006 ) . Apart from this late burst of auxilin recruitment , small andvariableamountsofauxilinarepresentatearlierstagesofCCP growth ( Massol et al . , 2006 ) . Such events can be observed with total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , a method that allows live imaging of the PM surface at high magni ﬁ cation . We wanted to address the recruitment of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 to newly forming clathrin - coated vesicles in a similar manner . We Figure 2 . Subcellular Localizations of the Identi ﬁ ed Clathrin Interactors . ( A ) and ( B ) PM ( A ) and cell plate ( B ) localization of CAP1 , SH3P2 , AUXILIN - LIKE1 , and AUXILIN - LIKE2 ﬂ uorescent protein fusions in the seedling root epidermisofstabletransformants . Backgroundcytosolstainingcanbeobservedinalllines , whileCAP1andSH3P2alsoshowfaintnuclearstaining . 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 wasidenticalto 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE2 . Additionallocalizationdata , includingcolocalizationswithPMmarkers , arepresentedin Supplemental Figure 2B . ( C ) VAEMcolocalizationofclathrin ( CLC2 pro : CLC - GFP ) andAUXILIN - LIKE1 ( UBQ pro : mCherry - AUXILIN - LIKE1 ) inthehypocotylepidermis . Kymographs ( middle andright ) showexamplesofauxilin - like1recruitmentattheendofCCPlifetime , whichwasobservedinasmallsubsetofallendocyticevents ( arrowheads ) . The majority of clathrin foci were lacking AUXILIN - LIKE1 , and AUXILIN - LIKE1 foci without clathrin could be observed . See Supplemental Movie 1 . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 703 generated a double ﬂ uorescent reporter line , CLC2 pro : CLC2 - GFP 3 UBQ10 pro : mCherry - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , and employed variable angle epi ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) , a plant cell - speci ﬁ c TIRF - likemethodthatallowsthePMsurfacetobeimagedthrough the plant cell walls , although it does not completely remove the cytoplasmic background below the PM ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008 ) . In the epidermis of etiolated hypocotyls , AUXILIN - LIKE1 appeared as highly dynamic PM foci ( Figure 2C ; Supplemental Movie 1 ) . With kymograph analysis , we observed events of brief AUXILIN - LIKE1 recruitment at the end of the lifetime of clathrin - coated pits , as previously described in non - plant systems . However , notably , we only observed this in a small fraction of all CCPs ( estimated at around 5 % ) , while the majority of clathrin - positivefociapparentlydidnotrecruitAUXILIN - LIKE1 ( Figure2C ) . We also regularly observed events of brief AUXILIN - LIKE1 re - cruitment at sites not containing clathrin . Based on these ob - servations , we performed a control to assure that the observed colocalizationeventsindeedrepresentspeci ﬁ claterecruitmentto coated pits . We looked at the kymographs for events where AUXILIN - LIKE1 signal appears not at the end , but around the beginning of a CLC2 - GFP trace , which we consider to represent accidentalcolocalization . Wefoundsucheventstobe muchmore rare ( 16 versus 100 events in a single TIRF movie ) , which con ﬁ rms that AUXILIN - LIKE1 is indeed speci ﬁ cally recruited at the end of the PM lifetime for at least a subpopulation of CCPs . This observation might indicate that the majority of clathrin - coated vesicles do not use AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 for uncoating . Alternatively , perhaps AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 recruitment often takes place later after scission , when the vesicles had already moved away from the PM and thus had moved away from the variable region of VAEM detection . Some brief recruitment events could have also been missed because our method uses sequential scanning of the two ﬂ uorescent channels . Seedling Phenotypes of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpressors While generating transgenic lines expressing ﬂ uorescent protein fusions of the clathrin - associated proteins , we observed that overexpressing AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 under the control of the 35S promoter was associated with deleterious phenotypes ( Supplemental Figure 3B ) . In the T2 generation of 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 and 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE2 lines , we saw many seeds that did not germinate , even after prolonged culturing . Seeds that did germinate often developed slowly and exhibited relatively weak and patchy expression of RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 signals . In the T3 generation , a virtually complete silencing of the transgenes was observed . These ob - servationsrevealselectionagainsthighAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2expression levels , whichwasofinteresttous , becauseoverexpressingauxilinsin non - plant systems can inhibit endocytosis ( Zhao et al . , 2001 ) . In contrast , overexpression of CAP1 and SH3P2 in 35S - promoter - driven lines did not interfere with seed germination or seedling de - velopment ( Supplemental Figure 3A ) . Therefore , we chose to follow up on the effects of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 overexpression as a possible way to elucidate a clathrin - associated function of these two putative uncoating factors . To circumvent the deleterious effects of constitutive AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2overexpression , wegeneratedstabletransgenicArabidopsis lines overexpressing AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 under the control of chemi - cally inducible promoters . We prepared estradiol - inducible trans - activation lines overexpressing untagged AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 ( XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 and XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 ) , as well as a tamoxifen - inducible transactivation line overexpressing GFP - tagged AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 ) . De - pendingonthestrengthofaparticulartransgenicline , uponchemical induction , we observed a spectrum of seedling phenotypes ranging from weak reduction in the rates of growth and development to a strong delay or inhibition of germination , as well as the complete inhibition of seedling growth and development if the transgene was activated later ( Figures 3A and 3B ; Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Over - expressionofauxilin - likegenesinthelineswithstrongphenotypeswas con ﬁ rmed with qRT - PCR ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) . Using long - term , time - lapse confocal microscopy with automated root tracking ( Tip - Tracker ; von Wangenheim et al . , 2017 ) , we directly compared root growth rates with AUXILIN - LIKE1 expression levels in the root tips of induced INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 seedlings ( SupplementalFigure 6 ) . GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 expression was ﬁ rst observed 1 h after in - ductionandgraduallyincreaseduntil ; 15h . FollowingGFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 expression , we observed a sharp decrease in growth between the4thand11thhourofinduction . Therefore , growthinhibitionappears to be a relatively direct effect of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 overexpression . Usinglightmicroscopy , wefoundthatthemorphologyofcellsin the RAM in AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 - overexpressing seedlings was drastically different from that of the wild - type controls . RAM epidermis cells of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 lines exhibited enlarged vacuolesthat ﬁ lledmajorpartsofthecellvolume , whilethecytosol content was reduced and the nucleus was displaced from its central location ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . This phenomenon was typically observed after ; 1 d of induction and became pro - gressively more pronounced after 2 to 3 d . Inhibition of Endocytosis by AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpression Using our inducible overexpressing lines , we then assayed the effect of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 overexpression on endocytosis . Three lines of evidence support the notion that overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 leads to the inhibition of endocytosis : ( 1 ) imagingoftheendocyticcargoes , ( 2 ) imagingofthe molecular endocytic machinery , and ( 3 ) the distribution of mem - branes within the cell . Asabasicexperimenttoassaythegeneralratesofendocytosis , we monitored the uptake of FM4 - 64 , a membrane dye commonly usedinstudiesofendocytosis ( AnientoandRobinson , 2005 ; Bolte et al . , 2004 ; Jelínková et al . , 2010 ) . After pulse staining of Arabi - dopsisseedlingswithFM4 - 64 , thedyeisgraduallytakenupbythe cell through the endocytic process , and over time it can be ob - served ﬁ rstatendosomalcompartmentsandthenatthetonoplast ( vacuolar membrane ) . XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 lines induced overnight ( ; 16 – 24 h ) showed an inhibition of FM4 - 64 uptake in a majority of the seedlings and RAM epidermis cells observed ( Figure 4A ) . Considering the alteration of cell morphology ( the enlargement of vacuoles ) , we monitored the cells closely in the visible lightchanneltorecognize areasstillcontainingthecytosol , and therefore also endosomes that FM4 - 64 could reach , and saw thatstainingwaseitherabsentfromtheseareasorendosomeswere 704 The Plant Cell only weakly stained compared with the controls ( Supplemental Figure 7A ) . In these experiments , we also observed that FM4 - 64 - stained PMs in XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 lines often lost the normal , smooth appearance and were instead thicker and uneven , which will be explained below . We then repeated the FM4 - 64 uptake experimentinthe INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 lineatearlierstages of induction . In this line , we could monitor AUXILIN - LIKE1 ex - pression directly due to the GFP ﬂ uorescence . We observed in - hibition of FM4 - 64 uptake into RAM epidermis cells as early as 8 h after transgene induction ( Figure 4B ) . The rate of endocytic tracer uptake was inversely correlated with GFP expression levels on a cell - to - cell basis , demonstrating that the endocytic inhibition by auxilin - likeoverexpressioniscell - autonomous . Importantly , atthese early stages of overexpression , the epidermal cells still exhibited normalmorphology , withabundantcytosolandsmall , fragmented vacuoles . Finally , at an even earlier time point of 5 h of expression induction , GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 levels were already high in the lateral root cap , and we observed inhibition of FM4 - 64 uptake speci ﬁ cally in this tissue ( Supplemental Figure 7B ) . Next , we corroborated these ﬁ ndings by monitoring known CME cargoes , including the auxin ef ﬂ ux transporters of the PIN family ( Nodzy´nski et al . , 2016 ; Adamowski and Friml , 2015 ) and the syntaxin KNOLLE ( Lauber et al . , 1997 ) . The endocytic traf ﬁ cking of PINproteinsisclassicallyassayedviaBrefeldinA ( BFA ) treatments . BFAtreatmentsleadtothedeactivationofADP - ribosylationfactors ( ARFs ) , components of the vesicle formation machinery in the endomembrane system , by directly targeting a subset of ARF activators , the guanine nucleotide exchange factors for ARFs ( ARF - GEFs ) . As a result , certain endomembrane traf ﬁ cking path - ways , including GNOM ARF - GEF - dependent polar recycling of PINs to the PM , are inhibited , while others , including PIN endo - cytosis , are not . As a related phenomenon , agglomeration of en - dosomalcompartmentsintolargestructurescalled “ BFAbodies ” or “ BFA compartments ” occurs . Therefore , after BFA treatments , the continuously internalized PIN proteins can be observed inside BFA bodies , from which they cannot be recycled back to the PM ( Naramoto et al . , 2014 ) . In RAMs of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 seed - lingsinducedfor16to24h , immunolabeledPIN1wasrarelyfoundin BFA bodies in the stele , while in the epidermis , PIN2 - GFP was not observed in BFA bodies at all ( Figures 5A and 5B ) , indicating that PIN1 and PIN2 endocytosis was inhibited . To assure that BFA bodies still form after auxilin - like overexpression and that they can be observed despite the enlarged vacuoles , we visualized the BFA body structures themselves using CLC2 - GFP as a marker of ag - gregating endosomal populations ( Figure 5C ) . To con ﬁ rm these observations without the use of BFA and to more clearly distinguish the internalization of PIN2 from its bio - synthesis and secretion , we monitored the cellular turnover of PIN2 over the long term using PIN2 fused to Dendra ( a green - to - red photoactivatable ﬂ uorescent protein induced by blue light ) . After 6 h of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 induction , we converted PIN2 - Dendra from the green into the red form in whole root tips . Eighteen Figure 3 . AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpression Causes an Arrest of Seed Germination and Seedling Growth and Alterations in Cell Morphology . Overexpression of auxilin - likes in XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 ( A ) or INTAM » GFP - auxilin - like1 ( B ) lines inhibits or strongly delays seed germination andinhibits seedlinggrowthifthetransgeneisinducedpostgermination . TheRAMsofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 - overexpressingseedlingsappearsemitransparent ( C ) dueto enlargement of vacuoles and reduction of the cytoplasmic volume ( D ) . V , vacuole ; c , cytoplasm ; n , nucleus . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 705 hours later , AUXILIN - LIKE2 - overexpressing seedlings retained sig - ni ﬁ cantamountsoftheredPIN2 - DendraformatthePMs ( Figure5D ) , demonstrating inhibition of PIN2 endocytosis . In control seedlings , virtuallyalloftheredformbecameinternalizedanddegradedandwas replaced by newly synthesized , green PIN2 - Dendra . In addition to PIN1 and PIN2 , we monitored the endocytosis of KNOLLE . KNOLLE is a SNARE protein that is speci ﬁ cally expressed during cell division and targeted to the growing cell plates , where it is retained for some time after cell division is com - pleted . The speci ﬁ c localization of KNOLLE to the newly formed cell membranes is dependent on the endocytic process , as inhibition of endocytosis is associated with lateral spreading of KNOLLE to the “ old ” PMs after the completion of cell division ( Boutté et al . , 2010 ) . Similartopreviousobservations , overexpressionofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 also caused diffusion of KNOLLE out of the newly completed cell membranes and into the old PMs , demonstrating thatendocytosis of KNOLLE was inhibited ( Figure 5E ) . In summary , our imaging of FM4 - 64 dye , as well as known CME cargoes PIN1 , PIN2 , and KNOLLE , supported the notion that overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 inhibits endocytosis . AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpression Inhibits Endocytosis at the Clathrin Recruitment Step Next , wevisualized the effect of auxilin - like overexpression onthe molecular components of the endocytic machinery itself . For this Figure 4 . Inhibition of FM4 - 64 Endocytic Tracer Uptake by AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpression . ( A ) TheuptakeoftheendocytotictracerFM4 - 64intoRAMepidermalcellsin XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 seedlingsinducedfor16to24hisstronglyreduced . At least 10 roots per genotype were imaged in three repeated experiments . The graphs shows quanti ﬁ cation of intracellular - to - PM FM4 - 64 signal ratio from 40 cells coming from four roots in a representative experiment . ( B ) FM4 - 64uptakeatearlystages ( 8h ) of INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 induction . ThedegreeofFM4 - 64uptakecorrelatedwithGFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1levels inindividualrootmeristemepidermalcells . Graphsshowexamplesofthiscorrelationinfourroots . Eachdatapointrepresentsanindividualcell . Noticethatat this stageofAUXILIN - LIKE1overexpression , cellmorphology remainsnormal , withabundantcytosol illuminated byGFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1expression , and small , fragmented vacuoles seen by negative staining . a . u . , arbitrary units . 706 The Plant Cell Figure 5 . Inhibition of Protein Cargo Endocytosis by AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Overexpression . ( A ) ImmunolocalizationofPIN1intheRAMsteleafter90minofBFA ( 25 m M ) treatment . TheBFAbodynumberismarkedlyreduced , indicativeofinhibitionof PIN1 endocytosis . The graph shows collated results from three repetitions of the experiment . Each data point represents one root . ( B ) and ( C ) Following AUXILIN - LIKE2 overexpression , PIN2 - GFP does not localize to BFA - induced bodies in RAM epidermis after 90 min of BFA ( 25 m M ) treatment ( B ) . Control experiment with CLC2 - GFP used as an endosome marker ( C ) shows that BFA bodies can be easily observed in auxilin - like overexpressing seedlings despite the enlarged vacuoles . ( D ) Long - term PIN2 turnover monitoring in XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 with photoconvertible PIN2 - Dendra fusion . PIN2 - Dendra has been converted from green intoredforminwholeroottipsat6hofAUXILIN - LIKE2induction . Atthe24 - htimepoint , signi ﬁ cantamountsoftheredformhavebeenretainedatthePMsof Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 707 analysis , we crossed the XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 line with ﬂ uores - cent reporter lines for subunits of the adaptor protein complexes AP2 and TPLATE ( AP2A1 - TagRFP and TPLATE - GFP ) , for clathrin ( CLC2 - GFP ) , andfordynamins ( DRP1C - GFP ) . Wethenperformed live imaging after 1 d ( 16 – 24 h ) of AUXILIN - LIKE1 induction . Through CLSM of seedling roots , we observed that clathrin signalswereabsentfromthePMsofepidermalcellsinamajorityof AUXILIN - LIKE1 - overexpressing seedlings ( Figure 6A ) . These observations were con ﬁ rmed in the hypocotyl epidermis , where we employed VAEM . Upon AUXILIN - LIKE1 overexpression , normal , densely distributed clathrin - positive PM foci were not observed ( Figure6B ) . However , wedid observeCLC2 signals that were very sparse , larger than normal endocytic pits , and often laterally mobile ( Supplemental Movie 2 ) . We cannot determine whether these were clathrin structures that were attached to the PM or localized to the cytosol . Apart from endocytosis at the PM , clathrin participates in vesicle formation at other compartments of the endomembrane system , where it likely acts with AP - 1 , AP - 3 , and AP - 4 complexes to functioninvacuolar , andpotentiallysecretory , traf ﬁ cking ( Richteretal . , 2014 ; Parketal . , 2013 ; Wangetal . , 2013b , 2014 ; Feraruetal . , 2010 ; Fuji et al . , 2016 ; Robinson and Pimpl , 2014 ; Zwiewka et al . , 2011 ) . In - terestingly , it appears that the endosomal clathrin pools were not af - fected by auxilin - like overexpression , as CLC2 - GFP signals were still bound to endosomes ( observed as large , intracellular bodies ) in both roots and hypocotyls ( Figures 6A and 6B ; Supplemental Movie 2 ) . The presence ofdynamin ( DRP1C ) at the PM was also reduced , although the reduction was less pronounced than that of clathrin . In most roots , very weak PM signals of DRP1C - GFP could still be observed ( Figure 6C ) , while VAEM in the hypocotyl epidermis showed DRP1C - positive foci of normal appearance , but at much reduced densities compared with the control ( Figure 6D ) . These remaining DRP1C foci did not show normal dynamics in most of the cells observed , but instead exhibited very long lifetimes , suggesting that these DRP1C - containing structures may have been nonfunctional ( Figure 6E ) . Figure 5 . ( continued ) . auxilin - likeoverexpressingseedlings , whiletheproteinhasbeeninternalizedanddegradedinthemock - treatedcontrols . Panelsat6hshowmergedgreen and red channels , while panels at 24 h show green and red channels separately . ( E ) ImmunolocalizationofKNOLLEintheRAMof XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE linesshowingdiffusionofKNOLLEoutofthecompletedcellplatesandintotheoldPM in late cytokinetic cells . The graph shows percentage of cells with diffused KNOLLE signals ; error bars indicate SD between 3 experiments . Experiments in ( A ) to ( C ) and ( E ) were performed after 16 to 24 h of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 induction . Figure 6 . Loss of Clathrin and Dynamin from the PMs of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 Line . ( A ) and ( B ) Following AUXILIN - LIKE1 overexpression , CLC2 - GFP signals were absent from the PMs of RAM epidermis cells ( A ) and normal CLC2 - GFP endocytic foci could not be observed in hypocotyl epidermis by VAEM ( B ) . The endosomal clathrin populations were retained in both tissues . ( C ) to ( E ) DRP1C - GFP PMsignals weremarkedly reducedinRAMepidermis ( C ) , andthedensityofDRP1C - positivePMfoci wasreduced inthehypocotyl epidermis ( D ) . The remaining DRP1C - positive PM foci had exceptionally long lifetimes in the majority of observed cells ( E ) . Graphs in ( A ) and ( C ) show average 6 SD percentage of roots with strong PM signals from the ﬂ uorescent markers . Graph in ( D ) shows collated measurements from three repetitions of the experiment . All experiments in this ﬁ gure were performed after 16 to 24 h of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 induction . 708 The Plant Cell Interestingly , in contrast to clathrin and dynamin , the endocytic adaptorcomplexesAP2andTPLATEwerenotonlypresentatthePMs of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 , but their binding was consistently stronger than in control conditions . This was most clearly observed in the RAM epidermisusingCLSM ( Figures7Aand7B ) , butthesamephenomenon occurredinthehypocotylepidermis , asobservedbyVAEM ( Figures7C and7D ) . Furthermore , time - resolvedimagingdemonstratedthatthese adaptor protein foci had shorter lifetimesat the PM than under control conditions ( Figures 7E and 7F ; Supplemental Movies 3 and 4 ) . In summary , live microscopy observations of clathrin , dynamin , and adaptor protein complexes suggest that auxilin - like over - expression blocks endocytosis after the initial step of adaptor protein complex binding to the PM . It appears that endocytic pits are initiated by the adaptors at high frequency , but due to the lack of clathrin binding , they are not progressing and quickly become aborted . The nature of the scarce , remaining DRP1C - positive structures with long lifetimes remains unclear . Disturbance in Cellular Membrane Distribution Indicates Inhibited Endocytosis Apart from cargoes and the traf ﬁ cking - related molecular machinery , the endomembrane system naturally consists of the biological membranes themselves . These membranes are in a constantstateof ﬂ uxthroughthe cell , moving fromplaceto place asvesicles ( e . g . , secretoryvesicles , CCVs , COPI , andCOPII - coated vesicles ) andthroughthematurationofcompartments , examplesof whichincludetheproposedmaturationof trans - Golginetwork / early endosome into multivesicular bodies ( Scheuring et al . , 2011 ) and the cis - medial - trans progression of cisternae in the Golgi stack . Considering this overall membrane ﬂ ow , one can imagine that in - terfering with a particular traf ﬁ cking process could lead to broad changes in membrane distribution in the endomembrane system . Speci ﬁ cally , inhibited endocytosis should lead to the excess ac - cumulation of the membrane at the cell periphery — the plasma membrane — and a concomitant loss of membranes from the cell interior , bothoccurringduetothenowisolated , imbalancedactivity of the secretory pathway . Indeed , upon staining the PMs in AUX - ILIN - LIKE1 / 2 - overexpressing lines with the FM4 - 64 dye or with PIN2 - GFP , we observed thick deposits of membrane at the cell periphery instead of the typical smooth , thin PMs ( Figure 8 ) . This observationprovidesmore , althoughindirect , evidenceforinhibited endocytosisduetoAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2overexpression . Stainingwith propidium iodide showed that the cell wall structure was also af - fected ( SupplementalFigure8 ) , asthickdepositsstronglybindingto propidium iodide could be seen . Figure 7 . Increased PM Binding of Endocytic Adaptor Protein Complexes in XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 Line . Overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE1 caused increased PM binding of TPLATE , a subunit of the TPLATE complex , as well as AP2A1 , a subunit of the AP - 2 complex . CLSMimagesfromRAMepidermis ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) andVAEMimagesfromhypocotylepidermis ( [ C ] and [ D ] ) areshown . Graphsin ( A ) and ( B ) show PM signal intensity measurements from a representative experiment . Kymographs ( [ E ] and [ F ] ) show reduced lifetimes of TPLATE and AP2A1 foci in XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 line , likely indicating that endocytic pits aborted after initiation . All experiments in this ﬁ gure were performed after 16 to 24 h of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 induction . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 709 Taken together , the imaging of endocytic cargoes , the endo - cytic machinery components , and the cellular distribution of membranes all demonstrated that overexpressing AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 leads to the inhibition of endocytosis . This phenomenon isanalogoustotheeffectofoverexpressionofauxilinhomologs in non - plant systems . However , we do not consider these data to necessarily be indicative of a vesicle - uncoating function of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 . The most parsimonious interpretation is that overexpressed AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 proteins may inhibit the re - cruitment of clathrin to initiating endocytic pits simply by binding to and retaining all available clathrin in the cytosol , although this simple model would not explain why the endosomal pools of clathrin remain intact ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . While not proving a speci ﬁ c function in uncoating , these ﬁ ndings , together with our protein - protein interaction and subcellular localization data , constitute strong evidence for a clathrin - related function of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 . AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 Loss of Function Inanattempttoaddressthespeci ﬁ cmolecularfunctionofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , we aimed to obtain auxilin - like1 / 2 knockout plants . The behaviors of the two proteins in terms of interactions , localization , andtheeffectsofoverexpressionwerethesameinourexperiments , andthetwoproteinsshareveryhighsequencesimilarity . Therefore , weexpectedAUXILIN - LIKE1andAUXILIN - LIKE2tobefunctionally redundant , so we aimed to obtain a double mutant . AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 genes occupy a common locus on chromosome 4 , in which their coding sequences are inversely oriented around a short , shared promoter region ( Figure 9A ) . The genes are therefore tightly linked , making it impossible to generate double mutants by crossing single T - DNA insertion lines . Instead , we generated double knockouts by simultaneously targeting both homologs using CRISPR technology . The CRISPR method gen - erates short ( 1 – 2 nucleotide ) deletions or insertions in the target sequence , thus causing open reading frame shifts and disrupting the coding sequence . Using this approach , we isolated two double mutant combinations , auxilin - like1 / 2 c1 and auxilin - like1 / 2 c2 , as well as single auxilin - like1 and auxilin - like2 mutants ( Figure 9A ) . To our surprise , both the single and the double mutants were phenotyp - ically normal under standard growth conditions at the seedling and adult stages ( Figure 9B ) . The plants also exhibited normal fertility . Furthermore , an FM4 - 64 uptake experiment using the RAM epi - dermis of auxilin - like1 / 2 c1 seedlings did not indicate any defects in endocytosis ( Figure 9C ) . This loss - of - function analysis revealed that Arabidopsis auxilin - like proteins are not essential for endo - cytosis and development , at least under optimal environmental conditions . This ﬁ nding is in contrast to the results of similar analyses in animals such as mouse ( Mus musculus ) , worm ( Caenorhabditis elegans ) , and zebra ﬁ sh ( Danio rerio ) , where de - fects in growth and development of auxilin / GAK mutants were reported ( Yimetal . , 2010 ; Greeneretal . , 2001 ; Baietal . , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2008 ) , hinting at crucial differences in the mechanism of clathrin - mediated endocytosis between plants and animals . DISCUSSION Here , we aimed to expand our knowledge of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in plants by searching for , and functionally charac - terizing , novel clathrin - associated proteins . Using a TAP - MS approach , we identi ﬁ ed four CLC binding proteins with possible endocyticfunctions : CAP1 , SH3P2 , AUXILIN - LIKE1 , and AUXILIN - LIKE2 . We analyzed the binary interactions among these proteins andrevealedtheirlocalizationtothePMandthecellplate , twoofthe sites of clathrin action . Our more detailed studies focused on characterizing the two putativeuncoating factorhomologs , AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 . Like auxilin homologs in non - plants , we found that over - expressing AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 led to an inhibition of endocytosis . We believe that our inducible auxilin - overexpressing lines are useful and very ef ﬁ cient genetic tools for speci ﬁ cally interfering with endocytosis , with applications in studies of various clathrin - dependent processes ( Ortiz - Morea et al . , 2016 ) . Our in - depth mapping of the effects of AUXILIN - LIKE1 overexpression on the molecular components of the endocytic pathway may prove in - terestingforresearchersinterestedintheendocyticprocessitself . We note that the effect of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 overexpression ap - pears to be speci ﬁ c for the PM pool of clathrin , as we did not observe a loss of clathrin from the endosomal compartments . The observation that membranes accumulated at the cell periphery , which we interpret as an effect of the continuation of secretionintheabsenceofendocytosis , tangiblydemonstratesthe interdependence of distinct traf ﬁ cking processes in the endo - membrane system . Although highly speculative , it is tempting to Figure 8 . Excess Membrane Accumulation at the PM as a Result of Inhibited Endocytosis . Overexpression of AUXILIN - LIKE2 caused excess deposition of mem - brane material at the PMs of root epidermis , as visualized with FM4 - 64 staining ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) or with PIN2 - GFP ( C ) . ( A ) and ( C ) are maximum intensity projections of z - stacks through outer region of the epidermis , while ( B ) is a longitudinal section of epidermal cells showing membrane aggregation mainly in the outer domain . FM4 - 64 - stained deposits in Col - 0 in ( A ) are likely remnants of apoptosed lateral root cap cells . 710 The Plant Cell hypothesizethatthelossofcytoplasminwhichtheendomembrane compartments are embedded , together with the increase in vac - uolar volume , as observed in AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 - overexpressing lines , are also traf ﬁ cking homeostasis - related phenomena , as they may represent secondary effects of the bulk loss of internal endomembrane compartments . In an attempt to address the speci ﬁ c molecular function of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , we also generated auxilin - like1 / 2 mutants us - ingCRISPRtechnology . WefoundthatthelossofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 function did not visibly affect endocytosis or plant growth and development under optimal growth conditions . This is in contrast to loss - of - function alleles of other endocytic components , which exhibit various defects in growth , development , and / or reduced fertility ( Gadeyne et al . , 2014 ; Kang et al . , 2001 , 2003 ; Collings etal . , 2008 ; Kimetal . , 2013 ; Kitakuraetal . , 2011 ) . Thisobservation also differs from that of auxilin loss - of - function mutants in yeast , whosegrowthisreduced ( Dingetal . , 2015 ) , andauxilin / GAKloss - of - function mutants in animals such as mouse , worm , or zebra ﬁ sh , wherevariousaspectsofdevelopmentareaffected ( Yimetal . , 2010 ; Greener et al . , 2001 ; Bai et al . , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2008 ) . We propose several possible interpretations for the lack of mutant phenotypes in auxilin - like1 / 2 . First , it appears likely that AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 functionisnecessaryforonlyasmallsubsetof all clathrin - coated vesicles that form at the PM . This can be concluded from our VAEM colocalization analysis of clathrin and AUXILIN - LIKE1 , in which we observed that a vast majority of Figure 9 . auxilin - like1 / 2 Loss - of - Function Mutants . ( A ) Isolationof auxilin - like1 / 2 CRISPRmutants . Top : Overviewofthe AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 genomiclocusshowingCRISPRtargetsitesinthesecondexonsof AUXILIN - LIKE1 and AUXILIN - LIKE2 . Bottom : Details of the CRISPR target sequence and the isolated mutant alleles . ( B ) auxilin - like1 / 2 double homozygous mutants , as well as single mutants , developed normally at both the seedling and adult stages . ( C ) FM4 - 64 uptake into auxilin - like1 / 2 c1 seedlings was comparable to that of the controls , indicating functional endocytosis . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 711 CCPs did not recruit AUXILIN - LIKE1 . As discussed above , it is possible that auxilin - like recruitment often takes place in the cytosol , andsucheventscouldhavebeenmissedbyourimaging system . However , it is also possible that most CCVs are in fact uncoated with the help of other factors , while the function of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 is limited to only a speci ﬁ c subpopulation of vesicles . This appears consistent with the observation that knocking out the two genes does not visibly interfere with en - docytosis , and it hints at the exciting possibility of the existence of functionally distinct populations of PM - derived CCVs in plant cells , only one of which uses the conserved auxilin - Hsc70 pathway for uncoating . Second , thelackofevidentphenotypesin auxilin - like1 / 2 maybe explained by a functional overlap between the closely homolo - gous AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 pair and any of the ﬁ ve remaining auxilin - likeproteinsinArabidopsis . However , weandothersidentifythese proteins as auxilin - like only due to the presence of C - terminal DNAJ domains that recruit and activate the heat shock protein . The remaining portions of auxilin - likes have different lengths and bear little or no sequence similarity when comparisons are made between the closely homologous AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 pair and AUXILIN - LIKE3 - 7 ( Supplemental Figure 9 ) . The lack of sequence similarity , togetherwiththespeci ﬁ cdetectionofAUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 but not AUXILIN - LIKE3 - 7 in our CLC - TAP assay , suggest a pos - sible diversi ﬁ cation in the functions of plant C - terminal DNAJ proteinsbeyondsimplyclathrin - relatedprocesses . Anexampleof this is JAC1 ( AUXILIN - LIKE6 ) , which was identi ﬁ ed in a forward genetic screen for regulators of light - dependent chloroplast re - locations in the leaf ( Suetsugu et al . , 2005 ) , a process , to our knowledge , not regulated by clathrin . An analysis of the effects of AUXILIN - LIKE3 - 7 overexpression , as well as clathrin binding assays , may help to address with more certainty whether any of these proteins could function in the endocytic process together with AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 . At the moment , we hypothesize that plant cells recruit the chaperoning function of Hsc70 at various cellular locations using a suite of auxilin - like DNAJ domain proteins that actasbindingadaptorsbetweenthechaperoneanddistincttarget protein complexes . As a ﬁ nal note , while it is true that some of the features of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 , such as the presence of a C - terminal DNAJ domain , the late recruitment to coated pits , and the effects of overexpression , suggest they possess a function identical to that of non - plant auxilins , our data are insuf ﬁ cient to draw speci ﬁ c conclusions about the molecular function of these auxilin - like proteins . Returning to protein sequence comparisons , when whole sequences are taken into consideration , neither AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 nor any other Arabidopsis auxilin - like are similar to non - plant auxilins ; interestingly , yeast auxilin is overall not similar to animal auxilins either . Although biochemical experiments have suggested thatAUXILIN - LIKE1possessesuncoatingactivityinvitro ( Lametal . , 2001 ) , we believe that further investigation into the molecular function of AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 and into the uncoating of CCVs in plants , may bring more clarity . The recent ﬁ nding that the yeast auxilinhomologAUX1 / SWA2 not onlyparticipates in the uncoating ofCCVs , butalsofunctionswithCOPIandCOPII - coatedvesiclesin theearlysecretorypathway ( Dingetal . , 2015 ) , providesacautionary tale against assuming that distantly similar proteins found across the tree of life possess identical molecular functions . METHODS Plant Materials The following previously published Arabidopsis thaliana lines were used : UBQ10 pro : SH3P2 - GFP ( Zhuang et al . , 2013 ) , PIN2 pro : PIN2 - GFP ( Abas etal . , 2006 ) , PIN2 pro : PIN2 - Dendra ( Salanenkaetal . , 2018 ) , CLC2 pro : CLC2 - GFP and DRP1C pro : DRP1C - GFP ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008 ) , INTAM : GAL4 ( Friml etal . , 2004 ) , TPLATE - GFP 3 AP2A1 - TagRFP ( Gadeyne etal . , 2014 ) , and 35S pro : PIN5 - GFP ( Mravec et al . , 2009 ) . The following lines and crosses were generated in this study : XVE - » AUXILIN - LIKE1 , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 3 CLC2 pro : CLC2 - GFP , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 3 DRP1C pro : DRP1C - GFP , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 3 TPLATE - GFP , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 3 AP2A1 - TagRFP , XVE » AUX - ILIN - LIKE2 3 PIN2 pro : PIN2 - GFP , XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 3 PIN2 pro : PIN2 - Dendra , CAP1 pro : CAP1 - mCherry , 35S pro : CAP1 - RFP , 35S pro : SH3P2 - GFP , UBQ10 pro : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , CLC2 pro : CLC2 - GFP 3 UBQ10 pro : mCherry - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE2 , UAS : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( UAS : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 3 - INTAM : GAL4 ) , auxilin - like1 / 2 c1 , auxilin - like1 / 2 c2 , auxilin - like1 , and auxilin - like2 . Unfortunately , 35S pro : RFP - auxilin - like1 / 2 seedsarenotavailabledueto low yields and a high degree of silencing , but expression vectors for plant transformation can be provided instead . Molecular Cloning AllconstructsusedforTAP , forgeneratingstableArabidopsistransgeniclines , and for BiFC assays were cloned with the Gateway system . The following Gateway entry clones were generated in this study : CLC1 / pDONR221 , AUXILIN - LIKE1 / pENTR / D - TOPO , AUXILIN - LIKE2 / pENTR / D - TOPO , AUX - ILIN - LIKE1 / pDONRP2rP3 , AUXILIN - LIKE2 / pDONRP2rP3 , CAP1 / pENTR / D - TOPO , SH3P2 / pENTR / D - TOPO ( allinvariantswithandwithoutstopcodons ) , PIP5K1 / pDONR221 , and pCAP1 / pDONRP4P1r . The coding sequences of CLC1 , AUXILIN - LIKE1 , AUXILIN - LIKE2 , and CAP1 were cloned from Ara - bidopsis ( accession Columbia - 0 ) cDNA , whereas those of SH3P2 and the CAP1 promoter were cloned from Arabidopsis Col - 0 genomic DNA . The primers used are shown in Supplemental Table 1 . The expression vectors were cloned using previously published Gateway vectors ( Karimi et al . , 2002 ; Curtis and Grossniklaus , 2003 ; Van Leeneetal . , 2014 ) . ConstructsforTAPweregeneratedbyfusingCLC1with TAP tags and with 35S promoter sequences in pKCTAP and pKCTAP destination vectors . The following constructs were cloned and used for stable transformation of Arabidopsis : XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 and XVE » AUX - ILIN - LIKE2 [ pMDC7B ( UBQ10 ) ] , 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 and 35S pro : RFP - AUXILIN - LIKE2 ( pK7WGR2 ) , UAS : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( pK7m34GW ) , UBQ10 pro : GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( pB7m34GW , 0 ) , UBQ10 pro : mCherry - AUX - ILIN - LIKE1 ( pB7m34GW , 0 ) , 35S pro : SH3P2 - GFP ( pH7FWG2 ) , 35S pro : CAP1 - RFP ( pK7RWG2 ) , and CAP1 pro : CAP1 - mCherry ( pK7m34GW ) . Theconstructs used for the BiFC assays were cloned in p * 7m34GW and p * 7m24GW2 backbones ( where * indicates resistance cassettes not relevant for these constructs ) andconsistedoffusionsofN - andC - terminalpartsofEGFPfused to CLC1 , AUXILIN - LIKE1 , AUXILIN - LIKE2 , CAP1 , SH3P2 , and PIP5K1 , all under the control of the 35S promoter . TAP TAPusingCLC1asbaitwasperformedasdescribedpreviously ( VanLeene et al . , 2014 ) with Arabidopsis cell cultures . BiFC Assays For the BiFC assays , Nicotiana benthamiana leaves were transiently transformed with Agrobacterium tumefaciens . The Agrobacterium strains carrying the BiFC constructs were grown to OD = 1 , spun down , and 712 The Plant Cell resuspended in in ﬁ ltration buffer ( 10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM MES , and 100 m M acetosyringone ) to OD = 1 . 5 . The suspensions were incubated at room temperatureonashakerfor2h . Strainscarryingthetwoassayedconstructs weremixedandinjectedintothebottomsidesofleaves . Leaveswereimaged by CLSM 3 to 4 d after injection . Each interacting pair was assayed in three repeated experiments . Positive interactions displayed broad areas of GFP ﬂ uorescence throughout the injected leaf surface . Single photographs of GFP ﬂ uorescence were taken to document the results . Growth Conditions and Chemical Induction of Transgenes Arabidopsis seedlings were grown on half - strength Murashige and Skoog ( 1 / 2MS ) mediumwith1 % ( w / v ) sucroseat21°Cundera16 - h - day / 8 - h - night cycle or in darkness for imaging in etiolated hypocotyls . Lights used were Philips GreenPower LED in deep red / far red / blue combination , intensity : 2100 m W 6 10 % . Estradiol induction of the XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 lines was done by transferring 3 - d - old seedlings to medium containing b - estradiol ( Sigma - Aldrich ) or solvent ( ethanol ) as a control . b - Estradiol concentrationsusedwere2 . 5 m g / mL ( ; 9 . 18 m M ) for experimentspresented inFigures3 , 4 , 5Ato5C , 5E , 6to8 , andSupplementalFigure7Aand2 m Mfor experiments presented in Figure 5D and Supplemental Figures 5 and 8 . Inductionofthe INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 linewasdoneanalogouslyon medium supplemented with 2 m M tamoxifen ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Seedling Root Morphology For light microscopy of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 seedling roots , seedlings werestainedinLugol ’ ssolutionfor ; 1min , washed , andmountedonslides in chloral hydrate solution . Immunostaining An Intavis InsituPro VSi robot was used for immunostaining according to a previously published protocol ( Sauer et al . , 2006 ) . The following anti - bodies were used : rabbit anti - PIN1 ( 1 : 1000 ; Paciorek et al . , 2005 ) , rabbit anti - PIN2 ( 1 : 1000 ; Abas et al . , 2006 ) , rabbit anti - KNOLLE ( 1 : 1000 ; Lauber etal . 1997 ) , andanti - rabbit - Cy3 ( 1 : 600 ; Sigma - Aldrich ; catalogno . C2306 ) . Fluorescent Imaging CLSM imaging was done with a Zeiss LSM700 , LSM800 , and LSM880 confocalmicroscopeswithPlan - Apochromat20x / 0 . 8andPlan - Apochromat 40 3 / 1 . 2 lenses . Long - term live imaging with root growth tracking was performedonaverticalZeissLSM700aspreviouslydescribed ( vonWangenheim et al . , 2017 ) . VAEM imaging was performed with an Olympus IX83 inverted micro - scopeequippedwithacell - TIRFmoduleandanUAPONOTIRF100 3 lens . For colocalization imaging of CLC2 pro : CLC2 - GFP 3 UBQ10 pro : mCherry - AUXILIN - LIKE1 , the two channels were captured sequentially . FM4 - 64 and FM1 - 43 Staining For FM4 - 64 uptake experiments , seedlings were stained in liquid 1 / 2MS medium with 1 % ( w / v ) sucrose supplemented with 2 m M FM 4 - 64 dye ( ThermoFisher ) for5mininthedarkandonice . Excessdyewaswashedoff and the seedlings were mounted in 1 / 2MS medium with 1 % ( w / v ) sucrose on microscopy slides at room temperature , marking the start of the in - ternalization time measurement . To visualize the membrane accumulation at the PMs of the XVE - » AUXILIN - LIKE2 line , and for colocalizationsof ﬂ uorescent markers with PM - localized FM4 - 64 and FM1 - 43 stains , the seedlings were treated as described above but at room temperature and imaged immediately after washing . FM1 - 43 stain was used at 0 . 2 m M concentration . BFA Treatments Seedlings were incubated in liquid 1 / 2MS medium with 1 % ( w / v ) sucrose and containing BFA ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at a ﬁ nal concentration of 25 m M . The solvent ( DMSO ) was added to the controls . Propidium Iodide Staining Propidiumiodide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) wasdiluted100 3 in1 / 2MSmediumwith 1 % ( w / v ) sucrose and roots were stained for 2 min before CLSM imaging . Fluorescence Quanti ﬁ cation Quanti ﬁ cation of CLSM and VAEM ﬂ uorescence images was performed using Fiji / ImageJ . FM4 - 64 uptake was quanti ﬁ ed by comparing average PMandintracellularsignalintensitiesinindividualcells . BFAbodiesstained by PIN1 were counted in circular areas 50 m m in diameter , placed in the middle of microscopic pictures . DRP1C - GFP foci at the PM in VAEM pictureswerecountedsimilarlyincircularareas120pixelsindiameter . PM signal intensities of TPLATE - GFP and AP2A1 - TagRFP in root epidermis were measured on lines drawn along multiple PMs in individual micro - scopic pictures . Quantitative RT - PCR Total RNA from ; 15 4 - d - old seedlings induced with 2 m M b - estradiol / 4 - hydroxytamoxifen / solvent control ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 24 h was extracted using theTRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) and puri ﬁ ed using an RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen ) according to manufacturer ’ s instructions . Two micrograms of RNA was reverse - transcribed using an iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit ( Bio - Rad ) . qRT - PCRwasperformedin5 - m LreactionsusingtheLightCycler480 SYBR Green I Master Mix in a LightCycler480 II ( ser . no . 5659 ; Roche ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Relative gene expression wascalculatedwith the2 2 DD CT method ( LivakandSchmittgen , 2001 ) . The primers used are listed in Supplemental Table 1 . CRISPR Mutant Isolation The CRISPR construct was cloned according to a published method ( J . Richter , J . M . Watson , P . Stasnik , M . Borowska , J . Neuhold , P . Stolt - Bergner , V . K . Schoft , and M . T . Hauser , unpublished data ) . T1 plants transformed with the CRISPR construct were selected on Basta and re - sistant transformants genotyped for AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 mutations by PCR ampli ﬁ cation and sequencing of relevant gene fragments . Plants carrying mutations in auxilin - like paralogs were propagated , and the T2 progenies were PCR genotyped to ﬁ nd those that segregated out the CRISPR cassette ( byampli ﬁ cationofthe Cas9 and Bar genes ) . Amongthem , single and double auxilin - like homozygotes were selected . The primers used are listed in Supplemental Table 1 . Protein Sequence Alignment Auxilin - like protein sequences were aligned using the Geneious software package ( www . geneious . com ) with standard settings . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the GenBank / EMBL libraries under the following accession numbers : AUXILIN - LIKE1 ( At4g12780 ) , AUXILIN - LIKE2 ( At4g12770 ) , CAP1 ( At4g32285 ) , SH3P2 ( At4g34660 ) , CLC1 ( At2g20760 ) , CLC2 ( At2g40060 ) , CHC1 ( At3g08530 ) , CHC2 ( At3g11130 ) , DRP1C ( At1g14830 ) , TPLATE ( At3g01780 ) , AP2A1 ( At5g22770 ) , KNOLLE ( At1g08560 ) , PIN1 ( At1g73590 ) , PIN2 ( At5g57090 ) , AUXILIN - LIKE3 ( At1g21660 ) , AUXILIN - LIKE4 ( At4g36520 ) , AUXILIN - Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 713 LIKE5 ( At1g75310 ) , JAC1 / AUXILIN - LIKE6 ( At1g75100 ) , AUXILIN - LIKE7 ( At1g30280 ) , PIP5K1 ( At1g21980 ) , and DHNAT2 ( At5g48950 ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Figure 1 . Additional BiFC interactions . Supplemental Figure 2 . Additional subcellular localization data for AUXILIN - LIKEs , SH3P2 , and CAP1 . Supplemental Figure 3 . Growth and development of seedlings in transgenic lines constitutively overexpressing AUXILIN - LIKE1 , SH3P2 , and CAP1 . Supplemental Figure 4 . Uninduced controls for seed germination experiments with XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE lines . Supplemental Figure 5 . qPCR of inducible AUXILIN - LIKE overex - pression lines . Supplemental Figure 6 . Correlation of GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 expres - sion and root growth inhibition during INTAM » GFP - AUXILIN - LIKE1 induction . Supplemental Figure 7 . Additional data on FM4 - 64 uptake in in - ducible AUXILIN - LIKE overexpression lines . Supplemental Figure 8 . Propidium iodide staining of XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE2 roots . Supplemental Figure 9 . Protein sequence alignment of Arabidopsis AUXILIN - LIKE1 - 7 . Supplemental Table 1 . Primers used in this study . Supplemental Movie 1 . VAEM colocalization of CLC2 - GFP and mCherry - AUXILIN - LIKE1 . Supplemental Movie 2 . VAEM imaging of CLC2 - GFP in the XVE - » AUXILIN - LIKE1 line . Supplemental Movie 3 . VAEM imaging of TPLATE - GFP in the XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 line . Supplemental Movie 4 . VAEM imaging of AP2A1 - TagRFP in the XVE » AUXILIN - LIKE1 line . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank James Matthew Watson , Monika Borowska , and Peggy Stolt - Bergner at ProTech Facility of the Vienna Biocenter Core Facilities for the CRISPR / CAS9 construct ; Anna Müller for assistance with molecular clon - ing ; Sebastian Bednarek , Liwen Jiang , and Daniël Van Damme for sharing publishedmaterial ; Matyá (cid:1) sFendrych , DaniëlVanDamme , andLindyAbas for valuable discussions ; and Martine De Cock for help with correcting the manuscript . This work was supported by the European Research Council under the European Union Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) / ERC Grant 282300 and by the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic / M (cid:1) SMT project NPUI - LO1417 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors designed parts of the research . M . A . , M . N . , U . K . , and M . G . performed experiments . M . A . and J . F . wrote the manuscript . Received October 9 , 2017 ; revised January 16 , 2018 ; accepted March 5 , 2018 ; published March 6 , 2018 . REFERENCES Abas , L . , Benjamins , R . , Malenica , N . , Paciorek , T . , Wi´sniewska , J . , Moulinier – Anzola , J . C . , Sieberer , T . , Friml , J . , and Luschnig , C . ( 2006 ) . Intracellular traf ﬁ cking and proteolysis of the Arabidopsis auxin - ef ﬂ ux facilitator PIN2 are involved in root gravitropism . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 249 – 256 . Adamowski , M . , and Friml , J . ( 2015 ) . PIN - dependent auxin transport : action , regulation , and evolution . Plant Cell 27 : 20 – 32 . Ahle , S . , and Ungewickell , E . ( 1990 ) . Auxilin , a newly identi ﬁ ed cla - thrin associated protein in coated vesicles fron bovine brain . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 19 – 29 . Ahn , G . , et al . ( 2017 ) . SH3P2 plays a crucial role at the step of membrane tubulation during cell plate formation in plants . Plant Cell 29 : 1388 – 1405 . Aniento , F . , and Robinson , D . G . ( 2005 ) . Testing for endocytosis in plants . Protoplasma 226 : 3 – 11 . Bai , T . , Seebald , J . L . , Kim , K . - E . , Ding , H . - M . , Szeto , D . P . , and Chang , H . C . ( 2010 ) . Disruption of zebra ﬁ sh cyclin G - associated kinase ( GAK ) function impairs the expression of Notch - dependent genes during neurogenesis and causes defects in neuronal de - velopment . BMC Dev . Biol . 10 : 7 . Bashline , L . , Li , S . , Anderson , C . T . , Lei , L . , and Gu , Y . ( 2013 ) . The endocytosis of cellulose synthase in Arabidopsis is dependent on m 2 , a clathrin - mediated endocytosis adaptin . Plant Physiol . 163 : 150 – 160 . Ben Khaled , S . , Postma , J . , and Robatzek , S . ( 2015 ) . A moving view : subcellular traf ﬁ cking processes in pattern recognition receptor – triggered plant immunity . Annu . Rev . Phytopathol . 53 : 379 – 402 . Bolte , S . , Talbot , C . , Boutte , Y . , Catrice , O . , Read , N . D . , and Satiat - Jeunemaitre , B . ( 2004 ) . FM - dyes as experimental probes for dis - secting vesicle traf ﬁ cking in living plant cells . J . Microsc . 214 : 159 – 173 . Boucrot , E . , Ferreira , A . P . A . , Almeida - Souza , L . , Debard , S . , Vallis , Y . , Howard , G . , Bertot , L . , Sauvonnet , N . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2014 ) . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent en - docytic pathway . Nature 517 : 460 – 465 . Boutté , Y . , Frescatada - Rosa , M . , Men , S . , Chow , C . - M . , Ebine , K . , Gustavsson , A . , Johansson , L . , Ueda , T . , Moore , I . , Jürgens , G . , and Grebe , M . ( 2010 ) . Endocytosis restricts Arabidopsis KNOLLE syntaxin to the cell division plane during late cytokinesis . EMBO J . 29 : 546 – 558 . Collings , D . A . , Gebbie , L . K . , Howles , P . A . , Hurley , U . A . , Birch , R . J . , Cork , A . H . , Hocart , C . H . , Arioli , T . , and Williamson , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Arabidopsis dynamin - like protein DRP1A : A null mutant with wide - spread defects in endocytosis , cellulose synthesis , cytokinesis , and cell expansion . J . Exp . Bot . 59 : 361 – 376 . Curtis , M . D . , and Grossniklaus , U . ( 2003 ) . A Gateway cloning vector set for high - throughput functional hnalysis of henes in planta . Plant Physiol . 133 : 462 – 469 . Dhonukshe , P . , Aniento , F . , Hwang , I . , Robinson , D . G . , Mravec , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , and Friml , J . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin ef ﬂ ux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 17 : 520 – 527 . Ding , J . , Segarra , V . A . , Chen , S . , Cai , H . , Lemmon , S . K . , and Ferro - Novick , S . ( 2015 ) . Auxilin facilitates membrane traf ﬁ c in the early secretory pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 : 1 – 36 . Di Rubbo , S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The clathrin adaptor complex AP - 2 me - diates endocytosis of BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1 in Ara - bidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 2986 – 2997 . Emons , A . M . C . , and Traas , J . A . ( 1986 ) . Coated pits and coated vesicles on the plasma membrane of plant cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 41 : 57 – 64 . 714 The Plant Cell Fan , L . , Hao , H . , Xue , Y . , Zhang , L . , Song , K . , Ding , Z . , and Botella , M . A . , Wang , H . , Lin , J . ( 2013 ) . Dynamic analysis of Arabidopsis AP2 s subunit reveals a key role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and plant development . Development 140 : 3826 – 3837 . Feraru , E . , Paciorek , T . , Feraru , M . I . , Zwiewka , M . , De Groodt , R . , De Rycke , R . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . The AP - 3 b - adaptin mediates the biogenesis and function of lytic vacuoles in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 22 : 2812 – 2824 . Friml , J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A PINOID - dependent binary switch in apical - basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin ef ﬂ ux . Science 306 : 862 – 865 . Fuji , K . , Shirakawa , M . , Shimono , Y . , Kunieda , T . , Fukao , Y . , Koumoto , Y . , Takahashi , H . , Hara - Nishimura , I . , and Shimada , T . ( 2016 ) . The adaptor complex AP - 4 regulates vacuolar protein sorting at the trans - Golgi network by interacting with VACUOLAR SORTING RECEPTOR1 . Plant Physiol . 170 : 211 – 219 . Gadeyne , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . The TPLATE adaptor complex drives cla - thrin - mediated endocytosis in plants . Cell 156 : 691 – 704 . Galway , M . E . , Rennie , P . J . , and Fowke , L . C . ( 1993 ) . Ultrastructure of the endocytotic pathway in glutaraldehyde - ﬁ xed and high - pressure frozen / freeze - substituted protoplasts of white spruce ( Picea glau - ca ) . J . Cell Sci . 3 : 847 – 858 . Gao , B . , Biosca , J . , Craig , E . A . , Greene , L . E . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 1991 ) . Uncoating of coated vesicles by yeast hsp70 proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 19565 – 19571 . Greener , T . , Grant , B . , Zhang , Y . , Wu , X . , Greene , L . E . , Hirsh , D . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 2001 ) . Caenorhabditis elegans auxilin : a J - domain protein essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 215 – 219 . Henne , W . M . , Boucrot , E . , Meinecke , M . , Evergren , E . , Vallis , Y . , Mittal , R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2010 ) . FCHo proteins are nuclea - tors of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 : 1281 – 1284 . Irani , N . G . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fluorescent castasterone reveals BRI1 sig - naling from the plasma membrane . Nat . Chem . Biol . 8 : 583 – 589 . Ischebeck , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in ﬂ uences PIN polarization by controlling clathrin - mediated mem - brane traf ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 4894 – 4911 . Jelínková , A . , Malínská , K . , Simon , S . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Pa (cid:1) rezová , M . , Pejchar , P . , Kube (cid:1) s , M . , Martinec , J . , Friml , J . , Za ˇ zímalová , E . , and Petrá (cid:1) sek , J . ( 2010 ) . Probing plant membranes with FM dyes : tracking , dragging or blocking ? Plant J . 61 : 883 – 892 . Kang , B . H . , Busse , J . S . , Dickey , C . , Rancour , D . M . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2001 ) . The Arabidopsis cell plate - associated dynamin - like protein , ADL1Ap , is required for multiple stages of plant growth and development . Plant Physiol . 126 : 47 – 68 . Kang , B . H . , Rancour , D . M . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2003 ) . The dynamin - like protein ADL1C is essential for plasma membrane maintenance during pollen maturation . Plant J . 35 : 1 – 15 . Karimi , M . , Inzé , D . , and Depicker , A . ( 2002 ) . GATEWAY TM vectors for Agrobacterium - mediated plant transformation . Trends Plant Sci . 7 : 193 – 195 . Kerppola , T . K . ( 2009 ) . Visualization of molecular interactions using analysis : Characteristics of protein fragment complementation . Chem . Soc . Rev . 38 : 2876 – 2886 . Kim , S . Y . , Xu , Z . - Y . , Song , K . , Kim , D . H . , Kang , H . , Reichardt , I . , Sohn , E . J . , Friml , J . , Juergens , G . , and Hwang , I . ( 2013 ) . Adaptor protein complex 2 - mediated endocytosis Is crucial for male re - productive organ development in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 2970 – 2985 . Kitakura , S . , Vanneste , S . , Robert , S . , Löfke , C . , Teichmann , T . , Tanaka , H . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . Clathrin mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 1920 – 1931 . Kolb , C . , Nagel , M . - K . , Kalinowska , K . , Hagmann , J . , Ichikawa , M . , Anzenberger , F . , Alkofer , A . , Sato , M . H . , Braun , P . , and Isono , E . ( 2015 ) . FYVE1 is essential for vacuole biogenesis and intracellular traf ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 167 : 1361 – 1373 . Konopka , C . A . , Backues , S . K . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008 ) . Dynamics of Arabidopsis dynamin - related protein 1C and a clathrin light chain at the plasma membrane . Plant Cell 20 : 1363 – 1380 . Konopka , C . A . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008 ) . Variable - angle epi ﬂ uor - escence microscopy : A new way to look at protein dynamics in the plant cell cortex . Plant J . 53 : 186 – 196 . Lam , B . C . , Sage , T . L . , Bianchi , F . , and Blumwald , E . ( 2001 ) . Role of SH3 domain - containing proteins in clathrin - mediated vesicle traf - ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 2499 – 2512 . Lauber , M . H . , Waizenegger , I . , Steinmann , T . , Schwarz , H . , Mayer , U . , Hwang , I . , Lukowitz , W . , and Jürgens , G . ( 1997 ) . KNOLLE protein is a cytokinesis - speci ﬁ c syntaxin . Cell 139 : 1485 – 1493 . Lee , D . - W . , Wu , X . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2006 ) . Re - cruitment dynamics of GAK and auxilin to clathrin - coated pits during endocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 3502 – 3512 . Lee , D . , Zhao , X . , Yim , Y . - I . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2008 ) . Essential role of cyclin - G – associated kinase ( auxilin - 2 ) in developing and mature mice . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 : 2766 – 2776 . Van Leene , J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . An improved toolbox to unravel the plant cellular machinery by tandem af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation of Arabidopsis protein complexes . Nat . Protoc . 10 : 169 – 187 . Livak , K . J . , and Schmittgen , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Analysis of relative gene expression data using real - time quantitative PCR and the 2 2 DD CT method . Methods 25 : 402 – 408 . Ł angowski , Ł . , Wabnik , K . , Li , H . , Vanneste , S . , Naramoto , S . , Tanaka , H . , and Friml , J . ( 2016 ) . Cellular mechanisms for cargo delivery and polarity maintenance at different polar domains in plant cells . Cell Discov . 2 : 16018 . Massol , R . H . , Boll , W . , Grif ﬁ n , A . M . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2006 ) . A burst of auxilin recruitment determines the onset of clathrin - coated vesicle uncoating . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 10265 – 10270 . McMahon , H . T . , and Boucrot , E . ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 517 – 533 . Mersey , B . G . , Grif ﬁ ng , L . R . , Rennie , P . J . , Fowke , L . C . , Mersey , B . G . , Grif ﬁ ng , L . R . , Rennie , P . J . , and Fowke , L . C . ( 1985 ) . The isolation of coated vesicles from protoplasts of soybean . Planta 163 : 317 – 327 . Mravec , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Subcellular homeostasis of phytohormone auxin is mediated by the ER - localized PIN5 transporter . Nature 459 : 1136 – 1140 . Nagel , M . - K . , Kalinowska , K . , Vogel , K . , Reynolds , G . D . , Wu , Z . , Anzenberger , F . , Ichikawa , M . , Tsutsumi , C . , Sato , M . H . , Kuster , B . , Bednarek , S . Y . , and Isono , E . ( 2017 ) . Arabidopsis SH3P2 is an ubiquitin - binding protein that functions together with ESCRT - I and the deubiquitylating enzyme AMSH3 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 114 : E7197 – E7204 . Naramoto , S . , Otegui , M . S . , Kutsuna , N . , de Rycke , R . , Dainobu , T . , Karampelias , M . , Fujimoto , M . , Feraru , E . , Miki , D . , Fukuda , H . , Nakano , A . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . Insights into the localization and function of the membrane traf ﬁ cking regulator GNOM ARF - GEF at the Golgi apparatus in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 26 : 3062 – 3076 . Nodzy´nski , T . , Vanneste , S . , Zwiewka , M . , Pernisová , M . , Hejátko , J . , and Friml , J . ( 2016 ) . Enquiry into the topology of plasma membrane - localized PIN auxin transport components . Mol . Plant 9 : 1504 – 1519 . Ortiz - Morea , F . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Danger - associated peptide signaling in Arabidopsis requires clathrin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 : 11028 – 11033 . Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factor AUXILIN - LIKE1 / 2 715 Paciorek , T . , Zazímalová , E . , Ruthardt , N . , Petrásek , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Morris , D . A . , Emans , N . , Jürgens , G . , Geldner , N . , and Friml , J . ( 2005 ) . Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its own ef ﬂ ux from cells . Nature 435 : 1251 – 1256 . Park , M . , Song , K . , Reichardt , I . , Kim , H . , Mayer , U . , Stierhof , Y . - D . , Hwang , I . , and Jurgens , G . ( 2013 ) . Arabidopsis mu - adaptin subunit AP1M of adaptor protein complex 1 mediates late secretory and vacuolar traf ﬁ c and is required for growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 : 10318 – 10323 . Renard , H . - F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Endophilin - A2 functions in membrane scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature 517 : 493 – 496 . Richter , J . , Watson , J . M . , Stasnik , P . , Borowska , M . , Neuhold , J . , Stolt - Bergner , P . , Schoft , V . K . , and Hauser , M . T . ( 2018 ) . Multiplex mutagenesis with CRISPR / CAS9 exposes growth regulatory roles of four clustered CrRLK1L to metal ions . submitted . Richter , S . , Kientz , M . , Brumm , S . , Nielsen , M . E . , Park , M . , Gavidia , R . , Krause , C . , Voss , U . , Beckmann , H . , Mayer , U . , Stierhof , Y . D . , and Jürgens , G . ( 2014 ) . Delivery of endocytosed proteins to the cell - division plane requires change of pathway from recycling to secretion . eLife 2014 : 1 – 16 . Robinson , D . G . , and Pimpl , P . ( 2014 ) . Clathrin and post - Golgi traf - ﬁ cking : A very complicated issue . Trends Plant Sci . 19 : 134 – 139 . Salanenka , Y . , Verstraeten , I . , Löfke , Ch . , Tabata , K . , Naramoto , S . , Glanc , M . , and Friml , J . ( 2018 ) . Gibberellin DELLA signaling targets the retromer complex to redirect protein traf ﬁ cking to the plasma membrane . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA pii : 201721760 . Sauer , M . , Paciorek , T . , Benková , E . , and Friml , J . ( 2006 ) . Immu - nocytochemical techniques for whole - mount in situ protein locali - zation in plants . Nat . Protoc . 1 : 98 – 103 . Scheuring , D . , Viotti , C . , Kruger , F . , Kunzl , F . , Sturm , S . , Bubeck , J . , Hillmer , S . , Frigerio , L . , Robinson , D . G . , Pimpl , P . , and Schumacher , K . ( 2011 ) . Multivesicular bodies mature from the trans - Golgi network / early endosome in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 3463 – 3481 . Song , K . , Jang , M . , Kim , S . Y . , Lee , G . , Lee , G . - J . , Kim , D . H . , Lee , Y . , Cho , W . , and Hwang , I . ( 2012 ) . An A / ENTH domain - containing protein functions as an adaptor for clathrin - coated vesicles on the growing cell plate in Arabidopsis root cells . Plant Physiol . 159 : 1013 – 1025 . Suetsugu , N . , Kagawa , T . , Wada , M . , and Corporation , T . ( 2005 ) . An auxilin - like J - domain protein , JAC1 , regulates phototropin - mediated chloroplast movement . Plant Physiol . 139 : 151 – 162 . Tanaka , H . , Kitakura , S . , Rakusová , H . , Uemura , T . , Feraru , M . I . , de Rycke , R . , Robert , S . , Kakimoto , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Cell polarity and patterning by PIN traf ﬁ cking through early endosomal compartments in Arabidopsis thaliana . PLoS Genet . 9 : 1 – 9 . Tanchak , M . A . , Grif ﬁ ng , L . R . , Mersey , B . G . , and Fowke , L . C . ( 1984 ) . Endocytosis of cationized ferritin by coated vesicles of soybean protoplasts . Planta 162 : 481 – 486 . Tejos , R . , Sauer , M . , Vanneste , S . , Palacios - Gomez , M . , Li , H . , Heilmann , M . , van Wijk , R . , Vermeer , J . E . M . , Heilmann , I . , Munnik , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . Bipolar plasma membrane dis - tribution of phosphoinositides and their requirement for auxin - mediated cell polarity and patterning in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 26 : 2114 – 2128 . Ungewickell , E . , Ungewickell , H . , Holstein , S . E . H . , Linder , R . , Prasad , K . , Barouch , W . , Martin , B . , Greene , L . E . , and Eisenberg , E . ( 1995 ) . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 378 : 632 – 635 . von Wangenheim , D . , Hauschild , R . , Fendrych , M . , Barone , V . , Benková , E . , and Friml , J . ( 2017 ) . Live tracking of moving samples in confocal microscopy for vertically grown roots . eLife 6 : 1 – 20 . Wang , C . , Yan , X . , Chen , Q . , Jiang , N . , Fu , W . , Ma , B . , Liu , J . , Li , C . , Bednarek , S . Y . , and Pan , J . ( 2013a ) . Clathrin light chains regulate clathrin - mediated traf ﬁ cking , auxin signaling , and development in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 499 – 516 . Wang , J . - G . , Li , S . , Zhao , X . - Y . , Zhou , L . - Z . , Huang , G . - Q . , Feng , C . , and Zhang , Y . ( 2013b ) . HAPLESS13 , the Arabidopsis m 1 adaptin , is essential for protein sorting at the trans - Golgi network / early endo - some . Plant Physiol . 162 : 1897 – 1910 . Wang , X . , Cai , Y . , Wang , H . , Zeng , Y . , Zhuang , X . , Li , B . , and Jiang , L . ( 2014 ) . Trans - Golgi network - located AP1 gamma adaptins me - diate dileucine motif - directed vacuolar targeting in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 26 : 4102 – 4118 . Widhalm , J . R . , Ducluzeau , A . L . , Buller , N . E . , Elowsky , C . G . , Olsen , L . J . , and Basset , G . J . C . ( 2012 ) . Phylloquinone ( vitamin K1 ) bio - synthesis in plants : Two peroxisomal thioesterases of lactoba - cillales origin hydrolyze 1 , 4 - dihydroxy - 2 - naphthoyl - coa . Plant J . 71 : 205 – 215 . Xing , Y . , Böcking , T . , Wolf , M . , Grigorieff , N . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 2010 ) . Structure of clathrin coat with bound Hsc70 and auxilin : mechanism of Hsc70 - facilitated disassembly . EMBO J . 29 : 655 – 665 . Yamaoka , S . , Shimono , Y . , Shirakawa , M . , Fukao , Y . , Kawase , T . , Hatsugai , N . , Tamura , K . , Shimada , T . , and Hara - Nishimura , I . ( 2013 ) . Identi ﬁ cation and dynamics of Arabidopsis Adaptor Protein - 2 complex and its involvement in ﬂ oral organ development . Plant Cell 25 : 2958 – 2969 . Yim , Y . - I . , Sun , T . , Wu , L . - G . , Raimondi , A . , De Camilli , P . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2010 ) . Endocytosis and clathrin - uncoating defects at synapses of auxilin knockout mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 4412 – 4417 . Yoshinari , A . , Fujimoto , M . , Ueda , T . , Inada , N . , Naito , S . , and Takano , J . ( 2016 ) . DRP1 - dependent endocytosis is essential for polar localization and boron - induced degradation of the borate transporter BOR1 in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell Physiol . 57 : 1985 – 2000 . Zhang , Y . , Persson , S . , Hirst , J . , Robinson , M . S . , van Damme , D . , and Sánchez - Rodríguez , C . ( 2015 ) . Change your Tplate , change your fate : Plant CME and beyond . Trends Plant Sci . 20 : 41 – 48 . Zhao , X . , Greener , T . , Al - Hasani , H . , Cushman , S . W . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . ( 2001 ) . Expression of auxilin or AP180 inhibits endocytosis by mislocalizing clathrin : evidence for formation of nascent pits containing AP1 or AP2 but not clathrin . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 353 – 365 . Zhuang , X . , Cui , Y . , Gao , C . , and Jiang , L . ( 2015 ) . Endocytic and autophagic pathways crosstalk in plants . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 28 : 39 – 47 . Zhuang , X . , Wang , H . , Lam , S . K . , Gao , C . , Wang , X . , Cai , Y . , and Jiang , L . ( 2013 ) . A BAR - domain protein SH3P2 , which binds to phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate and ATG8 , regulates autopha - gosome formation in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 4596 – 4615 . Zouhar , J . , and Sauer , M . ( 2014 ) . Helping hands for budding pros - pects : ENTH / ANTH / VHS accessory proteins in endocytosis , vacu - olar transport , and secretion . Plant Cell 26 : 1 – 13 . Zwiewka , M . , Feraru , E . , Möller , B . , Hwang , I . , Feraru , M . I . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Weijers , D . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . The AP - 3 adaptor complex is required for vacuolar function in Arabidopsis . Cell Res . 21 : 1711 – 1722 . 716 The Plant Cell DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 17 . 00785 ; originally published online March 6 , 2018 ; 2018 ; 30 ; 700 - 716 Plant Cell Friml Maciek Adamowski , Madhumitha Narasimhan , Urszula Kania , Matous Glanc , Geert De Jaeger and Jirí Arabidopsis A Functional Study of AUXILIN - LIKE1 and 2 , Two Putative Clathrin Uncoating Factors in This information is current as of May 7 , 2018 Supplemental Data / content / suppl / 2018 / 03 / 06 / tpc . 17 . 00785 . DC1 . html References / content / 30 / 3 / 700 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 81 articles , 39 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists