REVIEWS The fundamental features of clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in nerve terminals are similar to other types of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , but some of its charac - teristics are unique . Several molecular components of the pathway are expressed at high levels at synapses and / or exist as nerve terminal - specific splice variants or genes . The kinetics of synaptic vesicle recycling are rapid and typically faster than membrane recycling in other systems 1 . Furthermore , the clathrin - mediated recycling pathway that mediates synaptic vesicle refor - mation is more direct than the classical ‘clathrin - medi - ated recycling’pathway . Typically , clathrin - coated vesi - cles fuse with early / sorting ENDOSOMES after shedding their coat 2 , 3 . In nerve terminals , however , an endosomal sorting station may be bypassed . This possibility , first indicated by ultrastructural observations on intact synapses and cell - free preparations 4 , has recently been supported by imaging studies of QUANTAL UPTAKE and release of fluorescent tracers 5 . According to this model : first , the endosome - like intermediates that accumulate transiently in nerve terminals after massive exocytosis do not represent stations downstream of uncoated vesi - cles , but instead are fragments of plasma membrane internalized by bulk endocytosis ; second , clathrin - coat - ed vesicles bud in parallel from these vacuoles and from the plasma membrane 4 . Clathrin - mediated budding at the synapse may therefore also represent the mecha - nism underlying the biogenesis of a synaptic vesicle . Clathrin - independent synaptic vesicle - recycling path - ways have also been proposed 6 , but evidence supporting their existence remains largely indirect . Finally , in con - trast to the constitutive , and / or ligand - stimulated nature of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in other systems , endocytosis at presynaptic terminals is primarily a com - pensatory reaction that re - internalizes newly fused synaptic vesicle membranes after their exocytosis 7 . Clathrin - coated pits are extremely rare or absent in rest - ing nerve terminals but can become abundant after massive synaptic vesicle exocytosis . They are generally found at the edges of the synaptic junction , away from the portion of the presynaptic membrane where synap - tic vesicles are docked and undergo exocytosis 7 – 9 . These regions , also called endocytic zones , are rich in actin 10 – 12 and have also been implicated in the formation and maintenance of synapses 13 . Clathrin and the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 The main building blocks of endocytic clathrin coats , including those of nerve terminals , are clathrin and the adaptor - binding protein 2 ( AP - 2 ) , a member of the het - erotetrameric family of clathrin adaptor proteins 2 , which link clathrin to the membrane . On the basis of ACCESSORY FACTORS IN CLATHRIN - DEPENDENT SYNAPTIC VESICLE ENDOCYTOSIS Vladimir I . Slepnev and Pietro De Camilli Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is a special form of vesicle budding important for the internalization of receptors and extracellular ligands , for the recycling of plasma membrane components , and for the retrieval of surface proteins destined for degradation . In nerve terminals , clathrin - mediated endocytosis is crucial for synaptic vesicle recycling . Recent structural studies have provided molecular details of coat assembly . In addition , biochemical and genetic studies have identified numerous accessory proteins that assist the clathrin coat in its function at synapses and in other systems . This review summarizes these advances with a special focus on accessory factors and highlights new aspects of clathrin - mediated endocytosis revealed by the study of these factors . ENDOSOME A membrane - bound organelle that carries materials ingested by endocytosis and commonly passes them to lysosomes for degradation or recycles them to the cell surface . QUANTAL UPTAKE The content ofa single synaptic vesicle taken up by the cell after endocytosis . NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 161 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School ofMedicine , 295 Congress Avenue , New Haven , Connecticut 06510 , USA . e - mails : pietro . decamilli @ yale . edu vladimir . slepnev @ yale . edu Correspondence to P . D . C . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 162 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S clathrin - coated vesicle in vivo have been identified 29 . Studies of these factors have indicated that they may help in coat assembly and may regulate coat dynamics . They also coordinate growth of the coat with biochemi - cal changes in the lipid bilayer and with local modifica - tions of the peripheral actin cytoskeleton . Finally , they mediate a crosstalk between endocytic mechanisms and intracellular signalling pathways . After fission , other fac - tors participate in vesicle uncoating . Whereas some of these factors interact with clathrin and AP - 2 , most of them are not enriched in clathrin - coated vesicles 30 , indi - cating that they act in TRANS to the clathrin coat or are associated with the coat only transiently . Many such fac - tors are members of protein families conserved from yeast to man and specific isoforms are expressed in nerve terminals . For most of them , a functional link to endocytosis has been provided by a set of distinct crite - ria , including genetic studies , antibody and peptide microinjections or DOMINANT - NEGATIVE INTERFERENCE . These perturbations have revealed new intermediates in the process of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and are help - ing in the dissection of distinct stages of this process . The best characterized among these factors and their putative functions are summarized below ( FIGS 1 and 2 ) . AP - 180 AP - 180 is a brain - specific protein that is concentrated in nerve terminals and that purifies together with clathrin coats . It can promote clathrin assembly and may there - fore be seen as an accessory adaptor between clathrin and the membrane 31 . A protein that shares considerable similarity with AP - 180 — the clathrin assembly lym - phoid myeloid leukaemia protein ( CALM ) — is ubiqui - tously expressed and is thought to represent the func - tional homologue of AP - 180 in non - neuronal cells 32 . The amino - terminal moiety of AP - 180 contains a clathrin - box motif and binds clathrin . However , the clathrin assembly properties of AP - 180 have been attrib - uted to the Asp - Leu - Leu ( DLL ) repeats present in its carboxy - terminal region 33 . AP - 180 also binds the ear domains of AP - 2 ( REFS 26 , 34 ) and the complex of AP - 180 with AP - 2 has much stronger ability to assemble clathrin than each protein has separately 35 . Finally , AP - 180 , like AP - 2 , binds phosphoinositides and this binding regulates its clathrin - polymerizing activity 36 . In experiments with purified proteins , clathrin bas - kets polymerized in the presence of AP - 180 are smaller and more homogeneous in size than baskets formed in its absence . So AP - 180 has been proposed to mediate control of vesicle size 37 . Such a possibility has been con - firmed by genetic studies in Drosophila melanogaster , where the gene encoding the homologue of AP - 180 , LAP ( Like AP - 180 ) , has been disrupted by insertional mutagenesis 38 . The few surviving mutant adult flies showed marked neurological defects and the number of vesicles in their nerve terminals was greatly reduced . The remaining synaptic vesicles were variable in size and notably larger than in control synapses 38 . A muta - tion in the Caenorhabditis elegans homologue of AP - 180 , uncoordinated 11 ( Unc - 11 ) , produced similar defects 39 . Furthermore , the synaptic vesicle protein current models , coat assembly starts with the recruit - ment and oligomerization of the adaptors , and is fol - lowed by the recruitment of clathrin . It is a highly co - operative process in which binding of one component enhances the binding of others . As the coat expands through the addition of new subunits , the membrane acquires a more pronounced curvature until a deeply invaginated coated pit forms . The coated pit then undergoes fission to generate a free clathrin - coated vesi - cle . This is a transient structure that sheds its coat immediately after fission 14 . Clathrin is composed of heavy and light chains . Three heavy and three light chains form stable oligomeric complexes , the three - legged triskelia , which are the unit elements of the clathrin lattice 15 ( FIG . 1 ) . The legs of the triskelia are formed by right - handed super - helices of short α - helix hairpins and represent the edges of the lattice 16 . The end of each leg , corresponding to the amino - terminal region of the heavy chain , is a separate protein – protein interaction module with a seven - bladed β - propeller structure 17 . A binding site present in the groove that separates blades 1 and 2 ( REF . 18 ) recognizes a short peptide motif , called the clathrin box 19 , present in clathrin adaptors and in several other endocytic pro - teins . The relative flexibility of the angle formed by the legs of the triskelia allows clathrin to oligomerize into hexagons and pentagons , and generate curvature 20 . In nerve terminals , clathrin - coated buds typically have a high and homogeneous curvature , indicating that mechanisms may exist that control this process in a tight manner . AP - 2 consists of four subunits — α - adaptin , β 2 adaptin , µ 2 adaptin and σ 2 adaptin — tightly bound to each other 2 ( FIG . 1 ) . AP - 2 has a brick - like structure with two ear domains that correspond to the carboxy - termi - nal regions of α - and β 2 - adaptin . The core region of AP - 2 binds both to membrane proteins , such as synapto - tagmin and proteins that contain endocytic motifs 21 , 22 , and to membrane lipids , such as PHOSPHOINOSITIDES and other acidic phospholipids 23 – 25 . The binding of AP - 2 to clathrin is mediated primarily by β 2 - adaptin and involves two binding sites . One is in the ear domain and the other , a typical clathrin box , is localized in the hinge region that connects the ear to the trunk of β 2 - adaptin 26 . Both sites cooperate to promote clathrin polymerization and it has been proposed that their interaction with clathrin may displace accessory proteins during coat maturation 26 . AP - 2 binds various accessory proteins through the ear domains of α - and β 2 - adaptin . These proteins , which are thought to have an accessory func - tion in the endocytic reaction ( see below ) 27 , 28 , are general - ly characterized by the presence of the signature sequence DPØ ( where Ø is a bulky hydrophobic amino acid ) . This sequence binds a surface - exposed , shallow hydrophobic pocket surrounded by polar residues in the structurally similar ear domains of α - and β 2 - adaptin 26 – 28 . A plethora of clathrin accessory factors Purified clathrin and AP - 2 can form cages similar to those surrounding clathrin - coated vesicles 2 . However , several accessory factors that assist the formation of a PHOSPHOINOSITIDE A generic term used to define any inositol - containing glycerophospholipid . TRANS - ACTING FACTOR An agent whose effects are independent ofits direct interaction with the element being regulated . DOMINANT - NEGATIVE INTERFERENCE The interference ofa mutant protein on the activity ofthe wild type following the formation ofa heteromeric complex . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 163 R E V I E W S α β 2 µ 2 σ 2 Clathrin triskelion Heavy chain Lightchain Adaptor complex 2 ( AP - 2 ) CC DPF EH EH EH AP - 2 binding EPS15 Epsin 1 NPF ENTH DPW AP - 2 / clathrin binding 100 kDa protein . Similar genes : EPS15R . Related proteins characterized genetically : Pan1 ( S . cerevisae ) . Other related proteins : CG16932 ( Drosophila ) , ZK1248 . 3 ( C . elegans ) , Ybl047cp ( S . cerevisae ) . 94 kDa protein . Similar genes : epsin 2 and 3 . Related proteins characterized genetically : Liquid facets ( Drosophila ) , Ent1 , Ent2 , Ent3 , Ent4 ( S . cerevisae ) . C . elegans homologue : T04C10 . 2 . AP - 180 Dynamin 1 95 kDa protein , but runs as 180 kDa on SDS - PAGE . Other names : AP - 3 , NP185 , F1 - 20 . Non - neuronal isoform : CALM . Related proteins characterized genetically : Lap ( Drosophila ) , Unc - 11 ( Caenorhabditis elegans ) , Yap1801 and Yap1802 ( S . cerevisae ) . 100 kDa protein . Similar genes : dynamin 2 and 3 . Related proteins characterized genetically : shibire ( Drosophila ) , dyn - 1 ( C . elegans ) , Vps1 ( S . cerevisae ) . Clathrin assembly Clathrinbinding AP - 2 binding ENTH - like GTPase PH PRD GED Trimerization of the heavy ( 170 kDa ) and light ( 33 – 35 kDa ) chains of clathrin generates a triskelion , the main building element of clathrin coats . The heavy chain of clathrin is a non - essential gene in Saccharomyces cerevisae and Dictyostelium , but is essential in Drosophila melanogaster . Major domains of the heavy chain : amino - terminal domain ( green , membrane attachment primarily through adaptor proteins ) ; leg ( interaction with the legs of neighbouring triskelia to generate edges of the clathrin lattice ) ; carboxy - terminal domain or hub domain ( yellow , trimerization domain ) . Heterotetrameric complex composed of α - ( 100 kDa ) , β 2 ( 100 kDa ) , µ 2 ( 50 kDa ) and σ 2 ( 19 kDa ) subunits ( also called adaptins ) . Significant similarity to three other adaptor complexes ( AP - 1 , AP - 3 , AP - 4 ) . Non - essential in S . cerevisae but essential in Drosophila . Binds clathrin through the ear and hinge domain of β 2 - adaptin . Interacts with membrane proteins and lipids through multiple interactions of its core region . Binds several clathrin accessory factors through the ear domains of α - and β 2 - adaptins . PH SH3 SH3 SH3 SH3 SH3 CC EH EH DH C2 Intersectin Endophilin 1 200 kDa ( long isoform ) , 145 kDa ( short isoform ) . Two mammalian genes . Other names : ESE , EHSH . Related proteins : Dap160 ( Drosophila ) , Y116A8C . 36 ( C . elegans ) . 40 kDa protein . Other name : SH3P4 . Similar proteins : endophilins 2 and 3 ( SH3P8 , SH3P13 ) , endophilin B1 . Related proteins : CG14296 ( Drosophila ) , T04D1 . 3 ( C . elegans ) , SPCC1919 . 11 ( Saccharomyces pombe ) . SH3 CC J AP - 2 / clathrin binding Tensin homology Syndapin 1 Auxilin 55 kDa protein . Similar genes : syndapin 2 ( pacsin ) , SH3 - domain - containing protein 6511 . Related proteins : CG15694 ( Drosophila ) , F45E1 . 7 ( C . elegans ) . 100 kDa protein . Similar genes : G - cyclin - associated kinase ( GAK ) . Related proteins : CG1107 ( Drosophila ) , W07A8 . 3 ( C . elegans ) , Ydr320cp ( S . cerevisae ) . NPF CC SH3 PRD 5 ' - phosphatase Sac1 NPF AP - 2 / clathrin binding Synaptojanin 1 Amphiphysin 1 and 2 145 kDa ( short isoform ) is brain specific , alternatively spliced 170 kDa isoform is expressed ubiquitously . Similar genes : synaptojanin 2 . Related proteins characterized genetically : Unc - 26 ( C . elegans ) , Inp51 , Inp52 , Inp53 ( S . cerevisae ) . Amphiphysin 1 is a 76 kDa protein , but runs as 125 kDa on SDS – PAGE . Amphiphysin 2 ( BIN1 ) has several splice variants with different tissue and cell distribution . Related proteins characterized genetically : Rvs167 ( S . cerevisae ) ; C . elegans homologue F58G6 . 1 ; Drosophila homologue AF171225 . AP - 2 / clathrin binding BAR SH3 Figure 1 | Domain structure of the coat components and accessory factors of clathrin - mediated endocytosis at the synapse . ( AP , adaptor - binding protein ; CALM , clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukaemia protein ; CC , coiled coil ; Dbl , Disabled ; DPF , Asp - Pro - Phe ; DPW , Asp - Pro - Trp ; EH , EPS15 homology ; EHSH , EH domain and SH3 - domain - containing protein ; ENTH , epsin amino - terminal homology ; EPS , epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate ; ESE , EH domain and SH3 domain regulator of endocytosis ; GED , GTPase - enhancing domain ; J , DNAJ domain ; NPF , Asp - Pro - Phe motifs ; PH , pleckstrin homology domain ; PRD , proline - rich domains ; Sac1 , suppressor of actin 1 ; SH3 , Src homology 3 ; SH3P4 , SH3 - domain - containing protein 4 ) . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 164 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S correlates with a conformational change in dynamin that severs the connection of the vesicle with the donor membrane either by constriction 44 , 45 or stretching 46 . This idea has found support in the demonstration that dynamin can form tubule from LIPOSOMES and then frag - ment them in a GTP hydrolysis - dependent manner 47 , 48 . However , this model has been challenged by a recent study indicating that GTP hydrolysis by dynamin may not be critical for endocytosis 49 . It seems possible that dynamin may combine both the features of a classical GTPase and the properties of a mechanochemical enzyme . Clearly , the GTPase activity of dynamin is cru - cial for its function . This activity is regulated by dynamin - binding proteins , by its own oligomerization state , and by lipids — in particular , phosphoinosi - tides 41 , 42 . An important downstream target of dynamin may be the actin cytoskeleton . Dynamin interacts with PROFILIN 50 , and isoforms of dynamin localize together with actin at actin - rich regions 42 . Furthermore , dynamin isoforms were detected at sites of cell adhesion where no clathrin - mediated endocytosis occurs 51 . A partnership between dynamin and actin is in agreement with the functional connection between actin and many of the binding partners of dynamin ( REF . 52 and see below ) . The carboxy - terminal region of dynamin is a pro - line - rich protein – protein interaction module that binds various SH3 DOMAINS through an array of distinct binding sites . Studies of this interaction network have led to the identification of several major synaptic synaptobrevin / VAMP was partly mislocalized to the plasma membrane in these mutants , indicating that AP - 180 may be required to sort this protein into the vesi - cles 39 . As AP - 180 functions together with clathrin , its putative role in defining synaptic vesicle size supports the idea of a direct reformation of synaptic vesicles from clathrin - coated vesicles . Dynamin The GTPase dynamin was linked to endocytosis by its identification as the protein encoded by the shibire gene of Drosophila . Temperature - sensitive mutations of this gene produce an arrest of the synaptic vesicle endocytic reaction at the stage of the deeply invaginated uncoated pit . An electron - dense collar surrounds the necks of these pits 40 . Dynamin has now been shown to have a key func - tion in the fission of clathrin - coated and other endocyt - ic vesicles , and its properties have been thoroughly dis - cussed in several recent reviews 41 – 43 . Its mechanism of action , however , is still unclear . In the presence of the non - hydrolysable analogue of GTP , guanosine 5 ′ - γ - triphosphate ( GTP γ S ) , dynamin , together with binding partners such as amphiphysin and endophilin ( see below ) , forms stacks of rings around the stalks of coated pits ( FIG . 3e , f ) , similar to the rings observed in nerve ter - minals of paralysed shibire flies 4 , 44 . This observation led to the hypothesis that ‘collared’pits represent an inter - mediate step in vesicle fission and that GTP hydrolysis Amphiphysin Endophilin SH3 CC BAR SH3 Auxilin J Tensin homology Dynamin Synaptojanin PRD 5 ' - phosphatase Sac1 GTPase PH PRD GED N - WASP PRD Syndapin NPF CC SH3 Epsin NPF ENTH DPW Intersectin EPS15 CC EH EH EH PH SH3 SH3 SH3 SH3 SH3 CC EH EH Dbl C2 DPF Clathrin coat Clathrin assembly ENTH - like Clathrin AP - 180 AP - 2 Figure 2 | Documented interactions of the coat components and accessory factors of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Note that several of the accessory factors interact directly with either AP - 2 ( through the ear domains of α - and β - adaptin ) or the clathrin heavy chain ( through its seven - bladed β - propeller amino - terminal module ) . Many of these interactions are regulated by phosphorylation . ( BAR , BIN - amphiphysin - RVS domain ; CC , coiled coil ; Dbl , disabled ; DPW , Asp - Pro - Trp ; EH , EPS15 homology ; ENTH , epsin amino - terminal homology ; GED , GTPase - enhancing domain ; J , DNAJ domain ; NPF , Asp - Pro - Phe motifs ; PH , pleckstrin homology domain ; PRD , proline - rich domains ; SH3 , Src - homology region 3 . ) LIPOSOME A lipid vesicle artificially formed by sonicating lipids in an aqueous solution . PROFILIN Multifunctional actin - binding protein that regulates actin dynamics . It can bind and sequester actin monomers , catalyse nucleotide exchange on actin , and promote monomer addition at the barbed end ofa growing filament . SH3 DOMAINS Src - homology region 3 domains . Protein modules of about 50 amino acids that recognize and bind proline - containing sequences . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 165 R E V I E W S nerve terminals , where it is concentrated on coated endo - cytic intermediates 56 . Synaptojanin 2 has at least two main splice variants that differ in their carboxy - terminal regions . Synaptojanin 2A is targeted to the outer mito - chondrial membrane 57 , where , interestingly , a dynamin - like protein has also been detected 58 . Synaptojanin 2B is more similar to synaptojanin 1 and this isoform may overlap in function with synaptojanin 1 ( Y . Nemoto and P . D . C . , unpublished observations ) . Synaptojanin 1 knockout mice die shortly after birth and have clear neurological defects 59 . Likewise , mutations in UNC26 , the single synaptojanin gene in C . elegans , are uncoordinated 60 . Studies of these mutants , as well as of lamprey giant reticulospinal axons micro - injected with antibodies against synaptojanin 61 , have revealed an increased number of clathrin - coated vesi - cles and a hypertrophy of the actin - rich matrix at endocytic zones . This effect is particularly prominent in lamprey axons microinjected with antibodies ( FIG . 4 ) . Amphiphysin Amphiphysin 1 and 2 are two similar proteins concen - trated in nerve terminals ( for a review see REF . 62 ) . Amphiphysin 1 is predominantly expressed in the brain ( at a level 20 – 30 - fold higher than in other tis - sues ) , whereas amphiphysin 2 is broadly expressed and undergoes extensive alternative tissue - specific splicing 62 . Amphiphysin may function as a multifunc - tional adaptor that cooperates in the recruitment of SH3 - domain - containing proteins , including amphi - physin , endophilin , intersectin and syndapin , as well as of synaptojanin , another binding partner for these proteins besides dynamin . All of these proteins , which are discussed below , have been implicated as accessory factors in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Synaptojanin Synaptojanin is a polyphosphoinositide phosphatase that regulates a pool of phosphoinositides important for endocytosis . It contains two inositol - phosphatase mod - ules that act at different positions of the inositol ring , followed by a protein – protein interaction domain that mediates SH3 - domain binding 53 , 54 . The main physio - logical substrate of synaptojanin is phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , which can be degraded to phosphatidylinositol . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate is a positive regulator of clathrin coat assembly 25 and of the nucleation of actin filaments 55 . It also regulates dynamin function 41 . So , the enzymatic activity of synaptojanin is thought to have PLEIOTROPIC functions in nerve terminals , including a function in clathrin uncoating and in the downregulation of actin polymerization at endocytic zones . Two mammalian synaptojanin genes have been iden - tified so far . ALTERNATIVESPLICING of their carboxy - terminal regions generates isoforms with different tissue and sub - cellular distribution . Synaptojanin 1 , and more specifi - cally its 145 kDa isoform , is the predominant form in a b c d e f g Figure 3 | Sequential stages in clathrin - mediated endocytosis at the presynaptic terminal . Top : electron micrographs of clathrin - coated intermediates trapped at different stages by experimental manipulations . Bottom : schematic representation of the endocytosis stages depicted in the top panels . a | Lamprey reticulospinal synapse after microinjection of antibodies against endophilin followed by stimulation . Note the block in the invagination reaction . b , c | Lamprey reticulospinal synapses after microinjection of the SH3 domain of amphiphysin ( b ) or of peptide PP15 ( REF . 71 ) , which corresponds to its cognate binding site in dynamin ( c ) followed by stimulation . Both manipulations block endocytosis at the stage of deeply invaginated coated pits . d | Lamprey reticulospinal synapse after microinjection of the SH3 domain of endophilin followed by stimulation . Numerous clathrin - coated pits connected to the membrane are visible . Some of these pits have elongated necks decorated by electron - dense rings and are therefore similar to the dynamin - coated tubules induced by the incubation of broken synaptosomes with cytosol and GTP γ S ( e , f ) . g | Lamprey reticulospinal synapse after microinjection of the peptide PP - 19 ( REF . 61 ) , which blocks the SH3 - mediated interactions of endophilin . Numerous free clathrin - coated vesicles are present . These vesicles are typically absent from this synapse even after massive stimulation . Deeply invaginated pits and an abundant cytoskeletal matrix are also visible . ( a reprinted with permission from ( REF . 9 ) © ( 1999 ) Elsevier Science Ltd ; b reprinted with permission from ( REF 71 ) © ( 1997 ) American Association for the Advancement of Science ; c , d Shupliakov , O . , Löw , P . , Gad , H . , Ringstad , N . , Brodin , L . & De Camilli , P . unpublished ; e , f reprinted with permission from ( REF . 44 ) © ( 1995 ) Macmillan Magazines Ltd ; g reprinted with permission from ( REF . 61 ) © ( 2000 ) Elsevier Science Ltd ) . PLEIOTROPISM The ability ofa single protein to have several , seemingly unrelated biological actions . ALTERNATIVE SPLICING During splicing , introns are excised from RNA following transcription and the cut ends are rejoined to form a continuous message . Alternative splicing gives rise to different messages from the same DNA molecule . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 166 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S antibodies used . It is therefore possible that amphiphysin may also assist other endocytic proteins in the genera - tion of highly curved membrane microdomains and / or that it may cooperate directly with dynamin in the vesi - cle fission reaction by , for example , amplifying a con - formational change induced by GTP hydrolysis . A criti - cal role for the interactions of the SH3 domain of amphyphysin in vesicle fission has been shown at the giant reticulo - spinal synapse of the lamprey . At this synapse , the injection of peptides that compete with the interactions of this SH3 domain produces a potent block of synaptic vesicle recycling at the stage of deeply invaginated and constricted coated pits 71 ( FIG . 3b , c ) . Finally , members of the amphiphysin family can affect actin function and interact with signalling path - ways , including signalling to the nucleus 72 – 74 . In particu - lar , strong connections to actin function , endocytosis and the control of cell proliferation have emerged from studies of Rvs167 , the amphiphysin homologue in yeast 75 . Considering the evolutionary conservation of the BAR domain and the presence of proteins with this domain only ( Rvs161 ) , further studies on the function and properties of this domain will yield new insights into the mechanism of action of this family of proteins . Endophilin Endophilins ( endophilin 1 , 2 and 3 ) have a domain struc - ture similar to amphiphysin with a conserved amino - terminal domain and a carboxy - terminal SH3 domain . However , relative to amphiphysin , they bind synapto - janin with higher affinity than dynamin . Endophilin 1 is most abundant in brain , where it is concentrated in nerve terminals 76 . This molecule is the preferred binding part - ner for synaptojanin 19 , 77 . The conserved amino - terminal domain of endophilin 1 , which mediates dimerization and binds lipids ( K . Farsad , N . Ringstad and P . D . C . , unpublished observations ) , was reported to have LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID ACYL TRANSFERASE ACTIVITY 78 . Endophilin was shown to be required for synaptic vesicle biogenesis in a cell - free system 78 . Its crucial func - tion at several steps in synaptic vesicle reformation was further shown by microinjections of antibodies and peptides that disrupt its function at the giant reticu - lospinal axon of the lamprey 9 . First , anti - endophilin antibody injection resulted in the arrest of the invagina - tion reaction at the stage of shallow coated pits ( FIG . 3a ) , indicating that endophilin may function in the acquisi - tion of membrane curvature . This effect may be mediated by its binding to lipids , by the induction of an asymme - try in bilayer geometry due to conversion of lysophos - phatidic acid to phosphatidic acid 78 , or by the second messenger role of phosphatidic acid itself . Second , injec - tion of a peptide that blocks the interactions of its car - boxy - terminal SH3 domain led to an accumulation of invaginated pits and clathrin - coated vesicles accompa - nied by proliferation of the actin cytoskeleton at active zones 9 , 61 ( FIG . 3g ) . The accumulation of invaginated pits may reflect a kinetic delay in fission due to disruption of the endophilin – dynamin interaction 9 , 78 . Conversely , the accumulation of clathrin - coated vesicles and actin produced by this peptide may reflect decreased coat proteins to the lipid bilayer , and in targeting of dynamin and synaptojanin to the coat . Its amino - ter - minal region , also referred to as the BIN - amphiphysin - RVS ( BAR ) domain 145 , mediates the formation of homo - and heterodimers and also harbours a lipid - binding site that mediates membrane binding 63 – 65 . The central region binds the heavy chain of clathrin and the ear domain of the AP - 2 subunit α - adaptin through two distinct but partly overlapping sites 66 , 67 . The SH3 domain that mediates dynamin and synaptojanin bind - ing is located at the carboxyl terminus 68 . Interestingly , whereas the isolated SH3 domain of amphiphysin dis - rupts dynamin ring formation in vitro , this effect is not seen with the full - length protein 65 , 69 . Purified amphiphysin evaginates liposomes into narrow tubules and assembles together with dynamin into thick rings 65 ( FIG . 5 ) . Although an earlier report indicated that amphiphysin does not localize together with dynamin on dynamin - coated tubules 70 , this obser - vation may be explained by epitope accessibility of the Figure 4 | Disruption of synaptojanin function in the giant reticulospinal synapse of the lamprey . This disruption produces an endocytic block that correlates with the presence of clathrin - coated vesicles and enhanced actin polymerization at endocytic zones . Two synapses were microinjected with antibodies directed against lamprey synaptojanin ( a ) or control immunoglobulins ( b ) and stimulated at 5 Hz for 30 min . In ( a ) , note the extension of the presynaptic membrane around the active zone towards the postsynaptic cell , and the presence of a cytoskeletal matrix ( asterisks ) originating from the tips these extensions . A clathrin - coated vesicle is visible in this matrix . ( reprinted with permission from ( REF . 61 ) © ( 2000 ) Elsevier Science Ltd ) . LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID ACYL TRANSFERASE ACTIVITY Enzymatic activity that leads to the generation ofphosphatidic acid from lysophosphatidic acid and acyl - coenzyme A . STERIC HINDRANCE Prevention ofa reaction between different molecules as a result of their sizes or spatial disposition . EH DOMAINS Protein – protein interaction modules that recognize the consensus motifs NPF or other aromatic and hydrophobic di - and tripeptides in target proteins . RAS PROTEINS A group ofproteins involved in growth , differentiation and signalling that require the binding ofGTP to enter into their active state . DISABLED A non - receptor tyrosine kinase that has SH2 and SH3 protein - interaction domains . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 167 R E V I E W S On the basis of cell - free studies , the SH3 - mediated interactions of intersectin function both in late stages of the endocytic reaction ( possibly through dynamin and synaptojanin ) as well as in early stages ( possibly through Sos ) 85 . A link between intersectin and Ras function has been shown 84 . So intersectin has several functions : it binds proteins and lipids of the vesicle membrane , it interacts with clathrin coat proteins indi - rectly through epsin and EPS15 , it binds dynamin and synaptojanin , it affects Ras function through the ex - change factor Son of Sevenless ( Sos ) and it may trigger actin polymerization through its Dbl homology domain . It could therefore participate in coat recruitment and coordinate the function of endocytic proteins , actin and signalling mechanisms . Syndapin Syndapin ( also referred to as pacsin ) may represent an important link between the endocytic machinery and actin dynamics 86 – 88 . The function of the conserved amino - terminal domain of syndapin is unknown . The central region of the protein contains two NPF motifs that predict its interactions with EH domain - containing proteins of the endocytic machinery . Its carboxy - termi - nal SH3 domain not only binds dynamin and synapto - janin , but also the neural WISKOTT – ALDRICH SYNDROME pro - tein ( N - WASP ) , a stimulator of actin filament nucleation induced by the ARP2 / 3 ( REFS 55 , 86 – 88 ) . Consistent with these properties , the SH3 domain of syndapin has been shown to inhibit endocytosis in a cell - free system and in intact cells 85 , 88 . In addition , syndapin localizes to sites of high actin turnover , such as the tips of FILOPODIA and LAMELLIPODIA , when expressed in non - neuronal cells . Furthermore , overexpression of syndapin has a strong effect on cortical actin organization and induces the extension of filopodia 88 . EPS15 and epsin Epidermal growth factor protein substrate 15 ( EPS15 ) was originally identified as a substrate for the epider - mal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase . It was sub - sequently found to interact with the ear domains of AP - 2 ( for a review see REF . 89 ) and to be enriched at synapses 30 . Its reported localization at the edges of clathrin - coated pits has indicated a possible function in molecular dynamics at the periphery of the coat or its interplay with dynamin 90 . It is now thought that EPS15 may act as a housekeeping component of the endocytic machinery , as well as an adaptor for the recruitment of growth factor receptors to clathrin - coated pits 89 . The central region of EPS15 mediates homodimerization 89 and heterodimerization with intersectin 80 . The car - boxy - terminal region , which contains several Asp - Pro - Phe ( DPF ) motifs , constitutes the AP - 2 binding domain 19 , 91 , 92 . The amino - terminal region has three EH domains 89 and binds several endocytic proteins , includ - ing epsin 30 , non - neuronal isoforms of synaptojanin 56 and Hrs , a protein implicated in endosomal function 93 . These multiple interactions are responsible for the powerful dominant - negative effect of truncated forms of EPS15 on endocytosis 94 , 95 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis due to impaired synaptojanin recruitment . Last , microinjection of the SH3 domain of endophilin produced a block of vesicle fission and the accumulation of coated pits with elongated necks and dynamin collars ( FIG . 3d ) . This intermediate , which resembles those produced by GTP γ S injection , may result from a block of dynamin function due to STERIC HINDRANCE by the bound SH3 domain 61 . Intersectin Intersectin is a large multidomain polypeptide with the properties of a scaffold protein 79 – 81 . Its amino - terminal region contains two sequences homologous to domains in the epidermal growth factor protein substrate 15 ( EPS15 ) ( see below ) 82 . These EPS15 domains ( EH DOMAINS ) in intersectin allow it to bind epsin ( see below ) 80 , 81 , and the cytoplasmic domains of a family of secretory carrier membrane proteins ( SCAMPs ) 83 characteristic of synap - tic vesicles and other endocytic vesicles . Intersectin also has a coiled - coil domain through which it can form dimers , heterodimerize with EPS15 ( see below ) 80 or bind to SNAP25 ( REF . 146 ) . Its carboxy - terminal region con - tains five SH3 domains and mediates the interaction of intersectin with dynamin , synaptojanin and Sos , a RAS - guanine nucleotide - exchange factor 79 , 80 , 84 . Furthermore , the main intersectin splice variant present at synapses has a carboxy - terminal extension that contains other protein modules , including a DISABLED ( Dbl ) homology domain , and a PLEKSTRIN - homology ( PH ) domain 81 . Figure 5 | Amphiphysin , dynamin and clathrin - coat components can transform liposomes into structures similar to the tubules and coated pits observed in situ . a | Liposome made from a brain lipid extract after incubation with amphiphysin and dynamin . The two proteins generate narrow tubules and co - assemble together around them in thick , regularly spaced rings , similar in size to those observed at the neck of clathrin - coated pits after GTP γ S incubations ( FIG . 3e , f ) . b , c | Liposomes incubated with amphiphysin and a clathrin coat fraction . Numerous clathrin - coated buds are present on the amphiphysin - coated tubules . ( Unpublished micrographs by K . Takei , V . Haucke , V . I . Slepnev and P . D . C . , see REF . 65 for methods ) . PLECKSTRIN A protein of unknown function originally identified in platelets . It is a principal substrate of protein kinase C . Pleckstrin - homology domains are sequences of about 100 amino acids present in many signalling molecules . WISKOTT – ALDRICH SYNDROME X - linked recessive immuno - deficiency caused by mutations in the WASP gene . This gene encodes a protein capable of interacting with actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and members of the Rho family of GTPases , molecules that regulate the polymerization of actin . ARP2 / 3 COMPLEX Actin - related protein complex . A complex of seven proteins that participates in the nucleation of crosslinked actin networks . FILOPODIA Thin protrusions from a cell that usually contain microfilaments . LAMELLIPODIA Flattened projections of the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 168 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S phosphatase - like domain in which residues known to participate in phosphopeptide hydrolysis are not con - served 111 . A similar atypical tyrosine - phosphatase domain is present in other proteins , including the actin - binding protein tensin and the tumour suppressor protein PTEN ( phosphatase and tensin homologue ) 112 . In PTEN , this domain was shown to have phospho - inositide phosphatase activity with specificity for the 3 ′ position of the inositol ring 112 . This raises the possibility that auxilin may contribute with synaptojanin to phos - phoinositide catabolism at endocytic sites . Recently , a functional homologue of auxilin capable of stimulating the activity of Hsc70 in non - neuronal tissues has been identified . This protein is called cyclin G - associated kinase ( GAK ) or auxilin 2 ( REFS 110 , 113 ) and contains an amino - terminal extension represented by an Ark - type protein kinase domain 110 . In yeast , Ark kinases are key regulators of actin function and endocytosis through the phosphorylation of several substrates , which include Pan1 ( homologous to EPS15 ) , and the Ent proteins ( homologues to epsin ) 114 – 116 . This observation indicates a possible functional link between Ark / GAK kinases and endocytosis that needs to be explored in brain . Other factors The list of accessory factors of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis is growing rapidly . Recent additions to this list are the huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) and HIP1 - related ( HIP1R ) 117 . These two proteins are homol - ogous to the yeast protein Sla2 , which is functionally linked to endocytosis and actin . In vivo , HIP1R is associ - ated with clathrin coats , but when expressed alone , its carboxy - terminal region localizes together with actin 117 . Interestingly , huntingtin also localizes with clathrin - coated intermediates but the functional significance of this localization remains to be discovered 118 . Two proteins that are likely to function in synaptic vesicle endocytosis are Stoned A and Stoned B , the two products of the stoned locus of Drosophila , which encodes a BICISTRONIC messenger RNA . Mutations in both open reading frames produce defects in synaptic vesicle exo - and endocytosis , depletion of synaptic vesicles , accumulation of endocytic intermediates and mislocal - ization of synaptotagmin 119 , 120 . The stoned locus inter - acts genetically with shibire , indicating that its products function in the same pathway as dynamin 121 . Stoned B contains a region homologous to the µ 2 subunit of AP - 2 . In addition , both Stoned A and Stoned B contain motifs that indicate a possible interaction with other endocytic proteins . However , the relationship of the Stoned gene products to clathrin - mediated endocytosis at the synapse remains unclear . It will be interesting to determine whether Stoned B can function as an accessory clathrin adaptor . Many functions of the accessory factors As is clear from this description of the best - character - ized accessory factors involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , they can have several functions and may act at several stages . For example , endophilin may have an early , direct role in curvature acquisition and a late , A member of the epsin family , epsin 1 , which is pre - sent at high concentration in nerve terminals , is the main binding partner for the amino - terminal domain of EPS15 in nervous tissue 30 . Epsin binds EPS15 through its carboxy - terminal region , which also binds intersectin 30 , 80 , 96 . Its central portion interacts with AP - 2 and clathrin , as predicted by the presence of two clathrin boxes and several copies of the consensus sequence for binding to α - and β - adaptin 30 , 81 , 97 , 98 . Consistent with these interactions , expression of epsin fragments and microinjection of antibodies against epsin in non - neu - ronal cells inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis 30 , 97 . Genetic studies of epsin homologues in yeast , however , have indicated that the most important portion of this protein might be its amino - terminal domain 99 , which comprises an evolutionary conserved module called the epsin amino - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain 97 , 100 . The crystal structure of this domain is markedly similar to the VHS DOMAIN , another evolutionary conserved mod - ule found in several proteins , which functions in vesicle - budding reactions 101 . The two modules are similar in turn to ARMADILLO REPEATS , protein – protein interaction domains that act both at the cell surface and in the nucleus 102 . Surprisingly , a functional connection to nuclear function has been reported both for EPS15 and epsin . EPS15 interacts with the protein HRB and affects the REV nuclear export pathway 103 . Epsin interacts with the transcription factor promyelocytic leukaemia Zn 2 + finger protein ( PLZF ) and shuttles in and out of the nucleus 102 . So , in addition to their function in endocyto - sis , these proteins may be part of a signalling pathway from the cell surface to the nucleus . Recently , a Drosophila homologue of epsin , liquid facet , was reported to act downstream of fat facet , a de - ubiquitinating enzyme implicated in eye development 104 . Liquid facet , which also interacts genetically with clathrin and AP - 2 , may itself be the target for this enzyme 105 . So far , however , UBIQUITINATION has been reported for EPS15 but not for epsin 106 . Growing evi - dence indicates a possible function of ubiquitination in the endocytic pathway 107 . Such evidence is particularly strong in yeast , where the Ent1 and Ent2 epsin homo - logues have been identified as components of a protein network that controls actin and endocytosis , a network which also includes Rsp5 , an ubiquitin ligase 99 . However , it is still unknown whether ubiquitination occurs at the synapse . It is also important to note that functional evidence for a role of EPS15 and epsin in synaptic vesicle recycling has yet to be provided . Auxilin At synapses , newly formed clathrin - coated vesicles rapidly shed their coat in a reaction involving the ATPase heat shock protein cognate 70 ( Hsc70 ) and its cofactor auxilin 14 , a protein highly concentrated in nerve terminals . Another uncharacterized factor is needed to dissociate the adaptors from the membrane 108 . Auxilin not only assists Hsc70 and stimulates its ATPase activity , but also targets it to the assembled clathrin coat through interactions with clathrin and with AP - 2 ( REFS 109 , 110 ) . The amino - terminal region of auxilin contains a tyrosine VHS DOMAIN Protein – protein and protein – membrane interaction module present in various proteins . Derives its name from the first three proteins in which it was found : Vps27p , Hrs and STAM . ARMADILLO REPEAT Protein motifof42 amino acids described in the Drosophila melanogaster Armadillo protein . It mediates protein – protein interactions with molecules such as the cadherins . HRB PROTEIN HIV - 1 Rev - binding protein . Hrb is related to the nucleoporins , a class ofproteins that mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport . REV PROTEIN A component ofthe human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) . UBIQUITINATION The attachment ofthe protein ubiquitin to lysine residues of other proteins . BICISTRONIC SEQUENCE A single DNA or RNA sequence that encodes for two proteins . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 169 R E V I E W S of endocytic pits . Another factor , synaptojanin , acts by regulating membrane – coat interactions through the dephosphorylation of phosphoinositides . The function of phosphoinositides as positive regulators of clathrin coats interactions has been shown by several biochemi - cal studies 23 – 25 ( for reviews see REFS 122 , 123 ) . However , the identification and functional characterization of synaptojanin has provided the first genetic evidence for this hypothesis 59 , 60 . Other phosphoinositide - metaboliz - ing enzymes may assist clathrin coat function as indi - cated by the recent identification of a PI ( 3 ) K associated with clathrin coats 124 . Finally , the theme that recurs more frequently , and which may reflect the most critical function of several clathrin accessory factors , is their link to actin dynamics . Actin and endocytosis In Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the function of actin in endocytosis is well established and supported by genetic studies . Homologues of several of the accessory factors described above are present in yeast , and mutations in the corresponding genes affect both endocytosis and actin function . However , the precise relationship between endocytic mechanisms in yeast and mam - malian cells is still unclear 75 . One problem is the still incomplete description of the ultrastructural aspects of endocytosis in S . cerevisiae . Whereas clathrin has been implicated in the endocytic pathways of this organism , no clathrin - coated pits have ever been observed at the surface of these cells 125 . Both actin patches and furrow - like invaginations have been proposed to be sites of endocytosis 126 , 127 . In mammalian cells , actin is clearly involved in bulk endocytosis , but its role in clathrin - coated vesicle formation was shown to vary in different cell types 128 and its mode of action in this process is not known . At least in some systems , including the synapse , the evidence for a function for actin in clathrin - mediat - ed endocytosis is strong 52 . An overlap between endocyt - ic zones and sites of actin polymerization has been observed at the lamprey synapse 10 . These zones may represent an exaggeration of the endocytic hot spots recently described in fibroblasts 129 . The actin pool pre - sent at endocytic zones of the giant lamprey synapses is dynamic and enhanced by stimulation 11 . So , there seems to be a correlation between a burst of endocytic activity and actin polymerization . In one potential model , actin could participate in fis - sion and in the translocation of vesicles away from sites of endocytosis . This possibility is supported by the link between dynamin and actin function 51 , 87 , and by the observation of actin tails propelling endocytic vesicles 130 . If actin polymerizes at the necks of budding vesicles , the scar left by the fission reaction may be the site where actin ‘comets’assemble . Alternatively , a crosslinked net - work of actin that assembles at endocytic zones and flows towards the cytoplasm may trap the nascent vesi - cle and move it away from the cell surface . It is remark - able that several accessory factors of endocytosis , in - cluding isoforms of dynamin , endophilin 51 , syndapin 131 and GAK 113 have been detected in non - neuronal cells at sites of adhesion between cells and the substratum , indirect role in fission and uncoating through its inter - acting partners . On the basis of its protein – protein interactions , intersectin may act at virtually every step of the endocytic process . The binding of several accessory factors to dynamin indicates their possible role in the molecular machinery that controls fission , but their function may not be limited to their interplay with dynamin . Dynamin itself may have a role at early stages of the budding reaction . Most of the accessory factors have binding sites for several other proteins of the endocytic machinery , often including a binding site for clathrin and AP - 2 . Pools of these proteins are present in nerve terminals as part of large macromolecular complexes . One of their func - tions , therefore , is to act as scaffolds or adaptors that help to recruit and / or coordinate the recruitment of coat proteins and other accessory factors to sites of endocytosis . However , with the exception of AP - 180 , whose enrichment in clathrin - coated vesicles roughly parallels the enrichment of AP - 2 and clathrin , most fac - tors are not enriched in clathrin - coated vesicles , indicat - ing that they do not function as classical clathrin adap - tors . It has been proposed that high - affinity binding of clathrin to β - adaptin may displace the other proteins as new interactions between clathrin and AP - 2 are formed during coat maturation 26 . Many interactions of accesso - ry factors involve recognition by a set of small protein modules ( for example SH3 domains , EH domains , ear domains of AP - 2 , the β - propeller region of clathrin ) of binding sites in target proteins centred around short sig - nature amino - acid sequences , such as NPF and clathrin boxes . The presence of these signature motifs in a pro - tein is often a good predictor of its involvement in the endocytic pathway . Some factors have signalling functions , indicating a functional overlap between accessory proteins of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and proteins of sig - nalling pathways . It would seem that the same set of molecules might participate both in mechanistic aspects of endocytosis and in downstream signalling . Clear examples of this dual function are intersectin and EPS15 . Another example is synaptojanin , whose enzymatic activity may affect not only coat - membrane and actin - membrane interactions , but also the sig - nalling pathways controlled by proteins that use PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 as a substrate , such as phospholipase C and phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase ( PI ( 3 ) K ) . Still another connection to signalling is the property of some accessory proteins to enter the nucleus and con - trol nuclear function . Whereas this connection has so far been directly shown only for EPS15 , epsin and amphiphysin 2 , it may also apply to other proteins ( P . Di Fiore , personal communication ) . Other factors have an effect on membrane lipids . Some of these factors may help to modify the curva - ture of the bilayer either through direct binding , as proposed for dynamin , endophilin and amphiphysin ( FIG . 5 ) , or through changes produced by their enzy - matic activity , as proposed for endophilin 78 . These pro - teins may cooperate with components of the clathrin coat in the generation of the highly curved surfaces © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 170 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S with dynamin 1 ( REF . 143 ) . It has been proposed that the stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation of endocytic proteins may represent a trigger for assembly of endo - cytic complexes , priming the nerve terminal for a burst of endocytosis 63 . It remains unclear whether this mecha - nism underlies the critical Ca 2 + dependence 7 of the clathrin - dependent compensatory re - internalization of synaptic vesicle membranes . Besides the phosphorylation – dephosphorylation cycle controlled by depolarization in an acute fashion , other phosphorylation reactions are likely to be critical in endocytosis 144 . It will be of special interest to eluci - date whether in mammalian cells Ark / GAK family kinases have the same critical role in actin function and endocytosis that they have in yeast 114 – 116 . Concluding remarks This overview of accessory factors in clathrin - mediated endocytosis reveals the complexity of protein – protein and protein – lipid interaction networks that coordinate the dynamics of the coat with changes in the lipid bilay - er and in the peripheral actin cytoskeleton with sig - nalling cascades . A challenging task will be to establish the hierarchy , the sequence of action , and the precise function of these factors . It will also be important to fur - ther define the function of specific lipids , a field that has been neglected until recently . A multiplicity of approaches , including biochemical and genetic studies , as well as studies with purified components and with semi - intact and intact models , will be needed to obtain a comprehensive understanding of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and of the specific features of this process at the synapse . Advances in videomicroscopy are rapidly increasing the temporal and spatial resolution with which we can study these events , thereby bridging bio - physics and cell biology . Finally , considerable progress in this field will derive from structural studies , which will allow the dissection of the mechanisms of endocytosis at the submolecular level . which are also sites of actin polymerization . In some cases , tubular invaginations of the membrane form at these sites . These invaginations have the same diameter as the neck of clathrin - coated buds 51 . Considering the numerous proteins that regulate actin function , the connection between actin and endocytosis may account for the rapidly expanding number of clathrin coat accessory factors . Regulation of endocytic factors The function of endocytic proteins requires an associa - tion – dissociation cycle that must be highly regulated . In nerve terminals , one of the main triggers for clathrin coat assembly is the incorporation of synaptic vesicle membranes in the plasma membrane 7 . The association of the clathrin coat with the vesicle membrane only after exocytosis implies the existence of a molecular switch that correlates with exocytosis . In other coat - mediated budding reactions , including the budding of clathrin coats that use AP - 1 adaptors , a critical function for small GTPases as primer for coat recruitment has been shown ( Arf 1 in the case of clathrin 132 ) . Although GTP γ S stimulates AP - 2 clathrin coat formation in cell - free systems 4 , it is still unclear whether it produces this effect by stimulating an Arf - like protein . One of the functions of Arf family members is to stimulate the synthesis of phosphoinositides 133 , 134 which , in turn , recruit coats and actin 133 , 135 . Other mechanisms to gen - erate phosphoinositides may bypass the effect of Arf in AP - 2 / clathrin recruitment . The Arf - independent acti - vation of phospholipase D ( REF . 25 ) , or the direct associ - ation with the membrane of a PI ( 3 ) K 124 are examples of these mechanisms . However , the identity of the lipid kinase that generates the phosphoinositide pool involved in endocytosis at the synapse remains to be elucidated . Another important regulatory mechanism of coat assembly is protein phosphorylation . Almost all the components of the endocytic machinery in nerve termi - nals are phosphoproteins 63 , 70 , 136 – 141 . Generally , phospho - rylation inhibits and dephosphorylation enhances the ability of these proteins to associate with each other . In the cytosol of resting nerve terminals , most endocytic proteins are in the phosphorylated state , but depolariza - tion - dependent Ca 2 + entry produces their rapid dephos - phorylation 70 , 138 , 139 , 141 , 142 . On the basis of pharmacologi - cal criteria , this reaction is mediated by calcineurin , a Ca 2 + - dependent protein phosphatase that associates Links DATABASE LINKS Clathrin | α - adaptin | β 2 adaptin | LAP | Unc - 11 | dynamin | shibire | profilin | synaptojanin | Unc - 26 | amphiphysin | endophilin | intersectin | syndapin | N - WASP | EPS15 | epsin | liquid facets | HSC70 | tensin | PTEN | HIP1 | HIP1R | stoned 1 . Cochilla , A . J . , Angleson , J . K . & Betz , W . J . Monitoring secretory membrane with FM1 - 43 fluorescence . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 22 , 1 – 10 ( 1999 ) . 2 . Hirst , J . & Robinson , M . S . Clathrin and adaptors . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1404 , 173 – 193 ( 1998 ) . 3 . Mellman , I . Endocytosis and molecular sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 12 , 575 – 625 ( 1996 ) . 4 . Takei , K . , Mundigl , O . , Daniell , L . & De Camilli , P . The synaptic vesicle cycle : a single vesicle budding step involving clathrin and dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1237 – 1250 ( 1996 ) . 5 . Murthy , V . N . & Stevens , C . F . Synaptic vesicles retain their identity through the endocytic cycle . Nature 392 , 497 – 501 ( 1998 ) . Uses the fluorescent dye FM1 - 43 to show that the content of an endocytic vesicle in the nerve terminal is released without dilution in an endocytic compartment . This finding supports a direct reformation of synaptic vesicles from uncoated clathrin - coated vesicles . 6 . Fesce , R . , Grohovaz , F . , Valtorta , F . & Meldolesi , J . Neurotransmitter release : fusion or kiss - and - run ? Trends Cell . Biol . 4 , 1 – 6 ( 1994 ) . 7 . Gad , H . , Low , P . , Zotova , E . , Brodin , L . & Shupliakov , O . Dissociation between Ca 2 + - triggered synaptic vesicle exocytosis and clathrin - mediated endocytosis at a central synapse . Neuron 21 , 607 – 616 ( 1998 ) . 8 . Heuser , J . E . & Reese , T . S . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 57 , 315 – 344 ( 1973 ) . A classical study worth reading by anybody interested in this field . It provides a first description of the clathrin - mediated recycling pathway of synaptic vesicles . 9 . Ringstad , N . et al . Endophilin / SH3P4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicles endocytosis . Neuron 24 , 1 – 20 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Gustafsson , J . et al . GTP γ S induces an actin matrix associated with coated intermediates in presynaptic neurons . Neurosci . Soc . Abstr . 327 , 19 ( 1998 ) . 11 . Brodin , L . Actin - dependent steps in synaptic vesicle recycling . Biochimie 81 , S49 ( 1999 ) . 12 . Dunaevsky , A . & Connor , E . A . F - actin is concentrated in nonrelease domains at frog neuromuscular junctions . J . Neurosci . 20 , 6007 – 6012 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Chang , Q . & Balice - Gordon , R . J . Highwire , rpm - 1 , and futsch : balancing synaptic growth and stability . Neuron 26 , 287 – 290 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Schmid , S . S . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 – 548 ( 1997 ) . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 1 | DECEMBER 2000 | 171 R E V I E W S 15 . Smith , C . J . & Pearse , B . M . Clathrin : anatomy of a coat protein . Trends Cell . Biol . 9 , 335 – 338 ( 1999 ) . 16 . Ybe , J . A . et al . Clathrin self - assembly is mediated by a tandemly repeated superhelix . Nature 399 , 371 – 375 ( 1999 ) . 17 . ter Haar , E . , Musacchio , A . , Harrison , S . C . & Kirchhausen , T . Atomic structure of clathrin : a β - propeller terminal domain joins an α - zigzag linker . Cell 95 , 563 – 573 ( 1998 ) . 18 . ter Haar , E . , Harrison , S . C . & Kirchhausen , T . Peptide - in - groove interactions link target proteins to the beta - propeller of clathrin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 1096 – 1100 ( 2000 ) . 19 . Owen , D . J . & Luzio , J . P . Structural insights into clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 467 – 474 ( 2000 ) . 20 . Musacchio , A . et al . Functional organization of clathrin in coats : combining electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray crystallography . Mol . Cell 3 , 761 – 770 ( 1999 ) . A striking structural description of clathrin coats . 21 . von Poser , C . et al . Synaptotagmin regulation of coated pit assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 30916 – 30924 ( 2000 ) . 22 . Haucke , V . & De Camilli , P . AP - 2 recruitment to synaptotagmin stimulated by tyrosine - based endocytic motifs . Science 285 , 1268 – 1271 ( 1999 ) . 23 . Rapoport , I . et al . Regulatory interactions in the recognition of endocytic sorting signals by AP - 2 complexes . EMBO J . 16 , 2240 – 2250 ( 1997 ) . 24 . Gaidarov , I . & Keen , J . H . Phosphoinositide - AP - 2 interactions required for targeting to plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 755 – 764 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Arneson , L . S . , Kunz , J . , Anderson , R . A . & Traub , L . M . Coupled inositide phosphorylation and phospholipase D activation initiates clathrin - coat assembly on lysosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 17794 – 17805 ( 1999 ) . 26 . Owen , D . J . , Vallis , Y . , Pearse , B . M . , McMahon , H . T . & Evans , P . R . The structure and function of the β 2 - adaptin appendage domain . EMBO J . 19 , 4216 – 4227 ( 2000 ) . Shows an unexpected similarity of the ear domain of β - adaptin to the ear domain of α - adaptin . 27 . Owen , D . J . et al . A structural explanation for the binding of multiple ligands by the α - adaptin appendage domain . Cell 97 , 805 – 815 ( 1999 ) . 28 . Traub , L . M . , Downs , M . A . , Westrich , J . L . & Fremont , D . H . Crystal structure of the alpha appendage of AP - 2 reveals a recruitment platform for clathrin - coat assembly . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 8907 – 8912 ( 1999 ) . 29 . De Camilli , P . , Slepnev , V . I . , Shupliakov , O . & Brodin , L . in Synapses ( eds Cowan , M . , Sudhof , T . & Stevens , C . ) 217 – 274 ( John Hopkins Univ . Press , Baltimore , 2000 ) . 30 . Chen , H . et al . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature 394 , 793 – 797 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Ahle , S . & Ungewickell , E . Purification and properties of a new clathrin assembly protein . EMBO J . 5 , 3143 – 3149 ( 1986 ) . 32 . Tebar , F . , Bohlander , S . K . & Sorkin , A . Clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia ( CALM ) protein : localization in endocytic - coated pits , interactions with clathrin , and the impact of overexpression on clathrin - mediated traffic . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2687 – 2702 ( 1999 ) . 33 . Morgan , J . R . , Prasad , K . , Hao , W . , Augustine , G . R . & Lafer , E . M . A conserved clathrin assembly motif essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J . Neurosci . ( in the press ) Identification of a novel motif in AP - 180 with a putative function in coat assembly . 34 . Wang , L . H . , Sudhof , T . C . & Anderson , R . G . The appendage domain of alpha - adaptin is a high affinity binding site for dynamin . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 10079 – 10083 ( 1995 ) . 35 . Hao , W . , Luo , Z . , Zheng , L . , Prasad , K . & Lafer , E . M . AP180 and AP - 2 interact directly in a complex that cooperatively assembles clathrin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 22785 – 22794 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Hao , W . et al . Regulation of AP - 3 function by inositides . Identification of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate as a potent ligand . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 6393 – 6398 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Ye , W . & Lafer , E . M . Bacterially expressed F1 - 20 / AP - 3 assembles clathrin into cages with a narrow size distribution : implications for the regulation of quantal size during neurotransmission . J . Neurosci . Res . 41 , 15 – 26 ( 1995 ) . 38 . Zhang , B . et al . Synaptic vesicle size and number are regulated by a clathrin adaptor protein required for endocytosis . Neuron 21 , 1465 – 1475 ( 1998 ) . 39 . Nonet , M . L . et al . UNC - 11 , a Caenorhabditis elegans AP180 homologue , regulates the size and protein composition of synaptic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2343 – 2360 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Koenig , J . H . & Ikeda , K . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 , 3844 – 3860 ( 1989 ) . Key paper in the field of endocytosis . It reports for the first time that a dynamin mutation arrests synaptic vesicle endocytosis at the stage of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits . 41 . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . & De Camilli , P . Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 504 – 512 ( 1998 ) . 42 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . & Yoon , Y . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Sever , S . D . , G . & Schmid , S . L . Garrotes , springs , ratchets , and whips : putting dynamin models to the test . Traffic 1 , 385 – 392 ( 2000 ) . 44 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . & De Camilli , P . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 ( 1995 ) . [ Nature ] 45 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . 46 . Stowell , M . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 47 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1019 ( 1998 ) . 48 . Takei , K . et al . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 49 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . & Schmid , S . L . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 ( 1999 ) . 50 . Witke , W . et al . In mouse brain profilin I and profilin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO J . 17 , 967 – 976 ( 1998 ) . 51 . Ochoa , G . C . et al . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 37 – 89 ( 2000 ) . 52 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 53 . McPherson , P . S . et al . A presynaptic inositol - 5 - phosphatase . Nature 379 , 353 – 357 ( 1996 ) . 54 . Guo , S . , Stolz , L . E . , Lemrow , S . M . & York , J . D . SAC1 - like domains of yeast SAC1 , INP52 , and INP53 and of human synaptojanin encode polyphosphoinositide phosphatases . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 12990 – 12995 ( 1999 ) . 55 . Rohatgi , R . et al . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 ( 1999 ) . A seminal paper concerning the cooperative mechanisms through which PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and CDC42 trigger actin nucleation . 56 . Haffner , C . et al . Synaptojanin 1 : localization on coated endocytic intermediates in nerve terminals and interaction of its 170 kDa isoform with Eps15 . FEBS Lett . 419 , 175 – 180 ( 1997 ) . 57 . Nemoto , Y . & De Camilli , P . Recruitment of an alternatively spliced form of synaptojanin 2 to mitochondria by the interaction with the PDZ domain of a mitochondrial outer membrane protein . EMBO J . 18 , 2991 – 3006 ( 1999 ) . 58 . van der Bliek , A . M . Functional diversity in the dynamin family . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 96 – 102 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Cremona , O . et al . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 , 179 – 188 ( 1999 ) . Reports an increased number of clathrin - coated vesicles in nerve terminals of synaptojanin 1 knockout mice . 60 . Harris , T . W . , Hartwieg , E . , Horvitz , H . R . & Jorgensen , E . M . Mutations in synaptojanin disrupt synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 589 – 600 ( 2000 ) . Evidence that Caenorhabditis elegans synaptojanin has a function in the endocytic reactions . 61 . Gad , H . et al . Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 , 301 – 312 ( 2000 ) . Disruption of endophilin and synaptojanin function at the giant synapses of the lamprey impairs endocytosisand produces an accumulation of clathrin - coated intermediates and actin matrix at endocytic zones . 62 . Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . The amphiphysin family of proteins and their role in endocytosis at the synapse . Trends Neurosci . 21 , 339 – 344 ( 1998 ) . 63 . Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Butler , M . H . , Grabs , D . & De Camilli , P . Role of phosphorylation in regulation of the assembly of endocytic coat complexes . Science 281 , 821 – 824 ( 1998 ) . 64 . Ramjaun , A . R . , Philie , J . , de Heuvel , E . & McPherson , P . S . The N terminus of amphiphysin II mediates dimerization and plasma membrane targeting . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 19785 – 19791 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . & De Camilli , P . Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 ( 1999 ) . 66 . Ramjaun , A . R . & McPherson , P . S . Multiple amphiphysin II splice variants display differential clathrin binding : identification of two distinct clathrin - binding sites . J . Neurochem . 70 , 2369 – 2376 ( 1998 ) . 67 . Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Butler , M . H . & De Camilli , P . Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 17583 – 17589 ( 2000 ) . 68 . David , C . , McPherson , P . S . , Mundigl , O . & de Camilli , P . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 331 – 335 ( 1996 ) . 69 . Owen , D . J . et al . Crystal structure of the amphiphysin - 2 SH3 domain and its role in the prevention of dynamin ring formation . EMBO J . 17 , 5273 – 5285 ( 1998 ) . 70 . Bauerfeind , R . , Takei , K . & De Camilli , P . Amphiphysin I is associated with coated endocytic intermediates and undergoes stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation in nerve terminals . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30984 – 30992 ( 1997 ) . 71 . Shupliakov , O . et al . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science 276 , 259 – 263 ( 1997 ) . 72 . Wechsler - Reya , R . , Elliott , K . , Herlyn , M . & Prendergast , G . C . The putative tumor suppressor BIN1 is a short - lived nuclear phosphoprotein , the localization of which is altered in malignant cells . Cancer Res . 57 , 3258 – 3263 ( 1997 ) . 73 . Galderisi , U . et al . Induction of apoptosis and differentiation in neuroblastoma and astrocytoma cells by the overexpression of Bin1 , a novel Myc interacting protein . J . Cell . Biochem . 74 , 313 – 322 ( 1999 ) . 74 . Gold , E . S . et al . Amphiphysin IIm , a novel amphiphysin II isoform , is required for macrophage phagocytosis . Immunity 12 , 285 – 292 ( 2000 ) . 75 . Geli , M . I . & Riezman , H . Endocytic internalization in yeast and animal cells : similar and different . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1031 – 1037 ( 1998 ) . 76 . Ringstad , N . , Nemoto , Y . & De Camilli , P . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 8569 – 8574 ( 1997 ) . 77 . de Heuvel , E . et al . Identification of the major synaptojanin - binding proteins in brain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 8710 – 8716 ( 1997 ) . 78 . Schmidt , A . et al . Endophilin I mediates synaptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 401 , 133 – 141 ( 1999 ) . Proposes that transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid may mediate fission by forcing a change in membrane curvature owing to the different shape of the precursor ( lysophosphatidic acid ) and product ( phosphatidic acid ) of this activity . 79 . Roos , J . & Kelly , R . B . Dap160 , a neural - specific Eps15 homology and multiple SH3 domain - containing protein that interacts with Drosophila dynamin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19108 – 19119 ( 1998 ) . 80 . Sengar , A . S . , Wang , W . , Bishay , J . , Cohen , S . & Egan , S . E . The EH and SH3 domain Ese proteins regulate endocytosis by linking to dynamin and Eps15 . EMBO J . 18 , 1159 – 1171 ( 1999 ) . 81 . Hussain , N . K . et al . Splice variants of intersectin are components of the endocytic machinery in neurons and nonneuronal cells . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15671 – 15677 ( 1999 ) . 82 . Santolini , E . et al . The EH network . Exp . Cell Res . 253 , 186 – 209 ( 1999 ) . 83 . Fernandez - Chacon , R . , Achiriloaie , M . , Janz , R . , Albanesi , J . P . & Sudhof , T . C . SCAMP1 function in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 12752 – 12756 ( 2000 ) . 84 . Tong , X . K . et al . The endocytic protein intersectin is a major binding partner for the Ras exchange factor mSos1 in rat brain . EMBO J . 19 , 1263 – 1271 ( 2000 ) . Intersectin is shown to have a dual function in endocytosis and signalling . 85 . Simpson , F . et al . SH3 - domain - containing proteins function at distinct steps in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 119 – 124 ( 1999 ) . 86 . Ritter , B . , Modregger , J . , Paulsson , M . & Plomann , M . PACSIN 2 , a novel member of the PACSIN family of cytoplasmic adapter proteins . FEBS Lett . 454 , 356 – 362 ( 1999 ) . 87 . Qualmann , B . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . & Kelly , R . B . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 501 – 513 ( 1999 ) . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 172 | DECEMBER 2000 | VOLUME 1 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S 88 . Qualmann , B . & Kelly , R . B . Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1047 – 1062 ( 2000 ) . Provides strong evidence for a link between an endocytic protein and actin . 89 . Salcini , A . E . , Chen , H . , Iannolo , G . , De Camilli , P . & Di Fiore , P . P . Epidermal growth factor pathway substrate 15 , Eps15 . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 31 , 805 – 809 ( 1999 ) . 90 . Tebar , F . , Sorkina , T . , Sorkin , A . , Ericsson , M . & Kirchhausen , T . Eps15 is a component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles and is located at the rim of coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 28727 – 28730 ( 1996 ) . 91 . Benmerah , A . , Begue , B . , Dautry - Varsat , A . & Cerf - Bensussan , N . The ear of α - adaptin interacts with the COOH - terminal domain of the Eps 15 protein . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 12111 – 12116 ( 1996 ) . 92 . Iannolo , G . et al . Mapping of the molecular determinants involved in the interaction between eps15 and AP - 2 . Cancer Res . 57 , 240 – 245 ( 1997 ) . 93 . Bean , A . J . et al . Hrs - 2 regulates receptor - mediated endocytosis via interactions with Eps15 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15271 – 15278 ( 2000 ) . 94 . Benmerah , A . , Bayrou , M . , Cerf - Bensussan , N . & Dautry - Varsat , A . Inhibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1303 – 1311 ( 1999 ) . 95 . Carbone , R . et al . eps15 and eps15R are essential components of the endocytic pathway . Cancer Res . 57 , 5498 – 5504 ( 1997 ) . 96 . Yamabhai , M . et al . Intersectin , a novel adaptor protein with two Eps15 homology and five Src homology 3 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 31401 – 31407 ( 1998 ) . 97 . Rosenthal , J . A . et al . The epsins define a family of proteins that interact with components of the clathrin coat and contain a new protein module . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33959 – 33965 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Drake , M . T . , Downs , M . A . & Traub , L . M . Epsin binds to clathrin by associating directly with the clathrin - terminal domain . Evidence for cooperative binding through two discrete sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 6479 – 6489 ( 2000 ) . 99 . Wendland , B . , Steece , K . E . & Emr , S . D . Yeast epsins contain an essential N - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 , 4383 – 4393 ( 1999 ) . 100 . Kay , B . K . , Yamabhai , M . , Wendland , B . & Emr , S . D . Identification of a novel domain shared by putative components of the endocytic and cytoskeletal machinery . Protein Sci . 8 , 435 – 438 ( 1999 ) . 101 . Mao , Y . et al . Crystal structure of the VHS and FYVE tandem domains of Hrs , a protein involved in membrane trafficking and signal transduction . Cell 100 , 447 – 456 ( 2000 ) . 102 . Hyman , J . , Chen , H . , Di Fiore , P . P . , De Camilli , P . & Brunger , A . T . Epsin 1 undergoes nucleocytosolic shuttling and its eps15 interactor NH 2 - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domain , structurally similar to Armadillo and HEAT repeats , interacts with the transcription factor promyelocytic leukemia Zn 2 + finger protein ( PLZF ) . J . Cell . Biol . 149 , 537 – 546 ( 2000 ) . 103 . Doria , M . et al . The eps15 homology ( EH ) domain - based interaction between eps15 and hrb connects the molecular machinery of endocytosis to that of nucleocytosolic transport . J . Cell . Biol . 147 , 1379 – 1384 ( 1999 ) . 104 . Cadavid , A . L . , Ginzel , A . & Fischer , J . A . The function of the Drosophila fat facets deubiquitinating enzyme in limiting photoreceptor cell number is intimately associated with endocytosis . Development 127 , 1727 – 1736 ( 2000 ) . The study reports the isolation of liquid facet as a dominant enhancer of the fat facet mutant eye phenotype of Drosophila melanogaster . It also reports that the liquid facet locus encodes epsin and links epsin both to endocytosis and to signalling during development . 105 . Carthew , R . W . & Xu , C . Endocytosis : why not wait to deubiquitinate ? Curr . Biol . 10 , R532 – R534 ( 2000 ) . 106 . van Delft , S . , Govers , R . , Strous , G . J . , Verkleij , A . J . & van Bergen en Henegouwen , P . M . Epidermal growth factor induces ubiquitination of Eps15 . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 14013 – 14016 ( 1997 ) . 107 . Hicke , L . Gettin’ down with ubiquitin : turning off cell - surface receptors , transporters and channels . Trends Cell . Biol . 9 , 107 – 112 ( 1999 ) . 108 . Hannan , L . A . , Newmyer , S . L . & Schmid , S . L . ATP - and cytosol - dependent release of adaptor proteins from clathrin - coated vesicles : A dual role for Hsc70 . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2217 – 2229 ( 1998 ) . 109 . Ungewickell , E . et al . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 378 , 632 – 635 ( 1995 ) . 110 . Umeda , A . , Meyerholz , A . & Ungewickell , E . Identification of the universal cofactor ( auxilin 2 ) in clathrin coat dissociation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 79 , 336 – 342 ( 2000 ) . 111 . Haynie , D . T . & Ponting , C . P . The N - terminal domains of tensin and auxilin are phosphatase homologues . Protein Sci . 5 , 2643 – 2646 ( 1996 ) . 112 . Lee , J . O . et al . Crystal structure of the PTEN tumor suppressor : implications for its phosphoinositide phosphatase activity and membrane association . Cell 99 , 323 – 334 ( 1999 ) . 113 . Greener , T . , Zhao , X . , Nojima , H . , Eisenberg , E . & Greene , L . E . Role of cyclin G - associated kinase in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles from non - neuronal cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 1365 – 1370 ( 2000 ) . 114 . Cope , M . J . , Yang , S . , Shang , C . & Drubin , D . G . Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1203 – 1218 ( 1999 ) . Characterization of a new family of protein kinases with a critical role in actin function . 115 . Wendland , B . , Cope , M . J . & Watson , H . A . Evidence linking the yeast epsin homologue Ent1p to Ark protein kinases . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 119a ( 1999 ) . 116 . Zeng , G . & Cai , M . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast by a novel serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 71 – 82 ( 1999 ) . 117 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . & Drubin , D . G . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1503 – 1518 ( 1999 ) . 118 . Velier , J . et al . Wild - type and mutant huntingtins function in vesicle trafficking in the secretory and endocytic pathways . Exp . Neurol . 152 , 34 – 40 ( 1998 ) . 119 . Stimson , D . T . , Estes , P . S . , Smith , M . , Kelly , L . E . & Ramaswami , M . A product of the Drosophila stoned locus regulates neurotransmitter release . J . Neurosci . 18 , 9638 – 9649 ( 1998 ) . References 119 and 120 provide the first cell biological characterization of the stoned mutation . 120 . Fergestad , T . , Davis , W . S . & Broadie , K . The stoned proteins regulate synaptic vesicle recycling in the presynaptic terminal . J . Neurosci . 19 , 5847 – 5860 ( 1999 ) . 121 . Petrovich , T . Z . , Merakovsky , J . & Kelly , L . E . A genetic analysis of the stoned locus and its interaction with dunce , shibire and Suppressor of stoned variants of Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 133 , 955 – 965 ( 1993 ) . 122 . De Camilli , P . , Emr , S . D . , McPherson , P . S . & Novick , P . Phosphoinositides as regulators in membrane traffic . Science 271 , 1533 – 1539 ( 1996 ) . 123 . Martin , T . F . Phosphoinositide lipids as signaling molecules : common themes for signal transduction , cytoskeletal regulation , and membrane trafficking . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 231 – 264 ( 1998 ) . 124 . Domin , J . , Gaidarov , I . , Smith , M . E . , Keen , J . H . & Waterfield , M . D . The class II phosphoinositide 3 - kinase PI3K - C2 α is concentrated in the trans - Golgi network and present in clathrin - coated vesicles . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 11943 – 11950 ( 2000 ) . 125 . Pishvaee , B . & Payne , G . S . Clathrin coats — threads laid bare . Cell 95 , 443 – 446 ( 1998 ) . 126 . Mulholland , J . et al . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 381 – 391 ( 1994 ) . 127 . Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . & Botstein , D . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 799 – 817 ( 1999 ) . 128 . Fujimoto , M . L . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 1 , 161 – 171 ( 2000 ) . 129 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . & Keen , J . H . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 ( 1999 ) . 130 . Merrifield , C . J . et al . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured must cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 ( 1999 ) . Evidence for the function of actin in endocytosis in mammalian cells . 131 . Merilainen , J . , Lehto , V . P . & Wasenius , V . M . FAP52 , a novel , SH3 domain - containing focal adhesion protein . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 23278 – 23284 ( 1997 ) . 132 . Springer , S . , Spang , A . & Schekman , R . A primer on vesicle budding . Cell 97 , 145 – 148 ( 1999 ) . 133 . Roth , M . G . , Bi , K . , Ktistakis , N . T . & Yu , S . Phospholipase D as an effector for ADP - ribosylation factor in the regulation of vesicular traffic . Chem . Phys . Lipids 98 , 141 – 152 ( 1999 ) . 134 . Honda , A . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase - α is a downstream effector of the small G protein ARF6 in membrane ruffle formation . Cell 99 , 521 – 532 ( 1999 ) . 135 . Janmey , P . A . , Xian , W . & Flanagan , L . A . Controlling cytoskeleton structure by phosphoinositide - protein interactions : phosphoinositide binding protein domains and effects of lipid packing . Chem . Phys . Lipids 101 , 93 – 107 ( 1999 ) . 136 . Robinson , P . J . et al . Dynamin GTPase regulated by protein kinase C phosphorylation in nerve terminals . Nature 365 , 163 – 166 ( 1993 ) . 137 . Murphy , J . E . , Hanover , J . A . , Froehlich , M . , DuBois , G . & Keen , J . H . Clathrin assembly protein AP - 3 is phosphorylated and glycosylated on the 50 - kDa structural domain . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 21346 – 21352 ( 1994 ) . 138 . McPherson , P . S . , Takei , K . , Schmid , S . L . & De Camilli , P . p145 , a major Grb2 - binding protein in brain , is co - localized with dynamin in nerve terminals where it undergoes activity - dependent dephosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30132 – 30139 ( 1994 ) . 139 . Powell , K . A . & Robinson , P . J . Dephosphin / dynamin is a neuronal phosphoprotein concentrated in nerve terminals : evidence from rat cerebellum . Neuroscience 64 , 821 – 833 ( 1995 ) . 140 . Wilde , A . & Brodsky , F . M . In vivo phosphorylation of adaptors regulates their interaction with clathrin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 635 – 645 ( 1996 ) . 141 . Chen , H . , Slepnev , V . I . , Di Fiore , P . P . & De Camilli , P . The interaction of epsin and Eps15 with the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 is inhibited by mitotic phosphorylation and enhanced by stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation in nerve terminals . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 3257 – 3260 ( 1999 ) . 142 . Liu , J . P . , Sim , A . T . & Robinson , P . J . Calcineurin inhibition of dynamin I GTPase activity coupled to nerve terminal depolarization . Science 265 , 970 – 973 ( 1994 ) . 143 . Lai , M . M . et al . The Calcineurin - Dynamin 1 complex as a calcium sensor for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25963 – 25966 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Wilde , A . et al . EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , influencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 96 , 677 – 687 ( 1999 ) . 145 . Ge , K . & Prendergast , G . C . Bin2 , a functionally nonredundant member of the BAR adaptor gene family . Genomics 67 , 210 – 220 ( 2000 ) . 146 . Okamoto , M . , Schoch , S . & Sudhof , T . C . EHSH1 / intersectin , a protein that contains EH and SH3 domains and binds to dynamin and SNAP - 25 . A protein connection between exocytosis and endocytosis ? J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 18446 – 18454 ( 1999 ) . Acknowledgements We thank Scott Floyd for discussion and assistance in the prepara - tion of the manuscript . Work carried out in our lab was supported in part by grants from the NIH . © 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd