The Limits of Global Inclusion in AI Development Alan Chan * 1 , Chinasa T . Okolo ∗ 2 , Zachary Terner ∗ 3 , Angelina Wang ∗ 4 1 Mila , Universit´e de Montr´eal 2 Cornell University 3 National Institute of Statistical Sciences 4 Princeton University alan . chan @ mila . quebec , chinasa @ cs . cornell . edu , zterner @ niss . org , angelina . wang @ princeton . edu Abstract Those best - positioned to proﬁt from the proliferation of arti - ﬁcial intelligence ( AI ) systems are those with the most eco - nomic power . Extant global inequality has motivated Western institutions to involve more diverse groups in the develop - ment and application of AI systems , including hiring foreign labour and establishing extra - national data centres and labo - ratories . However , given both the propensity of wealth to abet its own accumulation and the lack of contextual knowledge in top - down AI solutions , we argue that more focus should be placed on the redistribution of power , rather than just on in - cluding underrepresented groups . Unless more is done to en - sure that opportunities to lead AI development are distributed justly , the future may hold only AI systems which are un - suited to their conditions of application , and exacerbate in - equality . Introduction The arm of global inequality is long , rendering itself vis - ible especially in the development of artiﬁcial intelligence ( AI ) . In an analysis of publications at two major machine learning conference venues , NeurIPS 2020 and ICML 2020 , Chuvpilo ( 2020 ) found that of the top 10 countries in terms of publication index , none were located in Latin Amer - ica , Africa , or Southeast Asia . Vietnam , the highest placing country of these groups , comes in 27th place . Of the top 10 institutions by publication index , eight out of 10 were based in the United States , including American tech giants like Google , Microsoft , and Facebook . Indeed , the full lists of the top 100 universities and top 100 companies by pub - lication index include no companies or universities based in Africa or Latin America . Although conference publications are just one metric , they remain the predominant medium in which progress in AI is disseminated , and as such serve to be a signal of who is generating research . These statistics are unsurprising . The predominance of the United States in these rankings is consistent with its eco - nomic and cultural dominance , just as the appearance of China with the second highest index is a marker of its grow - ing might . Also comprehensible is the relative absence of * Author order is alphabetical by last name . All authors con - tributed equally to this work . Copyright © 2021 , Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . countries in the Global South , given the exploitation and un - derdevelopment of these regions by European colonial pow - ers ( Frank 1967 ; Rodney 1972 ; Jarosz 2003 ; Bruhn and Gal - lego 2012 ) . Current global inequality in AI development involves both a concentration of proﬁts and a danger of ignoring the con - texts to which AI is applied . As AI systems become increas - ingly integrated into society , those responsible for develop - ing and implementing such systems stand to proﬁt to a large extent . If these players are predominantly located outside of the Global South , a disproportionate share of economic ben - eﬁt will fall also outside of this region , exacerbating extant inequality . Furthermore , the ethical application of AI sys - tems requires knowledge of the contexts in which they are to be applied . As recent work ( Grush 2015 ; De La Garza 2020 ; Coalition for Critical Technology 2020 ; Beede et al . 2020 ; Sambasivan et al . 2020 ) has highlighted , work that lacks this contextual knowledge can fail to help the targeted individu - als , and can even harm them ( e . g . , misdiagnoses in medical applications ) . Whether explicitly in response to these problems or not , calls have been made for broader inclusion in the devel - opment of AI ( Asemota 2018 ; Lee et al . 2019 ) . At the same time , some have acknowledged the limitations of in - clusion . Sloane et al . ( 2020 ) describes and argues against participation - washing , whereby the mere fact that somebody has participated in a project lends it moral legitimacy . In this work , we focus upon the implications of participation for global inequality , focusing particularly on the limitations in which inclusion in AI development is practised in the Global South . We look speciﬁcally at how this plays out in the do - mains of datasets and research labs , and conclude with a discussion of opportunities for ameliorating the power im - balance in AI development . Datasets Given the centrality of large amounts of data in today’s ma - chine learning systems , there would appear to be substantial opportunity for inclusion in data collection and labeling pro - cesses . While there are beneﬁts to more diverse participation in data - gathering pipelines ( that is , processes involved in the collection , labeling , and other processing of data for use in machine - learning systems ) , we will highlight how this ap - proach does not go far enough in addressing global inequal - a r X i v : 2102 . 01265v1 [ c s . C Y ] 2 F e b 2021 ity in AI development . Data collection itself is a practice fraught with prob - lems of inclusion and representation . Two large , publicly available image datasets , ImageNet ( Deng et al . 2009 ; Rus - sakovsky et al . 2015 ) and OpenImages ( Krasin et al . 2017 ) , are US - and Eurocentric ( Shankar et al . 2017 ) . Shankar et al . ( 2017 ) further argues that models trained on these datasets perform worse on images from the Global South . For ex - ample , images of grooms are classiﬁed with lower accuracy when they come from Ethiopia and Pakistan , compared to images of grooms from the United States . Along this vein , DeVries et al . ( 2019 ) shows that images of the same word , like “wedding” or “spices” , look very different when queried in different languages , as they are presented distinctly in dif - ferent cultures . Thus , publicly available object recognition systems fail to correctly classify many of these objects when they come from the Global South . A representative dataset is crucial to allowing models to learn how certain objects and concepts are represented in different cultures . Since many deep learning techniques require large amounts of data to train their models , the importance of data labeling has grown . The data collection and labeling mar - ket is expected to grow to $ 6 . 5 billion USD by 2027 ( Grand View Research 2020 ) , while Cognilytica ( 2019 ) estimates that over 80 % of the machine learning development process consists of data preparation tasks ( collection , cleaning , and labeling ) . Large tech companies such as Uber and Alpha - bet rely heavily these services , with some paying millions of dollars monthly ( Synced 2019 ) . At the same time , data labeling is a time - consuming , repetitive process . Its importance in machine - learning re - search and development has led to the crowdsourcing of this work , whereby anonymous individuals are remunerated for completing this work . A major venue for crowdsourcing work is Amazon Mechanical Turk ; according to Difallah , Filatova , and Ipeirotis ( 2018 ) , less than 2 % of Mechanical Turk workers come from the Global South ( a vast majority come from the USA and India ) . Other notable companies in this domain , Samasource , Scale AI , and Mighty AI also operate in the United States , but they crowdsource work - ers from around the world , primarily relying on low - wage workers from sub - Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia ( Mur - gia 2019 ) . This leads to a signiﬁcant disparity between the millions in proﬁts earned by data labeling companies and worker earnings ; for example , workers at Samasource earn around $ 8 USD a day ( Lee 2018 ) while the company made $ 19 million in 2019 ( Samasource 2021 ) . While Lee ( 2018 ) notes that $ 8 USD may well be a living wage in certain areas , the massive proﬁt disparity remains despite the importance of these workers to the core businesses of these companies . Additionally , many of these workers are contributing to AI systems that are likely to be biased against underrepresented populations in the locales they are deployed in ( Buolamwini and Gebru 2018 ; Obermeyer et al . 2019 ) and may not be directly beneﬁting their local communities . While data la - beling is not as physically intensive as traditional factory la - bor , workers report the pace and volume of their tasks as ”mentally exhausting” and ”monotonous” due to the strict requirements needed for labeling images , videos , and audio to client speciﬁcations ( Gent 2019 ; Croce and Musa 2019 ) . In the Global South recently , local companies have begun to proliferate , like Fastagger in Kenya , Sebenz . ai in South Africa , and Supahands in Malaysia . As AI development con - tinues to scale , the expansion of these companies opens the door for low - skilled laborers to enter the workforce but also presents a chance for exploitation to continue to occur . Barriers to Participation There are barriers that exist to participating in data labeling . The most obvious is that a computing device and stable internet access are required for access to these data labeling platforms . These goods are highly correlated with socioeconomic status and geographic locations , thus serving as a barrier to participation for many Harris , Straker , and Pollock ( 2017 ) . A reliable internet con - nection is necessary for ﬁnding tasks to complete , complet - ing those tasks , and accessing the remuneration for those tasks . Further , those in the Global South pay higher prices for Internet access compared to their counterparts in the Global North ( i . e . Western countries ) ( Nzekwe 2019 ) . An - other barrier is in the method of payment for data labeling services on some of these platforms . For example , Amazon Mechanical Turk , a widely used platform for ﬁnding data labelers , only allows payment to a U . S . Bank Account or in the form of an Amazon . com gift card ( Amazon 2020 ) . These methods of payment restrict may not be what is desired by a worker , and can serve as a deterrent to work for this plat - form . Problems with Participation Although global inclusion in the data pipeline can be beneﬁcial , it is no panacea for global inequality in AI development , and in fact , can even be detrimental if not approached with care . The develop - ment of AI is highly concentrated in countries in the Global North for a variety of reasons , such as an abundance of cap - ital , well - funded research institutions , and technical infras - tructure . The existence of these advantageous conditions is inextricable from the history of colonial exploitation of the Global South , whereby European states plundered labour and capital for the beneﬁt of the metropoles , to the detriment of the colonized ( Frank 1967 ; Rodney 1972 ) . A key justiﬁ - cation for this exploitation was white supremacy : the colo - nized , as “uncivilized” , were most ﬁt to perform physically excruciating labour , at wages lower than those paid to Eu - ropeans . As such , colonized peoples were for the most part prevented from engaging in the more lucrative businesses of insurance , banking , industry , and trading ( Rodney 1972 ) . Although the labour and natural capital of colonized nations were indispensable to European economic projects , Euro - pean institutions and individuals captured the vast majority this wealth . It is instructive to view inclusion in the data pipeline as a continuation of this exploitative history . With respect to data collection , current practices can neglect consent and poorly represent areas of the Global South . Image datasets are often collected without consent from the people involved , even in pornographic contexts ( Prabhu and Birhane 2020 ; Paullada et al . 2020 ) , while others ( e . g . , companies , end - users ) beneﬁt from their use . Jo and Gebru ( 2020 ) suggests drawing from the long tradition or archives when collecting data because this is a discipline that has already been thinking about chal - lenges like consent and privacy . Indeed , beyond a possible honorarium for participation in the data collection process , no large - scale , successful schema currently exists for com - pensating users for the initial and continued use of their data in machine - learning systems , although some efforts are cur - rently underway ( Kelly 2020 ) . However , the issue of com - pensation elides the question of whether such large - scale data collection should occur in the ﬁrst place . Indeed , the process of data collection can contribute to an “othering” of the subject and cement inaccurate or harmful beliefs . Even if data come from somewhere in the Global South , they are of - ten from the perspective of an outsider ( Wang , Narayanan , and Russakovsky 2020 ) . That the outsider may not under - stand the context or may have an agenda counter to the in - terest of the subject is reﬂected in the data captured , as has been extensively studied in the case of photography ( Ranger 2001 ; Batziou 2011 ; Thompson 2016 ) . Ignorance of context can cause harm , as Sambasivan et al . ( 2020 ) discusses in the case of fair ML in India , where distortions in the data ( e . g . , a given sample corresponds to multiple individuals be - cause of shared device usage ) distort the meaning of fair - ness deﬁnitions that were formulated in Western contexts . Furthermore , the history of phrenology reveals the role that the measurement and classiﬁcation of colonial subjects had in justifying domination ( Bank 1996 ; Poskett 2013 ) . Denton et al . ( 2020 ) points out the need to interrogate more deeply the norms and values behind the creation of datasets , as they are often extractive processes that beneﬁt only the dataset collector and users . As another signiﬁcant part of the data collection pipeline , data labeling is an extremely low - paying job involving rote , repetitive tasks that offer no room for upward mobility . Indi - viduals may not require many technical skills to label data , but they do not develop any meaningful technical skills ei - ther . The anonymity of platforms like Amazon’s Mechan - ical Turk inhibit the formation of social relationships be - tween the labeler and the client that could otherwise have led to further educational opportunities or better remunera - tion . Although data is central to the AI systems of today , data labelers receive only a disproportionately tiny portion of the proﬁts of building these systems . In parallel with colonial projects of resource extraction , data labeling as extraction of meaning from data is no way out of a cycle of colonial dependence . The people doing the work of data labeling have been termed ”ghost - workers” ( Gray and Suri 2019 ) . The labour of these unseen workers generates massive proﬁts that oth - ers capture . While our following discussion provides US statistics because those are the ones most readily available , it is easy to imagine similar or worse labour situations in the Global South . ImageNet ( Deng et al . 2009 ; Russakovsky et al . 2015 ) – a benchmark dataset essential to recent progress in computer vision – would have not been possible without the work of data labelers ( Gershgorn 2017 ) . However , the workers themselves made only around a median of $ 2 / hour USD , with only 4 % making more than the US federal min - imum wage of $ 7 . 25 / hour ( Hara et al . 2018 ) , itself a far cry from a living wage . The study attributed much of this low - wage structure to the time spent on activities that were not compensated , such as ﬁnding tasks or working on tasks that are ultimately rejected . This leads into another major problem of the power dynamics on a platform like Ama - zon Mechanical Turk , where all of the power is given to the requester of the task . Requesters have the power to set any price they want ( as low as $ . 01 ) , reject the completed work of a worker , and misleadingly claim their task will take a length of time much shorter than what it would actually take ( Semuels 2018 ) . In the US , workers in this business are considered independent contractors rather than employees , so protections guaranteed by the Fair Labor Standards Act do not apply . A same lack of protections can be seen for data labelers in the Global South ( Kaye 2019 ) . This power imbalance emphasizes the need for labor protection . Research Labs Establishing research labs has been essential for major tech companies to advance the development of their respective technologies while providing valuable contributions to the ﬁeld of computer science ( Nature 1915 ) . In the United States , General Electric ( GE ) Research Laboratory is widely accepted as the ﬁrst industrial research lab , providing early technological achievements to GE and establishing them as a leader in industrial innovation ( Center 2011 ) . As the as - cendance of artiﬁcial intelligence becomes more important to the bottom lines of many large tech companies , indus - trial research labs have spun out that solely focus on artiﬁ - cial intelligence and its respective applications . Companies from Google to Amazon to Snapchat have doubled down in this ﬁeld and opened up labs leveraging artiﬁcial intel - ligence for web search , language processing , video recog - nition , voice applications , and much more . As AI becomes increasingly integrated into the livelihoods of consumers around the world , tech companies have recognized the im - portance of democratizing AI development and moving it outside the bounds of the Global North . Of ﬁve notable tech companies developing AI solutions ( Google , Microsoft , IBM , Facebook , and Amazon ) , Google , Microsoft , and IBM have research labs in the Global South and all have either de - velopment centers , customer support centers , or data centers within these regions . Despite their presence throughout the Global South , AI research centers tend to be concentrated in certain countries . Within Southeast Asia , the representa - tion of lab locations is limited to India ; in South America , representation is limited to Brazil . In sub - Saharan Africa we ﬁnd a bit more spread in location with AI labs established in Accra , Ghana ; Nairobi , Kenya ; and Johannesburg , South Africa . Barriers to Participation For a company to choose to es - tablish an AI research center , the company must believe this initiative to be in its ﬁnancial interest . Unfortunately , several barriers exist . The necessity of generating reliable returns for shareholders precludes ventures that appear too risky , espe - cially for smaller companies . The perception of risk can take a variety of forms and possibly be inﬂuenced by stereotypes to differing extents . Two such factors are political / economic instability or a relatively lower proportion of tertiary for - mal education in the local population , which can be traced to the history of colonial exploitation and underdevelop - ment ( Rodney 1972 ; Jarosz 2003 ; Bruhn and Gallego 2012 ) , whereby European colonial powers extracted labour , natural resources , and economic surplus from colonies , while at the same time subordinating their economic development to that of the metropoles . It is hard to imagine the establishment of a top - tier research university — with the attendant technical training afforded to the local populace — in regions repeat - edly denuded of wealth . Problems with Participation While the opening of data centers and AI research labs in the Global South appears beneﬁcial for the local workforce , these positions may re - quire technical expertise which the local population might not have . This would instead introduce opportunities for dis - placement by those from the Global North who have had more access to specialized training needed to develop , main - tain , and deploy AI systems . Given the unequal distribution of AI development globally , it is common for AI researchers and practitioners to work and study in places outside of their home countries ( i . e . , outside of the Global South ) . For example , the current director of Google AI Accra , origi - nally from Senegal , was recruited to Google from Facebook AI Research in Menlo Park , CA ( Adekanmbi 2018 ; Ase - mota 2018 ) . The director for Microsoft’s new lab in Nairobi , Kenya was recruited from Microsoft Research India ; before that , she was a research scientist at Xerox in France ( O’Neill 2020 ; Research 2020 ) . While the directors of many research labs established in the Global South have experience work - ing in related contexts , we ﬁnd that local representation is sorely lacking at both the leadership and general workforce level . Grassroots AI education and training initiatives by communities such as Deep Learning Indaba , Data Science Africa , and Khipu AI in Latin America aim to increase lo - cal AI talent , but since these initiatives are less than ﬁve years old , it is hard to measure their current impact on im - proving the pipeline of AI researchers and machine learn - ing engineers . However , with the progress made by these organizations publishing novel research at premier AI con - ferences , hosting conferences of their own , and much more , the path to inclusive representation in the global AI work - force is strengthening . Although several tech companies have established re - search facilities across the world and in the Global South , these efforts remain insufﬁcient at addressing long - term problems in the AI ecosystem . A recent report from George - town University’s Center for Security and Emerging Tech - nologies ( CSET ) describes the establishment of AI labs by US companies , namely Facebook , Google , IBM , and Mi - crosoft , abroad ( Heston and Zwetsloot 2020 ) . The report notes that while 68 % of the 62 AI labs are located outside of the United States , 68 % of the staff are located within the United States . Therefore , the international ofﬁces re - main half as populated on average relative to the domestic locations . Additionally , none of these ofﬁces are located in South America and only four are in Africa . To advance eq - uity within AI and improve inclusion efforts , it is imperative that companies not only establish locations in underrepre - sented regions , but hire employees and include voices from those regions in a proportionate manner . The CSET report also notes that AI labs form abroad generally in one of three ways : through the acquisition of startups ; by establishing partnerships with local universi - ties or institutions ; and by relocating internal staff or hiring new staff in these locations ( Heston and Zwetsloot 2020 ) . The ﬁrst two of these methods may favor locations with an already - established technological or AI presence , as many AI startups are founded in locations where a ﬁnancial and technological support system exists for them . Similarly , the universities with whom tech companies choose to partner are often already leaders in the space , as evidenced by Face - book’s partnership with Carnegie Mellon professors and MIT’s partnerships with both IBM and Microsoft . The gen - eral strategy of partnering with existing institutions and of acquiring startups has the potential to reinforce existing in - equities by investing in locations with already thriving tech ecosystems . One notable exception to this is Google’s in - vestment into infrastructure , skills training , and startups in Ghana ( Asemota 2018 ) . Long - term investment and planning in the Global South can form the stepping stones for broad - ening AI to include underrepresented and marginalized com - munities . Even with long - term investment into regions in the Global South , the question remains of whether local residents are provided opportunities to join management and contribute to important strategic decisions . Several organizations have emphasized the need for AI development within a country to happen at the grassroots level , so that those implement - ing AI as a solution understand the context of the problem being solved ( Mbayo 2020 ; Gul 2019 ) . The necessity of in - digenous decision - making is just as important in negotiat - ing the values that AI technologies are to instantiate , such as through AI ethics declarations that are at the moment heavily Western - based ( Jobin , Ienca , and Vayena 2019 ) . Al - though this is critical not only to the success of individual AI solutions but also to equitable participation within the ﬁeld at large , more can and should be done . True inclusion necessitates that underrepresented voices can be found in all ranks of a company’s hierarchy , including in positions of up - per management . Tech companies which are establishing a footprint in these regions are uniquely positioned to offer this opportunity to natives of the region . Taking advantage of this ability will be critical to ensuring that the beneﬁts of AI apply not only to technical problems that arise in the Global South , but to socioeconomic inequalities which per - sist around the world . Opportunities In the face of global inequality in AI development , there are a few promising opportunities . Afﬁnity Groups While AI and technology in general has long excluded marginalized populations , the emergence of grassroots efforts by organizations to ensure that indige - nous communities are actively involved as stakeholders of AI has recently been strong . Black in AI , a nonproﬁt organi - zation with worldwide membership , was founded to increase the global representation of Black - identifying students , re - searchers , and practitioners in the ﬁeld of AI , and has made signiﬁcant improvements in increasing the number of Black scholars attending and publishing in NeurIPS and other pre - mier AI conferences ( Earl 2020 ; Silva 2021 ) . Inclusion in AI is extremely sparse in higher education and recent efforts by Black in AI have focused on instituting programming to sup - port members in graduate programs and in their postgradu - ate careers . Other efforts such as Khipu AI , based in Latin America , have been established to provide a venue to train aspiring AI researchers in advanced machine learning top - ics , foster collaborations , and actively participate in how AI is being used to beneﬁt Latin America . Other communities based on the African continent such as Data Science Africa and Deep Learning Indaba have expanded their efforts , es - tablishing conferences , workshops , and dissertation awards , and developing curricula for the broader African AI commu - nity . These communities are clear about their respective mis - sions and the focus of collaboration . Notably , Masakhane , a grassroots organization focusing on improving the represen - tation of African languages in the ﬁeld of natural language processing shares the sentiment expressed in this paper on how AI research should be approached : Masakhane are not just annotators or translators . We are researchers . We can likely connect you with anno - tators or translators but we do not support shallow en - gagement of Africans as only data generators or con - sumers ( Masakhane 2021 ) . As these initiatives grow across the Global South , we hope large organizations and technology companies partner with and adopt the values of these respective initiatives to ensure AI developments are truly representative of the global populace . Research Participation One key component of AI inclu - sion efforts should be to elevate the involvement and par - ticipation of those historically excluded from technological development . Many startups and several governments across the Global South are creating opportunities for local com - munities to participate in the development and implemen - tation of AI programs ( Mbayo 2020 ; Gul 2019 ; Galperin and Alarcon 2018 ) . In situations where the central involve - ment has been data labeling , strides should be taken to add model development roles to the opportunity catalog there . Currently , data labelers are often wholly detached from the rest of the ML pipeline , with workers oftentimes not know - ing how their labor will be used nor for what purpose ( Gra - ham 2018 ) . Little sense of fulﬁllment comes from menial tasks , and by exploiting these workers solely for their pro - duced knowledge without bringing them into the fold of the product that they are helping to create , a deep chasm ex - ists between workers and the downstream product ( Rogsta - dius et al . 2011 ) . Thus , in addition to policy that improves work conditions and wages for data labelers , workers should be provided with education opportunities that allow them to contribute to the models they are building in ways beyond la - beling ( Gray and Suri 2019 ) . Similarly , where participation in the form of model development is the norm , employers should seek to involve local residents in the ranks of man - agement and in the process of strategic decision - making . The advancement of an equitable AI workforce and ecosys - tem requires that those in positions of data collection and training be afforded opportunities to lead their organizations . Including these voices in positions of power has the added beneﬁt of ensuring the future hiring and promotion of local community members . AI as Development The massive inequalities in the devel - opment of AI can appear daunting . Will it ever be possible to close the gap ? Similar concerns arise in the broader study of economic development , from which one can draw lessons . Despite the large developmental gap between the Global North and the Global South , the latter part of the 20th cen - tury saw some countries bridge it . For example , while the GDP per capita of South Korea was far lower than that of the USA in the 1960s , by 2000 the gap had considerably narrowed , especially in comparison to world GDP per capita over the same time period . 1 Much work ( Chang 2009 ; Lin 2011 ; Aryeetey and Moyo 2012 ; Mendes , Bertella , and Teix - eira 2014 ) has linked the relative economic success of South Korea to the policy of import substitution industrialization ( ISI ) , whereby a country attempts to replace foreign im - ports with domestic production in an attempt to build high - productivity industries ( e . g . , electronics ) , rather than rely on exports of low - productivity industries ( e . g . , agriculture ) . The idea is that once the so - called “infant industries” have developed enough , they will be able to compete in interna - tional markets without government support . The execution of ISI involves protectionist trade policies , subsidies for tar - geted industries , and sufﬁcient investment in education and infrastructure . While ISI can be incredibly successful , as in the cases of Samsung and POSCO from South Korea ( Chang 2009 ) , its execution relies on sufﬁcient agricultural input and human capital , careful management of foreign reserves , and state capacity for coordination with private partners ( Ary - eetey and Moyo 2012 ; Mendes , Bertella , and Teixeira 2014 ) . In the absence of these factors , ISI can fail and the country can even go through de - industrialization . We suggest viewing AI development as a path forward for economic development , in light of the lessons learned from ISI policies . Rather than rely upon foreign construc - tion of AI systems for domestic application , where any re - turns from these systems are not reinvested domestically , we encourage the formation of domestic AI development activity . This development activity should not be focused on low - productivity activities , such as data - labeling , but in - stead on high - productivity activities like model develop - ment / deployment and research . An AI - focused ISI policy could include state - led investments into AI - related educa - tion and infrastructure , funding for private bodies to engage in domestic AI development , and limitations on the extent to which foreign companies may be involved in or proﬁt from domestic AI activities . While it remains essential , as it was in historical ISI policies , to work with and assimilate tech - nology and expertise from foreign companies , it is impera - 1 https : / / ourworldindata . org / grapher / average - real - gdp - per - capita - across - countries - and - regions ? time = 1869 . . 2016 & country = KOR ∼ USA ∼ OWID WRL tive that domestic expertise be developed in tandem to shape the future of AI development and reap its large proﬁts . This is by no means an easy task , and an AI - focused ISI policy encounters many of the same difﬁculties as histori - cal ISI policies , such as the necessity of bringing in exper - tise and technology , and in ensuring that sufﬁcient education and infrastructure ( e . g . , internet access ) exist . It will likely encounter many new difﬁculties that are unique to AI de - velopment as well . Even in the absence of centralized state coordination , however , recent initiatives like Deep Learning Indaba and Khipu have promoted the importance of indige - nous AI development and have advanced education in AI . Conclusion As the development of artiﬁcial intelligence continues to progress across the world , the exclusion of those from com - munities most likely to bear the brunt of algorithmic inequity only stands to worsen . We address this question by explor - ing the challenges and beneﬁts of increasing broader inclu - sion in the ﬁeld of AI . We examine the limits of current AI inclusion methods , problems of participation regarding AI labs situated in the Global South from major tech compa - nies , and discuss opportunities for AI to accelerate develop - ment within disadvantaged regions . We hope the actions we propose can help to begin the movement of communities in the Global South from being just beneﬁciaries or subjects of AI systems to being active , engaged participants . Having true agency over the AI sys - tems integrated into the livelihoods of communities in the Global South will maximize the impact of these systems and lead the way for global inclusion of AI . As a limitation of our work , it is important to acknowl - edge we are currently all located at , and have been educated at , North American institutions . Our positions in these insti - tutions thus limit our perspective , and we respect the con - siderations we may have missed and the voices we have not heard in the course of writing this work . References Adekanmbi , B . 2018 . 10 inspiring Facts about Moustapha Cisse , Google AI Ghana Pioneer Lead . URL https : / / www . datasciencenigeria . org / 10 - inspiring - facts - moustapha - cisse - google - ai - ghana - pioneer - lead / . Amazon . 2020 . FAQs . URL https : / / www . mturk . com / work er / help . Aryeetey , E . ; and Moyo , N . 2012 . Industrialisation for Struc - tural Transformation in Africa : Appropriate Roles for the State . Journal of African Economies 21 ( suppl 2 ) : ii85 . URL https : / / econpapers . repec . org / article / oupjafrec / v 3a21 3ay 3 a2012 3ai 3asuppl 5f2 3ap 3a - ii85 . htm . Publisher : Centre for the Study of African Economies ( CSAE ) . Asemota , V . 2018 . ’Ghana is the future of Africa’ : Why Google built an AI lab in Accra . URL https : / / edition . cnn . co m / 2018 / 07 / 14 / africa / google - ghana - ai / . Bank , A . 1996 . Of ’Native Skulls’ and ’Noble Caucasians’ : Phrenology in Colonial South Africa . Journal of Southern African Studies 22 ( 3 ) : 387 – 403 . ISSN 0305 - 7070 . URL http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2637310 . Publisher : [ Taylor & Francis , Ltd . , Journal of Southern African Studies ] . Batziou , A . 2011 . Framing ‘otherness’ in press photographs : The case of immigrants in Greece and Spain . Journal of Media Practice 12 ( 1 ) : 41 – 60 . ISSN 1468 - 2753 . doi : 10 . 1386 / jmpr . 12 . 1 . 41 1 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1386 / jmpr . 12 . 1 . 41 1 . Publisher : Routledge eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1386 / jmpr . 12 . 1 . 41 1 . Beede , E . ; Baylor , E . ; Hersch , F . ; Iurchenko , A . ; Wilcox , L . ; Ruamviboonsuk , P . ; and Vardoulakis , L . M . 2020 . A Human - Centered Evaluation of a Deep Learning System Deployed in Clinics for the Detection of Diabetic Retinopa - thy . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’20 , 1 – 12 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376718 . URL http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376718 . Bruhn , M . ; and Gallego , F . A . 2012 . Good , Bad , and Ugly Colonial Activities : Do They Matter for Economic Develop - ment ? The Review of Economics and Statistics 94 ( 2 ) : 433 – 461 . URL https : / / ideas . repec . org / a / tpr / restat / v94y2012i2p 433 - 461 . html . Publisher : MIT Press . Buolamwini , J . ; and Gebru , T . 2018 . Gender shades : Inter - sectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classiﬁ - cation . In Conference on fairness , accountability and trans - parency , 77 – 91 . Center , E . T . 2011 . General Electric Research Lab . URL https : / / edisontechcenter . org / GEresearchLab . html . Chang , H . - J . 2009 . Bad Samaritans : The Myth of Free Trade and the Secret History of Capitalism . New York , NY : Bloomsbury Press . ISBN 978 - 1 - 59691 - 598 - 5 . Chuvpilo , G . 2020 . AI Research Rankings 2020 : Can the United States Stay Ahead of China ? URL https : / / chuvpilo . medium . com / ai - research - rankings - 2020 - can - the - united - states - stay - ahead - of - china - 61cf14b1216 . Coalition for Critical Technology . 2020 . Abolish the # Tech - ToPrisonPipeline . URL https : / / medium . com / @ Coalition ForCriticalTechnology / abolish - the - techtoprisonpipeline - 9b5b14366b16 . Cognilytica . 2019 . Data Engineering , Preparation , and La - beling for AI . URL https : / / www . cognilytica . com / 2019 / 03 / 06 / report - data - engineering - preparation - and - labeling - for - ai - 2019 / . Croce , N . ; and Musa , M . 2019 . The new assembly lines : Why AI needs low - skilled workers too . URL https : / / www . weforum . org / agenda / 2019 / 08 / ai - low - skilled - workers / . De La Garza , A . 2020 . States’ Automated Systems Are Trapping Citizens in Bureaucratic Nightmares With Their Lives on the Line . URL https : / / time . com / 5840609 / algorit hm - unemployment / . Deng , J . ; Dong , W . ; Socher , R . ; Li , L . - J . ; Li , K . ; and Fei - Fei , L . 2009 . ImageNet : A Large - Scale Hierarchical Image Database . In CVPR . Denton , E . ; Hanna , A . ; Amironesei , R . ; Smart , A . ; Nicole , H . ; and Scheuerman , M . K . 2020 . Bringing the Peo - ple Back In : Contesting Benchmark Machine Learning Datasets . ICML Workshop on Participatory Approaches to Machine Learning . DeVries , T . ; Misra , I . ; Wang , C . ; and van der Maaten , L . 2019 . Does Object Recognition Work for Everyone ? Com - puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop ( CVPRW ) . Difallah , D . ; Filatova , E . ; and Ipeirotis , P . 2018 . Demo - graphics and Dynamics of Mechanical Turk Workers . Pro - ceedings of WSDM : The Eleventh ACM International Con - ference on Web Search and Data Mining . Earl , C . C . 2020 . Notes from the Black In AI 2019 Work - shop . URL https : / / charlesearl . blog / 2020 / 01 / 08 / notes - from - the - black - in - ai - 2019 - workshop / . Frank , A . G . 1967 . Capitalism and underdevelopment in Latin America : historical studies of Chile and Brazil . New York : Monthly Review Press . Galperin , H . ; and Alarcon , A . 2018 . The Future of Work in the Global South . Gent , E . 2019 . The ‘ghost work’ powering tech magic . URL https : / / www . causeiq . com / organizations / samasource , 2625 47062 / . Gershgorn , D . 2017 . The data that transformed AI re - search—and possibly the world . Quartz . Graham , M . 2018 . The rise of the planetary labour market – and what it means for the future of work . NS Tech . Grand View Research . 2020 . Data Collection & Labeling Market Size Worth 6 . 5 Billion By 2027 . URL https : / / www . grandviewresearch . com / press - release / global - data - collecti on - labeling - market . Gray , M . L . ; and Suri , S . 2019 . Ghost Work : How to Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Underclass . Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt . Grush , L . 2015 . Google engineer apologizes after Photos app tags two black people as gorillas . URL https : / / www . th everge . com / 2015 / 7 / 1 / 8880363 / google - apologizes - photos - app - tags - two - black - people - gorillas . Gul , E . 2019 . Is Artiﬁcial Intelligence the frontier solution to Global South’s wicked development challenges ? URL https : / / towardsdatascience . com / is - artiﬁcial - intelligence - th e - frontier - solution - to - global - souths - wicked - development - challenges - 4206221a3c78 . Hara , K . ; Adams , A . ; Milland , K . ; Savage , S . ; Callison - Burch , C . ; and Bigham , J . 2018 . A Data - Driven Analysis of Workers’ Earnings on Amazon Mechanical Turk . ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) . Harris , C . ; Straker , L . ; and Pollock , C . 2017 . A socioeco - nomic related’digital divide’exists in how , not if , young peo - ple use computers . PloS one 12 ( 3 ) : e0175011 . Heston , R . ; and Zwetsloot , R . 2020 . Mapping U . S . Multina - tionals’ Global AI R & D Activity . URL https : / / cset . georget own . edu / research / mapping - u - s - multinationals - global - ai - rd - activity / . Jarosz , L . 2003 . A Human Geographer’s Response to Guns , Germs , and Steel : The Case of Agrar - ian Development and Change in Madagascar . An - tipode 35 ( 4 ) : 823 – 828 . ISSN 1467 - 8330 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1467 - 8330 . 2003 . 00356 . x . URL h t tp : / / o n l i n e l i b r a r y . w i l e y . c o m / d o i / a b s / 1 0 . 1 0 4 6 / j . 1 4 67 - 8 3 3 0 . 2 0 0 3 . 0 0 3 5 6 . x . eprint : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1046 / j . 1467 - 8330 . 2003 . 00356 . x . Jo , E . S . ; and Gebru , T . 2020 . Lessons from Archives : Strate - gies for Collecting Sociocultural Data in Machine Learning . ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , Transparency ( FAccT ) . Jobin , A . ; Ienca , M . ; and Vayena , E . 2019 . The global land - scape of AI ethics guidelines . Nature Machine Intelligence 1 ( 9 ) : 389 – 399 . ISSN 2522 - 5839 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s42256 - 019 - 0088 - 2 . URL http : / / www . nature . com / articles / s42256 - 019 - 0088 - 2 . Kaye , K . 2019 . These companies claim to provide “fair - trade” data work . Do they ? URL https : / / www . technolo gyreview . com / 2019 / 08 / 07 / 133845 / cloudfactory - ddd - samasource - imerit - impact - sourcing - companies - for - data - annotation / . Kelly , M . 2020 . Andrew Yang is pushing Big Tech to pay users for data . URL https : / / www . theverge . com / 2020 / 6 / 22 / 21298919 / andrew - yang - big - tech - data - dividend - project - facebook - google - ubi . Krasin , I . ; Duerig , T . ; Alldrin , N . ; Ferrari , V . ; Abu - El - Haija , S . ; Kuznetsova , A . ; Rom , H . ; Uijlings , J . ; Popov , S . ; Veit , A . ; Belongie , S . ; Gomes , V . ; Gupta , A . ; Sun , C . ; Chechik , G . ; Cai , D . ; Feng , Z . ; Narayanan , D . ; and Murphy , K . 2017 . OpenImages : A public dataset for large - scale multi - label and multi - class image classiﬁcation . Dataset available from https : / / github . com / openimages . Lee , D . 2018 . Why Big Tech pays poor Kenyans to teach self - driving cars . BBC News . Lee , M . K . ; Kusbit , D . ; Kahng , A . ; Kim , J . T . ; Yuan , X . ; Chan , A . ; See , D . ; Noothigattu , R . ; Lee , S . ; Psomas , A . ; and Procaccia , A . D . 2019 . WeBuildAI : Participatory Frame - work for Algorithmic Governance . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 ( CSCW ) : 181 : 1 – 181 : 35 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3359283 . URL http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 335928 3 . Lin , J . Y . 2011 . From Flying Geese to Leading Dragons : New Opportunities and Strategies for Structural Transfor - mation in Developing Countries . Technical Report WPS 5702 , World Bank . Masakhane . 2021 . Masakhane : A grassroots NLP commu - nity for Africa , by Africans . URL https : / / www . masakhane . io / . Mbayo , H . 2020 . Data and Power : AI and Development in the Global South . URL https : / / www . oxfordinsights . com / i nsights / 2020 / 10 / 2 / data - and - power - ai - and - development - in - the - global - south . Mendes , A . P . F . ; Bertella , M . A . ; and Teixeira , R . F . A . P . 2014 . Industrialization in Sub - Saharan Africa and import substitution policy . Revista de Economia Pol´ıtica 34 ( 1 ) : 120 – 138 . ISSN 0101 - 3157 . doi : 10 . 1590 / S0101 - 315720 14000100008 . URL http : / / www . scielo . br / scielo . php ? scrip t = sci arttext & pid = S0101 - 31572014000100008 & lng = en & t lng = en . Murgia , M . 2019 . AI’s new workforce : the data - labelling industry spreads globally . Financial Times . Nature . 1915 . Industrial Research Laboratories . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 096419a0 . Nzekwe , H . 2019 . Africans Are Paying More For Internet Than Any Other Part Of The World – Here’s Why . URL https : / / weetracker . com / 2019 / 10 / 22 / africans - pay - more - for - internet - than - other - regions / . Obermeyer , Z . ; Powers , B . ; Vogeli , C . ; and Mullainathan , S . 2019 . Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations . Science 366 ( 6464 ) : 447 – 453 . O’Neill , J . 2020 . Jacki O’Neill — LinkedIn . URL https : / / www . linkedin . com / in / jacki - o - neill - 5605534 / . Paullada , A . ; Raji , I . D . ; Bender , E . M . ; Denton , E . ; and Hanna , A . 2020 . Data and its ( dis ) contents : A survey of dataset development and use in machine learning research . arXiv : 2012 . 05345 . Poskett , J . 2013 . Django Unchained and the racist science of phrenology | James Poskett . The Guardian ISSN 0261 - 3077 . URL https : / / www . theguardian . com / science / blog / 201 3 / feb / 05 / django - unchained - racist - science - phrenology . Prabhu , V . U . ; and Birhane , A . 2020 . Large image datasets : A pyrrhic win for computer vision ? arXiv : 2006 . 16923 . Ranger , T . 2001 . Colonialism , Consciousness and the Cam - era . Past & Present 203 – 215 . ISSN 0031 - 2746 . URL http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3600818 . Publisher : [ Oxford University Press , The Past and Present Society ] . Research , M . 2020 . Jacki O’Neill at Microsoft Research . URL https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / people / jao neil / . Rodney , W . 1972 . How Europe underdeveloped Africa . London : : Bogle L’Ouverture Publications . ISBN 978 - 0 - 9501546 - 4 - 0 . Rogstadius , J . ; Kostakos , V . ; Kittur , A . ; Smus , B . ; Laredo , J . ; and Vukovic , M . 2011 . An Assessment of Intrinsic and Ex - trinsic Motivation on Task Performance in Crowdsourcing Markets . Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media . Russakovsky , O . ; Deng , J . ; Su , H . ; Krause , J . ; Satheesh , S . ; Ma , S . ; Huang , Z . ; Karpathy , A . ; Khosla , A . ; Bernstein , M . ; Berg , A . C . ; and Fei - Fei , L . 2015 . ImageNet Large Scale Vi - sual Recognition Challenge . International Journal of Com - puter Vision ( IJCV ) 115 ( 3 ) : 211 – 252 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11263 - 015 - 0816 - y . Samasource . 2021 . Samasource . URL https : / / www . causeiq . com / organizations / samasource , 262547062 / . Sambasivan , N . ; Arnesen , E . ; Hutchinson , B . ; and Prab - hakaran , V . 2020 . Non - portability of Algorithmic Fairness in India . arXiv : 2012 . 03659 [ cs ] URL http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2012 . 03659 . ArXiv : 2012 . 03659 . Semuels , A . 2018 . The Internet Is Enabling a New Kind of Poorly Paid Hell . The Atlantic https : / / www . theatlanti c . com / business / archive / 2018 / 01 / amazon - mechanical - turk / 551192 / . Shankar , S . ; Halpern , Y . ; Breck , E . ; Atwood , J . ; Wilson , J . ; and Sculley , D . 2017 . No Classiﬁcation without Representa - tion : Assessing Geodiversity Issues in Open DataSets for the Developing World . NeurIPS workshop : Machine Learning for the Developing World . Silva , M . 2021 . URL https : / / blackinai . github . io / # / about . Sloane , M . ; Moss , E . ; Awomolo , O . ; and Forlano , L . 2020 . Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning . arXiv : 2007 . 02423 [ cs ] URL http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2007 . 0 2423 . ArXiv : 2007 . 02423 . Synced . 2019 . Data Annotation : The Billion Dollar Business Behind AI Breakthroughs . URL https : / / medium . com / syn cedreview / data - annotation - the - billion - dollar - business - behind - ai - breakthroughs - d929b0a50d23 . Thompson , A . 2016 . Otherness and the Fetishization of Sub - ject . URL https : / / petapixel . com / 2016 / 11 / 16 / otherness - fetishization - subject / . Wang , A . ; Narayanan , A . ; and Russakovsky , O . 2020 . RE - VISE : A Tool for Measuring and Mitigating Bias in Vi - sual Datasets . European Conference on Computer Vision ( ECCV ) .