1 Copyright © 2012 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 1 DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 61350 - 062 - 0 . ch001 INTRODUCTION Specialist terminology in Biology , Chemistry and Physics has proved difficult for most students ( Wellington & Osborne , 2001 ) . Students have difficulty recognizing where a concept begins and ends and therefore cannot differentiate concepts . Zhang and Lidbury ( 2006 ) identified difficulties with language as contributing significantly to problems students experience in studying science ( specifically Genetics ) . In this study , we seek to implement language oriented strategies ( Table 1 ) developed by Zhang and Lidbury ( 2006 ) for First Year Biology , Chemistry and Physics lectures and tutorials with the aim of evaluating the benefits of those methods . One distinctive feature of this project is that the language expert worked collaboratively with lecturers in the disciplines closely as a novice first year student with no previous HSC experience ( but an expert in language learning and teaching ) . In this project , the language expert ‘learned’ the Felicia Zhang University of Canberra , Australia Language Problems of First Year Science Students ABSTRACT The chapter discusses the background of a project which aimed at addressing the language needs of a diverse student body ( both domestic and international student body ) by embedding strategic approaches to learning and teaching in first year sciences in tertiary education . These strategies consisted of ac - tive learning skills which are widely used in language learning . The disciplines covered by the project were Biology , Chemistry and Physics and involved the University of Canberra , University of Sydney , University of Tasmania , University of Technology , Sydney , and University of Newcastle in Australia . This project was funded by the Australian Learning and Teaching Council ( ALTC ) . 2 Language Problems of First Year Science Students content of the disciplines by direct experience and in this process , attempts to ( a ) make lectures more accessible ; ( b ) look for opportunities for small group participation ; ( c ) look for opportuni - ties to develop students’ communication skills in communicating scientific knowledge to lay com - munities ; ( d ) create opportunities for providing formative feedback both face - to - face and through online activities by negotiating and collaborating with the disciplinary lecturers . Some of the ac - tivities focused on language issues , others focused on active learning strategies . Context and Characteristics of the Students Students undertaking tertiary studies in science are a highly diverse group . For instance , at the University of Sydney , Australia in 2008 , there were 969 students from various faculties in the first year Chemistry cohort . Three - hundred and eighty eight students had little or no High School Certificate Chemistry while 116 students have very high University Admission Index Chemistry scores ( greater than 98 for Veterinary Science students ) . With such a diverse group there was , naturally , a wide range of interest in and aptitude for the subject . Such diversity is typical in cohorts in Biology , Chemistry and Physics at the partici - pating Australian universities . Administration of the Language Difficulty Questionnaires In this project , we adopted a model which varied slightly from that of Jacobs ( 1989 ) . We distrib - uted one questionnaire through the Learning Management System ( LMS ) of the participating institutions . In this questionnaire , we tested com - prehension of ten common terms . The examined terms are ; ‘research’ , ‘power’ , ‘concentration’ , ‘equilibrium’ , ‘graph’ , ‘system’ , equation’ , ‘ex - periment’ , ‘model’ and ‘significant’ . The criteria for selection of the words were that they have to be : • Words used as basic currency in physics , chemistry and biology lectures and for which definitions would be assumed un - necessary ; and • Words which in lay contexts acquire more flexible and approximate meanings . For example , in the question related to ‘re - search’ for the Chemistry and Physics disciplines , the following was provided : “We carry out research to find out the answers to scientific questions” What is meant by the word ‘research’ in the sentence above ? ( There may be more than one cor - rect answer ; see Table 2 ) . They are then provided with five answers for this question : Table 1 . Proposed language oriented techniques to be implemented in the project 1 . Small group work in tutorials using guided questions . 6 . Attaching sound files to vocabulary 2 . Students are provided with a list of terms and , through the process of group work , place these terms in relation . 7 . Breaking down long words to aid memory by identifying prefixes and suffixes , and exploring the roots and origin of words . 3 Giving students opportunities to put forward their points of view in groups . 8 . Using warm up activities such as matching scientific terms to definitions for revision purposes . 4 . Using online language exercises such as crosswords , gap - fill ( Cloze ) exercises . 5 . Providing stimulus quizzes for lecture and tutorial materials on WebCT thus encouraging students to prepare before the lecture . 10 . Role playing : students practise conveying complex scientific discoveries to the public . 15 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / language - problems - first - year - science / 56409 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Educational Technologies , Assistive , Therapeutic , and Support Technologies , Library Science , Information Studies , and Education , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Education , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content The " Pastoral " in Virtual Space : A Tale of Two Systems and How E - Learning Practitioners Re - Make Them Mary Griffiths and Michael Griffiths ( 2007 ) . Cases on Global E - Learning Practices : Successes and Pitfalls ( pp . 218 - 231 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / pastoral - virtual - space / 6255 ? camid = 4v1a Logs Analysis of Adapted Pedagogical Scenarios Generated by a Simulation Serious Game Architecture Sophie Callies , Mathieu Gravel , Eric Beaudry and Josianne Basque ( 2017 ) . International Journal of Game - Based Learning ( pp . 1 - 19 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / logs - analysis - of - adapted - pedagogical - scenarios - generated - by - a - simulation - serious - game - architecture / 180344 ? camid = 4v1a Encouraging Engagement in Game - Based Learning Nicola Whitton ( 2011 ) . International Journal of Game - Based Learning ( pp . 75 - 84 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / encouraging - engagement - game - based - learning / 50558 ? camid = 4v1a Electronic Publication Jon Dron ( 2007 ) . Control and Constraint in E - Learning : Choosing When to Choose ( pp . 119 - 138 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / electronic - publication / 7150 ? camid = 4v1a