Asking Questions : Information Needs in a Surgical Intensive Care Unit Madhu C . Reddy M . S . , , Wanda Pratt Ph . D . 2 , Paul Dourish Ph . D . ' , M . Michael Shabot M . D . 3 ' Information and Computer Science Department , University of California , Irvine , USA . 2 Division of Biomedical & Health Informatics and the Information School , University of Washington , Seattle , USA . 3Departments of Surgery and Enterprise Information Systems , Cedars - Sinai Medical Center , Los Angeles , USA . Abstract Even in the information - rich environment of hospitals , health - care providers face challenges in addressing their various information needs . Through a study of a patient - care team in a terti - ary care Surgical Intensive Care Unit ( SICU ) , we expanded our understanding of health - care providers ' information needs in two important ways . First , the study focused on a patient - care team instead of individual health - care providers . Second , information needs were examined in a particular organizational setting , the SICU , which had not been previously studied . We found that organizational information was ex - tremely important to SICU team members . Fur - thermore , the first resource that team members utilized was not electronic or paper but rather human : another team member . Information Needs Despite the increasing use of clinical information technologies , health - care providers still face difficul - ties in addressing their various information needs . Furthermore , their ability to address these informa - tion needs is effected by their organizational setting . For instance , the information needs of physicians in office practicel1 are different than those in an aca - demic medical center [ 21 . Before medical informatics system designers can build appropriate technologies to support health - care providers ' information needs , they need to understand not only the " the nature and scope of the actual information needs " [ 31 but also the effects ofthe organizational setting on those needs . Through a study of a patient - care team in an open Surgical Intensive Care Unit ( SICU ) , we expanded our understanding of health - care providers ' informa - tion needs in two important ways . First , the study focused on the information needs of health - care pro - viders within a patient - care team rather than the typi - cal focus on individual health - care providers . Al - though it is important to understand an individual ' s information needs , people rarely work independently in modern health - care settings such as hospitals . In - stead , the dominant setting for most work in hospitals is interdisciplinary teams ; people normally collabo - rate with others to accomplish their tasks [ 41 . Despite the dominant role of teams in hospital work , little attention has been paid to the information needs of patient - care teams . Second , our study examined in - formation needs within a particular organizational setting , the SICU . The work activities and goals in the SICU created constraints that effected the infor - mation needs of the health - care providers within that unit . Information Needs in Medicine An important stream of medical informatics research has focused on investigating information needs of health - care providers . Covell et al . 111 in their classic study of physician information needs discovered that physicians had their information needs met less than 30 % of the time while interacting in the office with patients . As a way of investigating physician needs , researchers have focused on physician questions . Ely et al . 051 studied the types of questions that primary care physicians asked during their interactions with patients . The researchers found that although physi - cians had a number of questions , they did not pursue the answers to the majority of these questions . Beside studying physicians , medical informatics researchers have also investigated the information needs of other health - care providers such as nurses . Lange [ 6 ] found that nurses spent the majority of their time at the be - ginning of their shift finding medication related in - formation . Yet , whether examining the information needs of clinicians , nurses , or other health - care pro - viders , most researchers have focused on interaction between an individual information seeker and various information sources . Few studies have examined the information needs problem in the context of an inter - disciplinary team consisting of various health - care workers . Forsythe et al . 13 ] studied a patient - care team but focused on the information needs of only the phy - sicians on the team and not the other health - care pro - viders . Organizational settings also can affect health - care providers ' information needs . Medical informatics researchers have investigated information needs of physicians in a number of different clinical settings . Woolf and Benson [ 21 found that the type of medical information required depended on the work setting . For instance , faculty required information for re - search while medical housestaff required information for diagnosis and patient management . However , AMIA 2002 Annual Symposium Proceedings6 647 both groups depended on textbooks for information . In contrast , Dee , [ 71 in her study of rural physicians , argued that they depended more on colleagues be - cause rural physicians lacked access to electronic and other high - quality information sources . Few studies have focused on information needs in intensive care units . Forsythe131 did study the information needs in medical intensive care units but we have found no studies of information needs in a surgical intensive care unit . Study Methodology In this study , we describe the information needs of members of the SICU patient - care team . This exami - nation of information needs is part of a larger re - search project , where we are investigating informa - tion seeking behavior of health - care providers in the SICU of a large , urban teaching hospital . Subjects The subjects included : * Three surgical residents * Two surgical fellows * Surgical attending - A surgical faculty member headed the team . * SICU Pharmacist * Nurses - The team interacted extensively with each patient ' s nurse as they examined the pa - tient . * Medical Students - These were 4th year medical students who were doing a one month rotation in the SICU . The primary goal of the SICU team is to stabilize patients as quickly as possible so they can be safely transferred out of the unit . Therefore , on a daily ba - sis , physicians , nurses , and pharmacists must success - fully coordinate their information seeking activities to ensure appropriate patient care . Site The SICU provides intensive - care monitoring for patients who require special attention after a surgical procedure . It consists of two 10 - bed units , each of which has the same technologies , staffing , and physi - cal layout . The SICU has a number of information resources including : * Digital physiological monitors - Bedside monitor - ing devices that measure patient ' s physiological data . * Electronic patient record ( EPR ) system - Contains patient physiological , medication and other data . * Web - based applications - Contain digital images and data such as culture reports that are not in the EPR . * Digital X - ray workstations - Contains the latest digital x - ray images of patients in the unit . * Reference books - Various medical and nursing reference manuals and policy books . * White board - Contains patient - bed information and on - call information . * Paper - based patient record - Patient chart main - tained along with the EPR record . Outside con - sultants write their notes in this record . * Paper - based medication chart - Chart of medica - tion orders kept by the patient ' s room . * Health - care workers - This includes team mem - bers , outside medical consultants , patient ' s pri - mary physician / team , respiratory therapists , physical therapists , and members of the SICU team . Bed management is an important activity in the SICU . If all twenty beds in the SICU are full , non - emergency surgeries are often cancelled . Canceling surgeries has serious repercussions for the hospital in terms of lost revenue and anger from patients and surgeons . Therefore , a key organizational task of the SICU team is to ensure enough open beds in the unit for new patients . Procedures Our study employed observational techniques that were successfully used in other information needs studies [ 3 6 , 8 9 ] . Because the focus of the study was information needs of members of a patient - care team , we decided that the best way to gather the most use - ful data was to observe the team when they were all interacting together . Therefore , the first author went on morning rounds with the team over a three - month period . The investigator observed the subjects during the entire morning round period which lasted an av - erage of 2 . 5 hours . During the round , the investigator documented : ( 1 ) who asked a question ( 2 ) the ques - tions asked and ( 3 ) the resource used to answer the question . Obviously , with only one observer , we were unable to capture all the questions asked by team members during rounds . Still , we believe that we captured a large enough number of questions to be representative of the type of questions asked in the SICU . During data analysis , we used grounded theory method [ lu ] to identify categories from the data . Results : Questions Asked During our observations , team members asked 1 , 584 separate questions during rounds . Questions were analyzed in three different ways . First , we catego - rized them by the type of question : Osheroff et al . ' s categorization [ 91 served as the basis of our categories . However , because we observed additional types of 648 questions we added categories , such as organizational that were not included in the original categorization . Second , we categorized the questions by the informa - tion source that team members used to answer the question . Finally , we categorized the questions by the information seeker . Due to the limited space , we do not describe our analysis of which information seek - ers used which information sources . Question Categories We identified seven major categories of questions ( Table 1 ) . * Plan of Care - treatment plan for the patient e . g . - What are you planning to do about thepelvis ? * Patient Specific - information dealing with the patient e . g . - What ' s he [ patient ] doing ? * Organizational - policies , procedures , and bed management issues e . g . - What is the protocol for doing an apnea test ? * Medication - medication related issues e . g . - Were we able to wean the drug down ? * Teaching - training of the residents and medical students e . g . - When is MI [ myocardial infarc - tion ] most likely to strike post - operatively ? * Further Details - These questions were asked to gain more detail than were initially given . e . g . - Didyou find out what that meant ? * Misc - could not be categorized in any of the ma - jor categories e . g . - Is that o . k with you ? Table 1 . Categories of questions asked by SICU team members . Question Categories Questions ( n = 1584 ) 100 % Plan of Care 580 ( 36 . 6 % ) Patient Specific 335 ( 21 . 2 % ) Organizational 269 ( 17 . 0 % ) Medication 204 ( 12 . 9 % ) Teaching 162 ( 10 . 2 % ) Further Details 18 ( 1 . 1 % ) Misc 16 ( 1 . 0 % ) Other studies have highlighted the importance of clinical questionsl9l . In our study , team members also had many clinical questions . However , we also un - covered a large number of organizational questions . We will come back to these questions in our discus - sion section . Information Sources The residents were the focus of most questions for two observable reasons ( Table 2 ) . First , they were directly responsible for patient care . Therefore , the residents closely followed their assigned patients and had the most recent information about their patients . Second , as physicians - in - training , the residents were asked a number ofteaching questions during rounds . Table 2 . Information source and number ofquestions each source was asked Information source Number of Questions each source was asked ( n = 1584 ) Residents 651 ( 41 . 1 % ) Fellows 344 ( 21 . 7 % ) Nurses 138 ( 8 . 7 % ) Students 115 ( 7 . 3 % ) Attendings 79 ( 5 . 0 % ) General Team 65 ( 4 . 1 % ) Pharmacists 58 ( 3 . 7 % ) Unknown 43 ( 2 . 7 % ) Patient 35 ( 2 . 2 % ) Other Consultants 33 ( 2 . 1 % ) Non - human sources * 15 ( 0 . 9 % ) RT / PT / CP 6 ( 0 . 4 % ) Patient ' s Family 2 ( 0 . 1 % ) * Non - human sources include electronic and non - electronic sources . Information Seekers As we analyzed the data , we realized that although a SICU faculty member was always present during rounds , the fellows actually lead the rounds and initi - ated much of the discussion concerning patient and unit issues ; hence , they asked most of the questions ( Table 3 ) . Although the nurses and pharmacists were part of the SICU team , the physicians asked most of the questions . The nurses and pharmacists served primar - ily as information sources rather than information seekers . Most of the nurses ' questions were medica - tion related or confirmation of the plan of care deci - sions . Table 3 . Information seekers and number of ques - tions they asked Information Seekers Number of questions asked ( n = 1584 ) Fellows 739 ( 46 . 6 % ) Attendings 326 ( 20 . 6 % ) Residents 277 ( 17 . 5 % ) Non Team Members * 120 ( 7 . 6 % ) Nurses 67 ( 4 . 2 % ) Students 31 ( 2 . 0 % ) Pharmacists 24 ( 1 . 5 % ) * Non - team members include outside physicians , respiratory therapists , physical therapists and social workers . 649 Discussion In this section , we briefly describe our use of obser - vational data . We then discuss two findings that we believe are particularly important for the design of information technology in health - care . Use of Observational Data Although , the majority of information needs research in medical informatics have primarily used survey methodology , researchers have found that observa - tional data helps provide important context for the information needs being studied . Forsythe [ 31 used observational techniques to investigate the ways that that physicians express their information needs . Con - text played an important role in their study . As she stated , " The context of a message may affect or de - termine its meaning . " Other researchers including Gorman [ 81 , Osherofft91 , and Ely [ 51 have also used ob - servational methods to capture physicians ' informa - tion needs . We used observational data in this study to capture the contextually rich interactions between team members . Importance ofOrganizational Issues During rounds , team members asked many clinically oriented questions dealing with plan of care , patient specific data , or medication questions . Not surpris - ingly , these three categories comprised 70 % of the noted questions . However , there was a subset of questions categorized as " organizational " which we had not anticipated appearing as frequently as they did . This category includes questions such as : * Who is the nurse for bed 2 ? * Do we have a brain death protocol ? * Who ' s got Homer ' s chart ? * Did we get a bio [ ethics ] consult ? * Who is doing [ round ] notes ? All team members at one point or another asked organizational questions . The questions ranged from policies and procedures [ 91 to interdepartmental infor - mation [ 6 ] . Without the organizational information , the SICU team would have difficulty providing appropri - ate patient care . For instance , the question " Do we have a brain death protocol ? " was an important pol - icy question because the team could not implement the plan of care for the patient without an answer . They did not know whether they needed to continue to provide care for the patient or whether they could declare that the patient was dead . Most organizational questions were clearly identi - fiable as such . Our organizational category included these easily identifiable questions . However , organ - izational issues encompass more than just questions about policies and procedures . Many clinical ques - tions also had an organizational component . For in - stance the question " She has to stay in the SICU ? " had multiple meanings to the information seeker , an attending physician . Clinically , the physician was trying to find out what the team had decided for the patient ' s plan of care . Organizationally , he wanted to ascertain whether her problems were serious enough to keep her in the ICU . Underlying many of the clini - cal questions was the bed management issue . The team constantly had to evaluate the patients ' condi - tions against the need for beds . Although we identified organizational aspects of clinical questions , we still listed these questions in the relevant clinical categories because the question - ers were identified as primarily seeking clinical in - formation . Thus , the organizational category in Table 1 could have included a much larger number of ques - tions than it currently contains . Organizational information is essential for the SICU team to function effectively . The effective care for the patient requires that team members not only coordinate their own work activities but also the work activities of numerous consultants and other health - care providers . Organizational questions and organizational features of clinical questions acted as the " glue " allowing team members to accomplish their work and keep the SICU functioning smoothly . Informal Information Sources Medical work especially in the SICU is highly col - laborative [ ' l . To provide appropriate patient care , health - care providers must interact frequently with each other . During rounds , team members used a wide variety of information resources to answer ques - tions . Yet , we observed that the first resource that they utilized was not an electronic or paper but rather a human or " informal " [ 3 ] source : another team mem - ber . In a team setting , this is not unusual because various team members bring their particular expertise and perspective [ 41 to a question . For instance , resi - dents were expected to know about all the medical issues concerning their patients even if they did not always know what was causing these conditions . Therefore , the fellows or the attending would first direct many of their patient care questions to the resi - dent . Similarly , nurses were also important informa - tion sources because they maintain close contact with the patient , the patient ' s family , and the patient ' s other health - care providers . They often acted as in - formation conduits between these different caregivers and the SICU team . As part of their work , the SICU team must coordi - nate all the activities of a patient ' s numerous health - care providers . Therefore , team members want to know not only know what was done but why it was done . Often , this context is not written down rather it is in the minds of the individuals who were involved 650 in the situation . For example , a physician might ver - bally tell a nurse about a medication but not write the rationale for it in the chart . Therefore , only the physi - cian and nurse could provide information about why the medication was given . More " formal " sources , such as the patient record , would not contain this information . In a complex , fluid work environment such as the SICU , individuals play an important role in providing contextual information Informal sources are essential for supporting the SICU team ' s information needs especially during rounds . Team members usually turn to each other for information before accessing other resources . Fur - thermore , individuals usually are much better than more formal sources in providing context for an event . Study Limitations There were two major limitations to our study . First , we focused on verbal questions . Therefore , most of the questions were naturally directed to human in - formation sources . Although focusing on verbal ques - tions limited our ability to fully capture all the infor - mation needs of the SICU team , it did allow us to capture the rich interaction among team members . Second , the questions were collected only during morning rounds . Obviously , information needs arise throughout the day and not just during morning rounds . For instance , a physician or nurse could have questions during the implementation of the round plan that did not come up when the plan was devel - oped . However , as we stated in the procedures sec - tion , we examined morning rounds because the pa - tient - care team members were physically co - located together and verbally interacted with each other . Designing for Work Information needs in a team - oriented environment such as the SICU are different than those in other organizational settings . We found from our analysis of the questions that organizational issues play a prominent role in allowing the SICU patient - care team to successfully carry out their work activities . The questions asked by SICU team members often contained both a clinical and organizational compo - nent . We believe that these findings have a direct implication for medical informatics system designers First , to build effective clinical systems , designers must consider how people work together to find and use information in their daily work . Clinical systems are more than mere repositories of patient data ; they also support various activities of a patient - care team including information seeking activities . Second , medical informatics system designers must recognize the organizational nature of the work . By this , we mean understanding the relationships that exist between the clinical care of the patient and the day - to - day work necessary to keep a unit such as the SICU functioning . Finally , understanding the collaborative nature of teamwork is essential to build systems that truly sup - port the work activities of the health - care providers in a busy , fluid work environment such as the SICU . Acknowledgements We thank the SICU physicians , nurses , pharmacists and other staff members for allowing us to observe and in - terview them . This work was supported by a grant from the Center for Research in Information Technology and Organizations at the University of Califomia , Irvine . References 1 . Covell , D . G . , G . C . Uman , and P . R . Manning . Infor - mation needs in office practice : are they being met ? Annals of Intemal Medicine , 1985 . 103 : p . 596 - 99 . 2 . Woolf , S . H . and D . A . Benson . The medical informa - tion needs of internists and pediatricians at an aca - demic medical center . Bulletin of the Medical Library Association , 1989 . 77 ( 4 ) : p . 372 - 80 . 3 . Forsythe , D . E . , B . G . Buchanan , J . A . Osheroff , and R . A . Miller . Expanding the concept of medical infor - mation : An observational study ofphysicians ' infor - mation needs . Computers and Biomedical Research , 1992 . 25 ( 2 ) : p . 181 - 200 . 4 . Cicourel , A . V . , The Integration of Distributed Knowl - edge in Collaborative Medical Diagnosis , in Intellectual Teamwork , J . Galegher , R . E . Kraut , and C . Egido , Editors . 1990 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associ - ates : Hillsdale , NJ . p . 221 - 242 . 5 . Ely , J . W . , J . A . Osheroff , P . N . Gorman , et al . A Tax - onomy of generic clinical questions : classification study . BMJ , 2000 . 321 : p . 429 - 432 . 6 . Lange , L . L . Information Seeking by Nurses During Beginning - of - Shift Activities . In AMIA . 1993 ; p . 317 - 321 . 7 . Dee , C . and R . Blazek . Information needs of the rural physician : a descriptive study . Bulletin of the Medi - cal Library Association . 1993 . 81 ( 3 ) : p . 259 - 264 . 8 . Gorman , P . N . Information Needs of Physicians . Jour - nal of the American Society for Information Science , 1995 . 46 ( 10 ) : p . 729 - 736 . 9 . Osheroff , J . A . , D . E . Forsythe , B . G . Buchanan , R . A . Bankowitz , B . H . Blumenfeld , and R . A . Miller . Phy - sicians ' information needs : analysis of questions posed during clinical teaching . Annals of Intemal Medicine , 1991 . 114 ( 7 ) : p . 576 - 81 . 10 . Strauss , A . and J . Corbin , Basics ofQualitative Re - search : Grounded Theory Procedures and Tech - niques . 1990 , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . 1 1 . Baggs , J . G . , S . A . Ryan , C . E . Phelps , J . F . Richeson , and J . E . Johnson . The association between interdisci - plinary collaboration and patient outcomes in a medical intensive care unit . Heart Lung , 1992 . 21 ( 1 ) : p . 18 - 24 . 651