http : / / jom . sagepub . com Journal of Management DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0149206305279113 2005 ; 31 ; 700 Journal of Management Bradley L . Kirkman and John E . Mathieu The Dimensions and Antecedents of Team Virtuality http : / / jom . sagepub . com / cgi / content / abstract / 31 / 5 / 700 The online version of this article can be found at : Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com On behalf of : Southern Management Association can be found at : Journal of Management Additional services and information for http : / / jom . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / jom . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : http : / / jom . sagepub . com / cgi / content / refs / 31 / 5 / 700 SAGE Journals Online and HighWire Press platforms ) : ( this article cites 41 articles hosted on the Citations © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from 10 . 1177 / 0149206305279113 ARTICLEJournal of Management / October 2005 Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality The Dimensions and Antecedents of Team Virtuality † Bradley L . Kirkman * Mays Business School , Texas A & M University , 4221 TAMU , College Station , TX 77843 - 4221 John E . Mathieu School of Business , University of Connecticut , 2100 Hillside Road , Unit 2041MG , Storrs , CT 06269 - 2041 Team virtuality is an important factor that is gaining prominence in the literature on teams . Departing from previous research that focused on geographic dispersion , the authors define team virtuality as the extent to which team members use virtual tools to coordinate and execute team processes , theamountofinformationalvalueprovidedbysuchtools , andthesynchronicityofteam membervirtualinteraction . Theauthorsidentifythekeyfactorsthatleadgroupstohigherlevelsof team virtuality and the implications of their model for management theory and practice . Keywords : teams ; virtual ; virtuality ; technology During the past 15 to 20 years , organizations have increasingly used work teams , defined as groups of individuals with mutual accountability that work interdependently to solve prob - lems or carry out work ( Guzzo & Dickson , 1996 ) . More recently , attention has turned to vir - †We thank Bradford Bell , Gilad Chen , Susan Cohen , Cristina Gibson , Elizabeth Mannix , Daniel Feldman , and two anonymousreviewersforbothcommentsonpreviousdraftsandhelpinshapingourideasforthismanuscript . Aprevi - ousandabbreviated ( i . e . , six - page ) versionofthisarticleappearedinthe2004AcademyofManagement’s BestPaper Proceedings ( New Orleans , August ) . * Corresponding author . Tel . : 979 - 845 - 8813 ; fax : 979 - 845 - 9641 . E - mail address : brad . kirkman @ tamu . edu Journal of Management , Vol . 31 No . 5 , October 2005 700 - 718 DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0149206305279113 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . 700 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from tual teams , which are typically defined as “groups of geographically and / or organizationally dispersed coworkers that are assembled using a combination of telecommunications and information technologies to accomplish a variety of critical tasks” ( Townsend , DeMarie , & Hendrickson , 1998 : 17 ) . Although virtual teams research has grown considerably with theo - retical work ( Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith , Sawyer , & Neale , 2003 ; Shin , 2004 ) , laboratory investigations ( Jarvenpaa , Knoll , & Leidner , 1998 ; Jarvenpaa & Leidner , 1999 ; Montoya - Weiss , Massey , & Song , 2001 ; Warkentin , Sayeed , & Hightower , 1997 ) , empirical field stud - ies ( Kirkman , Rosen , Tesluk , & Gibson , 2004 , in press ) , practitioner articles ( Cascio , 2000 ; Coutu , 1998 ; Kirkman , Rosen , Gibson , Tesluk , & McPherson , 2002 ; Majchrzak , Malhotra , Stamps , & Lipnack , 2004 ) , case studies ( Majchrzak , Rice , Malhotra , King , & Ba , 2000 ; Maznevski & Chudoba , 2000 ) , and popular books ( Duarte , & Snyder , 2001 ; Lipnack & Stamps , 2000 ) , recent reviews conclude that much remains to be done to enhance the theoretical understanding of virtual teams ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ; Martins , Gilson , & Maynard , 2004 ) . We attempt to address several theoretical limitations in the virtual teams literature , and our purpose is threefold . First , given the lack of a widely accepted definition of virtual teams and perhaps due to the futility of attempting to pigeonhole these teams into a single definition , we advance a multidimensional view of “team virtuality” as an important construct for future research . Our second contribution is the removal of member geographic dispersion as a pre - requisite for team virtuality . In contrast to previous work that includes geographic dispersion as a defining characteristic of virtual teams ( e . g . , Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ; Cohen & Gibson , 2003 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ) , we suggest that co - located ( i . e . , physically face - to - face ) teams can also exhibit high levels of virtuality and that moving beyond geographic dispersion will enhance our theoretical and practical understanding of virtual teams and their antecedents . Our final contribution is our delineation of virtuality antecedents . We offer three major cat - egories of antecedents to team virtuality derived from integrative frameworks of team effec - tiveness ( Gully , 2000 ; Kozlowski & Bell , 2003 ) , describe specific antecedents within each category , and build propositions linking the antecedents and team virtuality . Research on what makes teams more or less virtual is needed because , as Kiesler and Cummings recently lamented , “The absence of an analysis of the antecedents [ of virtuality ] in the literature is wor - risome” ( 2002 : 73 ) . Our overall goal is to develop an integrative framework for such investigations . The Construct of Virtual Teams A wide variety of disciplines and literatures have addressed the idea of virtual teams . One of the most frequently asked questions across disciplines , however , is , What are the differ - ences between virtual and co - located teams ( e . g . , Driskell , Radtke , & Salas , 2003 ; Kayworth & Leidner , 2001 ; Potter & Balthazard , 2002 ; Warkentin et al . , 1997 ) ? Some researchers have argued that virtual teams cannot simply be integrated into existing typologies of teams and as a result represent an entirely new type of team ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ) . Others have recently argued that the distinction between purely virtual teams and co - located teams is unrealistic and artificial and that all teams can be described in terms of their virtuality ( Cohen & Gibson , 2003 ; Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ; Martins et al . , 2004 ) . Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 701 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Most current definitions of virtual teams describe them in terms of multiple dimensions . A common feature of virtual team definitions is that their membership crosses geographic boundaries . For example , Cohen and Gibson stated , “Members of the [ virtual ] team are geo - graphically dispersed” ( 2003 : 4 ) , and Belland Kozlowski noted , “The most criticaland impor - tant feature of virtual teams is that they cross boundaries of space” ( 2002 : 22 ) . Moreover , Driskell et al . stated , “The core feature of a virtual team is that it is one in which interdependent group members work together on a common task while they are spatially separated” ( 2003 : 297 ) . The implicit assumption in these definitions is that when team members are co - located , they are not likely to interface through virtual means . We contend that geographic and other forms of member dispersion are indeed likely to lead teams to adopt more virtual means of coordination but that member geographic dispersion is not a prerequisite for team virtuality . In other words , a team with co - located members does not automatically preclude members from interacting virtually or even prevent the team from being highly virtual . For example , sometimes co - located team members may choose to employ virtual means of coordinating their actions for a variety of reasons . Financial audit team members , sitting in the same room , may choose to exchange various reports and information with one another over wireless networks , rather than directly , to make digital copies of information available ( cf . Griffith et al . , 2003 ; Straus & Olivera , 2000 ) . Air - traffic controllers sitting side by side will transfer responsibility for aircraft to one another and reallocate airspace completely through virtual means . In fast - food restaurants , employees usually work in a sequential fashion where an order taker enters selections using a touch screen , which displays items to others in the chain . In turn , each employee completes his or her portion of the order , which is then assem - bled and given to a customer . The entire transaction is coordinated digitally even though employees were standing merely feet apart . Verbal instructions are usually reserved for exceptions . These examples show that even co - located team members can communicate and coordi - nate in a highly virtual manner even though they are in close physical proximity . Thus , we define team virtuality using three dimensions : ( a ) the extent to which team members use vir - tual tools to coordinate and execute team processes ( including communication media such as e - mail and videoconferencing and work tools such as group decision support systems [ GDSS ] ) , ( b ) the amount of informational value provided by such tools , and ( c ) the synchronicity of team member virtual interaction . The notion here is that teams are less virtual to the extent that their direct ( e . g . , communications ) or indirect ( e . g . , contributing to and accessing knowledge bases ) exchanges with each other resemble those that would occur if mediating technologies were not employed . More important , no existing models of team vir - tuality include these latter two dimensions ( cf . Cohen & Gibson , 2003 ; Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , previous models have not taken into account key differences in how the informational value and synchronicity of virtual tools influence team virtuality . Note that we use the term virtual tools to refer to interaction modes where members communi - cate virtually such as videoconferencing . Although videoconferencing approaches the com - munication richness ( i . e . , the information - carrying capacity of a communication medium ) afforded by physical face - to - face communication , researchers agree that videoconferencing cannot fully substitute for , and is less rich than , physical face - to - face communication ( for a 702 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from discussion , see Straus & Olivera , 2000 ) . We elaborate on each of our three virtuality dimensions below . Extent of Reliance on Virtual Tools Given the modern - day proliferation of information technologies , many teams that have previously been considered “face - to - face” may now incorporate a high reliance on virtual tools ( e . g . , our fast - food example ) . Furthermore , many teams that are often referred to as “vir - tual” meet face - to - face , at least initially ( e . g . , Geber , 1995 ) . Even many global virtual teams schedule periodic face - to - face meetings ( e . g . , Maznevski & Chudoba , 2000 ) . Most certainly , at one extreme , there remain some types of teams that employ no virtual means of interacting . At the other extreme , there are a small number of teams that coordinate their efforts com - pletely through virtual means . Far more teams , however , fall between these extremes and occupy middle ranges on a continuum of virtuality . Thus , all teams can be described in terms of their level of virtuality . Specifically , the more teams rely on virtual tools to work and com - municate as opposed to face - to - face interaction , the higher the level of virtuality . Therefore , consistent with previous work ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ; Cohen & Gibson , 2003 ; Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ) , we consider the extent of members’ reliance on virtual means of coordinating as an important , but not the only , dimension of virtuality . Informational Value Our conceptualization of informational value comes from the media richness literature ( Daft & Lengel , 1986 ; Venkatesh & Johnson , 2002 ) and concerns the extent to which virtual tools send or receive communication or data that are valuable for team effectiveness . While Griffith and colleagues ( Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ) incorporated communi - cation richness as a subcomponent of their technology support dimension of virtuality , it referred only to the carrying capacity of a communication channel . The authors reasoned that the richer the media used to communicate , the lower the level of virtuality . For example , videoconferencing would be richer than e - mail because the former allows for both nonverbal and verbal communication , whereas the latter only allows for verbal communication . We agree with this basic premise , but we also recognize that not all technologies in virtual teams are used for direct communication between team members , and thus the richness continuum does not apply to these exchanges . For example , consider an effort to convey the spatial relationships among a set of objects , as is commonly done by engineering or architect teams . Attempting to do so by text alone would represent a highly virtual exchange . This follows from the fact that text does not adequately convey three - dimensional relationships ( i . e . , offers relatively little informational value in this case ) . In contrast , conveying the same relationships via joint authoring three - dimensional computer animations would represent an exchange that is lower in virtuality . The value of the information that is conveyed by these joint authoring tools is much higher than text , and there - fore , reduces the virtuality of the exchange . The general theme here is that not all technologies Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 703 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from are the same . In some instances , mediated exchanges are quite impoverished as compared to what could be done face - to - face or via other means . In other instances , leveraging technolo - gies offers advantages as compared to more traditional means of team exchanges . We argue that when the members employ technologies that convey rich , valuable information , then their exchanges are less virtual than when they employ technologies that provide less valuable information . Accordingly , although our concept of informational value is similar to that of media richness , it is much broader and concerns the extent to which the combination of virtual tools being used conveys communication and data that are important for the team to be effec - tive . Informational value recognizes that teams use virtual tools for much more than commu - nicating . Thus , the lower the informational value of virtual tools , the higher the level of virtuality . Synchronicity Researchers have chronicled the coordination implications of synchronous versus asyn - chronous modes of exchanging information ( Goel , Sharda , & Taniar , 2003 ; Jarvenpaa & Leidner , 1999 ; Massey , Montoya - Weiss , & Hung , 2003 ; Mennecke , Valacich , & Wheeler , 2000 ; Navarro , 2001 ; Pinelle , Dyck , & Gutwin , 2003 ) . Synchronous exchanges occur in real time , whereas asynchronous exchanges involve a time lag ( Goel et al . , 2003 ; Pinelle et al . , 2003 ) . Although some have assumed that asynchronous exchanges degrade communication quality and detract from team member coordination ( Warkentin et al . , 1997 ) , asynchronous communication allows members to take time to consider both the message and their response , perhaps consult other resources or consider extenuating circumstances , as well as minimize time and location constraints ( cf . Borges , Pino , Fuller , & Salgado , 1999 ; Rasters , Vissers , & Dankbaar , 2002 ) . Whether it is advantageous for members to be exchanging information in real time or lagged in time hinges on the nature of their performance environment . For example , it would be counterproductive to interrupt the activities of audit team members simply to provide them with background information . Face - to - face conversations or chat discussions would be less effective than an asynchronous threaded discussion list if participants need time to consult background sources and formulate their positions . In sum , asynchronous exchanges represent greater virtuality than do synchronous ones because members are unable to engage in simulta - neous exchanges with fellow members as is the case with face - to - face interaction , videoconferencing , or instant messaging . More important , this dimension must be considered in concert with the other two virtuality aspects . Figure 1 shows the three dimensions of team virtuality advanced by our definition and how they combine to determine various levels of team virtuality . As shown in Figure 1 , the extent to which team members use virtual tools to both communicate and work , the informational value provided by such tools , and the synchronicity of interactions combine to constitute a team’s virtuality . For example , if a team relies heavily on asynchronous technology of low informa - tional value ( e . g . , email ) , the team is relatively high in virtuality . In this case , members work and communicate almost exclusively using technology , and the tools used allow few opportu - nities to experience interpersonal subtleties such as tone of voice , body language , or immedi - 704 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from ate feedback . In contrast , if a team meets or works more frequently face - to - face and tends to use information - rich , synchronous technology ( e . g . , videoconferencing ) , the team is lower in virtuality . Low to moderate levels of virtuality would exist as a result of moderate combina - tions of the three dimensions . Thus , our conception of team virtuality goes beyond simple additive frameworks and suggests that team virtuality emanates from a combination of antecedent conditions and can be manifest in a variety of forms . Antecedents of Team Virtuality Our literature review yielded surprisingly little in terms of a systematic , theoretical discus - sion of the antecedents of virtuality . Figure 2 illustrates theoretically derived antecedents to our three - dimensional conceptualization of virtuality . Teams operate within and sometimes across organizational boundaries , have histories , and need to perform multiple tasks and employ different technologies . This implies that traditional small - group research , conducted with short - term , ad hoc groups , performing contrived tasks , will not be particularly applicable Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 705 Extent of Use of Virtual Tools Informational Value High Low Synchronicity Low Low High High More Virtual Teams Less Virtual Teams Figure 1 A Three - Dimensional Model of Team Virtuality © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from ( Gully , 2000 ) . Rather , one must consider the “presses” that operate on real - world teams that make interacting face - to - face or virtuality more conducive for effectiveness . We reviewed the work team effectiveness literature to develop parsimonious theoretical categories of the antecedents of virtuality including research on team context ( e . g . , Gladstein , 1984 ; Guzzo & Shea , 1992 ) , task and technology characteristics ( e . g . , Goodman , 1986 ; McGrath , 1984 ) , and time ( e . g . , Gersick , 1988 ; Kozlowski , Gully , Salas , & Cannon - Bowers , 1996 ; Marks , Mathieu , & Zaccaro , 2001 ) . Thus , we developed a model of the three categories of antecedents that are likely to lead to lower or higher levels of virtuality including a team’s ( a ) contextual features , ( b ) task - media - member compatibility , and ( c ) temporal dynamics . Such a categorization allows us to draw a conceptual linkage to the dominant themes that most teams researchers agree are critical for successful virtual team performance . Contextual Features Contextual features refer to the larger system within which teams are embedded . Evolving work arrangements and forms such as networks , alliances , partnerships , cellular designs , vir - tual arrangements , and multiteam systems suggest that teams are no longer insulated within a single , traditionally designed organization . Team members now need to manage a wide vari - ety of external relationships . Guzzo and Shea ( 1992 ) , among others ( Gully , 2000 ; Sethi , 2000 ) , have argued that contextual features of teams represent a critical , yet underresearched , driver of effectiveness . Here , we focus our attention on contextual features that lead team members to employ more virtual means of coordination than they might otherwise . The first contextual feature is number of boundaries crossed . Research has shown that when members from the same organization work more than 30 meters apart , they have much - reduced daily contact and less frequent informal , face - to - face contact ( Kiesler & Cummings , 706 Journal of Management / October 2005 Contextual Features Task - Media - Member Compatibility Temporal Dynamics Number of Boundaries Crossed ( P1 ) Task Complexity ( P4 ) Time Available for Task Completion ( P6 ) Proportion of Co - Located Members ( P2 ) Team Member Competencies ( P5 ) Team Evolution and Maturation ( P7 ) Team Size ( P3 ) Rhythms of Team Processes ( P8 ) Team Virtuality Extent of Use of Virtual Tools Informational Value Synchronicity Figure 2 Antecedents of Team Virtuality © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from 2002 ) . By extension , crossing organizational boundaries suggests that multiorganizational team members will rely more on electronic , relative to informal face - to - face , interaction than same - organization teams . Naturally , working across different cultures , countries , or time zones will necessitate a higher reliance on virtual tools over face - to - face contact ( Straus & Olivera , 2000 ) . Some global teams do manage to assemble face - to - face periodically ( Maznevski & Chudoba , 2000 ) . For example , a global virtual team at Whirlpool consisting of members from the United States , Brazil , and Italy met face - to - face every 4 months in the development of a chlorofluorocarbon - free refrigerator over a 2 - year period ( Geber , 1995 ) . However , because of the high cost and time required to travel , global virtual teams will likely assemble face - to - face much less frequently than teams with members from the same country . In addition , these teams will be more likely to use less rich , asynchronous modes of interaction ( e . g . , e - mail ) rather than richer , synchronous forms ( e . g . , videoconferencing ) that could simu - late “psychological co - presence” ( Pratt , Fuller , & Northcraft , 2000 : 238 ) than teams whose members are all located in the same time zone ( DeSanctis , Poole , & Dickson , 2000 ) . Consequently , we propose the following : Proposition 1 : As the number of boundaries ( e . g . , organizational , country / cultural , time zones ) crossed increases , team virtuality likely increases . The second contextual feature is the proportion of co - located team members . Many mod - ern - day team configurations have some members co - located and others situated elsewhere . In fact , there may be “clusters” or subgroups of team members that are co - located in different places yet link through virtual means ( Straus & Olivera , 2000 ) . For example , Sabre , a travel reservation service organization based in the Dallas – Fort Worth , Texas area , has the majority of its team members spread throughout the United States and Canada ( Kirkman et al . , 2002 ) . However , team members in charge of billing , servicing customers , and setting up installation appointments ( typically two to three members of each team ) are co - located at the Dallas – Fort Worth , Texas headquarters . Subgroups are characteristic of hybrid teams that have elements of both face - to - face and virtual teams ( Griffith & Neale , 2001 ) . Clearly , co - located team mem - bers increase the chance ( but do not guarantee ) that at least some of the team members will rely more on face - to - face interaction than those teams whose members are all geographically dis - persed . Indeed , in a test of adaptive structuration theory , DeSanctis et al . ( 2000 ) found that more geographically distributed administrative teams were more likely to use advanced com - munication technologies than more geographically proximate teams . Thus , we propose the following : Proposition 2 : As the proportion of co - located team members decreases , team virtuality likely increases . The third contextual feature is team size . Team size will likely affect the level of team virtu - ality for several reasons . First , as teams grow in size , there are fewer opportunities for entire intact teams to assemble face - to - face and coordinate due to logistical problems and the high costs of assembling members . This argument does not apply as much to co - located subgroups within a virtual team that could assemble periodically ( Kirkman et al . , 2002 ; Majchrzak et al . , Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 707 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from 2004 ) . Nevertheless , larger teams would make coordinating face - to - face meetings more diffi - cult . Second , research has shown that as teamsgrow in size , the quality of teaminteraction pro - cesses decreases ( Hare , 1981 ) . Third , the inability to interact face - to - face would also imply that members would use more asynchronous communication . Finally , group size has been positively linked to higher absenteeism rates ( Markham , Dansereau , & Alutto , 1982 ) , thereby making it less likely that all team members will be present when face - to - face interaction occurs , even in co - located subgroup meetings . Thus , when teammembers do interactelectron - ically , larger teams will be more likely to employ technology with less informational value ( e . g . , e - mail ) than smaller teams due to the difficulty of assembling all team members in a syn - chronous fashion necessary for richer tools ( e . g . , videoconferencing ) . Thus , we propose the following : Proposition 3 : As team size increases , team virtuality likely increases . Task - Media - Member Compatibility By task - media - member compatibility , we refer to the resulting synergy between the nature of team tasks , the available technologies , and the relative competencies of team members . Clearly , some technologies are better suited for accomplishing certain tasks than others ( McGrath & Hollingshead , 1993 ) , assuming that those technologies are aligned with team members’ competencies and preferences ( Carlson & Zmud , 1999 ) . Generally , to the extent that the task ( s ) at hand lends itself to virtual means of coordination , members are capable and willing to use technology , and the team has appropriate virtual tools at their disposal , they will choose to function more virtually . The first aspect of task - media - member compatibility is task complexity . Team tasks can range from simple to complex ( Jehn , Northcraft , & Neale , 1999 ) and are critical to under - standing team effectiveness ( Goodman , 1986 ) . Thompson ( 1967 ) offered a valuable taxon - omy that has been used to describe task complexity ( cf . Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ) . At one extreme is pooled interdependence in which team effectiveness is essentially the sum of the members’ contributions . Sales teams often operate in this fashion and share , perhaps , only a database of products , services , and client information . Sequential interdependence depicts a classic assembly line where one member’s inputs are the outputs of another . Assuming little temporal pressures , this could imply that technology of relatively low informational value is beneficial ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ) and might well be superior to face - to - face . Synchronicity of exchanges is , however , important to maintain . Reciprocal interdependence represents a sit - uation in which work is passed back and forth between members . Depending on the time issues surrounding exchanges , these are likely to be better done with technologies of higher informational value and synchronous member interactions . Intensive interdependence requires members to work in real time with one another and places pressures on them to continuously maintain situation awareness , monitor each other , balance workloads , and execute back - up behaviors ( Van de Ven , Delbecq , & Koenig , 1976 ) . Clearly , these actions are optimized with high informational value and synchronous technol - 708 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from ogy . Thus , for interpersonally sensitive issues , technologies such as videoconferencing or vir - tual reality applications would be most suitable . Alternatively , such situations may be opti - mized by using smart technologies that are not designed to approximate member copresence , such as those used in nuclear power plants and by air traffic control systems . Furthermore , technology with lower informational value may still be used during such exchanges . Being able to reference a hospital patient’s history , a previous document on an intranet , or the recorded flight path of a troubled aircraft all enables team members to better execute tasks at hand . Overall , however , the demands of an intensive interdependent task will require the use of less virtual interaction between team members . Consequently , we propose the following : Proposition 4 : As the level of task complexity increases , team virtuality likely decreases . Team member competencies constitute the second aspect of task - media - member compati - bility . Team member competencies will have an impact on the success of any type of team , and virtual ones are no exception . In terms of types of competencies , however , virtual team mem - bers require sophistication in three general areas : ( a ) task work ; ( b ) teamwork ; and ( c ) virtu - ality - related knowledge , skill , ability , and other ( e . g . , personality or disposition ) characteris - tics ( KSAOs ) . Specifically for operating effectively in virtual teams , members must be comfortable with various technologies ( Blackburn , Furst , & Rosen , 2003 ; Shin , 2004 ; Sta - ples , Hulland , & Higgins , 1999 ) . Carlson and Zmud ( 1999 ) found some support for their con - tention that as user experience with e - mail increased , so did perceptions of e - mail media rich - ness ( although other factors such as experience with the communication partner and organizational context were found to be more important , especially over time ) . Unfortunately , team virtuality – related KSAOs are often limited to teaching members how to use the virtual tools , but not necessarily why or when to use such tools ( Hess & Hess , 2000 ) . Whereas Hess and Hess ( 2000 ) acknowledged that members must be proficient in the use of virtual tools , they further argued that training also needs to include rules of use and the devel - opment of shared mental models regarding what types of information would be conveyed through which mean ( s ) , at what time ( s ) , and for what purpose ( s ) . Stated simply , it is not enough to simply know “how” to use technology but team members must also know how to leverage technology to facilitate processes related to team tasks . To the extent that members possess team virtuality – related KSAOs required for employing virtual means of coordination and execution of team processes , the team is better able to leverage virtual interactions ( Shin , 2004 ) . Therefore , we propose the following : Proposition 5 : To the extent that team members possess virtuality - related KSAOs , team virtuality likely increases . Temporal Dynamics Below , we consider three of the more influential attributes of time on team processes and performance and their influence on the three dimensions of virtuality . Here , we are dealing with how time influences teams’choices about the extent to which they employ different types Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 709 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from of virtual tools . In terms of Ancona , Okhuysen , and Perlow’s ( 2001 ) types of time , Proposition 6 concerns clock time or simply how quickly work can be accomplished . In contrast , Proposi - tion 7 concerns team life cycles and the fact that there are different demands on teams at differ - ent stages of their evolution . Finally , Proposition 8 concerns task - based cyclical time , repre - senting the ebbs and flows of recurring performance episodes ( see also Marks et al . , 2001 ; Perlow , 1999 ) . Whereas the unifying theme is that time matters , the nature of the temporal demands means teams will base decisions to employ technology on different temporal dynamics . The first aspect of time is time available for task completion . Previous researchers have bemoaned the fact that it takes longer for teams to function via virtual means than it does face - to - face ( Baltes , Dickson , Sherman , Bauer , & LaGanke , 2002 ; Straus , 1997 ) . The bulk of this research comes from comparisons of ad hoc groups completing fairly simple tasks face - to - face or through computer - mediated means . Yet , recall that virtuality allows organizations to comprise teams that span geographic time zones and organizations ( Lipnack & Stamps , 2000 ) . In these kinds of instances , there is little to be learned from comparisons between vir - tual versus face - to - face teams . Such teams would not exist were it not for electronic communication tools . Perhaps a more accurate comparison would be to contrast how easily and quickly team members coordinate their efforts electronically versus how long it would take them to coordi - nate schedules , travel to a common location , and discuss the matter face - to - face . The core issue is whether , given a particular composition of individuals , work can be coordinated more quickly through virtual means than otherwise . To the extent that meeting face - to - face would slow cycle times , members are more likely to employ virtual means of coordination and vice versa . For example , the effectiveness of many sales teams would be hampered if members met face - to - face rather than virtually . Adaptive structuration theory posits that the more team members view advanced technologies as capable of reducing coordination burdens and improving the team’s work , the more likely they will adopt them ( DeSanctis et al . , 2000 ) . Consequently , we propose the following : Proposition 6 : To the extent that available virtual tools enable the team to complete work more quickly and efficiently , team virtuality likely increases . The second aspect of time is team evolution and maturation . It has long been recognized that teams evolve over time akin to a life cycle . Temporal models include Tuckman’s ( 1965 ) forming - storming - norming - performing - adjourning framework ; Gersick’s ( 1988 ) punctuated equilibrium conception ; Morgan , Salas , and Glickman’s ( 1993 ) team evolution and matura - tion approach ; and Kozlowski and colleagues’ theory of team compilation ( e . g . , Kozlowski , Gully , McHugh , Salas , & Cannon - Bowers , 1996 ; Kozlowski , Gully , Nason , & Smith , 1999 ) . The underlying logic from these models is that teams have life cycles that present implications regarding the role of virtuality . Specifically , these models suggest that different forms of inter - action may be better suited for coordinating actions at different stages of team maturity . The general issue with regard to team development is , At what stage should different virtual tools be employed ? Walther ( 2002 ) warned researchers not to assume that teams with greater degrees of technology - based interaction follow the same timing and sequences as teams with 710 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from more face - to - face interactions do . We would submit that , from a social - psychological per - spective , synchronous virtual tools with higher levels of informational value that convey sub - tle cues ( e . g . , videoconferencing ) would best be employed during early stages of group forma - tion ( Kiesler , Zugrow , Moses , & Geller , 1985 ) . Following from Alge , Wiethoff , and Klein ( 2003 ) and others ( e . g . , Chidambaram , 1996 ; Townsend et al . , 1998 ) , it may well be that mem - bers can effectively employ asynchronous and leaner means of coordination once the team has established processes for interacting and accomplishing tasks , and once trust has developed . The general principle here is not whether interacting electronically is always better or worse than working face - to - face or that synchronous virtual tools or tools of higher informa - tional value are always better than the alternatives . Rather , the issue becomes when it is advan - tageous to work in what manner . A corollary to this is that different virtual tools will be more beneficial at different periods of team development . As a general rule , we anticipate that virtu - ality will be lower during the early stages of team development as members seek to develop task - related strategies and to determine how they will organize themselves . We expect that their level of virtuality will likely increase over time as the team evolves from early “forming and storming” activities and moves into “norming and performing stages” ( Tuckman , 1965 ) . Therefore , we propose the following : Proposition 7 : Teams’ virtuality will vary as a function of their stages of development . In general , teamswilllikelybeloweronvirtuality throughouttheirearly stagesofdevelopment andhigheron virtuality during the latter stages of their life span . The final aspect of time we discuss is rhythms of team processes . Marks et al . ( 2001 ) out - lined an episodic framework and argued that teams execute different processes at different times . They suggested that teams execute processes such as mission analysis , goal specifica - tion , and strategy formulation when they are transitioning from one period to another . Such transition phases are likely to call for less virtual means of coordination such as more frequent face - to - face meetings to develop teamstrategies and processes . In contrast , Marks etal . ( 2001 ) submitted thatteamsexecuteprocesses such as coordination , monitoring the environment , and performing back - up behaviors during action phases when task work is being accomplished . Compared to transition phases , action phases are most likely carried out using more virtual means of coordination such as e - mail . Teams will be less focused on strategy and planning and more concentrated on accomplishing tasks . Rhythms of team processes are akin to a form of temporal entrainment in teams . In a team context , entrainment refers to the process by which one cyclic team process rhythm becomes “captured by and set to oscillate with another” ( Perlow , 1999 : 58 ) . Cycling between periods of action and transition depends , to some extent , on the level of interdependence needed at differ - ent points during a team’s activities related to task accomplishment ( Marks et al . , 2001 ; Perlow , 1999 ) . The key point is that teams will adopt different virtual tools to varying degrees as they seek to accomplish different tasks as prompted by their pattern of entrainment . The rhythms of team task demands will place premiums on interacting in different ways on the basis of whether virtual or face - to - face means of coordination are warranted . Therefore , we propose the following : Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 711 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Proposition 8 : Team virtuality will vary depending on the nature of the tasks that teams are perform - ing at any given time . In general , virtuality will likely be lower during transition periods and higher during action periods . Discussion Advances in information technology and the rise of virtual teams have led to a shift away from face - to - face interaction to increased reliance on virtual tools ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ; Lipnack & Stamps , 2000 ; Townsend et al . , 1998 ) . We attempted to integrate existing literature and extend previous research by incorporating different aspects of technology into the virtu - ality construct and illuminating reasons why teams become more or less virtual . As a result , we make three contributions to the literature . First , we argued that not all virtual tools are cre - ated alike . Simply assessing a team’s reliance on virtual tools to determine its virtuality is overly simplistic and ignores the fact that the tools themselves differ in fundamental ways that alter a team’s virtuality . Second , we argued that geographic dispersion is an antecedent to , and not a defining dimension of , a team’s virtuality . Finally , we specified eight antecedents of vir - tuality to begin to establish the nomological network of virtuality antecedents . We now turn to theoretical and managerial implications . Theoretical Implications and Directions for Future Research Our discussion of team virtuality has several implications for researchers interested in the study of virtual teams . We argue that researchers and practitioners need to reach beyond sim - ply the extent to which team members use virtual tools but also consider the fact that different virtual technologies offer different advantages and disadvantages for enhancing team effec - tiveness ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 ; Cohen & Gibson , 2003 ; Griffith & Neale , 2001 ; Griffith et al . , 2003 ) . Because many teams rely on virtual tools to communicate and carry out work , it is imperative to more rigorously examine and eventually understand how the attributes of infor - mational value and synchronicity enrich our conception of team virtuality . Along those lines , we urge future researchers to focus their attention on empirical operationalizations of our three - dimensional virtuality construct and move beyond overly simplistic , unidimensional measures ( e . g . , Kirkman , Rosen , Tesluk , and Gibson 2004 ) . Moreover , although we have depicted the relationship between each of the three dimensions and virtuality as linear and additive , it may well be that more complex relationships between the dimensions exist . In other words , future research should also consider whether the three dimensions that we articu - lated combine in additive or more complex fashions as related to team virtuality . Clearly , researchers will need to understand the various levels of informational value afforded by virtual tools that seem to change and become more sophisticated by the minute . Assessing the informational value of virtual tools is a highly complex task . For example , in attempting to determine the communication richness of various technologies , channel expan - sion theory suggests that it is perceptions of communication richness rather than objective assessments that are critical to understanding how individuals choose and experience different 712 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from technologies ( Carlson & Zmud , 1999 ) . Indeed , there have been conflicting results when respondents were asked to place e - mail along the channel richness continuum ( Rice & Love , 1987 ; Schmitz & Fulk , 1991 ) . Thus , the perceived informational value of a virtual tool most likely depends on knowledge acquired from experience with the tool , other users of the tool , the tool’s purpose , the specific organizational context , and even social influence processes over time ( cf . Carlson & Zmud , 1999 ) . Undertaking such an agenda will be complex and chal - lenging for researchers and will most likely benefit from a multidisciplinary approach that incorporates the fields of information technology , communication studies , and human factors . A rich area for future research concerns how levels of virtuality affect previously examined relationships in traditional input - process - output ( IPO ) models of team effectiveness , particu - larly as a moderator . For example , using a unidimensional measure of virtuality as a modera - tor , Kirkman et al . ( 2004 ) found that team empowerment was a stronger predictor of team per - formance when teams were higher , rather than lower , in virtuality . Researchers need accurate empirical assessments of virtuality to determine whether previously supported relationships are affected by varying levels of virtuality . Regarding geographic dispersion , we showed that a team might be very high in virtuality ( i . e . , interact almost exclusively using asynchronous virtual tools with low informational value ) but be very low in geographic dispersion ( i . e . , members may all be located in the same facility ) . Conversely , a team may be high in geographic dispersion ( i . e . , all members located in different cities ) but low in virtuality ( i . e . , team members may physically meet face - to - face reg - ularly or in a rich videoconferencing or virtual reality environment ) . We encourage research - ers to seek out and study these types of teams that challenge the conventional wisdom of label - ing teams as “virtual” or “face - to - face”—and reframe future investigations toward questions as to why teams choose to employ differing degrees of virtuality and how such choices influ - ence team effectiveness . Such research will likely take the form of ethnographic , qualitative efforts to inductively uncover the range of underlying causes of team member technology choices and their performance effects . The points outlined above lead to the inevitable conclusion that issues surrounding team virtuality are complex and contingent on a wide variety of factors . And , although we believe that the general propositions we advance should prove valuable , we recommend that research - ers and practitioners modify them as needed as they pertain to particular team contexts . For example , Propositions 7 and 8 suggested that team virtuality would vary as a function of team developmental phases and task - related cycles , respectively . Thus , consider a newly formed quality - improvement team . Early in the team’s development and using Tuckman’s ( 1965 ) ter - minology , during the “storming” stage , one might anticipate that meeting face - to - face would be most beneficial for their effectiveness . In addition , perhaps group decision support tools would be valuable for helping to identify common ground , to prioritize work projects , and to set agendas . Once the team’s agenda has been established and members move from the “storming” to the “norming” and “performing” stages , task scheduling and organization tools such as “Microsoft Project” should help members to maintain focus and to coordinate their efforts and deliverables . A grounded theory approach such as this may lead to different specific hypotheses than would be evident from our general propositions . Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 713 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Managerial Implications The managerial implications of our construct of team virtuality are numerous . First , our assertion that co - located team members may be high on virtuality should reframe managers’ thoughts about the use of team technologies . Rather than viewing virtuality as a necessary evil of linking people at a distance and overcoming the degradation of interacting through virtual means , our view of team virtuality challenges managers to consider how team virtuality can be leveraged to enhance team effectiveness , even with co - located team members . Naturally , some managers will have control over how virtual their teams are , whereas others may not . Controlling virtuality may depend on the variables we characterized as antecedents to virtu - ality . For example , team leaders may have less control over the extent of virtuality if all mem - bers are geographically dispersed in many different countries around the world and budget constraints severely limit face - to - face interaction . Similarly , the choices about how much to use lean versus rich synchronous or asynchronous technologies might be constrained by tech - nology availability . In many other instances , however , the extent and nature of virtuality will be more of a strategic choice than a necessity of working together . Therefore , the role of managers might transform more toward being a coach , monitoring team demands , and cuing when the use of certain virtual tools is most warranted ( Hackman & Wageman , 2005 ) . Moreover , their role should also ensure that teams have the necessary resources to exploit virtual means of coordination when it is adopted . This would include securing appropriate hardware / software , arranging for training and development before it is needed , and helping to shield the team from other pressures and demands as they learn new ways of working together ( Kirkman et al . , in press ) . A final implication of our position may be obvious yet is not always appreciated . Clearly , we are advocating that a thorough needs analysis be conducted before virtuality , as a strategic choice , is thrust on teams . In contrast to some managers who tolerate technology use as a nec - essary evil , more often we fear that virtual means of coordination are employed because some - one perceives that the technology is available and can be exploited ( Schunn , Crowley , & Okada , 2002 ) . Blackburn et al . ( 2003 ) outlined many important considerations in terms of training virtual teams to use technology , including what to train , when to train it ( e . g . , before they work in virtual teams vs . embedded training ) , how to train it ( e . g . , to individuals or teams ) , and what delivery systems to employ ( e . g . , in person vs . virtually ) . These questions underscore the more general principle that a thorough needs analysis must be conducted that identifies ( a ) what is trying to be accomplished through virtual means , ( b ) what competencies are required to execute the virtual processes , and ( c ) who needs to be trained . The answers to these questions defy simple yes - no answers and are inextricably intertwined . The answer to the technology paradox , that the use of technology does not always yield the productivity gains anticipated ( Bruque & Medina , 2002 ) , lies in this web of questions . Conclusion We hope that our conceptualization of virtuality as a multidimensional construct will con - tinue to move researchers away from viewing teams as either virtual or not . Although research 714 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from comparing virtual to face - to - face teams has generated interesting insights ( e . g . , Potter & Balthazard , 2002 ; Warkentin et al . , 1997 ) , the classification of modern - day teams seems less relevant given that most of these teams have attributes of both traditional and virtual teams ( Griffith et al . , 2003 ) . Although classification schemes such as traditional , hybrid , and virtual ( Griffith & Neale , 2001 ) can be useful in creating general descriptions and for exemplary pur - poses , we urge researchers to drop references to “virtual” or “traditional” teams . As we have stated , adaptive structuration theory suggests that teams make choices about virtuality on the basis of a confluence of factors including group structure , task , and interaction frequency . Thus , definitions of virtual teams that specify that they must be “geographically dispersed” ( Bell & Kozlowski , 2002 : 15 ; Townsend et al . , 1998 : 17 ) or rely on “technology - mediated communications rather than [ italics added ] face - to - face interaction” ( Cohen & Gibson , 2003 : 4 ) are far too deterministic . Instead , we argue that teams would be better described using our continuum of virtuality . References Alge , B . J . , Wiethoff , C . , & Klein , H . J . 2003 . When does the medium matter ? Knowledge - building experiences and opportunities in decision - making teams . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 91 : 26 - 37 . Ancona , D . G . , Okhuysen , G . A . , & Perlow , L . A . 2001 . Takingtimetointegratetemporalresearch . AcademyofMan - agement Review , 26 : 512 - 529 . Baltes , B . B . , Dickson , M . W . , Sherman , M . P . , Bauer , C . C . , & LaGanke , S . 2002 . Computer - mediated communica - tion and group decision - making : A meta - analysis . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 87 : 156 - 179 . Bell , B . S . , & Kozlowski , S . W . J . 2002 . A typology of virtual teams : Implications for effective leadership . Group & Organization Management , 27 : 14 - 49 . Blackburn , R . S . , Furst , S . A . , & Rosen , B . 2003 . Buildingawinningvirtualteam . InC . B . Gibson & S . G . Cohen ( Eds . ) , Virtualteamsthatwork : Creatingconditionsforvirtualteameffectiveness : 95 - 120 . SanFrancisco : Jossey - Bass . Borges , M . R . , Pino , J . A . , Fuller , D . A . , & Salgado , A . C . 1999 . Keyissuesinthedesignofanasynchronoussystemto support meeting preparation . Decision Support Systems , 27 : 269 - 287 . Bruque , S . , & Medina , J . A . 2002 . The technology paradox : Characteristics , causes and implications for IT manage - ment . International Journal of Information Technology , 8 : 75 - 94 . Carlson , J . R . , & Zmud , R . W . 1999 . Channel expansion theory and the experiential nature of media richness percep - tions . Academy of Management Journal , 42 : 153 - 170 . Cascio , W . F . 2000 . Managing a virtual workplace . Academy of Management Executive , 14 ( 3 ) : 81 - 90 . Chidambaram , L . 1996 . Relational development in computer - supported groups . Management Information Systems Quarterly , 20 : 143 - 166 . Cohen , S . G . , & Gibson , C . B . 2003 . In the beginning : Introduction and framework . In C . B . Gibson & S . G . Cohen ( Eds . ) , Virtualteamsthatwork : Creatingconditionsforvirtualteameffectiveness : 1 - 13 . SanFrancisco : Jossey - Bass . Coutu , D . 1998 . Trust in virtual teams . Harvard Business Review , 76 ( 3 ) : 20 - 21 . Daft , R . , & Lengel , R . 1986 . Organizational information requirements , media richness , and structural design . Man - agement Science , 32 : 554 - 571 . DeSanctis , G . , Poole , M . S . , & Dickson , G . W . 2000 . Teams and technology : Interactions over time . In M . A . Neale , E . A . Mannix , & T . L . Griffith ( Eds . ) , Researchonmanaginggroupsandteams , vol . 3 : 1 - 27 . Stamford , CT : JAI . Driskell , J . E . , Radtke , P . H . , & Salas , E . 2003 . Virtualteams : Effectsoftechnologicalmediationonteamperformance . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 7 : 297 - 323 . Duarte , D . L . , & Snyder , N . T . 2001 . Mastering virtual teams ( 2nd ed . ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Geber , B . 1995 . Virtual teams . Training , 32 ( 4 ) : 36 - 40 . Gersick , C . J . 1988 . Timeandtransitioninworkteams : Towardanewmodelofgroupdevelopment . AcademyofMan - agement Journal , 31 : 9 - 41 . Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 715 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Gladstein , D . 1984 . Groups in context : A model of task group effectiveness . Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 : 499 - 517 . Goel , S . , Sharda , H . , & Taniar , D . 2003 . Messaging in distributed systems . Computer Systems Science and Engineer - ing , 18 : 339 - 355 . Goodman , P . S . ( Ed . ) . 1986 . Designing effective work groups . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Griffith , T . L . , & Neale , M . A . 2001 . Information processing in traditional , hybrid , and virtual teams : From nascent knowledge to transactive memory . In B . M . Staw & R . L . Sutton ( Eds . ) , Research in organizationalbehavior , vol . 23 : 379 - 421 . Greenwich , CT : JAI . Griffith , T . L . , Sawyer , J . E . , & Neale , M . A . 2003 . Virtualnessandknowledgeinteams : Managingthelovetriangleof organizations , individuals , and information technology . MIS Quarterly , 27 : 265 - 287 . Gully , S . M . 2000 . Work teams research : Recent findings and future trends . In M . M . Beyerlein ( Ed . ) , Work teams : Past , present and future : 25 - 44 . Lisse , the Netherlands : Kluwer . Guzzo , R . A . , & Dickson , R . A . 1996 . Teams in organizations : Recent research on performance and effectiveness . Annual Review of Psychology , 47 : 307 - 338 . Guzzo , R . A . , & Shea , G . P . 1992 . Groupperformanceand intergrouprelations in organizations . In M . D . Dunnette & L . M . Hough ( Eds . ) , Handbookofindustrialandorganizationalpsychology , vol . 3 : 269 - 313 . PaloAlto , CA : Con - sulting Psychologists Press . Hackman , J . R . , & Wageman , R . 2005 . A theory of team coaching . Academy of Management Review , 30 : 269 - 287 . Hare , A . P . 1981 . Group size . American Behavioral Scientist , 24 : 695 - 708 . Hess , K . P . , & Hess , S . M . 2000 . The impacts of collaborative technologies on the functions of distributed , dynamic organizations . Paper presented at the 15th annual meeting of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psy - chology , New Orleans , LA . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Knoll , K . , & Leidner , D . E . 1998 . Is anybodyout there ? Antecedents of trust in global virtual teams . Journal of Management Information Systems , 14 : 29 - 64 . Jarvenpaa , S . L . , & Leidner , D . E . 1999 . Communication and trust in global virtual teams . Organization Science , 10 : 791 - 815 . Jehn , K . A . , Northcraft , G . B . , & Neale , M . A . 1999 . Why differences make a difference : A field study of diversity , conflict , and performance in workgroups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 : 741 - 763 . Kayworth , T . R . , & Leidner , D . E . 2001 . Leadership effectiveness in global virtual teams . Journal of Management Information Systems , 18 : 7 - 40 . Kiesler , S . , & Cummings , J . N . 2002 . What do we know about proximity and distance in work groups ? A legacy of research . In P . J . Hinds & S . Kiesler ( Eds . ) , Distributed work : 57 - 80 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kiesler , S . , Zugrow , D . , Moses , A . M . , & Geller , V . 1985 . Affect in computer - mediated communication : An experi - ment in synchronous terminal - to - terminal discussion . Human - Computer Interaction , 1 : 77 - 104 . Kirkman , B . L . , Rosen , B . , Gibson , C . B . , Tesluk , P . E . , & McPherson , S . O . 2002 . Fivechallengestovirtualteamsuc - cess : Lessons from Sabre , Inc . Academy of Management Executive , 16 ( 3 ) : 67 - 79 . Kirkman , B . L . , Rosen , B . , Tesluk , P . E . , & Gibson , C . B . 2004 . Theimpactofteamempowermentonvirtualteamper - formance : The moderating role of face - to - face interaction . Academy of Management Journal , 47 : 175 - 192 . Kirkman , B . L . , Rosen , B . , Tesluk , P . E . , & Gibson , C . B . inpress . Enhancingthetransferofcomputer - assistedtraining proficiency in geographically - distributed teams . Journal of Applied Psychology . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , & Bell , B . S . 2003 . Workgroupsandteamsinorganizations . InW . C . Borman , D . R . Ilgen , & R . J . Klimoski ( Eds . ) , Comprehensive handbook of psychology . Vol . 12 : Industrial and organizational psychology : 333 - 375 . New York : John Wiley . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , Gully , S . M . , McHugh , P . P . , Salas , E . , & Cannon - Bowers , J . A . 1996 . Adynamictheoryofleader - ship and team effectiveness : Developmental and task contingent leader roles . In G . R . Ferris ( Ed . ) , Research in personnel and human resource management : 253 - 305 . Greenwich , CT : JAI . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , Gully , S . M . , Nason , E . R . , & Smith , E . M . 1999 . Developingadaptiveteams : Atheoryofcompila - tion and performance across levels and time . In D . R . Ilgen & E . D . Pulakos ( Eds . ) , The changing nature of work and performance : Implications for staffing personnel actions and development : 240 - 292 . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , Gully , S . M . , Salas , E . , & Cannon - Bowers , J . A . 1996 . Team leadership and development : Theo - ries , principles , and guidelines for training team leaders and teams . In M . M . Beyerlein , D . A . Johnson , & S . T . Beyerlein ( Eds . ) , Advances in interdisciplinary study of work teams , vol . 3 : 253 - 291 . Greenwich , CT : JAI . 716 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Lipnack , J . , & Stamps , J . 2000 . Virtual teams : People working across boundaries with technology ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : John Wiley . Majchrzak , A . , Malhotra , A . , Stamps , J . , & Lipnack , J . 2004 . Canabsencemakeateamgrowstronger ? HarvardBusi - ness Review , 82 ( 5 ) : 131 - 137 . Majchrzak , A . , Rice , R . E . , Malhotra , A . , King , N . , & Ba , S . 2000 . Technology adaptation : The case of a computer - supported inter - organizational virtual team . MIS Quarterly , 24 : 569 - 600 . Markham , S . E . , Dansereau , F . , Jr . , & Alutto , J . A . 1982 . Group size and absenteeism rates : A longitudinal analysis . Academy of Management Journal , 25 : 921 - 927 . Marks , M . A . , Mathieu , J . E . , & Zaccaro , S . J . 2001 . A temporallybasedframeworkandtaxonomyofteamprocesses . Academy of Management Review , 26 : 356 - 376 . Martins , L . L . , Gilson , L . L . , & Maynard , M . T . 2004 . Virtualteams : Whatdoweknowandwheredowegofromhere ? Journal of Management , 30 : 805 - 835 . Massey , A . P . , Montoya - Weiss , M . M . , & Hung , Y . 2003 . Because time matters : Temporal coordinationin global vir - tual project teams . Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 : 129 - 155 . Maznevski , M . L . , & Chudoba , K . M . 2000 . Bridging space over time : Global virtual - team dynamics and effective - ness . Organization Science , 11 : 473 - 492 . McGrath , J . E . 1984 . Groups , interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . McGrath , J . E . , & Hollingshead , A . B . 1993 . Puttingthegroupbackingroupsupportsystems : Sometheoreticalissues about dynamic processes in groups with technological enhancements . In L . M . Jessup & J . S . Valacich ( Eds . ) , Group support systems : New perspectives : 78 - 96 . New York : Macmillan . Mennecke , B . E . , Valacich , J . S . , & Wheeler , B . C . 2000 . Theeffects ofmedia andtask onuser performance : A test of the task - media fit hypothesis . Group Decision and Negotiation , 9 : 507 - 529 . Montoya - Weiss , M . M . , Massey , A . P . , & Song , M . 2001 . Gettingittogether : Temporalcoordinationandconflictman - agement in global virtual teams . Academy of Management Journal , 44 : 1251 - 1262 . Morgan , B . B . , Salas , E . , & Glickman , A . S . 1993 . An analysis of team evolution and maturation . Journal of General Psychology , 120 : 277 - 291 . Navarro , C . 2001 . Sharing information in remote collaboration and new communication technology : A review of recent work . Travail Humain , 64 : 297 - 319 . Perlow , L . A . 1999 . Thetimefamine : Towardasociologyofworktime . AdministrativeScienceQuarterly , 44 : 57 - 81 . Pinelle , D . , Dyck , J . , & Gutwin , C . 2003 . Aligning work practices and mobile technologies : Groupware design for loosely coupled mobile groups . Proceedings of the Human - Computer Interaction With Mobile Devices and Ser - vices Conference , Udine , Italy , 177 - 192 . Potter , R . E . , & Balthazard , P . A . 2002 . Understandinghumaninteractionandperformanceinthevirtualteam . Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application , 4 : 1 - 23 . Pratt , M . G . , Fuller , M . A . , & Northcraft , G . B . 2000 . Media selection and identification in distributed groups : The potential costs of “rich” media . In M . A . Neale , E . A . Mannix , & T . L . Griffith ( Eds . ) , Research on managing groups and teams , vol . 3 : 231 - 255 . Stamford , CT : JAI . Rasters , G . , Vissers , G . , & Dankbaar , B . 2002 . An inside look : Rich communication through lean media in a virtual research team . Small Group Research , 33 : 718 - 754 . Rice , R . , & Love , G . 1987 . Electronic emotion . Communication Research , 14 : 85 - 108 . Schmitz , J . , & Fulk , J . 1991 . Organizationalcolleagues , mediarichness , andelectronicmail : Atestofthesocialinflu - ence model of technology use . Communication Research , 18 : 487 - 523 . Schunn , C . , Crowley , K . , & Okada , T . 2002 . Whatmakescollaborationacrossadistancesucceed ? Thecaseofthecog - nitive science community . In P . J . Hinds & S . Kiesler ( Eds . ) , Distributed work : 407 - 430 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sethi , R . 2000 . New product quality and product development teams . Journal of Marketing , 64 : 1 - 14 . Shin , Y . 2004 . A person - environment fit model for virtual organizations . Journal of Management , 30 : 725 - 743 . Staples , D . S . , Hulland , J . S . , & Higgins , C . A . 1999 . Aself - efficacytheoryexplanationforthemanagementofremote workers in virtual organizations . Organizational Science , 10 : 758 - 776 . Straus , S . G . 1997 . Technology , group process , and group outcomes : Testing the connections in computer - mediated and face - to - face groups . Human - Computer Interaction , 12 : 227 - 266 . Straus , S . G . , & Olivera , F . 2000 . Knowledgeacquisitionin virtualteams . InM . A . Neale , E . A . Mannix , & T . L . Grif - fith ( Eds . ) , Research on managing groups and teams , vol . 3 : 257 - 282 . Stamford , CT : JAI . Kirkman , Mathieu / Team Virtuality 717 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from Thompson , J . D . 1967 . Organizations in action . New York : McGraw - Hill . Townsend , A . M . , DeMarie , S . M . , & Hendrickson , A . R . 1998 . Virtual teams : Technology and the workplace of the future . Academy of Management Executive , 12 ( 3 ) : 17 - 29 . Tuckman , B . W . 1965 . Developmental sequence in small groups . Psychological Bulletin , 63 : 384 - 389 . VandeVen , A . H . , Delbecq , A . , & Koenig , R . 1976 . Determinantsofcoordinationmodeswithinorganizations . Ameri - can Sociological Review , 41 : 322 - 338 . Venkatesh , V . , & Johnson , P . 2002 . Telecommutingtechnologyimplementations : Awithin - andbetween - subjectslon - gitudinal field study . Personnel Psychology , 55 : 661 - 687 . Walther , J . B . 2002 . Time effects in computer - mediated groups : Past , present , and future . In P . J . Hinds & S . Kiesler ( Eds . ) , Distributed work : 235 - 257 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Warkentin , M . E . , Sayeed , L . , & Hightower , R . 1997 . Virtualteamsversusface - to - faceteams : Anexploratorystudyof a Web - based conference system . Decision Sciences , 28 : 975 - 996 . Biographical Notes BradleyL . Kirkman ( brad . kirkman @ tamu . edu ) isanassociateprofessorofmanagementandMaysResearchFellow in the Mays Business School at Texas A & M University . He received his Ph . D . in organizational behavior from the Kenan - FlaglerBusinessSchoolattheUniversityofNorthCarolinaatChapelHill . Hisresearchinterestsincludework team effectiveness , virtual teams , cross - cultural management , and organizational justice . He is an associate editor of the Academy of Management Journal and a member of the Academy of Management . JohnE . Mathieu ( john . mathieu @ business . uconn . edu ) is a professorofmanagementin the SchoolofBusiness at the University of Connecticut . He is a member of the Academy of Management and a Fellow of the Society of Industrial Organizational Psychology . His current research interests include models of training effectiveness , team and multiteam processes , and cross - level models of organizational behavior . 718 Journal of Management / October 2005 © 2005 Southern Management Association . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 6 , 2008 http : / / jom . sagepub . com Downloaded from