Scientometrics , Vol . Z Nos 3 - 6 ( 1985 ) 431 - - 441 USING THE ARCHIVE : DEREK PRICE ' S THEORY OF DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES SUSAN E . COZZENS Division of Policy Research and Analysis Washington , D . C . 20550 ( USAJ ( Received June 13 , 1984 ) Derek Price ' s theory of variation among the sciences stressed that the essential differences lay in the process through which scientists use each other ' s results . He maintained that the critical processes were those which took place within small groups of scientists who shared an intellectual focus , and proposed that an indication of those processes could be found in referencing patterns . Later research , reviewed in this paper , has corroborated Price in these observations . Several bodies of evidence point to the desirability of further application of the basic concepts Price introduced for the purpose he proposed : as diagnostic tools to describe and compare processes of knowledge growth in the sciences . Introduction In the early 1970 ' s , the problem of describing the differences among the sciences was much on the minds of researchers in the various fields of science studies . In the sociology of science ( then less than 15 years old ) , comparisons of the social structures of disciplines were being reported or underway ) The concept of " codification " was introduced in an attempt to capture the essence of differences among the sciences at the level of " cognitive structure " . 2 And in the history of science , a dichotomous descriptor of cognitive structure - the distinc - tion between paradigmatic and pre - paradigrnatic sciences - was under heated discussion , a At the beginning o ' f this period , Derek Price wrote an essay on ! ' Citation Measures of Hard Science , Soft Science , Technology and Non - science " . 4 In the essay , he introduced a bibliometric diagnostic tool for distinguishing among those four types of knowledge - producing activities ; he called it Price ' s Index . Like all powerful scientific instruments , the Index embodied a theory of the phenomenon it helped to observe . This article reviews Price ' s essay in order to explicate that theory , then briefly summarizes some of the evidence to date on its validity . Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) 431 SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES The immediacy effect Price ' s theory of knowledge growth , later applied to differences among the sciences , appeared first in " Networks of Scientific Papers " , published in 1965 . s How do scientists draw on older scientific papers when they are writing new ones ? Price addressed this question in a novel manner in the article : through an aggregate analysis of the data contained in the then - new Science Citation Index ( SCI ) . If references from current to past literature were distributed evenly across the entire archive of material available to cite , Price reasoned , then the time distribu - tion of citation in any year ' s SCI file should reflect the amount of literature available , that is , " the size of the archive " for any particular year in the past . However , this was not the pattern of citations as they appeared in the SCI . Instead in the materials he examined , the most recent literature of science was cited more often than one would expect on the basis of the simple probability model - up to six times the expected value , in fact . This over - citation reached its maximum for papers two and a half years old , and tapered off gradually for older papers , until the expected value was observed for papers about fifteen years old . Price dubbed tkis phenomenon " The Immediacy Effect " , because it represented the article ' s impact immediately after it appeared , an effect which faded with time . " I am surprised at the extent of this immediacy phenomenon " , he wrote , " and want to indicate its significance " . ~ The statistical results suggested to Price tbe following insight into scientific process : Thus each group of papers is " knitted " into a small , select part of the existing scientific literature but connected rather weakly and randomly to a much greater part . Since only a small part of the earlier literature is knitted together by the new year ' s crop of papers , we may look upon this small part as a sort of growing tip or epidermal layer , an active research front . 7 In brief , the essence of the research front of science , oin Price ' s concept , was the selective attention of scientists , focused on a small part of the literature of the immediat e past . From the time of its introduction , this notion was linked , in Price ' s writing , to the question of differences among knowledge systems in their growth processes . " I believe it is the existence of a research front , in this sense " , he wrote immediately after the passage above , " that distinguishes the sciences from the rest of scholar - ship . . . , , 8 And a few paragraphs later , he related his data to a conjecture by Burton and Kebler 9 that the scientific literature is composed of classic and ephemeral parts , with different " half lives " . " It is obviously desirable to explore further " , he then noted , the tentative finding of those authors that " the relative proportions 432 Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES of classic and ephemeral literature vary considerably from field to field : mathematics , geology and botany being strongly classical ; chemical , mechanical and metallurgical engineering and physics strongly ephemeral ; and chemistry and physiology a much more even mixture . " l o Hard and soft sciences This desirable exploration was taken up in the 1970 essay , " Citation Measures of Hard Science , Soft Science , Technology and Non - science " J 1 Here Price proposed that the immediacy effect could be used a diagnostic tool to sort out the various kinds of knowledge growth , and as a prescription as well , pointing to the kind of attention which scientists need to devote to the recent literature of their fields in order to make them ( in the metaphor used in this piece ) " hard " and " crystalline " . Unlike the sociological discussions of the time , which stressed cognitive struc - tures , Price ' s exposition of the notion of hard and soft sciences focused on the process of knowledge growth . Insisting that one should not artificially separate substantive content from social behavior , in the first part of the paper he port - rayed science as " a conspiracy to pool the capabilities of many men , " so that " the totality of . . . knowledge can grow more rapidly than any individual can move by himself " . It is by setting up such a conspiracy that natural philosophy was transformed into science , and in general , it is in this way that the different substantive contents have erected different social apparatuses of information pooling and exchange . 12 The second part of the paper turns to a more empirical formulation of the matter . " If the paper is an expression of a person or several persons working at the research front " , Price wrote , " we can tell something about the relations among the people from the papers themselves " . 13 First he considered the " scholarliness " of papers in various fields - that is , the number of footnotes ( scholia ) the average paper in the field contained . Second , he turned to a measure of the immediacy effect : the percent of references in the field which were to literature published in the last five years . This figure was termed " Price ' s Index " . The Index should provide a good diagnostic , he wrote , for " the extent to which a subject is attempting , so to speak , to grow from the skin rather than from the body . . . . The thinner the skin of science , the more crystalline the growth and the more rapid the process " . 14 And later , putting the abstract metaphor in human action terms , he suggested : " . . . if you want to Scientometries 7 ( 1985 ) 433 SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES make the field firm and tight and hard and crystalline you have to play with your peers and keep on the ball by citing their recent work . " The hypothesis was intuitively appealing , but how could it be tested ? Price reached for the major concept available in 1970 to describe differences among disciplines - the hierarchy of the sciences . Introduced nearly two centuries earlier by Comte , this notion had been adopted by many contemporary authors . 1 s Although the validity of the hierarchy was well accepted , the concept itself was no more empirically grounded than Price ' s hypothesis on the immediacy effect . Yet in the context of the article , it served Price ' s purpose well . " Perhaps the most important finding I have to offer " , he wrote , " is that Price ' s Index seems to correspond very well with what we intuit as hard science , soft science , and nonscience as we descend the scale " ~ In a sample of 162 journals , physics and biochemistry ranked high in immediacy , with indexes of 60 to 70 percent . Social science journals were in the middle , ranging between 40 and 50 percent . And non - science journals ( German Review , for instance , and 1sis ) showed indexes lower than one would expect under the simple probability model for the distribution of references ; they seemed actively to ignore their recent literatures . Another model The hierarchy of the sciences was brought in to this essay to confirm Price ' s Index , not vice - versa . A rejection or even disproof of the hierarchy does not , therefore , reject or disprove Price ' s hypothesis that the Index distinguishes sciences which grow from the skin from those which do not . Rejection of the hierarchy merely leaves the Index in need of validation with some other independent indicator of the growth processes which produce the immediacy effect . In fact , the hierarchy has recently been attacked by Stephen Cole , 17 in part based on his finding in a replication of Price ' s original study , that the Index does not cor - relate perfectly with the traditional hierarchy of the sciences . Even more important than this finding to the present discussion , however , is the central claim of Cole ' s article : that there are no differences among the sciences in the processes of know - ledge growth at the research front . This claim is based on Cole ' s interpretation of a series of studies , which he completed with his brother Jonathon and a number of other collaborators over the space of a decade , devoted to locating differences among the sciences . The reasoning behind these studies is quite different from that found in Price ' s theory of knowledge growth . Following Zuckerman and Merton 18 , the Coles and their collaborators hypothesized that the essential differences among the sciences 434 Scientomerrics 7 ( 1985 ) SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES were in the structure of knowledge systems - in particular , in " codification " , " the consolidation of empirical knowledge into succinct and interdependent theoretical statements " ) 9 Codification was " intuited " , not measured , in the Coles " studies , but was thought to lead to measurable effects : differences in levels of consensus and differences in the rate of obsolescence of knowledge . The studies attempt to confirm this hypothesis by locating systematic differences among disciplines in these features . The results were not as expected . As Cole perceived it , the overall pattern in the eight studies cited in his review did not indicate systematic differences among the sciences in levels of consensus or obsolescence rates , and he concludes that the processes of consensus formation are similar " at the research frontier " among fields at the top and at the bottom of the traditional hierarchy . Another study , however , shows to Cole ' s satisfaction that there are differences among sciences in their " knowledge cores " . This study examined the references in textbooks , which showed striking differences between physics and chemistry on the one hand and sociology on the other . Cole reconciles these two findings - no differences at the research frontier , but differences in knowledge cores - into a new model of " the structure of knowledge in science " , in which the research frontier is linked to the knowledge core through " evaluation processes " . Cole ' s new model and Price ' s theory of knowledge growth are more compatible than they may at first glance appear . First , the lack of systematic differences among sciences " at the research front " is exaggerated in Cole ' s account by the fact that the studies cited did not compare a standard list of fields on a series of measures , but rather a shifting set , ranked within each study by " intuition " . Only physics , chemistry , psychology and sociology appear in more than a few of the studies , and the results in regard to these fields are not particularly inter - nally inconsistent . The consensus indicators for chemistry and psychology are quite similar , suggesting that social sciences can show high levels of consensus . While this finding is consistent with Cole ' s rejection of certain traditional notions about the social sciences , it does not support his claim that there are no systematic differences among sciences at the research front . Second , consensus itself played no role in Price ' s theory . Price posited that the concerted attention of scientists produced the immediacy effect ; but concerted attention can just as easily be devoted to controversy and lack of agreement over importance and accomplishment as consensus on these matters . Finally , assuming for the moment that its empirical basis is sound , Cole ' s new model raises an important question : If there are differences among the sciences in their knowledge cores , but no differences at the research front , then where do the core differences come from ? It is logical to assume them to be a Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) 435 20 SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES result of the process which transforms new findings into a " discipline " suitable for passing on to new generations of researchers . Cole says nothing about the character of that process , but Price ' s theory addressed precisely that point : it described not how scientists judge each other ' s results , but how they use them . Thus in an oblique way , Cole ' s work provides added incentive for pursuing Price ' s theory . Co - citation studies Price suggested that each new year ' s crop of papers " knits together " the earlier literature of sciences . " The total research front of science has never , however , been a single row of knitting " , he wrote . " It is , instead , divided by dropped stitches into quite small segments and strips . . . . I have come to the conclusion that most of these strips correspond to the work of , at most , a few hundred men at any one time . . . . If one would work out the nature of such strips , it might lead to a method for delineating the topography of current scientific literature . ' ' 2 ~ Since this passage appeared , topographical methods in science studies have improved dramatically . Dominant among the methods for mapping science is co - citation analysis . ~ 1 Using as raw data the extent to which any two papers in the archive appear together in the reference lists of the current literature , co - citation analysts have used a variety of clustering and graphic display techniques which reveal , as Price predicted , that the map of science contains both peaks of concerted attention and valleys of " weak and random linkage " among cited documents . Co - citation studies have also produced several results which corroborate Price ' s notion that a focus on the very recent literature is symptomatic of a particular kind of knowledge growth process . First , several co - citation studies of the development of specialties have found a relationship between immediacy and periods of intellectual focus . At times of intellectual excitement , whether in response to a recent breakthrough which has opened up a new set of interesting questions or because researchers are trying to resolve a theoretical issue , members of the specialty concentrate their references more heavily on a few papers , and the literature they cite tends to be more recent than it is at other times . For instance , Dean 22 found that operant psychologists generally cited papers about seven years old . But during the period when additivity theory was displacing inhibitory theory as the dominant explanation for the probability of a conditioned response , the median age of references fell sharply , climbing back to the usual level only after the controversy was resolved . Likewise , Small found for collagen that immediacy rose during a " mini - revohition ' ' 23 ; and 436 Scientometries 7 ( 1985 } SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES Sullivan , White and Barboni observed a similar phenomenon during a period of rapid theory change in the physics of weak interactions . 2 4 A second finding emerged from a study by Small and Crane which compared certain characteristics of the literature of high energy physics with those of three social sciences , psychology , economics , and sociology 2 s If the process of growth in the social sciences is similar to that of the natural sciences , Crane and Small hypothesized , then we would expect to find in both of them clusters of co - cited documents representing groups of researchers pursuing closely related problems . In fact , they did find differences among the fields they examined in the " propensity to cluster " , that is , in the statistical tendency to form " growing tips " of the sort Price described . This " propensity to cluster " is not merely an artifact of the age of the literature cited in the field . The co - citation clustering algorithm thoroughly sei ~ arates these two features operationally . Yet Crane and Small also found that the fields which showed a high propensity to cluster focused their attention on younger literature , on average . " Propensity to cluster " thus qualifies as an independent indicator of the sort of knowledge growth process which Price believed to produce the immediacy effect , and corroborates its connection to the recency of the literature . These studies suggest that intellectual focus itself is an essential element in the pattern of knitting Price described . The dynamic of the system does not actively drop stitches between areas , but instead actively tightens the network of references at certain critical points . Citation context studies But how does the knitting itself occur ? A third body of evidence emerging in recent years is beginning to answer that question by providing detailed , biblio - metric data on the process of knowledge building itself ~ These studies are based on the notion that high - impact publications in science provide the raw materials - the findings and concepts - which allow new papers to be written . 26 Taking a highly cited paper as a starting point , they examine closely what was said about it when it was cited over a period of years . They provide new evidence that the tight network of citations characteristic of a research front a la Price is symptomatic of the active efforts of scientists to extract from older papers what they need to write new ones ; that this activity is concentrated among small groups of scientists who are particularly concerned with the findings ; and that tiffs kind of activity tapers off over time , as the immediacy effect does . Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 437 20 * SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES 1 2 7 ~ 76 76 80 Years Fig . ! . Average references per citing paper I . Opiate receptor studies , 2 . Endogenous opioid studies , 3 . Multiple receptor studies , 4 . Other The figure shows the number of places in each citing text where a footnote to the highly - cited work appeared(cid:12)9 Citing papers have been divided into four subject - matter groups using titles and abstracts . " Opiate Receptor Studies " represent those most closely connected to the topic of the cited document . (cid:12)9 1 " . . 3 . . " . 74 76 78 60 Ve6FS Fig , 2 . Average level of detail per citation context I . Opiate receptor studies , 2 . Endogenous opioid studies ~ 3 . Miscellaneous studies The figure shows the number of identifiable items of information drawn from the cited work and repeated in the text surrounding the footnote number in the citing paper . This figure includes only references to the idea of the opiate receptor and not references to other aspects of the cited work . Citing papers have been divided into subject matter groups as described in the caption for Fig . 1 . The most detailed case study of this sort examines the citation record of a paper from neuropharmacology which announced the discovery of the opiate receptor . 27 In the years following its publication , researchers working on the same receptor paid a great deal of attention to its contents when they cited it . References to the paper appeared frequently within each citing paper ( see Fig . 1 ) , and each reference carried with it a relatively detailed description of the work itself : the 438 Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES substance and method used , for instance , and details of the experimental con - ditions ( see Fig . 2 ) . Gradually , these direct signs of " concerted attention " disappeared . The number of references per citing article trailed off , and the level of detail of references dropped , as well . By five years after publication , the average reference to the paper contained only the name of the discovery and appeared just once in the text of the citing paper , even among those who were particularly concerned with this kind of research . Among other authors , how - ever , the paper was cited this way from the beginning . Citing authors from outside opiate receptor research generally referred to the paper just once in their texts , and did not provide much detail in their references . The method applied in this study has been applied to the analysis of another paper from neuropharmacology , with similar results . 28 The method has also been used to contrast the process of knowledge growth indicated in the opiate receptor results with the process revealed in another case , drawn from the sociology of science . 29 The paper chosen for comparison was also a highly - cited empirical work which , like the opiate receptor paper , introduced an important concept . However , it was used quite differently by sociologists than the opiate receptor paper was by pharmacologists . The high level of detail in the references to the pharmacology paper were created by repeating , in the citing text , specific points made in the opiate receptor paper . But the specific empirical findings of the paper analyzed from the sociology of science were virtually ignored by citing authors . Instead of paying attention to the details of the work , they focused on its general conclusion , and in many cases generalized this even further than the authors had , citing the study itself as evidence . Thus while the acceptance of the main point of the neuropharmacology paper was firmly grounded in an examination of the empirical evidence its authors had to report , the use of the main point of the sociology of science paper was inflated by later authors , without regard to the quality of data offered . The results of the comparison suggest that the social force behind both the immediacy effect and the propensity to cluster is the close attention scientists pay to each other ' s texts in the process of actively incorporating the work of others into their own later written works . Summary and conclusion Pdce ' s theory of differences among the sciences included three important points in regard to knowledge growth in science . First , he stressed that the essen - tial differences between knowledge growth in science and in other fields lay in Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) 439 SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES the process through which scientists use each other ' s results . Second , he main - tained that the critical processes were those which took place within small groups of scientists who shared an intellectual focus . And third , he proposed that an indication of those proc ~ , sses could be found in referencing patterns . Later research has corroborated Price on all three points . The Coles ' studies point to the conclusion that one cannot start from the social structural features they studied to account for differences in core knowledge , but that process must be taken into account . Co - citation studies confirm the relationship between immediacy and intellectual focus both within small groups and at the level of disciplines . Finally , citation context studies describe the process of knowledge building itself - the attention scientists pay to detail as they incorporate the contents of published papers into new texts . Several bodies of evidence thus point to the desirability of further application of the basic concepts Price introduced for the very purpose he proposed : as a diagnostic tool to describe and compare differences among the sciences in their processes of knowledge growth . As hybrid fields develop , as sciences change their character under the influence of new instruments or new sponsors , as established fields undergo revolutionary change , such a diagnostic tool is essential to sys - tematic understanding of the emerging differences . The Price theory , clearly rich in the kind of insight necessary to that task , is an important contribution to our understanding of scientific development . References 1 . For example , L . L . HARGENS , Patterns of Scientific Research : A Comparative Analysis of Research in Three Scientific FieMs . American Sociological Association , Washington , D . C . , 1975 . 2 . H . A . ZUCKERMAN , R . K . MERTON , Age , Aging and Age Structure in Science , in : R . K . MERTON , The Sociology of Science , edited by N . STORER , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1973 , pp . 497 - 559 . 3 . T . S . KUHN , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . , 2nd ed . , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1970 . ; J . B . LODAHL , G . GORDON , The Structure of Scientific Fields and the Functioning of University Graduate Departments , American Sociological Review , 37 ( 1972 ) 57 - 72 . 4 . D . J . de SOLLA PRICE , Citation Measures of Hard Science , Soft Science , Technology , and Non - science , in : Communication among Scientists and Engineers , C . E . NELSON , D . K . POLLACK , Eds , Heat , Lexington , Mass . , 1970 , pp . 1 - 12 . 5 . D . J . de SOLLA PRICE , Networks of Scientific Papers , Science , 149 ( 1965 ) 510 - 515 . 6 . Ibid . , p . 513 . 7 . Ibid . , p . 512 . 8 . Ibid . , 9 . R . E . BURTON , R . W . KEBLER , The ' Hal - life ' of Some Scientific and Technical Literatures , Am . Doc . , 11 ( 1960 ) 18 . 440 Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) SUSAN E . COZZENS : DIFFERENCES AMONG THE SCIENCES 10 . PRICE , op . cit . , note 5 , p . 514 . 11 . PRICE , op . cit . , note 4 . 12 . Ibid . , p . 6 . 13 . Ibid . , p . 6 - 7 . 14 . Ibid . , p . 15 . 15 . A list is provided in S . COLE , The Hierarchy of the Sciences , AmericanJournalofSociology , 89 ( 1983 ) No . 1 , 111 - 139 . 16 . PRICE , op . cit . , note 4 , p . 12 . 17 . COLE , op . cit . , note 15 . 18 . ZUCKERMAN and MERTON , op . cit . , note 2 . 19 . Ibid . , p . 507 . 20 . PRICE , op . cit . , note 5 , p . 515 . 21 . B . C . GRIFFITH , H . G . SMALL , J . A . STONEHILL , S . DEY , The Structure of Scientific Literatures II : Toward a Macro - and Microstructure for Science , Science Studies , 4 ( 1974 ) 339 - 365 ; H . G . SMALL , B . C . GRIFFITH , The Structure of Scientific Literatures I : Identifying and Graphing Specialties , Science Studies , 4 ( 1974 ) 17 - 40 . 22 . M . C . DEAN , A Quantitative Analysis of Theory Change in Experimental Operant Psychology , paper presented at the fifth annual meeting of the Society for Social Studies of Science , Toronto , October 17 - 19 , 1980 . 23 . H . G . SMALL , A Co - citaton Model of a Scientific Specialty : A Longitudinal Study of Collagen Research , Social Studies of Science , 7 ( 1977 ) , 139 - 166 . 24 . D . SULLIVAN , D . KOESTER , D . H . WHITE , R . KERN , " Understanding Rapid Theoretical Change in Particle Physics : A Month - by - month Co - citation Analysis , " in : Information Choices and Policies , Knowledge Industries Publications , New York , 1979 . 25 . H . G . SMALL , D . CRANE , Specialties and Disciplines in Science and Social Science : An Examination of their Structures Using Citation Indexes , Scientometrics , 1 ( 1979 ) No . 5 - 6 , 445 - 461 . 26 . H . G . SMALL , Cited Documents as Concept Symbols , Social Studies of Science , 8 ( 1978 ) 327 - 340 . 27 . S . E . COZZENS , Life History of a Knowledge Claim : The Opiate Receptor Case , paper presented at the Sixth annual meeting of the Society for Social Studies of Science , Atlanta , November 4 - 6 , 1981 . 28 . H . DOLMAN , H . BODEWlTZ , Sedimantation of a Scientific Concept : the Use of Citation Data , unpublished manuscript , Science Studies Unit , State University of Groningen , The Netherlands , 1984 . 29 . S . E . COZZENS , Comparing the Sciences : Citation Context Analysis of Papers from Neuropharmacology and the Sociology of Science , forthcoming in Social Studies of Science 15 ( 1985 ) No . 1 . Scientometrics 7 ( 1985 ) 441