Correlative live - cell and superresolution microscopy reveals cargo transport dynamics at microtubule intersections (cid:1) Stefan Bálint , Ione Verdeny Vilanova , Ángel Sandoval Álvarez , and Melike Lakadamyali 1 Institut de Ciències Fotòniques ( ICFO ) , 08860 Castelledefels ( Barcelona ) , Spain Edited by David M . Warshaw , University of Vermont , Burlington , VT , and accepted by the Editorial Board January 15 , 2013 ( received for review November 12 , 2012 ) Intracellular transport plays an essential role in maintaining the organization of polarized cells . Motor proteins tether and move cargos along microtubules during long - range transport to deliver them to their proper location of function . To reach their destina - tion , cargo - bound motors must overcome barriers to their forward motion such as intersection points between microtubules . The ability to visualize how motors navigate these barriers can give important information about the mechanisms that lead to ef ﬁ cient transport . Here , we ﬁ rst develop an all - optical correlative imaging method based on single - particle tracking and superresolution mic - roscopy to map the transport trajectories of cargos to individual microtubules with high spatiotemporal resolution . We then use this method to study the behavior of lysosomes at microtubule – microtubule intersections . Our results show that the intersection poses a signi ﬁ cant hindrance that leads to long pauses in transport only when the separation distance of the intersecting microtu - bules is smaller than ∼ 100 nm . However , the obstructions are typ - ically overcome by the motors with high ﬁ delity by either switching to the intersecting microtubule or eventually passing through the intersection . Interestingly , there is a large tendency to maintain the polarity of motion ( anterograde or retrograde ) after the inter - section , suggesting a high degree of regulation of motor activity to maintain transport in a given direction . These results give in - sights into the effect of the cytoskeletal geometry on cargo trans - port and have important implications for the mechanisms that cargo - bound motors use to maneuver through the obstructions set up by the complex cytoskeletal network . STORM | dynein | kinesin | traf ﬁ cking C ells rely on a two - way transport system to deliver important proteins and organelles to their location of function . Kinesin and dynein motors are responsible for long - range transport along microtubules ( 1 ) . Although dynein walks toward the ( − ) end of the microtubule ( retrograde ) , carrying cargo toward the cell nucleus , most kinesins walk toward the ( + ) end ( anterograde ) , carrying cargo toward the cell periphery ( 1 ) . Microtubules or - ganize into a complex , 3D network inside cells , and the inter - sections between microtubule ﬁ laments or between microtubules and other cytoskeletal ﬁ laments ( actin , intermediate ﬁ laments ) likely have important consequences on the ef ﬁ ciency and accu - racy of cargo transport ( 2 ) . For example , microtubule – microtubule intersections can serve as switching points or barriers that disrupt continuous transport in a given direction . The effect of microtubule – microtubule intersections on the movement of individual motors and motor - decorated beads has been studied using in vitro reconstituted microtubules deposited on top of each other ( 3 , 4 ) . These studies showed that although single motors can have varied behavior ( passing , dissociation , switching ) , at high motor densities dynein - decorated beads stop and tether at the intersection ( 3 ) . On the basis of these results , it was suggested that microtubule intersections can act as a teth - ering point for cargo when it reaches the right destination and that the tethering can be tuned in the cell by regulating motor stoichiometry ( 3 ) . These studies constitute a starting point to understand how ﬁ lament intersections can affect cargo transport ; however , the implications for intracellular transport are not clear . The microtubule network has a more complex architecture inside the cell than what has been achieved in these in vitro ex - periments . In addition , it is likely that both polarity motors ( dy - nein and kinesin ) are present on the cargo simultaneously ( 5 , 6 ) , and their activity can be regulated through mechanisms that are not present in vitro ( 7 ) . Relating cargo dynamics to the underlying microtubule net - work inside cells is technically challenging . The high density and the complex organization of microtubules and the inherently dy - namic nature of transport necessitate imaging tools with high spatiotemporal resolution . Microtubule track switching has been studied in neuronal cells by using high - resolution single - particle tracking of vesicles with time - lapse microscopy ( 8 ) . In these studies , a displacement perpendicular to the direction of motion was taken to indicate a switch from one microtubule to another . However , as the microtubules were not imaged , their geometry and the effect of this geometry on transport were unclear . Con - ventional dual - color time - lapse microscopy has also been used to study the interaction of peroxisomes with microtubules ( 9 , 10 ) , but dissecting the 3D geometry of the microtubule network was not possible in these studies because of the diffraction - limited resolution of conventional ﬂ uorescence microscopy . In fact , mi - crotubule intersections could only be discerned in select regions close to the cell periphery where the microtubule network was less dense . Recent development of superresolution microscopy techniques such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) or photoactivation localization microscopy ( PALM ) has made it pos - sible to surpass the diffraction limit in ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( 11 – 13 ) . These techniques rely on precisely determining the po - sition of sparsely activated photoswitchable probes . A superre - solution image can be reconstructed from repeated cycles of activation , localization , and deactivation . The microtubule net - work has been imaged using these methods in 3D with ∼ 20 - nm lateral and ∼ 55 - nm axial resolution inside ﬁ xed cells ( 14 ) and in 2D with ∼ 70 - nm lateral resolution inside living cells ( 15 ) . How - ever , the imaging speed of live - cell superresolution microscopy has been limited because of the frame rates of modern cameras andtheperformanceofphotoswitchable ﬂ uorescentprobes ( 15 – 18 ) . Therefore , spatial and temporal resolution must often be balanced Author contributions : M . L . designed research ; S . B . , I . V . V . , and A . S . A . performed research ; A . S . A . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; S . B . and I . V . V . analyzed data ; and M . L . wrote the paper . The authors declare no con ﬂ ict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . D . M . W . is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : melike . lakadamyali @ icfo . es . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1219206110 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1219206110 PNAS | February 26 , 2013 | vol . 110 | no . 9 | 3375 – 3380 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y against each other in live - cell superresolution microscopy , making it challenging to observe fast cargo dynamics on the microtubule network with the needed spatiotemporal resolution . We developed an all - optical correlative imaging method that combines single - particle tracking with superresolution micros - copy such that fast intracellular dynamics can be interpreted in the context of subcellular ultrastructure . Using this method , we could map the transport trajectories of lysosomes onto individual microtubules with high precision and analyze cargo behavior at microtubule intersections inside cells . Our results show that the axial separation of intersecting microtubules plays an important role in whether the lysosome can pass through the intersection . However , even at small separations , microtubule intersections do not constitute a stopping point for lysosome transport , and mo - tors can maneuver around these barriers by either switching to the intersecting microtubule or eventually squeezing through the intersection . There is a large tendency to preserve the polarity of transport direction after the intersection , which points toward regulatory mechanisms of motor activity . Results Correlative Live - Cell and Superresolution Imaging : Work ﬂ ow and Requirements . Fig . 1 shows the work ﬂ ow for all - optical correlative live - cell and superresolution microscopy . First , the cargo of interest ( e . g . , lysosomes ) is labeled with a ﬂ uorescent marker ( e . g . , Lyso - Tracker ; Invitrogen ) and a time - lapse movie is recorded . The cells are subsequently ﬁ xed in situ on the microscope stage and immu - nostained with primary and secondary antibodies against a target of interest ( e . g . , tubulin antibodies ) . After the sample preparation is complete , a superresolution ( STORM ) image of the immunos - tained target structure ( e . g . , microtubules ) can be recorded . The transport trajectories of the cargos can be obtained from the time - lapse movie using a single - particle tracking routine that deter - mines and links together the centroid position of their images . Fiduciary markers that are visible both in the time - lapse movie and the STORM image allow precise alignment of the two chan - nels ( Fig . S1 and ref . 19 ) . The trajectories can then be mapped onto the STORM image of microtubules for further analysis . We found that the in situ ﬁ xation was very rapid ( faster than a single camera frame , which was 100 – 500 ms in our experi - ments ) , and after ﬁ xation the structures were preserved as they appeared in the ﬁ nal frame of the movie ( Fig . S2 ) . The image in the ﬁ nal frame of the movie also matched well with the STORM image ( Fig . S2 ) . To map the transport trajectories of lysosomes to their corresponding microtubules , the microtubule network must be stable , such that the end - point STORM image corre - sponds with the position of the microtubules during the time - lapse movie . We could reduce the microtubule network dynamics from milliseconds to minutes by treating the cells with low con - centrations of paclitaxel and nocodazole ( SI Methods ) and car - rying out the imaging at room temperature ( 24°C ) . Movies S1 and S2 show the dynamics of the microtubule network before and after drug treatment , respectively . As is evident in Movie S1 , the microtubules showed rapid growth , shrinkage , and buckling behavior before drug treatment . However , after treatment , these dynamic changes were substantially slower . We recorded simul - taneous time - lapse movies of the microtubules and lysosomes and con ﬁ rmed the stability of the microtubules from these time - lapse movies before further analysis . Microtubule Stabilization Does Not Signi ﬁ cantly Alter Lysosome Transport . There was more cell - to - cell variability in terms of ly - sosome mobility in treated cells compared with physiological conditions . Although some cells had very few mobile lysosomes , likely because of a compromised cytoskeleton , others showed high lysosome mobility and a stable microtubule network . For our correlative studies we only imaged the latter cells containing a large fraction of highly mobile lysosomes , similar to physio - logical conditions . We tested the effect of microtubule stabilization on lysosome transport by measuring several transport parameters under physiological conditions ( 37°C ) and at room temperature ( 24°C ) with and without drug treatment ( Table 1 and Fig . S3 ) . Lysosomes were labeled with LysoTracker ( Invitrogen ) and their trajectories reconstructed from time - lapse movies in living cells using conventional ﬂ uorescence microscopy and single - particle tracking . To distinguish the transport mode , we determined the dependence of the mean - square displacement ( < Δ r 2 > ) on time ( Δ t ) by plotting < Δ r 2 > versus Δ t on a logarithmic scale and ﬁ t - ting to a line ( ref . 5 and SI Methods ) . We de ﬁ ned the mean - square displacement α - coef ﬁ cient as the slope of this linear ﬁ t ( 5 ) . In all cases we found two populations of lysosomes : proc - essive ones with α greater than or equal to 1 . 5 and nonprocessive ones with α lesser than or equal to 1 . 0 ( 5 ) . The percentage of processive lysosomes was slightly smaller in treated cells ( 60 % in treated cells vs . 80 % in nontreated cells ; Fig . S3 A ) . Among the processive lysosomes , the retrograde and anterograde speeds spanned a similar range in treated and nontreated cells ( Fig . S3 B ) . The average speeds were slightly slower in treated cells ( Table 1 ) , likely because of decoupling of the microtubule dy - namics from the lysosome movement ( 10 ) . The run lengths , de ﬁ ned as the total displacement during processive runs , showed a similar distribution ( Fig . S3 C ) , and the average retrograde and anterograde run lengths were similar in treated and nontreated cells ( Table 1 ) . The processive periods of motion were inter - rupted by periods of pausing , and the pausing times and pausing frequencies were similar in treated and nontreated cells ( Fig . S3 D and E and Table 1 ) . Lysosome transport was bidirectional , and on average lysosomes reversed their transport direction with similar frequency in treated and nontreated cells ( Fig . S3 F and Table 1 ) . Given these results , we conclude that the microtubule stabilization did not substantially affect lysosome transport . Fi - nally , we note that GFP – tubulin transfection alone did not have an effect on lysosome mobility ( Table S1 ) . We also tested the effect of drug treatment on microtubule posttranslational modi ﬁ cations . We focused on acetylation and detyrosination because these modi ﬁ cations have been associated with stable microtubules ( 20 ) . Immuno ﬂ uorescence and Western blot analysis showed that detyrosinated tubulin levels were un - changed after drug treatment ( Fig . S4 ) . In terms of acetylation , there was no discernible difference between drug - treated and Fig . 1 . Work ﬂ ow of the all - optical correlative live - cell and superresolution imaging . A live - cell time - lapse movie is recorded at high temporal resolu - tion . The sample is then ﬁ xed in situ and stained with antibodies conjugated with photoswitchable ﬂ uorophores for immuno ﬂ uorescence and super - resolution imaging ( STORM ) . A STORM image of the microtubule network is then recorded . Single - particle tracking is used to obtain trajectories from the live - cell movie , and these trajectories are precisely aligned with the STORM image of the microtubules using ﬁ duciary markers . IF , immuno ﬂ uorescence . 3376 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1219206110 Bálint et al . nontreated cells in immuno ﬂ uorescence images ( Fig . S4 ) . West - ern blot analysis showed only a small increase ( ∼ 1 . 5 - fold ) in the levels of acetylated tubulin in treated cells ( Fig . S4 ) . Correlation of Lysosome Trajectories with the Underlying Microtubule Cytoskeleton . We next aimed to correlate lysosome trajectories with the 2D superresolution images of the microtubule cytoskel - eton . Fig . 2 shows multiple frames from an example time - lapse movieand thecorresponding trajectory of a lysosome overlaidwith the conventional and the STORM image of microtubules ( Movie S3 ) . Individual microtubules and their organization could not be resolved in the conventional image because of the diffraction limit . However , the microtubule network was clearly resolved in the STORM image , and the lysosome trajectory could be precisely mapped onto the individual microtubules . When the trajectory was aligned with the STORM image of microtubules , it became evi - dent that the lysosome crossed several microtubule – microtubule intersections and switched microtubules multiple times . In the overlay with the conventional microtubule image , only the sharp changes in transport direction ( e . g . , at t = 12 s ) could be inter - preted as a potential change of microtubule track , whereas the lysosome behavior at the rest of the intersections was missed . This example clearly demonstrates the power of correlative single - particle tracking and superresolution imaging in studying the in - teraction of cargos with their microtubules during motor protein – mediated long - range transport . Because the trajectories were determined by tracking the centroid of the lysosome image , they only showed perfect overlap with the microtubules when the lysosome center was transported directly above or below the microtubule . However , lysosomes can bind to and translocate on the microtubule such that their centers are laterally displaced from the microtubule image . Given the size of an average lysosome ( ∼ 600 nm ) , we assumed that the displacement between the lysosome and its associated microtubule can be as large as 300 nm . Thus , we took the mi - crotubule that was closest to the lysosome trajectory to be the one with which the lysosome was associated . In a few cases , when the lysosome was moving between two parallel microtubules in very close proximity , we could not assign it to one speci ﬁ c mi - crotubule and discarded these lysosomes from our analysis . In addition , in certain regions the microtubule network was too dense even for STORM to clearly resolve the individual micro - tubules and it was not possible to map the trajectories to in - dividual microtubules in these regions . In some cases , lysosomes Table 1 . Average values of lysosome motility parameters measured under different conditions Parameters ( mean ± SD ) 37°C 24°C 24°C + treatment RG AG RG AG RG AG Average speed , μ m / s 0 . 45 ± 0 . 19 ( 50 ) 0 . 41 ± 0 . 18 ( 50 ) 0 . 45 ± 0 . 18 ( 50 , 0 . 93 ) 0 . 43 ± 0 . 22 ( 50 , 0 . 62 ) 0 . 39 ± 0 . 24 ( 50 , 0 . 20 ) 0 . 33 ± 0 . 17 ( 50 , 0 . 01 * ) Run length , μ m 2 . 6 ± 1 . 9 ( 50 ) 2 . 3 ± 1 . 9 ( 50 ) 2 . 6 ± 2 . 0 ( 50 , 0 . 99 ) 2 . 1 ± 1 . 5 ( 50 , 0 . 55 ) 2 . 3 ± 1 . 4 ( 50 , 0 . 36 ) 2 . 1 ± 1 . 5 ( 50 , 0 . 54 ) Processivity , s 6 . 8 ± 4 . 4 ( 50 ) 6 . 8 ± 4 . 8 ( 50 ) 6 . 0 ± 3 . 5 ( 50 , 0 . 29 ) 5 . 3 ± 3 . 3 ( 50 , 0 . 08 ) 7 . 3 ± 3 . 7 ( 50 , 0 . 59 ) 7 . 4 ± 3 . 7 ( 50 , 0 . 44 ) Pausing time , s 6 . 0 ± 5 . 0 ( 112 ) 7 . 5 ± 6 . 7 ( 106 , 0 . 07 ) 7 . 2 ± 5 . 8 ( 184 , 0 . 07 ) Pausing frequency , events / min 5 . 1 ± 2 . 0 ( 50 ) 4 . 5 ± 1 . 6 ( 50 , 0 . 13 ) 4 . 5 ± 1 . 8 ( 50 , 0 . 11 ) Frequency of reversal , events / min 1 . 9 ± 2 . 5 ( 50 ) 1 . 3 ± 1 . 6 ( 50 , 0 . 18 ) 1 . 2 ± 1 . 2 ( 50 , 0 . 12 ) Mean - square displacement α - coef ﬁ cient 1 . 7 ± 0 . 2 ( 30 ) 1 . 7 ± 0 . 2 ( 30 , 0 . 43 ) 1 . 6 ± 0 . 2 ( 30 , 0 . 15 ) The ﬁ rst three parameters have been split into retrograde ( RG ) and anterograde ( AG ) directions . The two numbers in the parentheses are the event number ( n ) and the P value for a two - tailed two - sample t test , respectively . P < . 05 was taken to indicate statistical signi ﬁ cance ( * ) . Fig . 2 . Correlative live - cell and superresolution imaging allows interpreting cargo dynamics in the context of the cytoskeleton . ( Upper ) Multiple frames from a conventional dual - color movie of lysosomes ( red dotted circle shows the position of a single lysosome as determined from the lysosome image ) and microtubules ( green ) . The trajectory ( red line ) of the lysosome is overlaid with the image of the microtubules at multiple times . ( Lower ) The same region as Upper but with the conventional microtubule image replaced by the end - point STORM image of microtubules . The lysosome trajectory can be mapped to the individual microtubules in the STORM image with high ﬁ delity . Bálint et al . PNAS | February 26 , 2013 | vol . 110 | no . 9 | 3377 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y seemed to fall off the microtubules during processive motion . We associated this effect to either a not - well - preserved micro - tubule structure after ﬁ xation or a low stability of microtubules in that particular region of the image . In regions in which the mi - crotubule network structure was clearly visible , 65 % of lysosome trajectories could be associated with the microtubules for their entire length ; in 27 % of cases the trajectory could be partially associated with the microtubules . There were very few cases ( 8 % ) in which the trajectory could not at all be matched with the microtubules . Lysosome Behavior at Microtubule Intersections . We ﬁ rst used 2D STORM images of microtubules and identi ﬁ ed points in which the images of two or more microtubules crossed as microtubule – microtubule intersections . We then analyzed the behavior of lysosomes when they approached these intersections by over - laying their trajectories with the STORM images of the micro - tubules . Of the intersections we analyzed this way , 50 % were between two microtubules and 50 % involved three or more microtubules . We observed four distinct behaviors of lysosomes at microtubule intersections ( Fig . 3 A and Movies S4 , S5 , S6 , and S7 ) . The majority of lysosomes ( 48 . 6 % ; n = 108 ) slowed down and paused when they arrived at an intersection point between multiple microtubules ( Fig . 3 B ) . We de ﬁ ned pausing as no net displacement of the centroid position for 1 s or longer . The second most common behavior ( 31 . 5 % ; n = 70 ) was given by lysosomes passing through the intersection unhindered and con - tinuing to move on the same microtubule ( Fig . 3 B ) . A small per - centage of lysosomes ( 14 . 5 % ; n = 32 ) switched to the intersecting microtubule when they encountered an intersection ( Fig . 3 B ) . Reversing transport direction and moving backward on the same microtubule was rare ( 5 . 4 % ; n = 12 ) ( Fig . 3 B ) . To distinguish the behavior of anterograde and retrogradely moving lysosomes , we used the GFP – tubulin image to determine the position of the microtubule organizing center near the cell nucleus . The direction of transport was then classi ﬁ ed as ante - rograde if the net displacement was away from the microtubule organizing center and as retrograde if the net displacement was toward it . Trajectories for which the direction could not be determined on the basis of these criteria were discarded from the analysis . Retrograde lysosomes ( dynein - mediated ) were more likely to pass through intersections than to switch track or reverse di - rection , but the pausing happened with equal probability in both directions ( Fig . 3 C ) . When the full trajectory of the lysosomes was taken into account , the majority of pauses ( 71 % ) and direction reversals ( 69 % ) happened at microtubule intersections . We further characterized the behavior of those lysosomes that initially paused near intersections . Unlike in vitro studies ( 3 , 4 ) , the pausingwasnotanendpointfortransportbut , rather , aperiodspent overcomingthebarrierpresentedbytheintersection . Inthemajority of the cases ( 83 % ) , lysosomes exhibited what we refer to as a sec - ondarybehaviorafterpausing ( Fig . S5 ) . Thesecondarybehaviorwas equally split between switching to the intersecting microtubule and eventually passing through the intersection ( Fig . 3 D ) . As in the case of primary behavior , only a small percentage of lysosomes reversed direction after pausing ( 18 % ) . The lysosomes that crossed the in - tersection after pausing appeared to slowly “ crawl ” through the in - tersection and increased their speed substantially once they were able to pass the intersection . Interestingly , when an anterograde - moving or retrograde - moving organelle switched to the intersect - ing microtubule either as a primary behavior or after pausing , the transport direction was maintained as anterograde ( 28 / 34 cases ) or as retrograde ( 23 / 33 cases ) , respectively . To ensure that drug treatment did not in ﬂ uence lysosome behavior at microtubule intersections , we also matched lysosome trajectories to STORM images of microtubules in untreated cells imaged at room temperature . Because of the dynamic rearrange - ments in the microtubule network , we could only match a small percentage of lysosome trajectories to their microtubules during a short period toward the end of the live - cell movie . Similar to cells with a stabilized microtubule network , pausing and passing were the majority primary behavior , and microtubule track switching or direction reversals were less common . Effect of 3D Microtubule Network Geometry on Lysosome Transport . We next examined the correlation between the axial separation Fig . 3 . Lysosome behavior at microtubule intersections . ( A ) Examples showing the four different types of lysosome behavior at microtubule intersections . The lysosome trajectories have been color coded to show time according to the color scale bars . ( Far Left ) An example of pausing : The lysosome rapidly approaches the intersection ( red arrow ) , indicated by the magenta - blue part of the trajectory , but spends extended time at the intersection , indicated by the blue - red part of the trajectory . ( Middle Left ) An example of passing : The lysosome moves with linear directed motion through the intersection ( red arrow ) , indicated by the mostly uniform change of color of the trajectory . ( Middle Right ) Microtubule track switching at the intersection ( red arrow ) . ( Far Right ) Direction reversing . ( B ) Histogram showing the percentage of lysosomes that pause ( n = 108 ) , pass ( n = 70 ) , switch track ( n = 32 ) , or reverse direction ( n = 12 ) at microtubule intersections . ( C ) Histogram showing the lysosome behavior at microtubule intersections split into anterograde ( red bars ) and retrograde ( blue bars ) directions ( anterograde : n = 44 pause , n = 21 pass , n = 16 switch , and n = 6 reverse ; retrograde : n = 52 pause , n = 44 pass , n = 15 switch , and n = 4 reverse ) . ( D ) Histogram showing the secondary behavior of lysosomes after pausing . Passing ( n = 36 ) and switching ( n = 38 ) were equally likely ; reversing ( n = 16 ) was less common . 3378 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1219206110 Bálint et al . of intersecting microtubules and the lysosome behavior at the intersection by obtaining 3D STORM images of the microtubule network . For 3D STORM , we used the astigmatism method to map the z - position of single molecules ( SI Methods and ref . 21 ) . We de ﬁ ned the axial separation as the peak - to - peak distance between microtubule images ( Fig . S6 ) . We could resolve sepa - rations that were 100 nm or larger , which was the limit of our 3D resolution for the microtubule STORM images . Figs . 4 A and B show two examples in which multiple frames from the time - lapse movie of lysosomes and the corresponding trajectories were overlaid with z - color - coded 3D STORM images of microtubules ( Movies S8 and S9 ) . The z - stacks that show the axial separation of the microtubules in these images are provided in Fig . S7 . In the ﬁ rst example , the lysosome encountered three intersections ( red arrows ) in which the intersecting microtubules were separated by 250 , 130 , and less than 100 nm , respectively . The lysosome crossed the ﬁ rst intersection without pausing or slowing down but slowed down substantially and paused for 2 . 5 and 1 . 5 s , respectively , while crossing the second and third intersections . In the second example , the lysosome encountered two intersections both separated by less than 100 nm . However , inspection of the focal plane in which the image of the bottom microtubule started and that of the top microtubule ﬁ nished revealed that the ﬁ rst intersection was wider than the second one . The lysosome once again paused for 3 s at the ﬁ rst inter - section and gradually passed through this intersection after pausing . When it arrived at the second intersection , the lysosome paused for a much longer time ( 25 s ) . These examples demon - strate the strong correlation between microtubule separation and lysosome transport . Analysis of several such examples further con ﬁ rmed that the pausing events predominantly happened at intersections at which the microtubules were separated by less than 100 nm ( Fig . 4 C ) . These results indicate that the microtubule network geometry is the main determinant of the amount of hindrance the intersection constitutes to the directed transport of cargo . The fact that a large number of lysosomes could pass through intersections separated by less than 100 nm without pausing ( Fig . 4 C ) is consistent with this result . Because we could not determine whether the lysosome was between the intersecting microtubules , it is likely that those lysosomes that could pass through tight intersections without any pausing were on the top of the overpass microtubule or on the bottom of the underpass microtubule , and thus did not feel any obstruction to their motion from the intersecting microtubule . As indicated earlier , a small subset of lysosomes could switch to the intersecting microtubule without any signi ﬁ cant pausing . There was no strong correlation between the switching and the microtubule axial separation . Lysosomes could directly switch to the intersecting microtubule at a large range of microtubule axial separation distances ( Fig . 4 D ) . Conclusions and Discussion We developed an all - optical correlative imaging method that combines live - cell imaging and single - particle tracking with superresolution microscopy . Using this powerful method , we could study the effect of the 3D architecture of the microtubule network on lysosome transport ( Fig . 5 ) . Our results showed that the majority of lysosomes paused when they arrived at an inter - section point between multiple microtubules . The pausing be - havior was directly correlated with the axial separation of the intersecting microtubules , with intersections having a separation less than 100 nm constituting a substantial obstruction that stalled the motors and prevented the cargo from moving forward ( Fig . 5 ) . However , the lysosome - bound motors could eventually over - come the obstruction with high ﬁ delity by either switching to the intersecting microtubule or passing through the intersection . Given the size of the lysosomes , the ability to pass through an intersection with microtubule separation of less than 100 nm points toward the lysosome having a high degree of ﬂ exibility to change its shape to squeeze through the intersection . Another possibility is that the motors move the lysosome away from the intersecting microtubule by changing their position on the microtubule surface . Interestingly , recently , high - precision 3D particle tracking using internalized nanorods showed that en - dosomes undergo a large degree of rotation during periods of Fig . 4 . Correlation of lysosome behavior at microtubule intersections with the axial separation of microtubules . ( A ) Six frames from a time - lapse movie of lysosomes , in which the lysosome trajectory ( red line ) has been overlaid with 3D STORM image of microtubules . The 3D microtubule STORM image has been color coded to indicate z - position according to the color scale bar . The lysosome encounters three intersections ( red arrows ) in which the microtubules are axially separated by 250 , 130 , and less than 100 nm , re - spectively . The lysosome rapidly passes through the ﬁ rst intersection , arriv - ing at the second intersection ( ﬁ rst two frames ) . It pauses for 2 . 5 s at the second intersection before passing ( frames 2 – 4 ) . Finally it pauses for 1 . 5 s at the third intersection before passing ( frames 4 – 6 ) . ( B ) Another example showing a lysosome that encounters two intersections , both separated by less than 100 nm . Lysosome pauses and slowly passes through the ﬁ rst in - tersection ( frames 1 – 4 ) and pauses for an extended period at the second intersection ( frames 4 – 6 ) . ( C ) Histogram showing the number of lysosomes that pause ( red bar ) or pass ( green bars ) versus the axial separation of microtubules . ( D ) Histogram showing the number of lysosomes that switch track versus the axial separation of microtubules . Bálint et al . PNAS | February 26 , 2013 | vol . 110 | no . 9 | 3379 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y pausing , which might correspond to the rearrangement of motors on the microtubule surface ( 22 ) . Future studies that combine high - precision 3D tracking with superresolution microscopy can potentially reveal whether motors rearrange on the microtubule surface at intersections as opposed to other possibilities ( cargo squeezing , microtubule deformation , etc . ) . A subset of lysosomes could switch to the intersecting micro - tubule within less than 1 s even when the two microtubules were separated by large distances ( up to 500 nm ) . Both dynein and kinesin motors take small steps ( 8 – 32 nm ) relative to the dis - tances between the intersecting microtubules that we observed ( 23 ) . Thus , it seems unlikely that switching is mediated by an individual motor but , rather , by other excess motors present on the same cargo . Interestingly , lysosomes had a strong tendency to maintain the polarity in their transport direction even after switching onto the intersecting microtubule . Similar “ memory ” has recently also been shown for lipid droplets in optical manipulation experi - ments ( 24 ) . These studies showed that after pulling the lipid droplet off the microtubule by optical tweezers and allowing it to reattach , the majority of lipid droplets continued to move in the same direction . Membranous vesicles such as lysosomes have previously been shown to have both polarity motors ( kinesin and dynein ) present simultaneously during transport ( 5 ) . Taken together with these former studies , our results point toward a high degree of cellular regulation to maintain only a single motor type active at a time to ensure transport continues in a given direction to deliver cargo at the right location . Finally , it is important to emphasize that our all - optical cor - relative method is not limited to studying cargo transport and that we expect that it will have a wide range of applications in biology , where putting dynamics into the context of nanoscale ultrastructural or molecular information is important . Methods For a detailed description of the methods , please refer to SI Methods . Brie ﬂ y , African green monkey kidney cells ( BS - C - 1 , American Type Culture Collection , ATCC ) were treated with 120 nM paclitaxel and 120 nM nocodazole for 10 min at 37°C and maintained in serum and phenol - red free media containing these drugs throughout the imaging . For live - cell imaging , cells were trans - fected with a GFP – tubulin plasmid and lysosomes were labeled with 50 nM of LysoTracker orange ( Invitrogen ) for 10 min at 37°C . Live - cell and STORM imaging were carried out by a custom microscope ﬁ tted with a 100 × 1 . 4 numerical aperture ( NA ) oil immersion objective , 488 - nm laser for exciting GFP , 560 - nm laser for exciting LysoTracker orange ( Invitrogen ) , and 647 - nm laser for exciting Alexa647 ( Invitrogen ) . The ﬂ uorescence emissions from these markers were collected and ﬁ ltered by three emission ﬁ lters ( ET525 / 50 , ET605 / 52 , and ET705 / 72m , respectively ; Chroma Technology ) and imaged onto an electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera ( Andor Tech - nology ) at a frame rate of 100 – 500 ms per frame for live - cell imaging and 20 ms per frame for STORM imaging . Temperature was maintained using a stage incubator system from Live Cell Instruments , and focus was maintained by a custom - built focus lock system as previously described ( 14 , 21 ) . After live - cell imaging , cells were ﬁ xed with 3 % ( vol / vol ) paraformaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS and immunostained with anti - α - tubulin primary anti - body and a secondary antibody labeled with an activator / reporter dye pair ( Alexa405 / Alexa647 ; Invitrogen ) , as previously described ( 25 ) . Lysosomes in live - cell images were tracked with an automated single - particle tracking software ( Kalaimoscope ; Transinsight ) . STORM images were analyzed and rendered with custom - written software ( STORMProcessor , a kind gift of Mark Bates , Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Gottingen , Germany ; Insight3 , a kind gift of Bo Huang , University of California , San Francisco , CA ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Dr . Mark Bates and Prof . Bo Huang for the STORM analysis software and Prof . Christine Payne and Prof . Thomas Misgeld for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions . This work was supported in part by Marie - Curie International Reintegration Grant FP7 - PEOPLE - 2010 - RG ( to M . L . ) and in part by the Fundació Cellex , Barcelona , Spain . 1 . Hirokawa N ( 1998 ) Kinesin and dynein superfamily proteins and the mechanism of organelle transport . Science 279 ( 5350 ) : 519 – 526 . 2 . Ross JL , Ali MY , Warshaw DM ( 2008 ) Cargo transport : Molecular motors navigate a complex cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 ( 1 ) : 41 – 47 . 3 . Ross JL , Shuman H , Holzbaur EL , Goldman YE ( 2008 ) Kinesin and dynein - dynactin at intersecting microtubules : Motor density affects dynein function . Biophys J 94 ( 8 ) : 3115 – 3125 . 4 . Vershinin M , Carter BC , Razafsky DS , King SJ , Gross SP ( 2007 ) Multiple - motor based transport and its regulation by Tau . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 1 ) : 87 – 92 . 5 . Hendricks AG , et al . ( 2010 ) Motor coordination via a tug - of - war mechanism drives bidirectional vesicle transport . Curr Biol 20 ( 8 ) : 697 – 702 . 6 . Gross SP , Vershinin M , Shubeita GT ( 2007 ) Cargo transport : Two motors are some - times better than one . Curr Biol 17 ( 12 ) : R478 – R486 . 7 . Mallik R , Gross SP ( 2004 ) Molecular motors : Strategies to get along . Curr Biol 14 ( 22 ) : R971 – R982 . 8 . Mudrakola HV , Zhang K , Cui B ( 2009 ) Optically resolving individual microtubules in live axons . Structure 17 ( 11 ) : 1433 – 1441 . 9 . Kapitein LC , et al . ( 2010 ) Probing intracellular motor protein activity using an in - ducible cargo traf ﬁ cking assay . Biophys J 99 ( 7 ) : 2143 – 2152 . 10 . Kulic IM , et al . ( 2008 ) The role of microtubule movement in bidirectional organelle transport . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 ( 29 ) : 10011 – 10016 . 11 . Hell SW ( 2007 ) Far - ﬁ eld optical nanoscopy . Science 316 ( 5828 ) : 1153 – 1158 . 12 . Lippincott - Schwartz J , Patterson GH ( 2009 ) Photoactivatable ﬂ uorescent proteins for diffraction - limited and super - resolution imaging . Trends Cell Biol 19 ( 11 ) : 555 – 565 . 13 . Huang B , Babcock H , Zhuang X ( 2010 ) Breaking the diffraction barrier : Super - reso - lution imaging of cells . Cell 143 ( 7 ) : 1047 – 1058 . 14 . Huang B , Jones SA , Brandenburg B , Zhuang X ( 2008 ) Whole - cell 3D STORM reveals interactions between cellular structures with nanometer - scale resolution . Nat Meth - ods 5 ( 12 ) : 1047 – 1052 . 15 . Zhu L , Zhang W , Elnatan D , Huang B ( 2012 ) Faster STORM using compressed sensing . Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 721 – 723 . 16 . Jones SA , Shim SH , He J , Zhuang X ( 2011 ) Fast , three - dimensional super - resolution imaging of live cells . Nat Methods 8 ( 6 ) : 499 – 508 . 17 . Shim SH , et al . ( 2012 ) Super - resolution ﬂ uorescence imaging of organelles in live cells with photoswitchable membrane probes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 35 ) : 13978 – 13983 . 18 . Wombacher R , et al . ( 2010 ) Live - cell super - resolution imaging with trimethoprim conjugates . Nat Methods 7 ( 9 ) : 717 – 719 . 19 . Bates M , Dempsey GT , Chen KH , Zhuang X ( 2012 ) Multicolor super - resolution ﬂ uo - rescence imaging via multi - parameter ﬂ uorophore detection . ChemPhysChem 13 ( 1 ) : 99 – 107 . 20 . Wloga D , Gaertig J ( 2010 ) Post - translational modi ﬁ cations of microtubules . J Cell Sci 123 ( Pt 20 ) : 3447 – 3455 . 21 . Huang B , Wang W , Bates M , Zhuang X ( 2008 ) Three - dimensional super - resolution imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy . Science 319 ( 5864 ) : 810 – 813 . 22 . Gu Y , Sun W , Wang G , Jeftinija K , Jeftinija S , Fang N ( 2012 ) Rotational dynamics of cargos at pauses during axonal transport . Nat Commun 3 : 1030 . 23 . Gennerich A , Vale RD ( 2009 ) Walking the walk : How kinesin and dynein coordinate their steps . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 ( 1 ) : 59 – 67 . 24 . Leidel C , Longoria RA , Gutierrez FM , Shubeita GT ( 2012 ) Measuring molecular motor forces in vivo : Implications for tug - of - war models of bidirectional transport . Biophys J 103 ( 3 ) : 492 – 500 . 25 . BatesM , HuangB , DempseyGT , ZhuangX ( 2007 ) Multicolorsuper - resolutionimaging with photo - switchable ﬂ uorescent probes . Science 317 ( 5845 ) : 1749 – 1753 . Fig . 5 . Mechanistic model . When cargo arrives at a microtubule – microtu - bule intersection in which the axial separation of the intersecting micro - tubules is larger than 100 nm , there is minimal hindrance to the forward motion and transport continues on the same microtubule without disruption ( A ) . When the axial separation of the intersecting microtubules is less than 100 nm , the intersection presents a major obstacle , stalling the motors and momentarily stopping forward motion until the obstacle is overcome ( B ) . Cargos that are not positioned between the intersecting microtubules con - tinue moving forward on the same microtubule without feeling the ob - struction from the intersection ( C ) . 3380 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1219206110 Bálint et al .