 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 10 / 133 / 11 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 155 , Number 1 , October 1 , 2001 133 – 143 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200106148 JCB Article 133 Activation of ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase supports invasion of endothelial cells by Neisseria meningitidis Isabelle Hoffmann , 1 Emmanuel Eugène , 2 Xavier Nassif , 2 Pierre - Olivier Couraud , 1 and Sandrine Bourdoulous 1 1 Laboratoire d’Immuno - Pharmacologie Moléculaire , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire , 75014 Paris , France 2 Laboratoire de Microbiologie , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , Faculté de Médecine Necker - Enfants Malades , 75015 Paris , France rbB2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase belonging to the family of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptors which is generally involved in cell differentiation , proliferation , and tumor growth , and activated by het - erodimerization with the other members of the family . We show here that type IV pilus – mediated adhesion of Neisseria meningitidis onto endothelial cells induces tyrosyl phos - phorylation and massive recruitment of ErbB2 underneath the bacterial colonies . However , neither the phosphorylation status nor the cellular localization of the EGF receptors , ErbB3 or ErbB4 , were affected in infected cells . ErbB2 phosphorylation induced by N . meningitidis provides docking sites for the kinase src and leads to its subsequent E activation . Speciﬁc inhibition of either ErbB2 and / or src activity reduces bacterial internalization into endothelial cells without affecting bacteria - induced actin cytoskeleton reorganization or ErbB2 recruitment . Moreover , inhibition of both actin polymerization and the ErbB2 / src pathway totally prevents bacterial entry . Altogether , our results pro - vide new insight into ErbB2 function by bringing evidence of a bacteria - induced ErbB2 clustering leading to src kinase phosphorylation and activation . This pathway , in cooperation with the bacteria - induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , is required for the efﬁcient internalization of N . meningitidis into endothelial cells , an essential process enabling this pathogen to cross host cell barriers . Introduction The ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) * com - prises four closely related members : EGF receptor ( EGFR ; also termed ErbB1 ) , ErbB2 / Neu , ErbB3 , and ErbB4 . These receptors are activated by numerous ErbB - specific ligands , each containing an EGF - like domain which confers binding specificity ( for review see Olayioye et al . , 2000 ) . These ligands , which are produced as transmembrane precursors and are processed and released by proteolysis , bind the extra - cellular domain of ErbB receptors and lead to the formation of both homo - and heterodimers . No soluble ligand for ErbB2 has yet been discovered . However , increasing evi - dence suggests that the primary function of ErbB2 is as a coreceptor , since ErbB2 is the preferred heterodimerization partner for all other ErbB family members ( Tzahar et al . , 1996 ; Graus - Porta et al . , 1997 ) and plays a role in the po - tentiation of ErbB receptor signaling ( Beerli et al . , 1995 ; Graus - Porta et al . , 1995 ) . Dimerization stimulates the in - trinsic tyrosine kinase activity of the receptors and triggers autophosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues within the cytoplasmic domains . These phosphorylated residues pro - vide docking sites for proteins which contain src homology 2 ( SH2 ) or phosphotyrosine binding domains and which are involved in the regulation of intracellular signaling cascades . All ErbB family members couple via the adaptors Shc and / or Grb2 to the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) path - way . However , preferential modulation of specific pathways linked to specific homo - or heterodimers , or to specific cell surface sites , have been described ( Olayioye et al . , 2000 ; Carraway and Sweeney , 2001 ) . Therefore , the signaling di - versity associated with the ErbB family is dependent upon the repertoire of ErbB ligands , the combinatorial properties of induced receptor dimers , and receptor localization . Ulti - mately , downstream effects on gene expression determine the biological response to receptor activation . ErbB recep - tors are expressed in a variety of tissues of epithelial , mesen - Address correspondence to Sandrine Bourdoulous , Laboratoire d’Im - muno - Pharmacologie Moléculaire , Centre National de la Recherche Sci - entifique UPR 415 , Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire , 22 rue Méchain , 75014 Paris , France . Tel . : ( 33 ) 1 - 40 - 51 - 64 - 34 . Fax : ( 33 ) 1 - 40 - 51 - 64 - 30 . E - mail : bourdoulous @ cochin . inserm . fr * Abbreviations used in this paper : EGFR , EGF receptor ; GST , glu - tathione S - transferase ; HBMEC , human bone marrow endothelial cell ; MAPK , mitogen - activated protein kinase ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; SH2 , src homology 2 . Key words : ErbB2 ; homodimerization ; src ; Neisseria meningitidis ; invasion 134 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 1 , 2001 chymal , and neuronal origin , where they play fundamental roles in development , proliferation , and differentiation . Re - cently , an expression of ErbB receptors has also been described on endothelial cells , where they play a role in an - giogenesis ( Russell et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , deregulated ex - pression of ErbB receptors , in particular ErbB1 and ErbB2 , has been implicated in the development and malignancy of numerous types of human cancers ( Yarden and Sliwkowski , 2001 ) . ErbB2 overexpression , observed in a significant pro - portion of breast and ovarian cancers , triggers ligand - inde - pendent activation of the kinase domain , apparently as a re - sult of spontaneous dimer formation . A ligand - independent activation of ErbB RTKs can also be triggered by other classes of receptors , such as G protein – coupled receptors , cy - tokine receptors , or adhesion molecules ( Carpenter , 1999 ; Gschwind et al . , 2001 ) . In the absence of ErbB kinase activ - ity , phosphorylation of specific tyrosyl residues in the cyto - plasmic tail of the receptor by nonreceptor kinases such as jak or src can provide docking sites for cytoplasmic signaling molecules and promote signaling cascades . In addition , a ligand - dependent transactivation of EGFR by G protein – coupled receptors can also occur by a proteolytic processing of the transmembrane pro - HB - EGF precursor followed by a paracrine activation of EGFR ( Gschwind et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , ErbB RTKs are central signal transducers which respond to the binding of specific ligands or via transactiva - tion by distinct receptor systems . Many bacterial pathogens exploit host cell signaling path - ways in order to promote their adherence to or uptake by host cells ( Dramsi and Cossart , 1998 ) . For most invasive bacteria , a major consequence of these signaling events is a morphological change of the host cell surface resulting from a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . The nature and magnitude of such changes depend highly on the pathogen and its cellular host , although a common feature is the acti - vation of host tyrosine phosphorylation leading to the acti - vation of the small GTPases of the Rho family , key regu - lators of actin cytoskeleton dynamics . The best studied examples are those of Shigella or Salmonella which trigger the induction of large cellular membrane folds or ruffles around bacteria leading to their subsequent uptake by a macropinocytic process ( Nhieu and Sansonetti , 1999 ; Galan and Zhou , 2000 ) . These pathogens have evolved a complex type III secretion system allowing them to inject into host cells bacterial components that can directly initiate the acti - vation of cellular signaling cascades . Alternatively , Listeria monocytogenes , which does not have a type III secretion sys - tem , promotes its entry by engaging cell adhesion receptors ( E - cadherins ) and the tyrosine kinase receptor Met ( Men - gaud et al . , 1996 ; Shen et al . , 2000 ) . Neisseria meningitidis ( also referred to as meningococcus ) is an extracellular , human - specific pathogen responsible for septicemia and meningitis . Despite the lack of type III secre - tion system , virulent capsulated N . meningitidis also initiates host cell signaling cascades leading to their subsequent up - take into host cells that are normally nonphagocytic ( Nassif et al . , 1999 ; Merz and So , 2000 ) . This entry is likely to pro - mote their transcytosis through cellular barriers by a mecha - nism that remains to be clearly identified , and therefore plays a major role in bacterial pathogenesis . Capsulated N . meningitidis interact with host cells in a multistep process ( Pujol et al . , 1997 ) . Bacteria first adhere through their type IV pili , which are long filamentous protein structures that interact with an unidentified cellular receptor . Bacteria then proliferate , locally forming a colony at their site of attach - ment on the cell surface , a step referred to as localized adhe - sion . Subsequently , bacteria loose their pili , disperse from the colony , and spread over the cell surface to form a single monolayer of bacteria covering the cells , a step referred to as diffuse adhesion . The bacterial protein PilT , which is re - sponsible for pilus retraction ( Merz et al . , 2000 ) , is required for the transition from localized to diffuse adhesion ( Pujol et al . , 1999 ) . Internalization of these bacteria occurs essentially during the first step of localized adhesion . During this inter - action , N . meningitidis adhering to epithelial cells elicits the formation of specific molecular complexes underneath the bacterial colonies . These structures , called cortical plaques , result from the localized polymerization of cortical actin , re - cruitment of ezrin , a protein that links the cellular mem - brane to the actin cytoskeleton , and clustering of membrane integral proteins , such as the ezrin binding proteins CD44 or ICAM - 1 as well as tyrosine phosphorylated proteins ( Merz and So , 1997 ; Merz et al . , 1999 ) . These events are ac - companied by the elongation of the epithelial cell microvilli towards the bacteria , leading to their engulfment and inter - nalization into host cells . We recently showed that N . men - ingitidis interaction with endothelial cells also leads to corti - cal actin polymerization underneath the bacterial colonies and the massive recruitment of ezrin and ezrin - binding pro - teins ( unpublished data ) . This recruitment promotes the for - mation of membrane projections , reminiscent of epithelial microvilli structures , which surround single bacteria and provoke their internalization within endothelial intracellular vacuoles . This has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo and suggests that this process is essential for the crossing of human endothelium via a transcytosis pathway . We fur - ther showed that N . meningitidis – induced actin polymeriza - tion requires the activation of the small GTPases of the Rho family RhoA and Cdc42 , but not Rac1 . Inhibition of Rho family GTPases prevented cortical actin polymerization , but only partially inhibited bacterial internalization , suggesting an alternative signaling pathway involved in N . meningitidis internalization . The process by which N . meningitidis inter - acts with the host cell and induces these signaling events has not been elucidated . In this study , we therefore analyzed the tyrosine phos - phorylation events occurring in human endothelial cells dur - ing adhesion of N . meningitidis . We provide evidence that pilus - mediated adhesion of capsulated N . meningitidis in - duces the clustering and tyrosyl phosphorylation of the host cell tyrosine kinase receptor ErbB2 , but not of the other ErbBs . ErbB2 activation leads to downstream activation of the protein tyrosine kinase src and the tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of the src - substrate cortactin . Furthermore , we show that ErbB2 / src signaling pathway is not involved in the for - mation of cortical plaques per se , but plays a crucial role in facilitating bacterial entry into endothelial cells . By analyz - ing the respective contributions to bacterial entry of both ErbB2 / src and Rho GTPases – dependent signaling path - ways , we show that ErbB2 / src pathway regulates N . menin - ErbB2 supports N . meningitidis invasion | Hoffmann et al . 135 gitidis entry through signaling events distinct from those leading to bacteria - induced actin cytoskeleton reorganiza - tion . Moreover , both pathways cooperate in bacterial entry . Therefore , our results provide evidence for a new mode of activation of ErbB2 by bacteria - induced homodimerization , and for a novel biological function of ErbB2 in supporting bacterial internalization into host cells . Results Adhesion of N . meningitidis to human endothelial cells induces tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins , which can be prevented by AG1478 , an ErbB family inhibitor We investigated the tyrosine phosphorylation events occur - ring in a human endothelial cell line ( HBMEC ) during in - teraction with N . meningitidis . For this purpose , HBMECs were infected with a piliated capsulated strain of N . menin - gitidis ( wild - type 2C43 ) , and two derivative mutants of that strain : a highly piliated and adhesive mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) and a nonpiliated ( nonadherent ) PilE (cid:2) mutant . As shown in Fig . 1 A , infection with the wild - type strain 2C43 for 4 h induced the major tyrosyl phosphorylation of proteins of (cid:2) 80 / 85 and 180 kD . These phosphorylation events were markedly increased when cells were infected with the PilT (cid:2) mutant of 2C43 , whereas they were not observed in cells in con - tact with the nonadherent PilE (cid:2) mutant . Kinetics analysis showed that these signals were detectable as soon as 30 min after infection , maximal at 4 h ( during the pilus - mediated localized adhesion ) . By contrast , they were no longer de - tected at 8 h with the wild - type strain ( diffuse adhesion ) , whereas the signal remained persistent in cells infected with the PilT (cid:2) mutant , which is unable to retract pili and to pro - ceed to the diffuse adhesion step ( unpublished data ) . There - fore , these events occur during the localized pilus - mediated adhesion of N . meningitidis to human endothelial cells . In parallel , experiments were performed with an isolate of a highly virulent strain , designated as ROU , obtained from the cerebrospinal fluid of a patient with fulminant meningo - coccal infection ( Fig . 1 B ) . This strain was highly efficient in inducing tyrosyl phosphorylation of the p80 / 85 and p180 , suggesting a correlation between these cellular events and the infectious process of N . meningitidis . Moreover , similar data were observed with a primary culture of human umbili - cal vein endothelial cells ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that these phosphorylation events might be a general response of endothelial cells to N . meningitidis adhesion . Since ErbB receptors are (cid:2) 180 kD , compatible with that of p180 , we hypothesized that tyrosine kinase receptors of the EGFR family might be involved in the cellular response to bacterial adhesion . We tested whether these phosphoryla - tion events would be affected by AG1478 , a very potent and selective inhibitor of both EGFR and ErbB2 kinases ( Kurokawa et al . , 2000 ) . As shown in Fig . 1 C , cell treat - ment with 5 or 10 (cid:3) M AG1478 totally prevented the in - crease of tyrosyl phosphorylation of p180 protein induced by either EGF or infection for 4 h with the PilT (cid:2) mutant , whereas cell treatment with 10 (cid:3) M AG1296 , a selective in - hibitor of the PDGF receptor kinase , had no effect . Simi - larly to EGF , N . meningitidis induced the activation of the MAPK Erk1 / 2 that was also prevented by treatment with AG1478 , but not by AG1296 . Altogether , these data strongly suggest that the infection by N . meningitidis leads to the activation of member ( s ) of the ErbB family . Interest - ingly , AG1478 treatment also drastically reduced the phos - phorylation of p80 / 85 induced by N . meningitidis , suggest - ing these proteins as downstream targets of ErbB signaling cascade . However , phosphorylation of p80 / 85 was not ob - served in response to EGF stimulation . Adhesion of N . meningitidis to human endothelial cells induces tyrosine phosphorylation and clustering of ErbB2 , but not of the other ErbB members Therefore , we analyzed the tyrosyl phosphorylation state of members of the ErbB family in cells infected for 4 h with ei - ther the 2C43 wild - type , the PilT (cid:2) mutant , or the ROU strain in the presence or in the absence of 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 . Stimulation of HBMECs with EGF at 10 ng / ml for 3 min Figure 1 . Localized adhesion of N . meningitidis induces tyrosine phosphorylation events that are prevented by AG1478 treatment . ( A ) HBMECs ( starved for 18 h ) were either uninfected ( (cid:2) ) or infected with the wild - type strain ( WT ) , the PilT - defective mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) , or the PilE - defective mutant ( PilE (cid:2) ) of the 2C43 strain of N . meningitidis for 4 h before lysis . ( B ) HBMECs starved for 18 h were either uninfected ( (cid:2) ) or infected with the 2C43 wild - type strain ( WT ) or ROU strain ( ROU ) . ( C ) HBMECs ( starved for 18 h ) were pretreated for 2 h with 5 or 10 (cid:3) M AG1478 , 10 (cid:3) M AG1296 , or left untreated ( (cid:2) ) . Cells were then infected for 4 h with the PilT - defective mutant strain in the presence of these inhibitors before lysis . As control , cells pretreated the same way were stimulated with 10 ng / ml EGF for 3 min before lysis . ( A – C ) Samples of whole cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting with an antiphosphoty - rosine antibody ( 4G10 ) . The electrophoretic mobilities of proteins of 80 / 85 and 180 kD ( arrows ) and of molecular weight standards ( 175 , 116 , 84 , and 58 kD ) are indicated . ( C ) Bottom , blot was reprobed with an antiphosphoErK1 / 2 antibody , which detects Erk1 / 2 when activated by phosphorylation . 136 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 1 , 2001 highly stimulated EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation as ex - pected , whereas N . meningitidis adhesion had no effect on tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGFR ( Fig . 2 A ) . Analysis of not only EGFR , but also ErbB3 or ErbB4 phosphor - ylation over several hours of infection by N . meningitidis failed to reveal any modification ( unpublished data ) . By contrast , bacterial infection induced tyrosyl phosphorylation of ErbB2 , which could be prevented by AG1478 treatment ( Fig . 2 ) , indicating that N . meningitidis leads to the selective activation of ErbB2 , whereas EGF stimulated both EGFR and ErbB2 phosphorylation , consistent with EGFR / ErbB2 heterodimerization ( Fig . 2 C ) . Therefore , cellular localization of the ErbB receptors was analyzed in cells infected for 4 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain . As shown in Fig . 3 , although ErbB2 displayed a punctuated staining in uninfected cells , it was highly re - cruited underneath the bacterial colonies in infected cells , whereas EGFR , ErbB3 , and ErbB4 staining was not af - fected . Altogether , these data show that adhesion of N . men - ingitidis to human endothelial cells induces tyrosine phos - phorylation and clustering of ErbB2 , but not of the other ErbB members , suggesting that most likely N . meningitidis induces ErbB2 activation by promoting the formation of ErbB2 homodimers . ErbB2 activation is not required for cortical plaque formation induced by N . meningitidis We have reported previously that N . meningitidis induces ac - tin cytoskeleton rearrangements and cortical plaque forma - tion in human endothelial cells ( unpublished data ) . Since stimulation of ErbBs may lead to Rho GTPase activation Figure 2 . Localized adhesion of N . meningitidis induces the tyrosyl phosphorylation of ErbB2 , but not of the other ErbB members . HBMECs ( starved for 24 h ) were pretreated for 2 h with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 ( (cid:4) ) or left untreated ( (cid:2) ) . Cells were either noninfected ( NT ) or infected with the wild - type ( WT ) , the PilT - defective mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) of the 2C43 strain , or the ROU strain of N . meningitidis , as indicated , for 4 h before lysis . AG1478 treatment was maintained during infection . As control , cells pretreated the same way were stimulated with 10 ng / ml EGF for 3 min before lysis . ( A ) EGF recep - tor was immunoprecipitated and immunoblotted with an antiphos - photyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) ( top ) . Blot was reprobed with an anti - EGFR antibody ( bottom ) to show that similar levels of receptors were immunoprecipitated . ( B and C ) ErbB2 receptor was immuno - precipitated and immunoblotted with an antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) ( top ) . Blots were reprobed with an anti - ErbB2 antibody ( bottom ) . Three independent experiments were carried out with similar results and representative results from one experi - ment are shown . Figure 3 . Localized adhesion of N . meningitidis induces the clustering of ErbB2 , but not of the other ErbB members . ( A ) Top , uninfected cells were stained for ErbB2 ; bottom , cells infected for 3 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningitidis were double - stained for ErbB2 ( left ) and bacterial colonies ( middle ) . Merged images ( overlay ) of the same fields are presented on the right . ( B ) Cells infected for 3 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningi - tidis were double - stained for either EGFR , ErbB3 , or ErbB4 ( top , as indicated ) and bacterial colonies ( bottom ) . Panels show receptor and bacterial staining in the same fields . ErbB2 supports N . meningitidis invasion | Hoffmann et al . 137 and actin cytoskeleton rearrangements , we investigated the contribution of ErbB2 activation in the HBMEC response to N . meningitidis . Immunofluorescence analysis of ezrin , actin , and ErbB2 was performed in cells infected for 4 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningitidis in the presence of 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 . As shown in Fig . 4 A , AG1478 did not prevent the massive recruitment of ezrin and cortical actin polymerization underneath the bacterial colonies that we described previously in the absence of inhibitor . This ob - servation indicates that ErbB2 activation is not required for cortical plaque formation induced by N . meningitidis . More - over , we observed that inhibition of ErbB2 activity did not affect its own massive recruitment underneath the bacte - rial colonies , thus suggesting that N . meningitidis – induced ErbB2 clustering may precede receptor activation . Cellular localization of ErbB2 was then analyzed in the presence of 30 (cid:3) M Y27632 , a selective inhibitor of the Rho effector Rho - kinase ( Ishizaki et al . , 2000 ) , which prevents N . meningitidis – induced actin cytoskeleton rearrangement , but does not affect ezrin recruitment underneath the bacte - rial colonies ( Fig . 4 B ) . Interestingly , Y27632 did not affect either ErbB2 clustering ( Fig . 4 B ) or phosphorylation ( un - published data ) induced by bacterial interaction . Therefore , the Rho - GTPase – dependent cortical actin polymerization induced by N . meningitidis is not required for ErbB2 recruit - ment underneath the bacterial colonies or ErbB2 activation . ErbB2 activation induced by N . meningitidis leads to the activation of the tyrosine kinase src and the subsequent phosphorylation of the src substrate cortactin To define the role of ErbB2 in the interaction process of N . meningitidis with human endothelial cells , we attempted to identify the tyrosyl - phosphorylated proteins p80 / 85 affected by AG1478 treatment described in Fig . 1 . The migration pattern of p80 / 85 was suggestive of a few candidate proteins , including the actin - binding protein cortactin , ezrin , and the p85 (cid:5) subunit of the PI - 3 kinase . Indeed , as shown in Fig . 5 A , infection for 4 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . Figure 4 . ErbB2 activation is not required for cortical plaque formation induced by N . meningitidis . HBMECs were pretreated for 2 h with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 ( A ) or with 30 (cid:3) M Y27632 ( B ) before infection for 3 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningitidis in the presence of the inhibitors . Cells were double - stained for ErbB2 and bacterial colonies ( top ) or ezrin and actin ( bottom ) . Merged images ( overlay ) of the same fields are presented on the right . Figure 5 . ErbB2 activation induced by N . meningitidis leads to src activation and the phosphorylation of cortactin . ( A and B ) HBMECs ( starved for 18 h ) were either uninfected ( (cid:2) ) or infected with the wild - type ( WT ) , the PilT - defective mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) , or the PilE - defective mutant ( PilE (cid:2) ) of the 2C43 strain of N . meningitidis for 4 h before lysis . ( C – E ) HBMECs starved for 18 h were pretreated for 2 h with either 5 (cid:3) M PP2 or 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 ( (cid:4) ) or left untreated ( (cid:2) ) . Cells were either noninfected ( NT ) or infected with the wild - type 2C43 or the ROU strains as indicated for 4 h before lysis . PP2 and AG1478 treatments were maintained during infection . As control , cells pretreated the same way were stimulated with 10 ng / ml EGF for 3 min before lysis . ( A , D , and E ) Cortactin was immunoprecipitated and immunoblotted with an antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) ( top ) . Blots were reprobed with an anticortactin antibody ( bottom ) to show that similar protein levels were immunoprecipitated . ( B and C ) Src was immunoprecipitated and subjected to either an autophosphorylation assay ( B ) or an in vitro kinase assay using acid - denaturated enolase as a substrate ( C ) . Three independent experiments were carried out with similar results and representative results from one experiment are shown . 138 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 1 , 2001 meningitidis induced the tyrosyl phosphorylation of cortac - tin , whereas ezrin or the p85 (cid:5) subunit of the PI - 3 kinase were not tyrosine phosphorylated under the same conditions ( unpublished data ) . In agreement with the fact that cortactin is a known substrate of the tyrosine kinase src , an autophos - phorylation assay demonstrated that src was indeed activated in cells infected for 4 h with the 2C43 wild - type ( Fig . 5 B ) . As expected , no src activity nor tyrosyl phosphorylation of cortactin was detected in cells in contact with the 2C43 PilE (cid:2) mutant , whereas the PilT (cid:2) mutant was more efficient in inducing both src activity and cortactin phosphorylation . Src activation induced by either 2C43 wild - type or ROU strains of N . meningitidis was largely reduced by treatment with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 ( Fig . 5 C ) . Moreover , cortactin phos - phorylation was fully inhibited by a treatment with 5 (cid:3) M PP2 , a selective inhibitor of src family kinases ( Fig . 5 D ) , and was also largely inhibited by treatment with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 ( Fig . 5 E ) , whereas EGF stimulation did not stimu - late cortactin phosphorylation . Together , these results dem - onstrate that N . meningitidis induces src activation and sub - sequent cortactin phosphorylation and point to src as a downstream signaling effector of ErbB2 in this pathway . In addition , since AG1478 does not fully inhibit src activity and cortactin phosphorylation , whereas it completely pre - vents ErbB2 phosphorylation , an alternative pathway , inde - pendent of ErbB2 , may also contribute to the activation of src induced by N . meningitidis . Therefore , we examined whether src was associated with phosphorylated ErbB2 in infected cells . As shown in Fig . 6 A , an increased amount of src was detected in ErbB2 immu - noprecipitates in cells infected for 4 h with either the 2C43 wild - type or PilT (cid:2) mutant . These interactions were largely prevented by treatment with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 , thus confirm - ing that ErbB2 phosphorylation induced by N . meningitidis results in the recruitment and activation of src . To further confirm that bacteria - or EGF - induced ErbB2 phosphoryla - tion can provide a docking site for the SH2 domain of src , we performed a pull - down assay with a recombi - nant gluthatione S - transferase ( GST ) – src SH2 fusion pro - tein ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . Analysis of the pattern of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins precipitated with the fusion protein showed that both N . meningitidis and EGF induced the in - teraction of src – SH2 with a 185 - kD phosphoprotein identi - fied by Western blotting as ErbB2 , whereas only EGF stim - ulation induced the interaction of src - SH2 with a prominent tyrosine - phosphorylated band of 175 kD identified as EGFR . These interactions were dependent on the intrinsic ki - nase activity of ErbB2 or EGFR , since it was prevented by AG1478 treatment . These observations confirmed our con - clusion that , although EGF induced EGFR / ErbB2 het - erodimerization , bacteria induced the clustering of ErbB2 as homodimers . Since cortactin is known to interact with actin , we as - sessed whether cortactin was recruited at the site of actin po - lymerization . Although cortactin displayed a generalized cy - toplasmic staining with some enrichment in membrane ruffles in uninfected cells , it was recruited in cortical plaques in cells infected for 4 h with a the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningitidis ( Fig . 7 ) . AG1478 and PP2 only slightly af - fected cortactin recruitment into cortical plaques , which was instead totally prevented by Y27632 treatment . Thus , ErbB2 activation promotes cortactin phosphorylation , but this event is not required for cortactin recruitment within cortical plaques , a process dependent on cortactin interac - tion with the actin cytoskeleton . ErbB2 / Src signaling pathway activation is involved in bacterial internalization by human endothelial cells The internalization of N . meningitidis in endothelial cells , as shown previously , is maximal during localized adhesion , i . e . , when the ErbB2 / src pathway is fully activated , as shown here . The potential role of the ErbB2 / src signaling pathway on bacterial internalization into endothelial cells was there - fore investigated . We observed that the 2C43 PilT (cid:2) mutant and the ROU strain , which activate the ErbB2 / src signaling pathway more efficiently than the 2C43 wild - type strain , were also more effectively internalized ( 2 . 5 and 10 (cid:6) , respec - tively ) ( Fig . 8 A ) . As expected , no internalization of the non - adherent PilE (cid:2) mutant was observed . Furthermore , treat - ment with 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 or 5 (cid:3) M PP2 decreased bacterial internalization by (cid:2) 50 or 70 % , respectively ( Fig . 8 B ) . In agreement with our conclusion that src is a downstream sig - naling effector of ErbB2 , the addition of both inhibitors did not further reduce bacterial entry . By contrast , AG1296 , the specific inhibitor of the PDGF receptor which failed to af - Figure 6 . Localized adhesion of N . meningitidis leads to src association with phosphorylated ErbB2 . HBMECs ( starved for 18 h ) were either uninfected ( (cid:2) ) or infected with the wild - type ( WT ) , or the PilT - defective mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) of the 2C43 strain of N . meningiti - dis for 4 h before lysis . As control , cells pretreated the same way were stimulated with 10 ng / ml EGF for 3 min before lysis . ( A ) ErbB2 was immunoprecipitated and immunoblotted with an anti - src anti - body ( top ) . Blot was reprobed with an anti - ErbB2 antibody ( bottom ) to show that similar protein levels were immunoprecipitated . ( B and C ) Whole cell extracts were incubated with 5 (cid:3) g of a GST - tagged peptide containing the SH2 domain of src and coupled to glutathione - Sepharose . The complexes were immunoblotted with an antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) ( top ) . Blots were reprobed with an anti - ErbB2 antibody ( middle ) and anti - EGFR antibody ( bot - tom ) . Three independent experiments were carried out with similar results and representative results from one experiment are shown . ErbB2 supports N . meningitidis invasion | Hoffmann et al . 139 fect the tyrosyl phosphorylation induced by N . meningitidis ( Fig . 1 ) , had no effect on bacterial entry . Thus , these experi - ments indicate that the ErbB2 / src pathway is involved in N . meningitidis internalization into endothelial cells . Since we recently showed that the small Rho GTPases were involved in cortical plaque formation and subsequent N . meningitidis internalization into endothelial cells ( unpub - lished data ) , we analyzed the respective contributions of both ErbB2 / src and Rho GTPase – dependent signaling path - ways on bacterial entry into endothelial cells . As shown in Fig . 8 B , treatment with PP2 in the presence of Y27632 al - most totally prevented bacterial entry ( 90 % inhibition ) , whereas Y27632 alone inhibited bacterial entry by 60 % . None of these treatments affected bacterial adhesion to en - dothelial cells ( unpublished data ) . Together , these data dem - onstrate that N . meningitidis promotes two distinct signaling pathways , the ErbB2 / src and Rho - GTPase pathways , which cooperate to promote N . meningitidis internalization into endothelial cells . Discussion We have investigated here the tyrosine phosphorylation events occurring during the interaction of N . meningitidis with human endothelial cells . We demonstrate that the acti - vation of the ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase is directly in - volved in host signal transduction promoted by N . meningi - tidis interaction and subsequent bacterial internalization . N . meningitidis induces a massive recruitment and tyro - sine phosphorylation of ErbB2 . Our data suggest that the in - teraction of N . meningitidis with human endothelial cells leads to the activation of ErbB2 , most likely via formation of ErbB2 homodimers , since no recruitment nor tyrosine phos - phorylation of any other known ErbB family members was detected . We believe that these results constitute an impor - tant finding since , although no soluble ligand for ErbB2 has been identified so far , this receptor appears to be the pre - ferred heterodimerization partner of all ErbB proteins ( Tza - har et al . , 1996 ; Graus - Porta et al . , 1997 ) . Although the for - mation of most heterodimers is mediated by ErbB ligands , ErbB2 - containing heterodimers may also be triggered by other classes of receptors through ligand - independent path - ways ( Qiu et al . , 1998 ) . ErbB2 homodimerization was previ - Figure 7 . ErbB2 activation is not required for cortactin recruit - ment within cortical plaques . Cells were pretreated for 2 h with either 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 or 30 (cid:3) M Y27632 . Cells noninfected or infected for 3 h with the 2C43 wild - type strain of N . meningitidis were double - stained for ErbB2 ( left ) and cortactin ( middle ) . Merged images ( overlay ) of the same fields are presented on the right . Figure 8 . ( A ) Entry levels of the different strains of N . meningitidis in HBMECs . HBMECs were infected with the wild - type ( WT ) , the PilT - defective mutant ( PilT (cid:2) ) , or the PilE - defective mutant ( PilE (cid:2) ) of the 2C43 strain of N . meningitidis . After 4 h , the number of internal - ized bacteria in relation to the number of adherent bacteria was determined . ( B ) Effects of PP2 , AG1478 , AG1296 , and Y27632 on N . meningitidis entry in HBMECs . Cells were either left untreated ( NT ) or pretreated for 2 h with 5 (cid:3) M PP2 , 5 (cid:3) M AG1478 , 5 (cid:3) M AG1296 , 30 (cid:3) M Y27632 , or with both inhibitors PP2 (cid:4) AG1478 or PP2 (cid:4) Y27632 , as indicated . Cells were infected with the wild - type strain of N . meningitidis for 4 h in the presence of the inhibitors . The percentage of internalized bacteria in relation to the entry or adhesion of the wild - type strain in absence of any activator or inhibitor was determined , and average values ( (cid:7) SEM ) from four independent experiments are presented . 140 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 1 , 2001 ously described only in a few cases : a ligand - independent ac - tivation of the kinase domain of ErbB2 is observed in a significant proportion of breast and ovarian cancers overex - pressing ErbB2 , apparently as a result of spontaneous dimer formation ( Yarden and Sliwkowski , 2001 ) . Homodimeriza - tion of this receptor can also be achieved by mutating a single amino acid residue in the transmembrane domain , leading to constitutive ErbB2 dimerization and activation ( Bargmann et al . , 1986 ; Olayioye et al . , 1998 ) . Alterna - tively , antibody binding to the extracellular domain can also promote ErbB2 homodimerization and its subsequent acti - vation ( Sarup et al . , 1991 ; Olayioye et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , our results constitute the first example of ErbB2 activation by homodimerization induced in nontumor cells ( expressing physiological levels of ErbB2 ) through a ligand - independent pathway . ErbB2 activation by N . meningitidis infection apparently results from bacteria - induced clustering of this receptor , since ErbB2 tyrosine phosphorylation is dependent on its in - trinsic kinase activity . In contrast , ErbB2 recruitment under - neath the bacterial colonies appears to be activation - inde - pendent , inasmuch as it was not affected by the ErbB2 kinase inhibitor AG1478 . Clustering of ErbB2 may result in the spontaneous homodimer formation due to an increased local concentration of ErbB2 molecules , in a similar way to what has been described in tumor cells overexpressing ErbB2 . Indeed , previous studies performed with antibody - induced clustering of ErbB2 showed that the activation state of ErbB2 correlates with the size of ErbB2 clusters ( Nagy et al . , 1999 ) . However , how N . meningitidis interaction leads to ErbB2 clustering is still unclear . No activation of this sig - naling pathway is observed in cells in contact with the non - piliated strain of N . meningitidis ( PilE (cid:2) ) , thus indicating that these events are not due to the presence of any bacterial - secreted molecule in the infection medium . Moreover , this activation is maximal during the localized adhesion of N . meningitidis and decreases when bacteria loose their pili and disperse at the cell surface , whereas it remains persistent in cells infected with the PilT (cid:2) mutant . This mutant , defective in pili retraction , is highly piliated and cannot disperse at the cell surface ( Pujol et al . , 1999 ; Merz and So , 2000 ) . Thus , these data provide evidence that ErbB2 activation requires a pilus - dependent interaction of the bacteria with the host cells . Type IV pili initiate the interaction of virulent , capsu - lated N . meningitidis with human cells by interacting with a cellular receptor that remains to be clearly identified . The membrane protein MCP / CD46 was suggested as a receptor for N . meningitidis pili ( Kallstrom et al . , 1997 ) . However the weak affinity of the pili – CD46 interaction suggests the exist - ence of an alternative human cell receptor for N . meningiti - dis . Thus , ErbB2 clustering may result from a direct inter - action with bacterial pili . Alternatively , ErbB2 might be recruited underneath the bacterial colonies by interacting in a multimer complex with other cellular components re - cruited after interaction of bacteria with an unknown cellu - lar receptor . Indeed , the evidence provided suggests that an interaction between ErbB2 and other transmembrane glyco - proteins may potentiate ErbB2 activation . In normal and transformed mammary epithelial cells , the transmembrane subunit of sialomucin complex ASGP - 2 was shown to form a stable complex through its EGF - like domain with ErbB2 , but not EGFR , ErbB3 , or ErbB4 , and to potentiate neureg - ulin - induced ErbB2 – ErbB3 heterodimer activation ( Carr - away et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , a direct interaction between CD44 and ErbB2 has been described , leading to a potentia - tion of the constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of ErbB2 in an ovarian carcinoma cell line overexpressing ErbB2 ( Bourguignon et al . , 1997 ) , or to a significant increase in neuregulin - induced ErbB2 – ErbB3 heterodimerization and ErbB2 phosphorylation in Schwann cells ( Sherman et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , we show here that ErbB2 was recruited together with ezrin and CD44 . Further studies are required to assess whether such an interaction of ErbB2 with other transmembrane glycoproteins may occur in endothelial cells in response to N . meningitidis adhesion and may be critical for bacteria - induced ErbB2 clustering and / or activation . How does the activation of ErbB2 lead to the entry of N . meningitidis into host cells that are normally nonphagocytic ? We showed that ErbB2 phosphorylation results in the re - cruitment and activation of the tyrosine kinase src , which are dependent on the intrinsic kinase activity of ErbB2 . A se - lective inhibition of both ErbB2 and src revealed a major role of the ErbB2 / src signaling in N . meningitidis internal - ization . Interestingly , the ErbB2 / src pathway is not required for the activation of GTPase - dependent cytoskeletal modifi - cations that we have observed recently in response to the ad - hesion of N . meningitidis ( unpublished data ) . Inhibition of ErbB2 or src activity did not affect the cortical actin reorga - nization induced underneath the bacterial colonies . In - versely , inhibition of bacteria - induced cortical actin po - lymerization did not prevent the activation of ErbB2 / src pathway . Therefore , N . meningitidis promotes the activation of two distinct pathways , both of which contribute to an ef - ficient internalization of bacteria . Interestingly , the implica - tion in bacterial internalization of host cell src family tyro - sine kinases and Rho family GTPases has been reported in several cases of invasive pathogens ( Dramsi and Cossart , 1998 ) . For example , Opa 52 - mediated phagocytosis of N . gonorrhoeae by human neutrophils requires , for an efficient uptake , the activity of the related Rho family member Rac , which appears to be controlled by an src - like tyrosine kinase ( Fgr or Hck ) ( Hauck et al . , 1998 ) . In the same way , src , to - gether with Rho family GTPases , is involved in the internal - ization of Shigella ( Dehio et al . , 1995 ; Adam et al . , 1996 ) and is required for triggering the formation of actin poly - merization foci induced by Shigella ( Dumenil et al . , 1998 ) . By contrast , invasion by Salmonella , which requires the acti - vation of Cdc42 , probably does not involve tyrosine phos - phorylation ( Galan and Zhou , 2000 ) . When required , tyro - sine kinase activity is then directly involved in the activation of small GTPases and controls bacterial entry by eliciting cy - toskeleton changes . N . meningitidis seems to have developed an alternative pathway leading to its subsequent uptake into endothelial cells , since we observed that src tyrosine kinase activity controls N . meningitidis entry at a different level than Rho family GTPases . We showed that src activation by N . meningitidis leads to the tyrosyl phosphorylation of a ma - jor susbstrate ( p80 / 85 ) , which we identified as cortactin . Cortactin is an actin - binding protein , which can promote in vitro F - actin crosslinking . We consistently observed that ErbB2 supports N . meningitidis invasion | Hoffmann et al . 141 cortactin was highly recruited underneath the bacterial colo - nies , and that this recruitment was not correlated with ty - rosyl phosphorylation of cortactin , but was instead de - pendent on cortical actin polymerization induced by N . meningitidis . Interestingly , ErbB2 activation induced by EGF , while activating src ( unpublished data ) , did not lead to cortactin phosphorylation . This apparent discrepancy may result from the activation of specific signaling pathways acti - vated by ErbB2 homodimers ( in response to N . meningitidis ) or ErbB2 / EGFR heterodimers ( in response to EGF ) , includ - ing the activation of alternative kinases involved in cortactin phosphorylation , such as Fer ( Kim and Wong , 1998 ) . Alter - natively , cortactin phosphorylation induced in infected cells may result from the local concentration of signaling mole - cules in microdomains underneath the bacterial colonies . Further studies are required to investigate the consequences of the tyrosyl phosphorylation of cortactin and to character - ize the mechanism by which the src signaling pathway facili - tates N . meningitidis internalization into endothelial cells . In summary , these results , summarized in Fig . 9 , provide evidence for a novel mode of activation and an unsuspected involvement of ErbB2 in host pathogen interaction . We be - lieve that they will help unravel the pathophysiological mechanism of meningitis associated with N . meningitidis in - fection . Materials and methods Antibodies and reagents Antibodies to cortactin ( p80 / 85 ) and pp60 c - src were purchased from Up - state Biotechnology ; antiphosphotyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) was from Med - itech ; polyclonal antibodies directed against EGFR , ErbB2 , ErbB3 , ErbB4 were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Antiphospho Erk1 / 2 ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ) was from Cell Signaling Technology . Rhodamine phalloi - din and recombinant human EGF were from Sigma - Aldrich . GST fusion protein containing src - SH2 domain was provided by Dr . S . Fisher ( Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire , Paris , France ) . The selective inhibitors AG1478 , AG1296 , and PP2 were from Calbiochem , and Y27632 was pro - vided by Yoshitomi Pharmaceutical . Bacterial strains and growth conditions 2C43 ( formerly clone 12 ) , a piliated capsulated Opa (cid:2) variant of the sero - group C meningococcal strain 8013 , the nonpiliated derivative strain pilE : : Km , and the PilT (cid:2) derivative strain pilT : : Erm were described previously ( Nassif et al . , 1993 ; Pujol et al . , 1999 ) . The strain designated ROU ( group W135 , ET37 ) , is a piliated , capsulated isolate obtained from the cere - brospinal fluid of a 2 - mo - old infant and has been described previously ( Pron et al . , 1997 ) . Before experiments , N . meningitidis was grown over - night on GCB solid medium ( 4 % GC medium base ; Difco ) , 1 % agar , 0 . 4 % glucose , 0 . 2 mg / ml thiamine , 0 . 0005 % Fe ( NO 3 ) 3 9H 2 O , 0 . 01 % L - glutamine at 37 (cid:8) C under 5 % CO 2 . Several colonies were then selected and grown in DME supplemented with 0 . 1 % BSA for 2 h and were finally diluted to (cid:2) 10 7 bacteria / ml suspension for cell infection . Cell culture , infection , and quantification of N . meningitidis adhesion or entry into endothelial cells HBMECs ( Schweitzer et al . , 1997 ) , provided by Dr . B . Weksler ( Weill Medical College of Cornell University , Ithaca , NY ) , were cultured in DME Glutamax ( Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fe - tal bovine serum , 7 . 5 (cid:3) g / ml endothelial cell growth supplement ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 7 UI heparin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 10 mM Hepes . Infections were performed as follows : confluent monolayers of HBMECs were starved for 18 h before infection in DME supplemented with 0 . 1 % BSA ( starvation medium ) to lower the basal level of tyrosine phosphoryla - tions . HBMECs were then overlaid for 30 min with (cid:2) 10 7 bacteria in starva - tion medium . Cells were then washed three times with starvation medium to remove nonadherent bacteria and infection was allowed to proceed for various periods of time . To avoid reinfection of the monolayers , cells were washed once every hour with starvation medium . When indicated , cells were pretreated for 2 h with AG1478 , AG1296 , PP2 , or Y27632 before in - fection . Cells were then infected as above and the infection was allowed to proceed for 4 h in the presence of the inhibitors . For adhesion and inter - nalization assays , cells grown to confluency in 6 - well plates were infected in starvation medium , washed three times , and the infection was allowed Figure 9 . Schematic representation of the signaling pathways activated by N . meningitidis and involved in bacterial en - try into endothelial cells . ( 1 ) Type IV pili initiate the interaction of virulent , capsu - lated N . meningitidis with human endo - thelial cells by interacting with a cellular receptor that remains to be clearly identi - fied . Bacteria then proliferate , locally forming a colony at their site of attach - ment on the cell surface . ( 2 ) This pili - dependent adhesion induces , through a Rho GTPase - independent pathway , the recruitment of ezrin and moesin , two proteins that link the cellular membrane to the actin cytoskeleton , and the cluster - ing of several transmembrane proteins : ErbB2 and the ezrin binding proteins CD44 and ICAM - 1 . ( 3 ) The activation of both Rho and Cdc42 GTPases induces a localized polymerization of cortical actin , leading to the formation of mem - brane projections reminiscent of epithelial microvilli structures , which surround single bacteria and provoke their internal - ization within endothelial intracellular vacuoles . Downstream of bacteria - induced ErbB2 activation are the ras / MAPK signaling pathway , and the src ty - rosine kinase which phosphorylates cort - actin , and is involved in bacterial entry . 142 The Journal of Cell Biology | Volume 155 , Number 1 , 2001 to proceed for 4 h . To quantify adherent bacteria , the infected cell layers were extensively washed , resuspended by scraping into GCB liquid me - dium , serially diluted , and spread onto GCB plates . Bacteria were grown overnight and colony - forming units were counted . To quantify internalized bacteria , the infected cell layers were extensively washed , incubated with 150 (cid:3) g / ml gentamicin at 37 (cid:8) C for 1 h , and washed extensively before scraping and plating dilutions onto GCB plates . Each condition was per - formed in triplicate and each experiment was carried out four times inde - pendently . Immunoprecipitations and immunoblotting Cells were washed once with cold PBS and lysed in a NP - 40 – based buffer ( 0 . 1 % NP - 40 , 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 250 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 2 mM NaVO 4 , 5 mM NaF , 1 mM PMSF , 10 (cid:3) g / ml each of aprotinin / leupep - tin / pepstatin ) . For the coimmunoprecipitation assay , cells were lysed in a Triton X - 100 – containing buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM NaVO 4 , 5 mM NaF , 1 mM PMSF , 10 (cid:3) g / ml each of aprotinin / leupeptin / pepstatin ) . The insoluble fraction was removed by centrifugation and the cleared lysates were used for immunoprecipitation with specific antibodies or pull down experiment with the GST fusion protein . Precipitated proteins or fractions of the whole cell lysate were separated on a 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose ( Schleicher & Schuell ) . After blocking for 1 h in PBS / 1 % BSA / 0 . 05 % Tween 20 , filters were probed overnight with specific antibodies . Proteins were visualized with peroxidase - coupled secondary antibody using the ECL system ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Src autophosphorylation / kinase assays Immunoprecipitation of src was carried out as described in the previous section , using anti - p60 c - src antibody and protein G – Sepharose beads . Beads were washed three times in an autophosphorylation buffer ( 20 mM Pipes , pH 7 , 10 mM MnCl 2 , 1 mM PMSF , 0 . 1 mM NaVO 4 , 2 (cid:3) g / ml aprotinin / leu - peptin / pepstatin ) . Beads were resuspended in autophosphorylation buffer and incubated for 5 min at 30 (cid:8) C with 1 (cid:3) M ATP and 25 (cid:3) Ci 32 P ATP . Alter - natively , beads were washed three times in an enolase buffer ( 100 mM Pipes , pH 7 , 10 mM MnCl 2 , 1 mM PMSF , 0 . 1 mM NaVO 4 , 2 (cid:3) g / ml aproti - nin / leupeptin / pepstatin ) and incubated for 5 min at 30 (cid:8) C with 3 (cid:3) M ATP , 25 (cid:3) Ci 32 P ATP , and 5 (cid:3) g of denatured enolase ( 5 min at 30 (cid:8) C in 25 mM acetate buffer , pH 3 . 3 ) . Reactions were stopped with Laemmli’s buffer . Samples were heated for 10 min at 100 (cid:8) C , separated by electrophoresis on a 12 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel , and transferred to nitrocellulose mem - branes . Incorporations of radioactive ATP by src ro enolase were detected by autoradiography . Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy HBMECs were grown to confluence on Permanox chamber slides ( Lab - Tek ) . After infection , cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min , washed three times with PBS , and permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 10 min . Cells were blocked for 30 min with 3 % BSA in PBS and were incubated for 2 h with the primary antibodies . After three washes with PBS , cells were incubated for 1 h with CY3 - conjugated anti – mouse IgG and CY2 - conjugated anti – rabbit IgG ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Labo - ratories ) . Actin staining was performed with rhodamine - labeled phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and bacteria staining with 0 . 5 (cid:3) g / ml ethidium bromide . Labeled preparations were mounted in mowiol and analyzed with a confo - cal microscope ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . We thank Dr . B . B . Weksler ( Cornell University , Ithaca , New York ) for pro - viding HBMECs and for helpful comments on the manuscript , Dr . Josiane Pierre ( INSERM U461 , Chatenay Malabry , France ) for providing us with specific antibodies to ErbB family members , Yoshitomi Pharmaceutical ( Osaka , Japan ) for the generous gift of Y27632 , and Dr . Sylvie Cazaubon and Dr . Simon Louis for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by grants from the Centre National de la Re - cherche Scientifique , the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale , and the Ministère de la Recherche et de la Technologie . Submitted : 27 June 2001 Revised : 28 August 2001 Accepted : 29 August 2001 References Adam , T . , M . Giry , P . Boquet , and P . Sansonetti . 1996 . Rho - dependent mem - brane folding causes Shigella entry into epithelial cells . EMBO J . 15 : 3315 – 3321 . Bargmann , C . I . , M . C . Hung , and R . A . Weinberg . 1986 . Multiple independent ac - tivations of the neu oncogene by a point mutation altering the transmem - brane domain of p185 . Cell . 45 : 649 – 657 . Beerli , R . R . , D . Graus - Porta , K . Woods - Cook , X . Chen , Y . Yarden , and N . E . Hynes . 1995 . Neu differentiation factor activation of ErbB - 3 and ErbB - 4 is cell specific and displays a differential requirement for ErbB - 2 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 6496 – 6505 . Bourguignon , L . Y . , H . Zhu , A . Chu , N . Iida , L . Zhang , and M . C . Hung . 1997 . Interaction between the adhesion receptor , CD44 , and the oncogene prod - uct , p185HER2 , promotes human ovarian tumor cell activation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 27913 – 27918 . Carpenter , G . 1999 . Employment of the epidermal growth factor receptor in growth factor – independent signaling pathways . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 697 – 702 . Carraway , K . L . , III , and C . Sweeney . 2001 . Localization and modulation of ErbB receptor tyrosine kinases . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 : 125 – 130 . Carraway , K . L . , III , E . A . Rossi , M . Komatsu , S . A . Price - Schiavi , D . Huang , P . M . Guy , M . E . Carvajal , N . Fregien , C . A . Carraway , and K . L . Carraway . 1999 . An intramembrane modulator of the ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase that po - tentiates neuregulin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 5263 – 5266 . Dehio , C . , M . C . Prevost , and P . J . Sansonetti . 1995 . Invasion of epithelial cells by Shigella flexneri induces tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by a pp60c - src - mediated signalling pathway . EMBO J . 14 : 2471 – 2482 . Dramsi , S . , and P . Cossart . 1998 . Intracellular pathogens and the actin cytoskele - ton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 137 – 166 . Dumenil , G . , J . C . Olivo , S . Pellegrini , M . Fellous , P . J . Sansonetti , and G . T . Nhieu . 1998 . Interferon (cid:5) inhibits a Src - mediated pathway necessary for Shigella - induced cytoskeletal rearrangements in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1003 – 1012 . Galan , J . E . , and D . Zhou . 2000 . Striking a balance : modulation of the actin cy - toskeleton by Salmonella . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 97 : 8754 – 8761 . Graus - Porta , D . , R . R . Beerli , and N . E . Hynes . 1995 . Single - chain antibody - medi - ated intracellular retention of ErbB - 2 impairs Neu differentiation factor and epidermal growth factor signaling . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 : 1182 – 1191 . Graus - Porta , D . , R . R . Beerli , J . M . Daly , and N . E . Hynes . 1997 . ErbB - 2 , the pre - ferred heterodimerization partner of all ErbB receptors , is a mediator of lat - eral signaling . EMBO J . 16 : 1647 – 1655 . Gschwind , A . , E . Zwick , N . Prenzel , M . Leserer , and A . Ullrich . 2001 . Cell com - munication networks : epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation as the paradigm for interreceptor signal transmission . Oncogene . 20 : 1594 – 1600 . Hauck , C . R . , T . F . Meyer , F . Lang , and E . Gulbins . 1998 . CD66 - mediated phago - cytosis of Opa52 Neisseria gonorrhoeae requires a Src - like tyrosine kinase - and Rac1 - dependent signalling pathway . EMBO J . 17 : 443 – 454 . Ishizaki , T . , M . Uehata , I . Tamechika , J . Keel , K . Nonomura , M . Maekawa , and S . Narumiya . 2000 . Pharmacological properties of Y - 27632 , a specific inhibi - tor of rho - associated kinases . Mol . Pharmacol . 57 : 976 – 983 . Kallstrom , H . , M . K . Liszewski , J . P . Atkinson , and A . B . Jonsson . 1997 . Membrane cofactor protein ( MCP or CD46 ) is a cellular pilus receptor for pathogenic Neisseria . Mol . Microbiol . 25 : 639 – 647 . Kim , L . , and T . W . Wong . 1998 . Growth factor - dependent phosphorylation of the actin - binding protein cortactin is mediated by the cytoplasmic tyrosine ki - nase FER . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 23542 – 23548 . Kurokawa , H . , A . E . Lenferink , J . F . Simpson , P . I . Pisacane , M . X . Sliwkowski , J . T . Forbes , and C . L . Arteaga . 2000 . Inhibition of HER2 / neu ( erbB - 2 ) and mi - togen - activated protein kinases enhances tamoxifen action against HER2 - overexpressing , tamoxifen - resistant breast cancer cells . Cancer Res . 60 : 5887 – 5894 . Mengaud , J . , H . Ohayon , P . Gounon , R . M . Mege , and P . Cossart . 1996 . E - cad - herin is the receptor for internalin , a surface protein required for entry of L . monocytogenes into epithelial cells . Cell . 84 : 923 – 932 . Merz , A . J . , and M . So . 1997 . Attachment of piliated , Opa - and Opc - gonococci and meningococci to epithelial cells elicits cortical actin rearrangements and clustering of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins . Infect . Immun . 65 : 4341 – 4349 . Merz , A . J . , and M . So . 2000 . Interactions of pathogenic Neisseriae with epithelial cell membranes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 : 423 – 457 . Merz , A . J . , C . A . Enns , and M . So . 1999 . Type IV pili of pathogenic Neisseriae elicit cortical plaque formation in epithelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . 32 : 1316 – 1332 . Merz , A . J . , M . So , and M . P . Sheetz . 2000 . Pilus retraction powers bacterial twitch - ing motility . Nature . 407 : 98 – 102 . Nagy , P . , A . Jenei , A . K . Kirsch , J . Szollosi , S . Damjanovich , and T . M . Jovin . 1999 . ErbB2 supports N . meningitidis invasion | Hoffmann et al . 143 Activation - dependent clustering of the erbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase de - tected by scanning near - field optical microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1733 – 1741 . Nassif , X . , J . Lowy , P . Stenberg , P . O’Gaora , A . Ganji , and M . So . 1993 . Antigenic variation of pilin regulates adhesion of Neisseria meningitidis to human epi - thelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . 8 : 719 – 725 . Nassif , X . , C . Pujol , P . Morand , and E . Eugene . 1999 . Interactions of pathogenic Neisseria with host cells . Is it possible to assemble the puzzle ? Mol . Microbiol . 32 : 1124 – 1132 . Nhieu , G . T . , and P . J . Sansonetti . 1999 . Mechanism of Shigella entry into epithelial cells . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 2 : 51 – 55 . Olayioye , M . A . , D . Graus - Porta , R . R . Beerli , J . Rohrer , B . Gay , and N . E . Hynes . 1998 . ErbB - 1 and ErbB - 2 acquire distinct signaling properties dependent upon their dimerization partner . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 : 5042 – 5051 . Olayioye , M . A . , R . M . Neve , H . A . Lane , and N . E . Hynes . 2000 . The ErbB signal - ing network : receptor heterodimerization in development and cancer . EMBO J . 19 : 3159 – 3167 . Pron , B . , M . K . Taha , C . Rambaud , J . C . Fournet , N . Pattey , J . P . Monnet , M . Musilek , J . L . Beretti , and X . Nassif . 1997 . Interaction of Neisseria meningi - tidis with the components of the blood - brain barrier correlates with an in - creased expression of PilC . J . Infect . Dis . 176 : 1285 – 1292 . Pujol , C . , E . Eugene , L . de Saint Martin , and X . Nassif . 1997 . Interaction of Neis - seria meningitidis with a polarized monolayer of epithelial cells . Infect . Im - mun . 65 : 4836 – 4842 . Pujol , C . , E . Eugene , M . Marceau , and X . Nassif . 1999 . The meningococcal PilT protein is required for induction of intimate attachment to epithelial cells following pilus - mediated adhesion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 4017 – 4022 . Qiu , Y . , L . Ravi , and H . J . Kung . 1998 . Requirement of ErbB2 for signalling by in - terleukin - 6 in prostate carcinoma cells . Nature . 393 : 83 – 85 . Russell , K . S . , D . F . Stern , P . J . Polverini , and J . R . Bender . 1999 . Neuregulin activa - tion of ErbB receptors in vascular endothelium leads to angiogenesis . Am . J . Physiol . 277 : H2205 – H2211 . Sarup , J . C . , R . M . Johnson , K . L . King , B . M . Fendly , M . T . Lipari , M . A . Napier , A . Ullrich , and H . M . Shepard . 1991 . Characterization of an anti - p185HER2 monoclonal antibody that stimulates receptor function and inhibits tumor cell growth . Growth Regul . 1 : 72 – 82 . Schweitzer , K . M . , P . Vicart , C . Delouis , D . Paulin , A . M . Drager , M . M . Langen - huijsen , and B . B . Weksler . 1997 . Characterization of a newly established hu - man bone marrow endothelial cell line : distinct adhesive properties for he - matopoietic progenitors compared with human umbilical vein endothelial cells . Lab Invest . 76 : 25 – 36 . Shen , Y . , M . Naujokas , M . Park , and K . Ireton . 2000 . InIB - dependent internaliza - tion of Listeria is mediated by the Met receptor tyrosine kinase . Cell . 103 : 501 – 510 . Sherman , L . S . , T . A . Rizvi , S . Karyala , and N . Ratner . 2000 . CD44 enhances neu - regulin signaling by Schwann cells . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1071 – 1084 . Tzahar , E . , H . Waterman , X . Chen , G . Levkowitz , D . Karunagaran , S . Lavi , B . J . Ratzkin , and Y . Yarden . 1996 . A hierarchical network of interreceptor inter - actions determines signal transduction by Neu differentiation factor / neureg - ulin and epidermal growth factor . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 : 5276 – 5287 . Yarden , Y . , and M . X . Sliwkowski . 2001 . Untangling the ErbB signalling network . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 127 – 137 .