1044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , MAN , AND CYBERNETICS—PART B : CYBERNETICS , VOL . 36 , NO . 5 , OCTOBER 2006 Design and Control of an IPMC Wormlike Robot Paolo Arena , Senior Member , IEEE , Claudia Bonomo , Luigi Fortuna , Fellow , IEEE , Mattia Frasca , Member , IEEE , and Salvatore Graziani , Member , IEEE Abstract —This paper presents an innovative wormlike robot controlled by cellular neural networks ( CNNs ) and made of an ionic polymer – metal composite ( IPMC ) self - actuated skeleton . The IPMC actuators , from which it is made of , are new materials that behave similarly to biological muscles . The idea that inspired the work is the possibility of using IPMCs to design autonomous moving structures . CNNs have already demonstrated their power - fulness as new structures for bio - inspired locomotion generation and control . The control scheme for the proposed IPMC moving structure is based on CNNs . The wormlike robot is totally made of IPMCs , and each actuator has to carry its own weight . All the actuators are connected together without using any other addi - tional part , thereby constituting the robot structure itself . Worm locomotion is performed by bending the actuators sequentially from “tail” to “head , ” imitating the traveling wave observed in real - world undulatory locomotion . The activation signals are gen - erated by a CNN . In the authors’ opinion , the proposed strategy represents a promising solution in the ﬁeld of autonomous and light structures that are capable of reconﬁguring and moving in line with spatial – temporal dynamics generated by CNNs . Index Terms —Cellular neural networks ( CNNs ) , smart actua - tors , undulatory locomotion , wormlike robot . I . I NTRODUCTION V ERY OFTEN , biomimetic projects ( i . e . , robots with a mechanical design inspired by animals ) remain incom - plete or too far from the real world . This is because of the large gap between the actuator structure , the materials used to actually manufacture the robots in traditional applications , and the structures and the materials involved in biological structures ( such as muscles , ﬂaps , living tissues , etc . ) . On the other hand , biomimetic devices are appealing in a number of robotic applications where biologically compatible materials are required ( for example in biomedical prostheses ) , or where soft motion is recommended . Hence , a growing interest in new materials offering the possibility of simultaneous low weight and high performance has been registered in the last decades . As a consequence , moving from hard ( hard materials , hard actuators that impose rigid movements ) to soft technology , in which both materials and movements are similar to the real world , seems to be a promising solution [ 1 ] . Until now , this evolution has not been within reach because of the lack of appropriate technology . The Manuscript received September 17 , 2004 ; revised November 16 , 2005 , and February 3 , 2006 . This work was supported in part by the European Union under the Project ISAMCO FP6 - 505275 - 1 and in part by the Min - istero dell’Istruzione , dell’Università e della Ricerca under PRIN Project 2005097521 . This paper was recommended by Associate Editor T . H . Lee . The authors are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica Elettronica e dei Sistemi , Facoltà di Ingegneria , Università Degli Studi di Catania , 95125 Catania , Italy ( e - mail : cbonomo @ diees . unict . it ) . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / TSMCB . 2006 . 873188 recent discovery of smart materials ( such as shape memory alloys ( SMA ) , soft polymers , electro - active ceramics ) , which develop mechanical reaction if subjected to adequate stimuli or , on the contrary , which produce electrical signals if mechan - ically deformed , has led to their being used as actuators sensors for both biomimetic applications and traditional robotics . Two examples of robots actuated by using SMAs are the lobster robot [ 2 ] and the lamprey robot [ 3 ] , while an autonomous microrobot based on piezoelectric actuators is illustrated in [ 4 ] . Among the smart materials available , the electro - active poly - mers ( EAPs ) , which are members of the Soft Polymer class , seem to ﬁt nicely in the constraints of robotics because they react mechanically when stimulated by an electrical signal and vice versa . Some devices and bio - inspired robots using these materials as actuators have already been produced [ 5 ] . EAPs are classiﬁed in two different groups : electronic or dry and ionic or wet [ 5 ] . Both have a similar working mode but a different activation voltage and frequency response . Their deformation exceeds the one of the stiff electro - active ceramics by up to two orders of magnitude ; they also turn out to be better than the SMAs both in their frequency response and elasticity [ 5 ] . EAPs prove to be attractive because of their low cost and their capability of emulating biological muscles ; this is the reason why they have been named “artiﬁcial muscles” [ 6 ] . Ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMCs ) belong to the class of wet EAPs . They are made of an ionic polymer membrane covered on both sides with a noble metal , which makes an elec - tric connection of the polymer with the conditioning circuitry possible . IPMCs can operate with low - voltage signals , which are easily generated by very simple circuits . Moreover , they are very light , and the actuation force they develop , even though rather weak , is enough to sustain their own weight . At the present state of the art , the potentiality of IPMCs is strongly limited by the poor knowledge of their chemical and physical structure , and of the activation processes and the parameters that control both the force and the deformation generated by them [ 7 ] . Because of the aforementioned advantages , researchers have made great efforts to ﬁnd both theoretical results and sound applications of IPMCs . In this paper , the authors have been involved in the production of a system where the actuators have to carry their own load ; a wormlike structure has been deemed adequate to demonstrate the effectiveness of the chosen approach . The structure of the wormlike robot consists of several actuators , where each actuator is a thin IPMC strip : therefore , both the robot skeleton and its actuators are made up of IPMCs . Such a structure , together with the adoption of cellular neural networks ( CNNs ) to control it , makes the reproduction of 1083 - 4419 / $ 20 . 00 © 2006 IEEE ARENA et al . : DESIGN AND CONTROL OF AN IPMC WORMLIKE ROBOT 1045 undulatory locomotion , typical of worms , possible . The activa - tion signals , generated by the CNN , propagate from the last to the ﬁrst actuator . CNNs , in fact , provide an analog approach for the implementation of the locomotion control system of robots with many controlled joints . In particular , the approach is based on the generation of autowaves , which can be considered as the electrical analogous of neural waves for locomotion control in the nervous system of animals . Autowaves are nonlinear waves propagating in the CNN circuit , which is directly connected to the motion actuators in such a way that the autowaves generate an actuation pattern capable of moving the wormlike structure in a proper manner . The use of an analog approach combined with a self - actuating structure is the main focus of this paper . The rest of this paper is organized as follows . Section II is dedicated to a brief explanation of the IPMC - actuator working mode . Section III is focused on the wormlike robot design and realization . Section IV describes the control scheme . Section V gives some relevant performance measurements of the robot , and Section VI concludes the paper . II . I ONIC P OLYMER – M ETAL C OMPOSITES ( IPMC ) Polymers or macromolecules are high - molecular - weight composites obtained from small molecules through a set of particular reactions of “polymerization . ” Nature offers many different macromolecular substances , such as cellulose , rubber , or many natural ﬁbers , which are very similar to the ones synthesized in a laboratory . Some polymers change their volume or shape under particu - lar conditions . This may be due to various causes : a variation in temperature , chemical changes in the environment , the applica - tion of magnetic ﬁelds , the exposure to light , and many others . EAPs deform if subjected to an electrical ﬁeld . Dry EAPs need high activation voltages ( larger than 100 V ) close to breakdown values , nevertheless , they can maintain deformation caused by dc voltages . On the contrary , wet EAPs are driven by signals in the range from few millivolts to few volts but they need to be kept wet during their use . Moreover , they do not maintain the deformation by having a dc voltage applied , and their frequency range goes from few millihertz to tens of hertz . Both types can bend , contract , or extend [ 8 ] . IPMCs belong to wet EAPs and are constituted by a poly - meric membrane with metallic electrodes deposed on both sides . Two kinds of polymer are typically used for the mem - brane : Naﬁon ( produced by DuPont , France ) and Flamion ( produced by Asahi Glass , Japan ) while the deposed metal is usually platinum . In 1992 , Oguro et al . [ 9 ] demonstrated that IPMCs have characteristics common to EAPs , and that the presence of metallic electrodes ampliﬁes their deformation thus making them suitable for utilization as motion actuators . A . General Considerations IPMCs are classiﬁed as smart materials . They have both actuator and sensor characteristics . They are generally cut in strips . If a dynamic electric ﬁeld is applied across the thickness of a strip , the latter undergoes an ample bending deformation ; in this sense , it can be used as an actuator . Vice versa , by bending a strip of IPMC , either quasi - statically or dynamically , a voltage arises between the two metallic electrodes . Hence , IPMCs can also work as motion sensors . Nevertheless , IPMCs can be cut in any shape and dimension , in particular , as microactuators and microsensors for microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) applications [ 10 ] . B . Structure and Working Mode The IPMCs used in this application are made up of a perﬂu - orinated ion exchange membrane ( PIEM ) covered by platinum on both sides to form the electrodes . The ionic polymer of the membrane is Naﬁon117 ( DuPont ) , of which the molecule has a structure expressed by the following formula : [ − ( CF 2 − CF 2 ) n − ( CF − CF 2 ) m − ] | O − CF − CF 2 − O − CF 2 − SO − 3 · · · M + | CF 3 ( 1 ) where M + is the positive ion ( cation ) which , as furnished by the farm , is H + ( Hydrogen ion ) , but it can be substituted by adequate chemical processing with Li + ( Lithium ion ) , Na + ( Sodium ion ) , etc . , to improve the performance of the sens - ing / acting devices [ 11 ] . Ionic polymers have inner ionizable groups that have the properties of dissociation in a variety of solvent media and movement in the molecular net generating a strong electric ﬁeld ( ∼ 10 10 V / m ) . The – SO − 3 group is the ﬁxed group in the polymeric matrix of Naﬁon while the cation is free to move . Cations and anions move in opposite directions when a voltage is applied to a simple electrolyte and , therefore , no energy is transferred from the molecular network to the solvent , and no molecule of the solvent is carried by the ions . Instead , in the polymeric membrane mentioned earlier on , the solvent can be parasitically carried by the free ions . When a voltage is applied across the thickness of the hydrated membrane , mobile cations move toward the cathode carrying water molecules with them [ 12 ] . An example is the case of the Lithium ion of which the hydrated volume is far bigger than either H + or Na + [ 13 ] . This is what makes it a preferable solution , as explained below . The described phenomenon is known as water pumping . The cathode area expands while the anode area contracts . Conse - quently , the polymer will bend toward the anode and , of course , the larger the number of parasitically carried water molecules , the higher the deformation effect . The effect of water pumping on the IPMC membrane is represented in Fig . 1 . Water pumping is not the only phenomenon involved in the bending deformation when the IPMC is subjected to an electric ﬁeld . Indeed , the two deposed metallic layers amplify the deformation by adding a Coulombian effect due to the inter - action of the charges . After deposition , the metallic ions scatter everywhere through the surface regions of the polymer because of the latter’s porous structure , and then they are reduced to their metallic atoms . The result is the formation of dendritic electrodes [ 11 ] schematically shown in Fig . 2 . 1046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , MAN , AND CYBERNETICS—PART B : CYBERNETICS , VOL . 36 , NO . 5 , OCTOBER 2006 Fig . 1 . Interaction of charges within the IPMC membrane . Fig . 2 . Platinum distribution after deposition on the Naﬁon membrane surface . An external voltage will produce the accumulation of oppo - site charges on the two electrodes . The charges will interact with ﬁxed anions in the polymeric bulk , as shown in Fig . 3 . It is interesting to note that the interaction will be attractive for one electrode and repulsive for the other . This effect is respon - sible for a further bending deformation due to the differential contraction – expansion of the strip’s external ﬁbers . Dendritic electrodes act as if the charges were concentrated at their ends . The interaction with ﬁxed and mobile ions of the network is only close to the upper and lower surfaces of the strip . Observation showed that under ac voltage , the membrane is capable of oscillating , while deformation depends on both the amplitude and the frequency of the input wave [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . When a constant voltage is applied , the gradient of water con - centration causes a back diffusion of the water molecules that , in turn , are responsible for the relaxation of the membrane and the production of a residual deformation by the Coulombian charge interactions at the electrode level . As a consequence , IPMCs are not able to maintain large constant deformations [ 5 ] . Water back diffusion is not the only cause of the membrane performance degradation over time . One must also consider that water tends to escape from the membrane both because of evap - oration and of water electrolysis . Continuous membrane hydra - tion has to be provided if constant performance is required . Fig . 3 . Interaction of charges within the IPMC membrane . C . IPMC - Actuator Modeling In order to use an IPMC strip as a motion actuator , it is necessary to have a model that relates the applied voltage to the deformation of the material . Due to this factor , the IPMC was modeled through a system having the voltage as its input and the deformation as its output . In order to point out the nonlinear relationship between the applied voltage and the IPMC absorbed current , in which the evidence is well known and reported in literature [ 30 ] , the sys - tem was split into two stages : the ﬁrst to transduce the applied voltage into the related current , and the second to convert this current into the macroscopic effect caused by it , that is , the IPMC angular deformation . The model was obtained by considering the strip in a cantilever conﬁguration with a mechanical constraint at the same end in which the voltage V was applied . The electrical stage , implemented through a non - linear circuit , results from the physics of the current terms that ﬂow through the IPMC , by adopting a gray - box approach , as shown in [ 31 ] . The electromechanical stage , here represented by a transfer function with three poles and two zeros , is derived from empirical results . Several surveys have been acquired in order to identify the model parameters . These surveys have been obtained at different amplitudes and frequencies of the applied voltage ; the model parameters depend on the strip dimensions , the water content , and the production procedure . In a typical case study ( i . e . , strip dimensions used for the robot single segment actuator ) , the transfer function from applied voltage to the current output is G ( s ) = 0 . 1968 s 2 + 4 . 208 s − 4 . 503 · 10 4 s 3 + 13 . 07 s 2 + 4 . 565 · 10 4 s + 5 . 52 · 10 4 . ( 2 ) Once the relation between voltage and deformation is ob - tained , it is possible to predict how the actuator will change its shape as a function of the input signal . III . D ESIGN OF THE IPMC A CTUATED W ORMLIKE R OBOT Undulatory locomotion is deﬁned as the process of generat - ing net displacements of a robotic structure via the coupling of internal deformations and continuous interaction between the robot and its environment [ 17 ] . This kind of locomotion is ARENA et al . : DESIGN AND CONTROL OF AN IPMC WORMLIKE ROBOT 1047 Fig . 4 . Scheme of the IPMC worm . used by very different animal species ( worms , snakes , ﬁsh ) in a huge variety of environments because of the high adaptability to terrains often inaccessible through other kinds of motion . This feature makes undulatory motion appealing also in robotics . Several kinds of undulatory locomotion are adopted in nature : for example , snakes use bending waves associated with the asymmetric friction of their scales to crawl on the plane ( in this case , the bending wave propagates from the head to the tail ) . Worms crawl by peristalsis , sending waves , which travel along the body of the worm and which lengthen and shorten the body segments [ 18 ] . In the case of earthworms , the peristaltic wave also travels from the head to the tail , whereas other worms such as Polyphysia have waves of contraction traveling from the tail to the head [ 18 ] . Other worms ( nematodes like the C . Elegans [ 19 ] ) have locomotion patterns resembling the typical motion of a snake , although the mechanisms used to generate the thrust in snakes and nematodes are very different . The design of the IPMC wormlike robot is based on the locomotion mechanism of the worm called Polyphysia . The main advantage of using IPMC materials as actuators for the design of small and light robots is that they offer low weight and high deformation and , even if the force exerted by these materials is not high , it is sufﬁcient to bear the load of their own weight . Hence , these materials can be used to control the locomotion of an autonomous microrobot in which the actuators make up the robot structure itself . The basic idea underlying the design of the structure is the use of several actuating IPMC segments connected to - gether . The assembly of this structure poses some technological problems . Connecting different IPMC strips is not practically pursuable because of the difﬁculty in creating joints of small dimensions without generating discontinuity along the worm body . A very efﬁcient solution is producing an IPMC strip where the metal is selectively deposed in order to accom - plish the different actuating segments in a unique polymeric substrate , as shown in Fig . 4 . This process is called the pattern - plating method , and requires a speciﬁc step in polymer produc - tion . Alternatively , the discontinuity in the metal layer can be achieved by carefully removing the metal of the homogeneous metallization on the polymer by using sandblasting . This solu - tion , even though less efﬁcient than the pattern - plating method , has revealed to be suitable for our application . Another technological issue is related to the electrical wiring of the IPMC segments . Because of its chemical Teﬂonlike structure [ 16 ] , the IPMC surface has very good antiadherent properties that make it almost impossible to have separate actuators pasted together . For the same reason , it is difﬁcult for external wires to make contact with the polymer : a conductive glue cannot be used and a common solder risks melting the membrane . However , external contacts can be wired by using a microsolder , avoiding excessive heating of the used polymer surface . Even here , the best solution would be to insert the conductive wires during the production process . The ﬁnal prototype of the wormlike robot consists of a unique IPMC substrate ( 10 . 5 cm long ) , divided in four actuating segments . Very thin copper wires are used . The IPMC structure weighs 0 . 3 g . IV . C ONTROL S CHEME The control system of this structure has been designed to provide the robot with signals that are suitable for undulatory locomotion . Even though more than one hypotheses have been formulated to explain the neural control of undulatory locomo - tion [ 19 ] , central pattern generators ( CPGs ) are an appropriate approach to accomplish such control . The control scheme is based on the utilization of CNNs to generate CPGs for artiﬁcial locomotion control [ 20 ] . This approach was successfully applied to several bio - inspired ro - bots [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] . In this control scheme , each CNN cell is a nonlinear oscillator controlling an actuator of the motion structure and connected with the other oscillators . The key point of the approach is that the locomotion pattern is reﬂected by the sequence of the signals generated in the artiﬁcial CPG . Since each CNN cell controls one actuator of the locomotion structure , it is referred to as a motor neuron of the artiﬁcial CPG . In animals and robots , the legs or other motion effectors are rhythmically moved in order to generate typical stereo - typed locomotion patterns . To this end , each artiﬁcial CPG cell is designed to provide periodic outputs by selecting its parameters so that a limit cycle behavior is obtained . As far as the locomotion pattern is concerned , this depends on how the CPG cells are connected . Connections between the CPG cells determine which synchronization pattern emerges at a CPG structure level . Since , in the case of two synchronized CPG cells , the movements of the corresponding actuators are also synchronized ; choosing the connections among CPG cells allows us to ﬁx a given locomotion pattern . The guidelines for the choice of the connections among CPG cells are described in detail in [ 20 ] . We will now focus on the particular locomotion pattern required in undulatory locomotion . In inchworm undulatory locomotion , a traveling wave prop - agates from the tail to the head of the body , which results in successive bending of the muscles of the segments from the tail to the head . In order to achieve this locomotion pattern , a traveling wave propagating from the CNN cell associated with the last ( tail ) segment toward the cell associated with the ﬁrst ( head ) segment should be obtained . This is exactly what occurs when a ringlike CNN structure is chosen . A ringlike structure is an array of n neurons with periodic boundary conditions , in which each neuron is connected to its nearest neighbor with an inhibitory synapse ( its mathematical model will be deﬁned later ) in a well - deﬁned direction , as shown in Fig . 5 . Hence , assuming that every cell ( motor neuron ) in the ring activates a single actuator ( muscle ) in the locomotion system , a structure 1048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , MAN , AND CYBERNETICS—PART B : CYBERNETICS , VOL . 36 , NO . 5 , OCTOBER 2006 Fig . 5 . Schematic representation of a ringlike CNN . Each circle represents a CNN cell ; arrows indicate inhibitory connections . with n actuators needs a CPG with a number of cells equal to the number of actuators . The cells of the ring can then be connected to the actuators that , as a result of the wave propagation along the CNN , will move in an undulatory way . The mathematical model of the CNN - based CPG is repre - sented by the following equations describing the dynamics of each second - order cell of the ring   dx ( i ) 1 dt = k (cid:4) − x ( i ) 1 + ( 1 + µ ) y ( i ) 1 − sy ( i ) 2 + i 1 + εy ( i + 1 ) 1 (cid:5) dx ( i ) 2 dt = k (cid:4) − x ( i ) 2 + ( 1 + µ ) y ( i ) 2 + sy ( i ) 1 + i 2 (cid:5) ( 3 ) where the nonlinearity is given by y ( i ) 1 , 2 = 0 . 5 (cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) x ( i ) 1 , 2 + 1 (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) − (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) x ( i ) 1 , 2 − 1 (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5) ( 4 ) and where x ( i ) 1 and x ( i ) 2 are the state variables of the i th cell , and y ( i ) 1 and y ( i ) 2 are the outputs where i = 1 , 2 , . . . , n . These state variables represent an abstraction of the physical variables used in mathematical models of neurons , which in turn typically represent membrane potential voltage and ionic channel current . It is important to note that the cell outputs are obtained by saturating the corresponding state variables to the values ± 1 . Each circle in Fig . 5 represents a nonlinear oscillator as in the ( 3 ) . The inhibitory synapse ( represented by an arrow in Fig . 5 ) corresponds to the term εy ( i + 1 ) 1 in the ( 3 ) . The parameters are chosen according to µ = 0 . 5 , s = 1 , ε = − 0 . 6 , i 1 = − 0 . 3 , i 2 = 0 . 3 , which guarantee a stable limit cycle [ 21 ] . Periodic boundary conditions have been assumed y ( n + 1 ) 1 , 2 = y ( 1 ) 1 , 2 . ( 5 ) The parameter k in ( 3 ) is a time - scale factor that has been chosen in order to have an oscillation frequency in the range of hundreds of millihertz ( i . e . , k = 5 ) , suitable for the IPMC control . The worm structure presented in Section III is made of four segments , thus , a ring of four nonlinear oscillators should be Fig . 6 . High - level control scheme shows how the signals generated by the CPG are used to control the actuators . needed to control the robot . However , in view of a miniatur - ization of the whole control system , a simpliﬁcation has been introduced by using a smaller number of nonlinear oscillators . Driven by the idea of using the CNN chip presented in [ 23 ] , a simple CPG consisting of two mutually inhibited oscillators has been considered . Since the two mutually inhibited CPG cells synchronize in out - of - phase ( i . e . , with a time lag of T / 2 , where T is the oscillation period ) and the dynamics of the CPG cell is such that x 2 has a time lag of T / 4 with respect to x 1 , such a CPG provides four signals with constant time lag equal to T / 4 , as required by the application . As a consequence , for this particular case study , the hypothesis previously mentioned , where one cell controls one actuator , can be discarded and each cell is used to control two actuators ( one for each state variable ) . The high - level control scheme that shows how the signals generated by the CPG are used is presented in Fig . 6 . A control over the four IPMC segments is accomplished by connecting the four actuators ( from the tail to the head ) with the signals x ( 1 ) 1 , x ( 1 ) 2 , x ( 2 ) 1 , and x ( 2 ) 2 , respectively . As the variable x ( i ) 2 has a phase lag of about 90 ◦ with respect to x ( i ) 1 and the variables x ( 1 ) 1 and x ( 2 ) 1 are out - of - phase , the desired activation sequence can be achieved . The parameters in ( 3 ) have been chosen as follows : n = 2 , ε = − 0 . 4 , and k = 5 . It is worth mentioning that in the very large scale integration ( VLSI ) CNN - based chip , [ 23 ] the parameter k can be varied and , thus , this chip is able to provide signals with the frequency required by the application . Nevertheless , if a structure made up of more than four segments is built , the general approach should be adopted . The CPG has been implemented by using a CNN reconﬁg - urable digital architecture . An interfacing stage is necessary in order to convert the digital output signals generated by this CNN into analog power signals , which then activate the IPMC strips . The analog signals are wired to the actuators as in Fig . 4 and represent the voltage input of the actuators . The control of the deformation of the IPMC actuators has been reached . The wave in a CNN cell causes the deformation of the correspond - ing actuator , thus producing the wavelike body shape assumed by the worm robot . The locomotion is , therefore , performed by bending each actuator sequentially from the “tail” to the “head . ” In this way , the output of the CNN - based CPG consists of patterns of actuator ( muscle ) excitation similar to those in the biological case . ARENA et al . : DESIGN AND CONTROL OF AN IPMC WORMLIKE ROBOT 1049 Fig . 7 . Experimental setup for the test of the IPMC robot . The CNN - based CPG is simulated on the PC ; the digital outputs are then converted by a DAC block into analog signals . These are then processed by TDA2030 ( current buffers in standard conﬁguration ) in order to generate proper control signals . Fig . 8 . State variables of the CNN - based CPG used to control the IPMC robot . ( Top to bottom ) x ( 1 ) 1 , x ( 1 ) 2 , x ( 2 ) 1 , and x ( 2 ) 2 . Horizontal axis units are seconds ; vertical axis units are voltages . Signals have been scaled to take the ampliﬁcation of the power board stage into account so that they represent the signals effectively sent to the IPMC robot . V . E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS The experimental setup to test the IPMC worm functionality is shown in Fig . 7 . The control scheme has been implemented on a PC . A software environment for the simulation of CNN - based CPGs with conﬁgurable parameters has been designed and used to drive the LPT port of the PC . An I2C bus has been used to allow communication between the PC and the IPMC actuators . The CNN outputs of the digital architecture carried out on the PC are then converted into analog signals by a digital - to - analog converter ( DAC ) block . This block uses MAX517 DACs . The MAX517 device is directly interfaced with the I2C bus . The outputs of the DAC block are analog signals that need to be processed by a power board made up of a series of current ampliﬁers . Operational ampliﬁers ( TDA2030 ) have been used . This power block is needed since the IPMC actuators have very low input impedances ( the order of magnitude being 4 Ω ) . Experimental tests have been performed on several structures differing in the number of actuators used . The best performance has been obtained by using a worm robot consisting of four IPMC segments . Wires have been connected in the central part of each actuator in order to obtain symmetrical bending and a force that is uniformly distributed along each segment . In this way , every actuator can lift its own weight by developing a force on its extreme ends . The experimental setup provides the possibility of tracking the behavior of each state variable of the dynamical control system visualized on the graphic interface of the CNN sim - ulator . Moreover , each signal has been measured and moni - tored by an oscilloscope where the probe is connected to the power ampliﬁer output . The resulting activation peak - to - peak voltage amplitude is 8 V at a frequency of 300 mHz . Fig . 8 shows the trends of the state variables of the CNN - based CPG . One can observe that they have a phase lag of 90 ◦ , thus , each actuator is controlled in such a way that its maximum deformation ( corresponding to the peak in the waveform of its control signal ) occurs after T / 4 from the maximum defor - mation of the previous actuator , where T is the period of the control signal . In each of the performed experiments , the worm robot fol - lows quite a regular trajectory . One of these experiments is illustrated in Fig . 9 , where several frames of a video included in our webpage [ 24 ] are shown . In the following paragraph , the dynamics of each actuator and of the wormlike robot as a whole are described with the help of a schematic illustration of the locomotion mechanism , where the deformations of the actuators are emphasized to furnish a better explanation of this process . The scheme is shown in Fig . 10 , where the motion direction is the x axis , and a sequence of the effects of the contraction wave propagation is reported . The robot has been schematized as a set of ﬁve points of mass connected by IPMC actuators . When each actuator is subjected to the input signal ( applied at the center of the segment ) , it 1050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , MAN , AND CYBERNETICS—PART B : CYBERNETICS , VOL . 36 , NO . 5 , OCTOBER 2006 Fig . 9 . Sequence of frames illustrating the trajectory of the IPMC wormlike robot . The related video is available online [ 24 ] . Fig . 10 . Schematic illustration of the locomotion mechanism of the wormlike robot . bends . The motion of the whole structure is achieved through the progressive bending of the IPMC actuators . Let the robot start from the initial conﬁguration labeled A , and let us indicate with P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P 5 ( numbered from head to tail ) the points of mass . The ﬁrst segment to be bent is the tail segment . The net displacement of point of mass P 5 compared to that of point P 4 is greater , since P 4 is connected to P 3 , while P 5 is free to move . Thus , as shown in Fig . 10 , B can be assumed that only P 5 moves . In this way symmetry breaking ( a key mechanism of undulatory locomotion [ 25 ] ) is achieved , allowing the robot to move in one direction . By repeating these Fig . 11 . Starting and ﬁnal positions for a typical trajectory of the IPMC wormlike robot . operations for the other points of mass , the sequence of frames , shown in Fig . 10 , is obtained . Starting and ﬁnal positions of the robot trajectory in the experiment discussed earlier are shown in Fig . 11 , where the starting position is numbered as A . The IPMC worm robot followed the trajectory from A to B for a total distance of 16 mm in 112 s , thus , it moved with an average speed of v = 0 . 14 mm / s . This value is comparable to the average speed reported in [ 26 ] ( v = 0 . 11 / 0 . 22 mm / s ) , in which an artiﬁcial earthworm is developed . The robot makes use of SMA actuators for a biologically inspired design . Other robotic projects based on undulatory locomotion [ 27 ] have quite different principles and designs . For instance , Hirose’s robots [ 28 ] are based on snakelike locomotion and make use of electrical motors . These robots are at an advanced stage of development and turn out to be very efﬁcient ; however , the investigation of smart materials , ARENA et al . : DESIGN AND CONTROL OF AN IPMC WORMLIKE ROBOT 1051 such as IPMC or SMA [ 26 ] , has several interesting points . In fact , although still at an early stage of development , it is evident that the use of IPMC actuators for undulatory locomotion can offer several beneﬁts ( for a comparison of the proper - ties of IPMC with other smart materials , see also [ 32 ] ) : low cost , low electrical actuation voltages ( in our case , the peak - to - peak voltage amplitude is 8 V ) , low power consumptions , easy implementation , low weight ( the IPMC structure weighs 0 . 3 g ) , and small size ( see Fig . 4 ) . The limits of the IPMC robot are mainly due to technological aspects related to the relatively new state of the art of the materials used and , thus , several factors could improve the performance of the IPMC wormlike robot . We are conﬁdent that the IPMC wormlike robot will also beneﬁt from technological improvements in the production procedure . Another key factor that could improve the performance of the robot is the use of asymmetric friction . This principle can also be found in other undulatory locomotion projects : for instance , Hirose’s work [ 28 ] , [ 29 ] illustrated that the key property of the snakelike locomotion is the difference in the friction coefﬁcients for the tangential and the normal directions with respect to the body . Hirose designed robots making use of wheels to implement this principle ; asymmetric friction coefﬁcients are also used in the SMA artiﬁcial earthworm [ 26 ] . VI . C ONCLUSION This paper aimed at illustrating the design of a wormlike robot . The robot structure is based on IPMCs , which make up both the skeleton of the wormlike robot and its actuation mechanism . Two main characteristics of IPMCs , low weight and high deformation when controlled by low - voltage signals , made them an advantageous choice . The level of biological inspiration is not limited to the similarity of the features of these materials with those of living muscles but it extends to the circuitry designed for locomotion control . Indeed , a CPG , as in many animals with undulatory locomotion , is used as a control system . This CPG is implemented by using CNNs , while undulatory locomotion is achieved by using a CNN autowave - based control . The cells of the CPG , namely second - order CNN circuits , are connected in a ringlike structure , which is self - organized in order to generate a suitable wave for the im - plementation of undulatory locomotion . CNNs are particularly efﬁcient in this case , since they provide the electrical signals needed to activate the IPMCs : in fact , on the basis of how undu - latory locomotion is accomplished in nature and , thus , how the robotic structure should move , the wave - based analog approach proves to be an efﬁcient one since it is capable of accomplishing the mapping of the motion structure and the control system . The overall design of the wormlike robot is the result of the synergic use of an IPMC - based self - actuating structure and of an autowave control by CNNs . This approach thus allowed us to come up with an easy - to - implement low - cost motion system . The use of an analog approach combined to a self - actuating structure is fundamental in the investigation of the possibility of integrating the structure , the actuation mechanism , and the control system . Future work will be directed toward these innovative issues . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] D . Voth , “Nature’s guide to robot design , ” IEEE Intell . Syst . , vol . 17 , no . 6 , pp . 4 – 6 , Nov . / Dec . 2002 . [ 2 ] J . Ayers , “A conservative biomimetic control architecture for autonomous underwater robots , ” in Neurotechnology for Biomimetic Robots , J . Ayers , L . Davis , and A . Rudolph , Eds . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2002 , pp . 241 – 259 . [ 3 ] C . Wilbur , W . Vorus , Y . Cao , and S . N . Currie , “A lamprey - based un - dulatory vehicle , ” in Neurotechnology for Biomimetic Robots , J . Ayers , J . L . Davis , and A . Rudolph , Eds . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2002 , pp . 285 – 296 . [ 4 ] G . Muscato , “The collective behavior of piezoelectric walking micro - robots , ” Intell . Autom . Soft Comput . , vol . 10 , no . 4 , pp . 267 – 276 , 2004 . [ 5 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , Electro - Active Polymer ( EAP ) Actuators as Artiﬁcial Muscles . Bellingham , WA : SPIE , 2001 . Topic 1 . [ 6 ] M . Shahinpoor , “Micro - electro - mechanics of ionic polymer gels as elec - trically controllable artiﬁcial muscles , ” J . Intell . Mater . Syst . Struct . , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 307 – 314 , 1995 . [ 7 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , “Electro - active polymers as artiﬁcial muscles— Capabilities , potentials and challenges , ” in Handbook on Biomimetics , Y . Osada , Ed . Peachtree City , GA : NTS Inc . , Aug . 2000 , ch . 8 , sec . 11 . Motion , paper 134 . [ 8 ] —— , “Electroactive polymers as artiﬁcial muscles—Reality and chal - lenges , ” presented at the Proc . 42nd AIAA Struct . SDM Conf . , Apr . 16 – 19 , 2001 , Conf . Paper No . 2001 - 1492 . [ 9 ] K . Oguro , Y . Kawami , and H . Takenaka , “Bending of an ion - conducting polymer ﬁlm – electrode composite by an electric stimulus at low voltage , ” Trans . J . Micromachine Soc . , vol . 5 , pp . 27 – 30 , 1992 . [ 10 ] S . Tung , S . R . Witherspoon , L . A . Roe , A . Silano , D . P . Maynard , and N . Ferraro , “A MEMS - based ﬂexible sensor and actuator system for space inﬂatable structures , ” Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 10 , no . 6 , pp . 1230 – 1239 , 2001 . [ 11 ] Y . Abe , A . Mochizuki , T . Kawashima , S . Yamashita , K . Asaka , and K . Oguro , “Effect on bending behavior of counter cation species in perﬂuorinated sulfonated membrane – platinum composite , ” Polym . Adv . Technol . , vol . 9 , no . 8 , pp . 520 – 526 , 1998 . [ 12 ] M . Shahinpoor , Y . Bar - Cohen , J . O . Simpson , and J . Smith , “Ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMC ) as biomimetic sensors , actuators and artiﬁcial muscle—A review , ” Int . J . Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 7 , no . 6 , pp . 15 – 30 , 1998 . [ 13 ] K . J . Kim and M . Shahinpoor , “Ionic polymer – metal composites : II . Manufacturing techniques , ” Int . J . Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 12 , no . 1 , pp . 65 – 79 , 2003 . [ 14 ] S . Nemat - Nasser , “Micromechanics of actuation of ionic polymer – metal composites , ” J . Appl . Phys . , vol . 92 , no . 5 , pp . 2899 – 2915 , Sep . 2002 . [ 15 ] M . Shahinpoor and K . J . Kim , “Ionic polymer – metal composites : I . Fun - damentals , ” Int . J . Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 10 , no . 4 , pp . 819 – 833 , 2001 . [ 16 ] —— , “The effect of surface - electrode resistance on the performance of ionic polymer – metal composite ( IPMC ) artiﬁcial muscles , ” Smart Mater . Struct . J . , vol . 9 , no . 4 , pp . 543 – 551 , 2000 . [ 17 ] J . P . Ostrowski and J . W . Burdick , “The geometric mechanics of undula - tory robotic locomotion , ” Int . J . Robot . Res . , vol . 17 , no . 7 , pp . 683 – 701 , 1998 . [ 18 ] R . M . Alexander , Principles of Animal Locomotion . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press , 2003 . [ 19 ] E . Niebur and P . Erdös , “Theory of the locomotion of Nematodes : Dy - namics of undulatory progression on a solid surface , ” Biophys . J . , vol . 60 , pp . 1132 – 1146 , 1991 . [ 20 ] P . Arena , L . Fortuna , and M . Frasca , “Multi - template approach to realize central pattern generators for artiﬁcial locomotion control , ” Int . J . Circuit Theory Appl . , vol . 30 , no . 4 , pp . 441 – 458 , Apr . 2002 . [ 21 ] P . Arena , L . Fortuna , and M . Branciforte , “Reaction - diffusion CNN algo - rithms to generate and control artiﬁcial locomotion , ” IEEE Trans . Circuits Syst . I , Fundam . Theory Appl . , vol . 46 , no . 2 , pp . 253 – 260 , Feb . 1999 . [ 22 ] P . Arena , L . Fortuna , and M . Frasca , “Attitude control in walking hexapod robots : An analogic spatio - temporal approach , ” Int . J . Circuit Theory Appl . , vol . 30 , no . 2 / 3 , pp . 349 – 362 , 2002 . [ 23 ] P . Arena , L . Fortuna , M . Frasca , and L . Patané , “A CNN - based chip for robot locomotion control , ” IEEE Trans . Circuits Syst . I , Reg . Papers , vol . 52 , no . 9 , pp . 1862 – 1871 , Sep . 2005 . [ 24 ] Webpage of bio - inspired robotics at the DIEES Laboratory , University of Catania . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . scg . dees . unict . it / activities / biorobotics / movie . htm [ 25 ] L . Mahadevan , S . Daniel , and M . K . Chaudhury , “Biomimetic ratcheting motion of a soft , slender , sessile gel , ” Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . US , vol . 101 , no . 1 , pp . 23 – 26 , Jan . 6 , 2004 . 1052 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS , MAN , AND CYBERNETICS—PART B : CYBERNETICS , VOL . 36 , NO . 5 , OCTOBER 2006 [ 26 ] A . Menciassi , S . Gorini , G . Pernorio , and P . Dario , “A SMA actuated artiﬁcial earthworm , ” in Proc . IEEE ICRA , New Orleans , LA , 2004 , pp . 3282 – 3287 . [ 27 ] M . Saito , M . Fukaya , and T . Iwasaki , “Serpentine locomotion with robotic snakes , ” IEEE Control Syst . Mag . , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 64 – 81 , Feb . 2002 . [ 28 ] S . Hirose , Biologically Inspired Robots ( Snake - like Locomotor and Manipulator ) . London , U . K . : Oxford Univ . Press , 1993 . [ 29 ] S . Hirose and A . Morishima , “Design and control of a mobile robot with an articulated body , ” Int . J . Robot . Res . , vol . 9 , no . 2 , pp . 99 – 114 , 1990 . [ 30 ] S . Leary and Y . Bar - Cohen , “Electrical impedance of ionic polymer – metal composites , ” presented at the SPIE 6th Annu . Int . Symp . Smart Structures Materials , Newport Beach , CA , Mar . 1999 , Paper 3669 - 09 . [ 31 ] C . Bonomo , L . Fortuna , S . Graziani , and D . Mazza , “An electric circuit to model ionic polymer – metal composite as actuator , ” in Proc . ISCAS , 2004 , pp . IV - 864 – IV - 867 . [ 32 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , T . Xue , M . Shahinpoor , J . O . Simpson , and J . Smith , “Low - mass muscle actuators using electroactive polymers ( EAP ) , ” presented at the SPIE 5th Annu . Int . Symp . Smart Structures Materials , San Diego , CA , Mar . 1 – 5 1998 , Paper No . 3324 – 32 . . Paolo Arena ( S’93 – M’97 – SM’01 ) received the degree in electronic engineering and the Ph . D . de - gree in electrical engineering from the Univer - sity of Catania , Catania , Italy , in 1990 and 1994 , respectively . He is currently an Associate Professor in system theory . He has published more than 130 technical papers , six books , and several international patents . His research interests include adaptive and learning systems , nonlinear systems , neural networks , cellular neural networks , collective behavior in living , and artiﬁcial neural structures and cognitive systems . Dr . Arena has served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS —P ART I . Claudia Bonomo was born in Palermo , Italy , in 1973 . She received the B . S . and Ph . D . degrees in electronics engineering from the University of Cata - nia , Catania , Italy , in 2001 and 2004 , respectively . Currently , she is a Research Associate at the Uni - versity of Catania . Her scientiﬁc interests include nonlinear systems , new materials for sensors and actuators , ionic polymer – metal composites ( IPMCs ) , and bio - inspired robotics . Luigi Fortuna ( M’90 – SM’99 – F’00 ) graduated from the University of Catania , Catania , Italy , in electrical engineering in 1977 . He has been a Full Professor in system theory at the University of Catania , since 1994 . He has published more than 350 technical papers and is coauthor of seven books , in which one is CNNs ( Springer , 1999 ) . He holds several U . S . patents . His scientiﬁc interests include nonlinear science and complexity , chaos , and CNNs with applications in bioengineering . Mattia Frasca ( S’01 – M’03 ) was born in Siracusa , Italy , in 1976 . He received the B . S . degree in elec - tronics engineering and the Ph . D . degree in elec - tronics and automation engineering from the Uni - versity of Catania , Catania , Italy , in 2000 and 2003 , respectively . Currently , he is a Research Associate at the Uni - versity of Catania . His scientiﬁc interests include nonlinear systems and chaos , CNNs , complex sys - tems , and bio - inspired robotics . He is coauthor of one research monograph on locomotion control of bio - inspired robots . Salvatore Graziani ( S’93 – M’95 ) received the M . S . degree in electronic engineering and the Ph . D . de - gree in electrical engineering from the Università degli Studi di Catania , Catania , Italy , in 1990 and 1994 , respectively . Since 1990 , he has been with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica , Elettrica e dei Sistemi , Uni - versità di Catania , where he is an Associate Pro - fessor in electric and electronic measurement and instrumentation . His primary research interests are in the ﬁeld of sensors and actuators , signal processing , multisensor data fusion , neural networks , and smart sensors . He has coauthored several scientiﬁc papers and one book .