1 Cortactin Promotes Migration and PDGF - induced Actin Reorganization by Signaling to Rho - GTPases Frank P . L . Lai ,  # Malgorzata Szczodrak ,  † J . Margit Oelkers ,  † Markus Ladwein ,  Filippo Acconcia , ‡ @ Stefanie Benesch , § Sonja Auinger , § Jan Faix , ║ J . Victor Small , § Simona Polo , ‡ Theresia E . B . Stradal , ¶ and Klemens Rottner   Cytoskeleton Dynamics Group , ¶ Signalling and Motility Group , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research , Inhoffen Straße 7 , D - 38124 Braunschweig , Germany ; ‡ IFOM Foundation , The FIRC Institute for Molecular Oncology , Via Adamello 16 , 20139 Milan , Italy ; § Institute of Molecular Biotechnology , Austrian Academy of Sciences , Dr . Bohr Gasse 3 , A - 1030 Vienna , Austria ; ║ Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Hannover Medical School , Carl - Neuberg - Straße 1 , D - 30625 Hannover , Germany ; # present address : Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology , Institute of Medical Biology , 8A Biomedical Grove , # 06 - 06 Immunos , Singapore 138648 ; @ present address : Department of Biology , University ROMA TRE , Viale G . Marconi 446 , I - 00146 , Rome , Italy . † M . S . and J . M . O . contributed equally to this work Address correspondence to : Klemens Rottner Phone : + 49 - 531 - 6181 - 3070 Fax : + 49 - 531 - 6181 - 3099 Email : klemens . rottner @ helmholtz - hzi . de Keywords : actin cytoskeleton , cortactin , Arp2 / 3 - complex , Rac , Cdc42 , lamellipodium , cell migration , endocytosis Running Head : Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2009 / 05 / 20 / E08 - 12 - 1180 . DC1 Supplemental Material can be found at : 2 Dynamic actin rearrangements are initiated and maintained by actin filament nucleators , including the Arp2 / 3 - complex . This protein assembly is activated in vitro by distinct nucleation promoting factors such as WASP / Scar family proteins or cortactin , but the relative in vivo functions of each of them remain controversial . Here we report the conditional genetic disruption of murine cortactin , implicated previously in dynamic actin reorganizations driving lamellipodium protrusion and endocytosis . Unexpectedly , cortactin - deficient cells showed little changes in overall cell morphology and growth . Ultrastructural analyses and live - cell imaging studies revealed unimpaired lamellipodial architecture , Rac - induced protrusion and actin network turnover , although actin assembly rates in the lamellipodium were modestly increased . In contrast , PDGF - induced actin reorganization and Rac activation were impaired in cortactin null cells . In addition , cortactin deficiency caused reduction of Cdc42 activity , and defects in random and directed cell migration . Reduced migration of cortactin null cells could be restored , at least in part , by active Rac and Cdc42 variants . Finally , cortactin removal did not affect the efficiency of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Together , we conclude that cortactin is fully dispensible for Arp2 / 3 - complex activation during lamellipodia protrusion or clathrin pit endocytosis . Furthermore , we propose that cortactin promotes cell migration indirectly , through contributing to activation of selected Rho - GTPases . 3 INTRODUCTION Cell migration is a complex process requiring the coordinated activities of multiple cellular machines , driving actin polymerization , actin - myosin II - based force generation and coupling to the extracellular matrix . However , the relative contribution of each of these machines to the different steps in the motility cycle is just beginning to emerge . Irrespective of the complexity of coordination of these activities , it is commonly agreed that protrusion at the cell front is initiated by localized actin polymerization , to form structures such as lamellipodia or ruffles ( Small et al . , 2002 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . The best characterized factors driving the nucleation of actin filaments in vertebrate cells are the Arp2 / 3 - complex and formins ( Pollard , 2007 ) . Arp2 / 3 - complex activity is considered essential for processes as diverse as lamellipodium protrusion , actin assembly during clathrin - mediated endocytosis , podosome formation , and different types of host - pathogen interaction ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Linder , 2007 ) . Activators of Arp2 / 3 - complex are termed nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) and were roughly subdivided into class I and II comprising as classical members WASP / WAVE proteins and cortactin , respectively ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) . This distinction derived - at least in part - from their mode of interaction with actin : the WH2 domains of class I and tandem repeat regions of class II NPFs bind to monomeric and filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , respectively ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ; Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . WASP and WAVE proteins have been studied in significant detail , including the characterization of genetic mutations in the mouse ( Stradal et al . , 2004 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . In addition , exciting recent progress included the 4 discovery of additional class I NPFs ( Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ; Campellone et al . , 2008 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , which foster the view of great versatility of Arp2 / 3 - complex function in cells . However , the precise functions of the mammalian type II NPF cortactin have remained controversial ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . Initially identified as a tyrosine phosphorylated protein in v - Src infected chicken embryo fibroblasts ( Kanner et al . , 1990 ) , cortactin comprises an amino terminal acidic domain , mediating Arp2 / 3 - complex binding ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) , followed by the F - actin binding region containing six and a half 37 amino acid repeats , an  - helical domain , a proline - rich region and a Src homology ( SH ) 3 domain at the distal carboxyl terminus ( Wu et al . , 1991 ; Sparks et al . , 1996 ) . Cortactin mostly localizes to dynamic actin structures driven by Arp2 / 3 - complex ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ; Frischknecht and Way , 2001 ; Boyle et al . , 2007 ) . The SH3 - domain was shown to interact with a plethora of proteins , including dynamin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) and N - WASP ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) , pointing at potential cortactin functions in endocytosis ( Zhu et al . , 2005 ) and migration ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) . In vitro assays have shown that cortactin promotes actin assembly by simultaneously binding to Arp2 / 3 - complex and actin filaments . It was proposed therefore that cortactin mediates both Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation and stabilization of Arp2 / 3 - induced filament branches ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Cortactin can also activate N - WASP ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) and both can synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 - complex in vitro ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . However , additional interactions observed for both cortactin and N - WASP with the family of WASP interacting proteins ( WIP ) ( Anton et al . , 2007 ) , or for N - WASP and WIP with SH3 adaptors like Nck complicate the picture of the precise composition and 5 biochemical activities of potential cortactin - containing complexes in vivo ( Tehrani et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , the Arp2 / 3 - modulating function of cortactin may not be solely restricted to N - WASP - dependent processes , since cortactin accumulates in structures such as lamellipodia , which lack N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Ladwein and Rottner , 2008 ) . The cortactin family comprises the ubiquitously expressed cortactin ( also called EMS in humans ) and the hematopoietic HS1 , which shares structural and functional features with cortactin , although its repeat region is shorter ( three and a half repeats ) and - as opposed to cortactin – requires the α - helical region for efficient F - actin binding ( Hao et al . , 2005 ) . Cortactin and HS1 have recently been implicated in the regulation of a number of actin - dependent processes ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) , and are not always functionally redundant ( Tehrani et al . , 2006 ) . Consistently , conventional HS1 knockout mice are viable , although they display defects in T - cell proliferation and negative selection ( Taniuchi et al . , 1995 ) , recently concluded to derive from defective actin assembly and IL - 2 production ( Gomez et al . , 2006 ; Burkhardt et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , HS1 has important functions in natural killer cells ( Butler et al . , 2008 ) . Both cortactin and HS1 are phosphorylated on multiple sites , but the functional subtleties of these phosphorylation events are just beginning to emerge ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ; Martin et al . , 2006 ; Boyle et al . , 2007 ; Tehrani et al . , 2007 ; Butler et al . , 2008 ; Kruchten et al . , 2008 ) . Cortactin knockdown by RNA interference supports its involvement in actin - dependent processes , including specific types of host - pathogen interaction ( Selbach and Backert , 2005 ; Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ) and lamellipodium protrusion , although its precise 6 mode of function in the latter process is controversial ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ; Kempiak et al . , 2005 ; Illes et al . , 2006 ; van Rossum et al . , 2006 ; Cai et al . , 2008 ) , due perhaps to differential efficacy of cortactin downregulation ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ) . To resolve this issue , and to define the precise functions of cortactin in Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly in vivo , we conditionally targeted the murine cortactin gene , and developed and characterized fibroblast cell lines lacking cortactin . 7 MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies Immunoblotting was performed according to standard protocols . Commercial primary antibodies were as follows : Monoclonal anti - cortactin ( clone 4F - 11 ) , Upstate Biotechnology Inc . ( New York , USA ) ; monoclonal anti - Cdc42 ( clone 44 ) , BD Transduction Laboratories ( Heidelberg , Germany ) ; monoclonal anti - RhoA ( Cytoskeleton Inc . , Denver , USA ) ; monoclonal anti - Rac1 ( clone 23A8 ) , Biomol ( Hamburg , Germany ) ; polyclonal anti - AKT ; polyclonal anti - pAKTser473 ; monoclonal anti - pERK1 / 2 ( clone E10 ; Figure 7 ) , polyclonal anti - pERK1 / 2 ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) , all Cell Signaling Technology ( Danvers , MA , USA ) ; polyclonal anti - ERK1 / 2 , monoclonal anti - actin , ( clone AC - 15 ) , monoclonal anti - vinculin ( hVIN - 1 ) , all Sigma - Aldrich ( Germany ) ; polyclonal anti - dynamin 2 , Abcam ( Germany ) , monoclonal anti -  - tubulin ( clone 3A2 ) , Synaptic Systems ( Göttingen , Germany ) ; monoclonal anti - clathrin heavy - chain , ( clone 23 ) , BD Transduction Laboratories ( Germany ) . Polyclonal anti - ArpC3 antibody was as described ( Pistor et al . , 2000 ) , monoclonal anti - WAVE2 was kindly provided by Giorgio Scita ( IFOM , Milan , Italy ) . Polyclonal anti - Nap1 was as described ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Monoclonal anti - HS1 antibody was a kind gift of Dr . Daisuke Kitamura ( University of Tokyo , Japan ) . Monoclonal antibodies specific for cortactin were raised using purified , full length protein and screening with extracts from control and KO fibroblast cell lines as well as B16 - F1 mouse melanoma cells expressing either full - length , EGFP - tagged cortactin or the EGFP - tagged N - terminus of cortactin ( see Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Monoclonal anti - N - WASP antibodies were as described ( Weiss et al . , 2009 ) . 8 Protein purification Full length GST - tagged cortactin was expressed in E . coli strain Rossetta ( Promega ) and purified from bacterial extracts on glutathione - conjugated agarose ( Sigma - Aldrich ) using standard procedures . The GST tag was cleaved by incubating the purified fusion protein with PreScission protease in PBS , pH 7 . 3 supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 1mM EDTA overnight at 4°C . Subsequently , the GST - tag was removed by gel filtration on a S200 Sepharose column in the same buffer using an Äkta purifier system . Cortactin containing fractions were pooled and dialyzed against 25mM Tris - buffer , pH 7 . 5 , containing 150mM NaCl and 1mM DTT . Protein concentration was calculated from the predicted extinction coefficient ( Invitrogen , Vector NTI software ) . Constitutively active Rac1 was also recombinantly expressed as a GST - fusion , and cleaved and purified as described ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Plasmids and generation of targeting constructs EGFP -  - actin and EGFP - C1 were purchased from Clontech ( Mountain View , CA , USA ) . Constructs driving expression of EGFP - tagged cortactin and myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 ( pRK5 - myc - Rac1Q61L ) or L61 - Cdc42 ( pRK5 - myc - Cdc42Q61L ) were kindly provided by Ed Schuuring , Groningen , The Netherlands ( van Rossum et al . , 2003 ) and Laura M . Machesky , Glasgow , UK , respectively . EGFP - ArpC5B ( EGFP - p16B ) was as described ( Rottner et al . , 2006 ) , mCherry - clathrin was generated by exchanging EGFP in an EGFP - clathrin construct , a gift from Dr . Ernst Ungewickell ( Hannover Medical School ) for mCherry , kindly provided by Dr . Roger Tsien ( Stanford University , USA ) . For 9 generation of EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 ( Q61L ) or Cdc42 ( Q61L ) , the human cDNAs harboring the respective mutations and lacking ATG were excised from pRK5 vectors ( see above ) and each fused into pEGFP - C1 ( Mountain View , CA , USA ) . Full - length , murine cortactin ( Cttn , Ensembl accession number : ENSMUSG00000031078 ) and the N - terminal fragment ( residues 1 - 146 ; Cttn - NT ) were generated by PCR amplifications using primer pairs F1 : 5’ - GGCGAATTCTGATGTGGAAAGCCTCTGC - 3’ , R1 : 5’ - CCGCTCGAGTCGA CCCGGCGAACGTGGCGA - 3’ and F1 , R2 : 5’ - GGTGGATCCTTCTGGGAG GCATGCTTC - 3’ , respectively . For generation of GST - tagged full length cortactin , the PCR - amplified fragment was subcloned into EcoRI and XbaI of pGEX - 6P2 vector ( GE Healthcare Europe GmbH , Munich , Germany ) . EGFP - tagged N - terminal cortactin was made by subcloning Cttn - NT into EcoR1 and BamHI sites of pEGFP - N1 vector ( Mountain View , CA , USA ) . For generation of the targeting constructs , a 7 kb genomic DNA fragment carrying cortactin gene exon 6 to 9 was used . A synthetic linker containing a loxP site was inserted into a Hind III site upstream of exon 7 . The neomycin ( Neo ) / puromycin ( Puro ) cassette containing the second loxP site and two flanking flp sites were inserted into the Stu I site downstream of exon 7 . The completed DNA fragments containing the 7 kb cortactin genomic DNA sequence , the loxP and flp sites with either Neomycin ( Neo ) or Puromycin ( Puro ) cassettes were subcloned into the pPNT targeting vector backbone ( Tybulewicz et al . , 1991 ) to generate ptCttn - Neo and ptCttn - Puro , respectively ( see Figure 1A ) . The integrity of the targeting constructs was confirmed both by restriction digests and sequencing of exons . RT - PCR detection of HS1 ( Hcls1 , Ensembl accession number : 10 ENSMUSG00000022831 ) was performed using the following primers : HS1fw , 5’ - GGCTGAAGGCAAAATTTGAG - 3’ and HS1rv , 5’ - TCTCCCTCTGCATCCTCATC - 3’ . Primers specific for SPIN90 ( Nckipsd , Ensembl accession number : ENSMUSG00000032598 ) were : SPfw , 5’ - CGAGGATCCATGTACCGCGCGCTGTA - 3’ and SPrv , 5’ - GCAGTCGACGCTGGGAACCTCTCCCA - 3’ . Generation of Cttn fl / fl embryonic fibroblast cells ES cells ( line IGD3 . 2 ) ( Hitz et al . , 2007 ) were modified by two rounds of homologous recombination using ptCttn - Neo and – Puro constructs according to standard procedures . Double targeted Cttn fl / fl ES ( F1 ) cells were differentiated in vivo by injection into C57BL / 6J host blastocysts , which were then transferred into pseudo - pregnant females . Targeted primary fibroblasts were obtained from E 14 . 5 chimeric embryos and enriched by double selection with neomycin ( 500  g / ml ) and puromycin ( 5  g / ml ) . Double - targeted primary fibroblasts were immortalized by retroviral transduction of SV40 LT antigen . Clonal Cttn del / del cell lines were obtained after adenoviral transduction of Cre recombinase ( kindly provided by Cord Brakebusch , University of Copenhagen , Denmark ) . Genotyping Genomic DNA was prepared from cultured cell samples as described previously ( DeChiara , 2001 ) . Genotyping for the floxed ( fl ) and wild type ( wt ) Cttn alleles was done with the following set of PCR primers , forward , fS : 5’ - AGGGTCTGACCATCATGTCC - 3’ and reverse , fA : 5’ - CCCGATTCGCAGCGCATCGCC - 3’ ) , specific for the wild - type 11 Cttn locus upstream of exon 7 . PCR products generated were ~ 150bp for the wt allele and ~ 250bp for the fl allele ( Figure 1C ) . Cre deletion ( which removes exon 7 ) of the Cttn fl allele results in a ~ 500bp PCR product being generated using the same forward primer as described above , fS , and a reverse primer ( dA : 5’ - GGTGGATGTGGAATGTGTG - 3’ ) specific for the neomycin cassette . In the presence of the Cttn fl allele , a ~ 1 . 2kb PCR product is generated ( Figure 1C ) . Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA was performed as described previously ( DeChiara , 2001 ) . For the screening of ES cell clones , an upstream ~ 1kb fragment lying beyond the regions of Cttn that had been cloned into the targeting vectors was used as probe for hybridization . Genomic DNA was digested with BamHI and BamHI + BglII for the screening of ptCttn - Neo and ptCttn - Puro targeted clones , respectively . For the detection of Cre - deleted fibroblast clones , genomic DNA was digested with HindIII , and hybridized with the 1kb probe mentioned above . Cell culture and transfection Puromycin resistant primary mouse embryonic feeder cells ( 4D ) were purchased from Open Biosystems ( Huntsville , AL , USA ) . Feeder and embryonic fibroblast cells were maintained in DMEM ( Life Technologies ) containing 10 % FCS ( Sigma - Aldrich , Germany ) and 2mM glutamine at 37 °C in the presence of 5 % CO 2 . Fibroblast cells were transfected using Metafectene Pro ( Biontex , Germany ) or FuGene HD ( Roche ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . One day after transfection , cells were either fixed and processed for immunolabeling or examined live by using an inverted microscope as described below . 12 Fluorescence microscopy , assessment of cell morphology , and data analysis Immunolabeling experiments were performed essentially as described previously ( Lommel et al . , 2001 ; Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . In brief , cells grown on fibronectin were fixed with pre - warmed formaldehyde ( 4 % ) in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) for 20 min , extracted with 0 . 1 % Triton - X 100 ( 1 min ) , and stained with the indicated antibodies and / or with phalloidin . Secondary reagents were Alexa - dye - labelled ( Alexa 350 , 488 , or 594 ) goat anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies ( Invitrogen , Karlsruhe , Germany ) . For quantification of PDGF - induced peripheral ruffling and focal adhesion reorganization , cells were seeded subconfluently onto FN - coated glass coverslips , starved , and treated with DMEM alone or DMEM containing 10ng / ml PDGF ( PDGF - BB , Sigma - Aldrich , Germany ) for 10 minutes , fixed as above , extracted with a mixture of 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 4 % formaldehyde for 1 min , and stained for vinculin and the actin cytoskeleton with phalloidin . Peripheral ruffling was classified essentially as described ( Bosse et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , cells were categorized according to the prominence of vinculin - positive adhesion sites as indicated . PDGF - induced dorsal ruffling was induced and quantified essentially as above , except that cells were plated onto uncoated cover - slips and treated for 5 minutes with DMEM or DMEM containing PDGF . Preparations were analyzed on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 100TV ; Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) using a 63x / 1 . 4 or 100x / 1 . 4 plan - apochromatic objectives and equipped for epi - fluorescence as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Images were acquired with a back - illuminated , cooled charge - coupled - device camera ( TE - CCD 800PB ; Princeton Scientific Instruments , Princeton , NJ ) driven by IPLab software ( Scanalytics Inc . , Fairfax , VA ) . Data and images 13 were processed using Microsoft Excel 9 . 0 ( Redmond , WA ) and Adobe Photoshop 7 . 0 / CS software ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Video and electron microscopy , and microinjection High magnification video microscopy in combination with or without microinjection was performed with cells mounted in an open , heated chamber ( Warner Instruments , Reading , UK ) at 37°C on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 100TV ; Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) essentially as described ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Control or cortactin KO fibroblasts with or without expressing EGFP - actin were recorded prior to and immediately after microinjection of constitutively active Rac1 ( L61 - Rac1 , 2 . 5mg / ml ) using phase contrast optics and / or epi - fluorescence . Supplemental movies were assembled using NIH Image ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / ) . Cell areas before and after Rac1 microinjection were measured using Cell - profiler ( http : / / www . cellprofiler . org / ) . FRAP ( fluorescent recovery after photobleaching ) experiments were performed on a dual - headed , confocal microscope ( Fluoview 1000 , Olympus Inc . , Hamburg , Germany ) with cells co - transfected ( o / n ) with myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and EGFP - actin or EGFP - p16B at a ratio of 2 : 1 , and analyzed as described ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . Wound healing and random cell migration assays were performed essentially as described ( Pankov et al . , 2005 ; Kopecki et al . , 2007 ) using an AxioCam MRm camera ( Zeiss ) on a Zeiss Axiovert 200 automatic microscope equipped with closed heating and CO 2 perfusion devices . Maximal wound closure rates corresponded to normalized slopes of linear equations derived from regression analyses of the area over time – plots shown in Figure 11B . Average wound closure rates were determined by dividing closed areas by 14 required time . For reconstitution of the wound - healing defect , cortactin - deficient cells were transfected either with EGFP alone , with EGFP - L61 - Rac1 or with EGFP – L61 - Cdc42 , and FACS - sorted to enrich for EGFP expressing cells . Wound - healing assays were performed in 12 - well plate holes two days after seeding of FACS - enriched cells . Data analysis was done using ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) and Cell - profiler . TIRF microscopy and quantification of actin assembly events accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis were done as previously described ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) . For electron microscopy , cells were plated on glass coverslips coated with formvar and 50µg / ml fibronectin ( Roche , Germany ) , extracted for 1 min with a mixture of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer ( CB : 10mM MES pH : 6 . 1 , 150mM NaCl , 5mM EGTA , 5mM glucose , 5mM MgCl2 ) containing 1µg / ml phalloidin , fixed for 15 min with 2 % glutaraldehyde in CB with 1µg / ml phalloidin , and processed for electron microscopy as described ( Auinger and Small , 2008 ) . Samples were negatively stained with sodium silicotungstate ( 2 % ; Agar Scientific ) and aurothioglucose ( 1 % ; Wako Chemicals , Germany ) at pH 7 . 0 . Cells were observed and imaged immediately in the electron microscope ( FEI Morgagni ) . GTPase activation assays Rho - GTPase activities were assessed using absorbance - based G - LISA activation kits ( individual assays for Cdc42 , Rac and RhoA ; Cytoskeleton Inc . , Denver , USA ) according to manufacturer’s protocols . Expression levels of examined Rho - GTPases were independent of cortactin genotype ( our unpublished results ) . 15 Confirmatory pull - down assays shown in Supplemental Material determining constitutive Cdc42 or Rac activities or PDGF - induced Rac activation were done as described ( Bosse et al . , 2007 ) . Pull - down of active RhoA was done using a commercial activation kit based on the Rho - binding domain ( RBD ) of rhotekin ( Cytoskeleton Inc . , Denver , USA ) . Band intensities of active GTPase from at least four independent experiments were each normalized to input ( total GTPase ) , averaged , and expressed relative to levels in respective controls . Constitutive Ras activities in control and cortactin - deficient cells were determined indirectly through MAPK / Erk phosphorylation relative to input (  - tubulin . 125 I - EGF internalization assays and quantification of surface EGFR and EGFR degradation Experiments were essentially as described ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ; Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . In brief , cells were seeded in triplicates for each time point ( plus one well for assessment of non - specific binding ) into 24 - well plates at a density so that the cells would reach 90 % confluency the day after . Next day , cells were serum - starved for at least 4 hours in binding buffer ( DMEM , 0 . 1 % BSA ; 20mM Hepes , pH 7 . 5 ) , and then incubated at 37°C in the presence of 1ng / ml 125 I - EGF ( Amersham ) in 300  l binding buffer . After different time points ( 2 , 4 , 6 and 8 minutes ) , cells were put on ice , washed twice in cold PBS , and then incubated for 5 minutes at 4°C in 300  l acidic wash solution ( 2M acetic acid ; 0 . 5M NaCl , pH 2 . 5 ) . Then , the solution was removed and its radioactivity measured . This sample represents the amount of receptor - bound 125 I - EGF at the cell surface . Internalized 125 I - EGF was determined by cell lysis with 300  l 1M NaOH and measurement of 16 radioactivity in the lysate . Non - specific binding was measured at each time point in the presence of excess , non - radioactive EGF ( 200x ) . After correction for non - specific binding , the rate of internalization was expressed as the ratio between internalized and surface - bound radioactivity . The number of EGF binding sites at the cell surface was determined by cell starvation as above and incubation at 4 °C for 6 hrs with 100 ng / ml of 125 I - EGF , 10ng / ml of 125 I - EGF ( Amersham ) + 90ng / ml cold EGF ( Intergen ) . Cells were then washed 3 times with cold PBS and lysed in 1M NaOH . The radioactivity measured in the lysate represents the amount of EGFR at the membrane . Non - specific binding was determined in the presence of excess , non - radioactive EGF ( 300x ) subtracted from total radioactivity . EGF binding sites of wild type and cortactin - / - MEF cells were expressed as receptors / cell . EGFR degradation was assessed upon EGF treatment ( 100ng / ml ) for different time points as indicated . Densitometric analyses were aided by Image J software . Background - corrected EGFR intensities were normalized to vinculin intensities for each time point , and expressed as percentage of the initial amount of EGFR at the cell surface . 17 RESULTS Generation of cortactin knockout ( KO ) fibroblast cells In order to investigate cortactin loss of function , we decided to utilize a conditional genetic knockout system . Two targeting constructs , harboring either a neomycin ( ptCttn - Neo ) or a puromycin resistance cassette ( ptCttn - Puro ) , were employed to sequentially replace in ES cells both wild type ( wt ) alleles with mutated alleles harboring loxP - sites for recombination ( floxed or fl , see Figure 1A for targeting strategy ) . Genomic Southern hybridization and PCR confirmed the presence of the corresponding alleles ( Figure 1 , B and C ) in double - targeted ES cells ( fl / fl ) . Cortactin fl / fl ES cells were subsequently differentiated into fibroblasts in vivo by isolation from chimeric day 14 embryos upon blastocyst injection and transfer . Cortactin wt / wt cells were successfully removed by a 14 - day treatment with G418 and puromycin , as confirmed by the absence of the wt allele using PCR ( data not shown ) . Primary cortactin fl / fl fibroblast cells were immortalized and infected with adenovirus - Cre ( Anton and Graham , 1995 ) to mediate site - specific recombination of the mutated allele to obtain individual and pooled ( from five individual clonal fibroblast lines ) cortactin del / del fibroblasts . PCR and genomic Southern confirmed the deleted genotypes of each line individually and of the pooled population ( Figure 2A ) . Successful Cre recombinase - mediated deletion of exon 7 in the cortactin gene was expected to cause a stop in the reading frame resulting in a null allele . Indeed , no cortactin message was detectable by PCR , neither with primers complementary to regions encoding the amino - terminal or carboxyl - terminal end of the protein , and we were unable to detect cortactin by Western blotting ( Figures 2 , B – E and S1 ) . In order to minimize 18 potential clonal variations , all subsequent experiments were performed with a mixed population of parental cortactin fl / fl cells and pooled cortactin del / del ( KO ) clones . Western blot analysis of total cell extracts from cortactin KO and control cells revealed no obvious changes in the expression levels of various prominent actin regulators and endocytic molecules ( Figure 2F ) . Furthermore , no HS1 message or protein , neither in control and nor cortactin KO fibroblast cells was detected ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . Cortactin is not essential for Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin assembly in the lamellipodium Cortactin has been implicated in driving lamellipodium protrusion and membrane ruffling , due to the dependence of these structures on Arp2 / 3 - complex - mediated actin assembly ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) . Therefore , lamellipodium protrusion and membrane ruffling were examined in various conditions and employing a number of methods . Interestingly , no gross morphological changes were initially observed between cortactin KO and control cells on plastic dishes ( Figure 3A ) . We thus explored the actin cytoskeleton in subconfluent cells growing on different substrates such as fibronectin . In the absence of cortactin ( Figure 3C ) , the actin cytoskeleton appeared to be largely unchanged , with cortactin knockout cells forming lamellipodia and ruffles , filopodia ( not shown ) as well as focal adhesions and stress fibers ( Figure 3B , see also Figure 8A ) . Moreover , there was no discernable difference as compared to control cells in the ultrastructure of the actin filament network in the lamellipodia of cortactin - deficient cells ( Figure 3D ) . These results suggested that cortactin - deficient cells were able in principle to form lamellipodia . In order to assess potential quantitative changes in 19 lamellipodia protrusion in the absence of cortactin , we first performed video microscopy before and after microinjection of constitutively active Rac1 . Rac1 injection caused a prominent and abrupt induction of smooth , peripheral lamellipodia in both control and knockout cells ( see Supplemental Video 1 ) , demonstrating that cortactin is dispensable for Rac - induced protrusion . Using cells ectopically expressing EGFP - tagged actin ( Figure 4A and Supplemental Video 2 ) , we assayed lamellipodial actin polymerization in vivo . First , no significant differences were observed in the increase in cell area caused by Rac injection between control and knockout cells ( Figure 4B ) , suggesting that Rac - induced actin reorganization was unimpaired by cortactin deficiency . The efficiency of Rac - induced actin assembly in lamellipodia was directly measured by FRAP ( fluorescent recovery after photobleaching ) in cells co - expressing EGFP - actin and constitutively active Rac1 ( Figure 5A and Supplemental Video 3 ) . Actin assembly at the lamellipodium tip directly correlates with the rearward movement of the bleached region ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . Our FRAP measurements indicated that actin assembly in the lamellipodium was modestly increased in the absence of cortactin ( Figure 5B ) , resulting in a significant reduction in the half time of lamellipodial actin recovery in cortactin knockout cells as compared to cortactin - expressing controls ( Figure 5C ; t 1 / 2 of 14 . 9 and 19 . 4 in KO and control , respectively ) . Although a molecular explanation for the observed increase in actin rearward flow in cortactin null cells is lacking , these data demonstrate active lamellipodial actin polymerization in both the presence and absence of cortactin . Consistent with this and the view that Arp2 / 3 - complex is essential for Rac - induced , lamellipodial actin assembly ( Steffen et al . , 2006 ; Nicholson - Dykstra and Higgs , 2008 ) , 20 Arp2 / 3 - complex uniformly incorporated into the lamellipodia of both control and cortactin - deficient cells ( our unpublished results ) . Furthermore , FRAP experiments with cells co - expressing constitutively active Rac1 and the Arp2 / 3 - complex subunit p16B revealed a similar increase of Arp2 / 3 - complex rearward flow rate in the absence of cortactin ( Figure 5D , E and Supplemental Video 4 ) . This was not unexpected if assuming identical lamellipodial turnover for actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex , which is incorporated into the network at the lamellipodium tip ( Figure 5D and Lai et al . , 2008 ) . The additional , genotype - independent acceleration of network flow rates in p16B as compared to actin expressers ( Figure 5B , E ) is not due to differential behavior of actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex in individual cells , as previously proposed by others ( Cai et al . , 2008 ) , since simultaneous bleaching of both components in B16 - F1 lamellipodia confirmed identical flow rates ( our unpublished results ) . Cortactin is not required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis Cortactin has also been shown to accumulate at internalizing clathrin coated pits ( ccps ) ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ) , suggestive of a role in Arp2 / 3 - complex activation at these sites . We first tested if both actin and Arp2 / 3 recruitment to ccps requires cortactin . Cortactin KO and control fibroblast cells were co - transfected with EGFP - actin and mCherry - clathrin , and examined using TIRF microscopy . Interestingly , actin accumulation at ccps was robust in both control and cortactin KO cells ( Figure 6A ) . Co - expression of EGFP - tagged p16B with mCherry - clathrin revealed that cortactin removal also had no effect on the accumulation of Arp2 / 3 - complex at ccps ( Figure 6B ) . In order to exclude potential quantitative differences in actin assembly frequencies 21 accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis , as previously observed for instance upon genetic deletion of N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) , we counted the average coincidence of actin accumulation with the internalization of individual clathrin - coated structures , which was around 80 % in both the presence and absence of cortactin ( Figure 6C ) . These results demonstrated that cortactin is not required for actin polymerization accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In order to explore a potential functional role for cortactin in this process , independent of the promotion of actin assembly , we initially looked at internalization of rhodamine - labelled EGF or transferrin , the latter being strictly clathrin - dependent . No obvious principal defects in ligand internalization could be detected ( our unpublished results ) . To test for potential quantitative differences of receptor - mediated endocytosis , the initial rate of EGF internalization was measured using iodinated ligand , low doses ( 1ng / ml ) of which induce internalization predominantly through the clathrin route ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . However , cortactin deficiency did not affect the efficiency of EGF internalization ( Figure 7A ) . Importantly , these experiments were performed at sub - saturating concentrations of the ligand in cortactin - expressing control cells , since cell surface receptor levels were strongly increased in cortactin null cells ( Figure 7B ) . The precise reasons for this are unknown , although no significant defects in EGFR degradation were observed in the absence of cortactin ( Figure 7 , C and D ) . Finally , EGF - induced signal transduction appeared intact in cortactin null cells , as exemplified by Erk / MAP kinase and Akt phosphorylation ( Figure 7C ) . Cortactin KO cells are defective in signaling to actin reorganization and Rho - GTPase activation 22 Although cortactin knockout cells did not fail to form lamellipodia or membrane ruffles upon microinjection or expression of constitutively active Rac ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , defects in actin reorganization were unexpectedly detected when treating cells with growth factors such as platelet derived growth factor ( PDGF ) . Lamellipodia and peripheral membrane ruffles , known to be driven by Rac , were readily induced by PDGF in serum - starved control but not cortactin knockout cells ( Figure 8A ) . In addition , stress fibers and focal adhesions were mostly dissolved after PDGF treatment in control cells , presumably due to the antagonism between Rac and Rho signaling observed previously ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Wildenberg et al . , 2006 ) . This response was also less prominent in cortactin knockout cells ( Figure 8A ) . Quantification of the number of cells with ruffles or prominent focal adhesions observed upon PDGF treatment revealed a significant decrease in the ruffling frequency in cells lacking cortactin ( Figure 8B , p  0 . 003 ) , and a strong defect in the dissolution of focal adhesions ( Figure 8C , p  0 . 025 ) . Furthermore , and in accordance with previous observations upon RNAi - mediated cortactin depletion ( Boyle et al . , 2007 ) , cortactin null fibroblasts showed a severe reduction in PDGF - induced dorsal ruffling ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) . All these data indicated that cortactin deficiency might cause defective signaling to Rac activation . This was indeed the case , as PDGF - induced Rac activation as measured by G - LISA assay ( see Materials and Methods ) was suppressed in the absence of cortactin , although it was not entirely abolished ( Figure 9A ) . Similar results were obtained using conventional PAK3 - CRIB pulldown ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Somewhat surprising , constitutive Rac - GTP - levels of cells growing in serum were not significantly different in control and cortactin - deficient cells . In contrast , constitutive Cdc42 activity was also severely suppressed in 23 cortactin - deficient cells , whereas RhoA or Ras signaling were not ( Figure 9 and Supplemental Figure 5 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that defective PDGF - induced actin reorganization in cortactin null cells is caused , at least in part , by reduced Rac activation and / or low Cdc42 activity . However , in spite of repeated attempts , we have failed to detect convincing Cdc42 activation effected by PDGF treatment in either cell type ( our unpublished results ) . Cortactin deficiency leads to impaired cell migration Since cortactin appeared to affect actin reorganization events , at least downstream of PDGF signaling , we also explored potential functions in cell migration . To do this , cells were seeded subconfluently , and the tracks of individually migrating cells analyzed in a computer - aided fashion . Interestingly , the speed of randomly migrating cells was reduced in the absence of cortactin . Average velocity ( arithmetic mean as calculated from the accumulated distance over time ) was 0 . 61 ( SEM : 0 . 01 , n = 109 ) and 0 . 49 ( SEM : 0 . 02 , n = 108 ) µm / min for control and cortactin KO cells , respectively ( p  0 . 0001 ) ( Figure 10A ) . The slight increase in directionality ( fl / fl : 0 . 26 , SEM : 0 . 01 versus KO : 0 . 29 , SEM : 0 . 01 ) was not statistically significant ( Figure 10B ) . The defect in migration rate was even more evident when color - coding individual tracks ( displayed in so called chemotaxis plots ) relative to the arithmetic mean of the migration of both cell types ( Figure 10C ) . This analysis revealed that 39 of 109 tracks of controls cells were slower than average , whereas the number of slower cells was significantly increased in the knockout ( 80 of 108 ) . 24 We also performed scratch - wound assays , which confirmed reduced migration efficiency ( Figure 11A , and Supplemental Video 5 ) . Average recovery curves summarizing wound closure rates for both cell types are shown in Figure 11B . The maximal wound healing rate , as extracted by regression analysis ( see Materials and Methods ) was reduced in cortactin KO cells to 67 . 7 % of the control cell population ( Figure 11C ) , with the difference confirmed to be statistically significant ( p  0 . 001 ) . These data showed a marked decrease of cell migration rate , as induced here by scratching a wound into a confluent monolayer , shown previously to be accompanied by activation of Rho - GTPases such as Rac ( Kraynov et al . , 2000 ) . To explore whether this defect might be a direct consequence of reduced Rac activity in the absence of cortactin , as observed after PDGF treatment ( see above ) , knockout cells were subjected to the wound healing assay after transient transfection with EGFP alone or with EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 ( Figure 11D ) . Average wound closure rates as assessed in these experiments were again significantly reduced in EGFP - expressing cortactin knockout cells as compared to ( EGFP - expressing ) control cells ( fl / fl ; p  0 . 001 ) . Interestingly , transient expression of constitutively active EGFP - Rac1 significantly increased the performance of cortactin knockout cells , albeit not to the level of cortactin - expressing control cells ( Figure 11D ) . In contrast , active EGFP - Rac1 decreased the wound healing efficiency of cortactin - expressing control cells ( fl / fl ) , demonstrating that the observed beneficial effects of Rac activation for migration are dependent on context , and restricted here to cells lacking cortactin . These data also highlight the requirement for precise tuning of Rac activity in order to promote effective migration . Finally , expression of constitutively active Cdc42 in cortactin null cells restored wound healing rates even better than Rac1 , to almost 95 % of 25 control cells ( Figure 11D ) . These results are thus consistent with the observed cooperative functions of Rac and Cdc42 small GTPases in the migration efficiency towards PDGF of primary fibroblasts ( Monypenny et al . , 2009 ) , and strongly suggest that the migration defects in cortactin null cells observed here are due to defective signaling to Rho - GTPase activation rather than problems in promoting or stabilizing Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin networks below the plasma membrane . 26 DISCUSSION We report the generation of murine cell lines lacking a functional cortactin gene . Cre - recombinase - mediated ablation of exon 7 within the cortactin locus in conditionally gene - targeted , immortalized fibroblasts resulted in undetectable levels of both cortactin message and protein . Neither control nor cortactin KO fibroblasts expressed the hematopoietic cortactin homologue HS1 , excluding functional compensation by HS1 . To our surprise , cortactin removal failed to severely affect the ability of these cells to form a normal actin cytoskeleton . Most remarkably , lamellipodia , which are thought to require Arp2 / 3 - complex dependent actin assembly ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ) showed no differences in their ultrastructural organization in the absence of this Arp2 / 3 - complex activator ( Figure 3D ) . In addition , Rac injection induced robust lamellipodium formation , spreading and Arp2 / 3 - complex incorporation in both cell types ( Figures 4 and 5 ) . Cortactin was previously also shown to localize on endosomal vesicles ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ) and clathrin coated pits ( Cao et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , it is capable of interaction with several proteins implicated in endocytic processes , such as dynamin , N - WASP , cortBP1 / SHANK2 or WIP ( Du et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weaver et al . , 2002 ; Aspenstrom , 2005 ) . Due to its biochemical activity as an Arp2 / 3 - complex activator and the fact that its accumulation at ccps peaks at the time point of vesicle fission off the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) , cortactin was assumed to induce local actin assembly in order to facilitate the scission process . Moreover , earlier observations made in our lab have indicated an essential function in actin assembly at these sites for the Arp2 / 3 - complex , activation of which was only partly mediated by N - WASP ( Benesch et 27 al . , 2005 ) . It was tempting to speculate therefore that cortactin could drive N - WASP - independent Arp2 / 3 - complex activation during clathrin pit internalization . Indeed , studies employing RNA interference , antibody injections or dominant negative approaches suggested an important function for cortactin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2007 ) , although contradictory observations were also made ( Barroso et al . , 2006 ) . The results obtained here demonstrate that cortactin is not required for actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex assembly at clathrin - coated pits , and its removal did not even affect the frequency of actin recruitment to internalizing pit - like structures ( Figure 6 ) . Since the efficiency of actin assembly is considered crucial for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) , these data are consistent with the lack of a phenotype when exploring the efficiency of EGF internalization ( Figure 7A ) . Without excluding potential modulatory functions , these data reveal a non - essential role of cortactin at these sites . The precise function of cortactin in this context remains to be elucidated , not least , due to the increasing number of interacting partners identified ( Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . For instance , an interaction of cortactin with Hip1R ( huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related ) was recently discovered , and both proteins appeared to inhibit actin assembly by capping actin filament barbed ends in vitro . The actin filament capping and nucleating activities of cortactin were proposed to be spatially separated in vivo , though to both promote actin assembly at ccps ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , Hip1R knockdown was previously shown to generate abnormally large actin tails nucleated at these sites , establishing this protein as a potent negative regulator of actin polymerization during endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . As these exaggerated structures required cortactin , although it was not 28 essential for the actin assembly at ccps observed here , we propose cortactin to execute fine - tuning perhaps , in association with specific proteins or protein complexes ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) , rather than constituting a decisive component of actin assembly accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In contrast to the structure and dynamics of constitutive or Rac - induced lamellipodia , the frequency of occurrence of lamellipodia and ruffles , induced for instance by PDGF treatment , was abrogated by cortactin removal . The majority of cortactin KO cells ( more than 60 % ) did not form membrane ruffles after 10 minutes of PDGF treatment , whereas most control cells ( ~ 90 % ) did . The impact of cortactin loss of function on PDGF - induced dorsal ruffling was even more severe ( Supplemental Figure 3 ) . Moreover , loss of stress fibers and focal adhesions not unusually observed to accompany the induction of membrane ruffling by growth factor treatment , also occurred much less prominent in cortactin - deficient cells ( Figure 8 , A and C ) , suggesting that cortactin removal abrogated the signaling pathway causing these various actin reorganizations observed upon PDGF treatment . This would also be in line with the recently established role in this signaling pathway for cortactin phosphorylation by Abl kinases ( Boyle et al . , 2007 ) . Since the efficiency of lamellipodial actin assembly and Arp2 / 3 - complex incorporation was not reduced upon injection or expression of constitutively active Rac1 , this deficiency likely occurs upstream or at the level of Rho - GTPase activation . Consistently , cortactin - deficient cells displayed a marked decrease in Rac activation effected by PDGF treatment ( Figure 9A ) . Furthermore , cortactin null cells displayed a significant reduction of active Cdc42 ( but not Rac , Ras or RhoA ) levels in regular growth conditions . These data 29 suggest that cortactin may operate in signaling to actin polymerization less downstream , and hence more indirectly than previously anticipated , i . e . through contributing to the temporal or spatial regulation of activation of selected Rho GTPases ( such as Cdc42 or Rac ) , and not as an essential activator of Arp2 / 3 - complex ( Figure 5 ) . Consistent with such a scenario , both cortactin and HS1 have already been reported to interact with GEFs for Rho - family GTPases ( Hou et al . , 2003 ; Gomez et al . , 2006 ) . Notably , the recruitment of Fgd1 to the cell periphery by interaction with the SH3 - domain of cortactin was proposed to contribute - upon multimerization - to a positive feedback cycle of cortactin - mediated actin assembly ( Kim et al . , 2004 ) . Although not necessarily restricted to the latter GEF , these observations point towards a potential role for cortactin in signal amplification through recruitment - not necessarily activation - of Rho - GTPase GEFs to sites of dynamic actin assembly . A potential function as “localizer” rather than stimulator of efficient Rho - GTPase activation would explain the absence of protrusion induction and evident Rho - GTPase activation by sole ectopic expression ( Lai et al . , 2008 , and our unpublished observations ) . As we show , cortactin - deficient cells displayed defects in the efficiency of cell migration , which could be reconstituted in part by ectopic expression of constitutively active Rac1 or Cdc42 . Given the fact that EGFP - Rac1 / Cdc42 - transfected and FACS - sorted cortactin knockout cells had to grow to confluence before the wound healing assay could be performed , incomplete reconstitution could derive , at least in part , from inhomogeneous expression of the ectopic protein . Nevertheless , these data show that a good fraction of the cell migration defects in cortactin null cells can be explained by inefficient signaling to selected Rho - GTPases , consistent with the observations made upon PDGF stimulation 30 ( see above ) . Although Cdc42 is not essential for cell migration in fibroblasts ( Czuchra et al . , 2005 ) , our data add to increasing evidence that Cdc42 activity can contribute to migration efficiency in certain conditions or cell types ( Yang et al . , 2006 ; Monypenny et al . , 2009 ) . In summary , we show that cortactin deficiency leads to defects in migration and to suppression of peripheral or dorsal ruffling in response to PDGF . Surprisingly however , no impairment of actin assembly in lamellipodia or ruffles was observed once they had formed , nor in other types of Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin structures , e . g . clathrin - coated pits . From these data we suggest that cortactin operates in signal transduction upstream of activation of specific Rho - family GTPases , rather than downstream , a novel role which may or may not involve its ability to activate Arp2 / 3 - complex - mediated actin assembly . Future studies will address this issue as well as the molecular link ( s ) mediating this function . 31 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported in part by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( to KR , TEBS , JF ) . MS was supported through a Marie Curie Early Stage Training ( EST ; contract number MEST - 2004 - 504990 ) of the European Community ` s Sixth Framework Programme . We thank Cord Brakebusch , Daisuke Kitamura , Laura Machesky , Ed Schuuring , Roger Tsien and Ernst Ungewickell for reagents , Giorgio Scita for helpful discussions and antibodies , Jürgen Wehland for support and providing infrastructure , Marlies Konradt and Christian Erck for generation of monoclonal antibodies , and Brigitte Denker for excellent technical assistance . We are also grateful to Werner Müller and Martin Hafner for valuable advice and discussion on mouse genetics and mutagenesis . 32 REFERENCES Ammer , A . G . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin branches out : roles in regulating protrusive actin dynamics . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 65 , 687 - 707 . Anton , I . M . , Jones , G . E . , Wandosell , F . , Geha , R . , and Ramesh , N . ( 2007 ) . WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) : working in polymerisation and much more . Trends Cell Biol 17 , 555 - 562 . Anton , M . , and Graham , F . L . ( 1995 ) . Site - specific recombination mediated by an adenovirus vector expressing the Cre recombinase protein : a molecular switch for control of gene expression . J Virol 69 , 4600 - 4606 . Aspenstrom , P . ( 2005 ) . The verprolin family of proteins : regulators of cell morphogenesis and endocytosis . FEBS Lett 579 , 5253 - 5259 . Auinger , S . , and Small , J . V . ( 2008 ) . Correlated light and electron microscopy of the actin cytoskeleton . Methods Cell Biol in press . Barroso , C . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Welch , M . D . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . A role for cortactin in Listeria monocytogenes invasion of NIH 3T3 cells , but not in its intracellular motility . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 63 , 231 - 243 . Benesch , S . , Polo , S . , Lai , F . P . , Anderson , K . I . , Stradal , T . E . , Wehland , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2005 ) . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 , 3103 - 3115 . Bosse , T . , Ehinger , J . , Czuchra , A . , Benesch , S . , Steffen , A . , Wu , X . , Schloen , K . , Niemann , H . H . , Scita , G . , Stradal , T . E . , Brakebusch , C . , and Rottner , K . ( 2007 ) . Cdc42 and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase drive Rac - mediated actin polymerization downstream of c - Met in distinct and common pathways . Mol Cell Biol 27 , 6615 - 6628 . Boyle , S . N . , Michaud , G . A . , Schweitzer , B . , Predki , P . F . , and Koleske , A . J . ( 2007 ) . A critical role for cortactin phosphorylation by Abl - family kinases in PDGF - induced dorsal - wave formation . Curr Biol 17 , 445 - 451 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr Biol 15 , 1276 - 1285 . Burkhardt , J . K . , Carrizosa , E . , and Shaffer , M . H . ( 2008 ) . The actin cytoskeleton in T cell activation . Annu Rev Immunol 26 , 233 - 259 . Butler , B . , Kastendieck , D . H . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Differently phosphorylated forms of the cortactin homolog HS1 mediate distinct functions in natural killer cells . Nat Immunol 9 , 887 - 897 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 - 842 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2008 ) . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 - 161 . 33 Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 23 , 2162 - 2170 . Cosen - Binker , L . I . , and Kapus , A . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 21 , 352 - 361 . Czuchra , A . , Wu , X . , Meyer , H . , van Hengel , J . , Schroeder , T . , Geffers , R . , Rottner , K . , and Brakebusch , C . ( 2005 ) . Cdc42 is not essential for filopodium formation , directed migration , cell polarization , and mitosis in fibroblastoid cells . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 4473 - 4484 . DeChiara , T . M . ( 2001 ) . Gene Knockout Protocols . Humana Press : Totwa , New Jersey . Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . C . , Marshall , T . D . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) . Identification of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol Cell Biol 18 , 5838 - 5851 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Zhang , C . X . , Carreno , S . , Barroso , C . , Heuser , J . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2004 ) . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 1666 - 1679 . Frischknecht , F . , and Way , M . ( 2001 ) . Surfing pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol 11 , 30 - 38 . Goley , E . D . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 713 - 726 . Gomez , T . S . , McCarney , S . D . , Carrizosa , E . , Labno , C . M . , Comiskey , E . O . , Nolz , J . C . , Zhu , P . , Freedman , B . D . , Clark , M . R . , Rawlings , D . J . , Billadeau , D . D . , and Burkhardt , J . K . ( 2006 ) . HS1 functions as an essential actin - regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity 24 , 741 - 752 . Haglund , K . , Sigismund , S . , Polo , S . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Dikic , I . ( 2003 ) . Multiple monoubiquitination of RTKs is sufficient for their endocytosis and degradation . Nat Cell Biol 5 , 461 - 466 . Hao , J . J . , Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2005 ) . The coiled - coil domain is required for HS1 to bind to F - actin and activate Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 280 , 37988 - 37994 . Hitz , C . , Wurst , W . , and Kuhn , R . ( 2007 ) . Conditional brain - specific knockdown of MAPK using Cre / loxP regulated RNA interference . Nucleic Acids Res 35 , e90 . Hou , P . , Estrada , L . , Kinley , A . W . , Parsons , J . T . , Vojtek , A . B . , and Gorski , J . L . ( 2003 ) . Fgd1 , the Cdc42 GEF responsible for Faciogenital Dysplasia , directly interacts with cortactin and mAbp1 to modulate cell shape . Hum Mol Genet 12 , 1981 - 1993 . Illes , A . , Enyedi , B . , Tamas , P . , Balazs , A . , Bogel , G . , Melinda , Lukacs , and Buday , L . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin is required for integrin - mediated cell spreading . Immunol Lett 104 , 124 - 130 . 34 Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , and Rauvala , H . ( 2000 ) . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J Cell Sci 113 Pt 24 , 4421 - 4426 . Kanner , S . B . , Reynolds , A . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1990 ) . Monoclonal antibodies to individual tyrosine - phosphorylated protein substrates of oncogene - encoded tyrosine kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 , 3328 - 3332 . Kempiak , S . J . , Yamaguchi , H . , Sarmiento , C . , Sidani , M . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . J . , Desmarais , V . , Way , M . , Condeelis , J . , and Segall , J . E . ( 2005 ) . A neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein - mediated pathway for localized activation of actin polymerization that is regulated by cortactin . J Biol Chem 280 , 5836 - 5842 . Kim , K . , Hou , P . , Gorski , J . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 , 2422 - 2427 . Kopecki , Z . , Luchetti , M . M . , Adams , D . H . , Strudwick , X . , Mantamadiotis , T . , Stoppacciaro , A . , Gabrielli , A . , Ramsay , R . G . , and Cowin , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Collagen loss and impaired wound healing is associated with c - Myb deficiency . J Pathol 211 , 351 - 361 . Kowalski , J . R . , Egile , C . , Gil , S . , Snapper , S . B . , Li , R . , and Thomas , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J Cell Sci 118 , 79 - 87 . Kraynov , V . S . , Chamberlain , C . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schwartz , M . A . , Slabaugh , S . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2000 ) . Localized Rac activation dynamics visualized in living cells . Science 290 , 333 - 337 . Kruchten , A . E . , Krueger , E . W . , Wang , Y . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin differentially regulate actin polymerization and focal adhesions . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 , C1113 - 1122 . Ladwein , M . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . On the Rho ' d : the regulation of membrane protrusions by Rho - GTPases . FEBS Lett 582 , 2066 - 2074 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Block , J . , Faix , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Mannherz , H . G . , Stradal , T . E . , Dunn , G . A . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . Embo J 27 , 982 - 992 . Le Clainche , C . , Pauly , B . S . , Zhang , C . X . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Cunningham , K . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . Embo J 26 , 1199 - 1210 . Linardopoulou , E . V . , Parghi , S . S . , Friedman , C . , Osborn , G . E . , Parkhurst , S . M . , and Trask , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet 3 , e237 . Linder , S . ( 2007 ) . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol 17 , 107 - 117 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rottner , K . , Franz , T . , Wehland , J . , and Kuhn , R . ( 2001 ) . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep 2 , 850 - 857 . 35 Martin , K . H . , Jeffery , E . D . , Grigera , P . R . , Shabanowitz , J . , Hunt , D . F . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin phosphorylation sites mapped by mass spectrometry . J Cell Sci 119 , 2851 - 2853 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , and Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 24 , 5269 - 5280 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J Cell Biol 151 , 187 - 198 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 - 606 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed fibroblasts . Cancer Res 62 , 669 - 674 . Monypenny , J . , Zicha , D . , Higashida , C . , Oceguera - Yanez , F . , Narumiya , S . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2009 ) . Cdc42 and Rac family GTPases regulate mode and speed but not direction of primary fibroblast migration during PDGF - dependent chemotaxis . Mol Cell Biol . Nicholson - Dykstra , S . M . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 depletion inhibits sheet - like protrusions but not linear protrusions of fibroblasts and lymphocytes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 65 , 904 - 922 . Pankov , R . , Endo , Y . , Even - Ram , S . , Araki , M . , Clark , K . , Cukierman , E . , Matsumoto , K . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2005 ) . A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell migration . J Cell Biol 170 , 793 - 802 . Pistor , S . , Grobe , L . , Sechi , A . S . , Domann , E . , Gerstel , B . , Machesky , L . M . , Chakraborty , T . , and Wehland , J . ( 2000 ) . Mutations of arginine residues within the 146 - KKRRK - 150 motif of the ActA protein of Listeria monocytogenes abolish intracellular motility by interfering with the recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 18 ) , 3277 - 3287 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36 , 451 - 477 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . , and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 9 , 640 - 648 . Rottner , K . , Kaverina , I . N . , and Stradal , T . E . B . ( 2006 ) . Cytoskeleton Proteins . In : Cell Biology , A Laboratory Handbook , vol . 3 , ed . J . E . Celis , London : Elsevier Acadmic Press , 111 - 119 . Selbach , M . , and Backert , S . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin : an Achilles ' heel of the actin cytoskeleton targeted by pathogens . Trends Microbiol 13 , 181 - 189 . 36 Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 2760 - 2765 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 , 112 - 120 . Sparks , A . B . , Rider , J . E . , Hoffman , N . G . , Fowlkes , D . M . , Quillam , L . A . , and Kay , B . K . ( 1996 ) . Distinct ligand preferences of Src homology 3 domains from Src , Yes , Abl , Cortactin , p53bp2 , PLCgamma , Crk , and Grb2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 , 1540 - 1544 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 2581 - 2591 . Steffen , A . , Rottner , K . , Ehinger , J . , Innocenti , M . , Scita , G . , Wehland , J . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2004 ) . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . Embo J 23 , 749 - 759 . Stradal , T . E . , Rottner , K . , Disanza , A . , Confalonieri , S . , Innocenti , M . , and Scita , G . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP and WAVE family proteins . Trends Cell Biol 14 , 303 - 311 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 37 - 48 . Taniuchi , I . , Kitamura , D . , Maekawa , Y . , Fukuda , T . , Kishi , H . , and Watanabe , T . ( 1995 ) . Antigen - receptor induced clonal expansion and deletion of lymphocytes are impaired in mice lacking HS1 protein , a substrate of the antigen - receptor - coupled tyrosine kinases . Embo J 14 , 3664 - 3678 . Tehrani , S . , Faccio , R . , Chandrasekar , I . , Ross , F . P . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin has an essential and specific role in osteoclast actin assembly . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 2882 - 2895 . Tehrani , S . , Tomasevic , N . , Weed , S . , Sakowicz , R . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 11933 - 11938 . Tybulewicz , V . L . , Crawford , C . E . , Jackson , P . K . , Bronson , R . T . , and Mulligan , R . C . ( 1991 ) . Neonatal lethality and lymphopenia in mice with a homozygous disruption of the c - abl proto - oncogene . Cell 65 , 1153 - 1163 . van Rossum , A . G . , de Graaf , J . H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . , Kluin , P . M . , Fan , Y . X . , Zhan , X . , Moolenaar , W . H . , and Schuuring , E . ( 2003 ) . Alternative splicing of the actin binding domain of human cortactin affects cell migration . J Biol Chem 278 , 45672 - 45679 . van Rossum , A . G . , Moolenaar , W . H . , and Schuuring , E . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin affects cell migration by regulating intercellular adhesion and cell spreading . Exp Cell Res 312 , 1658 - 1670 . Wang , Y . L . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J Cell Biol 101 , 597 - 602 . 37 Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 12 , 1270 - 1278 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol 11 , 370 - 374 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 151 , 29 - 40 . Weiss , S . M . , Ladwein , M . , Schmidt , D . , Ehinger , J . , Lommel , S . , Stading , K . , Beutling , U . , Disanza , A . , Frank , R . , Jansch , L . , Scita , G . , Gunzer , F . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2009 ) . IRSp53 links the enterohemorrhagic E . coli effectors Tir and EspFU for actin pedestal formation . Cell Host Microbe 5 , 244 - 258 . Welch , M . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 18 , 247 - 288 . Wildenberg , G . A . , Dohn , M . R . , Carnahan , R . H . , Davis , M . A . , Lobdell , N . A . , Settleman , J . , and Reynolds , A . B . ( 2006 ) . p120 - catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell - cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho . Cell 127 , 1027 - 1039 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) . Identification and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Mol Cell Biol 11 , 5113 - 5124 . Yang , L . , Wang , L . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2006 ) . Gene targeting of Cdc42 and Cdc42GAP affirms the critical involvement of Cdc42 in filopodia induction , directed migration , and proliferation in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 4675 - 4685 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 964 - 975 . Zhu , J . , Yu , D . , Zeng , X . C . , Zhou , K . , and Zhan , X . ( 2007 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J Biol Chem 282 , 16086 - 16094 . Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Hao , J . J . , Liu , J . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the fission of clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 , 807 - 817 . Zuchero , J . B . , Coutts , A . S . , Quinlan , M . E . , Thangue , N . B . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2009 ) . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 451 - 459 . 38 FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 . Sequential conditional targeting of both cortactin alleles in murine ES cells . ( A ) Targeting strategy for cortactin allele . Two targeting constructs carrying either a neomycin ( harboring an internal Bgl II site ) or a puromycin ( harboring an internal Bam HI site ) resistance cassette are depicted to target the wildtype cortactin allele ( Cttn ) in two sequential targeting experiments in murine ES cells . ( B ) Genomic Southern on ES cells carrying two wildtype ( wt / wt ) cortactin alleles , one wildtype and one floxed ( harboring the neomycin cassette ) cortactin allele [ wt / fl ( Neo ) ] , and two floxed [ fl ( Neo ) / fl ( Puro ) ] alleles ( one harboring a neomycin and the other a puromycin cassette ) . Genomic DNA extracted from each sample was digested with either Bam HI alone , or Bam HI together with Bgl II , and hybridized to the Southern probe ( corresponding to genomic DNA sequence outside the targeting vector ) as shown in A . Note that only the Puro floxed [ fl ( Puro ) ] allele produced a lower hybridization band with Bam HI digest alone , whereas both Neo [ fl ( Neo ) ] and Puro [ fl ( Puro ) ] floxed alleles resulted in a lower hybridization band when double digested with Bam HI and Bgl II . ( C ) PCR genotyping of ES cells carrying the wildtype , single targeted or double targeted alleles . The upper and lower bands indicate the presence of floxed alleles ( Neo or Puro ) and the wildtype allele , respectively . Figure 2 . Cortactin disruption and expression of regulators of the actin cytoskeleton or endocytosis . ( A ) Genomic Southern hybridization of immortalized fibroblast clones before and after Cre - mediated deletion . Genomic DNA was digested with Hind III and hybridized to a radioactively labeled 1 kb cortactin probe . Black , white and grey arrow 39 heads indicate wildtype cortactin allele , Cre - deleted cortactin allele and Neo or Puro targeted alleles , respectively . Lanes : 1 , wildtype cells ; 2 – 6 , individual clones isolated upon Cre - recombinase - mediated cortactin gene deletion ; 7 , population pooled from clones 2 – 6 ; 8 , double cortactin allele - targeted ES cell clone ( genotype flox / flox ) ; 9 , single cortactin allele - targeted ES cell clone ( genotype flox / wt ) . ( B ) PCR genotyping utilizing primers flanking the floxed cortactin exon 7 . Upper and lower bands show the presence of floxed / wildtype and deleted alleles , respectively . Lanes were as in A . ( C ) PCR genotyping utilizing primers specific for cortactin exon 7 . A PCR product indicates the presence of either wildtype or floxed allele . Lanes as in part A . ( D ) RT - PCR detection of cortactin messenger RNA . Top , middle and bottom panels refer to PCR reactions with primers specific for cortactin N - terminal and C - terminal parts , and SPIN90 ( loading control ) , respectively . Lanes 1 - 7 as in A . ( E ) Immunoblotting with cortactin antibody 4F - 11 ( top ) as compared to anti -  - tubulin antibody ( bottom ) . Lanes 1 - 7 as in A . ( F ) Immunoblotting of control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin KO fibroblast cells with actin and endocytic regulators as indicated ( Cla - HC : clathrin heavy chain ) . Anti -  - tubulin was used as loading control . Figure 3 . Cortactin is not essential for lamellipodium protrusion and stress fiber formation . ( A ) Morphology of control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin knockout ( KO ) fibroblast cells grown on plastic cell culture dishes . Bar = 50  m . B ) Phalloidin ( phall ) staining of fixed control and KO cells on fibronectin - coated glass cover - slips . Arrows and arrowheads mark stress fibers and lamellipodia , respectively . Bar = 10  m . ( C ) Immunolabeling with monoclonal anti - cortactin antibodies ( clone 289 ) confirming loss of specific labeling in 40 KO cells . ( D ) Electron microscopy of negatively stained whole - mount cytoskeletons of control and KO cells showing actin filament networks at the leading edge ( cell edges indicated by black arrows ) . Bar = 50nm . Figure 4 . Rac1 - induced protrusion in the presence and absence of cortactin . ( A ) Representative individual frames from epi - fluorescence time - lapse movies of EGFP - actin - expressing control and KO cells before and after microinjection with constitutively active Rac1 ( injection at time 0 ) . Time is in minutes and seconds . White arrows highlight lamellipodia induced by this treatment in both cell types . Bar = 10µm . ( B ) Quantification of cell area increase observed within 7 . 5 minutes after Rac injection . Data represent means  standard errors of means ( SEM ) . Figure 5 . Actin network turnover in lamellipodia of control and cortactin KO cells . ( A ) Representative examples of control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin - deficient ( KO ) fibroblasts co - expressing myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and EGFP - actin , and subjected to FRAP experiments in the lamellipodium . Note actin recovery from the lamellipodium front , as expected ( Wang , 1985 ; Lai et al . , 2008 ) , in both cell types . Time is in seconds , and bar = 2µm . ( B ) Quantification of the rate of rearward actin movement based on FRAP experiments as shown in A . All data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Acceleration of actin flow in the absence of cortactin was confirmed to be statistically significant ( * ) by one - sided two - sample t - test ( p  0 . 023 ) . ( C ) Lamellipodial actin recovery as assessed by FRAP for a lamellipodial width of 1 . 6µm in control and cortactin null cells as indicated . Data are means and SEM measured for each time point and cell type as indicated ( n = 4 ) . Linear 41 curves correspond to best fits of means ( black and red lines for cortactin KO and control cells , respectively ) . Fitted data followed equation : y = a ( 1 - exp ( - bx ) ) , with a = 1 . 0408 and b = 0 . 033 in fl / fl , and a = 1 . 1013 and b = 0 . 044 in KO cells . t 1 / 2 values were calculated by solving the corresponding equations with a fluorescence intensity of 50 % of the maximum recovery value derived from each fitted curve . ( D ) Representative examples of control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin - deficient ( KO ) fibroblasts co - expressing myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and the Arp2 / 3 - complex subunit p16B , and subjected to FRAP experiments in the lamellipodium . p16B fluorescence recovers from the lamellipodium front as described in both cell types . ( E ) Quantification of rearward movement of p16B as shown for actin above . All data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Increased flow in cortactin null cells was statistically significant , as confirmed by one - sided two - sample t - test ( p  0 . 046 ) . Figure 6 . Actin recruitment to clathrin coated pits ( ccps ) in the absence of cortactin . ( A ) Representative TIRF images of control ( fl / fl ) and KO cells co - transfected with EGFP - actin ( actin ) and mCherry - clathrin ( cla ) showing co - internalization of actin and clathrin . Red and white arrows mark co - internalizing pits . Bar = 1  m . ( B ) Co - internalization of Arp2 / 3 - complex and clathrin in both control and cortactin KO cells as visualized by co - transfection with EGFP - ArpC5B ( p16B ) and mCherry - clathrin ( cla ) . Arrows and bar as in A . ( C ) Quantification of actin recruitment to internalizing ccps . All data are means  SEM . At least 240 individual pits and 16 cells were analyzed for each cell type . Figure 7 . Cortactin is not required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . ( A ) Kinetics of EGF internalization in control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin knockout ( KO ) cells treated at the 42 indicated time points with 1ng / ml 125 I - EGF . Data are means  SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments both performed in triplicate . The internalization constants ( Ke ) are indicated in the panel . ( B ) EGFR numbers / cell measured as described in materials and methods . Data are means  SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments both performed in triplicate . ( C ) Western blot analysis of EGFR degradation as well as Akt and ERK activation ( pAkt and pERK ) in control and cortactin knockout cells treated at the indicated time points with 100ng / ml EGF . Total Akt , ERK , vinculin and cortactin were included in the panel as blot normalization . Blots are representative of three independent experiments . ( D ) Densitometric analysis of EGFR degradation performed as described in Materials and methods . Data are means  SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments . Figure 8 . Cortactin deficiency abrogates PDGF - induced actin reorganization . ( A ) Effect of PDGF treatment on cell morphology ; cells were stained for the actin cytoskeleton ( phall ) and for focal adhesions with anti - vinculin antibodies . Arrows and arrowheads mark membrane ruffles and focal adhesions , respectively . Bars = 10  m . Note induction of ruffles and concomitant reduction of focal adhesions in control , but not in cortactin KO cells . ( B ) Quantification of PDGF - treated control ( fl / fl ) and KO cells capable of forming membrane ruffles . All data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Two - sample two - sided t - test , p  0 . 003 , app . 300 cells from three independent experiments categorized for each cell type . ( C ) Quantification of PDGF - induced focal adhesion disassembly . All data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Two - sided two - sample t - test , p  0 . 025 , > 360 cells from three independent experiments categorized for each cell type . 43 Figure 9 . PDGF - induced Rac activation and constitutive activities of selected Rho GTPases . ( A ) Determination of active Rac levels ( Rac - GTP ) in starved control and cortactin knockout cells treated with DMEM alone or DMEM containing 10ng / ml PDGF ( 10 minutes ) using GLISA assay . Data are means  SEM ( error bars ) and were statistically compared using two - sample two - sided t - test . ( B - D ) Constitutive activities of selected Rho - GTPases in control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin knockout ( KO ) cells as indicated ( GLISA - assay ) , all data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Reduction of Cdc42 activity in cortactin - deficient cells was confirmed statistically significant using two - sided two - sample t - test ( p  0 . 029 ) . Figure 10 Cortactin deficiency reduces cell migration . ( A ) Box and whiskers plots showing migration rates of control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin KO cells in subconfluent cultures . The line within the box indicates median , the box boundaries contain 50 % ( 25 – 75 % ) and the whiskers 80 % ( 10 – 90 % ) of all measurements , whereas outlying points are shown as dots . The reduction of migration of KO cells was statistically significant at p  0 . 0001 ; two - sided two - sample t - test . ( B ) Directionality of control ( fl / fl ) and KO cells as indicated . Data are displayed as in A . Directionality was calculated by dividing net migration distance by total distance . ( C ) Chemotaxis plots of control ( fl / fl ) and KO cells in random migration assay . The position of each cell at time zero was centered at the origin of the grid and the tracks correspond to the movement of individual cells over time . Individual tracks slower or faster than the arithmetic mean of all tracks were displayed in red or black , respectively . The total duration of the movies was 495 minutes . 44 Figure 11 . Loss of cortactin function reduces wound healing efficiency . ( A ) Selected frames from wound healing movies for control ( fl / fl ) and cortactin KO cells . Time is in minutes , bar = 100  m . ( B ) Average wound healing recovery curve for each cell population over time . KO cells take longer to cover the wounded area ( i . e . reach 100 % ) . ( C ) Maximal wound closure rates derived from the individual wound closure curves shown in B ( see Materials and Methods ) . Data are means  SEM ( error bars ) and the differences between cell types confirmed to be statistically different by two - sided two - sample t - test ( p  0 . 001 ) . ( D ) Average wound closure rates of control ( fl / fl ) or cortactin knockout ( KO ) cells expressing EGFP alone ( as control ) or EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 or Cdc42 as indicated . Column colors corresponding to experimental conditions are also given on the right in panel D . All data are means  SEM ( error bars ) . Differences between cell types or conditions were confirmed to be statistically significant by two - sided two - sample t - test . n values correspond to number of movies recorded in at least three independent experiments .