Current Biology Magazine R1374 Current Biology 28 , R1365 – R1381 , December 17 , 2018 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd . including plant endophytic fungi and even parasitic plants , such as the love vine Cassytha ﬁ liformis , which has recently been found to attack galls and inﬂ uence gall wasp ﬁ tness . This complex system of natural enemies has made gall former communities a model system for questions in community ecology . How can the study of gall wasps contribute to other areas of science ? Cynipid gall wasps manipulate the stem cells of their host plants and exhibit bizarre and complex life cycles . They are distributed globally , attack most lineages of vascular plants , and exhibit an amazing array of phenotypic diversity . The structurally complex tumors cynipids induce harbor a species - rich community of natural enemies from which new taxa are discovered each year . Lastly , the genomes of many of these interconnected organisms are currently being sequenced with the hope of unlocking some of the secrets this charismatic group conceals . The question is not what areas of science can the study of gall wasps contribute to , but what areas of science can the study of gall wasps not contribute to ? Where can I ﬁ nd out more ? Egan , S . P . , Comerford , M . S . , Zhang , L . , and Hood , G . R . ( 2018 ) . Botanical parasitism of an insect by a parasitic vine . Curr . Biol . 28 , R863 – R864 . Hood , G . H . , Zhang , L . , Topper , L . , Brandão - Dias , P . F . P . , Del Pino , G . A . , Comerford , M . S . , and Egan , S . P . ( 2018 ) . ‘Closing the life cycle’ of Andricus quercuslanigera Ashmead 1881 ( Hymenoptera : Cynipidae ) . Ann . Entomol . Soc . Am . 111 , 103 – 113 . Stone , G . N . , and Schönrogge , K . ( 2003 ) . The adaptive signiﬁ cance of insect gall morphology . Trends Ecol . Evol . 18 , 512 – 522 . Stone , G . N . , Schönrogge , K . , Atkinson , R . J . , Bellido , D . , and Pujade - Villar , J . ( 2002 ) . The population biology of oak gall wasps ( Hymenoptera : Cynipidae ) . Ann . Entomol . Soc . Am . 47 , 633 – 668 . Tooker , J . F . , and Helms , A . M . ( 2014 ) . Phytohormone dynamics associated with gall insects , and their potential role in the evolution of the gall - inducing habit . J . Chem . Ecol . 40 , 742 – 753 . Weinersmith , K . L . , Liu , S . M . , Forbes , A . A . , and Egan , S . P . ( 2017 ) . Tales from the crypt : A parasitoid manipulates the behavior of its parasite host . Proc . Biol . Sci . B . 284 , 20162365 . 1 Department of Biosciences , Rice University , Houston , TX 77005 , USA . 2 Department of Biological Sciences , Wayne State University , Detroit , MI 48202 , USA . 3 Department of Entomology , University of Georgia , Athens , GA 30602 , USA . 4 Population and Conservation Biology Program , Department of Biology , Texas State University , San Marcos , TX 78666 , USA . * E - mail : scott . p . egan @ rice . edu Plasmodesmata and the symplast Christine Faulkner Multicellular organisms rely on cell - to - cell communication and resource exchange to coordinate the various diverse processes involved in growth , development , and environmental responses across tissues and organs . Most complex multicellular organisms have highly organised and specialised anatomies , which develop by processes underpinned by regulated mechanisms for intercellular coordination . Indeed , in 1897 Wilhelm Pfeffer noted that for a plant to coordinate its physiological responses across the whole , there must be continuity throughout the entire organism , and that connections between cells must transport material and messages between tissues . Intercellular communication is an integral factor in any tissue - wide or organ - wide process in a multicellular organism . Like other complex multicellular organisms , plants have cells with distinct identities and functions , and these are organised into tissues and organs . Remarkably , different plant organs are exposed to vastly different environments depending on whether they are aerial or subterranean , underlining the critical need for communication to mediate coordination within a plant . Further , unlike animals , plants do not have mobile cells , and therefore the mechanisms by which plants transport resources and signals between tissues must rely solely on structural connections between cells . Plant cells are surrounded by a cell wall that prevents immediate contact between the membranes of neighbouring cells . To breach the cell wall barrier , plants have specialised plasma membrane - lined tubes called plasmodesmata that connect adjacent cells . These tubes create an interconnected , multicellular cytoplasm that traverses almost all tissues of the plant and is referred to as the symplast . Plasmodesmata connect the symplast directly to the phloem , which serves as a long - distance conduit within the vasculature and allows rapid Primer translocation of material between tissues . Thus , plasmodesmata allow both short distance and long distance molecular transport throughout a plant . Applying the assumption that any soluble molecule that is small enough to ﬁ t through a plasmodesma can freely move through the symplast , we can infer that many molecules travel long distances via this pathway to carry both resources and signals between cells and tissues . Plasmodesmal structure Structurally , plasmodesmata are plasma - membrane - lined tubes , or tunnels , that cross the cell wall and generate cytoplasmic and plasma - membrane continuity between neighbouring cells ( Figure 1 ) . When the cytoplasm of one cell is loaded with a ﬂ uorescent dye , the dye moves freely into neighbouring cells , demonstrating the capacity of the cytoplasmic connections to facilitate molecular exchange between cells . By contrast , the plasma membrane that passes through a plasmodesma does not seem to function as a transport pathway for lipid - soluble molecules , despite its continuity between neighbours . Electron micrographs show that there is also a rod of endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membrane that runs through a plasmodesma , connecting the ER of adjacent cells . This membrane rod is known as the desmotubule ( Figure 1B ) . Dyes and proteins that are soluble in ER membrane have been seen to move between cells , but the same is not true for molecules contained within the ER lumen . This correlates with electron micrographs of cross sections of plasmodesmata in which the desmotubule appears as a tightly appressed membrane tube with no space for functional lumen . Cross sections of plasmodesmata show that there are connections , or spokes , that link the desmotubule to the plasma membrane . The identity of these spokes has been a topic of debate since they were ﬁ rst observed , but a recent hypothesis is that they are membrane contact sites . According to this idea , the spokes would be calcium - responsive proteins that are anchored in both the ER and the plasma membrane . How they function to deﬁ ne plasmodesmatal structure and function is not yet clear , although Current Biology Magazine Current Biology 28 , R1365 – R1381 , December 17 , 2018 R1375 they raise intriguing possibilities about molecular exchange between the plasma membrane and ER within a plasmodesma , as well as a possible mechanism for the regulation of the distance between membranes that deﬁ nes the cytoplasmic sleeve ( the cytoplasmic conduit within a plasmodesma ) . The cell wall that surrounds a plasmodesma is also a critical component of its structure . Plant cell walls are predominantly a matrix of cellulose microﬁ brils , but the wall material immediately around plasmodesmata is rich in pectin and depleted of cellulose . We can speculate that the pectin - rich wall is more ﬂ exible than cellulose ﬁ bres , and this might allow for the dynamic changes to plasmodesmal structure and function that occur in response to a range of environmental signals . Structural features of plasmodesmata have been well described but how they all work together as a functional , dynamic pore is not well understood . Given their structural complexity , it seems likely that plasmodesmal regulation is likely to be a multifactorial process with the capacity to respond to a range of stimuli to control cell - to - cell connectivity . Ontogeny and forms of plasmodesmata Plasmodesmata form during cell division as the cell plate is built . The cell plate is initiated between the two daughter nuclei and vesicle fusion causes it to grow outwards until it connects to the existing plasma membrane and cell wall . It is thought that this vesicle fusion process traps strands of ER in the cell plate , and this creates primary plasmodesmata . As cells grow , new secondary plasmodesmata are inserted into the wall . Secondary plasmodesmata have been seen to form immediately adjacent to existing plasmodesmata , resulting in clusters of plasmodesmata in a mature wall called pit ﬁ elds . This may arise because new plasmodesmata form using an existing pore as a template or seed point , or because the pectin - rich wall around a plasmodesma is the only environment in which formation of new plasmodesmata is possible . Primary plasmodesmata have a simple form — a single opening in each cell — but in mature cell walls CW PM ER Cytoplasmic sleeve Callose SE SE PPP CC A B C D E F * Current Biology Figure 1 . Plasmodesmata connect neighbouring cells throughout a plant to establish the symplast . Plasmodesmata establish an interconnected cytoplasm called the symplast , through which metabolites , proteins , and RNAs are exchanged between cells , tissues , and organs . ( A ) Soluble molecules ( green dots ) can move ( arrows ) from the cell in which they are synthesised ( * ) into the surrounding cells via plasmodesmata . ( B ) Plasmodesmata are plasma membrane ( PM ) - lined tubes that connect neighbouring cells across the cell wall ( CW ) . They are dynamic and can open or close via the deposition of callose in the cell wall that surrounds the pore . This is regulated in response to a variety of developmental and environmental signals and controls the passive movement of molecules through plasmodesmata . ( C ) Specialised plasmodes - mata , called pore plasmodesmata , connect the companion cells ( CC ) to the sieve elements ( SE ) in the phloem . ( D ) Pore plasmodesmata have asym - metric pores — they have more openings on the companion cell face than on the sieve element face , and this facilitates high - volume translocation of sugars into the sieve elements ( C , arrow ) . The arrow indicates the major direction of movement . ( E ) In sink tissues the phloem unloads ( arrows ) via the phloem pole pericycle ( PPP ) cells . ( F ) The plasmodesmata at the interface between the sieve element and the phloem pole pericycle cells are funnel shaped , with a wide opening on the sieve element face . The arrow indicates the major direction of movement . Current Biology Magazine R1376 Current Biology 28 , R1365 – R1381 , December 17 , 2018 plasmodesmata structure is often branched with multiple openings in each cell . Counterintuitively , branched plasmodesmata are correlated with a decreased capacity for cytoplasmic trafﬁ cking . Whereas the number of plasmodesmata in a cell wall increases with wall expansion , the density of plasmodesmata decreases , further suggesting that functional connectivity decreases with cell expansion and cell maturity . Plasmodesmata can take different forms , and are present at different frequencies , depending on which cell types they connect . This is particularly evident in the phloem where companion cells connect to the enucleate sieve elements ( through which sugars and other molecules travel long distances ) via plasmodesmata . At this interface , the plasmodesmata are asymmetric pores with multiple openings in the companion cell and a single wide opening into the sieve element ( Figure 1C , D ) . This presumably aids loading of the sieve elements with sugars and other molecules . Between phloem sieve elements , the plasmodesmata are further specialised during development into sieve pores . Sieve pores are essentially large holes in the sieve plates ( the mature transverse cell walls of the sieve tube cells ) that allow high volume ﬂ ux of phloem sap but have residual features of plasmodesmata in that they are lined by plasma membrane and are traversed by ER . Unloading of the phloem in sink tissues ( Figure 1E ) occurs via funnel shaped plasmodesmata that connect the sieve element to the phloem pole pericycle cells . Here , the wide opening of the funnel is in the sieve element and has been suggested to maximise molecular ﬂ ow . Cytoplasmic connectivity is regulated by plasmodesmal frequency as well as form . For example , the high density of plasmodesmata surrounding bundle sheath cells in C4 plants allows for high inﬂ ux of malate into the bundle sheath cells . Here CO 2 is released from the malate and thereby concentrated , allowing for the enhanced rate of carbon ﬁ xation that is characteristic of C4 photosynthesis . Details are lacking regarding the full range of plasmodesmal forms and frequencies observed in different cell and tissue interfaces in plants . However , it is likely that a variety of plasmodesmal structures enable different mechanisms of cell - to - cell exchange , and that there are many forms and functions of plasmodesmata that remain to be discovered . Trafﬁ cking capacity of plasmodesmata A key factor that determines the transport capacity of a plasmodesma is the physical size ( dimensions ) of its tube . Thus , a molecule must be smaller than the diameter of the pore to pass through . The size of the largest molecule that can pass through a plasmodesma is termed the size exclusion limit , but it is important to note that this property is representative of the dimensions of the folded molecule ( or Stokes radius ) rather than its linear size . Other factors that determine the symplastic transport capacity of a given wall are the number of plasmodesmata and the structure of the pores , as described above . Observations of dye movement between cells indicate that non - speciﬁ c transport through plasmodesmata can occur within minutes , demonstrating that passive symplastic transport can mediate the rapid spread of signals and resources . The size exclusion limit of a plasmodesma is a dynamic property . The aperture of the pore can be controlled by the deposition of callose in the cell wall around a plasmodesma — an increase in callose pushes the plasma membrane inwards and occludes or closes over the cytoplasmic sleeve ( Figure 1B ) . Thus , the activity of enzymes that synthesise and degrade callose ( callose synthases and beta - 1 , 3 - glucanases , respectively ) control the size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata , increasing or decreasing it in response to a range of stimuli . Presumably this process is not an ‘all or nothing’ response — deposition of callose could entirely close the channel over , or simply reduce the tube diameter . The dynamics of size - exclusion - limit regulation underpin developmental transitions such as the release from winter dormancy and initiation of ﬂ owering . Plasmodesmata are closed via callose deposition during dormancy and when environmental signals such as increased temperature and daylength are perceived , beta - 1 , 3 - glucanase activity degrades the callose , opens the plasmodesmata and allows the movement of signals from the leaves to the meristem to initiate ﬂ owering . During lateral root initiation , the initiating cell is isolated from its neighbours via callose deposition at plasmodesmata and the developing primordia remains isolated until fully formed , at which point the new organ is reconnected to the subtending root . These two examples demonstrate that connectivity and communication via plasmodesmata are differentially required for developmental processes — sometimes extensive cell connectivity and signal transmission mediate a transition , whereas in other cases cell isolation is required . Plasmodesmata also respond to environmental signals . For example , callose is deposited at plasmodesmata during pathogen infection . It is not yet known why cells beneﬁ t from isolation during defence , but it seems likely that this is a transient response , as the plasmodesmata must be open and the cells connected for systemic signalling and defence priming that also occurs during defence responses . One possible reason for transient cell isolation could be that defence - associated molecules must be contained within a localised area to reach the signalling threshold required to initiate downstream signalling , but this remains to be demonstrated . A range of stress signals induce plasmodesmal closure via callose deposition including cold temperatures , wounding , the defence hormone salicylic acid , and reactive oxygen species , suggesting that this is a commonly deployed stress response in plant physiology . It seems likely that each of these triggers regulates plasmodesmata for different purposes and thus much remains to be learned regarding how cell - to - cell connectivity and molecular exchange deﬁ ne a physiological response . Speciﬁ c and active transport through plasmodesmata Some molecules that pass between cells via plasmodesmata are larger than the pore size - exclusion limit , raising the question of how these molecules can ﬁ t . A range of large proteins have been detected in cell types where their Current Biology Magazine Current Biology 28 , R1365 – R1381 , December 17 , 2018 R1377 corresponding gene is not expressed , indicating that the transcript or protein itself is mobile and moves between cells . The classic example of this class of proteins is the maize transcription factor KNOTTED1 ; the KNOTTED1 transcript is present in the L1 cell layer of the shoot apical meristem , but the protein is present in the L2 and L3 layers . Since this initial discovery , a range of transcription factors involved in cell - fate determination have been observed to move between cell layers , presumably to carry positional information . Many of these transcription factors are larger than the plasmodesmal size - exclusion limit , suggesting that in addition to the passive transport of molecules through plasmodesmata , there is an active mechanism of plasmodesmal translocation . The only clue to this mechanism discovered to date is the discovery of a chaperonin that refolds KNOTTED1 after translocation from one cell to another , suggesting that large proteins are unfolded to allow passage through plasmodesmata . In addition to proteins and metabolites , RNAs also travel from cell to cell via plasmodesmata . Many mRNAs are detected in phloem sap , which indicates that they must pass through plasmodesmata into phloem sieve elements . Although some mRNAs have been found to function in tissues distant to their site of synthesis , there is scepticism that all phloem - mobile mRNAs are active in distant tissues . The presence of an mRNA in the phloem sap correlates strongly with its transcript abundance in source cells ; that is , the more abundant a transcript , the more likely it is to be mobile . This suggests that mRNA transport to the phloem is non - speciﬁ c and not functionally relevant . By contrast , small RNAs are mobile in the symplast and frequently active within their destination cells . These small nucleic acids are well within the range of the size exclusion limit of plasmodesmata and could be presumed to trafﬁ c in a passive fashion . However , several miRNAs move only a distance of one cell layer , suggesting a tightly regulated mechanism of cell - to - cell movement . Further , the long - distance movement of siRNAs was recently shown to depend on a receptor - like kinase that is located at plasmodesmata . On this basis we can infer that small RNAs use an active translocation mechanism to pass through plasmodesmata , possibly because they are bound by proteins and thus part of a much larger mobile module than their size suggests . There are several other observations to suggest that plasmodesmal trafﬁ cking occurs in a variety of actively regulated ways that we don’t yet understand . The plasmodesmata at the base of tobacco secretory trichomes exhibit unidirectional transport of some molecules ; that is , transport occurs from the epidermis into the trichome , but not the reverse . The plasmodesmata at this interface appear symmetrical in electron micrographs so it is not clear how unidirectional transport occurs . In phloem pole pericycle cells in the root tip , unloading of larger proteins occurs in explosive bursts . Again , it’s not clear how plasmodesmata regulate this uneven trafﬁ cking mechanism , highlighting that we have much to learn about how plasmodesmata control the symplastic pathway . Pathogen passage through plasmodesmata The symplast can also be exploited by non - endogenous molecules and even organisms . For example , viruses are well known to use plasmodesmata to move between cells to reach the phloem , from where they infect distant tissues . Tubule - forming viruses have a somewhat ‘brute - force’ approach to cell - to - cell translocation . These viruses produce a protein tubule that displaces the contents of the plasmodesma and acts as a scaffold along which the viral genome can pass between cells . Another class of viruses exploit a less destructive mechanism . These viruses encode a movement protein that interacts with plasmodesmata , both increasing the plasmodesmal size exclusion limit and acting as a chaperone to mediate translocation of the viral genome between cells . For Tobamoviruses such as Tobacco Mosaic Virus , the minimal requirements for local cell - to - cell translocation are the movement protein and the nucleic acid . However , for the virus to successfully travel long distances in the phloem , the coat protein is also required , suggesting that long distance transport in the phloem requires packaging of the virus into virions . It is less obvious how other pathogens use plasmodesmata to access non - infected cells and the symplast . Most biotic pathogens ( bacteria , fungi , oomycetes , insects , nematodes ) do not enter the plant cytoplasm and therefore are not present in the symplast . However , there is a class of fungal pathogens that invade and occupy the intracellular space of host cells with invasion hyphae , including the rice - blast pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae . These hyphae are surrounded by plant plasma membrane , separating them from the host cytoplasm , but as the infection develops , the hyphae cross into new cells at pit ﬁ elds . Electron micrographs of crossing sites show that this process doesn’t remove the plasmodesmata , and surprisingly , can leave individual pores intact . This suggests that the choice of crossing site might have more to do with the wall specialisation around plasmodesmata than the structures themselves . It is possible that a pectin - rich matrix would be easier to penetrate than a cellulose network . Despite being separated from the cytoplasm , fungal pathogens can invade the symplast in other ways . Most biotic pathogens secrete proteins into host cells that aid infection , and it’s been observed that proteins from Magnaporthe and Fusarium fungi can target plasmodesmata and move from cell to cell . Cells beyond those directly infected offer a wealth of resources and can initiate defence ; thus , it’s possible that a pathogen beneﬁ ts from the capacity to access and manipulate these cells . Plasmodesmata offer direct access to these cells and if a pathogen can control the regulation of plasmodesmata it is likely advantageous to infection . Future perspectives Recent advances in plasmodesmal research have identiﬁ ed new structural and functional features of these pores . Ongoing discovery of novel aspects of plasmodesmata suggest that we have barely scratched the surface in understanding how plasmodesmata work , and the range of ways the symplast and cell - to - cell communication are central to plant Current Biology Magazine R1378 Current Biology 28 , R1365 – R1381 , December 17 , 2018 © 2018 Elsevier Ltd . development and responses . Much of plant research centres on the model species Arabidopsis , in which we can perform genetic dissection of the structure and function of plasmodesmata , and their contribution to cell - to - cell communication . This has proved a powerful approach in understanding plasmodesmal form and function However , the observation that different plant anatomies have different distributions and forms of plasmodesmata indicates that we cannot understand the full contribution of plasmodesmata and the symplast to plant function by analysing Arabidopsis alone . The key technical and scientiﬁ c challenges before us that relate to plasmodesmal and symplast function are the requirement for single cell resolution in assaying for molecular transport and cell responses , and the identiﬁ cation of the molecules that carry critical information from one cell to another across the different contexts in which plasmodesmata function . With this knowledge we can trace the initiation and spread of a signal through plasmodesmata to discern the scope of intercellular signalling and co - ordination in plants . FURTHER READING Christensen , N . M . , Faulkner , C . , and Oparka , K . ( 2009 ) . Evidence for unidirectional ﬂ ow through plasmodesmata . Plant Physiol . 150 , 96 – 104 . Gunning , B . E . S . , and Robards , A . W . ( 1976 ) . Intercellular Communication in Plants : Studies on Plasmodesmata . ( Springer - Verlag ) . Nicolas , W . J . , Grison , M . S . , Trépout , S . , Gaston , A . , Fouché , M . , Cordelières , F . P . , Oparka , K . , Tilsner J . , Brocard , L . , and Bayer , E . M . ( 2017 ) . Architecture and permeability of post - cytokinesis plasmodesmata lacking cytoplasmic sleeves . Nat . Plants 3 , 17082 . Oparka , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Plasmodesmata . ( Oxford : Blackwell Publishing ) . Rosas - Diaz , T . , Zhang , D . , Fan , P . , Wang , L . , Ding , X . , Jiang , Y . , Jimenez - Gongora , T . , Medina - Puche , L . , Zhao , X . , Feng , Z . et al . ( 2018 ) . A virus - targeted plant receptor - like kinase promotes cell - to - cell spread of RNAi . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci USA 115 , 1388 – 1393 . Ross - Elliott , T . J . , Jensen , K . H . , Haaning , K . S . , Wager , B . M . , Knoblauch , J . , Howell , A . H . , Mullendore , D . L . , Monteith , A . G . , Paultre , D . , Yan , D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Phloem unloading in Arabidopsis roots is convective and regulated by the phloem - pole pericycle . eLife 6 , e24125 . Sager , R . E . , and Lee , J . Y . ( 2018 ) . Plasmodesmata at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 131 , jcs209346 . Tilsner , J . , Nicolas , W . , Rosado , A . , and Bayer , E . M . ( 2016 ) . Staying tight : plasmodesmal membrane contact sites and the control of cell - to - cell connectivity in plants . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 67 , 337 – 364 . John Innes Centre , Norwich Research Park , NR4 7UH , UK . E - mail : christine . faulkner @ jic . ac . uk Ethical seed sourcing is a key issue in meeting global restoration targets Paul G . Nevill * , Adam T . Cross , and Kingsley W . Dixon The global demand for restoration has increased orders of magnitude in the last decade , and hundreds of thousands of tonnes of native seed are required to feed this restoration engine [ 1 ] ( Figure 1 ) . But where are all the seeds required by restoration going to come from ? Wild seed resources continue to be depleted by habitat loss , land degradation and climatic change , and over - collection of seed from wild populations threatens to erode these resources further . Ethical seed sourcing for restoration now represents a core issue in responsible restoration practice . Solutions include the introduction of regulatory frameworks controlling seed sourcing from wild populations , the development of seed farming capacity and advancement of seed enhancement technologies and precision delivery systems reducing seed wastage . We estimate , for example , that over 200 , 000 tonnes of seed are required to revegetate the 3 . 7 million ha footprint of land degraded by mining in China alone , which is now greater than the land area of the Netherlands [ 2 ] . Without a clear understanding of the impacts of wild seed harvesting , many natural areas face a similar scenario to the collapse of the Atlantic Cod ﬁ shery [ 3 ] as already depleted ‘breeding stock’ is removed from the population . However , seeds remain the most cost - effective material for large - scale restoration , given their comparative ease of harvest , portability , ability of sowing to be automated and amenability for cost - effective long - term storage [ 1 ] . Seeds also confer restored communities greater genetic diversity and long - term climatic resilience . But , most importantly , seeds are easy to deliver . For instance , a large scale restoration project in northwest Minnesota , USA , can now seed approximately 81 ha of tallgrass prairie per day [ 4 ] . For most plants , seed production represents the culmination of investment in a long series of high - risk events ( i . e . ﬂ owering , pollination , seed maturation ) , and plants may be unable to compensate for sudden losses in seed outputs as a result of harvesting . Overharvesting from wild populations , both in scale and frequency , can lead to altered regeneration dynamics and population declines [ 5 ] . Such declines could potentially lead to a loss of resilience for the whole ecosystem , particularly as drying climates are expected to reduce seed production rates and alter seed maturation and seed persistence in soil [ 6 ] . The impact of overharvesting is likely to be particularly pronounced for short - lived non - clonal plant species , for which high - intensity annual harvests can increase extinction risks by up to 95 % [ 7 ] . If species are pushed beyond their adaptive capacity , the adverse impacts of overcollection on wild seed production will become increasingly frequent , and the cumulative depletion of seed resources over multiple seasons may push species with short generation times and narrow bioclimatic niches closer to extinction thresholds . Additionally , restoration is frequently undertaken in regions where native vegetation has been widely cleared , degraded or fragmented , rendering ecosystems disproportionately prone to the impacts of wild seed collection . Many insects , birds and mammals rely on wild seed sources for nourishment , and erosion of wild seed resources can result in dramatic population declines for granivorous fauna [ 8 ] . This impact is likely to be most profound for species with speciﬁ c dietary niches from regions where forage habitats are in decline . We advocate for signiﬁ cant future focus on a range of measures to achieve more ethical seed sourcing for ecological restoration . The ﬁ rst step in developing more ethical seed sourcing practices is to encourage the implementation of large - scale native seed production programs . Seed production areas ( SPA ) should be founded on robust business models , ensuring their long - term commercial viability , and supported by regulatory frameworks [ 9 ] . Examples of SPA providing signiﬁ cant seed quantities for Correspondence