MIND , BRAIN , AND EDUCATION Gene – Environment Interplay and Individual Diﬀerences in Behavior Ina Anreiter 1 , 2 , H . Moriah Sokolowski 3 , and Marla B . Sokolowski 1 , 2 ABSTRACT— Individuals of the same species display remarkable variation in behavior , even in identical contexts . Increasing complexity in behavioral phenotypes brings with it an increase in individual variation in the manifestation of those phenotypes , and human behavior undoubtedly stands at the pinnacle of complexity . In this article , we discuss current knowledge of gene – environment interplay and how the complex interactions of genes , experiences , epigenetics , and developmental timing give rise to individual diﬀerences in behavior . Questions about why humans and other animals vary in their behavior have occupied our thoughts for centuries ( Logan & Johnston , 2007 ) . Discussions concerning contri - butions to variation in behavior began with disagreements around the nature – nurture dichotomy ( Burkhardt , 2005 ; Kruuk , 2003 ) . Nature is akin to genes ( G ) and nurture to the environment ( E ) . Early psychologists who typically stud - ied aspects of nurture in the laboratory believed that infants were born with a blank slate and that their experiences ( E ) wrote on this slate and generated individual diﬀerences in behavior ( Pinker , 2002 ; Watson , 1913 ) . Biologists and early ethologists who observed and quantiﬁed animal behavior in their natural habitats argued that variation in behav - ior arises from nature ( genes ) and called these behaviors instinctive or innate ( Lorenz , 1981 ; Tinbergen , 1951 ) . The 1 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology , University of Toronto 2 Child and Brain Development Program , Canadian Institute for Advanced Research ( CIFAR ) 3 Department of Psychology , Brain and Mind Institute , The University of Western Ontario Address correspondence to Marla B . Sokolowski , Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology , University of Toronto , 25 Willcocks Street , Toronto , Ontario , M5S 3B2 Canada ; e - mail : marla . sokolowski @ utoronto . ca history of research that followed for the most part resulted in geneticists controlling but not manipulating environmen - tal inﬂuences on behavior and psychologists not consider - ing genetic predispositions and their contributions to indi - vidual diﬀerences in behavior . However , these early ideas about a nature – nurture dichotomy proved to be incorrect . Indeed , sources of variation in behavior are neither due to genes or environments alone . As more data were collected , the debates about there being a nature – nurture dichotomy were conﬁrmed to be nonsensical , along with the determin - istic thinking that this dichotomy provoked . Had the present article been written for a genetics audience we would have urged them to consider the importance of the environment ( experiences ) during development and adulthood and how the environment shapes behavioral variation . Because this article is written for researchers in psychology / neuroscience and education , we emphasize the inclusion of genetic predis - positions and their interplay with experiences as important for understanding behavioral variation . In either case , the aim is to understand concepts around gene – environment interplay so that they can be incorporated into research , practice , and everyday thinking . In particular , we introduce the Mind , Brain , and Education ( MBE ) community to the concept of gene – environment interplay and suggest that it become incorporated into discussions aiming to bridge neu - roscience and education . EARLY EFFORTS TO INTEGRATE GENETICS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO BEHAVIORAL DIFFERENCES Biometricians who used statistical approaches to make their arguments replaced the nature – nurture dichotomy with a G + E model . In this case , one could take the amount of variation in a behavioral trait that was attributed to genes and add it to the variation attributed to the environment and this alone would predict individual diﬀerences in behavior . © 2017 International Mind , Brain , and Education Society and Wiley Periodicals , Inc . 1 Gene – Environment Interplay This additive model led to broad sense heritability measures ( reviewed in M . B . Sokolowski & Wahlsten , 2001 ) that continued the tradition of gene – environment determinism by partitioning the variance into genetic and environmental sources of variation . Heritability consisted of the proportion of variance of a trait ( e . g . , IQ , aggression , smoking ) that was attributable to genetic variation among individuals in a population . There are many excellent critiques of heritability measures in the literature ( e . g . , Wahlsten & Gottlieb , 1997 ) . Although these measures were developed and eﬀectively used by quantitative geneticists for agricultural research to predict responses to selection ( Falconer & Mackay , 1996 ) , they have misled our thinking about the origins of our diﬀerences for decades because they have been interpreted from a genetic determinism framework . It is important to keep in mind that heritability measures are population mea - sures that cannot predict an individual’s traits . In addition , the idea that the eﬀect of G and E could be simply added together to explain individual diﬀerences in a trait propelled deterministic thinking into the scientiﬁc and public domain , because it implied that if something is heritable ( i . e . , in the genes ) , it is not modiﬁable or ﬂexible . This presumed inverse relationship between heritability and plasticity led people to believe that experience could not modify traits that are inﬂuenced by genes ( M . B . Sokolowski & Wahlsten , 2001 ) . An example from the animal literature is helpful to clar - ify the above point . The foraging gene inﬂuences a num - ber of behavioral traits . Rover and sitter allelic variants of the Drosophila foraging gene diﬀer in a number of behav - ioral and metabolic phenotypes . For example , rovers move more , eat less , and are leaner than sitters . However , despite the strong genetically based diﬀerences in rovers and sit - ters , these traits are themselves modiﬁable by the environ - ment ( Anreiter , Vasquez , Allen , & Sokolowski , 2016 ; Burns et al . , 2012 ; Kaun et al . , 2007 ) . When the nutritional envi - ronment is modiﬁed with a period of food deprivation in early life , rovers become sitters ( Kaun et al . 2007 ) . This shows that the nutritional environment interacts with the foraging gene to generate changes in behavior . In an olfactory - based learning paradigm , sitters are better at associating an odor with a reward , but only when they are trained and tested in a group . In contrast , rovers can learn and remember when trained and tested alone or in groups ( Kohn et al . , 2013 ) . In this case , the social context aﬀects the plasticity of traits that have a known genetic underpinning . Although there is a long reach from early life to adulthood , early - life experience can also aﬀect later - life outcomes . For example , rover and sitter ﬂies diﬀer in risk taking during food search , with rovers taking more risks , but both rovers and sitters increase their risk taking if they experience nutritional depri - vation in early life ( Burns et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , a genetic variant ( at the level of the DNA sequence ) in the human foraging gene PRKG1 aﬀects how sensitive mothers are to their infants ( i . e . , maternal sensitivity ) , but this is depen - dent on the mother’s history of abuse and neglect as a child ( H . M . Sokolowski et al . , 2017 ) . Mothers of one genotype are well buﬀered against early adversity , whereas mothers of the alternative genotype are more vulnerable . The aforemen - tioned examples using studies of the foraging gene clearly show that genetic predispositions to behave a certain way are ﬂexible and modiﬁable by experience . From the perspective of the environment , individuals can experience the same environment diﬀerently . Twin studies have been particularly useful to help conceptualize the dif - ferent ways that individuals experience their environments ( Ashbury & Plomin , 2014 ) . Historically , twins provide us with a natural experiment because identical ( monozygotic [ MZ ] ) twins share 100 % of their genes ( DNA ) , while frater - nal ( dizygotic [ DZ ] ) twins have only half of their genes in common . Heritability of behavior in twin studies is calcu - lated by comparing how similar identical twins are to how similar nonidentical twins are . Correlation analyses are used to deﬁne similarity ( a score of 1 . 0 indicates no diﬀerences between MZ and DZ twins and 0 . 0 indicates no similari - ties ) . Twin studies are particularly useful from the perspec - tive of understanding how the environment contributes to behavioral variation . In twin studies , behavior geneticists divide the environment ( the nongenetic inﬂuences ) into two parts : the shared environment ( SE ) and the nonshared envi - ronment ( NSE ) . Within the NSE , experiences can be objec - tively nonshared or subjectively nonshared . For example , in school - age twins , experiences that fall into the objectively nonshared category might be choosing diﬀerent types of friends , one twin breaking an arm , or one twin being cho - sen for a theater production , while the other did not audition because he / she was on the track team . The perceived or sub - jectively nonshared environment could occur around there being a divorce in the family . For example , when only one twin was exposed to a particularly bad argument between the parents , or when one twin may be more or less sensitive to the change in the family or more close to the parent that has left . This would make the experience of the same divorce in the family ( an objective experience ) diﬀerent for each child ( a subjective experience ) ( Ashbury & Plomin , 2014 ) . In this way , twin studies have been helpful in partitioning variance attributable to heredity and to environments . An important point here is that , undeniably , some environmen - tal eﬀects are hidden within heritability estimates through gene – environment interplay ( discussed further below ) . Twin studies have shown that educational traits , includ - ing reading , writing , and educational attainment , ﬁt a genetic model of many genes each with small additive eﬀects contributing to the variation in each of these traits . Currently , however , the identiﬁcation of gene variants ( e . g . , single - nucleotide polymorphisms [ SNPs ] ) involved in these multifaceted educational phenotypes is challenging , as each 2 Ina Anreiter et al . genetic variant will comprise a very small proportion of the variance ( 0 . 5 % at most ) . Notably , educational traits are normally distributed in populations and classrooms , and do not fall into dichotomous categories ( e . g . , reading abilities comprise a full range ) . Consequently , it makes sense to develop approaches to education that maximize each child’s potential rather than aim at bringing all children up to a given and often arbitrarily chosen level of attainment . From the perspective of gene – environment interplay , “genes do not operate independently of experience and therefore edu - cators need not fear genes as being deterministic . Instead teachers should think of themselves as drawing out a child’s genetic potential rather than writing haphazardly on a mythical blank slate” ( Ashbury & Plomin , 2014 , p . 145 ) . GENE – ENVIRONMENT INTERPLAY AND DEVELOPMENT As statistical models advanced , other components , such as gene by environment interaction terms ( G × E ) , were added to the previous gene – environment model . Animal research conﬁrmed that G × E was of critical importance for understanding behavioral variability ( M . B . Sokolowski & Wahlsten , 2001 ) . Nevertheless , with the advent of molecular biological techniques that can elevate statistical correlations to the level of causation , it became clear that the relationship between genes and the environment is more nuanced than G × E . Genetic predispositions and environmental exposure interact at many levels to guide child development . Neither genes or environment or even statistical gene – environment interactions ( G × E ) are suﬃcient to explain all the interindi - vidual variability in life trajectories . The dynamic complex - ity of environmental and biological factors that lead to spe - ciﬁc developmental outcomes has led researchers to the term gene – environment interplay ( Caspi & Moﬃtt , 2006 ; Boyce et al . , 2012 ) . Gene – environment interplay expands on the idea of G × E interactions by describing a reciprocal relation - ship between G and E ( Rutter , 2007 ) . As a child develops , genes are listening to the environment and respond to the child’s experiences in a reciprocal way . Below , we discuss gene – environment interplay in the context of G × E corre - lations and G × E interactions , genetic predispositions , and environmental exposures , as well as other contributing fac - tors such as epigenetics and developmental time constraints . GENE – ENVIRONMENT CORRELATIONS One of the earlier theories of how genotypes and environ - ments correlate highlights the false dichotomy between genetic determinism and naïve environmentalism men - tioned above ( Plomin , DeFries , & Loehlin , 1977 ) . This theory states that genotypic diﬀerences aﬀect phenotypes through passive , evocative , and active gene – environment correlations . Passive gene – environment correlations hap - pen when individuals who are genetically more similar are more likely to mate . In this scenario , children are genetically more related to their parents , and as a consequence , genet - ically more similar caregivers provide the environment for their child . This means that the child’s genetics will correlate with the child’s environment . Evocative gene – environment correlations refer to the notion that an individual’s genes inﬂuence the way that others respond to that individual . For example , a child who is taller might be treated diﬀerently than a shorter child . Active gene – environment correlations refer to the idea that an individual’s genes inﬂuence the individual’s selective attention to diﬀerent aspects of the environment . This may make the individual more likely to seek out certain experiences across the life span ( for a detailed description of gene – environment correlation , see Plomin et al . , 1977 ) . Active gene – environment corre - lations may explain why some students gravitate to one activity in the classroom , whereas others prefer another . Respecting this diversity of interests and providing a range of experiences in the classroom will embrace this diversity of interests and abilities and aid in having each child reach their potential . Importantly , this means that the latest science on gene – environment interplay does not support a one - size ﬁts all approach to learning . Furthermore , it has been sug - gested that the relative importance of these three kinds of gene – environment correlations changes across develop - mental time ( Scarr & McCartney , 1983 ) . Speciﬁcally , the passive kind may be most salient in infancy , whereas evoca - tive and active gene – environment correlations become more important during later childhood and adolescence ; however , these hypotheses require testing using longitu - dinal study designs ( Scarr & McCartney , 1983 ) . Although gene – environment correlations are not suﬃcient to fully explain variation in childhood developmental outcomes , they make important contributions to our understanding of gene – environment interplay . GENETIC PREDISPOSITIONS When discussing twin studies above , we mentioned that genetic contributions to reading and writing ﬁt a genetic model of many genes each with very small eﬀect sizes . We return to this subject by discussing approaches to investi - gate genetic and environmental contributions to individual diﬀerences in behavior . We know the most about genetic predispositions from studies of disease phenotypes . There are many examples of genetic mutations aﬀecting develop - ment , and the size of the eﬀects range from very small to very large . The most drastic examples are of speciﬁc single gene 3 Gene – Environment Interplay mutations causing impaired development , such as Tay - Sachs disease ( Lacorazza , Flax , Snyder , & Jendoubi , 1996 ) , or Cor - nelia de Lange syndrome ( Krantz et al . , 2004 ) . Nevertheless , these examples are relatively rare , and genetic variants ( also called polymorphisms ) associated with developmental out - comes in humans usually have small , additive eﬀects that are environment - dependent . Genome - wide association analysis is an approach used to identify genetic variants that associate with trait variation . Genome - wide association studies ( GWAS ) associate varia - tion in the phenotype with a set of genetic variants ( usu - ally SNPs ) . SNPs are distributed throughout the genome ( the entire DNA sequence in humans ) and GWAS identiﬁes SNPs that statistically diﬀer between individuals with dif - ferent phenotypes . Often , these SNPs mark a large region in the human genome that encompasses hundreds of genes , any one of which might be associated with variation in the trait of interest . Many GWAS studies have been carried out on major human diseases . The advantage of GWAS is that it is an unbiased approach that relies on phenotype rather than the genotype . What this means is that there are no prespeciﬁed candidate genes or regions of interest that are associated with trait variation . This makes GWAS a noncan - didate gene approach that avoids missing important genetic contributions due to a priori assumptions . Nevertheless , GWAS identiﬁes SNPs associated with the trait , but does not address whether the genetic variants found are causal to the trait variation . Confounders that can contribute to population stratiﬁcation , such as sex , age , geography , and ethnic background , have to be adjusted for in GWAS , and signiﬁcance values have to be corrected for multiple com - parisons . There are usually millions of SNPs tested for asso - ciation , making it necessary to adjust the p - value threshold of signiﬁcance for multiple comparisons to avoid “random” signiﬁcant hits . The downside of this multiple comparison correction is that SNPS with very small contributions ( small p - values ) can be easily missed . Finally , to assess reproducibil - ity , signiﬁcant SNPs need to be validated in an independent cohort . In general , SNPs found in GWAS have very small predictive value , but when validated can contribute to under - standing the genetic pathways underlying variation in a trait . Often the predictive value of a SNP is so small that sev - eral SNPs are used to assemble polygenic ( multiple gene ) risk scores with higher predictive value . In general , however , the reported associated variants are not likely to be causal variants because they mark an associated region of DNA that spans hundreds of genes , making it diﬃcult to biolog - ically interpret the genes that emerge from GWAS . To assess causality , genetic variants identiﬁed in GWAS have to be tested independently , but this approach is costly . As the prices for next generation sequencing have come down , large human genetics consortia have begun to use GWAS to identify genes important to complex phenotypes . Using GWAS , over 700 genes were found to be linked to intellectual disability ( Vissers , Gilissen , & Veltman , 2016 ) , and 107 genes were been associated with risks for autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) ( De Rubeis et al . , 2014 ) . More recently , Yuen et al . ( 2017 ) identiﬁed new genes that con - tribute to ASD . Nevertheless , it has been diﬃcult to ﬁnd genetic determinants for some complex human disorders . Although major depressive disorder has high heritability from twin studies ( 40 % – 50 % ) , it has been notoriously dif - ﬁcult to identify the genes that drive it ( Major Depressive Disorder Working Group of the Psychiatric GWAS Con - sortium et al . , 2013 ) , most likely because the genes involved have such small individual eﬀects that they are hard to detect . A recent study that identiﬁed 15 genetic loci asso - ciated with depression used over 300 , 000 individuals ( Hyde et al . , 2016 ) , illustrating the large sample sizes needed to detect genes of small eﬀects . Importantly , none of the genes involved in these complex disorders have been shown to be deterministic , or the sole cause for these disorders . Some of the diﬃculty in pinpointing the genetic contributions to these disorders comes from methodological problems with GWAS . GWAS often lack replication , meaning that a gene associated with a given phenotype in one study often does not correlate with that same phenotype in other studies ( Torrico et al . , 2017 ) . The lack of replication in GWAS is probably due to a combination of insuﬃcient sample sizes , inappropriate statistical methods , lack of control for population stratiﬁcation , variability in how phenotypes are measured , and unaccounted for GxE interactions ( Heid et al . , 2009 ; Kraft , Zeggini , & Ioannidis , 2009 ; Moonesinghe , Khoury , Liu , & Ioannidis , 2008 ) . GWAS studies also suﬀer from the problem that individual genes or SNPs cannot account for much of the heritability of diseases , behaviors , and other phenotypes predicted from twin studies ( Maher , 2008 ) . This most likely relates back to the ﬁndings in the animal literature that most phenotypes are driven by com - plex G × G , G × E interactions , and G – E correlations , rather than by single genes . Furthermore , when disease - correlated SNPs fall outside of gene - coding regions , they are often assumed to aﬀect the gene with the closest proximity , while in truth they might be aﬀecting the expression of a more distant gene ( Thakurela , Sahu , Kumar , Garding , & Tiwari , 2015 ) . Additionally , from the perspective of the present discussion , little is known about genetic diﬀerences and individual variation in normal human development that is not linked to a disease phenotype . G × E interactions could help explain much of the repro - ducibility problem of GWAS mentioned above , as the signiﬁcant correlation of genes with phenotypes might often be dependent on environmental factors . Neverthe - less , eﬀectively teasing apart G × E interactions in GWAS is challenging . Methods are being developed that will enable researchers to include quantitative measures of the 4 Ina Anreiter et al . environment and multifaceted measures of risk in GWAS ( e . g . , Soave et al . , 2015 ) , and combinations of genetic variants that pass threshold can be assembled to generate a poly - genic risk score that can be used to further assess risk . An example of this in the social science literature is described for a GWAS on educational attainment , which used almost 300 , 000 individuals along with a replicate sample of over 100 , 000 individuals . They found 74 genome - wide signiﬁ - cant loci associated with the number of years of schooling completed , a proxy for educational attainment . Together , a polygenic score accounted for approximately 20 % of the variation between individuals in this highly environmentally related trait ( Okbay et al . , 2016 ) . The environment ( and G × E ) can and should be included at the genome - wide level . Polimanti et al . ( 2017 ) performed a genome - wide study to address risk for alcohol use in two independent cohorts ( N = 16 , 361 and N = 8 , 084 ) , tak - ing into account lifetime trauma ; individuals were scored dichotomously as exposed or unexposed . Their study is called a GEWIS , which stands for a gene - by - environment genome - wide interaction study . They found a signiﬁcant gene - by - trauma interaction eﬀect on alcohol misuse in the African American subjects in their study . Interestingly , in this study , the PRKG1 gene ( discussed previously in a G × E candidate gene context ) was the only gene that passed signiﬁcance threshold and did so in the two independent cohorts . PRKG1 is a cyclic guanosine monophosphate ( cGMP ) – dependent protein kinase known to be an impor - tant modiﬁer of behavior in the animal literature . ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES AND G × E INTERACTIONS Another type of association analysis uses candidate genes to correlate variants in speciﬁc genes to variation in a par - ticular trait . ( Examples are provided in the next paragraph . ) G × E studies of this type use speciﬁc genetic variants of a candidate gene and correlate this to an environmental measure such as early adversity ( e . g . , H . M . Sokolowski et al . , 2017 ) . Nominated candidate genes often come from the animal literature and it is important to know enough about the human trait to erect a hypothesis about a partic - ular candidate gene . Results of analyses such as these for behavioral and psychiatric phenotypes have been incon - sistent , diﬃcult to replicate , and are heavily inﬂuenced by assumptions around candidate genes . As mentioned above , GWAS is exploratory and not hypothesis - driven , whereas the candidate gene approach is hypothesis - driven . Candidate gene and G × E studies have come under heavy scrutiny in the past decade for lack of reproducibility ( Caspi , Hariri , Holmes , Uher , & Moﬃtt , 2010 ; Duncan , Pollastri , & Smoller , 2014 ; Karg , Burmeister , Shedden , & Sen , 2011 ; Risch et al . , 2009 ; Rutter , 2010 ) . Studies can fail to replicate G × E interactions because of lack of standardization of environmental and phenotypic assessment , statistical methods , and study designs ( Dunn et al . , 2011 ) . Improved phenotyping , better environmental measures , bigger sample sizes , more informed study designs , and replication in inde - pendent populations will help to uncover more meaningful G × E interactions in the future . G × E interactions show that genetic risk factors should be seen as predispositions and do not determine a given developmental outcome . As mentioned above , it is timely to include E and G × E in genome - wide studies . Experience aﬀects development in many ways , especially in the early years , throughout pregnancy and childhood and also in adolescence . Prenatal nutrition and emotional stress can lead to life - long eﬀects on physical and psychological health ( Ozanne , Lewis , Jennings , & Hales , 2004 ; Vickers , Breier , Cutﬁeld , Hofman , & Gluckman , 2000 ) . Perceived socioeconomic status ( SES ) , which is a result of factors such as income , education , social status , poverty , and social stratiﬁcation , constitutes a major source of stress that clearly aﬀects biological and psychological development ( Good - man , Huang , Schafer - Kalkhoﬀ , & Adler , 2007 ) . Children from mothers that were stressed during pregnancy are at increased risk for attention - deﬁcit / hyperactivity disorder , conduct disorder , and impaired cognitive development ( Talge , Neal , & Glover , 2007 ) . This increased risk for behav - ioral disorders might be linked to altered brain structure and function in children and adults exposed to high levels of stress ( Buss et al . , 2012 ; Chetty et al . , 2014 ; Harker , Raza , Williamson , Kolb , & Gibb , 2015 ) . The eﬀects of adverse environments on biology are largely mediated through the hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal ( HPA ) axis , the human stress response system ( Maniam , Antoniadis , & Morris , 2014 ) . For instance , maternal separation aﬀects HPA axis function , resulting in cognitive impairment , anxiety , and depression later in life ( Aisa , Tordera , Lasheras , Del Río , & Ramírez , 2007 ; Champagne , Francis , Mar , & Meaney , 2003 ; Vargas , Junco , Gomez , & Lajud , 2016 ) . More recently , the early - life environment has been shown to also play an important role in the development of the immune sys - tem and regulation of inﬂammation throughout life ( Coe , Lubach , & Shirtcliﬀ , 2007 ; McDade , Borja , Largado , Adair , & Kuzawa , 2016 ; Miller et al . , 2009 ) . Both HPA axis reg - ulation and inﬂammation have been linked to metabolic syndrome and obesity , establishing a connection between early - life environment and later physical health outcomes . Nevertheless , exposure to an adverse environment does not always result in the same health outcome . There is individual variability in how susceptible we are to the bio - logical and psychological consequences of environmental exposure . G × E interactions have been shown for a variety of environmental factors . DNA polymorphisms in HPA axis 5 Gene – Environment Interplay regulators such as 5HTTLPR interact with early - life stress to determine psychophysiological outcomes ( Cicchetti , Rogosch , Sturge - Apple , & Toth , 2010 ; Kaufman et al . , 2006 ; Qiu et al . , 2015 ; Roy , Hu , Janal , & Goldman , 2007 ; Uher & McGuﬃn , 2010 ) . Adversity might have heightened eﬀects on individuals with genetic risk alleles , but positive envi - ronments can prevent the developmental consequences of carrying a risk allele . The misleading metaphor that DNA is a genetic blueprint that maps out development can lead to misguided thinking that interventions could not change individuals with certain genetic predispositions . EPIGENETIC EMBEDDING OF ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURE Research over the past decade has shown that environmental exposures can leave epigenetic marks on DNA that aﬀect the function of genes and molecular pathways . In this context , epigenetic regulation is receiving increasing attention as the molecular mechanism by which experience is embedded in to our biology in the long term ( Boyce et al . , 2012 ; Boyce & Kobor , 2015 ) . In some cases , these epigenetic changes are thought to last a lifetime , or even pass on to the next gener - ation . One of the ﬁrst studies on the epigenetic embedding of experience showed that rat pups that experience low maternal care have epigenetic changes at the glucocorticoid receptor , a gene important in HPA axis regulation . These changes are acquired during the ﬁrst weeks of life and persist into adulthood , but are absent in pups that were cross fostered with a high maternal care mother ( Weaver et al . , 2004 ) . Low maternal care in rats also negatively aﬀects other HPA regulators and neuroplasticity ( Chetty et al . , 2014 ; Murgatroyd et al . , 2009 ; Roth , Lubin , Funk , & Sweatt , 2009 ) through epigenetic mechanisms . In humans , similar epigenetic changes in HPA axis genes , caused by early - life stress , are associated with depression and diminished responsiveness to antidepressant treatment in adolescents ( Levine , Worrell , Zimnisky , & Schmauss , 2012 ; McGowan et al . , 2009 ; Nieratschker et al . , 2014 ; Oberlander et al . , 2008 ; Romens , McDonald , Svaren , & Pollak , 2014 ) . Other early - life exposures , such as early - life SES and nutrition , can also leave lifelong epigenetic signatures on the DNA that have been associated with psychological and physical health outcomes in adulthood ( Borghol et al . , 2012 ; Drake et al . , 2012 ; Heijmans et al . , 2008 ; Lam et al . , 2012 ; McGowan et al . , 2009 ; Mehta et al . , 2013 ; Tehranifar et al . , 2013 ; Terry et al . , 2008 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ; Yehuda & Bierer , 2009 ) . Studies of child development , disease , and resilience have mostly focused on genetic variability as a “predispos - ing” factor and on epigenetic embedding as a mechanism for integrating environmental information ( G + E model ) . Nevertheless , some recent studies show that genotypic diﬀerences can interact with epigenetic processes , resulting in individual responses to environmental factors ( Anreiter , Kramer , & Sokolowski , 2017 ; Klengel et al . , 2013 ; Okhovat , Berrio , Wallace , Ophir , & Phelps , 2015 ) . This adds a new level of complexity to biological processes and highlights the need for including genetic by epigenetic analysis as well as genome by epigenome - wide analyses in developmental research . The question of whether environmentally induced epi - genetic marks are passed to subsequent generations is still heavily debated . Both human and model organism stud - ies have shown that some epigenetic marks induced in the parents are still present in the oﬀspring ( Ashe et al . , 2012 ; Carone et al . , 2010 ; Dias & Ressler , 2014 ; Ost et al . , 2014 ) . But when a parent is exposed to an experience , their oﬀspring is indirectly exposed as well , through the developing gametes . And in a pregnant mother , the subsequent two generations are simultaneously exposed to the same environment as the mother , because the egg that will produce the grand - child is already developing within the fetus . This means that studies on transgenerational epigenetic inheritance must span over multiple generations , and even then , a recurring cycle of de novo deposition of epigenetic marks , instead of direct inheritance of these marks is hard to exclude . Because of this , empirical evidence for transgenerational epigenetic inheritance is scarce , with a few studies suggest - ing its occurrence in model organisms , but none in humans ( for review , see Heard & Martienssen , 2014 ) . Epigenet - ics research also struggles with other methodological chal - lenges . For instance , DNA methylation patterns vary more widely between diﬀerent tissues in a single person than in the same tissue in diﬀerent people ( Jiang et al . , 2015 ) . This means that questions regarding the functionality of DNA methyla - tion need to be directed at a speciﬁc tissue , and the tissues of most interest to child development ( e . g . , brain ) are not read - ily accessible . In sum , we know that epigenetic regulation undoubtedly plays an important role in child development , but the ﬁeld is still in its infancy , and more research is needed to fully understand the role of epigenetics in development . DEVELOPMENTAL TIME CONSTRAINTS Many aspects of child and brain development are governed by temporal constraints , known as critical or sensitive peri - ods . Critical periods are windows of plasticity where the brain is more sensitive to experience ( Takesian & Hensch , 2013 ) . These windows occur at diﬀerent times in early development and shape the function of the developing brain ( Kobayashi , Ye , & Hensch , 2015 ; Perani et al . , 2011 ; Werker & Hensch , 2015 ) . The onset and closure of critical periods is both genetically and environmentally inﬂuenced , and some research indicates that critical periods can be reopened even after closure ( Gervain et al . , 2013 ) . This is important because 6 Ina Anreiter et al . it means that experiences aﬀect development diﬀerently , depending on when during development they happen . For instance , maternal nutrient deﬁciency during the Dutch winter famine of 1944 – 1945 had speciﬁc long - term con - sequences at diﬀerent stages in human pregnancy ( Ravelli et al . , 1998 ; Ravelli , van der Meulen , Osmond , Barker , & Bleker , 1999 ) . This also means that interventions targeted to a speciﬁc cognitive skill might prove more ( or less ) eﬀective , depending on the age of the target group of children . Further research into developmental time constraints will prove use - ful in designing interventions . Although the biological basis of critical periods is not fully understood , research shows that certain factors can shift or reopen critical periods ( Peña , Werker , & Dehaene - Lambertz , 2012 ; Werker & Hensch , 2015 ) . This has led to the suggestion that the developmental time constraints for cognitive functions are often governed by ﬂexible sensitive periods , rather than unchangeable crit - ical periods . It is also important to consider critical periods in the study of gene – environment interplay and epigenetics , because a speciﬁc G × E interaction may be more important during a discrete period , and experiences might only result in epigenetic marks during these time periods . PHENOTYPE MEASUREMENTS The large body of research described above has identiﬁed biological mechanisms that underpin how the interplay between an individual’s genetics and their environment aﬀects certain phenotypes . Nevertheless , the term pheno - type has a broad deﬁnition ( i . e . , “observable characteristics or traits” ( Charney , 2016 ) , and when it comes to taking the leap from biological research to education , it is especially important to consider the usefulness of diﬀerent pheno - type measures . Phenotypic outcome measures can include lower biologically speciﬁc level of analysis , such as gene ( RNA / protein ) expression or synaptic plasticity ( Reaume & Sokolowski , 2011 ) , or higher behaviorally broad level of analysis , such as coarsely measured educational outcomes ( Belsky et al . , 2016 ; Okbay et al . , 2016 ) . Some common examples of phenotypic outcome measures include speciﬁc cognitive tasks ( Savitz , Solms , & Ramesar , 2006 ) , emo - tional regulation ( Canli , Ferri , & Duman , 2009 ) , personality traits ( Rimfeld , Kovas , Dale , & Plomin , 2015 ) and , more recently , patterns of neural activation ( Liu et al . , 2009 ; Peper , Brouwer , Boomsma , Kahn , & Hulshoﬀ Pol , 2007 ) . In view of this broad deﬁnition of the term phenotypes , researchers have evaluated the eﬀect of gene – environment interplay on phenotypes at many diﬀerent levels of analysis . This large body of research has made strides toward a major goal of genetic research—to establish and understand the con - nections between genetic variations , the environment , and phenotypic outcome measures . However , there are ongoing debates about which genetic methodology and analysis method is optimal ( Charney , 2016 ) and which phenotypic measures are best . For example , multiple studies have used various genetic methodologies to explore the link between genetics and educational attainment ( Belsky et al . , 2016 ; Okbay et al . , 2016 ; Shakeshaft et al . , 2013 ) . However , the “phenotype” educational attainment has been operationally deﬁned in many diﬀerent ways , such as years of education ( Okbay et al . , 2016 ) , highest degree completed ( Belsky et al . , 2016 ) , and score on a U . K . nationwide examination ( Rimfeld et al . , 2015 ; Shakeshaft et al . , 2013 ) . It is also possible to study the link between genetics and certain components of education attainment such as mathematics ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ) or reading ( Christopher et al . , 2016 ; Davis et al . , 2014 ; Gialluisi , Guadalupe , Francks , & Fisher , 2016 ) . It is unclear whether these diﬀerent measurements of educational attainment are all tapping into the same phenotype , or instead measuring distinct components of behavior . Phenotypic measurement inconsistencies have also been reported for genetic studies of psychiatric disor - ders ( Szatmari et al . , 2007 ) . Additionally , it remains unclear which levels of analyses are best suited to measure behavior and whether it is suﬃcient to measure a single level of anal - ysis when examining phenotypic outcomes . We argue that researchers from diﬀerent ﬁelds ( such as geneticists , psy - chologists , and educators ) , interested in understanding child development , life trajectories , and developmental outcomes , need to work together to identify the most informative phe - notypes . As the ﬁeld progresses , most researchers concur that gene – environment interplay and phenotypic outcomes should be assessed using multiple methods at numerous time points during development . More consistency among methods of assessment is also needed . Furthermore , lon - gitudinal studies , in addition to cross - sectional studies , are critical for analyzing developmental trajectories . Finally , replication of entire studies across more than one population is critical for assessing the signiﬁcance of the study . BRIDGING THE GAP For two decades , researchers have discussed whether the ﬁeld of neuroscience can inform education ( e . g . , Ansari & Coch , 2006 ; Bowers , 2016 ; Bruer , 1997 ; Gabrieli , 2016 ; Howard - Jones et al . , 2016 ) . This idea has garnered a great deal of support and led to a large group of international researchers developing the new ﬁeld Mind , Brain , and Education ( MBE ) . Skeptics of this idea have highlighted problems with this new ﬁeld ( Bowers , 2016 ; Bruer , 1997 ) . However , proponents of the ﬁeld of MBE have tirelessly high - lighted ﬂaws in these arguments and proposed novel ways to bridge the gap between neuroscience and education ( Ansari & Coch , 2006 ; Gabrieli , 2016 ; Howard - Jones et al . , 2016 ) . 7 Gene – Environment Interplay Bruer ( 1997 ) pointed out that directly applying neuro - science research to classroom practices has been challenging and unsatisfying . He suggests that this link is “a bridge to far” ( Bruer , 1997 ) . Researchers responded to this by highlighting that the link between neuroscience and education need not be a direct link ; instead , the ﬁeld of MBE creates multiple researcher – practitioner links for collaborations to facilitate engaging in discussions about the learning brain ( Ansari & Coch , 2006 ) . Recently , this debate has reemerged with Bow - ers ( 2016 ) stating that there is no instance in which neu - roscience research informs education beyond psychology . Teams of researchers responded to this criticism ( Gabrieli , 2016 ; Howard - Jones et al . , 2016 ) . Speciﬁcally , Howard - Jones et al . ( 2016 ) highlighted that the expectation that neuro - science must directly inﬂuence education is a misinterpre - tation of the goal of the ﬁeld of MBE . Critically , the defend - ers of the ﬁeld of MBE argue that the link between neu - roscience and education is bidirectional . Leading experts from the ﬁeld of MBE suggest that infrastructure should be put in place to support interdisciplinary training that pro - motes bidirectional collaborations between neuroscientists and educational researchers and educators ( Ansari & Coch , 2006 ; Ansari , Coch , & De Smedt , 2011 ; Howard - Jones et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , these researchers reason that brain and behavioral levels of analysis should not be pitted against each other , as they are complementary levels of analysis that should be examined simultaneously ( Howard - Jones et al . , 2016 ) . In line with this idea , we suggest that the ﬁeld of MBE should extend to include measures of gene – environment interplay . Gene – environment interplay is a critical level of analysis for understanding MBE . We recognize that building the intellectual bridge to form the link between neuroscience and education took time and extensive collaborative discus - sions . Therefore , we predict and encourage a forthcoming debate regarding the link between gene – environment inter - play , neuroscience , and education . These intellectual ongo - ing debates have ultimately strengthened the ﬁeld of MBE by forcing researchers to deeply consider the best approaches for forging collaborations between researchers across multi - ple disciplines and practitioners . We propose that the ﬁrst goal toward including gene – environment interplay in the ﬁeld is to work with educators to reconceptualize the false dichotomy between nature and nurture . Only then , can we forge collaborations to better understand the link between gene – environment interplay , neuroscience , and education . CONCLUSION Research exploring the link between gene – environment interplay and educational outcomes holds promise to improve the current education system . Speciﬁcally , this research can deepen our understanding of individual dif - ferences in children across development . This work has the potential to help educators better understand students’ responses to the educational environment . Additionally , it may be useful for informing researchers and practitioners on mechanisms that underlie children’s individual diﬀerences in response to educational intervention programs . This comprehensive understanding can be used to forge new collaborations to improve current educational practices . Ultimately , incorporating gene – environment interplay into the ﬁeld of MBE will provide researchers and practitioners with a more holistic understanding of the individual and plastic developmental trajectories of children throughout their education . REFERENCES Aisa , B . , Tordera , R . , Lasheras , B . , Del Río , J . , & Ramírez , M . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive impairment associated to HPA axis hyperactivity after maternal separation in rats . Psychoneu - roendocrinology , 32 ( 3 ) , 256 – 266 . Anreiter , I . , Kramer , J . M . , & Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2017 ) . Epige - netic mechanisms modulate diﬀerences in Drosophila forag - ing behavior . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114 ( 47 ) , 12518 – 12523 . Anreiter , I . , Vasquez , O . E . , Allen , A . M . , & Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2016 ) . Foraging path - length protocol for Drosophila melanogaster larvae . Journal of Visualized Experiments ( 110 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 53980 Ansari , D . , & Coch , D . ( 2006 ) . Bridges over troubled waters : Educa - tion and cognitive neuroscience . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 10 , 146 – 151 . Ansari , D . , Coch , D . , & De Smedt , B . ( 2011 ) . Connecting education and cognitive neuroscience : Where will the journey take us ? Educational Philosophy and Theory , 43 , 37 – 42 . Ashbury , K . , & Plomin , R . ( 2014 ) G is for genes : The impact of genetics on education and achievement . Chichester , England : John Wiley and Sons . Ashe , A . , Sapetschnig , A . , Weick , E . - M . , Mitchell , J . , Bagijn , M . P . , Cording , A . C . , … Miska , E . A . ( 2012 ) . piRNAs can trigger a multigenerational epigenetic memory in the germline of C . elegans . Cell , 150 , 88 – 99 . Belsky , D . W . , Moﬃtt , T . E . , Corcoran , D . L . , Domingue , B . , Harring - ton , H . , Hogan , S . , … Caspi , A . ( 2016 ) . Thegeneticsofsuccess : Howsingle - nucleotidepolymorphismsassociatedwitheduca - tionalattainmentrelate tolife - coursedevelopment . Psycholog - ical Science , 27 , 957 – 972 . Borghol , N . , Suderman , M . , McArdle , W . , Racine , A . , Hallett , M . , Pembrey , M . , … Szyf , M . ( 2012 ) . Associations with early - life socio - economic position in adult DNA methylation . Interna - tional Journal of Epidemiology , 41 , 62 – 74 . Bowers , J . S . ( 2016 ) . The practical and principled problems with educational neuroscience . Psychological Review , 123 , 600 – 612 . Boyce , W . T . , & Kobor , M . S . ( 2015 ) . Development and the epigenome : The “synapse” of gene – environment interplay . Developmental Science , 18 , 1 – 23 . 8 Ina Anreiter et al . Boyce , W . T . , Obradovi´c , J . , Bush , N . R . , Stamperdahl , J . , Kime , Y . S . , & Adler , N . ( 2012 ) . Socialstratiﬁcation , classroomclimate , and the behavioral adaptation of kindergarten children . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 109 ( Suppl . 2 ) , 17168 – 17173 . Bruer , J . T . ( 1997 ) . Education and the brain : A bridge too far . Educational Research , 26 ( 8 ) , 4 – 16 . Burkhardt , R . W . , Jr . ( 2005 ) Patterns of behavior : Konrad Lorenz , Niko Tinbergen , and the founding of ethology . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Burns , J . G . , Svetec , N . , Rowe , L . , Mery , F . , Dolan , M . J . , Boyce , W . T . , & Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2012 ) . Gene - environment interplay in Drosophila melanogaster : Chronic food deprivation in early life aﬀects adult exploratory and ﬁtness traits . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 109 , 17239 – 17244 . Buss , C . , Davis , E . P . , Shahbaba , B . , Pruessner , J . C . , Head , K . , & Sandman , C . A . ( 2012 ) . Maternal cortisol over the course of pregnancy and subsequent child amygdala and hippocampus volumes and aﬀective problems . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 109 ( 20 ) , E1312 – E1319 . Canli , T . , Ferri , J . , & Duman , E . A . ( 2009 ) . Genetics of emotion regulation . Neuroscience , 164 ( 1 ) , 43 – 54 . Carone , B . R . , Fauquier , L . , Habib , N . , Shea , J . M . , Hart , C . E . , Li , R . , … Rando , O . J . ( 2010 ) . Paternally induced transgenerational environmental reprogramming of metabolic gene expression in mammals . Cell , 143 , 1084 – 1096 . Caspi , A . , Hariri , A . , Holmes , A . , Uher , R . , & Moﬃtt , T . ( 2010 ) . Genetic sensitivity to the environment : The case of the sero - tonin transporter gene ( 5 - HTT ) and its implications for study - ing complex diseases and traits . American Journal of Psychia - try , 167 , 509 – 527 . Caspi , A . , & Moﬃtt , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Gene – environmentinteractionsin psychiatry : Joining forces with neuroscience . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 7 , 583 – 590 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn1925 Champagne , F . A . , Francis , D . D . , Mar , A . , & Meaney , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Variations in maternal care in the rat as a mediating inﬂuence for the eﬀects of environment on development . Physiology and Behavior , 79 ( 3 ) , 359 – 371 . Charney , E . ( 2016 ) . Genes , behavior , and behavior genetics . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Cognitive Science , 8 , e1405 . Chen , H . , Gu , X . - H . , Zhou , Y . , Ge , Z . , Wang , B . , Siok , W . T . , … Sun , Y . ( 2017 ) . A genome - wide association study identiﬁes genetic variants associated with mathematics ability . Scientiﬁc Reports , 7 , 40365 . Chetty , S . , Friedman , A . R . , Taravosh - Lahn , K . , Kirby , E . D . , Mirescu , C . , Guo , F . , … Kaufer , D . ( 2014 ) . Stress and glucocorticoids promote oligodendrogenesis in the adult hippocampus . Molecular Psychiatry , 19 , 1275 – 1283 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / mp . 2013 . 190 Christopher , M . E . , Keenan , J . M . , Hulslander , J . , DeFries , J . C . , Miyake , A . , Wadsworth , S . J . , … Olson , R . K . ( 2016 ) . The genetic and environmental etiologies of the relations between cognitive skills and components of reading ability . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 145 , 451 – 466 . Cicchetti , D . , Rogosch , F . A . , Sturge - Apple , M . , & Toth , S . L . ( 2010 ) . Interactionofchildmaltreatmentand5 - HTTpolymorphisms : Suicidal ideation among children from low - SES backgrounds . Journal of Pediatric Psychology , 35 , 536 – 546 . Coe , C . L . , Lubach , G . R . , & Shirtcliﬀ , E . A . ( 2007 ) . Maternal stress during pregnancy predisposes for iron deﬁciency in infants impacting innate immunity . Pediatric Research , 61 , 520 – 524 . Davis , O . S . P . , Band , G . , Pirinen , M . , Haworth , C . M . A . , Meaburn , E . L . , Kovas , Y . , … Spencer , C . C . A . ( 2014 ) . The correlation between reading and mathematics ability at age twelve has a substantial genetic component . Nature Communications , 5 , 377 – 393 . De Rubeis , S . , He , X . , Goldberg , A . P . , Poultney , C . S . , Samocha , K . , Cicek , A . E . , … Buxbaum , J . D . ( 2014 ) . Synaptic , tran - scriptional and chromatin genes disrupted in autism . Nature , 515 ( 7526 ) , 209 – 215 . Dias , B . G . , & Ressler , K . J . ( 2014 ) . Parental olfactory experience inﬂuences behavior and neural structure in subsequent gener - ations . Nature Neuroscience , 17 , 89 – 96 . Drake , A . J . , McPherson , R . C . , Godfrey , K . M . , Cooper , C . , Lilly - crop , K . A . , Hanson , M . A . , … Reynolds , R . M . ( 2012 ) . An unbalanced maternal diet in pregnancy associates with oﬀ - spring epigenetic changes in genes controlling glucocorticoid action and fetal growth . Clinical Endocrinology , 77 , 808 – 815 . Duncan , L . E . , Pollastri , A . R . , & Smoller , J . W . ( 2014 ) . Mind the gap : Why many geneticists and psychological scientists have discrepant views about gene – environment ( GxE ) research . American Psychologist , 69 , 249 – 268 . Dunn , E . C . , Uddin , M . , Subramanian , S . W . , Smoller , J . W . , Galea , S . , & Koenen , K . C . ( 2011 ) . Research review : Gene – environmentinteraction ( GxE ) researchinyouthdepression— A systematic review with recommendations for future research . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 52 , 1223 – 1238 . Falconer , D . S . , & Mackay , T . F . C . ( 1996 ) Introduction to quantita - tive genetics ( 4th ed . ) . Harlow , England : Longman . Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 2016 ) . The promise of educational neuroscience : Comment on Bowers . Psychological Review , 123 , 613 – 619 . Gervain , J . , Vines , B . W . , Chen , L . M . , Seo , R . J . , Hensch , T . K . , Werker , J . F . , & Young , A . H . ( 2013 ) . Valproate reopens critical - period learning of absolute pitch . Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience , 3 ( 7 ) , 102 . Gialluisi , A . , Guadalupe , T . , Francks , C . , & Fisher , S . E . ( 2016 ) . Neuroimaging genetic analyses of novel candidate genes asso - ciated with reading and language . Brain and Language , 172 , 9 – 15 . Goodman , E . , Huang , B . , Schafer - Kalkhoﬀ , T . , & Adler , N . E . ( 2007 ) . Perceived socioeconomic status : A new type of identity that inﬂuences adolescents’ self - rated health . Journal of Adolescent Health , 41 , 479 – 487 . Harker , A . , Raza , S . , Williamson , K . , Kolb , B . , & Gibb , R . ( 2015 ) . Pre - conception paternal stress in rats alters dendritic morphology and connectivity in the brain of developing male and female oﬀspring . Neuroscience , 303 , 200 – 210 . Heard , E . , & Martienssen , R . A . ( 2014 ) . Transgenerational epige - netic inheritance : Myths and mechanisms . Cell , 157 , 95 – 109 . Heid , I . M . , Huth , C . , Loos , R . J . , Kronenberg , F . , Adamkova , V . , Anand , S . S . , … Wichmann , H . - E . ( 2009 ) . Meta - analysis of the INSIG2 association with obesity including 74 , 345 individuals : Does heterogeneity of estimates relate to study design ? PLoS Genetics , 5 ( 10 ) , e1000694 . Heijmans , B . T . , Tobi , E . W . , Stein , A . D . , Putter , H . , Blauw , G . J . , Susser , E . S . , … Lumeye , L . H . ( 2008 ) . Persistent epigenetic diﬀerences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in 9 Gene – Environment Interplay humans . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 , 17046 – 17049 . Howard - Jones , P . A . , Varma , S . , Ansari , D . , Butterworth , B . , De Smedt , B . , Goswami , U . , … Thomas , M . S . C . ( 2016 ) . The principles and practices of educational neuroscience : Com - ment on Bowers . Psychological Review , 123 , 620 – 627 . Hyde , C . L . , Nagle , M . W . , Tian , C . , Chen , X . , Paciga , S . A . , Wendland , J . R . , … Winslow , A . R . ( 2016 ) . Identiﬁcation of 15 genetic loci associated with risk of major depression in individuals of European descent . Nature Genetics , 48 ( 9 ) , 1031 – 1036 . Jiang , R . , Jones , M . J . , Chen , E . , Neumann , S . M . , Fraser , H . B . , Miller , G . E . , & Kobor , M . S . ( 2015 ) . Discordance of DNA methylation variance between two accessible human tissues . Scientiﬁc Reports , 5 , 8257 . Karg , K . , Burmeister , M . , Shedden , K . , & Sen , S . ( 2011 ) . The sero - tonin transporter promoter variant ( 5 - HTTLPR ) , stress , and depression meta - analysis revisited . Archives of General Psychi - atry , 68 , 444 – 454 . Kaufman , J . , Yang , B . Z . , Douglas - Palumberi , H . , Grasso , D . , Lips - chitz , D . , Houshayar , S . , … Gelernter , J . ( 2006 ) . Brain - derived neurotropic factor 5 - HTTLPR gene interactions and environ - mental modiﬁers of depression in children . Biological Psychi - atry , 59 , 673 – 680 . Kaun , K . R . , Riedl , C . A . L . , Chakraborty - Chatterjee , M . , Belay , A . T . , Douglas , S . , Gibbs , A . G . , & Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2007 ) . Natu - ralpolymorphisminacGMP - dependentproteinkinaseaﬀects food intake and absorption in Drosophila . Journal of Exper - imental Biology , 210 , 3547 – 3458 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jeb . 006924 Klengel , T . , Mehta , D . , Anacker , C . , Rex - Haﬀner , M . , Pruessner , J . C . , Pariante , C . M . , … Binder , E . B . ( 2013 ) . Allele - speciﬁc FKBP5 DNA demethylation mediates gene – childhood trauma interactions . Nature Neuroscience , 16 , 33 – 41 . Kobayashi , Y . , Ye , Z . , & Hensch , T . K . ( 2015 ) . Clock genes control cortical critical period timing . Neuron , 86 ( 1 ) , 264 – 275 . Kohn , N . R . , Reaume , C . J . , Moreno , C . , Burns , J . C . , Sokolowski , M . B . , & Mery , F . ( 2013 ) . Social environment inﬂuences per - formance in a cognitive task in natural variants of the foraging gene . PLoS One , 8 ( 12 ) , e81272 . Kraft , P . , Zeggini , E . , & Ioannidis , J . P . A . ( 2009 ) . Replication in genome - wide association studies . Statistical Science , 24 , 561 – 573 . Krantz , I . D . , McCallum , J . , DeScipio , C . , Kaur , M . , Gillis , L . A . , Yaeger , D . , … Jackson , L . G . ( 2004 ) . Cornelia de Lange syn - drome is caused by mutations in NIPBL , the human homolog of Drosophila melanogaster nipped - B . Nature Genetics , 36 , 631 – 635 . Kruuk , H . ( 2003 ) Niko’s nature : A life of Niko Tinbergen and his sci - ence of animal behaviour . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Lacorazza , H . D . , Flax , J . D . , Snyder , E . Y . , & Jendoubi , M . ( 1996 ) . Expression of human bold beta − hexosaminidase alpha − subunit gene ( the gene defect of Tay − Sachs disease ) in mouse brains upon engraftment of transduced progenitor cells . Nature Medicine , 2 , 424 – 429 . Lam , L . L . , Emberly , E . , Fraser , H . B . , Neumann , S . M . , Chen , E . , Miller , G . E . , & Kobor , M . S . ( 2012 ) . Factors underlying variable DNA methylation in a human community cohort . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 109 ( Suppl . 2 ) , 17253 – 17260 . Levine , A . , Worrell , T . R . , Zimnisky , R . , & Schmauss , C . ( 2012 ) . Early life stress triggers sustained changes in histone deacety - lase expression and histone H4 modiﬁcations that alter responsiveness to adolescent antidepressant treatment . Neurobiology of Disease , 45 , 488 – 498 . Liu , J . , Pearlson , G . , Windemuth , A . , Ruano , G . , Perrone - Bizzozero , N . I . , & Calhoun , V . ( 2009 ) . Combining fMRI and SNP data to investigate connections between brain function and genetics using parallel ICA . Human Brain Mapping , 30 ( 1 ) , 241 – 255 . Logan , C . A . , & Johnston , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Synthesis and separation in the history of “nature” and “nurture . ” Developmental Psy - chobiology , 49 , 758 – 769 . Lorenz , K . Z . ( 1981 ) The foundations of ethology . Berlin , Germany : Springer - Verlag . Maher , B . ( 2008 ) . The case of the missing heritability . Nature , 456 , 18 – 21 . Major Depressive Disorder Working Group of the Psychiatric GWAS Consortium , Ripke , S . , Wray , N . R . , Lewis , C . M . , Hamilton , S . P . , Weissman , M . M . , … Sullivan , P . F . ( 2013 ) . A mega - analysis of genome - wide association studies for major depressive disorder . Molecular Psychiatry , 18 , 497 – 511 . Maniam , J . , Antoniadis , C . , & Morris , M . J . ( 2014 ) . Early - life stress , HPA axis adaptation , and mechanisms contributing to later health outcomes . Frontiers in Endocrinology , 5 , 73 . McDade , T . W . , Borja , J . B . , Largado , F . , Adair , L . S . , & Kuzawa , C . W . ( 2016 ) . Adiposity and chronic inﬂammation in young women predict inﬂammation during normal pregnancy in the Philippines . The Journal of Nutrition , 146 , 353 – 357 . McGowan , P . O . , Sasaki , A . , D’Alessio , A . C . , Dymov , S . , Labonté , B . , Szyf , M . , & Meaney , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood abuse . Nature Neuroscience , 12 , 342 – 348 . Mehta , D . , Klengel , T . , Conneely , K . N . , Smith , A . K . , Altmann , A . , Pace , T . W . , … Binder , E . B . ( 2013 ) . Childhood maltreatment is associated with distinct genomic and epigenetic proﬁles in posttraumatic stress disorder . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 110 , 8302 – 8307 . Miller , G . E . , Chen , E . , Fok , A . , Walker , H . , Lim , A . , Nicholls , E . F . , … Kobor , M . S . ( 2009 ) . Low early - life social class leaves a biological residue manifested by decreased glucocorticoid and increased proinﬂammatory signaling . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 106 , 14716 – 14721 . Moonesinghe , R . , Khoury , M . J . , Liu , T . , & Ioannidis , J . P . A . ( 2008 ) . Required sample size and nonreplicability thresholds for het - erogeneous genetic associations . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 , 617 – 622 . Murgatroyd , C . , Patchev , A . V . , Wu , Y . , Micale , V . , Bockmühl , Y . , Fis - cher , D . , … Spengler , D . ( 2009 ) . Dynamic DNA methylation programs persistent adverse eﬀects of early - life stress . Nature Neuroscience , 12 , 1559 – 1566 . Nieratschker , V . , Massart , R . , Gilles , M . , Luoni , A . , Suderman , M . J . , Krumm , B . , & Szyf , M . ( 2014 ) . MORC1 exhibits cross - species diﬀerential methylation in association with early intergenera - tional transmission of child abuse and neglect life stress as well 10 Ina Anreiter et al . as genome - wide association with MDD . Translational Psychi - atry , 4 , e429 . Oberlander , T . F . , Weinberg , J . , Papsdorf , M . , Grunau , R . , Misri , S . , & Devlin , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Prenatal exposure to maternal depression , neonatal methylation of human glucocorticoid receptor gene ( NR3C1 ) and infant cortisol stress responses . Epigenetics , 3 ( 2 ) , 97 – 106 . Okbay , A . , Beauchamp , J . P . , Fontana , M . A . , Lee , J . J . , Pers , T . H . , Rietveld , C . A . , … Benjamin , D . J . ( 2016 ) . Genome - wide association study identiﬁes 74 loci associated with educational attainment . Nature , 533 , 539 – 542 . Okhovat , M . , Berrio , A . , Wallace , G . , Ophir , A . G . , & Phelps , S . M . ( 2015 ) . Sexual ﬁdelity trade - oﬀs promote regulatory variation in the prairie vole brain . Science , 350 ( 6266 ) , 1371 – 1374 . Ost , A . , Lempradl , A . , Casas , E . , Weigert , M . , Tiko , T . , Deniz , M . , … Pospisilik , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Paternal diet deﬁnes oﬀ - springchromatinstateandintergenerationalobesity . Cell , 159 , 1352 – 1364 . Ozanne , S . E . , Lewis , R . , Jennings , B . J . , & Hales , C . N . ( 2004 ) . Early programming of weight gain in mice prevents the induction of obesity by a highly palatable diet . Clinical Science , 106 , 141 – 145 . Peña , M . , Werker , J . F . , & Dehaene - Lambertz , G . ( 2012 ) . Earlier speech exposure does not accelerate speech acquisition . Jour - nal of Neuroscience , 32 , 11159 – 11163 . Peper , J . S . , Brouwer , R . M . , Boomsma , D . I . , Kahn , R . S . , & Hulshoﬀ Pol , H . E . ( 2007 ) . Geneticinﬂuencesonhumanbrainstructure : A review of brain imaging studies in twins . Human Brain Mapping , 28 , 464 – 473 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20398 Perani , D . , Saccuman , M . C . , Scifo , P . , Anwander , A . , Spada , D . , Bal - doli , C . , … Friederici , A . D . ( 2011 ) . Neural language networks at birth . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 ( 38 ) , 16056 – 16061 . Pinker , S . ( 2002 ) . The blank slate : The modern denial of human nature . New York , NY : Viking . Plomin , R . , DeFries , J . C . , & Loehlin , J . C . ( 1977 ) . Genotype – environment interaction and correlation in the analysis of human behavior . Psychological Bulletin , 84 , 309 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 84 . 2 . 309 Polimanti , R . , Kaufman , J . , Zhao , H . , Kranzler , H . R . , Urano , R . J . , Kessler , R . C . , … Stein , M . B . ( 2017 ) . A genome - wide gene - by - trauma interaction study of alcohol misuse in two independent cohorts identiﬁes PRKG1 as a risk locus . Molecu - lar Psychiatry . Advance online publication . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / mp . 2017 . 24 Qiu , A . , Anh , T . T . , Li , Y . , Chen , H . , Rifkin - Graboi , A . , Broekman , B . F . , … Meaney , M . J . ( 2015 ) . Prenatal maternal depres - sion alters amygdala functional connectivity in 6 - month - old infants . Translational Psychiatry , 5 , e508 . Ravelli , A . C . J . , van der Meulen , J . H . P . , Michels , R . P . J . , Osmond , C . , Barker , D . J . P . , Hales , C . N . , & Bleker , O . P . ( 1998 ) . Glu - cose tolerance in adults after prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine . Lancet , 351 , 173 – 177 . Ravelli , A . C . J . , van der Meulen , J . H . P . , Osmond , C . , Barker , D . J . P . , & Bleker , O . P . ( 1999 ) . Obesity in adults after prenatal exposure to famine . American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 70 , 811 – 816 . Reaume , C . J . , & Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2011 ) . Conservation of gene function in behavior . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological Sciences , 366 , 2100 – 2110 . Rimfeld , K . , Kovas , Y . , Dale , P . S . , & Plomin , R . ( 2015 ) . Pleiotropy across academic subjects at the end of compulsory education . Scientiﬁc Reports , 5 , 11713 . Risch , N . , Herrel , R . , Lehner , T . , Liang , K . Y . , Eaves , L . , Hoh , J . , … Merikangas , K . R . ( 2009 ) . Interaction between the serotonin transporter gene ( 5 - HTTLPR ) , stressful life events , and risk of depression : A meta - analysis . Journal of the American Medical Association , 301 , 2462 – 2471 . Romens , S . E . , McDonald , J . , Svaren , J . , & Pollak , S . D . ( 2014 ) . Associations between early life stress and gene methylation in children . Child Development , 86 , 303 – 309 . Roth , T . L . , Lubin , F . D . , Funk , A . J . , & Sweatt , J . D . ( 2009 ) . Lasting epigenetic inﬂuence of early life adversity on the BDNF gene . Biological Psychiatry , 65 , 760 – 769 . Roy , A . , Hu , X . - Z . , Janal , M . , & Goldman , D . ( 2007 ) . Inter - action between childhood trauma and serotonin gene variation in attempting suicide . Neuropsychopharmacology , 32 , 2046 – 2052 . Rutter , M . ( 2007 ) . Gene – environment interdependence . Devel - opmental Science , 10 , 12 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2007 . 00557 . x Rutter , M . ( 2010 ) . Gene - environment interplay . Depression and Anxiety , 27 , 1 – 4 . Savitz , J . , Solms , M . , & Ramesar , R . ( 2006 ) . The molecular genetics of cognition : Dopamine , COMT and BDNF . Genes , Brain and Behavior , 5 ( 4 ) , 311 – 328 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1601 - 183X . 2005 . 00163 . x Scarr , S . , & McCartney , K . ( 1983 ) . How people make their own environments : A theory of genotype greater than environment eﬀects . Child Development , 54 , 424 – 435 . Shakeshaft , N . G . , Trzaskowski , M . , McMillan , A . , Rimfeld , K . , Krapohl , E . , Haworth , C . M . A . , … Plomin , R . ( 2013 ) . Strong genetic inﬂuence on a UK nationwide test of educational achievement at the end of compulsory education at age 16 . PLoS One , 8 , e80341 . Soave , D . , Corvol , H . , Panjwani , N . , Gong , J . , Li , W . , Boelle , P . Y . , … Sun , L . ( 2015 ) . A joint location - scale test improves power to detect associated SNPs , gene sets and pathways . American Journal of Human Genetics , 97 , 125 – 138 . Sokolowski , H . M . , Vasquez , O . E . , Unternaehrer , E . , Sokolowski , D . J . , Biergans , S . D . , Atkinson , L . , … Sokolowski , M . B . ( 2017 ) . The Drosophila foraging gene human orthologue PRKG1 pre - dicts individual diﬀerences in the eﬀects of early adversity on maternal sensitivity . Cognitive Development , 42 , 62 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2016 . 11 . 001 Sokolowski , M . B . , & Wahlsten , D . ( 2001 ) . Gene - environment inter - action and complex behaviour . In H . R . Chin & S . O . Moldin ( Eds . ) , Methods in genomic neuroscience . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Szatmari , P . , Maziade , M . , Zwaigenbaum , L . , Mérette , C . , Roy , M . - A . , Joober , R . , & Palmour , R . ( 2007 ) . Informative pheno - types for genetic studies of psychiatric disorders . American Journal of Medical Genetics . Part B , Neuropsychiatric Genet - ics , 144B , 581 – 588 . Takesian , A . E . , & Hensch , T . K . ( 2013 ) . Balancing plasticity / stability across brain development . Progress in Brain Research , 207 , 3 – 34 . 11 Gene – Environment Interplay Talge , N . M . , Neal , C . , & Glover , V . ( 2007 ) . Early stress , translational research and prevention science network : Fetal and neonatal experience on child and adolescent mental health . Antenatal maternal stress and long - term eﬀects on child neurodevelop - ment : How and why ? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychi - atry , 48 ( 3 – 4 ) , 245 – 261 . Tehranifar , P . , Wu , H . - C . , Fan , X . , Flom , J . D . , Ferris , J . S . , Cho , Y . H . , … Terry , M . B . ( 2013 ) . Early life socioeconomic factors and genomic DNA methylation in mid - life . Epigenetics , 8 , 23 – 27 . Terry , M . B . , Ferris , J . S . , Pilsner , R . , Flom , J . D . , Tehranifar , P . , Santella , R . M . , … Susser , E . ( 2008 ) . Genomic DNA methy - lation among women in a multiethnic new York City birth cohort . Cancer Epidemiology , Biomarkers and Prevention , 17 , 2306 – 2310 . Thakurela , S . , Sahu , S . K . , Kumar , S . , Garding , A . , & Tiwari , V . K . ( 2015 ) . Dynamics and function of distal regulatory elements during neurogenesis and neuroplasticity . Genome Research , 25 , 1309 – 1324 . Tinbergen , N . ( 1951 ) The study of instinct . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Torrico , B . , Chiocchetti , A . G . , Bacchelli , E . , Trabetti , E . , Hervás , A . , Franke , B . , … Toma , C . ( 2017 ) . Lack of replication of previous autism spectrum disorder GWAS hits in European populations . Autism Research , 10 ( 2 ) , 202 – 211 . Uher , R . , & McGuﬃn , P . ( 2010 ) . The moderation by the serotonin transporter gene of environmental adversity in the etiology of depression : 2009 update . Molecular Psychiatry , 15 , 18 – 22 . Vargas , J . , Junco , M . , Gomez , C . , & Lajud , N . ( 2016 ) . Early life stress increases metabolic risk , HPA axis reactivity , and depressive - like behavior when combined with postweaning social isolation in rats . PLoS One , 11 ( 9 ) , e0162665 . Vickers , M . H . , Breier , B . H . , Cutﬁeld , W . S . , Hofman , P . L . , & Gluckman , P . D . ( 2000 ) . Fetal origins of hyperphagia , obesity , and hypertension and postnatal ampliﬁcation by hypercaloric nutrition . American Journal of Physiology . Endocrinology and Metabolism , 279 ( 1 ) , E83 – E87 . Vissers , L . E . L . M . , Gilissen , C . , & Veltman , J . A . ( 2016 ) . Genetic studies in intellectual disability and related disorders . Nature Reviews Genetics , 17 , 9 – 18 . Wahlsten , D . , & Gottlieb , G . ( 1997 ) . The invalid separation of eﬀects of nature and nurture : Lessons from animal experimentation . In R . J . Sternberg & E . Grigorenko ( Eds . ) , Intelligence , heredity and environment ( pp . 163 – 192 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Wang , Z . , Hart , S . A . , Kovas , Y . , Lukowski , S . , Soden , B . , Thompson , L . A . , … Petrill , S . A . ( 2014 ) . Who is afraid of math ? Two sources of genetic variance for mathematical anxiety . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 55 , 1056 – 1064 . Watson , J . B . ( 1913 ) . Psychology as the behaviorist views it . Psycho - logical Review , 20 , 158 – 177 . https : / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0074428 Weaver , I . C . G . , Cervoni , N . , Champagne , F . A . , D’Alessio , A . C . , Sharma , S . , Secki , J . R . , … Meaney , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior . Nature Neuroscience , 7 , 847 – 854 . Werker , J . F . , & Hensch , T . K . ( 2015 ) . Critical periods in speech perception : New directions . Annual Review of Psychology , 66 , 173 – 196 . Xu , X . , Su , S . , Barnes , V . A . , De Miguel , C . , Pollock , J . , Ownby , D . , … Wang , X . ( 2013 ) . A genome - wide methylation study onobesity : Diﬀerentialvariabilityanddiﬀerentialmethylation . Epigenetics , 8 , 522 – 533 . Yehuda , R . , & Bierer , L . M . ( 2009 ) . The relevance of epigenetics to PTSD : Implications for the DSM - V . Journal of Traumatic Stress , 22 , 427 – 434 . Yuen , R . K . C . , Merico , D . , Bookman , M . L . , Howe , J . , Thiru - vahindrapuram , B . , Patel , R . V . , … Scherer , S . W . ( 2017 ) . Whole genome sequencing resource identiﬁes 18 new candi - date genes for autism spectrum disorder . Nature Neuroscience , 30 , 602 – 611 . 12