A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex Fiona Simpson , * Nicholas A . Bright , * Michele A . West , * Lori S . Newman , * Robert B . Darnell , * and Margaret S . Robinson * * Department of Clinical Biochemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 2QR , United Kingdom ; and * Laboratory of Molecular Neuro - Oncology , The Rockefeller University , New York 10021 Abstract . Coat proteins are required for the budding of the transport vesicles that mediate membrane traffic pathways , but for many pathways such proteins have not yet been identified . We have raised antibodies against p47 , a homologue of the medium chains of the adaptor complexes of clathrin - coated vesicles ( Pevsner , J . , W . Volknandt , B . R . Wong , and R . H . Scheller . 1994 . Gene ( Arnst . ) . 146 : 279 - 283 ) , to determine whether this protein might be a component of a new type of coat . p47 coimmunoprecipitates with three other proteins : two unknown proteins of 160 and 25 kD , and 13 - NAP , a homologue of the 13 / 13 ' - adaptins , indicating that it is a subunit of an adaptor - like heterotetrameric complex . However , p47 is not enriched in preparations of clath - rin - coated vesicles . Recruitment of the p47 - containing complex onto cell membranes is stimulated by GTP ~ S and blocked by brefeldin A , indicating that , like other coat proteins , its membrane association is regulated by an ARF . The newly recruited complex is localized to non - - clathrin - coated buds and vesicles associated with the TGN . Endogenous complex in primary cultures of neuronal cells is also localized to the TGN , and in addi - tion , some complex is associated with the plasma mem - brane . These results indicate that the complex is a com - ponent of a novel type of coat that facilitates the budding of vesicles from the TGN , possibly for trans - porting newly synthesized proteins to the plasma mem - brane . p I ~ OTEINS are transported between the organeUes of the secretory and endocytic pathways by means of carrier vesicles , which bud from a donor membrane and fuse with a target acceptor membrane . The process of vesicle budding is initiated by the recruitment of proteins from the cytosol onto the donor membrane , where they form a coat around the nascent vesicle . This coat may have a dual role : first , to act as a scaffold , enabling the mem - brane to bud ; and second , to determine the composition of the vesicle by interacting with the cytoplasmic domains of selected transmembrane proteins , which in turn may bind to ligands on the other side of the membrane . So far three types of coated transport vesicles have been characterized . Clathrin - coated vesicles , the first type to be identified , bud from the plasma membrane and the TGN . Their coats are made out of two components : clathrin , which forms the scaffold , and adaptors . The adaptors are heterotetrameric protein complexes , which attach the clathrin to the membrane and are thought to specify the vesicle membrane and contents ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) . Different adaptors are found at the plasma mem - brane and at the TGN . More recently two other classes of coated transport vesicles have been identified that act at Address all correspondence to M . S . Robinson , Department of Clinical Biochemistry , University of Cambridge , Addenbrooke ' s Hospital , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 2QR , UK . Tel . : 44 - 1223 - 330163 . Fax : 44 - 1223 - 330598 . earlier stages of the secretory pathway : coatomer - ( or COPI - ) coated vesicles , which bud from the Golgi stack , the intermediate compartment , and possibly the ER ( Se - rafini et al . , 1991 ; Bednarek et al . , 1995 ) ; and COPII - coated vesicles , which bud from the ER ( Barlowe et al . , t994 ) . Although very weak similarities have been reported between two of the coatomer subunits and two of the adaptor subunits ( Duden et al . , 1991 ; Kuge et al . , 1993 ) , it is clear that there are no strong homologies between the three types of coats , and that the cell has evolved several mechanisms for forming transport vesicles . One feature that all three classes of vesicles have in common , however , is that the recruitment of coat proteins onto the membrane is regulated by GTP - binding proteins . Thus , GTP ~ / S greatly enhances the recruitment of both coatomer and TGN adaptors onto their respective mem - branes in vitro ( Robinson and Kreis , 1992 ) , and in both cases the small GTP - binding protein ARF1 has been im - plicated in this process ( Stamnes and Rothman , 1993 ; Traub et al . , 1993 ) . The fungal metabolite brefeldin A ( BFA ) 1 , which prevents the nucleotide exchange of ARF proteins ( Donaldson et al . , 1992 ; Helms and Rothman , 1992 ) , blocks the recruitment of both coatomer and TGN 1 . Abbreviations used in thispaper . BFA , brefeldin A ; DTSSP , 3 , 3 ' - dithio - bissulfosuccinimidylpropionate ; GST , glutathione - S - transferase ; NRK , normal rat kidney . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 96 / 05 / 749 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , Number 4 , May 1996 749 - 760 749 adaptors in vitro and causes them to redistribute to the cy - toplasm when added to living cells ( Robinson and Kreis , 1992 ) . The role of GTP - binding proteins in plasma mem - brane adaptor recruitment is less clear - cut in that GTP ~ / S causes mislocalization of the adaptors to an endosomal compartment . This mislocalization can be blocked by pre - treatment with BFA ( Seaman et al . , 1993 ) , again suggest - ing the involvement of an ARF family member . In con - trast , COPII recruitment is regulated not by an ARF but by another small GTP - binding protein , Sarlp ( Barlowe et al . , 1994 ) . Although these three types of coats are well character - ized , there are many other membranes and pathways for which coats have not yet been identified . In particular , both the TGN and endosomes are major sorting stations in the cell : in both compartments different proteins are pack - aged into different populations of vesicles and sent to dif - ferent destinations , but so far only the clathrin - coated vesicles , which mediate the pathway from the TGN to pre - lysosomes , have been identified and characterized . Intrigu - ingly , however , some of the sorting signals that function in the TGN and endosomes have been identified , including those that direct proteins from both compartments to the basolateral plasma membrane ( Matter and Mellman , 1994 ) , from endosomes to the TGN , and from endosomes to lysosomes ( Luzio and Banting , 1993 ) ; and these have been found to bear a resemblance to internalization sig - nals , which are thought to function at the plasma mem - brane by binding to adaptors ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) . Thus , there may be adaptor - related proteins associ - ated with other types of transport vesicles , even though ul - trastructural studies indicate that such vesicles are not coated with clathrin . The adaptors are composed of four subunits : an et - or ~ - adaptin ( et for the plasma membrane ; - y for the TGN ) , a 13 - type adaptin ( 13 or 13 ' ) , a medium chain ( AP50 or AP47 ) , and a small chain ( AP17 or AP19 ) . Recently cDNAs have been cloned that encode proteins with homology to two of the adaptor subunits . Homologues of the adaptor medium chains were cloned and sequenced by Pevsner et al . ( 1994 ) , initially by using an antiserum raised against a syn - aptic vesicle preparation from the electric ray to screen an electric organ cDNA expression library . One of the clones , ray p47 , was subsequently used to screen a rat brain cDNA library , resulting in the isolation of rat p47A and p47B . Northern blotting revealed that p47B is only expressed in brain and spinal cord , while p47A is expressed more widely . The three p47 proteins are 0o80 % identical to each other and are all 28 - 30 % identical to the adaptor medium chains . Thus , since the two medium chains are 40 % identi - cal to each other , the p47 proteins are more distantly re - lated members of the family . A homologue of the 13 - and 13 ' - adaptin subunits of the two adaptor complexes has also been cloned and sequenced , in this case by screening a hu - man brain cDNA library with an autoimmune antiserum . This protein , 13 - NAP ( for neuronal adaptin - like protein ) , is ~ 28 % identical to each of the 13 subunits , which in turn are 84 % identical . Like p47B , 3 - NAP is tissue specific in its expression , being found exclusively in neurons and neu - roendocrine cells . An antiserum was raised against recom - binant 13 - NAP , and the protein was found to be present both in the cytosol and associated with membranes , consis - tent with a possible role as a coat component ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) . We have raised an antiserum against recombinant p47 and used it in conjunction with the recently described anti - serum against 13 - NAP to find out whether the proteins have the characteristics one would expect if they are sub - units of a novel adaptor - like complex . We find that p47 and 13 - NAP are part of the same complex and that this complex , unlike a conventional adaptor , is not associated with clathrin . We can reconstitute the recruitment of the complex onto cell membranes in a GTP - dependent man - ner . Biochemical and ultrastructural studies indicate that these membranes are a subcompartment of the TGN . These results indicate that the complex is a component of a new type of coat and that this coat facilitates the budding of vesicles from the TGN for transport to another mem - brane compartment of the cell . Materials and Methods Production of Antibodies against p47 Plasmids containing cDNAs encoding full - length rat p47A and p47B were generously provided by Jonathan Pevsner ( Stanford University , Palo Alto , CA ) . Most DNA manipulations were carried out as described by Sambrook et al . ( 1989 ) . Two degenerate PCR primers were designed to amplify p47A and p47B incorporating BamHI , EcoRI , and SmaI restric - tion sites . The sequences of the primers were : Forward : 5 ' CGC GGG ATC CCC ATG ATC / T CAC AGT CI ~ / A " IT 3 ' . Reverse : 5 ' GGA CCC GGG AAT TCA G / TGT C / TCG / T G / CAC TI ' G GAA 3 ' . The PCR products were ligated into pGEX - 3X , using the BamH1 and EcoRI sites for p47A and the BamHI and Sinai sites for p47B ( which con - tains an internal EcoRI site ) . MC1061 cells were transformed with the two plasmids , and expression of fusion proteins was induced . Both fusion pro - teins were found to be insoluble , so they were purified from an inclusion body preparation as previously described ( Page and Robinson , 1995 ) . Rabbits were injected subcutaneously along the flank with 0 . 5 mg fu - sion protein ( either individual fusion proteins or a mixture of the two ) in Freund ' s complete adjuvant and boosted with the same amount of protein in Freund ' s incomplete adjuvant after 2 wk and then after an additional 6 wk . The rabbits were bled 10 d after the final boost . The specificity of the antisera was tested on Western blots of the two fusion proteins , glu - tathione - S - transferase ( GST ) alone , and brain homogenate . Only one of the rabbits , which had been injected with a mixture of the two fusion pro - teins , was found to have responded , and its serum was absorbed with GST and affinity purified with a mixture of the two fusion proteins ( see Page and Robinson , 1995 ) . Western Blotting Western blots were prepared as previously described ( Robinson and Pearse , 1986 ) . The samples that were blotted included tissue and cell ho - mogenates , high speed supernatants and pellets of a brain homogenate , purified clathrin - coated vesicles , and samples from a Superose 6 gel filtra - tion column . The homogenates were prepared by homogenizing the samples in cytosol buffer ( 25 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 0 , 125 mM potassium acetate , 2 . 5 mM magnesium acetate , I mM dithiothreitol , and I mg / ml glucose ) , di - luting them to a concentration of 3 mg protein per ml , mixing them with an equal volume of 2 : , < sample buffer and boiling for 2 min , and then soni - cating and clarifying them by centrifugation before SDS - PAGE . The high speed supernatants and pellets were prepared by homogenizing 1 g of pig brain in 4 ml cytosol buffer , centrifuging at 50 , 000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C in a TL Ultracentrifuge using a TL100 . 3 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Inc . , Palo Alto , CA ) , and then resuspending the pellet in 4 ml cytosol buffer to give equal dilutions of supernatant and pellet . Clathrin - coated vesicles were kindly provided by Matthew Seaman ( University of Cambridge ) and were purified as described by Manfredi and Bazari ( 1987 ) . Gel filtration of 3 ml pig brain cytosol ( prepared as described above ) was carried out on a The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 750 Superose 6 100 - ml column as described by Stamnes and Rothman ( 1993 ) . The column was calibrated using 2 mg each of the following standards : blue dextran ( 2000 kD ) , thyroglobulin ( 669 kD ) , apoferritin ( 443 kD ) , BSA ( 66 . 2 kD ) , ovalbumin ( 45 kD ) , carbonic anhydrase ( 29 kD ) and cytochrome C ( 12 . 4 kD ) , all obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Blots were probed with anti - p47 , the species - specific v - adaptin anti - body mAbl00 / 3 ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) , anti - B - NAP ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) , and the tissue - specific ct - adaptin antibody A706 - 727 ( Ball et al . , 1995 ) . The blots were then labeled with 12 ~ I - protein A ( Amersham Intl . , Little Chalfont , UK ) , either directly , or in the case of mAbl00 / 3 , after a second incubation with rabbit anti - mouse IgG ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) . lmmunoprecipitation Immunoprecipitations were carried out on pig brain cytosol , prepared as described above , and on cytosol from metabolically labeled AtT20 cells . The AtT20 cells were grown until 70 % confluent , washed in PBS , and grown for 15 - 18 h in methionine - free medium with 10 % dialyzed FCS , 5 mM L - glutamine , 50 IU / ml penicillin , and 50 mg / ml streptomycin to which 1 mCi Tran35S label ( ICN Flow Laboratories , High Wyncombe , UK ) had been added . The cells were harvested by trypsinizing , washed three times in cytosol buffer , homogenized , and then cytosol was prepared as described above . For some experiments the cytosol samples were cross - linked and dena - tured before immunoprecipitation . This was carried out by first diluting 150 ~ 1 of cytosol with 150 gA cross - linking buffer ( 25 mM Hepes - NaOH , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM MgC12 , 0 . 25 M sucrose ) . 3 , 3 ' - dithiobissulfosuccinimidylpro - pionate ( DTSSP ) was added from a freshly made 100 mM stock solution in dimethylformamide to a final concentration of 2 mM . The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 rain , after which SDS was added to 1 % , and the sample was boiled for 2 min . The sample was then diluted with 1200 p . l RIPA buffer ( 150 mM NaCI , 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 % NP - 40 , and 0 . 5 % deoxycholate ) before immunoprecipitation . Native immunopre - cipitations were carried out in PBS containing 0 . 1 % NP - 40 , using 1350 Ixl buffer for 150 p . l cytosol . All samples were precleared twice by incubation for 1 h on a rotating wheel with 30 pA of a 50 % suspension of Protein A - Sepharose . The Sepharose was then pelleted , and the appropriate antibody was added to the supernatant for 1 h , followed by Protein A - Sepharose for an addi - tional hour . The beads were pelleted and washed five times before eluting by resuspending the beads into 2× sample buffer and boiling . Cross - linked samples were washed in RIPA buffer containing 0 . 1 % SDS , while native immunoprecipitations were washed in PBS containing 0A % NP - 40 . Recruitment Recruitment experiments were carried out both on normal rat kidney ( NRK ) ceils and on membrane fractions . Methods for permeabilizing the NRK cells , incubating them with pig brain cytosol under various condi - tions , and preparing them for immunofluoreseence after methanol / ace - tone fixation or for Western blotting have already been described ( Robin - son and Kreis , 1992 ; Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . All samples contained 100 ~ M EGTA . BFA was used at a final concentration of 100 Ixg / ml and GTP " / S at 100 ~ M . The ATP regenerating system consisted of 5 mM creatine phos - phate , 80 i ~ g / ml creatine phosphokinase , and 1 rnM ATP , while the ATP depletion system consisted of ~ 1 U hexokinase with glucose added to a fi - nal concentration of 50 mM . For quantitative Western blotting , the radio - activity of each band was analyzed with a FujiX Bas2000 Bio - Imaging An - alyzer ( Fuji Photo Film Co . , Ltd . , Tokyo , Japan ) . The experiments were repeated three times , and the results were averaged . Immunolocalization Primary antibodies used for the immunofluorescence experiments in - cluded those mentioned above , a new anti - 13 - NAP antibody that we pre - pared as previously described ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) and used to label pri - mary neuronal cells , and a mouse antibody specific for brain a - adaptin , MC4 ( Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . Fluorescein - labeled donkey anti - rabbit IgG and Texas red - labeled sheep anti - mouse IgG were obtained from Amer - sham Intl . Both NRK cells , permeabitized and incubated with pig brain cytosol as described above , and primary cultures of cerebellar granule neurons were examined by immunofluorescence . The cerebellar cells were generously provided by A . Randall and J . Mellor ( Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge , UK ) . They were prepared from p4 mouse cerebellum , essentially as described by Randall and Tsien ( 1995 ) , except that the culture medium was supplemented with an additional 20 mM K + to promote granule cell survival . Both types of cells were examined using either a fluorescence microscope ( Axioplan ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) or a confocal microscope ( MRC1000 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories , Richmond , CA ) . Two additional primary antibodies were used for immunogold EM : a rabbit anti - v - adaptin and a rabbit anti - clathrin heavy chain , both raised against GST fusion proteins . The sequences that were amplified by PCR for cloning into pGEX were those encoding amino acids 595 - 703 for mouse ~ / - adaptin ( the hinge ) , and amino acids 1545 - 1675 for rat clathrin heavy chain ( the COOH - terminal variable domain ) . The ~ , - adaptin con - struct was soluble and purified by affinity chromatography , while the clathrin construct was insoluble and electrophoretically purified from in - clusion bodies . Purification of both was carried out as previously de - scribed ( Page and Robinson , 1995 ) . The rabbits were injected , boosted , and bled , and their serum was affinity purified as described above . Electron Microscopy For immunogold localization of newly recruited proteins , NRK cells were permeabilized by immersion into liquid N 2 before incubation with pig brain cytosol as previously described ( Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . At the end of the incubation , the ceils were fixed for 30 min with 0 . 05 % glutaraldehyde in cytosol buffer minus the DTT , scraped , pelleted , and embedded in 10 % gelatin . For studies on endogenous proteins , cerebellar cells were fixed with 0 . 05 % glutaratdehyde before scraping , pelleting , and embedding in 10 % gelatin . Both sets of cells were then prepared for ultrastructural im - munocytochemistry essentially as outlined by Griffiths ( 1993 ) . Briefly , the embedded cell pellets were infused with 2 . 1 M sucrose in PBS overnight at 4°C , and then frozen on aluminium stubs in liquid nitrogen . Frozen ul - trathin sections were cut using a Reichert Ultracut S ultramicrotome equipped with an FCS cryochamber attachment ( Leica , Milton Keynes , UK ) . Sections were collected and labeled using the protein A - gold tech - nique ( Slot and Geuze , 1983 ) . Double labeling was performed using the sequential labeling methodology of Slot et al . ( 1991 ) . The sections were then contrasted by embedding them in freshly prepared 1 . 8 % methyl cel - lulose / 0 . 3 % uranyl acetate ( Tokuyasu , 1978 ) , allowed to air dry ' , and ob - served in a transmission electron microscope ( CM100 ; Philips Electronic Instruments , Inc . , Mahwah , N J ) . Fractionation Fractionation of rat liver membranes was carried out essentially as de - scribed by Branch et al . ( 1987 ) , using 15 g of rat liver homogenized in STM ( 40 ml of cold 0 . 25 M sucrose , 10 mM N - tris ( hydroxymethyl ) - methyl - 2 - aminoethane - sulfonic acid , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM MgCI2 ) . A postmitochondrial supernatant was prepared by centrifuging the homogenate at 1 , 500 g for 10 min , and 5 - ml samples were then loaded onto 34 - ml linear gradients prepared from 0 . 25 M sucrose , 10 mM TES , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA , and 45 % Nycodenz in 10 mM N - tris ( bydroxymethyl ) - methyl - 2 - aminoethane - sulfonic acid , pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA . The gradients were centrifuged in a vertical rotor ( VTi50 ; Beckman Instruments , Inc . ) at 206 , 000 g for 1 h , and 1 - ml fractions were collected by upward displacement . For recruitment experiments , 400 - / zl aliquots of the fractions were diluted threefold with STM and collected by pelleting at 90 , 000 g ( 50 , 000 rpm ) for 15 min in a Beckman TL100 . 2 rotor . Membrane pellets were resuspended in 50 Ixl cy - tosol ( clarified by centrifugation for 15 min at 350 , 000 g just before use ) with appropriate additions and incubated for 10 min at 37°C before wash - ing by 20 - fold dilution with cold STM and pelleting as before . Pellets were then resuspended in 50 ixl SDS - PAGE sample buffer , and 10 - 1 ~ 1 aliquots were analyzed by Western blotting . Results Distribution of p47 To raise antisera against p47 , rabbits were injected with rat p47A and rat p47B expressed as GST fusion proteins . Like their homologues , the adaptor medium chains , the p47 proteins were found to be extremely poor antigens : only one of the rabbits responded , and the resulting antiserum only recognized SDS - denatured p47 . Simpson et aL A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex 751 Figure 1 . Characterization of p47 by Western blotting . ( , 4 and B ) Gel ( A ) and blot ( B ) showing equal protein loadings of various tissue and cell homogenates . The blot was probed with anti - p47 . The most intensely labeled 47 - kD band is in brain followed by the neuroendocrine cell line PC12 . The higher molecular weight band labeled in the NRK cell lane is presumably an unrelated cross - reacting protein . ( C and D ) Gel ( C ) and blot ( D ) showing whole pig brain homogenate , a high speed pellet containing membranes , a high speed supernatant containing cytosol , and pu - rified clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) . The blot was cut in half , and the top half was probed with anti - - y - adaptin , the bottom half with anti - p47 . Both proteins partition about equally between mem - branes and cytosol , but whereas ~ - adaptin is enriched in clathrin - coated vesicles , p47 is depleted . ( E and F ) Gel ( E ) and blot ( F ) of fractions ( pooled groups of six ) from a Superose 6 gel filtration column . The blot was cut in half , and the top half was probed with anti - ' , / - adaptin , the bottom half with anti - p47 , p47 elutes slightly ahead of - , / - adaptin with an apparent size of ~ 400 kD . Fig . 1 , A and B , shows a gel and Western blot of differ - ent tissues and cells , probed with affinity - purified anti - p47 . A 47 - kD band is detectable in brain homogenate and in the neuroendocrine cell line PC12 . Longer exposure re - vealed a 47 - kD band in lung and a much weaker 47 - kD band in NRK cells ( data not shown ) . Thus , the antigen shows the tissue distribution expected from Northern blot - ting , since the antiserum recognizes both isoforms : p47B , which is only expressed in brain ; and p47A , which is ex - pressed more widely but which is particularly abundant in brain and lung . Formal proof that the antibody is specific for p47 was obtained by immunoprecipitating the protein from pig brain cytosol after SDS denaturation ( see Fig . 2 ) and sequencing the 47 - kD band . The first seven residues were able to be determined , and with the exception of an iso - leucine for leucine substitution at position 7 ( possibly due to the difference in species ) , there was a complete match with the sequences deduced from the two p47 cDNAs . We next examined the subcellular distribution of p47 to find out whether it was similar to that of adaptor com - plexes . The adaptors cycle on and off the membrane and thus exist both as a cytosolic pool and in a membrane - associated form , and they are highly enriched in prepara - tions of clathrin - coated vesicles . The gel in Fig . 1 C con - tains equal protein loadings of pig brain homogenate , a high speed pellet containing membranes , a high speed su - pernatant containing cytosol , and purified pig brain clath - rin - coated vesicles . A Western blot of these samples was probed for the ~ / - adaptin subunit of the TGN adaptor complex ( upper half ) , and for p47 ( lower half ) ( Fig . 1 D ) . Both proteins partition in a similar way between mem - branes and cytosol . However , whereas ~ / - adaptin is greatly enriched in the coated vesicle sample ( 50 - fold increase in signal over that in the homogenate ) , p47 is depleted ( four - fold decrease ) . Thus , although p47 is related to the adap - tor medium chains , it does not appear to be associated with clathrin , p47 is also not enriched in a partially purified synaptic vesicle preparation , although it is detectable ( data not shown ) , which is somewhat surprising in view of the fact that the original antiserum used to screen the ray ex - pression library was raised against such a preparation . To find out whether p47 is a component of an adaptor - sized protein complex , pig brain cytosol was subjected to gel filtration on a Superose 6 column , and the fractions were blotted and probed for both ~ / - adaptin and p47 . Fig . 1 , E and F , shows that p47 elutes slightly ahead of - , / - adap - tin . Calibration of the column indicated that p47 runs with an apparent size of ~ 400 kD , while on the same column , ~ / - adaptin runs with an apparent size of , - ~ 280 kD , close to its actual size of 263 kD as part of the TGN adaptor complex . p47 and [ 3 - NAP Are Part of the Same Complex Are the other subunits in the p47 - containing complex also related to adaptor subunits ? Two observations suggested that 13 - NAP might be one of the subunits of such a com - plex . First , it too shows ~ 30 % identity to its adaptor ho - mologue ; and second , its pattern of expression is similar to that of p47B ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , we carried out experiments to determine whether 13 - NAP and p47 coim - munoprecipitate . First , we immunoprecipitated pig brain cytosol under nondenaturing conditions with an antiserum raised against a 13 - NAP fusion protein and showed by Western blotting that p47 coprecipitates ( Fig . 2 A ) . Sec - ond , we treated the cytosol with the reversible cross - linker DTSSP , denatured it by boiling in SDS , and immunopre - cipitated with anti - p47 . Under these conditions 13 - NAP co - precipitates , but only in the presence of cross - linker ( Fig . 2 B ) . Thus , the complex contains both an adaptor medium chain homologue and a 13 - adaptin homologue . As a first step towards identifying the remaining sub - units of the complex , we carried out immunoprecipitations on metabolically labeled AtT20 cells , a neuroendocrine cell line in which both p47 and ~ - NAP are strongly ex - pressed . Under denaturing conditions , anti - p47 was found to bring down three additional bands in a cross - linker de - pendent manner : a , ' - q20 - kD band , which is likely to be 13 - NAP ; a N160 - kD band ; and a ~ 25 - kD band ( Fig . 2 C ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 752 Figure 2 . Composition of the p47 - contain - ing complex . ( A ) Pig brain cytosol was im - munoprecipitated with antiq3 - NAP under nondenaturing conditions , and the blot was then probed with anti - p47 , p47 coim - munoprecipitates with I3 - NAP . ( B ) Pig brain cytosol was treated with the cross - linker DTSSP , boiled in SDS , and immu - noprecipitated with anti - p47 . A reducing gel was run to reverse the cross - linking , and the blot was cut in half and probed with anti - 13 - NAP ( top ) and anti - p47 ( bot - tom ) . 13 - NAP coprecipitates with p47 in a cross - linker - dependent manner . ( C ) Cytosol was prepared from metabolically labeled AtT20 cells and immunoprecipitated either with anti - p47 after prior cross - linking and denaturation , as in B , or with anti - 13 - NAP under nondenaturing conditions , as in A . Proteins of ~ 160 kD ( p160 ) , ~ 120 kD ( 13 - NAP ) , and , ' , ~ 25 kD ( p25 ) coprecipitate with p47 in the presence of cross - linker . These same bands can be seen to coprecipitate with antiq3 - NAP under native conditions , although additional bands are also seen . ( D ) Labeled cytosol was pre - pared as in C and immunoprecipitated with either anti - 13 - NAP or anti - p47 after cross - linking and boiling in SDS . The four bands that consistently coprecipitate in a cross - linker - dependent manner are p160 , [ ~ - NAP , p47 , and p25 . These same bands were found to coimmunoprecipitate with anti - 13 - NAP under native conditions , although a num - ber of additional bands came down as well ( Fig . 2 C ) . A simpler pattern was obtained when anti - 13 - NAP was used to immunoprecipitate after cross - linking and denaturing in SDS , and again proteins of 160 , 47 , and 25 kD coprecipi - tated , as well as bands of ~ 50 and ~ 80 kD ( Fig . 2 D ) . Thus , there are four proteins common to all three immu - noprecipitations , and although we cannot rule out the pos - sibility that the extra bands that come down with anti - 13 - NAP are additional components of the complex , we favor a model where the p47 complex , like an adaptor complex , is composed of four subunits : two large ( 13 - NAP and p160 ) , one medium ( p47 ) , and one small ( p25 ) . This would give the complex a native molecular mass of ~ 350 kD , which is somewhat less than its apparent molecular mass by gel filtration of ~ 400 kD , but which could be explained if the complex is nonglobular . Recruitment of the Complex onto Membranes If the function of the p47 complex is to act as part of a ves - icle coat , its association with membranes should be regu - lated by a small GTP - binding protein . To test this possibil - Figure 3 . Recruitment of the p47 - containing complex onto membranes . ( A ) Immunoblot of permeablilized NRK cells incubated with pig brain cytosol under various conditions , cut in half and probed for newly recruited ~ - adaptin ( top ) and p47 ( bottom ) . Each lane contains pooled samples from three experiments . ( B ) Quantification of the recruitment . Blots similar to the one in A were prepared from three sepa - rate experiments , and the signals were quantified using the phosphoroimager . The numbers refer to the six conditions shown in A . Recruitment of both proteins is stimulated by GTP ' , / S and blocked by brefeldin A . However , whereas GTP - / S partially stimulates ~ / - adaptin recruit - ment even in the absence of ATP , recruitment of p47 is completely ATP dependent . ( C and D ) A rat liver postmitochondrial supernatant was frac - tionated on a 0 - - 45 % Nycodenz gradient , and 36 fractions were collected and incubated with pig brain cytosol , ATP , and a regenerating system , either without ( C ) or with ( D ) GTP ~ / S , centri - fuged , and assayed by Western blotting for coat protein recruitment . Blots of fractions from the central portion of the gradient ( the light end is on the left ) are shown labeled with antibodies against newly recruited ot - adaptin , ~ / - adaptin , and p47 . Both ct - adaptin and p47 have a tendency to precipitate even in the absence of membranes , as shown by the control lane ( - ) in which no membranes were added . With the excep - tion of o ~ - adaptin , recruitment above background in the absence of GTP ' yS is not detectable . However , specific recruitment of all three proteins can be seen in the presence of GTP ~ S , and the membranes that recruit p47 cofractionate with the membranes that recruit ~ - adaptin but not with the membranes that recruit ot - adaptin . Simpson et al . A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex 753 Figure 4 . Localization of newly recruited 13 - NAP by immunofluorescence . ( A - D ) Conventional fluorescence micrographs of 13 - NAP re - cruited onto NRK cell mem - branes in the presence of GTP3 , S ( A and C ) , double la - beled for newly recruited c ~ - adaptin ( B ) and - ¢ - adaptin ( D ) . The arrowheads indi - cate a nonpermeabilized cell that serves as a control . All three types of coats are re - cruited onto perinuclear membranes ( a - adaptin is mistargeted to an endosomal compartment in the presence of GTP ' yS ) , but the fine de - tails of the labeling are dif - ferent . ( E and F ) Confocal micrographs of a mitotic cell double labeled for newly re - cruited B - NAP ( E ) and " y - adaptin ( F ) . When the or - ganelles are dispersed during cell division , the two proteins are generally not colocalized . Bars , 10 ~ m . ity , we made use of an in vitro system originally designed to study the recruitment of adaptors onto membranes ( Robinson and Kreis , 1992 ; Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . Perme - abilized NRK ceils are incubated with pig brain cytosol under various conditions . Because p47 is much more strongly expressed in brain than in NRK cells ( see Fig . 1 B ) , recruitment of the exogenous complex from the cyto - sol can be assayed by centrifuging the cells at low speed and probing Western blots with anti - p47 under conditions where there is no detectable labeling of endogenous p47 . Experiments were carried out in triplicate , and the upper half of the blots was probed with a mAb against ~ / - adaptin , which also only detects the newly recruited protein be - cause it recognizes pig but not rat , while the bottom half was probed with anti - p47 ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . The signal from ~ - adaptin associated with the cell pellet increased about 10 - fold when GTP ~ / S was added to the in - cubation mixture , consistent with previous reports ( Robin - son and Kreis , 1992 ) . The signal from p47 was also found to increase in the presence of GTP - yS , by about threefold . In both cases the GTP ~ / S effect was strongly reduced by prior incubation with BFA , indicating that an ARF family member regulates the recruitment of the p47 complex as well as TGN adaptors . One important difference between the two complexes , however , was that GTP ~ / S stimulated ~ - adaptin recruitment whether or not ATP was present , while recruitment of the p47 complex absolutely required ATP and a regenerating system . When an ATP - depleting system was added instead , only basal recruitment was ob - served even in the presence of GTP ~ / S . One possible ex - planation for the ATP requirement of the p47 complex may be that a substrate needs to be phosphorylated before binding can occur . Recruitment was also investigated using membrane Figure 5 . Immunogold EM labeling of newly recruited coat proteins . Frozen thin sections were prepared of permeabilized NRK cells that had been allowed to recruit proteins from pig brain cytosol in the presence of GTP - / S . The sections were labeled with antibodies against newly recruited 13 - NAP ( 15 nm gold ) ( A ) , or double labeled for 13 - NAP ( 10 nm gold ) and ~ , - adaptin ( 15 nm gold ) ( B ) , 13 - NAP ( 10 nm gold ) and clathrin ( 15 nm gold ) ( C ) , or " y - adaptin ( 10 nm gold ) and clathrin ( 15 nm gold ) ( D ) . The arrowheads in B and C indicate 13 - NAP - positive membranes . All three proteins are associated with tubulovesicluar clusters of membrane near the Golgi stack ( G ) . 13 - NAP is often present on the same clusters as ~ - adaptin and clathrin but generally not on the same buds . The degree of coincidence The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 754 was quantified by counting vesicular profiles labeled for 13 - NAP and determining how many of these were also positive for ~ / - adaptin or clathrin . Out of 89 such profiles from cells such as the one in B , only four ( 4 % ) also had ~ / - adaptin associated with them . Similarly , out of 145 13 - NAP - positive profiles from cells such as the one in C , only six ( 4 % ) were also labeled with anticlathrin . Even these numbers may be an overestimate of the degree of colocalization , since when the vesicles appeared in clusters , it was often difficult to assign a gold par - ticle to a particular vesicle . However , when cells such as the one in D were scored for colocalization of 3 , - adaptin and clathrin , a much higher degree of coincidence was seen : out of 71 ~ / - adaptin - positive vesicular profiles , 30 ( 42 % ) were also positive for clathrin . The in - sets show coated buds labeled either for [ 3 - NAP ( A ) or ~ / - adaptin and clathrin ( D ) and reveal that the 13 - NAP - containing coats are thin - ner than the clathrin coats . Bars , 200 nm . Simpson et al . A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex 755 fractions prepared from rat liver ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . A post - mitochondrial supernatant was fractionated by Nycodenz gradient centrifugation , and the fractions were incubated with pig brain cytosol plus ATP and a regenerating system , with or without GTP ~ / S , pelleted , blotted , and probed for the presence of newly recruited et - adaptin , - y - adaptin , or p47 . The recruitment of all three proteins was found to be enhanced by GTP ~ / S . In addition , in the case of et - adaptin , a different fractionation profile was observed in the pres - ence and in the absence of GTP ~ / S , presumably because GTP ~ / S causes plasma membrane adaptors to be mistar - geted to an endosomal compartment instead of binding to the plasma membrane . The fractionation profile for p47 - recruiting membranes in the presence of GTP ~ / S was different from both of these but similar to the profile for - v - adaptin - recruiting membranes . These results indicate that the p47 complex does not bind to either of the mem - branes that recruit plasma membrane adaptors ( the plasma membrane itself and the endosomal mistargeting compart - ment ) but to a denser membrane compartment : either the same compartment that binds TGN adaptors or another compartment with a similar fractionation profile . Localization of the Newly Recruited Complex For a more precise identification of the membrane ( s ) with which the complex is associated , permeabilized NRK cells were incubated with pig brain cytosol plus ATP and a re - generating system in the presence of GTP ~ / S , and then double labeled with anti - 3 - NAP ( Fig . 4 , A and C ) and an - tibodies against newly recruited ( mistargeted ) a - adaptin ( Fig . 4 B ) or ~ / - adaptin ( Fig . 4 D ) . By immunofluores - cence , the compartment that recruits I3 - NAP is primarily perinuclear , with more punctate labeling extending out to - wards the cell periphery . Omission of ATP from the incu - bation mixture blocked the 13 - NAP recruitment , while omission of GTP ~ / S reduced the amount of recruitment ( data not shown ) , consistent with the results shown in Fig . 3 . Superficially at least , the structures labeled with anti - 13 - NAP look similar to those labeled with anti - a - adaptin and with anti - ~ - adaptin . However , closer examination reveals that the fine details of the labeling are different . The 13 - NAP perinuclear pattern is more fine grained than ei - ther of the other two , and the peripheral labeling is more pronounced . Moreover , when the peripheral structures la - beled with anti - ~ 3 - NAP are compared with those labeled with the other two antibodies , for the most part they do not coincide . Differences in the labeling patterns are more apparent in mitotic cells , where organelles that cluster in the perinu - clear region around the microtubule organizing center become more dispersed . Fig . 4 , E and F , shows confocal micrographs comparing newly recruited 13 - NAP ( E ) and ~ / - adaptin ( F ) in a mitotic cell . It is clear that most of the structures labeled with the two antibodies are different . Thus , although the membranes that bind these two pro - teins fractionate in a similar way and have a similar peri - nuclear distribution in interphase cells , they become segre - gated from each other during cell division . To examine the G - NAP - binding compartment at higher resolution , we used immunogold EM . Fig . 5 A reveals that newly recruited 13 - NAP is associated with tubulovesicular clusters of membrane in close proximity to the Golgi stack but not with the Golgi stack itself . Often the 13 - NAP - posi - tive membranes appear to be coated on the cytoplasmic side ( inset ) . The appearance of these membranes suggests that they may correspond to the TGN ; however , the inter - mediate compartment between the Golgi and the ER also has a tubulovesicular appearance in permeabilized cells ( Griffiths et al . , 1995 ) . To determine whether the compart - ment is cis or trans to the Golgi stack , cells were double la - beled with anti - 13 - NAP and with either anti - ~ / - adaptin ( Fig . 5 B ) or anti - clathrin ( Fig . 5 C ) . In both cases , the two la - bels are frequently associated with the same clusters , al - though not with the same buds and vesicles . In other re - gions of the cell , membranes can be seen that are labeled with only one of the two antibodies ( e . g . , in Fig . 5 C ) . In contrast , when cells are double labeled with anti - clathrin and anti - ~ / - adaptin ( Fig . 5 D ) , the labeling is much more coincident , and both labels are often seen on the same coated buds . The clathrin coat can be distinguished from the 13 - NAP - - containing coat because it generally appears to be thicker ( Fig . 5 D , inset ; compare with Fig . 5 A , inset ) . Thus , these observations indicate that the 3 - NAP / p47 complex binds to a compartment that is trans to the Golgi stack and that is most likely a subcompartment of the TGN , a possibility supported by partial colocalization with the TGN membrane protein TGN38 ( not shown ) . The less perinuclear , more peripheral labeling that can be seen by immunofluorescence may correspond to an endosomal subcompartment . Indeed , recent studies have shown that the TGN and endosomes are closely connected compart - ments with extensive trafficking between them , and " clas - sical " TGN markers , such as ~ / - adaptin and TGN38 , are found in endosomes as well as in the TGN ( Luzio and Banting , 1993 ; Seaman , M . N . J . , and M . S . Robinson , un - published observations ) . Localization of the Endogenous Complex Because studies on plasma membrane adaptors have shown that GTP ~ S may cause coat proteins to be mistar - geted ( Seaman et al . , 1993 ) , we also examined the distribu - tion of endogenous 3 - NAP in primary cultures of cerebel - lar granule neurons . The confocal micrographs in Fig . 6 show that both ~ / - adaptin ( A ) and 3 - NAP ( B ) are concen - trated in the cell body , next to or surrounding the nucleus . In addition , 3 - NAP labeling can also be seen in neurites ( Fig . 6 C , small arrowheads ) , consistent with previous ob - servations on brain sections in which the protein was found to be present not only in the perikaryon but also in cellular processes and in the nerve terminal ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) . At the electron microscope level ( Fig . 7 ) , 13 - NAP label - ing is mainly observed to one side of the Golgi stack . Some of the label is also associated with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 7 A , arrowheads ) . In the Golgi region of the ceil , ves - icles with a thick , clathrin - like coat frequently appear inter - spersed with the 13 - NAP - positive membranes ( Fig . 7 B , ar - row ) . To confirm that these vesicles are clathrin coated and thus can be used as markers for the TGN , cells were dou - ble labeled with antibodies against 13 - NAP and - , / - adaptin ( Fig . 7 C ) or with antibodies against 13 - NAP and clathrin ( Fig . 7 D ) . Both sets of labels are localized to the same tu - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 756 Figure 6 . Confocal micrographs of endogenous coat proteins in neuronal cells . Cultured cerebellar granule cells were labeled with antibodies against either y - adaptin ( A ) or 13 - NAP ( B and C ) . Both ~ - adaptin and 13 - NAP have a perinuclear or juxtanuclear distribution , consistent with their being associated with the TGN ; in addition , 13 - NAP is also present in neurites . In the extended fo - cus projection of a Z series of images shown in C , both the peri - nuclear region of the cell body ( large arrowhead ) and the neurites ( small arrowheads ) are labeled . Bars : ( A and B ) 25 p ~ m ; ( C ) 10 ~ m . bulovesicular network . Thus , these observations indicate that the 13 - NAP / p47 complex associates with the TGN not only when added to heterologous membranes in vitro , but also under physiological conditions in vivo . Discussion We have shown that p47 and G - NAP are subunits of a novel adaptor - related protein complex and that this com - plex is a component of a new type of non - clathrin coat . The existence of such coats has long been suspected , since there are a number of budding events for which coat pro - teins have not yet been identified , including some that make use of tyrosine - containing sorting signals related to the internalization signals , which have been shown to bind to adaptor complexes ( Matter and Mellman , 1994 ; Luzio and Banting , 1993 ) . Our evidence that the complex actually functions as a coat component is twofold . First , recruit - ment of the complex onto target membranes is enhanced by GTPTS and blocked by brefeldin A , indicating that , like other coats , its membrane association is regulated by a GTP - binding protein , probably an ARF . Second , immu - nogold EM reveals that the complex is associated with membrane buds that display a distinctive ~ 10 - nm coat on their cytoplasmic side . This coat is thinner than a clathrin coat ; and this observation , combined with the lack of colo - calization of G - NAP with clathrin and adaptors at both the light and the electron microscope level , and the finding by Western blotting that both p47 and 13 - NAP are depleted rather than enriched in preparations of clathrin - coated vesicles ( see Newman et al . , 1995 ) , indicates that the com - plex is not simply another clathrin - associated adaptor but is part of a different type of coat . Presumably this coat must also contain a structural protein , analogous although not necessarily homologous to clathrin , which would act as a scaffold to facilitate vesicle budding . The lace - like coats that have been observed on vesicles budding from the TGN by high voltage EM tomography ( Ladinsky et al . , 1994 ) may be the same coats that we see by immunogold EM , viewed with a different technique . Under conditions where p47 and G - NAP coimmunopre - cipitate , two other proteins come down as well , p160 and p25 . We predict that p160 will be found to share homology with the ~ - and 7 - adaptins , and p25 with the adaptor small chains , but that in both cases the homology will be less than that between ~ - and 7 - adaptin and between AP17 and AP19 . Interestingly , cDNAs encoding proteins that have these properties have recently been cloned as ex - pressed sequence tags and can be found in the public data - base . We also predict that there must be a 13 - NAP homo - logue expressed in nonneuronal cells to form complexes with the universally expressed p47A . Again , we believe that we have identified such a protein in the database , and we are currently raising antibodies against all of these pro - teins to determine whether they coimmunoprecipitate with p47 . Even if they are not subunits of the p47 - contain - ing complex , they are still likely to be of interest as compo - nents of yet another type of adaptor - related complex . What pathway or pathways might the p47 / ~ - NAP com - plex mediate ? In their recent report on the cloning and characterization of G - NAP , Newman et al . suggested that it might play a role in the trafficking of endosomally de - Simpson et al . A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex 757 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 758 rived vesicles between the cell body and the nerve termi - nal . This hypothesis was based on the neuronal - specific ex - pression of the protein and its presence in synaptosome fractions as well as in the cell body ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) . A neuronal - specific role was also proposed by Pevsner et al . ( 1994 ) in their study of p47 . They suggested that the protein might be a component of a coat involved in the biogenesis of synaptic vesicles from endosomes . We would like to propose an additional or alternative model that is supported by our EM localization studies , both of newly recruited 13 - NAP and of endogenous 3 - NAP in neurons . Both studies suggest that the complex is required for a non - clathrin - mediated budding event from the TGN . Our results are not inconsistent with the possibility that the complex might also be involved in trafficking from endo - somes , especially since more peripheral structures were also labeled with anti - B - NAP ; however , the endosomes in the nerve terminal are an early endosomal compartment , and in the NRK cells we failed to see significant colocal - ization with the transferrin receptor , which is concentrated in early endosomes , or with fluorescent wheat germ agglu - tinin , which the cells had been allowed to internalize for 2 , 5 , or 12 min before permeabilization ( data not shown ) . A number of different types of vesicles are formed from the TGN : clathrin - coated vesicles , which sequester newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes ; specialized secretory gran - ules in cells with a regulated secretory pathway ; and con - stitutive secretory vesicles , which exist as two distinct pop - ulations in polarized epithelial cells and possibly in other cells as well ( Matter and Mellman , 1994 ) . There is some evidence that the same sorting signals that are used to send different membrane proteins to the apical and basolateral domains in epithelial cells are used for trafficking to the axon and dendrites in neuronal cells ( Dotti and Simons , 1990 ) , and Newman et al . have proposed that the 13 - NAP - containing complex might play a role in the generation of axonally directed vesicles , which in epithelial cells would correspond to apically directed vesicles ( Newman et al . , 1995 ) . On the other hand , it is also possible that an adap - tor - related complex might function in the basolateral pathway , since the signals that target proteins into this pathway are closely related to the internalization signals , which bind to adaptors , while the apical pathway is thought to make use of a different type of machinery ( Matter and Mellman , 1994 ) . The localization of the endogenous com - plex in neuronal cells not only to the cell body but also to neurites , most of which are likely to be dendrites rather than axons , is consistent with this latter possibility . The association of label with the plasma membrane as well as with internal membranes is striking , and its signifi - cance is not yet clear . One possibility is that the complex might be required for a budding event at the plasma mere - brane as well as at the TGN , just as clathrin and adaptors are used at both locations . However , the labeled regions of plasma membrane are fiat , which is inconsistent with a role in budding . An alternative possibility is that the com - plex may stay membrane associated long after the vesicles bud from their donor compartment ( the TGN ) and remain associated even after the vesicles fuse with their acceptor compartment ( the plasma membrane ) . It is clear that further studies will need to be carried out before the function of the complex can be established de - finitively . New antibodies will need to be generated to find out whether , for instance , p47B can only coassemble with 13 - NAP and p47A with a nonneuronal 3 - NAP homologue or whether the subunits are interchangeable . Our immu - nolocalization studies on NRK cells will need to be con - firmed with antibodies that recognize the endogenous p47A - containing complex in these cells , and the distribu - tion of the two types of complexes will need to be com - pared in neuronal and nonneuronal cells . Although it is tempting to speculate that the neuronal specificity of p47B and 13 - NAP means that these proteins are required for a neuronal - specific pathway , it is equally possible that they are functionally identical to their nonneuronal isoforms but that their expression is regulated differently . Thus , the proteins could be required for a constitutive pathway that exists in all cells but that is used much more extensively in neurons . One such pathway is the route from the TGN to the plasma membrane , which must be upregulated in neu - rons as the cells send out axons and dendrites . Immunolocalization will only provide clues about what such a pathway might be . Functional studies will also be required , using antibodies or mutagenesis to try to inacti - vate the complex . Interestingly , a number of homologues of adaptor subunits have been identified in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , including some that ap - pear , by genetic and biochemical criteria , not to be associ - ated with clathrin ( Phan et al . , 1994 ; Stepp et al . , 1995 ) , and these proteins are candidates for components of a dif - ferent type of coat , which may be more like the p47 - and 3 - NAP - containing coat . The nematode worm Caenorhab - ditis elegans may prove to be an even better model system , especially for studying the role of the coat in neurons . We have recently identified a close homologue of I3 - NAP cloned from C . elegans as an expressed sequence tag , which is 78 % identical to the mammalian protein . Experi - ments are currently underway to investigate the function of this protein by taking advantage of C . elegans genetics . But even though the role of the complex remains to be es - tablished , the fact that it exists , and that its recruitment onto the membrane is regulated by GTP , supports the view that all membrane traffic pathways make use of simi - lar underlying mechanisms . Figure 7 . Immunogold EM labeling of endogenous coat proteins in neuronal cells . Frozen thin sections were prepared of cultured cere - bellar granule cells and labeled with antibodies against 13 - NAP ( 10 nm gold ) , either alone ( A and B ) or together with 15 - nm gold - conju - gated antibodies against ~ - adaptin ( C ) or clathrin ( D ) . Most of the 13 - NAP label is associated with tubulovesicular membranes near the Golgi stack ( G ) , although some also appears at the plasma membrane ( arrowheads in A ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles ( arrow in B ) are found in the same region near the Golgi stack , and their identity can be confirmed by double labeling ( C and D ) . Again , quantification revealed little colocalization of I ~ - NAP with " , / - adaptin or clathrin . Out of 176 13 - NAP - positive vesicular profiles from cells such as the one in C , three ( 2 % ) were also labeled with anti - ~ / - adaptin , while out of 183 3 - NAP - positive vesicular profiles from cells such as the one in D , six ( 3 % ) were also labeled wilh anticlathrin . Bars , 200 nm . Simpson et al . A Novel Adaptor - related Protein Complex 759 We are enormously indebted to Jonathan Pevsner and Richard Scheller , who showed unheard of generosity in giving us all of their p47 plasmids , even before their work on them had been published . We thank Matthew Seaman for the clathrin - coated vesicles , for the rabbit anti - ' y - adaptin , and for advice on cross - linking ; Andy Randall for the cultured cerebellar cells ; and Barbara Mullock for advice on fractionation . We also thank John Kil - martin , Paul Luzio , and members of the Robinson lab for critically read - ing the manuscript and for helpful discussions . This work was supported by grants from the Medical Research Council , the Wellcome Trust , and the Human Frontier Science Program . Received for publication 19 January 1996 and in revised form 5 March 1996 . References Ball , C . L . , S . P . Hunt , and M . S . Robinson . 1995 . Expression and localization of a - adaptin isoforms . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 2865 - 2875 . Barlowe , C . , L . Orci , T . Yeung , M . Hosobuchi , S . Hamamoto , N . Salama , M . F . Rexach , M . Ravazzola , M . Amherdt , and R . Schekman . 1994 . COPII : a membrane coat formed by sec proteins that drive vesicle budding from the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell . 77 : 895 - 907 . Bednarek , S . Y . , M . Ravazzola , M . Hosobuchi , M . Amherdt , A . Perrelet , R . Schekman , and L . Orci . 1995 . COPI - and COPll - coated vesicles bud directly from the endoplasm reticulum in yeast . Cell . 83 : 1183 - 1196 . Branch , W . J . , B . M . Mullock , and J . P . Luzio . 1987 . Rapid subcellular fraction - ation of the rat liver endocyfic compartment involved in transcytosis of poly - meric IgA and endocytosis of asialofetuin . Biochern . J . 244 : 311 - 315 . Donaldson , J . G . , D . Finazzi , and R . D . Klausner . 1992 . Brefeldin A inhibits Golgi membrane - catalyzed exchange of guanine nucleotide onto ARF pro - tein . Nature ( Lond . ) . 360 : 350 - 352 . Dotti , C . G . , and K . Simons . 1990 . Polarized sorting of viral glycoproteins to the axon and dendrites of hippocampal neurons in culture . CelL 62 : 63 - 72 . Duden , R . , G . Griffiths , R . Frank , P . Argos , and T . E . Kreis . 1991 . 13 - COP , a 100 kD protein associated with non - clathrin - coated vesicles and the Golgi com - plex , shows homology to 13 - adaptin . Cell 64 : 649 - 665 . Griffiths , G . 1993 . Fine structure immunocytochemistry . Springer - Verlag , Ber - lin . 459 pp . Griffiths , G . , R . Pepperkok , J . K . Locker , and T . E . Kreis . 1995 . Immunocy - tochemical localization of 13 - COP to the ER - Golgi boundary and the TGN . J . Cell ScL 108 : 2839 - 2856 . Helms , J . B . , and J . E . Rothman . 1992 . Inhibition by brefeldin A of a Golgi mem - brane enzyme that catalyzes exchange of guanine nucleotides bound to ARF . Nature . ( Lond . ) . 360 : 352 - 354 . Kuge , O . , S . Hara - Kuge , L . Orci , M . Ravazzola , M . Amherdt , G . Tanigawa , F . T . Wieland , and J . E . Rothman . 1993 . C - COP , a subunit of coatomer , is re - quired for COP - coated vesicle assembly . Z Cell BioL 123 : 1727 - 1734 . Ladinsky , M . S . , J . R . Kremer , P . S . Furcinitti , R . J . Mclntosh , and K . E . Howell . 1994 . HVEM tomography of the trans - Golgi network : structural insights and identification of a lace - like vesicle coat . J . Cell BioL 127 : 29 - 38 . Luzio , J . P . , and G . Banting . 1993 . Eukaryotic membrane traffic : retrieval and retention mechanisms to achieve organelle residence . Trends Biochem . ScL 18 : 395 - 398 . Manfredi , J . J . , and W . L . Bazari . 1987 . Purification and characterization of two distinct complexes of assembly polypeptides from calf brain coated vesicles that differ in their polypeptide composition and kinase activities . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 12182 - 12188 . Matter , K . , and I . Mellman . 1994 . Mechanisms of cell polarity : sorting and transport in epithelial cells . Curt . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 : 545 - 554 . Newman , L . S . , M . O . McKeever , O . J . Hirotaka , and R . B . Darnell . 1995 . B - NAP , a cerebellar degeneration antigen , is a neuron - specific vesicle coat protein . Cell . 82 : 773 - 783 . Page , L . J . , and M . S . Robinson . 1995 . Targeting signals and subunit interactions in coated vesicle adaptor complexes . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 619 - 630 , Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors , and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Pevsner , J . , W . Volknandt , B . R . Wong , and R . H . Scheller . 1994 . Two rat ho - mologs of clathrin - associated adaptor proteins . Gene ( AmstO . 146 : 279 - 283 . Phan , H . L . , J . A . Finlay , D . S . Chu , P . Tan , T . Kirchhausen , and G . S . Payne . 1994 . The S . cerevisiae APS1 gene encodes a homologue of the small subunit of the mammalian clathrin AP - 1 complex : evidence for functional interac - tion with clathrin at the Golgi complex . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 13 : 1706 - 1717 . Randall , A , and R . W . Tsien . 1995 . Pharmacological dissection of multiple types of Ca 2 + channel currents in rat cerebellar granule neurons . J . Neurosci . 15 : 2995 - 3012 . Robinson , M . S . , and T . E . Kreis . 1992 . Recruitment of coat proteins onto Golgi membranes in intact and permeabilized cells : effects of brefeldin A and G protein activators . Cell 69 : 129 - 138 . Robinson , M . S . , and B . M . F . Pearse . 1986 . Immunofluorescent localization of 100K coated vesicle proteins . J . Cell BioL 102 : 48 - 54 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , and T . Maniatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Labo - ratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , New York . 545 pp . Seaman , M . N . J . , C . L . Ball , and M . S . Robinson . 1993 . Targeting and mistarget - ing of plasma membrane adaptors in vitro . J . Cell BioL 123 : 1093 - 1105 . Serafini , T . , G . Stenbeck , A . Brecht , F . Lottspeich , L . Orci , J . E . Rothman , and F . T . Wieland . 1991 . A coat subunit of Golgi - derived non - clathrin - coated vesicles with homology to the clathrin - coated vesicle coat protein 13 - adaptin . Nature ( Lond . ) . 349 : 215 - 220 . Slot , J . W . , and H . J . Geuze . 1983 . The use of protein A - colloidal gold ( PAG ) complexes as immunolabels in ultrathin frozen sections . In Immunohistochem - istry . A . C . Cuello , editor . John Wiley & Sons , Chichester . 323 - 346 . Slot , J . W . , H . J . Geuze , S . Gigengack , G . E . Lienhard , and D . E . James . 1991 . Im - muno - localization of the insulin regulatable glucose transporter in brown ad - ipose tissue of the rat . Z Cell BioL 113 : 123 - 135 . Stamnes , M . A . , and J . E . Rothman . 1993 . The binding of AP - 1 clathrin adaptor particles to Golgi membranes requires ADP - ribosylation factor , a small GTP - binding protein . Cell . 73 : 999 - 1005 . Stepp , J . D , A . Pellicena - Palle , S . Hamilton , T . Kirchhausen , and S . Lemmon . 1995 . A late Golgi sorting function for Saccharomyces cerevisiae Apmlp , but not for Apm2p , a second yeast clathrin AP me ~ d ; lum chain - related protein . MoL BioL Cell . 6 : 41 - 58 . Tokuyasu , K . T . 1978 . A study of positive staining of ultrathin frozen sections . Z Ultrastruct . Res . 63 : 287 - 307 . Traub , L . M . , J . A . Ostrom , and S . Kornfeld . 1993 . Biochemical dissection of AP - 1 recruitment onto Golgi membranes . J . Cell BioL 123 : 561 - 573 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 760