For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us Business Model Generation : A Handbook for Visionaries , Game Changers , and Challengers Alexander Osterwalder , Yves Pigneur E - Book Rental ( 120 Days ) ISBN : 978 - 1 - 118 - 65640 - 2R120 February 2013 $ 6 . 00 E - Book Rental ( 150 Days ) ISBN : 978 - 1 - 118 - 65640 - 2R150 February 2013 $ 7 . 00 E - Book ISBN : 978 - 1 - 118 - 65640 - 2 February 2013 $ 22 . 99 Paperback ISBN : 978 - 0 - 470 - 87641 - 1 July 2010 $ 34 . 95 DESCRIPTION Business Model Generation is a handbook for visionaries , game changers , and challengers striving to defy outmoded business models and design tomorrow ' s enterprises . If your organization needs to adapt to harsh new realities , but you don ' t yet have a strategy that will get you out in front of your competitors , you need Business Model Generation . Co - created by 470 " Business Model Canvas " practitioners from 45 countries , the book features a beautiful , highly visual , 4 - color design that takes powerful strategic ideas and tools , and makes them easy to implement in your organization . It explains the most common Business Model patterns , based on concepts from leading business thinkers , and helps you reinterpret them for your own context . You will learn how to systematically understand , design , and implement a game - changing business model - - or analyze and renovate an old one . Along the way , you ' ll understand at a much deeper level your customers , distribution channels , partners , revenue streams , costs , and your core value proposition . Business Model Generation features practical innovation techniques used today by leading consultants and companies worldwide , including 3M , Ericsson , Capgemini , Deloitte , and others . Designed for doers , it is for those ready to abandon outmoded thinking and embrace new models of value creation : for executives , consultants , entrepreneurs , and leaders of all organizations . If you ' re ready to change the rules , you belong to " the business model generation ! " ABOUT THE AUTHOR Alexander Osterwalder ( Lausanne , Switzerland ; alexosterwalder . com ; businessmodelgeneration . com ) is a speaker , workshop facilitator and strategy consultant to organizations in 20 countries on all continents . Besides his speaking engagements , Dr . Osterwalder focuses on executive training in the domain of business model development and innovation . He writes a popular blog on business model innovation at www . businessmodelalchemist . com . Organizations that use the business strategy described in Business Model Generation include 3M , Ericsson , IBM , Telenor , Capgemini , Deloitte , and many more . Yves Pigneur , PhD , ( Lausanne , Switzerland ; http : / / hecshost . unil . ch / ypigneur / ) is a professor of business and head of the Information Systems Institute of the University of Lausanne , Switzerland . He has held visiting professorships at Georgia State University in Atlanta , Hong Kong University of Science and Technology , and University of British Columbia in Vancouver . Dr . Pigneur is the chairperson of several conferences ( IFIP , ISDSS , AIM ) . His research has been published in over fifty books , refereed journals and conference proceedings . For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us