Research Article WAFL , a new protein involved in regulation of early endocytic transport at the intersection of actin and microtubule dynamics Ing - Marie Viklund a , b , Pontus Aspenström b , c , Vannary Meas - Yedid d , Bo Zhang d , Jolanta Kopec a , e , Daniel Ågren a , e , Gunter Schneider a , e , Mauro D ' Amato a , b , Jean - Christophe Olivo - Marin d , Philippe Sansonetti f , Guy Tran Van Nhieu f , 1 , Sven Pettersson a , b , g , ⁎ , 1 a Strategic Research Center IRIS , Karolinska Institute , Stockholm , Sweden b Department of Microbiology , Tumor and Cell Biology , Karolinska Institute , Stockholm , Sweden c Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , Biomedical Center , Uppsala University , Uppsala , Sweden d Unité Analyse d ' Images Quantitative , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France e Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics , Karolinska Institute , Stockholm , Sweden . f Unité de Pathogénie Microbienne Moléculaire , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France g Genome Institute of Singapore , Singapore A R T I C L E I N F O R M A T I O N A B S T R A C T Article Chronology : Received 13 August 2008 Revised version received 12 November 2008 Accepted 2 December 2008 Available online 16 December 2008 We have previously identified a new gene with sequence homology to the WASP - family of actin regulators denoted WAFL ( WASP and FKBP - like ) . Here we report a possible biological function for WAFL , by demonstrating an association to early endosomes via its central coiled - coil domain . Further we show by functional and structural studies that WAFL is associated with both microtubules and the actin filament system , the two means of transport of early endosomes . In addition , WAFL interacts with WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) and actin , thus linking WAFL to actin dynamics . The use of RNAi depletion of WAFL shows that WAFL - deficient cells display delayed transport of endosomal cargo . Our findings are compatible with a model whereby WAFL is involved in the transport of early endosomes at the level of transition between microfilament - based and microtubule - based movement . © 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Endocytosis Transport Actin Microtubules KIAA0674 FKBP15 FKBP133 WIP E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 ⁎ Corresponding author . Department of Microbiology , Tumor and Cell Biology , Karolinska Institute , Theorells väg 3 , 17177 Stockholm , Sweden . Fax : + 46 8 331547 . E - mail address : Sven . Pettersson @ ki . se ( S . Pettersson ) . Abbreviations : WAFL , WASP and FKBP - like ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; FKPB , FK506 - binding protein ; WIP , WASP - interacting protein ; IBD , inflammatory bowel disease ; UC , ulcerative colitis ; CD , Crohn ' s disease 1 Guy Tran Van Nhieu and Sven Pettersson share senior authorship . 0014 - 4827 / $ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2008 . 12 . 004 available at www . sciencedirect . com www . elsevier . com / locate / yexcr Introduction Endocytosis is a vital basic cellular function critical for processes such as receptor signaling , membrane recycling and uptake of material from the extracellular space . Endocytosis is also impor - tant for immunological functions , including phagocytosis and antigen presentation [ 1 ] . Uptake is initiated at the plasma membrane , either as fluid - phase or receptor - mediated endocytosis . The main route is by clathrin - coated pit formation , but new clathrin - independent mechanisms depending on proteins such as caveolin and flotillin have been described [ 2 – 4 ] . Clathrin creates a lattice that pushes the membrane to invaginate , and the endocytic cup is then pinched off by dynamin . The force - generating machinery is powered by actin polymerization and proteins of the Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) - family work to shape the nascent endo - some [ 5 ] . The clathrin - coated vesicle then sheds its clathrin and fuses with early endosomes and can either be transported back to the cell surface as a recycling endosome or move to the increasingly acidic late endosomal compartment , to finally be degraded in the lysosome . How the transitions between the different compartments are achieved is not clear , but it is probably the result of numerous fusion and fission events [ 6 ] . The complex regulation and structure of the endocytic pathways have received fresh interest in recent years , mostly due to new , advanced imaging techniques . Despite this fact , there are many unclear points in the process . One of the unresolved issues is the requirement of actin dynamics in the formation and transport of endosomes . Endosomes have been considered to move primarily along microtubules but the contribution of the actin filament system for endosome motility is under reevaluation . The members of the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - family are proteins that link upstream signals to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex and start actin filament formation . They are important for different kinds of actin reorganization and are also crucial for endocytosis . One member , N - WASP , appears to regulate actin at the endocytic sites , and also binds to many membrane - shaping proteins [ 5 ] . The WASPs have also been associated with motile endosomes propelled by actin tail formation [ 7 – 9 ] . We have previously , in a study of gene expression in inflammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) patients , identified a novel gene with sequence homology to the WASP - family of actin regulators [ 10 ] . The protein which we named WASP and FKBP - like ( WAFL ) , contains an N - terminal WASP homology 1 ( WH1 ) domain , an FK506 - binding protein ( FKBP ) - domain , a large central coiled - coil domain , and a C - terminal stretch of acidic amino acids , resembling the end of the VCA region of the WASP - proteins . The highly similar mouse homologue of WAFL , denoted FKBP133 , has previously been implicated in brain biology [ 11 ] . Fig . 1 – WAFL structures associate with moving TRITC - dextran labeled endosomes . ( A ) HeLa cells expressing EGFP - WAFL ( green ) were stained for WAFL , analyzed by confocal microscopy , and the two z - projections were superimposed . Green is EGFP - WAFL and red is anti - WAFL staining . Scale bar is 5 μ m . ( B , C ) EGFP - WAFL transfected HeLa cells were pulsed with TRITC - dextran ( red ) and monitored in 4D . ( B ) shows the z - projected stack of one cell , and ( C ) is the indicated area in detail , single plane , time - lapse series . The arrow indicates association of a WAFL structure and a TRITC - dextran labeled endosome . Scale bar is 1 μ m . The complete 5 min movie can be found as Supplementary Movie 1 . 1041 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 It was found to be expressed in the developing nervous system and colocalize with actin in the growth cones of axons . Overexpression altered the morphology of neural growth cones : the number of filopodia increased , whereas the overall size was reduced after transfection with a WH1 domain deletion mutant . Additionally , overexpression of the full - length protein , or a FKBP domain deletion mutant , rendered the neurons less sensitive to Sema3A - mediated negative growth control . Since Sema3A is known to work through actin depolymerization [ 12 ] this effectively links the WAFL homologue to the microfilament system . Also from our perspective , based on the WASP - homology , we speculated that WAFL would be involved in actin dynamics . In addition , due to the dotted subcellular expression pattern previously found [ 10 ] , we hypothesized a role for WAFL in endocytosis . Interestingly , in our previous gene expression study , 6 % of the differentially expressed genes in ulcerative colitis were classified under “ Membrane trafficking ” , a category previously not reported to be disturbed in IBD . In the present study we provide evidence that WAFL is involved in both microtubule and micro - filament dynamics , and has a role in the correct processing of early endosomes . Results WAFL associates with moving endosomes during fluid - phase endocytosis To learn more about the previously observed speckled pattern of cellular localization [ 10 ] , we applied immunofluorescence staining on HeLa cells expressing endogenous WAFL and transfected with EGFP - WAFL . As shown in Fig . 1A , WAFL and EGFP - WAFL strictly colocalize thus validating the use of the EGFP - WAFL fusion as a Fig . 2 – WAFL aligns along microtubules and movement of WAFL structures is inhibited by nocodazole . HeLa cells were fixed and stained for endogenous WAFL and microtubules . Cells wereanalyzed byconfocal microscopy . ( A ) Top images show WAFL and tubulin staining and are z - projections from a confocal z - stack with 0 . 15 μ m between each plane . Bottom images are from one plane of the boxed region . Regions of WAFL alignment according to microtubules are indicated . ( B ) EGFP - WAFL transfected HeLa cells were monitored by live cell imaging for 5 min before and 5 min after treatment with nocodazole . Images in each panel show a merge of the first z - projected image ( green ) and the last ( red ) of the 5 min movie capture before and after treatment , respectively . Yellow demonstrates overlap , indicative of a lack of movement . Scale bars are 5 μ m . The complete movie can be found as Supplementary Movie S2 . 1042 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 bona fide tool to study WAFL localization . Live cell imaging of transfected cells indicate that EGFP - WAFL fluorescent structures show intracellular motility , supporting that they represent endo - somes . To test whether WAFL - positive structures localize to endocytic vesicles , we determined the dynamic localization of WAFL during fluid - phase endocytosis . Transfected cells were pulsed with TRITC - labeled dextran that is taken up by fluid - phase endocytosis and is a marker for the degradative pathway . The endocytosis process was recorded by time - lapse microscopy for 5 min ( Supplementary Movie 1 ) . The WAFL - positive speckles display a jerking motion , similarly to TRITC - dextran labeled vesicles , which is characteristic for endosomes . Fig . 1B shows a z - projection of a HeLa cell from the movie , and Fig . 1C shows a time - lapse series of a selected area in one z - plane . As shown in Fig . 1C , WAFL positive structures associate with dextran - labeled endo - somes . This association appears short ranged and highly dynamic and more in line with a transient contact between the two structures ( Fig . 1C , arrowheads ) . Thus , WAFL associates with endosomes in a transient and dynamic fashion . The role of actin and microtubules in WAFL structures ' organization and motility Since endosomes move along microtubule tracks or use the actin cytoskeleton during endocytosis , we assessed whether the intracellular movement of WAFL structures depends on these cytoskeletal systems . While the sequence similarity between WAFL and the WASP family of actin regulators ( WH1 domain and acidic C - terminus ) suggests a role for WAFL in actin - based motility , our experimental long - range movements recorded in time - lapse experiments suggest a role in microtubule - based transport . HeLa cells stained for endogenous WAFL and tubulin showed a typical organization of radial filaments ( Fig . 2A ) . WAFL structures Fig . 3 – WAFL colocalizes with actin clusters and movement of WAFL structures is altered by latrunculin A . HeLa cells were fixed and stained for endogenous WAFL and polymerized actin . Cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy . ( A ) Top images represent one plane and bottom images show the indicated regions with colocalization of WAFL and actin highlighted by the arrows . ( B ) EGFP - WAFL transfected HeLa cells were monitored by live cell imaging for 5 min before and 5 min after treatment with latrunculin A . Images in each panel show a merge of the first z - projected image ( green ) and the last ( red ) of the 5 min movie capture before and after treatment , respectively . Yellow demonstrates overlap , indicative of a lack of movement . Scale bars are 5 μ m . The complete movie can be found as Supplementary Movie S3 . 1043 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 were found predominantly in the cell central region , from which microtubule filaments emanated , probably corresponding to the centrosomal region . In addition , at the cell periphery where microtubule filaments could be clearly distinguished , WAFL structures were observed to line up along these filaments ( Fig . 2A , arrowheads ) . These observations suggest that WAFL structures traffic along microtubules . The vesicles containing endogenous WAFL appear to be smaller than those vesicles harboring transfected WAFL protein ( see Fig . 1 ) . This difference is likely to be caused by a general enlargement of the vesicles due to overexpression of WAFL or , alternatively , a result of a more intense signal from the larger vesicles compared to the smaller vesicles . In live cell imaging we employed density filters and short exposure time to prevent photo damage to the cells and hence , the large , intense , structures are more likely to be captured , at the expense of the small ones due to photo bleaching . To investigate the role of microtubules on WAFL motility we disrupted microtubule filaments using nocodazole and observed the movement of WAFL structures . EGFP - WAFL transfected HeLa cells were monitored by live cell imaging for 5 min to record the normal movement . After this , cells were treated with nocoda - zole for 30 min and then monitored again for 5 min . Fig . 2B shows image representations of the time - lapse movies before and after treatment ( the complete movie is found on - line as Supplementary Movie S2 ) . In each composite image , there is a merge of the first ( green ) and last ( red ) image of each 5 min movie , displaying overlap by yellow , i . e . no movement . As can be seen , movement of the WAFL - containing particles was abrogated by nocodazole and generally no movement was recorded after treatment . The treated cells were fixed and stained after treatment and normal cell morphology was observed , excluding the possibility that the cells had died from the treatment ( data not shown ) . When HeLa cells were stained for endogenous WAFL and polymerized actin ( Fig . 3A ) , a normal phenotype with stress fibers , membrane ruffles and microspikes was observed . Interestingly , while we did not observe an association of WAFL with large actin stress fibers , we did notice WAFL association with actin clusters found in the cell center . In Fig . 3A one central z - plane is shown for the best display of this association . Therefore , the overall WAFL staining appears more dispersed than in the z - projection shown in Fig . 2A . Similarly to the nocodazole experiment , we used latrunculin A , a drug which prevents actin polymerization , to investigate the movement of EGFP - WAFL structures ( Fig . 3B , and Supplementary Movie S3 ) . Transfected HeLa cells were monitored before and after treatment with the drug . The effect induced by latrunculin A Fig . 4 – WAFL interacts with WIP and β - actin . ( A ) WAFL binds to WIP via its WASP - binding domain ( WBD ) . HEK 293 cells transfected with WAFL - FLAG and Myc - WIP were lysed and immunoprecipitated with anti - Myc antibody . Immunoblots are shown for the immunoprecipitated proteins , probed with anti - FLAG antibody , and also total cell lysates to demonstrate protein expression . WH2 = Wiskott – Aldrich homology region 2 . ( B ) Schematic overview of the WIP constructs . ( C ) WAFL interacts with endogenous β - actin . WAFL - FLAG transfected HEK293 cells were lysed and immunoprecipitated with anti - FLAG antibody . To control for unspecific binding to filamentous actin , control cells were treated with Latrunculin B , which decreases the amounts of filamentous actin , before immunoprecipitation . The figure shows immunoblots for the immunoprecipitated proteins and for total cell lysates . Fig . 5 – WAFL associates with markers of early endosomes . ( A ) HeLa cells transfected with EGFP - WAFL were fixed and stained for the indicated proteins . For dynamin , the cells were transfected with GFP - dynamin and WAFL - FLAG . For clarity , dynamin was pseudocolored red and WAFL - FLAG green . Images are z - projections from confocal stacks with 0 . 15 μ m between each plane . Scale bar is 5 μ m . ( B ) Magnifications are of the indicated areas from the top panel . Images are single planes and arrows show points of association . ( C ) Confocal z - stacks of 30 cells per marker were analyzed for colocalization in 3D using the method described in Materials and methods . r c is colocalization ratio of WAFL in each analyzed cell , with the different marker proteins . 1044 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 1045 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 appeared more complex . Although particle movement could be detected , latrunculin A - treatment induced a collapse of WAFL - positive endosomes towards the juxtanuclear space . In addition , a subpopulation of endosomes remained at the cell periphery . Staining of treated cells confirmed the disruption of the microfila - ment system ( data not shown ) . Movement of WAFL - labeled endosomes is thus likely to be primarily on microtubule tracks , although there was an effect recorded by microfilament disruption . WAFL interacts with WASP - interacting protein and actin Although movement of WAFL - labeled endosomes was primarily dependent on intact microtubules , a role for WAFL in actin dynamics is possible due to the association with intracellular actin clusters ( Fig . 3A ) . In addition , WAFL shows sequence similarity to the WASP - family of actin regulators : in the N - terminus where a WH1 domain is predicted and in the very C - terminal acidic stretch ( Supplementary Figure S1 ) . In WASP and N - WASP these regions bind WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) [ 13 , 14 ] , monomeric actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 15 , 16 ] , respectively . So far , we have not been able to detect a direct interaction between WAFL and the Arp2 / 3 complex and we do not detect any effects on Arp2 / 3 driven actin polymerization ( data not shown ) . However , we did detect WAFL binding to both WIP and actin by immunoprecipitation ( Fig . 4 ) . In Fig . 4A cell lysates from cells transfected with WAFL - FLAG and Myc - tagged WIP constructs ( Fig . 4B ) were co - immunoprecipitated . Western blotting revealed that WAFL bound to WIP but only if the WASP - binding domain ( WBD ) was intact . We also detected endogenous actin in immunoprecipitated WAFL . To ensure that interaction was not unspecific due to the large amounts of filamentous actin found in cells , Latrunculin B - treatment ( which decreases the amount of F - actin ) of control cells was performed . Interaction was still detected in treated cells . However , our data do not allow us to discriminate whether WAFL binds to actin monomers or to filamentous actin ( Fig . 4C ) . Thus , WAFL appears to interact with WIP and actin , in line with sequence prediction and similarity to WASP and N - WASP . WAFL associates with early endosomes To characterize WAFL sub - localization more precisely , we per - formed dual immunofluorescent staining using endocytic mar - kers : clathrin and dynamin for nascent endocytic vesicles , EEA1 for early endosomes , CD63 for late endosomes , and Cathepsin D for lysosomes ( Figs . 5A and B ) . All stained cells were transfected with EGFP - WAFL , except for the dynamin samples where a dynamin - GFP construct was used , together with a WAFL - FLAG construct . ( See Supplementary Fig . 2 for comparison of EGFP - WAFL and WAFL - FLAG localization . ) In Fig . 5A the stainings of each marker and WAFL are displayed separately and merged , with WAFL in green and marker in red . In Fig . 5B the boxed region from 5A is shown and channel overlap between WAFL and marker is indicated by arrows . Confocal microscopy analysis revealed association with EEA1 and , to some extent , with CD63 . In contrast , WAFL was not associated with dynamin ( Figs . 5A and B ) , as is clear in Fig . 5B which displays one z - section , there was no detectable WAFL present in the same plane as dynamin . No associationwas detected with Cathepsin D , in spite of the fact that WAFL often showed a predominant perinuclear localization . However , since there was more of a partial overlap ( associa - tion ) , rather than a complete overlap ( colocalization ) , we pro - ceeded to perform an objective quantification of this association by use of a mathematical model . This is an object - based statistical colocalization method that relies on multiple hypothesis tests on the distances between all pairs of the spot - shaped objects from the two markers [ 17 ] . Confocal image stacks from at least 30 cells per marker were used for quantification of colocalization ( Fig . 5C ) . This confirmed that WAFL primarily associates with EEA1 ( R c = 0 . 5653×10 − 3 ) and to some extent with CD63 ( 0 . 1886×10 − 3 ) . These results are consistent with our model in which WAFL associates predominantly with early endosomes . WAFL association with early endosomes is mediated via its coiled - coil domain WAFL is a 135 kDa multidomain protein , with no apparent domain that could mediate the interaction with endosomal vesicles . It has an N - terminal WH1 domain , as discussed above , followed by an FKBP - domain , an extensive coiled - coil region and some additional sequence similarity to the WASP - proteins by an acidic C - terminus . The complete protein sequence and predicted domains can be seen in Supplementary Fig . 1 . In order to determine which region of WAFL is responsible for the speckled , endosome - associated localization , we generated a series of EGFP - tagged deletion constructs of WAFL ( Fig . 6A ) . In Construct 1 the C - terminus , including the acidic end , is deleted , whereas in Construct 2 only the WH1 and the FKBP domains are retained . Further , in Construct 3 these two domains are deleted and the coiled - coil region and the C - terminus are retained . Finally there is Construct 4 which consists of the large central coiled - coil region , and Construct 5 in which the coiled - coil region has been removed by internal deletion . HeLa cells were transfected with these constructs and stained for EEA1 ( Fig . 6 ) . Construct 4 was found to produce a speckled phenotype and to associate with EEA1 . Similarly , Construct 3 displayed structures that associated with EEA1 - stained early endosomes . In contrast , the version retaining only the N - terminal WH1 and FKBP - domains , Construct 2 , failed to form speckles and consequently could not associate with the endosomes . This is also truefor Construct 5 whichlacks the coiled - coildomain . Construct 1 displayed an interesting dual phenotype . Some cells would have the typical dotted pattern and endosomal association , whereas some would have a diffuse cytoplasmic organization . This implies that the C - terminus could contribute to the cellular localization of WAFL . Most strikingly however , it is apparent that the large coiled - coil stretch is essential for the speckled phenotype , and on its own ( construct 4 ) is enough to achieve the colocalization with early endosomes , and when lacking the protein fails altogether to localize properly . These results indicate that association of WAFL with early endosomes is mediated by the central coiled - coil domain . RNAi depletion of WAFL causes disturbed transport towards lysosomes The main task of the early endosome is to sort its content and to ship it further in the endocytic route , either towards recycling 1046 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 endosomes ( e . g . receptors such as transferrin ) or to late endo - somes and hence lysosomes ( receptor substrates or fluid - phase particles ) . To evaluate the function of WAFL in endocytosis , HeLa cells were transfected with a WAFL - specific RNA oligo to knock - down WAFL expression , and a control oligo to check for off - target effects . RNAi efficiency was verified by Western blot , and showed satisfactory knock - down 72 h after treatment of cells , indicative of a long half - life of WAFL . Treated cells were also stained for endogenous WAFL as an additional control ( Fig . 7A ) . We then monitored the transport of endocytic cargo through the endocytic route . Fluorescently labeled dextran , used in previous experiment ( Fig . 1 ) , is a marker for the degradative pathway . The FITC - fluorophore is pH - sensitive , so the signal will decrease as the dextran reaches increasingly more acidic compart - ments , to finally end in the lysosomes [ 18 ] . This was monitored in the cells by means of flow cytometry ( Fig . 7 ) . Fig . 6 – The coiled - coil domain of WAFL is sufficient and essential for endosomal localization . ( A – B ) HeLa cells transfected with the indicated EGFP - WAFL deletion constructs were fixed and stained for early endosomes ( EEA1 marker ) . Images are z - projections from confocal stacks with 0 . 15 μ m between the planes . Scale bar is 5 μ m . ( C ) Magnifications are of the indicated areas from the top panel . Images are single planes and arrows show points of association . 1047 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 Cells were pulsed with FITC - labeled dextran for 5 min , harvested immediately and put on ice for analysis ( t = 0 ) , or washed and chased for 30 min or 2 h . These time - points assess the effect on endocytic uptake ( t = 0 ) , and when cargo should start to reach lysosomes ( t = 30 min ) and when the majority should have reached the lysosomes ( t = 2 h ) [ 18 ] . While no effect on endocytic uptake was observed , a clear and statistically significant phenotype was observed in transport towards lysosomes after a 30 min chase . This loss of function was still in effect after 2 h but there was variation from experiment to experiment ( Figs . 7B and C ) . Hence , WAFL does not appear to affect endocytic vesicle formation , but plays a role in transport towards lysosomes . Discussion Here we report that WAFL - labeled structures associate with endosomes during fluid - phase endocytosis and are implicated in endosomal trafficking . While microtubules appear to control transport for long - range movements , actin , and the WASP - family proteins , have been connected to the initiation of endocytosis as well as early transport mechanisms [ 19 , 20 ] . These findings are in accordance with the suggested role of actin in yeast endocytosis . It is interesting to note that the contribution of the actin filament system to endocytosis in mammalian cells is now beginning to be fully appreciated [ 19 ] . Fig . 7 – WAFL - depleted cells display altered endosomal transport . HeLa cells transfected with WAFL - directed RNAi , control oligo or untransfected , were pulsed with FITC - labelled dextran , and then chased for the indicated times . Background signal was identified in samples not pulsed with dextran . ( A ) Western blot to verify WAFL knock - down in RNAi - treated HeLa cells after 72 h . Cell lysate from WAFL - FLAG transfected cells were loaded as a control forantibodyspecificityand band size . Cell staining of treated cells also confirm WAFL knock - down . ( B , C ) Intensity of the fluorescence signal was measured by FACS analysis as a read - out of transport along an increasingly acidic endocytic route . ( B ) The differences in median fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) between control oligo - treated and RNAi - treated cells are shown for six independent experiments carried out in biological duplicates . ⁎ means p < 0 . 05 . Statistical analysis was carried out using Mann – Whitney U test . ( C ) Representative readings form one experiment . 1048 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 By monitoring the movement of WAFL speckles together with TRITC - labeled dextran in HeLa cells , we demonstrate that WAFL is involved in vesicle transport . WAFL speckles show rapid and transient interaction with the dextran - labeled endosomes , in line with a very dynamic and strictly regulated process . Consistent with its implication in endocytosis , we observed that WAFL structures line up along microtubule filaments . Furthermore nocodazole , which inhibits microtubule polymeriza - tion , causes a complete arrest of movement . Latrunculin A , inhibiting actin polymerization , did not stop movements but rather collapsed the bulk of vesicles toward the cell center , with a subpopulation of vesicles remaining at the cell periphery . This result is complex and challenging to interpret , but one explanation could be that the vesicles in the center are mature endosomes and the peripheral WAFL - labeled endosomes may represent early endosomes that have not yet been loaded onto microtubule tracks , and that are unable to move in the absence of functional actin polymerization machinery . In line with this theory are the results that WAFL associated with sites of actin clusters , without any apparent association with stress fibers . The function of these actin clusters is debated , but a recent report indicates a role in intracellular transport [ 21 ] : routing of the Helicobacter pylori VacA protein from early endosomes to late endosomes required dynamic polymerized actin around the vesicles . These observa - tions combined with the presence of a WASP - homology domain in the WAFL primary sequence suggest that WAFL could be involved in the polymerization of actin during vesicle motility . Indeed we also demonstrated that WAFL binds to actin , and WASP - interacting protein , WIP , in immunoprecipitations , thus directly connecting WAFL to the actin polymerization machinery . Interestingly , the mouse homologue of WAFL is expressed in the developing brain and appear to exert an effect on the microfilament system of axonal growth cones [ 11 ] . In this study , it was shown that the WAFL WH1 domain regulates filopodia formation and size , consistent with the idea that WAFL may regulate actin dynamics at the membrane . The association of WAFL to early endosomes was partial rather than complete . This is in accordance with the observation that WAFL speckles form transient , dynamic interactions with dextran - labeled endosomes . The association with endosomes was further mapped to early endosomes by quantitative image analysis . In addition , we found that the central coiled - coil domain is essential and sufficient for localization to the early endosomal compartments . When the transport of FITC - labeled dextran was tested , a delay was observed in WAFL - depleted cells compared to a normal cell after 30 min , while no difference in dextran uptake was found . This would support a function for WAFL in correct sortingof endosomes of the degradative pathway . However , the effect has worn off after 2 h , indicating that WAFL depletion will cause a delay , but not a block in transport . In a study by Pal et al . [ 22 ] , it was found that a complex of Huntingtin - HAP40 - Rab5 regulates switching between microtu - bule - and actin - dependent transport of early endosomes . Over - expression of HAP40 , which is commonly found in patients with Huntington ' s disease , reduced the motility of endosomes by switching these organelles from microtubules to F - actin . It is likely that there are several different mechanisms of control that the cell can employ to ensure correct transport and sorting of endosomes . These probably complement each other , and could be the reason why WAFL depletion will disturb , but not abrogate transport towards lysosomes . We have previously identified WAFL in the context of chronic gut inflammation [ 10 ] . We have found WAFL to be subject to conditional up - regulation of RNA expression in differentiating macrophages , a process which is characterized by ample micro - filament activity ( switching from suspension cells to an adherent , motile phenotype ) and membrane trafficking ( phagocytic activity and processing of antigens ) . Endocytosis and actin remodeling are also important in other cells involved in gut inflammation . The mobility and cell – cell contacts of lymphocytes require actin and membrane remodeling , and the integrity of the gut epithelial barrier is maintained by actin structures , that are degraded via endocytic processes . In conclusion , we propose a model whereby WAFL associates to endocytic vesicles by its coiled - coil domain and is involved in actin - based movement of early endosomes via WIP and binding to actin . In a second phase , WAFL changes its activity as the endosomes reach the microtubule system . Such a model predicts that WAFL acts as a scaffolding protein that assembles factors involved in vesicle movement . Furthermore this model would also suggest that WIP has an important role in this scheme , since WIP is known to have a function in actin - based movement and endocy - tosis [ 23 , 24 ] . The S . cerevisiae homologue of WIP , verprolin , is essential for endocytosis together with Las17p , the homologue of WASP [ 25 ] . Our data add WAFL to the spectrum of proteins involved in membrane trafficking , with implications in both microtubule and actin - based transport . Future studies will further reveal how WAFL may execute its biological role in endocytic pathways such as Golgi transport , recycling endosomes and phagocytosis . The observed first glimpse of WAFL function in vesicle transport is exciting , and it will be interesting to further dissect how WAFL connects proteins that tune and regulate the endocytic network . Materials and methods Plasmids The WAFL - FLAG construct was made by creating a new 3 ′ end with a FLAG - tag by PCR , and inserting it using appropriate ligation sites into the original full - length WAFL construct [ 10 ] . All EGFP - WAFL deletion constructs were based on the full - length EGFP - WAFL plasmid [ 10 ] where truncated 3 ′ or 5 ′ ends , or internal deletion , were generated by PCR and then reinserted by using appropriate ligation sites into the EGFP - WAFL plasmid . The constructs contain the following residues of WAFL : Construct 1 : 1 – 1057 , Construct 2 : 1 – 301 , Construct 3 : 406 – 1219 , Construct 4 : 406 – 1039 , and Construct 5 : 1 – 1219 Δ 470 – 953 . All enzymes were from New England BioLabs . Plasmids were amplified using One Shot TOP10 Competent cells ( Invitrogen ) , purified with Qiagen MiniPrep or MaxiPrep kits , and sequenced by MWG ( Edelsberg , Germany ) . Live cell imaging HeLa cells from ATCC were grown in DMEM containing 10 % fetal calf serum and penicillin / streptomycin at 37 °C , in 10 % CO 2 . Cells were plated onto round 22 mm coverslips and transfected the following day with EGFP - WAFL plasmid using FuGene6 ( Roche ) 1049 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 according to the manufacturer ' s protocol , and left overnight . Cells were washed and incubated in serum - free medium for 1 h , then incubated with TRITC - dextran ( 5 mg / ml , dissolved in warm EM buffer ( 120 mM NaCl , 1 . 8 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 8 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM glucose , 25 mM HEPES pH 7 . 3 , 7 mM KCl ) ) with 10 % FCS for 45 min at 37 °C . Cells were washed 6× in warm EM buffer with 10 % fetal calf serum and then mounted onto awide - field fluorescence inverted DMRIBe microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) , with a heated chamber at 37 °C . Stacks of images were acquired with a piezzo - controlled 63× / 1 . 25 HCX PL APO objective and fluorescence band pass filters equipped with a Cascade 512B CCD camera ( Roper Instruments ) . For each stack , an image was acquired every 0 . 2 μ m , a new stack every 5 s for 5 min . For the drug inhibition experiments the same cells were monitored for 5 min before treatment and 5 min after treatment as described above . Latrunculin A ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to a final concentration of 10 μ M for 1 h and nocodazole ( Sigma - Aldrich ) 20 μ M for 30 min . Density filters and short exposure times were used to limit light - induced damage . Images and movies were acquired and processed using the MetaMorph and ImageJ software . Immunocytochemistry For co - staining with markers of the endocytic pathway , HeLa cells were transfected with EGFP - WAFL , or WAFL - FLAG and GFP - dynamin2 [ 30 ] as described above , and were fixed in 3 . 7 % PFA for 10 min . For staining with Clathrin Light chain Ab ( CRL - 2229 , mouse ascites , gift from N . Sauvonnet , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France ) permeabilization was carried out in 0 . 05 % saponin for 10 min and then 10 min block in 0 . 01 % BSA before incubation with the primary antibody . For pAb Capthepsin D staining ( Upstate Biotechnology , no . 06 - 467 ) permeabilizationwas for 10 min in 0 . 4 % saponin and then 10 min block in 0 . 01 % BSA . For EEA1 ( mAb , BD Transduction Laboratories cat no 610456 ) , anti - FLAG ( mAb , M2 Sigma ) , and CD63 ( mAb , gift from E . Rubenstein , Institut A . Lwoff , Villejuif , France ) , permeabilization was in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 5 min . Secondaryantibodies were TRITC anti - mouse and Alexa 568 anti - rabbit ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) . For staining of endo - genous WAFL and cytoskeleton , samples were fixed for 20 min in 3 . 7 % PFA , permeabilized for 10 min with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and then incubated with anti - FKBP135 ( Abcam ab14432 - 100 ) ( Wes - tern blot with this antibody on HeLa cell lysates is found as Supplementary Fig . 3 ) , TRITC phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , or mouse anti - tubulin ( Sigma ) . Secondary antibodies were Alexa 488 anti - rabbit ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) , and TRITC anti - mouse ( Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories ) . Coverslips where mounted in ProLong Gold ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) and image acquisition was performed on an SP5 ( Leica Microsystems ) confocal laser scanning microscope with a 63× / 1 . 4 Apochromat objective and 0 . 15 μ m between planes . Object - based statistical colocalization quantification In each image , the detected proteins ( aggregates ) are present as a number of bright spots . As these images are from a confocal microscope , it is assumed that they are contaminated by both photon noise ( Poisson statistics ) and camera readout noise ( Gaussian statistics ) . The colocalization relies on multiple hypoth - esis tests on the distances between all pairs of the spots generated by the two protein markers . Two spots are decided to be colocalized if their distance is significantly small . This colocaliza - tion procedure consists of three main steps , i . e . , spot detection , determination of the cellular supports of the proteins , and hypothesis tests . First the spots were extracted by applying a wavelet - based spot detection approach which fully takes into account the mixed - Poisson – Gaussian noise process of confocal fluorescence images [ 26 ] . The basic idea is to reconstruct the image from the thresholded wavelet bands such that the spots are denoised and enhanced [ 27 ] . Then , a null hypothesis ( H0 ) model was built in which the distribution of the distance between two independently randomly drawn spots of the two proteins is estimated by a kernel method . Finally the observed distances are tested against this null model . The tests control the false discovery rate ( FDR ) [ 28 , 29 ] of the colocalizations . Simulations show that this approach has a good specificity [ 17 ] . The final ratio of colocaliza - tion ( R c ) is calculated according to M / ( N1×N2 ) where M is the total number of colocalization and N1 is the number of detected spots for one channel and N2 for the other , M = N1×N2 thus representing the maximum theoretical colocalization if all N1 spots and all N2 spots colocalized with each other . R c is therefore a value which includes considerations such as multiple spot interactions and enables comparisons between different markers although the number of spots detected varies . Immunoprecipitations Deletion - mutants of human WIP were generated by PCR and subcloned into the pRK5Myc vector and sequenced . Mouse monoclonal anti - Myc ( 9E10 ) was from Santa Cruz . Mouse mono - clonal anti - Flag ( M2 ) and mouse monoclonal anti - β - actin anti - bodies were from Sigma . HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and penicillin / streptomycin . HEK293T cells were transfected by LipoFECTAMINE according to manufacturer ' s protocol ( Invitrogen ) . Cells were harvested 48 h after transfection , washed with ice - cold PBS and lysed on ice in Triton buffer ( 20 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 1 M NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 % glycerol , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( PMSF ) , 1 % aprotinin ( Trasylol , Beyer ) , 5 μ g / ml leupeptin ) . For the experiments depicted in Fig . 4C , cells were treated with 1 μ M Latrunculin B ( Calbiochem ) for 15 min prior to cell lysis and thereafter lysed in Triton buffer supplemented with 1 μ M Latrunculin B . Cells were then collected , centrifuged for 15 min , and the supernatant was collected . For co - immunoprecipitations , supernatants were incubated together with antibodies for 1 h at 4 °C , after which immunoprecipitates were collected on protein G - Sepharose 4 Fast Flow ( GE Healthcare ) . The beads were washed three times with Triton buffer and SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) sample buffer was added to each sample . The immunoprecipitates as well as control cell lysates were subjected to SDS - PAGE and subsequently transferred to nitro - cellulose filters ( Hybond - C Extra , GE Healthcare ) . Immunoblots were performed with antibodies as specified in the figure legends followed by horseradish - conjugated anti - mouse or anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( GE Healthcare ) . The Western blots were detected by the Luminol Western blotting reagent ( Santa Cruz ) . RNAi HeLa cells were transfected with 50 nM dsRNA with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to manufacturer ' s standard protocol . 1050 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 Transfection efficiency was estimated to more than 80 % by the Block - iT transfection control ( Invitrogen ) . Cell medium ( DMEM with 10 % FCS ) was replaced at least once , and cells were assayed after 72 h . WAFL knock - down was analyzed on whole cell lysates by Western blotting with HPA [ 10 ] anti - WAFL ab at 1 : 250 , and then 1 : 10 , 000 GAR / IgGCH + L / PO secondary antibody ( Nordic Immunol - ogy ) or for tubulin : mouse anti - tubulin 1 : 1000 ( Sigma ) and then SAM Ig HRP ( GE Healthcare ) . Immunocytochemistry of treated cells was performed as described above . The oligos were from Invitrogen Stealth RNAi package : KIAA0674 - HSS146308 CCACCA - CAGCUGGAUUCCAAUGAUU i . e . WAFL bp1136 – 1161 , and Stealth RNAi Negative Control high GC . Dextran pulse – chase experiment RNAi - treated HeLas ( see previous section ) were pulsed with FITC - dextran ( 5 mg / ml ) ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen ) for 10 min as described above for the live cell experiments , then thoroughly washed in warm PBS and either directly trypsinized and resuspended in HEPES - albumin buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , 125 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM Glucose , 5 mM KCL , 0 . 1 % BSA ) for FACS analysis , or chased in EM buffer with 10 % FCS for an additional 30 min or 2 h before trypsinization and analysis . Samples were prepared in duplicates with 10 4 cells analyzed per sample and the experiment was repeated 6 times . Samples were analyzed using a FACSCalibur cytometer running CellQuest software ( BD Biosciences ) . Final data analysis was performed using FlowJo software ( TreeStar ) . Statis - tical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prismv 4 . 0 software and statistical significance was analyzed using the Mann – Whitney U test . Acknowledgments This project was supported by grants from Swedish Research Council and Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research , VINNOVA Sweden , and by European Commission funding through the SPINE2 – COMPLEXES project LSHG – CT – 2006 – 031220 . P Aspen - ström is supported by the Swedish Cancer Foundation , and the Swedish Research Council . The authors would like to thank Gernot Sellge , Institut Pasteur , for technical assistance with the FACS , Jost Enninga , Institut Pasteur , for helpful discussions , Boeringer - Ingelheim for travel grants for I - M Viklund , the Plate - Forme Imagerie Dynamique at Institut Pasteur , and Velmurugesan Arulampalam for critically reading the manuscript . Special thanks to the organizers of the 2005 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course in Immunocytochemistry , in situ hybridization and live cell imaging , including Intelligent Imaging Innovations representatives Colin Monks and Kim Wicklund . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2008 . 12 . 004 . R E F E R E N C E S [ 1 ] S . D . Conner , S . L . Schmid , Regulated portals of entry into the cell , Nature 422 ( 2003 ) 37 – 44 . [ 2 ] M . Frick , N . A . Bright , K . Riento , A . Bray , C . Merrified , B . J . Nichols , Coassembly of flotillins induces formation of membrane microdomains , membrane curvature , and vesicle budding , Curr . Biol . 17 ( 2007 ) 1151 – 1156 . [ 3 ] M . Kirkham , R . G . Parton , Clathrin - independent endocytosis : new insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 ( 2005 ) 349 – 363 . [ 4 ] B . Nichols , Caveosomes and endocytosis of lipid rafts , J . Cell Sci . 116 ( 2003 ) 4707 – 4714 . [ 5 ] T . Takenawa , S . Suetsugu , The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . ( 2007 ) 8 : 37 – 48 . [ 6 ] N . A . Bright , M . J . Gratian , J . P . Luzio , Endocytic delivery to lysosomes mediated by concurrent fusion and kissing events in living cells , Curr . Biol . 15 ( 2005 ) 360 – 365 . [ 7 ] C . J . Merrifield , S . E . Moss , C . Ballestrem , B . A . Imhof , G . Giese , I . Wunderlich , W . Almers , Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells , Nat . Cell Biol . 1 ( 1999 ) 72 – 74 . [ 8 ] A . L . Rozelle , L . M . Machesky , M . Yamamoto , M . H . Driessens , R . H . Insall , M . G . Roth , K . Luby - Phelps , G . Marriott , A . Hall , H . L . Yin , Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 , Curr . Biol . 10 ( 2000 ) 311 – 320 . [ 9 ] J . Taunton , B . A . Rowning , M . L . Coughlin , M . Wu , R . T . Moon , T . J . Mitchison , C . A . Larabell , Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP , J . Cell Biol . 148 ( 2000 ) 519 – 530 . [ 10 ] I . M . Viklund , N . V . Kuznetsov , R . Lofberg , M . Daperno , R . Sostegni , M . Astegiano , M . Rizzetto , O . von Stein , M . D ' Amato , P . von Stein , et al . , Identification of a new WASP and FKBP - like ( WAFL ) protein in inflammatory bowel disease : a potential marker gene for ulcerative colitis , Int . J . Colorectal Dis . 23 ( 10 ) ( 2008 Oct ) 912 – 930 . [ 11 ] O . Nakajima , F . Nakamura , N . Yamashita , Y . Tomita , F . Suto , T . Okada , A . Iwamatsu , E . Kondo , H . Fujisawa , K . Takei , et al . , FKBP133 : a novel mouse FK506 - binding protein homolog alters growth cone morphology , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 346 ( 2006 ) 140 – 149 . [ 12 ] J . Fritsche , B . F . Reber , B . Schindelholz , C . E . Bandtlow , Differential cytoskeletal changes during growth cone collapse in response to hSema III and thrombin , Mol . Cell Neurosci . 14 ( 1999 ) 398 – 418 . [ 13 ] N . Ramesh , I . M . Anton , J . H . Hartwig , R . S . Geha , WIP , a protein associated with Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , induces actin polymerization and redistribution in lymphoid cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 ( 1997 ) 14671 – 14676 . [ 14 ] N . Martinez - Quiles , R . Rohatgi , I . M . Anton , M . Medina , S . P . Saville , H . Miki , H . Yamaguchi , T . Takenawa , J . H . Hartwig , R . S . Geha , et al . , WIP regulates N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization and filopodium formation , Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 2001 ) 484 – 491 . [ 15 ] L . M . Machesky , R . H . Insall , Scar1 and the related Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex , Curr . Biol . 8 ( 1998 ) 1347 – 1356 . [ 16 ] H . N . Higgs , L . Blanchoin , T . D . Pollard , Influence of the C terminus of Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex on actin polymerization , Biochemistry 38 ( 1999 ) 15212 – 15222 . [ 17 ] B . Zhang , N . Chenouard , J . - C . Olivo - Marin , V . Meas - Yedid , Statistical colocalization in biological imaging with false discovery control , IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging , ISBI 2008 , Paris , France , 2008 , pp . 1327 – 1330 . [ 18 ] G . Baravalle , D . Schober , M . Huber , N . Bayer , R . F . Murphy , R . Fuchs , Transferrin recycling and dextran transport to lysosomes is differentially affected by bafilomycin , nocodazole , and low temperature , Cell Tissue Res . 320 ( 2005 ) 99 – 113 . [ 19 ] M . Kaksonen , C . P . Toret , D . G . Drubin , Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis , Nat . Rev . , Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 404 – 414 . [ 20 ] J . P . Caviston , E . L . Holzbaur , Microtubule motors at the intersection of trafficking and transport , Trends Cell . Biol . 16 ( 2006 ) 530 – 537 . 1051 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2 [ 21 ] N . C . Gauthier , P . Monzo , T . Gonzalez , A . Doye , A . Oldani , P . Gounon , V . Ricci , M . Cormont , P . Boquet , Early endosomes associated with dynamic F - actin structures are required for late trafficking of H . pylori VacA toxin , J . Cell Biol . 177 ( 2007 ) 343 – 354 . [ 22 ] A . Pal , F . Severin , B . Lommer , A . Shevchenko , M . Zerial , Huntingtin – HAP40 complex is a novel Rab5 effector that regulates early endosome motility and is up - regulated in Huntington ' s disease , J . Cell Biol . 172 ( 2006 ) 605 – 618 . [ 23 ] V . Moreau , F . Frischknecht , I . Reckmann , R . Vincentelli , G . Rabut , D . Stewart , M . Way , A complex of N - WASP and WIP integrates signalling cascades that lead to actin polymerization , Nat . Cell Biol . 2 ( 2000 ) 441 – 448 . [ 24 ] S . Benesch , S . Lommel , A . Steffen , T . E . Stradal , N . Scaplehorn , M . Way , J . Wehland , K . Rottner , Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP2 ) - induced vesicle movement depends on N - WASP and involves Nck , WIP , and Grb2 , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 37771 – 37776 . [ 25 ] S . N . Naqvi , R . Zahn , D . A . Mitchell , B . J . Stevenson , A . L . Munn , The WASp homologue Las17p functions with the WIP homologue End5p / verprolin and is essential for endocytosis in yeast , Curr . Biol . 8 ( 1998 ) 959 – 962 . [ 26 ] B . Zhang , J . Fadili , J . - L . Starck , J . - C . Olivo - Marin , Multiscale Variance - Stabilizing Transform for Mixed - Poisson – Gaussian Processes and its Applications in Bioimaging , Book Multiscale Variance - Stabilizing Transform for Mixed - Poisson – Gaussian Processes and its Applications in Bioimaging , vol . VI , City , 2007 , pp . 233 – 236 . [ 27 ] J . C . Olivo - Marin , Extraction of spots in biological images using multiscale products , Pattern Recogn . 35 ( 2002 ) 1989 – 1996 . [ 28 ] Y . Benjamini , Y . Hochberg , Controlling the false discovery rate : a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing , J . R . Stat . Soc . 57 ( 1995 ) 289 – 300 . [ 29 ] Y . Benjamini , D . Yekutieli , The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency , Ann . Stat . 9 ( 2001 ) 1165 – 1188 . [ 30 ] H . Cao , F . Garcia , M . A . McNiven , Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells , Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 ( 9 ) ( 1998 Sep ) 2595 – 2609 . 1052 E X P E R I M E N T A L C E L L R E S E A R C H 3 1 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 1 0 4 0 – 1 0 5 2