The Participatory Turn in AI Design : Theoretical Foundations and the Current State of Practice Fernando Delgado ∗ Cornell University Ithaca , New York , USA fad33 @ cornell . edu Stephen Yang ∗† University of Southern California Los Angeles , California , USA stepheny @ usc . edu Michael Madaio ∗† Google Research New York , New York , USA Qian Yang ∗ Cornell University Ithaca , New York , USA qianyangcornell . edu ABSTRACT Despite the growing consensus that stakeholders affected by AI systems should participate in their design , enormous variation and implicit disagreements exist among current approaches . For researchers and practitioners who are interested in taking a partic - ipatory approach to AI design and development , it remains chal - lenging to assess the extent to which any participatory approach grants substantive agency to stakeholders . This article thus aims to ground what we dub the “ participatory turn ” in AI design by synthesizing existing theoretical literature on participation and through empirical investigation and critique of its current practices . Specifically , we derive a conceptual framework through synthesis of literature across technology design , political theory , and the social sciences that researchers and practitioners can leverage to evaluate approaches to participation in AI design . Additionally , we articu - late empirical findings concerning the current state of participatory practice in AI design based on an analysis of recently published research and semi - structured interviews with 12 AI researchers and practitioners . We use these empirical findings to understand the current state of participatory practice and subsequently provide guidance to better align participatory goals and methods in a way that accounts for practical constraints . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; In - teraction design theory , concepts and paradigms ; Computer supported cooperative work . KEYWORDS Artificial intelligence , machine learning , participation , participatory design , power ∗ The first two and last two authors contributed equally to this research . † Stephen began this work while at Cornell University , and Michael began this work while at Microsoft Research . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0381 - 2 / 23 / 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3617694 . 3623261 ACM Reference Format : FernandoDelgado , StephenYang , MichaelMadaio , andQianYang . 2023 . The Participatory Turn in AI Design : Theoretical Foundations and the Current State of Practice . In EAAMO ’23 : ACM conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms , Mechanisms , and Optimization , Boston , MA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3617694 . 3623261 1 INTRODUCTION As artificial intelligence ( AI ) systems are developed and deployed across various sectors ( e . g . , hiring , healthcare , education , content moderation ) , there have been increasing calls to involve members of communities impacted by AI systems in their design [ 7 , 99 , 121 , 129 , 136 , 137 , 162 , 178 , 179 , 213 , 221 ] . In part , such calls for partic - ipation in AI design argue that participation can enable AI systems to better reflect the values , preferences , and needs of users and other impacted stakeholders , or more broadly , that participation will empower stakeholders in shaping the design of AI systems [ 3 , 7 , 19 , 26 , 33 , 51 , 61 , 118 , 137 , 143 , 172 , 189 , 198 – 200 ] . However , despite a growing consensus that stakeholders should participate more in AI design , there is enormous variation in the methods and theories applied to achieve that participation , even with respect to the goals for leveraging participation in the first place . There are , for example , practitioners that take a community - centric approach in defining and operationalizing stakeholder par - ticipation upstream of any system or product design activity [ 110 ] ; community collectives of African NLP researchers [ 156 ] and queer AI researchers [ 175 ] have formed to design and evaluate algorith - mic systems that reflect their communities’ needs . In a commercial context , industry practitioners argue that participation helps de - velop products that better align with people’s different wants and needs and that it accelerates innovation [ 193 ] while improving profitability [ 88 ] . Further downstream from a traditional design phase , many practitioners involve stakeholders as the “human in - frastructure” [ 144 ] or “data labor” [ 146 ] that enables ML systems to work . This involves including stakeholders in data generation and interactions with data collection infrastructures [ 17 , 59 , 144 ] , data labeling or annotation [ 103 , 147 , 169 , 209 ] , feedback for optimiza - tion [ 15 , 46 , 81 , 135 ] , and end users’ discretionary work to make the system work [ 5 ] . Meanwhile , some researchers have begun to leverage language models to generate synthetic user research data positing such data as suitable “proxies for understanding human experiences” [ 10 , 91 ] . a r X i v : 2310 . 00907v1 [ c s . H C ] 2 O c t 2023 EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . As large - scale AI models such as large language models are trained on ever larger swaths of human - generated data [ e . g . 63 ] and “fine - tuned” through processes involving human feedback in some form [ e . g . , 15 ] , the stakes are high for what it means for stakeholders to meaningfully participate in shaping the design of AI—and what it might mean for an AI system or its design process to be branded as “participatory AI , ” with all of the implications for empowering stakeholders that that term implicitly conveys . While diversity in approach is warranted to address the various opportunities and constraints present in any system design context , the current state of participatory AI speaks to a largely unaccounted for and unaccountable heterogeneity that lacks a shared ethos or set of principles . To address this gap , we attempt in this paper to provide an analytic structure and empirical foundation to help mature partici - patory practice in AI design . To do that , we first synthesize theories and approaches to participation across multiple fields ( e . g . , technol - ogy design , policy and governance , international development ) to develop a conceptual framework that enables us to articulate key distinctions across a broad spectrum of participatory strategies and tactics . We then use this conceptual framework to analyze a corpus of 80 research papers that describe their approach as “participatory AI . ” In mapping this corpus to our conceptual framework , we map out the contemporary terrain of practice . Further , we interviewed 12 authors of papers in this corpus to understand the motivations , challenges , and aspirations of researchers leveraging participatory AI . We find that most current participatory AI efforts consult stake - holders for input on discrete implementation parameters , rather than empower them to make key AI design decisions . In addition , we find that researchers and practitioners implementing participa - tory AI projects experience a tension between their aspirations to empower participants and the practical constraints ( e . g . , resources , timelines ) they faced in attempting to do so . To resolve these ten - sions , we find that participatory AI projects adopt tactics such as relying on proxies for participation —including both human and al - gorithmic proxies—to represent stakeholders in shaping AI systems . Such tactics raise important questions regarding the affordances and limits of simulated stand - ins in the context of AI design . This paper makes three contributions . First , we provide a concep - tual framework for analyzing participatory approaches to AI design in a way that connects goals to techniques . Second , we contribute empirical findings about motivations and challenges within the current paradigm of participatory AI . Finally , we identify a set of empirically - grounded opportunities for future research to explore ways to improve the current state of stakeholder participation in AI design . 2 STAGE ONE : ESTABLISHING A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING PARTICIPATION 2 . 1 Related Work Given the heterogeneity of participatory AI , it remains challeng - ing to have substantive discussions about the extent to which a particular participatory approach achieves one’s goals ( e . g . , for in - clusiveness or empowerment ) [ e . g . , 12 , 80 ] . To this end , the first goal of this paper is to develop a conceptual framework as a point of reference that can provide theoretical grounding for such evalu - ations . Recent scholarship has started working toward typologies for classifying the different modes of participation in AI . Sloane et al . [ 203 ] elucidates the distinction between participation as work , as consultation , and as justice ; Birhane et al . [ 26 ] identifies three ob - jectives of participatory AI : for algorithmic performance improve - ments , process improvements , and collective exploration ; the Ada Lovelace Institute [ 104 ] proposes a “spectrum of participation” to describe five levels of participatory mechanisms , from inform , con - sult , involve , collaborate , to empower ; similarly , Berditchevskaia et al . [ 24 ] conceptualizes four levels of participatory AI : consul - tation , contribution , collaboration , and co - creation . While these are valuable starting points for conceptualizing and defining par - ticipatory AI , as Birhane et al . [ 26 ] points out , “there are yet no clear consensus on what minimum set of standards or dimensions one should use to assess or evaluate a given potential participatory mechanism . ” 2 . 2 Participatory Traditions Across Disciplines To bring some structure to our analysis of the current heterogeneous state of participatory AI , we took a step back from the contemporary AI literature and broadly reviewed existing literature on partici - patory traditions from multiple disciplines , including : technology design [ e . g . , 153 , 201 ] , political theory [ e . g . , 12 , 80 , 173 ] , and the social sciences [ e . g . , 212 ] . We pulled from works that specifically addressed the nature of participation in policy and design processes , as well as works cited by more recent participatory AI papers ( e . g . , [ 196 ] , as invoked by [ 126 ] ) . In addition to foundational theoretical and methodological works in these traditions , we included litera - ture that offered critiques and challenges to participatory practices in their respective fields [ e . g . , 54 ] . The specific traditions we drew from for our synthesis include user - centered design , service de - sign , participatory design , co - design , and value - sensitive design , as well as participatory action research , participatory democracy ( in - cluding deliberation theory ) , social choice theory , and mechanism design . Below we provide a high - level overview of each of these traditions and their corresponding tenets . 2 . 3 Approaches to Stakeholder Participation • User - centered design ( UCD ) : involving end users during need - finding and evaluation of designs . The double - diamond UCD process has become the most common design process in industry practice [ 57 ] . Technology designers engage end users in identi - fying user needs and assessing design ideas [ 142 , 161 ] . • Service design : involving direct and indirect stakeholders im - pacted by a technology service in its design . Using methods such as service blueprints and value stream mapping , service de - signers consider how their design decisions impact stakeholders [ 74 , 74 , 75 , 100 , 182 ] . • Participatory design ( PD ) : incorporating diverse voices in de - sign in order to challenge power structures . In contrast with UCD and service design , PD is designed to enable non - expert stake - holders to provide direct input on technology design [ 86 , 201 ] . PD provides guidance for practitioners to create a hybrid space The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA ( i . e . , neither in the stakeholders or the designers’ domain ) that al - lows diverse non - expert stakeholders to meaningfully contribute , while uncovering and challenging the power dynamics between stakeholders and designers , as well as within groups of stake - holders [ 93 , 122 , 153 ] . • Co - design : creative cooperation between stakeholders and tech - nology designers across the whole span of a design process [ 116 , 185 , 206 ] . While closely related to PD , co - design typically lacks its explicitly political component [ 206 ] . Further , co - design often focuses more explicitly on designing specific products or artifacts [ 116 ] , while PD may focus more on the larger sociotech - nical system in which particular artifacts will be embedded [ 201 ] . • Value - sensitive design ( VSD ) : accounting for the values of di - rect and indirect stakeholders . VSD is similar to PD , but focuses on identifying and incorporating the values of direct and indirect stakeholders in technology design [ 78 , 79 ] . • Participatory action research ( PAR ) : engaging stakeholders as co - inquirers to co - construct research plans and interventions [ 68 , 94 , 176 , 212 , 218 ] . Originating in the social sciences ( and adopted in HCI [ 93 , 94 ] ) , PAR involves stakeholders collaborating with researchers to develop research questions and study designs , con - duct research with researchers , and interpret results [ 68 , 94 , 176 , 212 , 218 ] , focusing on research rather than design ( as in PD ) [ 84 ] . • Social choice theory ( SCT ) and mechanism design : quanti - tative aggregation of stakeholder preferences . SCT focuses on identifying people’s preferences for ( e . g . ) public policies and mathematically aggregating those in a preference - ranking model [ e . g . , 13 , 108 , 184 , 195 , 196 ] . Prior work in the field of mecha - nism design has used SCT to develop a framework for including stakeholders in algorithmic decision - making [ 1 , 71 , 98 , 215 ] . • Participatory democracy and civic participation : involving citizens and stakeholders in civic decision - making . Although sharing a focus on policy outcomes with SCT , participatory democracyhasabroaderfocus onmethodsfordemocraticdecision - making , political action , and public engagement [ e . g . , 12 , 62 , 80 , 134 , 139 , 173 , 173 ] . • Deliberation theory : qualitatively weighing and discussing competingperspectives andpolicies . Deliberationtheoryemerged in response to mechanistic approaches to aggregating stakeholder preferences ( e . g . , social choice theory ) [ 72 , 160 , 163 ] . It empha - sizes the importance of bringing together small groups of people to discuss and qualitatively weigh competing arguments for poli - cies [ 72 ] . For many of these traditions , stakeholders’ power is manifested through the creation and deliberation of design alternatives that would not have been possible without their contribution [ 12 , 31 , 37 , 38 ] . Yet , in practice , previous surveys of participation have ob - served that many participatory techniques fail to truly empower stakeholders in a way that positions them as co - creators or co - owners in the design process . That is , in practice , many participa - tory approaches may extract the input of stakeholders for goals not defined by or even necessarily shared with those stakeholders [ 12 , 16 , 20 , 54 , 54 , 98 , 147 , 164 , 180 , 203 , 215 ] . Additionally , critics have noted that researchers and practitioners have difficulty putting aside their own notions of what the design should be and what the intervention should look like , thus blocking possible new avenues for change originating from stakeholders’ ideas [ 29 ] . Design pro - cesses in which stakeholders are only selecting or evaluating prede - fined choices have been described as forms of “pseudo - participation” [ 164 , 180 ] in which stakeholders lack agency in decision - making and agenda setting in the design process [ 31 , 37 , 170 ] . Further , cri - tiques have highlighted the risk of de - politicizing participation through methods that focus on individuals’ preferences rather than collective goods or examination of power structures [ 20 , 98 , 215 ] . To address this conundrum , participation scholars have called on researchers and practitioners to shift their role away from directly engaging in design activities towards configuring the context and procedures through which meaningful stakeholder participation and design contribution can take place [ 185 , 216 ] . To help enact this role shift , participation scholars have focused on the importance of reflexivity as a way to help researches and practitioners understand and beneficially redirect their relative power over stakeholders [ 30 , 76 , 206 , 216 ] . Nonetheless , given existing power structures within communities , and specifically between participants and de - signers , simply being reflexive may not be sufficient in centering the stakeholders’ values in the design process . [ 54 , 93 ] . 2 . 4 Parameters of Participation We used affinity diagramming to identify common threads across these nine different traditions of participatory scholarship discussed in the previous section . We chose affinity diagramming because it is a common method from HCI used to make sense of an unstruc - tured problem space [ 102 ] . Three of the authors iteratively engaged in affinity diagramming using a virtual whiteboard to make con - nections across the various schools of participatory thought and practice with a focus on isolating how each tradition framed the relationship between participation and agency , as well what key questions were articulated across traditions ( even if they came to different answers ) . We iterated through several rounds of discus - sion to resolve disagreements in order to reach consensus on our final version of the framework . Figure 1 illustrates the resulting Parameters of Participation , which includes a spectrum of different modes of stakeholder participation ( in blue ) , from consultative to stakeholders “owning” the project on the horizontal axis , and a set of key dimensions ( in red ) that inform the goals and methods of participation on the vertical axis . 2 . 4 . 1 Dimensions of Participation . The dimensions of participation represented on the vertical axis comprise the goals ( i . e . , why par - ticipation is needed ) , scope ( i . e . , what is on the table ; and who is in - volved ) and methods ( i . e . , the form of stakeholder participation ) that shape participatory approaches to AI . We frame these dimensions as questions for researchers and practitioners to ask themselves throughout the lifecycle of their participatory intervention—or questions that may be asked by impacted stakeholders , participants in a participatory AI initiative , or policymakers or others looking to better understand participatory AI efforts . • Why is participation needed ? Motivations to engage stakeholders broadly fall under two categories : The first is an instrumentalist motivation that stakeholder participation will result in better outcomes [ 27 ] . However , “better” might mean a range of things such as an outcome that is more reflective of stakeholders’ values , preferences , and needs [ 173 , 201 ] , or an outcome that leads to EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . Figure 1 : Parameters of Participation : a framework derived from a synthesis of prior literature on stakeholder participation more profit or legitimacy for the designers [ 54 ] – each of these possibly in tension with one another . The second is a normative motivation : i . e . , participation is important because inclusion of the people who may be impacted by the technology or policy being designed is simply the right thing to do [ 173 ] . For example , proponents of participatory democracy argue that participation is normatively important , as it aligns organizers’ ideological com - mitment to an egalitarian society to the methods adopted to achieve that society [ 173 ] . Participation may be conducted with both goals in mind , as in deliberation theory , which aims to give people a voice in shaping more effective policy decisions that lead to political equity [ 72 , 163 ] . • What is on the table ? The extent to which stakeholders are able to determine which design decisions they will inform or even make is a key differentiator across the various participatory schools of thought we surveyed [ 12 , 80 ] . For instance , in SCT , what is made available to participants is a set of of policy alternatives for them to rank . Rather than having participants propose or generate such alternatives , this set of options is often determined a priori by technical experts . It is important to note that this approach as - sumes that participants are able to express their desires in terms of ranking pre - defined alternatives ( which may not be the case should their preferences fall outside of the scope of those op - tions which they are presented ) [ 71 , 98 , 180 , 215 ] . By contrast , in PD , PAR , and other participatory approaches in HCI , identifying ‘what is on the table’ is often the core focus of the participa - tory approach . This can range from stakeholders contributing to specific design decisions about how a technology will be built , to more broadly designing the social or sociotechnical system in which those technologies will be embedded [ 75 , 153 , 201 ] , to even designing the research project as a whole , as in PAR [ 60 , 76 , 93 , 94 , 176 , 212 , 218 ] . • Who is involved ? The rationale and selection criteria for who gets to participate substantially differs based on the participa - tory tradition . For instance , service design and PD involve both direct and indirect stakeholders ( i . e . , beyond the end user ) as well as involve participants with less technological expertise who otherwise might be excluded from the design of complex systems [ 74 , 75 , 132 , 153 , 201 ] . PD strategically focuses on engag - ing participants who will be affected by design decisions , often intentionally involving marginalized voices specifically , rather than seeking to be broadly inclusive of all possible stakeholders [ 132 , 201 ] . In participatory democracy , some approaches involve participation of members of the general public , while others in - volve a cadre of expert administrators or representatives acting ( nominally ) on the community’s behalf [ 12 , 80 ] . In deliberation theory , a group of participants is selected by a randomized sam - ple in order to nominally represent the range of views held by the population at large [ 72 , 160 ] . SCT involves a larger number of participants , typically selected by the team of technical experts developing the models [ 98 , 215 ] . • What form does participation take ? In SCT , people participate by expressing preferences for policies , often by ranking alternatives on polls [ 98 , 180 ] . However , deliberation theory argues that such approaches fail to account for how people learn new information and update their beliefs over time [ 72 , 73 ] . Instead , in delibera - tion theory , participation involves a dialogic approach—bringing stakeholders and experts together to discuss trade - offs of policies and re - evaluate their opinions in light of new evidence [ 72 , 160 ] . In PD , participants are brought together for mutual learning with designers in “hybrid spaces” such as workshops involving ( e . g . ) storytelling , role - play , and co - creation of prototypes [ 151 , 201 ] . 2 . 4 . 2 Modes of Participation : From Consulting to Ownership . How best to maneuver as a practitioner or researcher in varying modes across these dimensions is a motivating dilemma within various branches of participatory scholarship . For example , in participa - tory democracy , questions of power dynamics include how policy design processes might be shared democratically [ e . g . , 173 ] and how such design processes might avoid being tokenistic [ cf . 12 ] or reifying existing power dynamics among groups of stakeholders [ cf . 54 ] . In PD , with its origin in workplace labor organizing , partic - ipation is explicitly intended to equalize power relations between stakeholders and designers ( as well as among different groups of stakeholders ) [ 151 – 153 , 201 ] . Crucially , in many traditional partic - ipatory scholarship and critique surveyed for this article , the goal of full stakeholder empowerment is achieved in practice only in situations where stakeholders have the ability to make decisions about both the design of systems or policies , as well as the process by which such a system or policy is developed [ e . g . , 54 , 173 ] . Reflecting the central role that stakeholder decision - making agency traditionally has in theorizing and evaluating participa - tory practice , we include what we call four modes of participation as part of the Parameters of Participation . This move follows sub - stantial prior scholarship that has articulated varying degrees of participatory power , such as Arnstein’s ladder of civic participation The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA [ 12 ] , Fung’s democracy cube [ 80 ] , and others [ e . g . , 3 ] . These four modes of participation form a spectrum . There are participatory approaches that consult with stakeholders ( e . g . , expressing pref - erences for policies in a ranking ) ; those that more substantively include stakeholders ( e . g . , deliberating about pre - defined policy options ) ; and those that collaborate with stakeholders ( e . g . , having stakeholders co - create candidate designs for selection ) . The most substantive form of participation occurs when stakeholders own the design process , playing a central role in shaping the procedures for deliberation as well as deciding on the outcomes of the process ( e . g . , co - constructing research questions and methods , or the “citizen control” described by Arnstein [ 12 ] ) . We combine these four modes of participation with the four dimensions of participation previously discussed above to derive our conceptual framework of participa - tion ( Figure 1 ) , which we leverage for our analysis of participatory approaches to AI design in this paper ( Figure 2 ) . It is important to note here that this model is meant to provide at its base a descriptive schema through which we can map participa - tory AI interventions according to a shared set of parameters that carry across a wide variety of contexts . This schema is not meant to necessarily imply that transferring ownership to stakeholders is the appropriate goal for any project dubbed participatory ( even if some of the scholarship and critique reviewed would make this norma - tive claim ) . On the contrary , our intervention here—while drawing much from existing traditions of participation—is motivated by the desire to articulate the terrain between transactional preference elicitation on one hand , and transformative subversion of power dynamics on the other . Moreover , our goal here is not to assign an evaluation purely at the level of which mode of participation is enacted on any given project , but rather to provide a framework to understand how the particular configuration of participatory dimensions shape the agency of the stakeholders involved . 3 STAGE TWO : EXAMINING CURRENT PARTICIPATORY APPROACHES TO AI DESIGN 3 . 1 Methods We applied our Parameters of Participation ( figure 1 ) framework to analyze participatory AI as an emerging practice , including the extent to which the participatory methods used in AI design are aligned with their stated goals for participation ( i . e . , the degree to which they engender stakeholder agency ) . The data we used to inform our analysis includes a corpus of 80 research articles in which authors report making use of participatory methods ( see section 3 . 1 . 1 ) and 12 semi - structured interviews with researchers and practitioners who were authors of at least one of the papers in our corpus ( see section 3 . 1 . 2 ) . 3 . 1 . 1 Corpus Development and Analysis . To develop our corpus , we compiled a set of research articles that reported use of participatory methods in their AI design approach . We searched for relevant research articles within conference proceedings accessible from the ACM Digital Library , as well as premier AI venues , such as the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ( NeurIPS ) , the International Conference on Machine Learning ( ICML ) , and the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence ( AAAI ) . Our first pass in identifying articles for inclusion was based on results from the following search query across all available text fields : “participatory design” OR “PD” OR “co - design” AND “artifi - cial intelligence” OR “AI” OR “machine learning” OR “ML . ” Informed by an initial round of data analysis , we also conducted a second pass search to broaden the scope of our corpus . We conducted the search on the same databases but with the following broader search queries derived from key terms in papers from our first pass : “par - ticipation” or “participatory” or “co - design” or “value - sensitive” or “human - centered” or “deliberation” and “artificial intelligence” or “AI” or “machine learning” or “ML” or “algorithm” or “algorithmic . ” We reviewed the query results to identify a final set of relevant articles in which ( 1 ) the research described the design of some type of AI system broadly construed ( e . g . , autonomous robots , nat - ural language processing , or machine learning ) , ( 2 ) the research described design efforts leveraging participatory techniques , rather than , for instance , calling for ( or critiquing ) participation in AI [ e . g . , 136 , 203 , 221 ] . Based on these inclusion criteria , we identified 80 relevant articles for inclusion into our corpus . A full listing of the relevant articles can be found in Appendix A . The resulting set of articles in this corpus reflects research across a wide range of appli - cation domains ( e . g . , education , healthcare , public services , content moderation ) , a diverse set of AI / ML technologies ( e . g . , predictive models , recommendation systems , classification systems , human - robot systems ) , and a broad range of organizational affiliations ( e . g . , academia , industry , public sector , nonprofit organizations ) . Taking a “descriptive analytical” approach [ 11 ] , we used the logic and content of the Parameters of Participation to code the corpus of research articles , using the dimensions of participation and modes of participation as codes . Two authors iteratively coded the articles in the corpus using these codes , resolving any disagreements about codes by discussion in order to reach consensus . 3 . 1 . 2 Researcher and Practitioner Interviews . In order to understand the motivations , processes , and challenges that researchers and practitioners face in pursuing participatory AI work , we conducted IRB - approved , semi - structured interviews with 12 researchers and practitioners who have worked on an AI project leveraging partic - ipatory methods , and who were authors on papers included in our corpus . We recruited 23 interviewees based on a purposive sam - ple [ 165 ] of authors of articles in the corpus , of whom 12 agreed to participate . We recruited these 23 interviewees based on their varied experience in leveraging stakeholder participation in AI de - sign on projects across a broad range of application domains , and to cover a wide range of the disciplinary backgrounds and sectors prevalent in the sample of research literature corpus . See Table 1 for more detail about the interviewees , with some details abstracted to preserve interviewees’ anonymity . Each interview lasted 45 - 60 minutes , and all were conducted re - motely on a video conferencing platform due to the COVID - 19 pan - demic . All interviews were recorded , transcribed , and anonymized , omitting specific details of projects as needed . The interviews cen - tered around questions related to the project described in the article in our corpus that they co - authored . This included questions about what motivated them to include stakeholders on their project , how they determined which stakeholders were involved , what role stake - holders played on the project , and what challenges they faced in EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . Identifier Sector Application Domain AI Task P01 Academia Digital Humanities Classification P02 Non - Profit Social Computing / Crowdsourcing Platforms Prediction P03 Academia Social Computing / Crowdsourcing Platforms Prediction P04 Academia Astronomy and Healthcare Prediction P05 Academia Social Welfare Ranking P06 Industry Education Conversational AI P07 Industry Financial Services Prediction P08 Academia Social Welfare Prediction P09 Academia Social Welfare Prediction P10 Industry Arts & Entertainment Prediction P11 Academia Online Moderation , Gig Work Prediction P12 Public Sector Healthcare Prediction Table 1 : Interview Study Participants adopting a participatory approach to their AI design work . We then asked interviewees to describe the actual participatory process they undertook in their work , as well as their aspirational vision for what they thought the participatory process should look like based on what they learned from their previous experiences . We took a hybrid approach [ e . g . , 70 ] to analyzing our interview data , using both a codebook—based on our dimensions and modes of participation from the framework—and inductively through in - ductive thematic analysis [ 39 , 40 ] ( see [ 53 , 107 ] for precedents of this hybrid approach to qualitative data analysis ) . This hybrid ap - proach allowed us to combine theories of participation from the framework ( i . e . , our codebook ) and empirical evidence ( i . e . , from in - ductive thematic analysis ) to better understand current approaches to stakeholder participation in AI design and development . First , we analyzed the interview data using primarily the dimensions from our conceptual framework ( Figure 1 ) . Then , after extracting excerpts of the transcripts based on the dimensions , we used induc - tive thematic analysis [ 39 ] to identify themes from these excerpts . Using a virtual whiteboard to cluster the excerpts , all authors itera - tively clustered the excerpts into themes , collectively discussing the emerging themes and revising our clusters during the discussions to resolve any disagreements about codes [ 39 , 161 ] . Examples of such themes include “anxieties around how to validate participatory approaches , ” “proxy - based participation , ” and “consultancy mode of collaboration . ” This approach to inductive thematic analysis , much like affinity diagramming , is widely used in qualitative - interpretive research in HCI and the social sciences [ 161 ] . 3 . 2 Findings : Current Participatory AI Landscape - A Largely Consultative Terrain 3 . 2 . 1 The majority of projects operationalized stakeholder partici - pation via discrete preference or value elicitation . Our analysis of the corpus of research articles indicates that the current state of partici - patory AI design falls largely under the consultative mode in which preferences and values are elicited from stakeholders through a variety of techniques . The output of these elicitation processes is then analyzed by AI researchers in a broader loop of design and development activities . From our corpus analysis , we found that in motivating “ why is participation needed ” , the majority of projects described their goal as to improve the user experience ( 80 out of 80 ) or to better align AI with stakeholders’ preferences and values ( 52 out of 80 ) . This reflects a state of participatory practice which focuses less on collaboration and stakeholder ownership and more on consultation and inclusion . In fact , only 10 % ( 8 out of 80 ) of the projects involved stakeholders with the goal of shaping the system’s scope and purpose . See Figure 2 , first row . In terms of the scope of participation , the majority of projects surveyed focused their participatory interventions exclusively on informing selected aspects of the user interface , thus restricting “ what is on the table ? ” to a particular component of the system in question ( and notably one that does not directly link to the algorithmic or machine learning aspects of the system ) . In fact , all projects involved stakeholders in shaping the user interface ( UI ) design of the AI system , such as designing the explanations around AI outputs . Shaping the design of AI models is rarely on the table for stakeholders . Only 10 % ( 8 of 80 ) of the projects allowed stakeholders to provide input into the type of model and features used , the design of objective or loss functions , or ( for AI classification models ) the decision thresholds . None of the projects allow stakeholders to rule out AI as a solution , since these projects were defined as “AI projects” in the first place . Mapping these observations onto the levels of participation framework , we can see that a vast majority of projects fall into the consultative realm in terms of “ what’s on the table “ . See Figure 2 , second row . As it relates to “ who is involved ? , ” the majority of stakeholders brought onto the projects in our corpus were identified and chosen by project leads ( 74 of 80 ) . Often ( 47 of 80 ) , project leads’ choices were based upon what they presumed to be the background of that group / person , recruiting stakeholders either opportunistically ( “ just talk to some of your friends ” [ P10 ] ) or through an opt - in mechanism ( “ Some people just kind of came to ( our ) team and said , hey , can we work with you ? ” [ P9 ] . This contrasts with the much smaller number of projects that leveraged a community - engaged approach in estab - lishing relationships with stakeholder groups and leveraging those relationships to help designate participants for design activities ( 6 The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Figure 2 : Participatory AI Projects Mapped to Conceptual Framework Results from coding the 80 research articles in our corpus according to our conceptual framework ( see section 2 . 4 ) . This figure is annotated with text specifying exemplar approaches pulled from both the corpus analysis and supporting literature review . out of 80 ) . Even fewer projects ( 3 out of 80 ) had community stake - holders involved throughout the life cycle of the AI design project . Overall , reliance on project leads’ criteria for deciding “ who’s in - volved ” across the majority of projects means less agency is given to community stakeholders in terms of design decision - making . Fur - ther , the relative scarcity of relationship - building and stakeholder involvement throughout the end - to - end AI lifecycle points more toward an ad - hoc mode of participation of current practice . See Figure 2 , third row . As it relates to participatory methods , 85 % ( 68 out of 80 ) of the projects engaged stakeholders in eliciting preferences or values through methods such as surveys and interviews , role - playing , and collaborative story - boarding . The majority of projects ( 57 out of 68 ) engaged with stakeholders only once , meaning that these high - level inputs were the only inputs stakeholders provided . For such projects , participation primarily took place during designated win - dowsoncethesystem’sscopeand purposewere already determined— or were specifically scoped to aspects of the user interface , rather than the underlying AI model , as previously described . In fact , fewer than a quarter ( 18 out of 80 ) of the research articles we reviewed described engaging with the same participants more than once throughout the research project . As an example , in their research article on participatory design of social robots , Lee et al . [ 124 ] adopted a six - step approach to their participatory design pro - cess . This approach involved interviewing the participants to learn from their perspectives , brainstorming design ideas with partici - pants , and validating final design ideas with the community . This “multi - phase” approach [ cf . 82 ] affords stakeholders more opportu - nities for participation throughout the design process than single instances . That said , none of the 80 research articles we analyzed involved stakeholders early on in reflective deliberations regarding EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . the participatory design process or their proposed role in it . See Figure 2 , fourth row . 3 . 2 . 2 Researchers and practitioners feel they have to substantially scale back their participatory ambitions . Interviewees across indus - try , the public sector , and academia reported that top - down or - ganizational constraints limited the time and resources available for participatory approaches . This narrowly limited the dimen - sions of “ what is on the table ” and “ which stakeholders are involved ” for their projects . Often , only how —not whether —AI will be de - ployed was subject to discussion with stakeholders . Corporations’ , research teams’ , and government agencies’ priorities , mandates , and resources were often reported to be in tension with intervie - wees’ desire to empower stakeholders . Multiple interviewees in the public sector , for example , described how legislative rules placed strong constraints regarding who could or could not be involved : “ children on the ground [ . . . ] They have no agency in this . They’re also stakeholders , but they don’t have any agency , because by law they’re not capable of making decisions ” [ P9 ] . For industry researchers , we heard how participatory projects needed to be scoped to align with formal management indicators and metrics : “ OKRs [ Objectives and Key Results ] , KPIs [ Key Perfor - mance Indicators ] and all this sort of stuff . . . those come from the top of the organization , and then trickle down ” [ P2 ] . This interviewee felt that they needed to “ fight more with management ” [ P2 ] to advocate for stakeholders’ interests to elevate them to the level of organiza - tional priorities . This uphill battle in securing stakeholder - based priorities led to researchers and practitioners making compromises regarding the amount and degree of stakeholder participation . The researcher or practitioner in such situations was often put in the situation where the best they could do was talk “ to a bunch of people ”—yet without truly empowering them—“ we call it ‘human - centered design’ ” [ P9 ] . When there is corporate interest in participatory projects , AI researchers and practitioners faced unanticipated expectations to include stakeholders other than those they were initially focused on based on “ the business needs for that particular AI system ” [ P7 ] or to include the sponsors who contributed to funding the project [ P6 ] . AI researchers and practitioners working on public sector projects also often face a what seems like an ever - growing set of stakeholders across various groups spanning organizational boundaries : And so if you think about stakeholders [ . . . ] you have agencies , you have the department at the state level , but you also have the court , [ . . . ] you have judges , you have attorneys , but when you want to add algorithms into the mix , you also have to talk about developers or , you know , the various IT companies that these people contract with , right ? [ . . . ] that’s the world that they live in , and it’s a very messy world . [ P9 ] For academic researchers conducting participatory work , the long - term relationship development needed for adequate under - standing of stakeholders’ needs and social contexts is further under - mined by the demand for rapid publication of results , the need to secure funding for students , and tenure requirements for faculty [ cf . 28 ] . One participant described how they “ set up a multi - year project in the hope that I would get external funding down the line , which would fund this project ” [ P9 ] , but this hope for funding is not a sus - tainable bet for many , and can often leave stakeholders in the lurch if this funding runs out and the engagement ends prematurely [ cf . 93 ] . Long - term relationship development is also not well - aligned with the discrete semester - long engagements that many academic research projects are scoped around [ P3 ] . Across all sectors , organizational timelines and resources were described as being at odds with involving a wide range of stakehold - ers , and certainly ill - equipped to support the “ deep ethnography ” [ P9 ] that enables a rich understanding of the social landscape in which algorithms are being designed for . Relatedly , interviewees described feeling caught between an idealized world of stakeholder empowerment and the practical constraints of available time and resources for participation . Interviewees described the desire for substantive stakeholder participation as an “ ambitious ” [ P10 ] but ( perhaps unrealistically ) idealistic goal , because “ we don’t live in a perfect world ” [ P9 ] . One interviewee went further to describe the notion of full par - ticipation as an impossibility , as for them this would require par - ticipants “ literally coming to the office with me and making every decision with me and doing all these things ; all of a sudden , they don’t have a life to live , right ? ” [ P10 ] . This straw - man description of par - ticipation seems to serve at one level to justify a diluted version of stakeholder involvement , and another as a source of anxiety about never being able to do participation in design any justice . Others were explicit that a more ideal form of participation involved the “ actual ability to change actual power and actual ability to choose a product direction and move it ” [ P3 ] . However , this interviewee went on to tell us that they felt “ a little jaded about companies ( not ) being willing to really change course ” [ P3 ] based on participants’ desires . Interviewees’ anxiety about not being able to achieve idealized modes of participation was occasionally expressed in feelings of guilt over not doing enough to engage more stakeholders in more ways . As one researcher told us , “ having more people involved is always better . And I think one thing that we didn’t do very well is like expand past what was like logistically kind of easy for us [ . . . ] we just decided to start with the people we could easily contact ” [ P5 ] . However , as this interviewee went on to acknowledge , those stakeholder groups who were left out were “ the end goal of who we want to like benefit , right ? And I think not having them in the picture is kind of bad ” [ P5 ] . In addition to tradeoffs about who was involved in participating , interviewees described how the pragmatic realities of participants’ circumstances motivated them to adopt particular approaches to participation . For instance , much like the concern of P10 that par - ticipants “ have a life to live ” and thus cannot provide input on every possible design decision , another interviewee shared how the ap - proach they took to participation involved selected participants training models to make decisions in their stead ( see section 3 . 3 . 1 for more about this type of approach ) . For them , this approach was : . . . a way of like realizing this [ constraint ] in an action - able way . Because you can’t have people constantly voting like 100 times a day over like where they think [ resources should be allocated ] . And you probably only have like a minute or a minute and a half to like ac - tually [ allocate each resource ] , ’cause you have to like The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA coordinate a bunch of volunteers . . . And it’s just very like operationally challenging . [ P5 ] Some interviewees [ P9 , P10 , P11 ] justified such pragmatic choices by arguing that participation—any form of participation , however limited—would be beneficial for stakeholders and better than the alternative of not having participated at all . As one researcher told us : “ the reality is a lot of times is , when I say participatory , I mean two hours [ . . . ] but I would argue it’s better than nothing or like no participation ” [ P10 ] . As they elaborated , “ I’m so in the mindset that if you get 80 % closer to something , that’s a win . If you genuinely get closer to something , I think that’s better ” [ P10 ] , while another interviewee expressed the importance of doing “ whatever I can , and it won’t be perfect , and it will be rough and it will be messy ” [ P9 ] . Meanwhile , others highlighted the importance of developing “ lighter - weight methods ” [ P3 ] such as surveys to follow up with stakeholders who were less interested in ongoing engagement via traditional PD style workshop sessions . 3 . 3 Findings : Proxy - Based Participation Across our corpus and interview data , we found that instead of directly engaging the affected stakeholders , AI system designers have come to embrace a proxy - based approach to participation . In particular , we identified three proxy - based tactics that AI system designers adopted to ostensibly incorporate stakeholders’ voices into the AI design process : ( a ) leveraging people who work with or are otherwise familiar with stakeholder communities to serve as stand - ins , ( b ) the introduction of User Experience ( UX ) or Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) practitioners as mediators that sit be - tween AI experts and stakeholders , and ( c ) the use of algorithmic proxies to elicit and model stakeholders’ preferences by training models . 3 . 3 . 1 Stand - ins for affected stakeholders . For example , in some cases , participants involved in design were not necessarily members of an affected stakeholder group themselves , but rather individu - als who the project team perceived as being able to stand - in and voice stakeholders’ preferences and values based on lived and / or work experience [ 8 , 44 , 45 , 50 , 138 , 145 , 157 , 204 , 224 , 226 ] . Some researchers we interviewed relied on policymakers they believed could “ somehow summarize whatever the affected users are saying ” [ P7 ] . Others , such as one educational research project , described using stand - ins ( e . g . , educators ) to role - play as other stakeholders ( e . g . , children ) to help design human - robot interaction patterns [ P6 ] . In their project on enhancing rescue work in the Finnish res - cue department , Luhtala et al . [ 138 ] asked workshop participants to “consider different viewpoints i . e . customer , communication or rescue worker , and especially what would a good proactive rescue service based on a partnership between different stakeholders be like . ” In another example involving a health counseling bot , Kearns et al . [ 114 ] leveraged actors trained to role - play as patients to ex - plore the possible needs of caregivers . Another type of representative stand - in took the form of recruit - ing participants with similar demographic backgrounds to a target stakeholder group of interest . One interviewee described recruiting “ people in your company who can sometimes represent the group that you’re looking at ” [ P10 ] . Despite acknowledging that employees of a tech company might be “ strange in different ways ” ( i . e . , different from other members of those demographic groups ) , they went on to describe how those employees can still provide AI designers with “ the stuff that’s just kind of obvious if you grew up like [ they ] grew up , if you had the lived experiences that [ they ] have , when [ they ] use these kinds of products ” [ P10 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 UX / HCI practitioners as mediators between AI experts and domain stakeholders . Another tactic described in the corpus and interviews consisted of team members described as having UX / HCI expertise “ function as mediators ” [ P4 ] between impacted stakehold - ers and AI researchers in a way that ( perhaps unintentionally ) limited the interaction between these groups . UX / HCI researchers in this view are seen as experts in the participation itself and thus positioned to play a central role in scoping , designing , and manag - ing participatory interventions . This work included deciding which stakeholders ( or others ) would be brought in as participants , what role those participants played , and how participants interacted with each other and other team members . Multiple interviewees [ P2 , P3 , P7 , P8 , P9 ] and research articles in our corpus [ e . g . , 101 ] specifically invoked UX / HCI expertise as imbued with a capacity that allowed UX or HCI experts to act as a bridge between stakeholders on one side , and algorithmic re - searchers on the other side . They were viewed as mediators that could “ speak the same language ” and have a “ two - way street ” con - versation across disciplinary lines [ P5 ] . Interviewees described a “ two - sided market ” [ P10 ] between team members with AI expertise and those with UX / HCI expertise in which the former relied on the latter to “ equip the non - experts [ i . e . , participants ] to be able to have the conversation ” [ P10 ] . This was especially important as stakeholders were described as “ bad at coming up with mental models of what they value ” [ P5 ] , having no “ idea of how the underlying technology works ” [ P4 ] , or otherwise incapable of understanding “ the impacts of different de - sign choices ” [ P11 ] . In fact , enabling non - technical stakeholders to understand AI’s capabilities and limitations repeatedly came up as a key obstacle to address to ensure meaningful participation : You need to explain the impacts of different design choices , so that people can start the conversation . Other - wise , these non - [ AI ] - expert community members , they just cannot discuss it . They do not know how to discuss these issues , right ? [ . . . You need to ] actually explain this complexity , output and potential outcomes to the com - munity , help the communities actually figure out and then navigate this complex , complicated outcomes , and then identify the actually the solutions that works best for the community . [ P11 ] Some papers went further to argue that the mediating role played by UX / HCI resources also “ temper [ ed ] the technological possibilities of algorithms and highlight [ ed ] the concerns for practitioners , whose work practices are being renegotiated as part of an overall change ” [ 101 ] . As such , this intermediary role was justified not only as a way to mitigate the perceived deficits in stakeholders’ technical literacy , but also as a way to offset the techno - optimism or techno - solutionism of algorithm designers . Yet , this empowerment of those with UX / HCI expertise came at the expense of stakeholders’ posi - tioning as well as the quality and quantity of their engagement with EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . the larger project team . For team members more focused on algo - rithmic design , the central positioning of UX / HCI experts pushed their interaction with the stakeholders to the periphery : “ HCI people talked to [ the participants ] a lot , but I hardly got to talk to them at all ” [ P5 ] . 3 . 3 . 3 Algorithmic proxies for participation . In addition to these human proxies , other projects we analyzed from our corpus [ e . g . , 50 , 126 , 228 ] drew on algorithmic proxies to ostensibly reflect stake - holders’ interests . Some projects did so by directly soliciting stake - holder preferences via the AI systems they were developing . In these types of projects , project teams would ask stakeholders to train ma - chine learning models , which would vote on binary outcomes ( e . g . , in a decision support tool ) that nominally reflected stakeholders’ preferences [ e . g . , 126 ] . The assumption underlying this approach ( informed by social choice theory [ 108 , 184 ] ) holds that a predictive model trained on people’s preferences is functionally equivalent to those preferences . Although stakeholders were involved in some fashion by training a model , this approach to participation was limited to providing training data or intervening in model training at one particular point in time . In this case , the set of preferences elicited from the stakeholder was only a snapshot of the stakeholders’ values at a particular time . And , even when project teams aimed to repeatedly engage stakeholders in model training , it remained challenging to produce a model that is representative of the stakeholders’ value systems given the constant flux of values and preferences that may exist for stakeholders at any particular point in time . In P5’s case of developing an AI system for resource allocation , they reported that by the end of the elicitation process , many of their stakeholders prioritized values were very different from what they prioritized at the beginning of the process . For example , a stakeholder might begin the process by solely focusing on their own preference to access resources in their vicinity . However , once they started the process of pairwise comparisons , they might begin wondering if they should care about other factors such as poverty rate and income , which they realized might be the priorities of other people . Looking back , P5 felt that designing a model that captures people’s constantly evolving values was akin to “ trying to hit a moving target . “ Whilemanyintervieweeslaudedsuchaniterativeprocessthrough whichstakeholderscouldattendtoothers’values toconsider“ what’s best for everyone ” [ P11 ] , such dynamic modeling of stakeholders preferences becomes difficult to scale over time . Let us turn to case of P11 in which they were developing a matching system on a col - laboration platform . P11 explained that while there are “ hundreds of thousands of members ” on the platform , “ there are only a few hundred members ” that are available for matching at a given time . The ever - changing composition of available members means that the definition of the best matching algorithm is constantly chang - ing . Given the complexity of value elicitation at this scale , instead of attempting to directly model the myriad of preferences given the varying composition of available members , P11 created simu - lation environments in which they calculated tradeoffs that were similar to the ones the members were trying to navigate in real - time . In these simulations , stakeholders preferences were mined but then further simplified to make the matching exercise more computationally tractable . 4 DISCUSSION Through our examination of participatory AI projects , we find that researchers and practitioners have difficulty mapping their par - ticipatory ambitions to the practical constraints they face on the ground . As such , we find that the current state of participatory AI largely involves consultative approaches that elicit preferences and values from stakeholders . While there is certainly potential value to be gained in aggregating preferences across affected stakeholders , it is important to take note that only a handful of outlier projects surveyed in this study allowed stakeholders to drive or own any part of the design process itself . As such , the current state of partic - ipatory AI leans heavily on a model where stakeholder engagement is highly discrete and programmed , affording little design agency to the stakeholders themselves . In our analysis , we also identified a growing trend in the use of proxy - based tactics in participatory AI including the use of rep - resentative stand - ins , the leveraging of UX / HCI practitioners as mediators between AI experts and stakeholders , as well as the use of algorithmic proxies to elicit or model stakeholders’ preferences . While the first two examples of proxies are not necessarily unique to participatory AI , the latter is of particular interest in grappling specifically with whether , and if so how , AI presents a substantively new terrain for participatory interventions . Given the central role played by machine learning models in automating human decision - making and generating simulated user content ( especially with the advent of large language models and generative AI ) [ 32 ] , it is important to reflect on whether or how to best leverage these tools as stand - ins for stakeholders in participatory AI . Drawing from the above empirical findings and insights , we first focus our discussion below on the importance of aligning partic - ipatory methods to specific underlying participatory goals . In so doing , we call for a departure from conceptualizing participation as an all - or - nothing characteristic [ cf . 38 ] and advocate for identi - fying actionable goals that specify the level of agency and weight in decision - making stakeholders will be provided for any particu - lar project ( understanding that there is a spectrum of agency and decision - making authority , and that there is not one right solution for all projects ) . Second , we identify characteristics of AI systems ( opacity and scale ) that lead to particular challenges to meaningful participation . Third , we raise questions about the use of human and algorithmic proxies for participation . 4 . 1 Moving beyond idealized aspirations toward specific outcomes Instead of focusing on the idealized aspirations of participatory approaches , we recommend conceptualizing participation as a set of dimensions ( see section 2 . 4 . 1 ) that need to be explicitly specified at the project level . This means moving away from conceptualizing participation as an all - or - nothing characteristic of a project [ cf . 38 ] , and setting specific goals regarding the extent to which stakeholders are able to contribute to the project . This also moves us away from a “ something is better than nothing ” perspective , and forcing a specific discussion of how much agency and decision - making authority The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA is meant to be provided to affected stakeholders . To aid in this assessment , in addition to the dimensions of participation , we also defined modes of participation for each dimension , in a spectrum ranging from consulting , involving , collaborating , and owning to help identify intermediate levels of stakeholder agency between the extreme poles of transactional consulting and transformative empowerment ( see section 2 . 4 . 2 ) . We offer this framework as a way to aid in designing for par - ticipatory approaches in AI , especially in light of the many practi - cal constraints participation will necessarily need to be designed around . Specifically , for researchers and practitioners aiming to move beyond a consultative mode of participation , this will require setting ambitious , yet reasonable goals based on stakeholder access , project timelines , and resources ( including funding ) . It will also require researchers and practitioners to move away from a role in which they oversee participation , to one where they collaboratively design and conduct the participatory approach collaboratively with stakeholders . However , it is critical to acknowledge that some participation may not be better than no participation , in situations where partici - pation is extractive ( and thus harms participants [ 65 , 203 ] ) , tokenis - tic in ways that reify or amplify existing power structures within participating communities or between stakeholders and designers [ 54 ] , or cases where “pseudo - participation” [ 164 ] may foreclose or co - opt more meaningful forms of participation [ 54 , 115 ] . Much like in participatory design more broadly , truly participatory approaches to AI will take more than“ add [ ing ] diverse users and stir [ ring ] ” to achieve substantive forms of participation and it will require “ new ways of thinking and new methods of openness ” [ 150 ] . 4 . 2 Unique challenges for participation in AI The sociotechnical complexity of AI systems raises challenges to meaningful stakeholder participation not addressed by existing frameworks of participation in other domains . Below , we high - light specific characteristics of AI design and development that require new ways to conceptualize and operationalize stakeholder participation in AI : 4 . 2 . 1 Between High - Dimensionality and Human Reasoning . With the prevalence of machine learning techniques , AI systems that are operationally useful often suffer from the “curse of dimension - ality” [ 64 ] . Such systems speaks the language of “mathematical optimization in high - dimensionality” that often goes beyond “what can be easily grasped by a reasoning human” [ 42 ] . This dilemma of interpretability is further compounded when AI systems are iteratively retrained on new data [ 9 ] . To this end , we resonate with Ananny and Crawford [ 9 ] that “if a system is so complex that even those with total views into it are unable to describe its failures and successes , then accountability models might focus on whether the system is sufficiently understood—or understandable—to allow its deployment in different environments . . . or if the system should be built at all . ” This calls attention to how such interpretability marks the dis - tinction between meaningful participation and mere inclusion . As Birhane et al . [ 26 ] put , “Being included might have practical conse - quences on the ability of people and groups to engage in participa - tory processes . But inclusion is not necessarily participation , since any individual can be included in a group , yet not participate , e . g . , by never voting , writing , or acting . ” As a starting point for meaningful participation , we call for prac - titioners to direct their attention toward explicating ( a ) the mecha - nisms of particular AI systems and ( b ) the potentials of AI broadly construed . This can be operationalized on three levels . When de - signing AI systems , practitioners should consider ways to explain how a given AI system work as part of humans’ interactions with such a system . Much of the effort branded as Explainable AI falls un - der this pursuit [ e . g . , 67 , 111 , 131 ] . During activities for stakeholder participation , practitioners should foster localized understandings of what a particular AI system in question can do and how such a system works . And more fundamentally , practitioners should create opportunities to foster broad understandings of what AI can do and how AI works prior to participation . 4 . 2 . 2 Between Scaling and Caring . Careful human interventions and scaling up are often conceived of as naturally opposed to each other [ 128 , 192 , 211 ] . Two decades ago , Neumann and Star [ 158 ] questioned to what extent stakeholder participation could be real - ized in large - scale design projects . The scale at which AI systems operate warrants special considerations of what constitutes mean - ingful participation . In the context of contemporary AI systems , a defining character of scaling is the shift away from rule - based AI systems toward more data - driven paradigms such as deep learning [ 123 ] . The na - ture of data collection and curation processes involved in training ML and AI models means that large numbers of stakeholders may be nominally ‘participating’ in AI development as the ‘human in - frastructure’ that enables ML systems to work [ 144 ] . Such nominal participation may involve “potentially indefinitely many actors” if the system employs third - party architectures or toolkits [ 55 ] . These shifts raise questions about whether meaningful human participation is even feasible at the scales at which many AI systems operate [ 21 , 83 , 92 , 128 , 192 , 211 ] —including both the spatial scales of collection of large - scale datasets and deployment of AI systems across geographic contexts [ 140 ] , as well as the rapid temporal scales at which data is collected , models are trained , and systems are deployed [ 52 ] . As Miceli et al . [ 147 ] and Sloane et al . [ 203 ] have argued , such forms of participation may be tokenistic , extractive , or may inadvertently reinforce or amplify existing power dynamics rather than challenging power structures , as in the aims of partici - patory design [ 201 ] . Given the scale of many AI systems , although some teams adopt methods from HCI to obtain narrowly scoped stakeholder participa - tion on an individual element of a larger AI assemblage ( e . g . , model performance metrics [ 199 ] ) , it is not clear how these methods map to participation in larger system - wide decisions related to large - scale data collection and storage or decisions about the structure and purpose of large - scale pre - trained models , such as Large Lan - guage Models ( LLMs ) often fine - tuned for downstream applications [ 32 ] . Further , designing for participation in situations where the system is constantly adapting to new training inputs raises critical questions about when and how often and by which means it makes sense to bring stakeholders into the loop [ e . g . , 36 , 126 ] . EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . 4 . 3 Risks in using proxies for participation In our analysis , we observed the use of stakeholder proxies as a key tactic in a variety of participatory AI projects . A proxy - based approach to participation was often justified due to the limited time that any given stakeholder may have to fully participate as well as the limited time and resources AI teams might have to properly recruit and engage with stakeholders . Yet , it is worth grappling seriously with the implications that the use of proxies has as a “labor - saving device” [ 154 ] or as a form of ‘discount’ par - ticipation ( following Borning et al . [ 34 ] , Young et al . [ 225 ] ) . In particular , we call attention to proxy - related challenges on three fronts—representativeness , power imbalances , and agency . 4 . 3 . 1 Mistaken identity . As discussed in section 3 . 3 . 1 , stand - ins are often recruited to represent the preferences and values of a particular group that they may belong to demographically or with which they share some aspect of lived and / or work experience . Yet , these approaches often rely on the assumption that stakeholders acting as a proxy may be able to adequately speak on behalf of the preferences for other stakeholders in a similar role ( e . g . , other teachers or other museum guides ) , or for stakeholders in roles they work closely with ( e . g . , students ) , or for other members of the same sociolinguistic or demographic group . Further , often due to selection bias , these stand - in selections may run counter to the goal of including more marginalized members of communities in the AI design process [ cf . 2 , 48 , 225 ] . There is good reason to be suspicious of the validity of these assumptions , in part due to the fact that communities are not monolithic and each person’s experiences , needs , and preferences may vary . This becomes even more fraught when stand - ins are used to provide input into value - based design or evaluations of fairness and ethics of AI systems [ e . g . , 140 ] . Representation on behalf of citizens has a long history in partic - ipatory democracy , including in representative deliberation , citizen assemblies , and community juries [ 2 , 171 ] , approaches that are gaining increasing traction in AI and technology design , such as diverse voices panels [ 225 ] and digital juries for adjudicating con - tent moderation [ 69 ] or annotation [ 85 ] . However , critical work on unpacking concepts such as representativeness [ 48 ] and proxies in multiple fields [ 154 ] suggests that more care should be taken in ex - amining the power dynamics involved in determining what or who constitutes a proxy [ 154 ] and what is meant by such representation and representativeness , as those terms move from one discipline ( e . g . , politics ) to another ( e . g . , statistics or AI design ) [ 48 ] . 4 . 3 . 2 Biased intermediation . The practice of relying on UX / HCI professionals as mediators has long been critiqued in the PD [ 29 , 58 , 141 ] and HCI [ 23 , 56 ] literature . In particular , leveraging ‘proxy users’ or ‘user surrogates , ’ may undermine the rich experiential knowledge that participants have about their contexts and prac - tices . Further , there is a risk that UX / HCI experts as stakeholder intermediaries may inadvertently elevate or augment some voices , while leaving other voices out of the conversation—as has been written about extensively in participatory democracy [ 173 ] and participatory development [ 54 ] . 4 . 3 . 3 Stale modeling . In the case of algorithmic models as proxies , even if these models are able to faithfully capture capture people’s preferences at the moment of training , they risk becoming stale to people’s changing preferences over time . These fossilized prefer - ence models may lead to a substantive distinction between human agent preferences and algorithmic voting across policy choices [ cf . 180 ] , thus functioning as what some have referred to as a ‘technol - ogy of de - politicization’ [ 98 ] . 4 . 4 Limitations Although we developed our corpus of research articles from a range of publication venues , using a variety of keywords , we may have missed out on relevant projects in venues outside of those we included here ( e . g . , work published outside of computing conference venues , including HCI journals and ‘grey literature’ such as white papers from policy institutes ) , and may have missed projects that used different terms from those we searched for to describe the participatory work they did . In addition , although we conducted a purposive sampling of authors of research articles in the corpus to recruit for the interviews , there may be key perspectives of researchers and practitioners from the corpus who we may have failed to reach , or who declined to participate . Finally , our interviews captured the perspectives , processes , and challenges expressed by researchers and practitioners working on participation in AI . Future work should incorporate perspectives from other key stakeholders , such as policymakers or others at civil society or community - based organizations , and , most crucially of all , people who have participated in designing any of the AI systems in the corpus , or stakeholders who are or may be impacted by particular AI systems more generally , to understand whether and how they might want to participate in shaping the design of the systems that impact their lives . 5 CONCLUSION In this article , we intend to provide an empirically - grounded theo - retical framework to inform research and practice on participatory approaches to AI design . We surveyed the current state of partici - patory approaches to AI through an analysis of a corpus of relevant research and through semi - structured interviews with researchers and practitioners involved in adopting participatory approaches to AI design . We find that the current state of participatory AI leans largely on a consultative interaction with stakeholders that allows them to provide input on particular modules of AI systems , but does not integrate them as active decision makers across the life cycle of AI design projects . In this context , we find that AI researchers and practitioners struggling with a tension between their participatory ambitions and the practical constraints they face on the ground . Further , we find that AI researchers and practitioners are adopting tactics to help them negotiate these practical constraints : including relying on stand - ins to represent the interests of affected stake - holders , relying on UX expertise to bridge stakeholders and the design team , and relying on algorithmic models to elicit stakehold - ers’ preferences—tactics that may reify or amplify existing power dynamics . We intend for this paper and the accompanying framework to help shed light on current practices , and to move the state of prac - tice forward in a way that allows AI researchers and practitioners to be more deliberate and strategic in how they articulate their The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA participatory goals and implement participatory methods on their projects . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Rediet Abebe and Kira Goldner . 2018 . Mechanism design for social good . AI Matters 4 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 27 – 34 . [ 2 ] JuliaAbelson , Pierre - GerlierForest , JohnEyles , PatriciaSmith , ElisabethMartin , and Francois - Pierre Gauvin . 2003 . Deliberations about deliberative methods : issues in the design and evaluation of public participation processes . Social science & medicine 57 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 239 – 251 . [ 3 ] Open Government Partnership Ada Lovelace Institute , AI Now Institute . 2021 . Algorithmic accountability for the public sector report . ( 2021 ) . https : / / www . opengovpartnership . org / documents / algorithmic - accountability - public - sector / [ 4 ] Kars Alfrink , Thijs Turel , AI Keller , Neelke Doorn , and Gerd Kortuem . 2020 . Contestable City Algorithms . ( 2020 ) . [ 5 ] Ali Alkhatib and Michael Bernstein . 2019 . Street - level algorithms : A theory at the gaps between policy and decisions . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 6 ] Oscar Alvarado , Elias Storms , David Geerts , and Katrien Verbert . 2020 . Fore - groundingAlgorithms : PreparingUsersforCo - designwithSensitizingActivities . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society . 1 – 7 . [ 7 ] Saleema Amershi , Dan Weld , Mihaela Vorvoreanu , Adam Fourney , Besmira Nushi , Penny Collisson , Jina Suh , Shamsi Iqbal , Paul N Bennett , Kori Inkpen , et al . 2019 . Guidelines for human - AI interaction . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 13 . [ 8 ] Asbjørn Ammitzbøll Flügge , Thomas Hildebrandt , and Naja Holten Møller . 2019 . Street - LevelAlgorithmsandAIinBureaucraticDecision - Making : ACaseworker Perspective . 5 ( 2019 ) , 40 : 1 – 40 : 23 . Issue CSCW1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449114 [ 9 ] Mike Ananny and Kate Crawford . 2018 . Seeing without knowing : Limitations of the transparency ideal and its application to algorithmic accountability . new media & society 20 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 973 – 989 . [ 10 ] Lisa P . Argyle , Ethan C . Busby , Nancy Fulda , Joshua R . Gubler , Christopher Rytting , and David Wingate . 2023 . Out of One , Many : Using Language Models to Simulate Human Samples . Political Analysis 31 , 3 ( 2023 ) , 337 – 351 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / pan . 2023 . 2 [ 11 ] Hilary Arksey and Lisa O’Malley . 2005 . Scoping studies : towards a methodolog - ical framework . International journal of social research methodology 8 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 19 – 32 . [ 12 ] Sherry R Arnstein . 1969 . A ladder of citizen participation . Journal of the American Institute of planners 35 , 4 ( 1969 ) , 216 – 224 . [ 13 ] Kenneth J Arrow . 2012 . Social choice and individual values . Yale university press . [ 14 ] Shiri Azenkot , Catherine Feng , and Maya Cakmak . 2016 . Enabling building service robots to guide blind people a participatory design approach . In 2016 11thACM / IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman - RobotInteraction ( HRI ) . IEEE , 3 – 10 . [ 15 ] Yuntao Bai , Andy Jones , Kamal Ndousse , Amanda Askell , Anna Chen , Nova DasSarma , Dawn Drain , Stanislav Fort , Deep Ganguli , Tom Henighan , et al . 2022 . Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2204 . 05862 ( 2022 ) . [ 16 ] Ellen Balka . 2010 . Broadening discussion about participatory design . Scandina - vian Journal of Information Systems 22 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 77 – 84 . [ 17 ] JuliaBarnettandNicholasDiakopoulos . 2022 . Crowdsourcingimpacts : exploring the utility of crowds for anticipating societal impacts of algorithmic decision making . In Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society . 56 – 67 . [ 18 ] Alex Bäuerle , Ángel Alexander Cabrera , Fred Hohman , Megan Maher , David Koski , XavierSuau , TitusBarik , andDominikMoritz . 2022 . Symphony : Compos - ing Interactive Interfaces for Machine Learning . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 19 ] Eric PS Baumer . 2017 . Toward human - centered algorithm design . Big Data & Society 4 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 2053951717718854 . [ 20 ] Eevi Beck . 2002 . P for Political - Participation is Not Enough . Scandinavian J . Inf . Systems 14 ( 01 2002 ) . [ 21 ] Emily M Bender , Timnit Gebru , Angelina McMillan - Major , and Shmargaret Shmitchell . 2021 . On the dangers of stochastic parrots : Can language models be too big ? . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness , accountability , and transparency . 610 – 623 . [ 22 ] Jesse Josua Benjamin , Christoph Kinkeldey , Claudia Müller - Birn , Tim Korjakow , and Eva - Maria Herbst . [ n . d . ] . Explanation Strategies as an Empirical - Analytical LensforSocio - TechnicalContextualizationofMachineLearningInterpretability . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 1 – 25 . Issue GROUP . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3492858 [ 23 ] CynthiaLBennettandDanielaKRosner . 2019 . ThePromiseofEmpathy : Design , Disability , and Knowing the " Other " . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 13 . [ 24 ] Aleks Berditchevskaia , Eirini Malliaraki , and Kathy Peach . 2021 . Participatory AI for humanitarian innovation . ( 2021 ) . https : / / media . nesta . org . uk / documents / Nesta _ Participatory _ AI _ for _ humanitarian _ innovation _ Final . pdf [ 25 ] Rahul Bhargava , Anna Chung , Neil S Gaikwad , Alexis Hope , Dennis Jen , Jasmin Rubinovitz , Belén Saldías - Fuentes , and Ethan Zuckerman . 2019 . Gobo : A system for exploring user control of invisible algorithms in social media . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 151 – 155 . [ 26 ] Abeba Birhane , William Isaac , Vinodkumar Prabhakaran , Mark Diaz , Madeleine Clare Elish , Iason Gabriel , and Shakir Mohamed . 2022 . Power to the People ? Opportunities and Challenges for Participatory AI . In Equity and Access inAlgorithms , Mechanisms , andOptimization ( Arlington , VA , USA ) ( EAAMO’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 6 , 8 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3551624 . 3555290 [ 27 ] Gro Bjerknes and Tone Bratteteig . 1995 . User participation and democracy : A discussion of Scandinavian research on system development . Scandinavian Journal of information systems 7 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 1 . [ 28 ] Emily Black , Joshua Williams , Michael A Madaio , and Priya L Donti . 2020 . A call for universities to develop requirements for community engagement in AI research . In The Fair and Responsible AI Workshop at the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . [ 29 ] Design Jeanette Blomberg and Helena Karasti . 2012 . Ethnography : Positioning ethnography within participatory design . In Routledge international handbook of participatory design . Routledge , 106 – 136 . [ 30 ] Susanne BØdker , Christian Dindler , and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2017 . Tying Knots : Participatory Infrastructuring at Work . Comput . Supported Coop . Work 26 , 1 – 2 ( apr 2017 ) , 245 – 273 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 017 - 9268 - y [ 31 ] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng . 2018 . Participatory Design That Mat - ters—Facing the Big Issues . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 1 , Article 4 ( feb 2018 ) , 31 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152421 [ 32 ] Rishi Bommasani , Drew A Hudson , Ehsan Adeli , Russ Altman , Simran Arora , Sydney von Arx , Michael S Bernstein , Jeannette Bohg , Antoine Bosselut , Emma Brunskill , et al . 2021 . On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2108 . 07258 ( 2021 ) . [ 33 ] Elizabeth Bondi , Lily Xu , Diana Acosta - Navas , and Jackson A . Killian . 2021 . Envisioning Communities : A Participatory Approach Towards AI for Social Good . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 425 – 436 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461702 . 3462612 [ 34 ] AlanBorning , BatyaFriedman , andPKahn . 2004 . Designingforhumanvaluesin an urban simulation system : Value sensitive design and participatory design . In Proceedings From the Eighth Biennial Participatory Design Conference . Citeseer . [ 35 ] Nina Bozic Yams and Álvaro Aranda Muñoz . 2021 . Poetics of Future Work : Blending Speculative Design with Artistic Methodology . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 36 ] Tone Bratteteig and Guri Verne . 2018 . Does AI Make PD Obsolete ? Explor - ing Challenges from Artificial Intelligence to Participatory Design . In Proceed - ings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( Hasselt and Genk , Belgium ) ( PDC ’18 ) . As - sociation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 8 , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210646 [ 37 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . 2012 . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 . 41 – 50 . [ 38 ] Tone Bratteteig and Ina Wagner . 2016 . Unpacking the Notion of Participation in Participatory Design . Comput . Supported Coop . Work 25 , 6 ( dec 2016 ) , 425 – 475 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 016 - 9259 - 4 [ 39 ] VirginiaBraunandVictoriaClarke . 2006 . Usingthematicanalysisinpsychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 40 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2019 . Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis . Qualitative Research in Sport , Exercise and Health 11 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 589 – 597 . [ 41 ] Anna Brown , Alexandra Chouldechova , Emily Putnam - Hornstein , Andrew To - bin , and Rhema Vaithianathan . 2019 . Toward Algorithmic Accountability in Public Services : A Qualitative Study of Affected Community Perspectives on Algo - rithmic Decision - Making in Child Welfare Services . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi - org . proxy . library . cornell . edu / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300271 [ 42 ] Jenna Burrell . 2016 . How the machine ‘thinks’ : Understanding opacity in machine learning algorithms . Big data & society 3 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 2053951715622512 . [ 43 ] Dan Calacci and Alex Pentland . [ n . d . ] . Bargaining with the Black - Box : Design - ing and Deploying Worker - Centric Tools to Audit Algorithmic Management . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 1 – 24 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3570601 [ 44 ] Heloisa Candello , Mauro Pichiliani , and Claudio Pinhanez . 2021 . Making Conversational Robots Learn from Children in a Collaborative Museum Exhi - bition . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 208 – 212 . https : / / doi - org . proxy . library . cornell . edu / 10 . 1145 / 3462204 . 3482888 EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . [ 45 ] Heloisa Candello , Mauro Pichiliani , Claudio Pinhanez , Sara Vidon , and Mairieli Wessel . 2020 . Co - designing a conversational interactive exhibit for children . In Proceedingsofthe2020ACMInteractionDesignandChildrenConference : Extended Abstracts . 326 – 331 . [ 46 ] Stephen Casper , Xander Davies , Claudia Shi , Thomas Krendl Gilbert , Jérémy Scheurer , Javier Rando , Rachel Freedman , Tomasz Korbak , David Lindner , Pedro Freire , et al . 2023 . Open Problems and Fundamental Limitations of Reinforce - ment Learning from Human Feedback . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2307 . 15217 ( 2023 ) . [ 47 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Chaitrali Gandhi , Matthew Wortley Mustelier , and Eric Gilbert . 2019 . Crossmod : A cross - community learning - based system to assist reddit moderators . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 48 ] Kyla Chasalow and Karen Levy . 2021 . Representativeness in Statistics , Politics , and Machine Learning . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 77 – 89 . [ 49 ] ZhilongChen , JinghuaPiao , XiaochongLan , HanchengCao , ChenGao , Zhicong Lu , andYongLi . [ n . d . ] . PractitionersVersusUsers : AValue - SensitiveEvaluation of Current Industrial Recommender System Design . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 533 : 1 – 533 : 32 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555646 [ 50 ] Hao - FeiCheng , LoganStapleton , RuiqiWang , PaigeBullock , AlexandraChoulde - chova , Zhiwei Steven Steven Wu , and Haiyi Zhu . 2021 . Soliciting Stakeholders’ Fairness Notions in Child Maltreatment Predictive Systems . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 17 . [ 51 ] Hao - Fei Cheng , Ruotong Wang , Zheng Zhang , Fiona O’Connell , Terrance Gray , F Maxwell Harper , and HaiyiZhu . 2019 . Explainingdecision - making algorithms through UI : Strategies to help non - expert stakeholders . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 12 . [ 52 ] Parmit K Chilana , Andrew J Ko , and Jacob Wobbrock . 2015 . From user - centered to adoption - centered design : a case study of an HCI research innovation be - coming a product . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1749 – 1758 . [ 53 ] Chhaya Chouhan , Christy M LaPerriere , Zaina Aljallad , Jess Kropczynski , Heather Lipford , and Pamela J Wisniewski . 2019 . Co - designing for commu - nity oversight : Helping people make privacy and security decisions together . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 31 . [ 54 ] Bill Cooke and Uma Kothari . 2001 . Participation : The new tyranny ? Zed books . [ 55 ] A Feder Cooper , Emanuel Moss , Benjamin Laufer , and Helen Nissenbaum . 2022 . Accountability in an algorithmic society : relationality , responsibility , and ro - bustness in machine learning . In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 864 – 876 . [ 56 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design justice : Community - led practices to build the worlds we need . The MIT Press . [ 57 ] Design Council . 2005 . The ‘double diamond’ design process model . Design Council ( 2005 ) . [ 58 ] Andy Crabtree . 1998 . Ethnography in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 1998 Participatory design Conference . Seattle , WA , 93 – 105 . [ 59 ] Kenneth Cukier and Viktor Mayer - Schoenberger . 2014 . The rise of big data : How it’s changing the way we think about the world . Princeton University Press . [ 60 ] Andy Dearden , Ann Light , Theodore Zamenopoulos , Paula Graham , Emma Plouviez , and Sophia de Sousa . 2014 . Scaling up co - design : research projects as design things . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 . 67 – 70 . [ 61 ] Emily Denton , Alex Hanna , Razvan Amironesei , Andrew Smart , Hilary Nicole , and Morgan Klaus Scheuerman . 2020 . Bringing the People Back In : Contesting Benchmark Machine Learning Datasets . ( 2020 ) . arXiv : 2007 . 07399 [ cs . CY ] [ 62 ] John Dewey . 1954 . { 1927 } The Public and Its Problems . Athens , OH : Ohio University Press . [ 63 ] Jesse Dodge , Maarten Sap , Ana Marasović , William Agnew , Gabriel Ilharco , Dirk Groeneveld , Margaret Mitchell , and Matt Gardner . 2021 . Documenting large webtext corpora : A case study on the colossal clean crawled corpus . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2104 . 08758 ( 2021 ) . [ 64 ] Pedro Domingos . 2012 . A few useful things to know about machine learning . Commun . ACM 55 , 10 ( 2012 ) , 78 – 87 . [ 65 ] Paul Dourish , Christopher Lawrence , Tuck Wah Leong , and Greg Wadley . 2020 . On Being Iterated : The Affective Demands of Design Participation . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376545 [ 66 ] Carlos Duarte , Luis Carriço , David Costa , Daniel Costa , André Falcão , and Luís Tavares . 2014 . Welcoming gesture recognition into autism therapy . In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1267 – 1272 . [ 67 ] Upol Ehsan and Mark O Riedl . 2020 . Human - centered explainable ai : Towards a reflective sociotechnical approach . In HCI International 2020 - Late Breaking Papers : Multimodality and Intelligence : 22nd HCI International Conference , HCII 2020 , Copenhagen , Denmark , July 19 – 24 , 2020 , Proceedings 22 . Springer , 449 – 466 . [ 68 ] JohnElliot . 1991 . Actionresearchforeducationalchange . McGraw - HillEducation ( UK ) . [ 69 ] Jenny Fan and Amy X Zhang . 2020 . Digital juries : A civics - oriented approach to platform governance . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 14 . [ 70 ] Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir - Cochrane . 2006 . Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis : A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development . International journal of qualitative methods 5 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 80 – 92 . [ 71 ] Jessie Finocchiaro , Roland Maio , Faidra Monachou , Gourab K Patro , Manish Raghavan , Ana - Andreea Stoica , and Stratis Tsirtsis . 2021 . Bridging Machine LearningandMechanismDesigntowardsAlgorithmicFairness . In Proceedingsof the2021ACMConferenceonFairness , Accountability , andTransparency . 489 – 503 . [ 72 ] James S Fishkin and Robert C Luskin . 2005 . Experimenting with a democratic ideal : Deliberativepollingandpublicopinion . Actapolitica 40 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 284 – 298 . [ 73 ] James S Fishkin and Jane Mansbridge . 2017 . The prospects and limits of deliber - ative democracy : Introduction . Daedalus 146 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 6 – 13 . [ 74 ] Jodi Forlizzi . 2018 . Moving beyond user - centered design . interactions 25 , 5 ( 2018 ) , 22 – 23 . [ 75 ] Jodi Forlizzi and John Zimmerman . 2013 . Promoting service design as a core practice in interaction design . In Proceedings of the 5th International Congress of International Association of Societies of Design Research - IASDR , Vol . 13 . [ 76 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , G . Fitzpatrick , and Ole Iversen . 2015 . In pursuit of rigour and accountability in participatory design . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) , 93 – 106 . [ 77 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Wendy Keay - Bright , and Helen Pain . 2012 . Interpreting input from children : a designerly approach . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 2377 – 2386 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208399 [ 78 ] Batya Friedman . 1996 . Value - sensitive design . interactions 3 , 6 ( 1996 ) , 16 – 23 . [ 79 ] Batya Friedman , Peter Kahn , and Alan Borning . 2002 . Value sensitive design : Theory and methods . University of Washington technical report 2 - 12 ( 2002 ) . [ 80 ] Archon Fung . 2006 . Varieties of participation in complex governance . Public administration review 66 ( 2006 ) , 66 – 75 . [ 81 ] DeepGanguli , LianeLovitt , JacksonKernion , AmandaAskell , YuntaoBai , Saurav Kadavath , Ben Mann , EthanPerez , NicholasSchiefer , KamalNdousse , etal . 2022 . Red teaming language models to reduce harms : Methods , scaling behaviors , and lessons learned . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2209 . 07858 ( 2022 ) . [ 82 ] TheodorosGeorgiou , LynneBaillie , MartinKRoss , andFrankBroz . 2020 . Apply - ing the Participatory Design Workshop Method to Explore how Socially Assis - tive Robots Could Assist Stroke Survivors . In Companion of the 2020 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 203 – 205 . [ 83 ] Tarleton Gillespie . 2020 . Content moderation , AI , and the question of scale . Big Data & Society 7 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 2053951720943234 . [ 84 ] Janne Gleerup , Lars Hulgaard , and Simon Teasdale . 2019 . Action research and participatory democracy in social enterprise . Social Enterprise Journal ( 2019 ) . [ 85 ] Mitchell L Gordon , Michelle S Lam , Joon Sung Park , Kayur Patel , Jeff Hancock , Tatsunori Hashimoto , and Michael S Bernstein . 2022 . Jury learning : Integrating dissenting voices into machine learning models . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 19 . [ 86 ] Judith Gregory . 2003 . Scandinavian approaches to participatory design . Inter - national Journal of Engineering Education 19 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 62 – 74 . [ 87 ] Erik Grönvall and Stefan Lundberg . 2019 . PYCIPEDIA : Supporting Local and Remote Collaboration between Social Workers . . In CSCW Companion . 195 – 200 . [ 88 ] Lara Groves , Aidan Peppin , Andrew Strait , and Jenny Brennan . 2023 . Going public : the role of public participation approaches in commercial AI labs . In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Trans - parency . 1162 – 1173 . [ 89 ] Hongyan Gu , Jingbin Huang , Lauren Hung , and Xiang ’Anthony’ Chen . [ n . d . ] . Lessons Learned from Designing an AI - Enabled Diagnosis Tool for Pathologists . 5 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 10 : 1 – 10 : 25 . Issue CSCW1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449084 [ 90 ] AaronHalfakerandRStuartGeiger . 2020 . Ores : Loweringbarrierswithparticipa - torymachinelearninginwikipedia . ProceedingsoftheACMonHuman - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 37 . [ 91 ] Perttu Hämäläinen , Mikke Tavast , and Anton Kunnari . 2023 . Evaluating large language models in generating synthetic hci research data : a case study . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 19 . [ 92 ] AlexHannaandTinaMPark . 2020 . AgainstScale : ProvocationsandResistances to Scale Thinking . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2010 . 08850 ( 2020 ) . [ 93 ] ChristinaHarrington , SheenaErete , andAnneMariePiper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 94 ] Gillian R Hayes . 2014 . Knowing by doing : action research as an approach to HCI . In Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer , 49 – 68 . [ 95 ] Sara Heitlinger , Lara Houston , Alex Taylor , and Ruth Catlow . 2021 . Algorithmic Food Justice : Co - Designing More - than - Human Blockchain Futures for the Food Commons . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Number 305 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 17 . The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445655 [ 96 ] Nico Herbig , Santanu Pal , Josef van Genabith , and Antonio Krüger . 2019 . Multi - Modal Approaches for Post - Editing Machine Translation . In Proceedings of the 2019CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300461 [ 97 ] Tom Hitron , Yoav Orlev , Iddo Wald , Ariel Shamir , Hadas Erel , and Oren Zuck - erman . 2019 . Can children understand machine learning concepts ? The effect of uncovering black boxes . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 11 . [ 98 ] Zoë Hitzig . 2020 . The normative gap : mechanism design and ideal theories of justice . Economics & Philosophy 36 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 407 – 434 . [ 99 ] Anna Lauren Hoffmann . 2020 . Terms of inclusion : Data , discourse , violence . new media & society ( 2020 ) , 1461444820958725 . [ 100 ] Stefan Holmlid . 2012 . Participative ; co - operative ; emancipatory : From participa - tory design to service design . In Conference Proceedings ServDes . 2009 ; DeThink - ing Service ; ReThinking Design ; Oslo Norway 24 - 26 November 2009 . Linköping University Electronic Press , 105 – 118 . [ 101 ] Naja Holten Møller , Irina Shklovski , and Thomas T Hildebrandt . 2020 . Shifting concepts of value : Designing algorithmic decision - support systems for pub - lic services . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society . 1 – 12 . [ 102 ] Karen Holtzblatt and Hugh Beyer . 1997 . Contextual design : defining customer - centered systems . Elsevier . [ 103 ] Dirk Hovy , Taylor Berg - Kirkpatrick , Ashish Vaswani , and Eduard Hovy . 2013 . Learning whom to trust with MACE . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies . 1120 – 1130 . [ 104 ] Ada Lovelace Institute . 2021 . Participatory data stewardship . ( 2021 ) . https : / / www . adalovelaceinstitute . org / report / participatory - data - stewardship / [ 105 ] Modassir Iqbal , Katie Shilton , Mahmoud F . Sayed , Douglas Oard , Jonah Lynn Rivera , and William Cox . [ n . d . ] . Search with Discretion : Value Sensitive Design of Training Data for Information Retrieval . 5 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 1 – 20 . Issue CSCW1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449207 [ 106 ] Maia Jacobs , Jeffrey He , Melanie F . Pradier , Barbara Lam , Andrew C . Ahn , Thomas H . McCoy , Roy H . Perlis , Finale Doshi - Velez , and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2021 . Designing AI for Trust and Collaboration in Time - Constrained Medical Decisions : A Sociotechnical Lens . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Number 659 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 14 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445385 [ 107 ] Liu Jiang , Shixia Liu , and Changjian Chen . 2019 . Recent research advances on interactive machine learning . Journal of Visualization 22 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 401 – 417 . [ 108 ] AnsonKahng , MinKyungLee , RiteshNoothigattu , ArielProcaccia , andChristos - Alexandros Psomas . 2019 . Statistical foundations of virtual democracy . In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR , 3173 – 3182 . [ 109 ] Simon Katan , Mick Grierson , and Rebecca Fiebrink . 2015 . Using Interactive Machine Learning to Support Interface Development Through Workshops with Disabled People . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 251 – 254 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702474 [ 110 ] Michael Katell , Meg Young , Dharma Dailey , Bernease Herman , Vivian Guetler , AaronTam , CorinneBintz , DaniellaRaz , andP . M . Krafft . 2020 . TowardSituated Interventions for Algorithmic Equity : Lessons from the Field . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency ( Barcelona , Spain ) ( FAT * ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 45 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3351095 . 3372874 [ 111 ] Harmanpreet Kaur , Eytan Adar , Eric Gilbert , and Cliff Lampe . 2022 . Sensible AI : Re - imagining interpretability and explainability using sensemaking theory . In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 702 – 714 . [ 112 ] JasmineKaur , RishabhDevgon , andDhairyaChaudhary . [ n . d . ] . WorkofFiction : Using Speculative Design to Deliberate on the Future of Hiring . In Companion Publication of the 2022 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( New York , NY , USA , 2022 - 11 - 08 ) ( CSCW’22 Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 23 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3500868 . 3559442 [ 113 ] Claire Kayacik , Sherol Chen , Signe Noerly , Jess Holbrook , Adam Roberts , and Douglas Eck . 2019 . Identifying the intersections : User experience + research scientist collaboration in a generative machine learning interface . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 114 ] William R . Kearns , Neha Kaura , Myra Divina , Cuong Vo , Dong Si , Teresa Ward , andWeichaoYuwen . 2020 . AWizard - of - OzInterfaceandPersona - BasedMethod - ology for Collecting Health Counseling Dialog . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3382902 [ 115 ] Christopher Kelty . 2016 . Too Much Democracy in All the Wrong Places : Toward a Grammar of Participation . Current Anthropology 58 ( 12 2016 ) , S000 – S000 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 688705 [ 116 ] Maaike Kleinsmann and Rianne Valkenburg . 2008 . Barriers and enablers for creating shared understanding in co - design projects . Design Studies 29 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 369 – 386 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2008 . 03 . 003 [ 117 ] Tomoko Komatsu , Marisela Gutierrez Lopez , Stephann Makri , Colin Porlezza , Glenda Cooper , Andrew MacFarlane , and Sondess Missaoui . [ n . d . ] . AI should embody our values : Investigating journalistic values to inform AI technol - ogy design . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( New York , NY , USA , 2020 - 10 - 26 ) ( NordiCHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420105 [ 118 ] P . M . Krafft , Meg Young , Michael Katell , Jennifer E . Lee , Shankar Narayan , Micah Epstein , Dharma Dailey , Bernease Herman , Aaron Tam , Vivian Guetler , Corinne Bintz , Daniella Raz , Pa Ousman Jobe , Franziska Putz , Brian Robick , and Bissan Barghouti . 2021 . An Action - Oriented AI Policy Toolkit for Technology Audits by Community Advocates and Activists . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference onFairness , Accountability , and Transparency ( Virtual Event , Canada ) ( FAccT’21 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 772 – 781 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3442188 . 3445938 [ 119 ] Kavita Krishnaswamy . 2017 . Participatory design : repositioning , transferring , and personal care robots . In Proceedings of the companion of the 2017 acm / ieee international conference on human - robot interaction . 351 – 352 . [ 120 ] Kavita Krishnaswamy , Srinivas Moorthy , and Tim Oates . 2017 . Preliminary Sur - vey Analysis in Participatory Design : Repositioning , Transferring , and Personal CareRobots . In ProceedingsoftheCompanionofthe2017ACM / IEEEInternational Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 171 – 172 . [ 121 ] Bogdan Kulynych , David Madras , Smitha Milli , Inioluwa Deborah Raji , Angela Zhou , and Richard Zemel . 2020 . Participatory Approaches to Machine Learning . International Conference on Machine Learning Workshop . [ 122 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CSCW ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1348 – 1358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 123 ] Yann LeCun , Yoshua Bengio , and Geoffrey Hinton . 2015 . Deep learning . nature 521 , 7553 ( 2015 ) , 436 – 444 . [ 124 ] Hee Rin Lee , Selma Šabanović , Wan - Ling Chang , Shinichi Nagata , Jennifer Piatt , Casey Bennett , and David Hakken . 2017 . Steps toward participatory design of social robots : mutual learning with older adults with depression . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM / IEEE international conference on human - robot interaction . 244 – 253 . [ 125 ] Min Hun Lee , Daniel P . Siewiorek , Asim Smailagic , Alexandre Bernardino , and Sergi Bermúdez i Badia . [ n . d . ] . Co - Design and Evaluation of an Intelligent DecisionSupportSystemforStrokeRehabilitationAssessment . 4 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 156 : 1 – 156 : 27 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3415227 [ 126 ] Min Kyung Lee , Daniel Kusbit , Anson Kahng , Ji Tae Kim , Xinran Yuan , Allissa Chan , DanielSee , RiteshNoothigattu , SiheonLee , AlexandrosPsomas , etal . 2019 . WeBuildAI : Participatory framework for algorithmic governance . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 35 . [ 127 ] Min Kyung Lee , Ishan Nigam , Angie Zhang , Joel Afriyie , Zhizhen Qin , and Sicun Gao . 2021 . Participatory Algorithmic Management : Elicitation Methods for Worker Well - Being Models . In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI / ACM Conference onAI , Ethics , andSociety ( NewYork , NY , USA , 2021 - 07 - 21 ) ( AIES’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 715 – 726 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461702 . 3462628 [ 128 ] Michael Lempert and E Summerson Carr . 2016 . Scale : Discourse and dimensions of social life . University of California Press . [ 129 ] Fei - Fei Li . 2021 . America’s global leadership in human - centered AI can’t come from industry alone . https : / / thehill . com / opinion / technology / 561638 - americas - global - leadership - in - human - centered - ai - cant - come - from - industry [ 130 ] Xingjun Li , Yuanxin Wang , Hong Wang , Yang Wang , and Jian Zhao . 2021 . NBSearch : SemanticSearchandVisualExplorationofComputationalNotebooks . In Proceedingsofthe2021CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . 1 – 14 . [ 131 ] QVeraLiao , DanielGruen , andSarahMiller . 2020 . QuestioningtheAI : informing design practices for explainable AI user experiences . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 15 . [ 132 ] Ann Light and Rosemary Luckin . 2008 . Designing for social justice : people , technology , learning . ( 2008 ) . [ 133 ] Phoebe Lin and Jessica Van Brummelen . 2021 . Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Number 239 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 12 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445377 [ 134 ] Walter Lippmann . 1993 . The phantom public . Transaction Publishers . EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . [ 135 ] Gabrielle Kaili - May Liu . 2023 . Perspectives on the Social Impacts of Reinforce - ment Learning with Human Feedback . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2303 . 02891 ( 2023 ) . [ 136 ] Daria Loi , Thomas Lodato , Christine T Wolf , Raphael Arar , and Jeanette Blomberg . 2018 . PD manifesto for AI futures . In Proceedings of the 15th Par - ticipatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 . 1 – 4 . [ 137 ] Daria Loi , Christine T Wolf , Jeanette L Blomberg , Raphael Arar , and Margot Brereton . 2019 . Co - designingAIfutures : IntegratingAIethics , socialcomputing , anddesign . In CompanionPublicationofthe2019onDesigningInteractiveSystems Conference 2019 Companion . 381 – 384 . [ 138 ] Matti Luhtala , Santeri Saarinen , Laura Virkki , Johanna Lappi - Ramula , Hans Hokka , Helen Tran , Matti Savolainen , Ilkka Heinonen , Sami Kanerva , Juha Rajala , et al . 2018 . Proactive Rescuework by Enhancing Situational Awareness : Modeling Resources , Services and People . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 139 ] C . B Macpherson . 1973 . Democratic theory : essays in retrieval . Clarendon Press . OCLC : 606090 . [ 140 ] Michael Madaio , Lisa Egede , Hariharan Subramonyam , Jennifer Wort - man Vaughan , and Hanna Wallach . 2022 . Assessing the Fairness of AI Systems : AI Practitioners’ Processes , Challenges , and Needs for Support . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 26 . [ 141 ] Peter Mambrey , Gloria Mark , and Uta Pankoke - Babatz . 1998 . User advocacy in participatory design : Designers’ experiences with a new communication channel . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 7 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 291 – 313 . [ 142 ] Ji - Ye Mao , Karel Vredenburg , Paul W Smith , and Tom Carey . 2005 . The state of user - centered design practice . Commun . ACM 48 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 105 – 109 . [ 143 ] Donald Martin Jr , Vinodkumar Prabhakaran , Jill Kuhlberg , Andrew Smart , and William S Isaac . 2020 . Participatory problem formulation for fairer ma - chine learning through community based system dynamics . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2005 . 07572 ( 2020 ) . [ 144 ] Alexandra Mateescu and Madeleine Clare Elish . 2019 . AI in context : the labor of integrating new technologies . Data & Society 30 ( 2019 ) . [ 145 ] Oussama Metatla , Alison Oldfield , Taimur Ahmed , Antonis Vafeas , and Sunny Miglani . 2019 . Voice user interfaces in schools : Co - designing for inclusion with visually - impaired and sighted pupils . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 146 ] Milagros Miceli and Julian Posada . 2022 . The Data - Production Dispositif . Pro - ceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 6 , CSCW2 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 37 . [ 147 ] Milagros Miceli , Martin Schuessler , and Tianling Yang . 2020 . Between subjec - tivity and imposition : Power dynamics in data annotation for computer vision . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 148 ] Milagros Miceli , Tianling Yang , Adriana Alvarado Garcia , Julian Posada , Sonja Mei Wang , Marc Pohl , and Alex Hanna . [ n . d . ] . Documenting Data Production Processes : A Participatory Approach for Data Work . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 510 : 1 – 510 : 34 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555623 [ 149 ] HenrikMucha , DennisMevißen , SebastianRobert , RicardaJacobi , KirstenMeyer , Winfried Heusler , and Daniel Arztmann . 2020 . Co - Design Futures for AI and Space : A Workbook Sprint . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375203 [ 150 ] Michael J . Muller . 2002 . Participatory Design : The Third Space in HCI . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , USA , 1051 – 1068 . [ 151 ] Michael J Muller . 2002 . Participatory design : the third space in HCI . The hu - mancomputer interaction handbook : fundamentals , evolving technologies and emerging applications . [ 152 ] Michael J Muller and Allison Druin . 2012 . Participatory design : the third space in human – computer interaction . CRC Press , 1125 – 1153 . [ 153 ] Michael J Muller and Sarah Kuhn . 1993 . Participatory design . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 ( 1993 ) , 24 – 28 . [ 154 ] Dylan Mulvin . 2021 . Proxies : The cultural work of standing in . MIT Press . [ 155 ] Yuri Nakao and Yusuke Sugano . [ n . d . ] . Use of Machine Learning by Non - Expert DHH People : Technological Understanding and Sound Perception . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( Tallinn Estonia , 2020 - 10 - 25 ) . ACM , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420157 [ 156 ] Wilhelmina Nekoto , Vukosi Marivate , Tshinondiwa Matsila , Timi Fasubaa , Tajudeen Kolawole , Taiwo Fagbohungbe , Solomon Oluwole Akinola , Sham - suddeen Hassan Muhammad , Salomon Kabongo , Salomey Osei , et al . 2020 . Participatory research for low - resourced machine translation : A case study in african languages . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2010 . 02353 ( 2020 ) . [ 157 ] IsabelNeto , HugoNicolau , andAnaPaiva . 2021 . CommunityBasedRobotDesign for Classrooms with Mixed Visual Abilities Children . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . Number31 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 12 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445135 [ 158 ] Laura J Neumann and Susan Leigh Star . 1996 . Making infrastructure : The dream of a common language . In Participatory Design Conference , Vol . 4 . 231 – 240 . [ 159 ] Ritesh Noothigattu , Snehalkumar Gaikwad , Edmond Awad , Sohan Dsouza , Iyad Rahwan , Pradeep Ravikumar , and Ariel Procaccia . 2018 . A voting - based system for ethical decision making . In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 32 . [ 160 ] PerOlaÖberg . 2016 . Deliberation . In Handbookontheoriesofgovernance . Edward Elgar Publishing . [ 161 ] Judith S Olson and Wendy A Kellogg . 2014 . Ways of Knowing in HCI . Vol . 2 . Springer . [ 162 ] OpenAI . 2023 . https : / / openai . com / blog / how - should - ai - systems - behave [ 163 ] David Owen and Graham Smith . 2015 . Survey article : Deliberation , democracy , and the systemic turn . Journal of Political Philosophy 23 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 213 – 234 . [ 164 ] Victoria Palacin , Matti Nelimarkka , Pedro Reynolds - Cuéllar , and Christoph Becker . 2020 . The design of pseudo - participation . In Proceedings of the 16th ParticipatoryDesignConference2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume2 . 40 – 44 . [ 165 ] Lawrence A Palinkas , Sarah M Horwitz , Carla A Green , Jennifer P Wisdom , Naihua Duan , and Kimberly Hoagwood . 2015 . Purposeful sampling for quali - tative data collection and analysis in mixed method implementation research . Administration and policy in mental health and mental health services research 42 ( 2015 ) , 533 – 544 . [ 166 ] Hyanghee Park , Daehwan Ahn , Kartik Hosanagar , and Joonhwan Lee . 2022 . Designing Fair AI in Human Resource Management : Understanding Tensions Surrounding Algorithmic Evaluation and Envisioning Stakeholder - Centered Solutions . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 22 . [ 167 ] Joon Sung Park , Karrie Karahalios , Niloufar Salehi , and Motahhare Eslami . [ n . d . ] . Power Dynamics and Value Conflicts in Designing and Maintaining Socio - Technical Algorithmic Processes . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 110 : 1 – 110 : 21 . Issue CSCW1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3512957 [ 168 ] Sunjeong Park and Youn - kyung Lim . 2020 . Investigating User Expectations on the Roles of Family - shared AI Speakers . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376450 [ 169 ] Desmond U Patton , William R Frey , Kyle A McGregor , Fei - Tzin Lee , Kathleen McKeown , and Emanuel Moss . 2020 . Contextual analysis of social media : The promise and challenge of eliciting context in social media posts with natural language processing . In Proceedings of the AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society . 337 – 342 . [ 170 ] Jens Pedersen . 2016 . War and peace in codesign . CoDesign 12 ( 2016 ) , 171 – 184 . [ 171 ] Ismael Peña - López et al . 2020 . Innovative citizen participation and new demo - cratic institutions : Catching the deliberative wave . ( 2020 ) . [ 172 ] Scott Pobiner and Timothy Murphy . 2018 . Participatory approaches to ma - chine learning . https : / / www2 . deloitte . com / us / en / insights / focus / cognitive - technologies / participatory - design - artificial - intelligence . html [ 173 ] FrancescaPolletta . 2012 . Freedomisanendlessmeeting . In FreedomIsanEndless Meeting . University of Chicago Press . [ 174 ] AarePuussaar , KyleMontague , SeanPeacock , ThomasNappey , RobertAnderson , Jennine Jonczyk , Peter Wright , and Philip James . [ n . d . ] . SenseMyStreet : Sensor CommissioningToolkitforCommunities . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 324 : 1 – 324 : 26 . IssueCSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555215 [ 175 ] Organizers Of Queerinai , Anaelia Ovalle , Arjun Subramonian , Ashwin Singh , Claas Voelcker , Danica J Sutherland , Davide Locatelli , Eva Breznik , Filip Klu - bicka , Hang Yuan , et al . 2023 . Queer In AI : A Case Study in Community - Led Participatory AI . In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness , Ac - countability , and Transparency . 1882 – 1895 . [ 176 ] Lauge Baungaard Rasmussen . 2004 . Action research—Scandinavian experiences . AI & SOCIETY 18 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 21 – 43 . [ 177 ] DaniellaRaz , CorinneBintz , VivianGuetler , AaronTam , MichaelKatell , Dharma Dailey , Bernease Herman , PM Krafft , and Meg Young . 2021 . Face Mis - ID : An Interactive Pedagogical Tool Demonstrating Disparate Accuracy Rates in Facial Recognition . In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society . 895 – 904 . [ 178 ] People + AIResearch . 2020 . Boundaryobjectsforparticipatorymachinelearning : PAIR Symposium 2020 Recap . https : / / medium . com / people - ai - research / pair - symposium - 2020 - recap - b7f206583e42 [ 179 ] People + AI Research . 2021 . PAIR @ Chi 2021 . https : / / medium . com / people - ai - research / pair - chi - 2021 - 410323929162 [ 180 ] Samantha Robertson and Niloufar Salehi . 2020 . What If I Don’t Like Any Of The Choices ? The Limits of Preference Elicitation for Participatory Algorithm Design . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 06718 ( 2020 ) . [ 181 ] Emma J Rose and Elin A Björling . 2017 . Designing for engagement : using par - ticipatory design to develop a social robot to measure teen stress . In Proceedings of the 35th ACM International Conference on the Design of Communication . 1 – 10 . [ 182 ] JoannaSaad - Sulonen , AmaliaDeGötzen , NicolaMorelli , andLucaSimeone . 2020 . Service design and participatory design : time to join forces ? . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 . 76 – 81 . [ 183 ] SelmaŠabanović , Wan - LingChang , CaseyCBennett , JenniferAPiatt , andDavid Hakken . 2015 . A robot of my own : participatory design of socially assistive robots for independently living older adults diagnosed with depression . In The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA International conference on human aspects of it for the aged population . Springer , 104 – 114 . [ 184 ] Debjani Saha , Candice Schumann , Duncan Mcelfresh , John Dickerson , Michelle Mazurek , and Michael Tschantz . 2020 . Measuring non - expert comprehension of machine learning fairness metrics . In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR , 8377 – 8387 . [ 185 ] Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . CoDesign 4 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701875068 [ 186 ] Devansh Saxena , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Pamela Wisniewski , and Shion Guha . 2021 . A Framework of High - Stakes Algorithmic Decision - Making for the Pub - lic Sector Developed through a Case Study of Child - Welfare . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2107 . 03487 ( 2021 ) . [ 187 ] Devansh Saxena and Shion Guha . 2020 . Conducting Participatory Design to Improve Algorithms in Public Services : Lessons and Challenges . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 383 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3406865 . 3418331 [ 188 ] Laura Schelenz , Ivano Bison , Matteo Busso , Amalia de Götzen , Daniel Gatica - Perez , FaustoGiunchiglia , LakmalMeegahapola , andSalvadorRuiz - Correa . 2021 . The Theory , Practice , and Ethical Challenges of Designing a Diversity - Aware PlatformforSocialRelations . In Proceedingsofthe2021AAAI / ACMConferenceon AI , Ethics , and Society ( New York , NY , USA , 2021 - 07 - 21 ) ( AIES ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 905 – 915 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461702 . 3462595 [ 189 ] Daniel Schiff , Bogdana Rakova , Aladdin Ayesh , Anat Fanti , and Michael Lennon . 2020 . Principles to practices for responsible AI : closing the gap . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2006 . 04707 ( 2020 ) . [ 190 ] Kristen M Scott , Sonja Mei Wang , Milagros Miceli , Pieter Delobelle , Karolina Sztandar - Sztanderska , and Bettina Berendt . 2022 . Algorithmic Tools in Public Employment Services : Towards a Jobseeker - Centric Perspective . In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 2138 – 2148 . [ 191 ] Hugo Scurto , Baptiste Caramiaux , and Frederic Bevilacqua . 2021 . Prototyping Machine Learning Through Diffractive Art Practice . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( New York , NY , USA , 2021 - 06 - 28 ) ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 2013 – 2025 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462163 [ 192 ] Nick Seaver . 2021 . Care and scale : decorrelative ethics in algorithmic recom - mendation . Cultural Anthropology 36 , 3 ( 2021 ) , 509 – 537 . [ 193 ] Elizabeth Seger , Aviv Ovadya , Ben Garfinkel , Divya Siddarth , and Allan Dafoe . 2023 . Democratising AI : Multiple Meanings , Goals , and Methods . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2303 . 12642 ( 2023 ) . [ 194 ] Cathrine Seidelin , Yvonne Dittrich , and Erik Grönvall . 2020 . Co - designing data experiments : Domain experts’ exploration and experimentation with self - selected data sources . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society . 1 – 11 . [ 195 ] Amartya Sen . 1977 . Social choice theory : A re - examination . Econometrica : journal of the Econometric Society ( 1977 ) , 53 – 89 . [ 196 ] Amartya Sen . 1986 . Social choice theory . Handbook of mathematical economics 3 ( 1986 ) , 1073 – 1181 . [ 197 ] Mark P Sendak , William Ratliff , Dina Sarro , Elizabeth Alderton , Joseph Futoma , Michael Gao , Marshall Nichols , Mike Revoir , Faraz Yashar , Corinne Miller , et al . 2020 . Real - world integration of a sepsis deep learning technology into routine clinicalcare : implementationstudy . JMIRmedicalinformatics 8 , 7 ( 2020 ) , e15182 . [ 198 ] HongShen , WesleyHDeng , AditiChattopadhyay , ZhiweiStevenWu , XuWang , and Haiyi Zhu . 2021 . Value Cards : An Educational Toolkit for Teaching Social Impacts of Machine Learning through Deliberation . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 850 – 861 . [ 199 ] Hong Shen , Haojian Jin , Ángel Alexander Cabrera , Adam Perer , Haiyi Zhu , and Jason I Hong . 2020 . Designing Alternative Representations of Confusion Matri - ces to Support Non - Expert Public Understanding of Algorithm Performance . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 200 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2021 . Human - Centered AI . Issues in Science and Technology 37 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 56 – 61 . [ 201 ] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson . 2012 . Routledge international handbook of participatory design . Routledge . [ 202 ] Zoe Skinner , Stacey Brown , and Greg Walsh . 2020 . Children of Color’s Percep - tions of Fairness in AI : An Exploration of Equitable and Inclusive Co - Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 203 ] MonaSloane , EmanuelMoss , OlaitanAwomolo , andLauraForlano . 2020 . Partic - ipation is not a design fix for machine learning . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 02423 ( 2020 ) . [ 204 ] C Estelle Smith , Bowen Yu , Anjali Srivastava , Aaron Halfaker , Loren Terveen , and Haiyi Zhu . 2020 . Keeping community in the loop : Understanding wikipedia stakeholder values for machine learning - based systems . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . [ 205 ] Logan Stapleton , Min Hun Lee , Diana Qing , Marya Wright , Alexandra Choulde - chova , Ken Holstein , Zhiwei Steven Wu , and Haiyi Zhu . 2022 . Imagining new futures beyond predictive systems in child welfare : A qualitative study with impacted stakeholders . In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 1162 – 1177 . [ 206 ] Marc Steen . 2013 . Co - Design as a Process of Joint Inquiry and Imagination . Design Issues 29 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 16 – 28 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 24266991 [ 207 ] Elias Storms , Oscar Alvarado , and Luciana Monteiro - Krebs . [ n . d . ] . ’Trans - parency is Meant for Control’ and Vice Versa : Learning from Co - designing and Evaluating Algorithmic News Recommenders . 6 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 405 : 1 – 405 : 24 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555130 [ 208 ] Hariharan Subramonyam , Colleen Seifert , and Eytan Adar . 2021 . Towards A Process Model for Co - Creating AI Experiences . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 . Association for Computing Machinery , 1529 – 1543 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462012 [ 209 ] HariniSuresh , RajivMovva , AmeliaLeeDogan , RahulBhargava , IsadoraCruxen , Angeles Martinez Cuba , Guilia Taurino , Wonyoung So , and Catherine D’Ignazio . 2022 . Towards Intersectional Feminist and Participatory ML : A Case Study in Supporting Feminicide Counterdata Collection . In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency . 667 – 678 . [ 210 ] Giovanni Maria Troiano , Matthew Wood , and Casper Harteveld . 2020 . " And This , Kids , Is How I Met Your Mother " : Consumerist , Mundane , and Uncanny Futures with Sex Robots . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 17 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376598 [ 211 ] Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing . 2012 . On NonscalabilityThe Living World Is Not Amenable to Precision - Nested Scales . Common Knowledge 18 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 505 – 524 . [ 212 ] Kim M Unertl , Chris L Schaefbauer , Terrance R Campbell , Charles Senteio , Katie A Siek , Suzanne Bakken , and Tiffany C Veinot . 2016 . Integrating community - based participatory research and informatics approaches to im - prove the engagement and health of underserved populations . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 23 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 60 – 73 . [ 213 ] Kush Varshney , Tina Park , Inioluwa Deborah Raji , Gaurush Hiranandani , Narasimhan Harikrishna , Oluwasanmi Koyejo , Brianna Richardson , and Min Kyung Lee . 2021 . Participatory Specification of Trustworthy Machine Learning . https : / / www . abstractsonline . com / pp8 / # ! / 10390 / session / 446 [ 214 ] Daryoush Vaziri , David Golchinfar , Gunnar Stevens , and Dirk Schreiber . [ n . d . ] . Exploring Future Work - Co - Designing a Human - robot Collaboration Envi - ronment for Service Domains . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing In - teractive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , 153 – 164 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395483 [ 215 ] Salomé Viljoen , Jake Goldenfein , and Lee McGuigan . 2021 . Design choices : Mechanism design and platform capitalism . Big Data & Society 8 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 20539517211034312 . [ 216 ] John Vines , Rachel Clarke , Peter Wright , John McCarthy , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Configuring Participation : On How We Involve People in Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 429 – 438 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470716 [ 217 ] John Vines , Peter C . Wright , David Silver , Maggie Winchcombe , and Patrick Olivier . 2015 . Authenticity , Relatability and Collaborative Approaches to Shar - ing Knowledge about Assistive Living Technology . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CSCW ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 82 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675222 [ 218 ] Nina B Wallerstein and Bonnie Duran . 2006 . Using community - based participa - tory research to address health disparities . Health promotion practice 7 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 312 – 323 . [ 219 ] Greg Walsh and Eric Wronsky . 2019 . AI + Co - Design : Developing a Novel Computer - Supported Approach to Inclusive Design . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Com - puting ( Austin , TX , USA ) ( CSCW ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 408 – 412 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3359456 [ 220 ] ChristineWolfandJeanetteBlomberg . [ n . d . ] . EvaluatingthePromiseofHuman - Algorithm Collaborations in Everyday Work Practices . 3 ( [ n . d . ] ) , 143 : 1 – 143 : 23 . Issue CSCW . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359245 [ 221 ] Christine T . Wolf , Haiyi Zhu , Julia Bullard , Min Kyung Lee , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2018 . The Changing Contours of " Participation " in Data - Driven , Algorithmic Ecosystems : Challenges , Tactics , and an Agenda . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Jersey City , NJ , USA ) ( CSCW ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 377 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3272973 . 3273005 [ 222 ] Allison Woodruff , Sarah E Fox , Steven Rousso - Schindler , and Jeffrey Warshaw . 2018 . A qualitative exploration of perceptions of algorithmic fairness . In Pro - ceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 14 . [ 223 ] Julia Woodward , Zari McFadden , Nicole Shiver , Amir Ben - hayon , Jason C Yip , andLisaAnthony . 2018 . Usingco - designtoexaminehowchildrenconceptualize intelligentinterfaces . In Proceedingsofthe2018CHIConferenceonHumanFactors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . [ 224 ] Deepika Yadav , Prerna Malik , Kirti Dabas , and Pushpendra Singh . 2019 . Feed - pal : Understanding Opportunities for Chatbots in Breastfeeding Education of Women in India . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 170 ( nov 2019 ) , 30 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359272 [ 225 ] Meg Young , Lassana Magassa , and Batya Friedman . 2019 . Toward inclusive tech policy design : a method for underrepresented voices to strengthen tech policy documents . Ethics and Information Technology 21 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 89 – 103 . [ 226 ] Bowen Yu , Ye Yuan , Loren Terveen , Zhiwei Steven Wu , Jodi Forlizzi , and Haiyi Zhu . 2020 . Keeping designers in the loop : Communicating inherent algorithmic trade - offs across multiple objectives . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1245 – 1257 . [ 227 ] AngieZhang , AlexanderBoltz , ChunWeiWang , andMinKyungLee . 2022 . Algo - rithmicmanagementreimaginedforworkersandbyworkers : Centeringworker well - being in gig work . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 20 . [ 228 ] Yunfeng Zhang , Rachel Bellamy , and Kush Varshney . 2020 . Joint optimization of AI fairness and utility : A human - centered approach . In Proceedings of the AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society . 400 – 406 . [ 229 ] Zheng Zhang , Ying Xu , Yanhao Wang , Bingsheng Yao , Daniel Ritchie , Tong - shuang Wu , Mo Yu , Dakuo Wang , and Toby Jia - Jun Li . 2022 . StoryBuddy : A Human - AI Collaborative Chatbot for Parent - Child Interactive Storytelling with Flexible Parental Involvement . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 21 . The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA A CORPUS DESCRIPTION Paper Sector Domain Purpose Methods Stakeholder Frauenberger et al . ( 2012 ) [ 77 ] Academia Education Scaffold the development of social skills for children Design sessions and workshops Children with and without Autism Spectrum Conditions Duarte et al . ( 2014 ) [ 66 ] Academia Assistive Living Assist therapists during interventions through gesture recognition Storytelling Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder Šabanović et al . ( 2015 ) [ 183 ] Academia Assistive Living Provide companionship and therapeutic value Design sessions and workshops Independently living older adults experiencingco - occurring chronic mental and physical illness Katan et al . ( 2015 ) [ 109 ] Academia Assistive Living Foster musical creativity Design sessions and workshops Musicians with learning and physical disabilities Vines et al . ( 2015 ) [ 217 ] Academia Assistive Living Sustain peer - to - peer knowledge sharing platform Design sessions and workshops Older people Azenkot et al . ( 2016 ) [ 14 ] Academia Assistive Living Interact with and guide a blind person through a building in an effective and socially acceptable way Design sessions and workshops People with visual impairment Krishnaswamy ( 2017 ) [ 119 ] Academia Assistive Living Increase independence of targeted stakeholder Surveys , Prototype Evaluation People with physical disabilities Krishnaswamy , Moorthy , and Oates ( 2017 ) [ 120 ] Academia Assistive Living Increase independence of targeted stakeholder Surveys , Prototype Evaluation People with reduced motor functionality Lee et al . ( 2017 ) [ 124 ] Academia Assistive Living Establish social relations with people via robots Interviews , Design sessions and workshops Older adults , Clinical and caregiving staff Rose and Björling ( 2017 ) [ 181 ] Academia Assistive Living Measure stress Design sessions and workshops , Prototype Evaluation Teens Noothigattu et al . ( 2018 ) [ 159 ] Academia Autonomous Vehicle Automate ethical decisions Crowdsourcepreferences None specified Luhtala et al . ( 2018 ) [ 138 ] Government Public Services Predictive rescue work service Ethnography , Design sessions and workshops , Wizard of Oz , Prototype Evaluation Personnel of rescue departments ( firefighters , operators , etc . ) Woodruff et al . ( 2018 ) [ 222 ] Industry Not Domain - Specific Explore how traditionally marginalized populations feel about algorithmic fairness Design sessions and workshops , Interviews Black or African American , Hispanic or Latinx , and low socioeconomic status participants in the United States Woodward et al . ( 2018 ) [ 223 ] Academia Assistive Living Improve recognition and accuracy Design sessions and workshops Older adults with depression , Therapists , Case workers Chandrasekharan et al . ( 2019 ) [ 47 ] Academia Online Moderation Automate decisions for content moderation Prototype Evaluation , Interviews Moderators of online communities EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . Paper Sector Domain Purpose Methods Stakeholder Herbig et al . ( 2019 ) [ 96 ] Academia Translation Translate text Elicitation Study , Interviews ProfessionalTranslators Lee et al . ( 2019 ) [ 126 ] Academia Social Welfare Allocate resources Preference Aggregation Donors , Volunteers , Recipientorganizations , and Nonprofitorganizations Metatla , Oldfield , and Ahmed ( 2019 ) [ 145 ] Academia Education Support inclusive education Focus Groups , Bodystorming , Design sessions and workshops Pupils with visual impairments Hitron et al . ( 2019 ) [ 97 ] Academia Education Recognize gestures to support learning Prototype Evaluation , Controlled Experiment Children Kayacik et al . ( 2019 ) [ 113 ] Industry Arts & Entertainment Foster creativity for musicians Interviews , Design sessions and workshops , Prototype Evaluation Musicians Bhargava et al . ( 2019 ) [ 25 ] Academia Online Moderation Filtering Content Survey , Prototype Evaluation Social media users Grönvall and Lundberg ( 2019 ) [ 87 ] Academia Public Services Support parents with intellectual disabilities taking care of their small children Focus Groups , Design sessions and workshops Social workers Walsh and Wronsky ( 2019 ) [ 219 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Create more inclusive co - design experiences for marginalized populations Wizard of Oz , Prototype Evaluation Marginalizedpopulations Brown et al . ( 2019 ) [ 41 ] Government Public Services Determine whether children should be placed in the child welfare system Design sessions and workshops Families involved in the child welfare system , Employees of child welfare agencies Yadav et al . ( 2019 ) [ 224 ] Academia Education Educate women in India on pregnancy - related issues Wizard of Oz Breastfeeding mothers from the slum areas of Delhi , India Møller , Shklovski , and Hildebrandt ( 2020 ) [ 101 ] Academia Public Services Support decision - making for job placement Design sessions and workshops Case workers Alfrink and Tur ( 2020 ) [ 4 ] Academia Urban Planning Make decisions for electric vehicle ( EV ) charge points Prototype Evaluation Electric vehicle drivers Candello et al . ( 2020 ) [ 45 ] Industry Education Teach children basic AI concepts Role - Playing , Design sessions and workshops Museum curators , guides , and educators Kearns et al . ( 2020 ) [ 114 ] Academia Healthcare Communicate health information Wizard of Oz , Design sessions and workshops Clinicians Scott et al . ( 2022 ) [ 190 ] Academia Public Services Support job counselors in assessing job seekers as well as resource allocation ( e . g . , skills training , unemployment benefits ) DesignSessions / Workshops Job seekers , practitioners Mucha et al . ( 2020 ) [ 149 ] Academia Multiple Domains Involve non - experts in complex technical discourses Workbook Sprint University students as non - experts The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Paper Sector Domain Purpose Methods Stakeholder Saxena and Guha ( 2020 ) [ 187 ] Academia Public Services Predict if a child needs state assistance Ethnography , Interviews Case workers in the Child - Welfare System Skinner , Brown , and Walsh ( 2020 ) [ 202 ] Academia Education Function as librarian in local libraries Design sessions and workshops Children of color in non - affluent neighborhoods of Baltimore City Smith et al . ( 2020 ) [ 204 ] Academia , Nonprofit Online Moderation Predict quality of edits Interviews Wikipedia editors Troiano , Wood , and Harteveld et al . ( 2020 ) [ 210 ] Academia Intimacy Foster sexual interactions with humans Story Completion Method ( SCM ) Communities of fluent English writers ( e . g . , " Fantasy Writers " on Reddit ) Yu et al . ( 2020 ) [ 226 ] Academia Criminal Justice Criminal defendants’ likelihood to re - offend Prototype Evaluation , Experimental Study , Interviews Criminal justice experts Georgiou et al . ( 2020 ) [ 82 ] Academia Assistive Living Support stroke survivors in the home environment Sketching , Demoing , Focus Groups Stroke survivors Halfaker and Geiger ( 2020 ) [ 90 ] Academia , Nonprofit Online Moderation Predict quality of edits Aggregate stakeholder inputs on the design of system specs Wikipedia editors Zhang , Bellamy , and Varshney ( 2020 ) [ 228 ] Industry Not Domain - Specific Support decision - making Preference Aggregation None specified Sendak et al . ( 2020 ) [ 197 ] Academia Healthcare Diagnose conditions Immerse project team in existing workflow , Accept project proposal from stakeholders Front - line clinical professionals Cheng et al . ( 2020 ) [ 50 ] Academia Public Services Predict child maltreatment Preference Aggregation Social workers , Parents Park and Lim ( 2020 ) [ 168 ] Academia Communication Foster family - oriented sociality Design sessions and workshops People in family units Vaziri et al . ( 2020 ) [ 214 ] Academia Service Operation Collaborate with humans for service work Design sessions and workshops Service operators Katell et al . ( 2020 ) [ 110 ] Academia Public Policy Re - center power with those most disparately affected by the harms of algorithmic systems Design sessions and workshops Non - profit organizations Lin and Van Brummelen ( 2021 ) [ 133 ] Academia Education Integrate AI into core curriculum to leverage learners’ interests Design sessions and workshops K - 12 teachers Neto , Nicolau , and Paiva ( 2021 ) [ 157 ] Academia Education / Assistive Living Foster collaborative learning for visually impaired children Contextual inquiries , Participant observation , Interviews Visually impaired children Jacobs et al . ( 2021 ) [ 106 ] Academia Healthcare Support antidepressant treatment decisionsa Interviews , Focus groups , Prototype evaluation Primary care physicians Heitlinger et al . ( 2021 ) [ 95 ] Academia Agriculture Foster decentralised non - extractive value exchange Role playing , Design sessions and workshops Urban agricultural communities Subramonyam , Seifert , and Adar ( 2021 ) [ 208 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Identify desirable AI characteristics Data probes AI designers and engineers EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Delgado et al . Paper Sector Domain Purpose Methods Stakeholder Scurto , Caramiaux , and Bevilacqua ( 2021 ) [ 191 ] Academia Arts & Entertainment Foster music performance and robotic art Art practices Musicians Raz et al . ( 2021 ) [ 177 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Demonstrate disparate accuracy rates in facial recognition Interactive demoing , Panel discussions , Community organizers Lee et al . ( 2021 ) [ 127 ] Academia Labor Relations Manage the workforce Preference aggregation Shift workers Schelenz et al . ( 2021 ) [ 188 ] Academia Online Moderation Foster diversity - aware social media platform Preference aggregation None specified Bozic Yams and Aranda Muñoz ( 2021 ) [ 35 ] Academia Labor Relations Augment employee creativity and support their well - being at work Art practices , Design sessions and workshops Professionals with non - technical background Li et al . ( 2021 ) [ 130 ] Academia Software Engineering Enable natural language search queries and intuitive visualizations for code search Brainstorming sessions , Interviews , Prototype Evaluation , Design sessions and workshops Experts in software engineering Flügge , Hildebrandt , and Møller ( 2021 ) [ 8 ] Government Employment Support decision - making for job placement Design sessions and workshops , Interviews Case workers Candello , Pichiliani , and Pinhanez ( 2021 ) [ 44 ] Industry Education Teach children basic AI concepts Role - Playing , Design sessions and workshops Museum curators , guides , and educators Saxena et al . ( 2021 ) [ 186 ] Academia Public Services Predict if a child needs state assistance Ethnography , Interviews Case workers in the Child - Welfare System Zhang et al . ( 2022 ) [ 229 ] Academia , Industry Education Create interactive storytelling experiences Interviews , Design Sessions / Workshops Parents , children Bäuerle et al . ( 2022 ) [ 18 ] Industry Not Domain - Specific Not System - Specific Interviews , Design Sessions / Workshops , Prototype Evaluation Machine learning practitioners Zhang et al . ( 2022 ) [ 227 ] Academia Labor Relations Manage , organize , coordinate , and evaluate workers DesignSessions / Workshops , Focus Groups Rideshare drivers Park et al . ( 2022 ) [ 166 ] Academia Labor Relations Evaluate employees’ work performance evaluation DesignSessions / Workshops Employees , employers / HR teams , AI / business experts Stapleton et al . ( 2022 ) [ 205 ] Academia Public Services Inform workers’ decision - making for child welfare DesignSessions / Workshops Those who have been impacted by the child welfare system , those who work in the system Suresh et al . ( 2022 ) [ 209 ] Academia , Nonprofit Activism Retrieve and filter media coverage of feminicide Prototype Evaluation , DesignSessions / Workshops , Focus Groups , Surveys Activists Miceli et al . ( 2022 ) [ 148 ] Academia , Nonprofit Not Domain - Specific Not System - Specific Interviews , Design Sessions / Workshops Data Workers Storms et al . ( 2022 ) [ 207 ] Academia Content Moderation Provide personalized content recommendation Prototype Evaluation , Design Sessions / Workshops News Audiences Wolf and Blomberg ( 2019 ) [ 220 ] Industry Computer - Assisted Cooperative Work Support solution design Ethnography IT Architects The Participatory Turn in AI Design EAAMO ’23 , October 30 – November 01 , 2023 , Boston , MA Paper Sector Domain Purpose Methods Stakeholder Park et al . ( 2022 ) [ 167 ] Academia CommunityEngagement Select volunteers for academic conferences Interviews Student Volunteers ( SV ) Chen et al . ( 2022 ) [ 49 ] Academia Content Moderation Provide personalized content recommendation Interviews Users and Practitioners Lee et al . ( 2020 ) [ 125 ] Academia Healthcare Identify salient features for stroke rehabilitation assessment Interviews , Prototype Evaluation Therapists Benjamin et al . ( 2022 ) [ 22 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Not System - Specific Prototype Evaluation , DesignSessions / Workshops Non - ML Experts Iqbal et al . ( 2021 ) [ 105 ] Academia Computer - Assisted Cooperative Work Retrieve information from email records Interviews , Test Collection Potential Donors of Personal Records Gu et al . ( 2021 ) [ 89 ] Academia Healthcare Diagnose disease Prototype Evaluation Pathologists Calacci and Pentland ( 2019 ) [ 43 ] Academia Labor Relations Audit changes to platform workers’ pay Prototype Evaluation Preference Aggregation , Platform Workers Puussaar et al . ( 2022 ) [ 174 ] Academia Public Services Data - driven decision - making in local and national government Community Meeting , DesignWorkshops / Sessions , Ethnography Local Residents Kaur et al . ( 2019 ) [ 112 ] Academia Employment Sort and screen job applications Speculative Design HR recruiters and job applicants Nakao and Sugano ( 2020 ) [ 155 ] Academia Accessibility Sound recognition Interviews , Design Workshops / Sessions Non - Expert Deaf , Hard - of - Hearing ( DHH ) People Komatsu et al . ( 2020 ) [ 117 ] Academia Computer - Assisted Cooperative Work Not System - Specific Interviews Journalists Alvarado et al . ( 2020 ) [ 6 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Not System - Specific Interviews , Diary Studies , Design Workshops / Sessions Not - specific Seidelin et al . ( 2020 ) [ 194 ] Academia Not Domain - Specific Not System - Specific Interviews , Design Workshops / Sessions , Prototype Evaluation Domain Experts