Clathrin localization and dynamics in Aspergillus nidulans Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson and B . D . Shaw * Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology , Texas A & M University , 2132 TAMU , College Station , TX 77845 , USA . Summary Cell growth necessitates extensive membrane remodeling events including vesicle fusion or fis - sion , processes that are regulated by coat proteins . The hyphal cells of filamentous fungi concentrate both exocytosis and endocytosis at the apex . This investigation focuses on clathrin in Aspergillus nidu - lans , with the aim of understanding its role in mem - brane remodeling in growing hyphae . We examined clathrin heavy chain ( ClaH - GFP ) which localized to three distinct subcellular structures : late Golgi ( trans - Golgi equivalents of filamentous fungi ) , which are concentrated just behind the hyphal tip but are intermittently present throughout all hyphal cells ; the region of concentrated endocytosis just behind the hyphal apex ( the “endocytic collar” ) ; and small , rap - idly moving puncta that were seen trafficking long distances in nearly all hyphal compartments . ClaH localized to distinct domains on late Golgi , and these clathrin “hubs” dispersed in synchrony after the late Golgi marker PH OSBP . Although clathrin was essential for growth , ClaH did not colocalize well with the endocytic patch marker fimbrin . Tests of FM4 - 64 internalization and repression of ClaH corroborated the observation that clathrin does not play an impor - tant role in endocytosis in A . nidulans . A minor portion of ClaH puncta exhibited bidirectional move - ment , likely along microtubules , but were generally distinct from early endosomes . Introduction Intracellular traffic occurs primarily through vesicle inter - mediates that move among individual organelles and the plasma membrane . The diversity of cargo and destinations that these trafficking intermediaries possess suggests the existence of subsets of vesicles and pro - teins dedicated to the transport of certain molecules . Moreover , it renders maintenance of vesicle integrity and specificity essential . Assisting in the formation and budding of membranes are coat proteins , which form around nascent vesicles and promote the energy - intensive membrane bending associated with vesicle formation . Mirroring the diversity of intracellular vesicles , there are different types of coat proteins . Among these are the coat proteins complexes ( COP ) I and II , which func - tion in traffic between the endoplasmic reticulum and the early Golgi , and clathrin , which works at later stages in the secretory pathway , as well at the plasma mem - brane as a prime component of endocytosis ( Schekman and Orci , 1996 ; Bonifacino and Glick , 2004 ; McMahon and Mills , 2004 ) . Clathrin is the most well - characterized coat protein complex . It was discovered and named in 1976 ( Pearse , 1976 ) and has been the subject of intense investigations ( Robinson , 2015 ) . It is composed of two proteins , the clathrin “heavy” and “light” chains , that combine into a triskelion that includes three copies of each subunit . Multiple triskelia organize into a lattice at sites of membrane budding to provide structural sup - port for membrane bending through the natural curva - ture of the lattice , as well as support for vesicle fission ( Brodsky , 1988 ; Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Kukulski et al . , 2016 ) . Clathrin performs this function primarily at the late / trans - Golgi and at the plasma membrane , with resulting vesicles being sent to early endosomes in both cases ( Costaguta et al . , 2001 ; Raiborg et al . , 2001 ; 2002 ; Hinners and Tooze , 2003 ; Puertollano et al . , 2003 ; Bonifacino and Glick , 2004 ) . Thus , clathrin is a major component of both the endocytic ( plasma mem - brane budding ) and the secretory ( Golgi budding ) machinery in eukaryotes ( Gall et al . , 2002 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ; Daboussi et al . , 2012 ) . In an effort to understand the molecular basis of the filamentous growth of fungi , we are working to charac - terize the endocytic machinery in the fungus Aspergillus nidulans . In hyphae , the tip - growing cells produced by filamentous fungi , endocytosis is highly concentrated at a specific region behind the site of growth . The annulus of endocytosis stretching from 1 to 5 m m behind the Accepted 10 October , 2016 . * For correspondence . E - mail bdshaw @ tamu . edu ; Tel . ( 1 1 ) 979 845 7518 ; Fax : ( + 1 ) 979 845 6499 . V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd Molecular Microbiology ( 2017 ) 103 ( 2 ) , 299 – 318 (cid:2) doi : 10 . 1111 / mmi . 13557 First published online 14 November 2016 apex , termed the “endocytic collar , ” thus represents endocytic “hot spots” seen in mammalian cells , where the membrane appears to be marked for constitutive endocytosis ( Taheri - Talesh et al . , 2008 ; Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ; Delgado - (cid:2) Alvarez et al . , 2010 ; Herv (cid:2) as - Aguilar and Pe ~ nalva , 2010 ; Cao et al . , 2011 ; Shaw et al . , 2011 ; Sudbery , 2011 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2015 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2016 ; Wang and Shaw , 2016 ) . Only proteins known to be involved in the middle and late stages of endocytosis have been stud - ied in filamentous fungi . These proteins generally arrive and leave the plasma membrane with consistent life - times , whereas “early stage” endocytic proteins , includ - ing clathrin , are more variable and can be dependent on factors such as the amount of cargo associated with patches ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Carroll et al . , 2012 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ) . Clathrin is therefore an ideal protein for investigating the molecular processes at the hyphal tip . The function and localization of clathrin has not been determined in filamentous fungi . Clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis occur in both the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( Lemmon and Jones , 1987 ; Tuo et al . , 2013 ) , and the fungal pathogen Can - dida albicans ( Xu et al . , 2007 ; Epp et al . , 2013 ) , and clathrin is not strictly essential for viability in either of these organisms . In C . albicans , however , inhibiting a component of clathrin - mediated endocytosis had the specific effect of abolishing the formation of hyphae ( Epp et al . , 2010 ) . Studying clathrin in filamentous fungi is potentially informative for several reasons . First , fun - gal cell biologists and pathologists have focused on intracellular trafficking as a major player in overcoming host defenses , production of mycotoxins , polarized growth , and development ( Wedlich - S € oldner et al . , 2000 ; Steinberg , 2007b ; Chanda et al . , 2009 ; Pinar et al . , 2013 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2015 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ) . Second , the elongate cells of filamentous fungi are excellent for imaging long distance trafficking , as well as the interplay of endocytosis and exocytosis ( Wedlich - S € oldner et al . , 2000 ; Feldbr € ugge et al . , 2004 ; Becht et al . , 2006 ; Steinberg , 2007a , b ; Lee et al . , 2008 ; Lee and Shaw , 2008 ; Taheri - Talesh et al . , 2008 ; Abenza et al . , 2009 ; Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ; Jones and Sudbery , 2010 ; S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on et al . , 2011 ; Sudbery , 2011 ; Echauri - Espinosa et al . , 2012 ; Caballero - Lima et al . , 2013 ; Riquelme et al . , 2014 ; S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on et al . , 2015 ) . Third , the endocytic collar that just precedes the hyphal tip is a uniquely fungal structure that is important for the maintenance of somatic fungal growth , and little is known about endocytic protein dynamics there ( Araujo - Baz (cid:2) an et al . , 2008 ; Lee et al . , 2008 ; Taheri - Talesh et al . , 2008 ; Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ; Delgado - (cid:2) Alvarez et al . , 2010 ; Echauri - Espinosa et al . , 2012 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2015 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2016 ) . Finally , membrane progression through Golgi is coupled to polarized growth and is easily visualized in filamentous fungi , allowing for the examination of any clathrin structures that might be found at this organelle ( Bracker , 1967 ; Howard , 1981 ; Dargent et al . , 1982 ; Cole et al . , 2000 ; Hohmann - Marriott et al . , 2006 ; Bowman et al . , 2009 ; Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ; Harris , 2013 ; Pinar et al . , 2013 ; Pantazo - poulou et al . , 2014 ; S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on et al . , 2015 ; Kim et al . , 2016 ; Pantazopoulou , 2016 ; Riquelme et al . , 2016 ) . Here , we examined clathrin function and localization in A . nidulans . Clathrin decorated late Golgi ( the trans - Golgi equivalents of filamentous fungi ) and exhibited dis - tinct dynamics during late Golgi maturation . In addition , clathrin weakly labeled endocytic sites , and disruption of clathrin had minimal effects on endocytosis . Finally , small structures labeled with clathrin , possibly represent - ing transitory vesicles moving from sites of clathrin bud - ding , exhibited long distance movement throughout hyphae . Results Identification of clathrin components in A . nidulans Clathrin is a major , conserved component of the endo - cytic and secretory machineries in eukaryotes ( Pearse , 1976 ; Robinson , 1994 ; Kirchhausen , 2000 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 2014 ) . The homo - logues of the clathrin heavy and light chain are encoded by A . nidulans AN4463 and AN2050 respectively ( Bour - ett et al . , 2007 ; Goldman and Osmani , 2007 ; S (cid:2) anchez - Ferrero and Pe ~ nalva , 2007 ) . Below , we use the name given to them previously ( S (cid:2) anchez - Ferrero and Pe ~ nalva , 2007 ) , and refer to the clathrin heavy chain / AN4463 as c laH and the clathrin light chain / AN2050 as c laL . The claH gene is composed of 5416 nucleotides , including 6 exons , and is predicted to encode a protein of 1676aa in length . claL is composed of 906 nucleotides , including 4 exons and is predicted to encode a protein of 240aa in length ( Cerqueira et al . , 2013 ) . Fungi ( including Neurospora crassa , S . cerevisiae , C . albicans , Ustilago maydis and A . nidulans ) appear to encode one copy each of the heavy and light chain pro - teins , as opposed to animals and plants , which possess at least two copies of each gene ( Read and Kalkman , 2003 ; Wakeham et al . , 2005 ; Kim et al . , 2010 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ; Epp et al . , 2013 ) . Clathrin light chain proteins , overall , appear to be much less conserved than heavy chain proteins , particularly in the N - terminal (cid:2) 50 % of the protein . ClaL , for example , shares (cid:2) 25 % similarity with both Homo sapiens clathrin light chain A and clathrin light chain B , but all of the similarity is within 300 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 the last 200aa of the 240aa ClaL for LCb and the last 120aa for LCa . The same holds true when comparing the ClaL with the light chain homologue in U . maydis , which shares almost no similarity with the first 80aa of ClaL . This can be accounted for by the observation that binding of the light chain to the heavy chain occurs pri - marily within the center and the C - terminal regions of the light chain ( Brodsky et al . , 1991 ; Chen et al . , 2002 ) . In the 22aa stretch on the N - terminus that is completely conserved among vertebrate light chains , a phenylala - nine and a leucine ( at position 29 – 30 in ClaL ) appear to be conserved throughout fungi and animals ( as an FLxRE motif in fungi , Supporting Information Fig . S1 ) . General localization of clathrin in A . nidulans To view general clathrin dynamics in A . nidulans , we constructed a strain expressing either claH : : GFP or claL : : GFP as the sole copy of the gene at their respec - tive loci under control of their native promoters by add - ing the GFP sequence immediately before the stop codon . In previous studies , an N - terminal fusion for labeling the clathrin light chain was used ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . Here , C - terminal fusions were used . All tested transformants were similar to wild type in growth ( Supporting Information Fig . S2 ) , and exhibited consist - ent fluorescent signals , and ClaH - GFP was used for the following experiments , unless otherwise noted . ClaH - GFP localized to a variety of structures , several of which will be examined in detail below . Among these , the most pronounced were fragmented , cytosolic rings that proceeded with the growing tip ( Fig . 1A and Movie 1 ) . These structures undulated , with portions of the rings moving in and out of focus during video acquisi - tion . Although they were highly pleiomorphic , they shared some characteristics , including : the presence of one or several bright puncta where ClaH - GFP was pre - sumably highly concentrated within the structure , the appearance of a semicircular or circular backbone along which the puncta were arranged , and their steady posi - tioning relative to the apex ( Fig . 1A ) . Next , we noted that in growing cells ClaH - GFP appeared to localize weakly to the endocytic collar , but ClaH - GFP structures were absent from the most apical 1 – 3 m m of the cytoplasm in growing cells ( Movie 1 and Fig . 1B ) . This could be seen clearly when FM4 - 64 was used to stain cells expressing claH : : GFP ( Fig . 1B ) . In fil - amentous fungi , FM4 - 64 is internalized primarily through endocytosis and slowly labels many intracellular mem - branes including , but not always , the Spitzenk € orper , a spherical body in the hyphal apex that is composed of exocytic and recycling vesicles ( Grove and Bracker , 1970 ; Howard , 1981 ; Hoffmann and Mendgen , 1998 , Fischer - Parton et al . , 2000 ; Fuchs et al . , 2006 ; Riquelme et al . , 2014 ; 2007 ; Verd (cid:2) ın et al . , 2009 ; Jones and Sudbery , 2010 ; Riquelme , 2013 ; S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on et al . , 2015 ) . A Spitzenk € orper is a hallmark of a healthy , rapidly - growing hypha in ascomycetous filamentous fungi , and in Fig . 1B this is shown with a Spitzenk € orper labeled with FM4 - 64 imaged concurrently with ClaH - GFP which showed a zone of ClaH - GFP exclusion that was present within the hyphal tip ( Fig . 1B ) . Alternatively , Fig . 1 . General ClaH - GFP / clathrin localization in A . nidulans . A . ClaH - GFP localizes to bright cytosolic structures , illustrated in the right panel and enlarged 2 3 in the insets ( * 5 hyphal tip ) . B . ClaH - GFP is absent from the tip in growing cells ( left three panels ) , while this exclusion zone is not seen in non - growing cells ( right three panels , brackets 5 area with minimal ClaH - GFP presence , arrow 5 Spitzenk € orper , red and green channels are presented in inverted grayscale ) . C . Small clathrin structures ( arrows ) were also seen moving long distances within hyphae ( time in seconds , presented in inverted grayscale ) . D . ClaH - GFP is concentrated within the region (cid:2) 15 m m from the hyphal tip ( right panel ) . E . Colocalization of ClaL - GFP and ClaH - mCherry ( Pearson’s correlation coefficient 5 0 . 92 for this image , likely < 1 . 0 because of time difference between GFP / mCherry channel capture ) . Scale bar 5 5 m m , except bar in insets 5 2 m m . ClathrininA . nidulans 301 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 in non - growing cells , both the zone of exclusion and the Spitzenk € orper were absent ( Fig . 1B ) ( L € opez - Franco and Bracker , 1996 ; Araujo - Palomares et al . , 2007 ) . The ClaH - GFP exclusion zone seen in growing cells was similar to that seen with late Golgi equivalents in A . nidulans ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ; Pantazo - poulou et al . , 2014 ; Pinar et al . , 2015 ; Pantazopoulou , 2016 ) . By taking videos of clathrin dynamics with frame rates of (cid:2) 5 / s , we observed several small puncta exhibiting directional movement near the edges of hyphae ( Fig . 1C ) . The movement was saltatory , and the structures were small and dim so that they were frequently obscured by larger ClaH - GFP structures during image capture , but they were seen and recorded frequently enough that it became clear that a separate population of clathrin was continuously trafficking along the length of the hyphae . The highest concentration of ClaH - GFP structures was present within 15 m m from the growing tip ( Movie 1 and Fig . 1D ) . Finally , we checked the local - ization of both ClaL and ClaH proteins in a strain that contained both ClaL : : mCHerry and ClaH - GFP . As expected , the proteins colocalized well ( Fig . 1E ) , although colocalization was not entirely complete , likely due to movement occurring in the time frame ( (cid:2) 2 s ) between the capture of each channel . Next , we ana - lyzed each class of ClaH - GFP localization more thoroughly . Clathrin localizes to dynamic hubs on late Golgi Clathrin is known to act as a coat protein for vesicles budding from the trans - Golgi network ( Griffiths and Simons , 1986 ; Brodsky , 1988 ; Draper et al . , 1990 ; Rothman and Orci , 1990 ; Salamero et al . , 1990 ; Le Borgne and Hoflack , 1997 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 2014 ) . This led us to hypothesize that a major cytosolic population of clathrin , likely the fragmented rings shown in Fig . 1A , would localize to the late Golgi . To assess whether these structures were indeed ClaH - GFP associ - ating with the late Golgi , we constructed strains that expressed both ClaH - GFP and the late Golgi marker mRFP - PH OSBP ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ) simultaneously . As shown in Fig . 2A – C and Movies 2 and 3 , ClaH - GFP localized on mRFP - PH OSBP – labeled late Golgi . Across several images and time lapse sequences , we did not observe any late Golgi that did not associate with some ClaH - GFP at some point dur - ing its lifetime ( Fig . 2A and C , and Movie 2 ) . Interest - ingly , instead of being arranged over the surface of the Golgi , ClaH - GFP was arrayed on the organelles in a variety of patterns . For example , circular cross - sections were seen with 1 – 8 ClaH puncta ( generally depending on the size of the mRFP - PH OSBP - labeled late Golgi ) arranged symmetrically , resulting in the appearance of “hubs” on late Golgi : specific sites that appeared to be dedicated to clathrin - associated bud - ding ( Fig . 2A – C ) . Alternatively , late Golgi that did not form rings were sometimes completely covered with ClaH - GFP ( Fig . 2C ) . To confirm that ClaH - GFP was associating with late Golgi , we treated ClaH - GFP and mRFP - PH OSBP expressing strains with Brefeldin A . In A . nidulans , BFA causes late Golgi to collapse into large , bulbous cytosolic bodies ( Lee and Shaw , 2008 ; Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ) . When added to a strain expressing ClaH - GFP and mRFP - PH OSBP , BFA caused the expected collapse of mRFP - PH OSBP . ClaH - GFP , moreover , strongly associated with these struc - tures , although there was some residual ClaH - GFP signal ( Fig . 2D ) . To obtain a better understanding of the interplay of clathrin and late Golgi dynamics we captured dual - channel image sequences of strains expressing ClaH - GFP and TGN - mRFP over a time limit that could cap - ture the entire lifetime of a late Golgi while limiting phototoxicity on our system ( (cid:2) 3 to 4 min total , imaging every 4 s ) . As shown in Movies 2 and 3 , and Fig . 3 , ClaH - GFP appeared to be associated with all late Golgi at some level throughout the lifetime of the organelle . However , as the late Golgi began to dissipate , ClaH - GFP fluorescence intensity increased until just after mRFP - PH OSBP could no longer be seen . Between 2 and 4 frames ( 10 – 20 s ) after mRFP - PH OSBP could not be seen , ClaH - GFP would dissipate . This behavior is repre - sented in Fig . 3A – C as a recording of relative ClaH - GFP and mRFP - PH OSBP fluorescence intensities over time on individual late Golgi , showing that ClaH - GFP intensity reaches its peak just after mRFP - PH OSBP dis - appears . Specifically , ClaH - GFP signal was highest on average 8 6 2 s ( s ) ( N 5 14 ) after mRFP - PH OSBP signal dissipated . Clathrin localization at sites of endocytosis Clathrin plays a well - known role in endocytic site estab - lishment and maintenance , as well as vesicle fission ( Robinson , 1994 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ; Granseth et al . , 2006 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ; Kukulski et al . , 2016 ) , although clathrin - independent endocytosis has also been documented in many organ - isms ( Prosser et al . , 2011 ; Epp et al . , 2013 ; Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . Endocytosis is generally thought to be essential for hyphal growth , and a characteristic feature of growing hyphae is a “collar” of endocytic sites concentrated behind the hyphal tip ( Fischer - Parton et al . , 2000 ; Fuchs et al . , 2006 ; Taheri - Talesh et al . , 2008 ; Upadhyay and 302 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 Shaw , 2008 ; Shaw et al . , 2011 ; Sudbery , 2011 ; Schultz - haus et al . , 2015 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2016 ) . There - fore , we attempted to track ClaH - GFP at endocytic sites in this region . Interestingly , unlike in budding yeast , where clathrin and most other endocytic proteins can be seen as puncta at the plasma membrane , and in contrast to the high concentrations of other endocytic proteins in the endocytic collar , no strong ClaH - GFP cortical localization could be seen ( Fig . 4A ) , even with significantly higher exposures than those used for viewing Golgi signal . Instead , ClaH - GFP was primarily localized to a haze with a few puncta where the endocytic collar would normally be located ( bracket in Fig . 4A ) , behind which the bright cytosolic structures corresponding to late Golgi could be seen ( Fig . 4A ) . Clathrin acts early in the endocytic process ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ) . To compare localization of this early endocytic pro - tein with that of a protein from later in the process , we obtained a strain in which ClaH - GFP and the actin cross - linking protein FimA - mCherry ( Fimbrin ) were co - expressed at their native loci by their native pro - moters . We also imaged FimA - GFP individually for analy - sis of actin patch dynamics . FimA - mCherry / GFP localized to bright , cortical puncta and was highly enriched in the endocytic collar , as seen previously ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) . When imaged together , ClaH - GFP and FimA - mCherry exhibited only minor colocalization at the collar , with FimA - mCherry much brighter and more dis - crete while ClaH - GFP signal was a haze only slightly Fig . 2 . ClaH - GFP / clathrin decorates A . nidulans late Golgi equivalents . A . ClaH - GFP puncta arranged on circular late Golgi in a germling ( and 2 3 magnification inset ) . B . Fluorescence intensity along a line drawn through the late Golgi shown in A with graph showing ClaH - GFP localization around mRFP - PH OSBP - labeled late Golgi . C . A variety of ClaH - GFP localization patterns on mRFP - PH OSBP labeled late Golgi . Left arrows and insets show three separate ClaH - GFP hubs on late Golgi , center arrows show ClaH - GFP brightly localized over an entire late Golgi , and right arrows show a late Golgi with one ClaH - GFP hub . D . A portion of ClaH - GFP segregates into “Brefeldin bodies , ” marked here by mRFP - PH OSBP , when hyphae were exposed to Brefeldin A . Scale bar 5 5 m m . ClathrininA . nidulans 303 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 above background ( Fig . 4B ) . In fact , only 57 . 7 % ( N 5 45 / 78 ) of FimA - mCherry in subapical regions ( > 15 m m behind the apex ) were preceded or colocalized with ClaH - GFP signal to some extent . In the endocytic collar , ClaH - GFP did form puncta , but these did not obviously give rise to FimA - mCherry puncta , and because both of these proteins were extremely dynamic in the endocytic collar , clear progression from ClaH - GFP to FimA - mCherry at a patch , as seen at endocytic sites in yeast ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) , was rare in this region ( Movie 4 and see below ) . To see if brighter structures were obscuring colocali - zation between clathrin and fimbrin , we also analyzed several videos of patches at distal regions of hyphae , where there was much less cytosolic fluorescence . Again , only a minor relationship between ClaH - GFP and FimA - mCherry was shown . Figure 4C shows one FimA - mCherry patch arising near a large ClaH - GFP patch with the ClaH - GFP dissipating around the same time as FimA - mCherry , and in Fig . 4D which captures a FimA - mCherry patch appearing at the same location just after a patch labeled with ClaH - GFP , then moving with ClaH - GFP before disappearing . Finally , we reasoned that endocytic patches could be observed within conidia that are swollen just prior to germ tube emergence , which do not have regions of highly concentrated endocytosis . Therefore , we incu - bated spores on minimal medium for 2 . 5 h ( a time after dormancy is broken , but before a polarized germ tube emerges ) . At this time , each spore had 11 . 3 6 0 . 41 endocytic sites ( N 5 30 ) as determined by Z - stacks of FimA - mCherry ( Movie 5 ) . Again , however , FimA - mCherry and ClaH - GFP did not show strong colocali - zation ( Fig . 4E and Movie 5 ) . Some FimA - mCherry patches were associated with ClaH - GFP , but the ClaH - GFP signal was significantly dimmer , and some ClaH - GFP patches that appeared to be associated at first with FimA - mCherry moved independently of them in subsequent frames ( Movie 5 ) . In conclusion , ClaH - GFP localizes to the endocytic collar , but it does not Fig . 3 . ClaH - GFP dynamics during late Golgi progression . A . As mRFP - PH OSBP / late Golgi dissipate , ClaH - GFP , which is present on late Golgi throughout its lifetime , increases in concentration ( arrows and arrowheads 5 two separate events of ClaH - GFP progression , 15 s between each image ) . B . An individual late Golgi progressing through a transition from mRFP - PH OSBP ( top row ) to ClaH - GFP ( middle row ) . Red and green channels are presented in inverted grayscale . C . Normalized fluorescence intensity of ClaH - GFP ( green line ) and mRFP - PH OSBP ( red line ) , during a time period corresponding to the mRFP - PH OSBP – ClaH - GFP transition . Scale bar 5 5 m m . 304 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 consistently colocalize or precede FimA - mCherry patches . Dynamics of endocytosis in A . nidulans hyphae To understand the dynamics of these “early module” and “late module” endocytic proteins ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) , we compared the movements and lifetimes of individual puncta labeled by either FimA - GFP or ClaH - GFP in mature hyphae and in germlings . ClaH - GFP puncta were quantified in the collar , where they were most likely of endocytic nature , and exhibited signifi - cantly longer lifetimes than distinct FimA - GFP patches , which could be easily seen throughout hyphae ( 24 6 1 . 5s , N 5 34 for ClaH - GFP vs 10 6 0 . 4s for FimA - GFP ) ( Fig . 5A ) . Some larger plaques of both proteins were not added to these counts as they were often com - posed of several patches fusing and breaking apart , so the individual lifetime was difficult to ascertain . These dynamics are discussed below . We did not find a correlation between FimA - GFP distance from the apex and patch lifetime ( not shown ) , which is in agreement with data from yeast that progression through the later endocytic ( “actin” ) module is more rapid and regular than the earlier module ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . In Fig . 5B , the dynamics of several FimA - GFP patches in the endocytic collar over time are presented . In the upper panels of this figure , a patch is seen as a distinct spot that slowly disappears , likely because it is internalized . On the opposite region of the membrane , distinct puncta can be seen moving laterally , and possibly fusing or splitting into several patches . ClaH - GFP showed different dynamics at the collar ( Fig . 5C ) . Rather than labeling specific puncta , we observed that much of the signal was present in tran - sient plaques that extend into the cytoplasm , in addition to more static patches near the membrane . This is dem - onstrated in the upper panels of Fig . 5C , in which sev - eral puncta appear that are too close to be resolved , and then can be seen forming a plaque . On the Fig . 4 . ClaH - GFP / clathrin localization at sites of endocytosis . A . ClaH - GFP patches at the endocytic collar ( bracket ) . Cytosolic ClaH - GFP structures were generally present in highest density within or just behind the endocytic collar . Green channel presented in inverted grayscale . B . ClaH - GFP expressed together with endocytic protein FimA - mCherry ( bracket 5 endocytic collar , arrows 5 subapical punctum with both ClaH - GFP and FimA - mCherry . Red and green channels presented in inverted grayscale . C . A ClaH - GFP patch progressing into a FimA - mCherry - labeled patch ( images taken at 4 s / frame interval , plasma membrane is in upper right quadrant of frames , where FimA - mCherry originates ) . D . A FimA - mCherry patch appearing and moving laterally , while associated with a ClaH - GFP patch ( images taken at 4 s / frame interval , arrow 5 ClaH - GFP patch , plasma membrane is in upper right quadrant of frames ) . E . ClaH - GFP colocalized only weakly with a portion of FimA - mCherry patches in swollen conidia ( arrows indicate no colocalization , arrowheads indicate some signal overlap ) . Scale bars for A , B , and E 5 5 m m , scale bars in C , D 5 1 m m . ClathrininA . nidulans 305 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 opposite side of the plasma membrane , puncta are obscured by these larger “plaques , ” which disappear , leaving the puncta behind ( see also arrowhead on lower panels ) . In addition , in Movie 6 , typical , elongate ClaH - GFP structures , rather than distinct patches , can be seen localizing from the edge of the cell at the endocytic collar to the center of the cytosol . Because the subapical collar appears to be marked for endocytosis , we next tested if any other regions of the subapical plasma membrane were marked for endo - cytosis . As shown in Fig . 5E – G , endocytic patches , in general , do not appear to assemble consistently at spe - cific sites in subapical regions , although there are exceptions in which large FimA - GFP structures were seen persisting for longer than most puncta and giving rise to multiple patches ( Movie 7 ) . These observations provided more evidence that the endocytic collar is a unique , marked “hotspot” for endo - cytosis , and led us to characterize the difference in fre - quency , size , and fate of endocytic sites occurring at the collar . From videos of FimA - GFP , we obtained videos showing several rounds of endocytosis at either the endocytic collar ( (cid:2) 1 to 5 m m from the apex Fig . 5F ) or a similarly sized region 15 m m away from the apex ( Fig . 5G ) . Kymographs from subapical regions allowed for a visualization of individual patch dynamics , which become more active and move along the membrane and into the cytosol near the ends of their lifetimes , giv - ing the characteristic endocytic patch “J - shape” on a kymograph ( Fig . 5G ) ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . We meas - ured the number of new FimA - GFP sites in these two areas ( apex and subapex ) over 1 min in germlings ( with no septa present between the hyphal tip and the spore ) and leading hyphae . As shown in Fig . 5H , significantly more patches were formed in the collar than in the sub - apex at all time points , as expected , and more patches were formed per minute for the collar ( 71 . 33 6 5 . 5 patches / min collar , mature ; 37 . 8 6 1 . 07 patches / min col - lar , germlings ) and the subapex ( 21 . 78 6 2 . 7 patches / min , subapex , mature ; 6 . 4 6 1 . 21 patches / min , subapex , germling ; N 5 6 mature hyphae and N 5 5 germlings , Fig . 5H ) . Patches in the collar of mature hyphae were also larger on average ( 0 . 55 6 0 . 032 m m , collar , N 5 41 and 0 . 4 6 0 . 017 m m , N 5 30 , Fig . 5I ) , which is apparent in kymographs of the collar ( Fig . 5F ) as wide structures of high intensity . Finally , because we had seen evidence of patches interacting ( fusing , splitting ) , we documented the fate of patches in the collar compared with the subapex . Figure 5J shows that patches arising in the collar are more likely to be seen fusing with another patch when compared with those in the subapex ( 48 % collar Fig . 5 . Endocytic patch dynamics in A . nidulans . A . Lifetimes of FimA - GFP and ClaH - GFP puncta at the plasma membrane . B . FimA - GFP patch dynamics at the endocytic collar , with images taken every 1 s ( different arrows and arrowheads indicate individual patches of interest within image sequence ) . C . ClaH - GFP patch dynamics at the endocytic collar with images taken every 1 s ( different arrows and arrowheads indicate individual patches of interest within image sequence ) . D and E . Kymograph of FimA - GFP patches generated from a time lapse video obtained from the germinated spore pictured in panel D . F . Kymograph of FimA - GFP patches at the endocytic collar ( arrows indicate overlap of two or more patches , arrowheads indicate large , intensely fluorescent endocytic patches ) . G . Kymographs of FimA - GFP patches in a subapical region ( > 15 m m from the apex . Arrows indicate lateral movement on the plasma membrane just before dissipating . H . Number of FimA - GFP patches arising in 1 min in the endocytic collar compared with a subapical region of the plasma membrane in germlings compared with mature hyphae . I . Size of FimA - GFP patches in the endocytic collar compared with a subapical region of the plasma membrane . J . “Fate” of FimA - GFP patches in the subapical region , Black indicates disappearance of the patch , gray indicates fusion with another patch , white indicates fission into two patches , and vertical lines indicates lateral movement out of the 5 m m region being analyzed . Scale bar 5 5 m m , bars in each graph indicate 6 standard error , asterisks indicate a Student’s t - test p - value of < 0 . 001 . All microscope images presented in inverted grayscale . 306 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 patches , N 5 41 vs 12 % subapical patches , N 5 25 ) , whereas subapical patches were more likely to arise and disappear without significant lateral movement or interaction with another patch ( 84 % subapical patches , N 5 25 vs 34 % collar patches , N 5 41 ) . Finally , patches in the collar were more likely to undergo fission into two or more particles than subapical patches ( 12 % collar patches , N 5 41 vs 4 % subapical patches , N 5 25 ) or to undergo lateral movement to a spot out - side of the 5 m m window used for analysis ( 5 % collar patches , N 5 41 vs 0 % subapical patches , N 5 25 ) . In conclusion , the endocytic collar gives rise to more FimA - GFP patches over time . These patches are , larger and more dynamic than patches that arise in subapical regions , and are more likely to interact with each other . The degree to how these characteristics affect endocytic progression and vesicle size are areas for future study . The role of clathrin in endocytosis We next tested whether clathrin plays a role in endocy - tosis . First , we attempted to delete claH and claL . Three individual transformations were unsuccessful in isolating a homokaryotic claH deletion , suggesting that this gene is essential . A claL deletion was isolated , but its growth and development was extremely disrupted ( Fig . 6A ) . Interestingly , however , FM4 - 64 uptake did not appear to be strongly inhibited in a claL deletion ( Fig . 6B ) . This phenotype is not completely diagnostic of the presence of endocytosis , as FM4 - 64 may enter the cell through other means , but it is important to note that internaliza - tion of FM4 - 64 was almost completely abolished in a fimA deletion ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) . To test whether clathrin is involved in endocytosis in a more direct manner , we looked at FimA - mCherry when claH was downregulated using the niiA promoter . The niiA promoter is well - characterized and allows expression when nitrate is present as a nitrogen source ( Cove , 1966 ; Punt et al . , 1995 ; Osherov et al . , 2000 ; Herv (cid:2) as - Aguilar and Pe ~ nalva , 2010 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2016 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2016 ) , but is strongly repressed when the nitrogen source pro - vided is ammonium . As expected , when a strain containing both FimA - mCherry and niiA : : claH was grown with sodium nitrate as the nitrogen source , hyphae were normal and FimA - mCherry was strongly concentrated at the endocytic collar ( Fig . 6C ) . When this strain was grown with ammo - nium chloride as the nitrogen source , growth was also extremely debilitated ( Supporting Information Fig . S2 ) . After an overnight incubation , several germlings were seen that were highly vacuolated , with fluorescence spread throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 6D ) . Other hyphae , however , exhibited FimA - mCherry patches ( Fig . 6D and Movie 8 ) . Interestingly , the lifetimes of these patches did not significantly differ on either claH expressing or repressing conditions ( 10 6 0 . 6 s , N 5 26 and 10 6 0 . 5s , N 5 24 respectively ) . Representative kymographs of FimA - mCherry in each of these condi - tions are given in Fig . 6E . We hypothesized that ClaH - GFP may accumulate on the plasma membrane and be easier to view if endocytic site progression is stalled , so we looked at ClaH - GFP in a fimA D strain produced previously ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) . In this strain , most conidia produce aber - rant germ tubes and short , swollen hyphae , although some normal but slow - growing hyphae are also pro - duced ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) . In the absence of fimA in swollen germlings , ClaH - GFP was still strongly localized to internal cytosolic structures , with little evi - dence of a proliferation of plasma membrane localization ( Fig . 6G and Movie 9 ) . Remarkably , however , in some normal - shaped hyphae , patches were seen accumulat - ing in the plasma membrane , near and beyond where the endocytic collar would generally be located ( Fig . 6G and Movie 9 ) . In time lapse videos these patches were dim and relatively static ( Movie 9 ) . Vesicle trafficking Finally , we observed structures labeled with ClaH - GFP undergo rapid , directed movement . This movement included the presence of a population of small , dim puncta that was only a minor portion of total ClaH - GFP signal , and it was observed occurring over distances of greater than 10 m m ( Fig . 7A – C and Movie 10 ) . This movement was bidirectional and rapid ( 2 . 04 1 / s 0 . 17 m m / s , N 5 21 ) , as judged by time lapse videos of these movements in several hyphae ( Movie 10 and Fig . 7A – C ) . These puncta were also frequently observed changing directions , stopping , and appearing to associate with other larger structures ( Movie 10 and Fig . 7A – C ) . These behaviors suggested that the puncta were trafficking along microtubules . Such movement has been exten - sively characterized in hyphae , and clathrin has been implicated in Golgi - endosome trafficking in other organ - isms ( Costaguta et al . , 2001 ; Hinners and Tooze , 2003 ; Lauvrak et al . , 2004 ; Liu et al . , 2008 ; Abenza et al . , 2009 ) . To test this hypothesis , we first looked at the effect that various cytoskeletal disrupting agents had on the long distance trafficking by determining how fre - quently we could detect the movement under various conditions . The results of this experiment , presented in Fig . 7D and Movie 11 , are as follows . In control condi - tions ( see Experimental procedures ) , long distance ClathrininA . nidulans 307 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 Fig . 6 . Role of claL and claH in growth , FM4 - 64 internalization , and FimA patch dynamics . A . General phenotype of colonies of claL deletion mutant . B . Time course of FM4 - 64 internalization for a claL deletion compared with wild type . C . FimA - mCherry localization in a strain with claH under control of the niiA promoter in expressing conditions . D . FimA - mCherry localization in a strain with claH expression repressed by the niiA promoter in repressed conditions . E . Kymograph demonstrating FimA - mCherry patch dynamics when claH is expressed and F . repressed . G . Localization of ClaH - GFP in a fimA deletion mutant . Scale bars 5 5 m m . All images except merged bright field / mCherry are presented in inverted grayscale . 308 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 movement , as defined by directional movement of a punctum over at least three frames , could be detected in 84 . 2 % of videos captured ( N 5 19 ) . When cytochalasin A was added to inhibit actin trafficking , growth halted , but ClaH - GFP movement could still be seen in 81 . 5 % of vid - eos ( N 5 27 ) . However , when benomyl was added , which abolishes microtubule trafficking in filamentous fungi , ClaH - GFP trafficking was only observed in 3 . 8 % of the captured image sequences ( N 5 26 , Movie 11 ) . To further confirm that clathrin was localized to struc - tures that undergo long distance movement on microtu - bules , we attempted to colocalize ClaH with microtubules with a strain expressing GFP - TubA and ClaH - mCherry at their native loci . The velocity of move - ment of the small puncta , however , made imaging of traffic along microtubules difficult on our system , as did the observation that long distance traffic was primarily accomplished by small , dim structures , which were even more difficult to image with an mCherry fluorescent label . To assist with image capture of this rapid process , then , we took advantage of a previous observation ( Abenza et al . , 2009 ) that vesicle trafficking is slower in germlings that have been chilled and placed on a micro - scope slide . Using this technique , we observed colocali - zation of ClaH - mCherry puncta on microtubules labeled by GFP - TubA , and also some evidence of trafficking ( Fig . 7E ) . Larger structures , presumably Golgi , could also be observed travelling along microtubules labeled with TubA - GFP ( Fig . 7F ) . Next , we tested the hypothesis that the trafficking ClaH - GFP was associated with endosomes . We approached this experiment in two ways . First , we attempted to see if the earliest FM4 - 64 labeled struc - tures colocalized with ClaH - GFP . FM4 - 64 is primarily Fig . 7 . ClaH - GFP / clathrin trafficking dynamics . A . Image sequence showing ClaH - GFP puncta ( thin arrows ) moving linearly over a long distances within the cytoplasm ( images taken from Movie 10 ) while another punctum remains static ( thick arrows ) , time in mm : ss . msmsms . B . Kymographs of ClaH - GFP trafficking near the opposite edges of one hyphal cell . Arrows indicate directional movement in the kymograph . Images taken every 300 ms for 1 min . C . Representative trafficking event from the video used to create kymographs in B ( Kymograph and time lapse images presented in inverted grayscale ) . D . Percent of image sequences in which linear traffic of puncta over 5 m m was observed when cells were exposed to cytoskeletal disrupting agents ( cytochalasin A – microfilaments or benomyl – microtubules ) or relevant controls . E . Small ClaH - mCherry punctum moving along a microtubule ( thin arrows ) after appearing to break off from a larger , static punctum ( thick arrows ) . F . Large ClaH - mCherry structure ( arrows ) moving along a microtubule , as labeled by GFP - TubA ( images acquired every 4 s ) . G . Early FM4 - 64 staining in cells expressing ClaH - GFP , arrows indicate FM4 - 64 - labeled structures . H . Image of mature hyphal cells expressing ClaH - GFP and mCherry - RabA simultaneously , thick arrows indicate colocalization , thin arrows indicate mCherry - RabA structures with no ClaH - GFP . I and J . Germlings of strains expressing ClaH - GFP and mCherry RabA showing both structures that colocalize ( thick arrows ) , and structures that do not colocalize ( thin arrows ) . Scale bars 5 5 m m . ClathrininA . nidulans 309 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 internalized through endocytosis and labels early endo - somes within the first 10 – 15 min after addition ( Hoffmann and Mendgen , 1998 ; Fischer - Parton et al . , 2000 ; Pe ~ nalva , 2005 ; Abenza et al . , 2009 ) . FM4 - 64 , and ClaH - GFP did not show colocalization at these earliest time points ( 5 / 45 , 11 . 1 % FM4 - 64 - labeled structures also had ClaH - GFP signal that persisted for 3 or more images , 4 s / image , Fig . 7G ) . To test the localization of ClaH - GFP on endosomes more directly , we colocalized ClaH - GFP with the early endosome marker mCherry - RabA , which is under the control of the alcA promoter ( Abenza et al . , 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . Under induc - ing conditions ( MM with 1 % ethanol as a carbon source ) , trafficking of ClaH - GFP and mCherry - RabA puncta could be easily observed ( Movie 12 ) . However , we were again unable to detect any strong colocaliza - tion ( 14 / 114 , 12 . 2 % mCherry - RabA endosomes had ClaH - GFP signal that persisted for 3 or more images , 4s / image , Fig . 7H ) . Finally , we attempted to slow down endosomal trafficking by imaging germlings mounted on chilled microscope slides in liquid MM , as previously described ( Abenza et al . , 2009 ) . In this instance , we observed an increase in colocalization of patches in those germlings characterized by minimal trafficking ( 34 / 88 mCherry - RabA endosomes had ClaH - GFP signal that persisted for 3 or more image , 4s / image , Fig . 7I and J ) . Importantly , ClaH - GFP that colocalized with mCherry - RabA was generally larger and brighter than the rapidly - moving ClaH - GFP puncta , which were fre - quently just large enough to be resolved by our micro - scope ( Movies 11 and 12 ) . These results suggested that clathrin associates somewhat with endosomes , but that the moving puncta were separate from endosomes . Discussion Our effort to explore the importance of endocytosis in fil - amentous fungi led us to investigate clathrin in A . nidu - lans . To date , little is known about the localization or function of clathrin in filamentous fungi , despite the roles endomembrane trafficking and endocytosis have in fun - gal growth , development , and pathogenicity . In fact , few endocytic proteins have been characterized , and those that have are generally associated relatively late stages of endocytosis . Analysis of endogenously tagged ClaH - GFP revealed several structures that exhibited predictable behaviors over time . In conidia , ClaH - GFP localization is almost indistinguishable from clathrin heavy chain in budding yeast ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) , where it is present as cort - ical and cytosolic puncta that are relatively static . How - ever , ClaH - GFP is substantially different in hyphae . Clathrin associated with late Golgi in A . nidulans Clathrin formed large , fragmented rings that punctuated the cytosol . Because clathrin is a coat protein for vesicles budding from late Golgi ( Daboussi et al . , 2012 ) , and because the location of late Golgi is well known in A . nidulans ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ; Panta - zopoulou et al . , 2014 ; Pinar et al . , 2015 ) , we reasoned that these clathrin structures represented clathrin local - ization on late Golgi . In yeast , clathrin overlaps strongly with late Golgi markers ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ; Daboussi et al . , 2012 ) , and this is the case for most proteins pre - viously localized to the late Golgi in filamentous fungi , which also cover the structures indiscriminately ( Panta - zopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2011 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ) . Clathrin , on the other hand , is concentrated to specific regions of late Golgi in hyphae . This suggests compart - mentalization in the cytosolic leaf of the late Golgi mem - brane . One reason for this observation may be because there is almost certainly an increase in the diversity and the amount of cargo traveling into and out of late Golgi , both from earlier on in the secretory pathway ( both early and late Golgi are relatively polarized ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ) ) and from endosomes ( e . g . , endo - cytic recycling from the endocytic collar ) . Organization at the late Golgi may be critical for properly handling this volume of traffic . An obvious question that arises from this observation is : how do late Golgi support such organization ? Many mechanisms could offer an explanation . The actin cyto - skeleton , for example , is responsible for the polarization of late Golgi in A . nidulans ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ) , and is also involved in segregating cargo at the yeast late Golgi ( Curwin et al . , 2012 ) . However , clathrin was still organized at discrete spots on late Golgi , rather than spread throughout the organelles , in the presence of cytochalasin A ( Movie 11 , and personal observations ) . Lipid composition is also coupled to protein dynamics at the Golgi . Ergosterol is enriched in low density secre - tory vesicles in yeast ( Surma et al . , 2011 ) . To our knowl - edge , there is currently no effective live - cell marker developed for ergosterol , but several sterol transport proteins were recently visualized in A . nidulans and did not appear to exhibit similar organization at the late Golgi ( B € uhler et al . , 2015 ) . Phosphatidyl inositol 4 - Phosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 ) P ) levels at the late Golgi , on the other hand , can be visualized in part by mRFP - PH OSBP , which also requires binding to ArfA / Arf1p for labeling ( Levine and Munro , 2002 ) . Again , both ArfA and PH OSBP appeared to localize to Golgi membranes evenly , rather than to distinct domains , and when PtdIns ( 4 ) P levels are artificially decreased in yeast , clathrin and adaptor pro - teins still arrive at the late Golgi and exhibit the same 310 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 organization and sequential progression ( Lee and Shaw , 2008 ; Daboussi et al . , 2012 ) . Whether manipulation of PtdIns ( 4 ) P levels in hyphae would change the overall organization of clathrin on late Golgi in A . nidulans remains to be seen . Phosphatidylserine ( PS ) is also a constituent of late Golgi membranes , and may play a role in budding clathrin - coated vesicles there ( Mioka et al . , 2014 ; Takeda et al . , 2014 ) . For example , many adaptor pro - teins associate with basic , negatively charged molecules such as PS ( Yeung et al . , 2008 ; Fairn and Grinstein , 2010 ; Fairn et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , PS has previously been shown to stimulate ArfA / Arf1p activity in the recruitment of AP - 1 and subsequent formation of clathrin - coated vesicles ( Zhu et al . , 1999 ) . Finally , the lipid flippase Drs2p , which contributes to PS asymmetry at the late Golgi and in post - Golgi vesicles , is required for the formation of a subset of clathrin coated secretory vesicles , and interacts physically with AP - 1 in the sorting of several secreted proteins in yeast ( Liu et al . , 2008 ; Gall et al . , 2002 ) . Although DnfB , the A . nidulans Drs2p homolog , shows strong localization to the late Golgi , it does not show the organization associated with clathrin , and PS only appears to be present in significant amounts on the outside of secretory vesicles ( i . e . , after late Golgi exit ) ( Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ) . A PS - flip may contribute to the budding off of clathrin - coated vesicles , but it likely is not the only factor in the spatial organiza - tion of clathrin at this location . Recent experiments in A . nidulans have demonstrated that the end of the late Golgi life cycle is typified by the exchange of PH OSBP for RabE , after which the organelle rapidly dissociates into smaller vesicles bound for the Spitzenk € orper ( Pantazopoulou et al . , 2014 ; Pinar et al . , 2015 ) . Our results place the time of clathrin recruitment ( and likely , clathrin budding ) at the late Golgi to just after PH OSBP depletion on all late Golgi , and given the data on RabE dynamics at late Golgi , the disappearance of clathrin is likely concomitant with the dissolution of the late Golgi into vesicles . This suggests that there might be synchronization between the production of exocytic vesicles and the production of clathrin - coated vesicles at the late Golgi . Clathrin budding could also be initiated by an overall change in late Golgi composition , which would explain why ClaH - GFP puncta on individual late Golgi arrive and leave with synchronicity even though they do not appear to be physically connected . It will be interesting to see whether Golgi adaptor proteins behave similarly . In addition , it is necessary to get a more time - resolved picture of the peak - peak times of fluorescence intensity for several late Golgi and post - Golgi markers , as done in Daboussi et al . ( 2012 ) . Our imaging system did not allow for the rapid capture needed for this analysis . Clathrin involvement in endocytosis in A . nidulans and other filamentous fungi The clathrin coat is one of the longest - lived components of the endocytic machinery that contains > 60 proteins . It is recruited by ENTH - domain containing proteins such as Ent1 / 2p , as well as the AP - 2 adaptor complex , early in the endocytic process , after which the coat assem - bles and is maintained on forming vesicles until they undergo fission and move into the cytosol ( Carroll et al . , 2012 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ; Kukulski et al . , 2016 ) . We previously published details of the endocytic marker FimA in A . nidulans ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) which did not include an examination of the lifetime of fimbrin endocytic patches . Fimbrin has since been shown to show similar localization in a variety of fila - mentous fungi ( Castillo - Lluva et al . , 2007 ; Delgado - (cid:2) Alvarez et al . , 2010 ; Gupta et al . , 2015 ) . Here , we observed that these structures appear to dissipate more rapidly in hyphae than in budding yeast ( (cid:2) 9 s vs (cid:2) 12 s ) ( Kim et al . , 2006 ) . Importantly , clathrin could not be seen colocalizing with many FimA patches , including nearly 60 % of subapical endocytic sites . In the endo - cytic collar , clathrin did not form puncta , but rather local - ized to a haze , whereas in spores and subapical compartments only rarely colocalized with FimA endo - cytic patches . In addition , the claL deletion mutants , though extremely impaired in growth , could internalize FM4 - 64 at rates similar to wild type , suggesting the presence of a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in A . nidulans . In parallel experiments looking at the inter - dependence between ClaH and FimA , ClaH depletion , although clearly disruptive to cells , did not appear to change FimA patch dynamics . fimA disruption produced a different effect on ClaH : ClaH accumulation occurred at the endocytic collar . The structures that accumulated , however , were still much larger , dimmer , and more sta - ble than FimA patches ( Fig . 6E and Movie 9 ) . In all , these suggested that clathrin , and possibly other “early” endocytic proteins , have a unique structure and dynamic from later endocytic proteins , and are possibly always present at sites of endocytosis at a low level , which makes them undetectable or having a negligible role at these sites . Despite the supposed ubiquity of clathrin in eukaryotic endocytosis , coated vesicles have rarely been seen in micrographs produced by transmission electron micros - copy in hyphae and other filamentous fungal cell types ( Bracker , 1967 ; Grove and Bracker , 1970 ; Howard , 1981 ; That et al . , 1987 ; Hoffmann and Mendgen , 1998 ; Fischer - Parton et al . , 2000 ; Hohmann - Marriott et al . , 2006 ; Bourett et al . , 2007 ) , and whether endocytosis in filamentous fungi is primarily clathrin - dependent or ClathrininA . nidulans 311 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 independent has remained unresolved . Mechanisms for clathrin - independent endocytosis are well known in mam - mals and have recently been analyzed in yeast , where they are controlled by proteins generally associated with actin cables , such as formin ( Prosser et al . , 2011 ; Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . The sole formin in A . nidulans , SepA , can be seen at the endocytic collar ( our unpublished observa - tions ) , and is important for hyphal growth ( Harris et al . , 1997 ; Sharpless and Harris , 2002 ) . However , the clathrin - independent pathway in yeast was not dependent upon fimbrin , whereas FimA appears required for nearly all endocytosis ( including FM4 - 64 internalization ) in A . nidu - lans ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ; Lucena - Agell et al . , 2015 ; Schultzhaus and Shaw , 2016 ) . One potential indication that clathrin - independent endocytosis or trafficking is occurring in fungi is the fila - some . These are small vesicles that are associated with cell wall components , and seen surrounded by microfila - ments ( Hoch and Howard , 1980 ; Howard , 1981 ; Takagi et al . , 2003 ) that were later shown to be primarily com - posed of actin ( Bourett and Howard , 1991 ; Roberson , 1992 ; Bourett et al . , 2007 ) . Actin is a major component of the endocytic machinery , and filasomes have been seen in the periphery of the cell , suggesting that they might be originating from the plasma membrane ( K € ubler and Riezman , 1993 ) . Whether they are associated with clathrin , however , has not been resolved , and more recent studies have provided evidence against them being of endocytic nature , at least in terms of trafficking to the vacuole ( Mulholland et al . , 1994 , 1999 , Ayscough , 2000 ; Takagi et al . , 2003 ) . Notably , fimbrin patches are not always associated with the plasma membrane , as some are observed undergoing long distance directional movement within the cytoplasm in A . nidulans ( Upadhyay and Shaw , 2008 ) . Most recently , filasomes were described in Coemansia reversa , but interestingly appeared to have a more regular coat rather than the indistinct mass of filaments surrounding the microvesicle cores of previous images of filasomes . In short , there is little direct evidence for filasome participation in endocy - tosis , but the role of filasomes , and whether clathrin itself is completely dispensable for endocytosis in fungi , remain unresolved . The use of methods to disrupt clathrin specifically at the plasma membrane are likely necessary to shed light on the latter issue , although dis - covering such a method that lacks significant pleiotropic effects is difficult ( Vercauteren et al . , 2010 ; Dutta and Donaldson , 2012 ) . Vesicle trafficking of clathrin in A . nidulans The historic absence of clathrin - coated vesicles seen using electron microscopy , however , did not preclude us from observing a lively network of clathrin trafficking within the cytosol . These led us to hypothesize that cla - thrin may be acting on early endosomes , both due to the speed and bidirectionality of the trafficking puncta , and by observations suggesting movement was on microtubules . Clathrin could potentially affect early endo - somes in three ways : first , by facilitating the transfer of cargo from the late Golgi to endosomes , second , by assisting in the formation of endocytic vesicles , which fuse with early endosomes , and third , because clathrin is known in mammalian cells to produce a specific class of vesicles from early endosomes . In plants , the late Golgi and early endosomes are part of a continuous net - work and share membrane identity ( Viotti et al . , 2010 ) . However , they are spatially resolved in filamentous fungi which has allowed for their extensive characterization ( Steinberg , 2007b ; Abenza et al . , 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . Early endosomes in A . nidulans are composed of two separate populations : large , less motile structures and smaller , bidirectionally motile , rapid structures that move over long distances ( Abenza et al . , 2009 ) . The highly motile ClaH - GFP puncta have the characteristics of the smallest set of early endosomes , and we did observe some colocalization between ClaH - GFP and the early endosomal marker mCherry - RabA . Movement of these proteins together on the same organelles , however , still needs to be established . It is possible that ClaH - GFP trafficking , which is able to stop abruptly and occasion - ally appears to occur from puncta breaking off of larger structures ( and notably does not enter the hyphal apex , as opposed to early endosomes ) , is representative of transient association of ClaH - GFP with vesicles immedi - ately after budding . Further investigations into clathrin in filamentous fungi should make use of biochemical char - acterization of isolated and purified early endosomes . Pharmaceuticals that target clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis but not other roles of clathrin would also be extremely useful in future studies . Experimental procedures Cultivation of A . nidulans All A . nidulans strains used in this study were cultivated on standard , solid minimal medium with the appropriate nutri - tional supplements ( Kaminskyj , 2001 ) unless otherwise noted . For transformation , (cid:2) 10 9 freshly harvested conidia were grown overnight in standard , liquid complete medium with appropriate supplements . Selection occurred on mini - mal medium with 1 . 2 M sorbitol and the appropriate supple - ments added . Germlings were cultivated on sterile coverslips in liquid minimal medium with the appropriate supplements added . alcA : : mCherry : : rabA was induced by culturing spores on solid or liquid minimal medium with 1 % 312 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 ethanol as a carbon source . niiA : : claH was cultured in solid minimal medium with either 40 mM NaNO 3 ( expressing ) or 40 mM NH 4 Cl ( repressing ) as a nitrogen source . Crosses were performed on minimal medium with appropriate sup - plements using standard A . nidulans mating techniques ( Kaminskyj , 2001 ) . Genetic analyses and genetic manipulation of A . nidulans Sequence of the claL , claH , and fimA coding sequences for the creation of primers and for sequence homology analysis were obtained through the Aspergillus genome database ( www . aspgd . org ) ( Cerqueira et al . , 2013 ) . Sequence homol - ogy analysis was performed by the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool for nucleotide and protein sequences on the National Center for Biotechnology Information website ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / ) . All A . nidulans strains used and constructed in this study are listed in Supporting Information Table S1 . The primers and plasmids used to obtain these strains are listed in Sup - porting Information Tables S2 and S3 respectively . The pro - tocol used to perform fusion PCR - based amplification of knockout and GFP / mCherry transformation constructs , as well as the protocol for polyethylene glycol transformation of protoplasts was previously published ( Oakley et al . , 2012 ) . The claL deletion mutant was obtained in the strain TNO2A7 ( Nayak et al . , 2006 ) using Aspergillus fumigatus riboB as a selectable marker to replace the complete claL coding sequence . All fluorescent protein constructs were expressed as the sole copy of the gene under the control of their native promoters through insertion of the GFP or mCherry coding sequence just before the stop codon of each respective coding region . These strains were con - structed in this manner to ensure native levels of expres - sion for all fluorescent constructs . ClaH - GFP and ClaL - GFP in strain TNO2A7 were obtained by inserting a fragment including the GFP coding sequence followed by the A . fumi - gatus pyrG gene amplified from plasmid pFNO3 ( Yang et al . , 2004 ) immediately after the claH or the claL coding sequence . The FimA - mCherry and ClaH - mCherry in the strain NkuNU ( Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ) were obtained by inserting a fragment including the mCherry coding sequence followed by the A . fumigatus pyroA gene amplified from plas - mid pHL85 ( Liu et al . , 2009 ) immediately after the fimA or the claH coding sequence . claH was placed under the con - trol of the niiA promoter by insertion of a construct encoding the A . fumigatus pyrG gene followed by the niiA promoter amplified from plasmid 1863 ( Herv (cid:2) as - Aguilar and Pe ~ nalva , 2010 ) immediately preceding the claH locus through homolo - gous recombination . For each transformation , eight primary transformants were analyzed to confirm the presence of sim - ilar phenotypes for deletion or knockdown mutants , or for similar fluorescence localization and the wild type - like growth in GFP and mCherry fusion strains . All strains were validated by PCR using primers outside of the introduced fragment of DNA to confirm the presence of an insertion of the expected size at the locus . A single inte - gration of ClaH - GFP into strain ZS100 was shown through Southern blotting , and ClaH - GFP fluorescent localization segregated 1 : 1 in crosses with MAD2243 ( late Golgi marker ) ( Pantazopoulou and Pe ~ nalva , 2009 ) , L01028 ( GFP - TubA strain ) ( Horio and Oakley , 2005 ) , and RQ54 ( mCherry - RabA strain ) ( Abenza et al . , 2009 ) . All transformants were single - spored twice before collecting and performing experiments to ensure that strains were homokaryotic . Preparation for imaging , and pharmaceutical and dye application . For imaging of clathrin at late Golgi and at the endocytic collar in mature hyphae , conidia were streaked in the center of a plate of minimal medium and incubated overnight at 30 8 C . On the next day , a square of agar con - taining the leading edge of the growing colony approxi - mately the size of a 22 mm 3 22 mm cover slip was cut out and placed on a glass slide . Next , 15 m l of liquid mini - mal media were applied to the cells on the block of agar , and a coverslip was gently added to minimize damage to the cells ; finally , the cells were incubated at 30 8 C for 20 min to allow for equilibration , and imaged at (cid:2) 23 8 C . Imaging of rapidly growing ( approximately 1 . 3 m m / min ) , leading hyphae could take place for at least 3 h after the addition of the cover slip before the space between the agar and the cov - erslip began to become desiccated . Imaging of germlings , alternatively , began within 5 min of placing the coverslip , with germlings attached , on the microscope slide with no additional liquid minimal medium , as performed previously ( Shaw et al . , 2002 ) . For chilling of germlings , spores germi - nated on coverslips in liquid minimal medium at 30 8 C over - night were placed in 4 8 C for 30 min before being placed on microscope slides pre - cooled to (cid:2) 1 8 C and maintained on ice until just before imaging . For benomyl treatment , 15 m l of liquid minimal media with a final concentration of 5 m g / ml benomyl from a stock of 500 m g / ml in 100 % ethanol was added to the cells before the addition of the coverslip . Cytochalasin A was added at a final concentration of 200 m g / ml from a stock of 10 mg / ml DMSO in a similar manner . The cells were then incubated for 20 min and imaged . A similar procedure was followed using an appropriate amount of 2 % DMSO or 1 % ethanol to strains expressing Lifeact - tagRFP or GFP - TubA to con - firm the effects of these drugs on actin and microtubule respectively . 15 m l of liquid minimal medium with a 300 m g / ml Brefeldin A ( BFA ) was added for observations on ClaH - GFP at late Golgi , and imaging took place immediately . FM4 - 64 , finally , was applied at a final concentration of 20 m M in 15 m m of liquid minimal medium before applying the coverslip to the hyphae , or by injecting a similar volume of medium with a similar concentration of FM4 - 64 to equili - brated cells situated between the surface of the agar and the coverslip using a Hamilton syringe . Imaging beginning immediately after application . Imaging and image analysis All images and videos presented here are of medial optical planes captured with epifluorescence microscopy . Imaging was done on using a system described previously ( Shaw and Upadhyay , 2005 ; Schultzhaus et al . , 2015 ) . This included an Olympus BX51 microscope ( Olympus , Tokyo , Japan ) with appropriate GFP and RFP / mCherry filter sets , ClathrininA . nidulans 313 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 a cooled Hamamatsu Orca ER camera ( Hamamatsu Pho - tonics , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) , Slidebook imaging soft - ware ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations / 3i , Denver , Colorado , USA ) for interfacing with the microscope and for deconvolu - tion when appropriate , FIJI / ImageJ ( Rasband , 1997 ; Schin - delin et al . , 2012 ) for image analysis , Adobe Photoshop ( Adobe , San Jose , California , USA ) for processing and for - matting . When appropriate ( e . g . , when presenting images or videos of dim ClaH - GFP structures such as endocytic sites or moving puncta ) , videos and images are presented in inverted grayscale . To analyze progression from mRFP - PH OSBP fluorescence on an individual late Golgi cisterna to ClaH - GFP fluorescent signal , ten two - color time - lapse image sequences of at least one mature hypha each were captured at a rate of 15 images / min for up to 8 min , taking into account the average late Golgi lifetime of (cid:2) 120 s ( Pantazopoulou et al . , 2014 , # 105 ; 2016 , # 502 ) . Late Golgi cisternae that exhibited a clear transition from mRFP - PH OSBP to ClaH - GFP in this time period and were sufficiently distant from other GFP and mCherry signal during their lifetimes such that their flu - orescent signal would not be augmented by signal from sur - rounding structures in the cytoplasm were chosen for data collection , which went as follows : mean fluorescence levels for each channel ( green and red ) were measured using ImageJ for regions of interest that included the complete late Golgi . Measurements were taken over the period from when mRFP - PH OSBP fluorescence reached maximum levels until the late Golgi cisterna was no longer visible . The mean fluorescence intensity for each channel at each time point was then corrected for background fluorescence lev - els and the relevant intensity data was normalized for maxi - mum and minimum fluorescence intensity of each channel during the entire image sequence to enable graphical rep - resentation of mRFP - PH OSBP to ClaH - GFP transition . A quantitative assessment of colocalization was obtained as a Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient through “Mask Statistics” in Slidebook 5 . 0 by measuring GFP and mCherry overlap in a filled in region of mature hyphae of interest expressing relevant GFP and mCherry constructs . The lifetimes of FimA - GFP and ClaH - GFP endocytic patches were measured using time - lapse sequences with sin - gle plane images for up to 2 min at a rate of 1 s / image . ClaH - GFP lifetimes were primarily calculated for patches as close to the endocytic collar as possible , while FimA - GFP patch life - times were calculated for patches present throughout the cell . Patch lifetimes were calculated from the time a patch was first visible until no signal was present . Colocalization between FimA - mCherry and ClaH - GFP was determined by obtaining time - lapse sequences ( 15 images / min ) of strains that pro - duced both of these proteins , and determining whether GFP signal was present or absent before the appearance of a FimA - mCherry patch . Density of FimA - mCherry patches was calculated by observing the number of new patches that appeared in 1 min within a 5 m m site corresponding to the endocytic collar , or a site of the same size 15 m m away from the apex . The patches that arrived in this time period were also measured for their maximum size and their fate ( fusion , fission , lateral movement outside of the 5 m m window , or dis - appearance ) for each zone ( apical and subapical ) . Kymographs were created using Slidebook by reslicing images along a segmented line drawn through the length of hyphae . At least ten videos of cells expressing ClaH - GFP and exposed to liquid minimal medium with 2 % DMSO , 1 % ethanol , cytochalasin A , or benomyl were taken , at (cid:2) 500 ms / frame and 20 frames , and the number of videos in which trafficking of puncta could be seen was tallied and compared between the treatments . Colocalization of ClaH - GFP with mCherry - RabA and FM4 - 64 was assessed by taking time - lapse sequences at 4s / image and assaying whether puncta in the RFP channel overlapped with puncta in the GFP channel for 3 or more frames in a row , to mini - mize the possibility of false positives . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No . DGE - 1252521 ( ZSS ) , a Texas A & M University Graduate Merit Fel - lowship ( ZSS ) , and TAMU CONACyT Grant No . 2015 - 031 ( BDS ) . We would like to thank Dr Rosa Mouri ~ no - P (cid:2) erez , and Srijana Upadhyay for helpful discussions . The authors report that they have no conflict of interest in regards to this study . References Abenza , J . F . , Pantazopoulou , A . , Rodr (cid:2) ıguez , J . M . , Galindo , A . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2009 ) Long - distance movement of Aspergillus nidulans early endosomes on microtubule tracks . Traffic 10 : 57 – 75 . Araujo - Baz (cid:2) an , L . , Pe ~ nalva , M . A . , and Espeso , E . A . ( 2008 ) Preferential localization of the endocytic internalization machinery to hyphal tips underlies polarization of the actin cytoskeleton in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol Microbiol 67 : 891 – 905 . Araujo - Palomares , C . L . , Castro - Longoria , E . , and Riquelme , M . ( 2007 ) Ontogeny of the Spitzenk € orper in germlings of Neurospora crassa . Fungal Genet Biol 44 : 492 – 503 . Ayscough , K . R . ( 2000 ) Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskele - ton . Curr Biol 10 : 1587 – 1590 . Becht , P . , K € onig , J . , and Feldbr € ugge , M . ( 2006 ) The RNA - binding protein Rrm4 is essential for polarity in Ustilago maydis and shuttles along microtubules . J Cell Sci 119 : 4964 – 4973 . Bonifacino , J . S . , and Glick , B . S . ( 2004 ) The mechanisms of vesicle budding and fusion . Cell 116 : 153 – 166 . Bourett , T . , and Howard , R . ( 1991 ) Ultrastructural immuno - localization of actin in a fungus . Protoplasma 163 : 199 – 202 . Bourett , T . M . , James , S . W . , and Howard , R . J . ( 2007 ) The endomembrane system of the fungal cell . In Biology of the Fungal Cell , 2nd edn . Howard , R . J . , and Gow , N . A . R . ( eds ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag , pp . 1 – 47 . Bowman , B . J . , Draskovic , M . , Freitag , M . , and Bowman , E . J . ( 2009 ) Structure and distribution of organelles and cellular location of calcium transporters in Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot Cell 8 : 1845 – 1855 . 314 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 Bracker , C . E . ( 1967 ) Ultrastructure of fungi . Annu Rev Phytopathol 5 : 343 – 372 . Brodsky , F . M . ( 1988 ) Living with clathrin : its role in intracel - lular membrane traffic . Science 242 : 1396 – 1402 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , and Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) Biological basket weaving : forma - tion and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 17 : 517 – 568 . Brodsky , F . M . , Hill , B . L . , Acton , S . L . , N € athke , I . , Wong , D . H . , Ponnambalam , S . , and Parham , P . ( 1991 ) Clathrin light chains : arrays of protein motifs that regulate coated - vesicle dynamics . Trends Biochem Sci 16 : 208 – 213 . B € uhler , N . , Hagiwara , D . , and Takeshita , N . ( 2015 ) Func - tional analysis of sterol transporter orthologues in the fila - mentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot Cell 14 : 908 – 921 . Caballero - Lima , D . , Kaneva , I . N . , Watton , S . P . , Sudbery , P . E . , and Craven , C . J . ( 2013 ) The spatial distribution of the exocyst and actin cortical patches is sufficient to organize hyphal tip growth . Eukaryot Cell 12 : 998 – 1008 . Cao , H . , Krueger , E . W . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2011 ) Hepato - cytes internalize trophic receptors at large endocytic “Hot Spots” . Hepatology 54 : 1819 – 1829 . Carroll , S . Y . , Stimpson , H . E . , Weinberg , J . , Toret , C . P . , Sun , Y . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2012 ) Analysis of yeast endocytic site formation and maturation through a regulatory transi - tion point . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 : 657 – 668 . Castillo - Lluva , S . , Alvarez - Tabar (cid:2) es , I . , Weber , I . , Steinberg , G . , and P (cid:2) erez - Mart (cid:2) ın , J . ( 2007 ) Sustained cell polarity and virulence in the phytopathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis depends on an essential cyclin - dependent kinase from the Cdk5 / Pho85 family . J Cell Sci 120 : 1584 – 1595 . Cerqueira , G . C . , Arnaud , M . B . , Inglis , D . O . , Skrzypek , M . S . , Binkley , G . , Simison , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) The aspergillus genome database : multispecies curation and incorpora - tion of RNA - Seq data to improve structural gene annota - tions . Nucleic Acids Res 42 : D705 – 710 . Chanda , A . , Roze , L . V . , Kang , S . , Artymovich , K . A . , Hicks , G . R . , Raikhel , N . V . , et al . ( 2009 ) A key role for vesicles in fungal secondary metabolism . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 19533 – 19538 . Chen , C . Y . , Reese , M . L . , Hwang , P . K . , Ota , N . , Agard , D . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2002 ) Clathrin light and heavy chain interface : a - helix binding superhelix loops via critical tryp - tophans . EMBO J 21 : 6072 – 6082 . Cole , L . , Davies , D . , Hyde , G . , and Ashford , A . ( 2000 ) ER - tracker dye and BODIPY - brefeldin A differentiate the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi bodies from the tubular - vacuole system in living hyphae of Pisolithus tinctorius . J Microsc 197 : 239 – 248 . Costaguta , G . , Stefan , C . , Bensen , E . , Emr , S . , and Payne , G . ( 2001 ) Yeast Gga coat proteins function with clathrin in Golgi to endosome transport . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1885 – 1896 . Cove , D . ( 1966 ) The induction and repression of nitrate reductase in the fungus Aspergillus nidulans . Biochim Biophys Acta 113 : 51 – 56 . Curwin , A . J . , von Blume , J . , and Malhotra , V . ( 2012 ) Cofilin - mediated sorting and export of specific cargo from the Golgi apparatus in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 2327 – 2338 . Daboussi , L . , Costaguta , G . , and Payne , G . S . ( 2012 ) Phos - phoinositide - mediated clathrin adaptor progression at the trans - Golgi network . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 239 – 248 . Dargent , R . , Touze , J . M . , Rami , J . , and Montant , C . ( 1982 ) Cytochemical characterization of Golgi apparatus in some filamentous fungi . Exp Mycol 6 : 101 – 114 . Delgado - (cid:2) Alvarez , D . L . , Callejas - Negrete , O . A . , G (cid:2) omez , N . , Freitag , M . , Roberson , R . W . , Smith , L . G . , and Mouri ~ no - P (cid:2) erez , R . R . ( 2010 ) Visualization of F - actin localization and dynamics with live cell markers in Neurospora crassa . Fungal Genet Biol 47 : 573 – 586 . Draper , R . K . , Goda , Y . , Brodsky , F . M . , and Pfeffer , S . R . ( 1990 ) Antibodies to clathrin inhibit endocytosis but not recycling to the trans Golgi network in vitro . Science 248 : 1539 – 1541 . Dutta , D . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2012 ) Search for inhibitors of endocytosis : intended specificity and unintended con - sequences . Cell Logistics 2 : 203 – 208 . Echauri - Espinosa , R . O . , Callejas - Negrete , O . A . , Roberson , R . W . , Bartnicki - Garc (cid:2) ıa , S . , and Mouri ~ no - P (cid:2) erez , R . R . ( 2012 ) Coronin is a component of the endocytic collar of hyphae of Neurospora crassa and is necessary for nor - mal growth and morphogenesis . PLoS One 7 : e38237 . Epp , E . , Nazarova , E . , Regan , H . , Douglas , L . M . , Konopka , J . B . , Vogel , J . , and Whiteway , M . ( 2013 ) Clathrin - and Arp2 / 3 - independent endocytosis in the fungal pathogen Candida albicans . MBio 4 : e00476 – 13 . Epp , E . , Walther , A . , L (cid:2) epine , G . , Leon , Z . , Mullick , A . , Raymond , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) Forward genetics in Candida albicans that reveals the Arp2 / 3 complex is required for hyphal formation , but not endocytosis . Mol Microbiol 75 : 1182 – 1198 . Fairn , G . D . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2010 ) Phosphatidylserine polar - ization is required for proper Cdc42 localization and for development of cell polarity . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1424 – 1430 . Fairn , G . D . , Hermansson , M . , Somerharju , P . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2011 ) Phosphatidylserine is polarized and required for proper Cdc42 localization and for develop - ment of cell polarity . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1424 – 1430 . Feldbr € ugge , M . , K € amper , J . , Steinberg , G . , and Kahmann , R . ( 2004 ) Regulation of mating and pathogenic develop - ment in Ustilago maydis . Curr Opin Microbiol 7 : 666 – 672 . Fischer - Parton , S . , Parton , R . , Hickey , P . , Dijksterhuis , J . , Atkinson , H . , and Read , N . ( 2000 ) Confocal microscopy of FM4 - 64 as a tool for analysing endocytosis and vesicle trafficking in living fungal hyphae . J Microsc 198 : 246 – 259 . Fuchs , U . , Hause , G . , Schuchardt , I . , and Steinberg , G . ( 2006 ) Endocytosis is essential for pathogenic develop - ment in the corn smut fungus Ustilago maydis . Plant Cell 18 : 2066 – 2081 . Gall , W . E . , Geething , N . C . , Hua , Z . , Ingram , M . F . , Liu , K . , Chen , S . I . , and Graham , T . R . ( 2002 ) Drs2p - dependent formation of exocytic clathrin - coated vesicles in vivo . Curr Biol 12 : 1623 – 1627 . Goldman , G . H . , and Osmani , S . A . ( 2007 ) The Aspergilli : Genomics , Medical Aspects , Biotechnology , and Research Methods . CRC press , London . Granseth , B . , Odermatt , B . , Royle , S . J . , and Lagnado , L . ( 2006 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the dominant mechanism of vesicle retrieval at hippocampal synapses . Neuron 51 : 773 – 786 . ClathrininA . nidulans 315 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 Griffiths , G . , and Simons , K . ( 1986 ) The trans Golgi net - work : sorting at the exit site of the Golgi complex . Sci - ence 234 : 438 – 443 . Grove , S . N . , and Bracker , C . E . ( 1970 ) Protoplasmic organi - zation of hyphal tips among fungi : vesicles and Spit - zenk € orper . J Bacteriol 104 : 989 – 1009 . Gupta , Y . K . , Dagdas , Y . F . , Martinez - Rocha , A . L . , Kershaw , M . J . , Littlejohn , G . R . , Ryder , L . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) Septin - dependent assembly of the exocyst is essential for plant infection by Magnaporthe oryzae . Plant Cell 27 : 3277 – 3289 . Harris , S . D . ( 2013 ) Golgi organization and the apical exten - sion of fungal hyphae : an essential relationship . Mol Microbiol 89 : 212 – 215 . Harris , S . D . , Hamer , L . , Sharpless , K . E . , and Hamer , J . E . ( 1997 ) The Aspergillus nidulans sepA gene encodes an FH1 / 2 protein involved in cytokinesis and the mainte - nance of cellular polarity . EMBO J 16 : 3474 – 3483 . Herv (cid:2) as - Aguilar , A . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2010 ) Endocytic machinery protein SlaB is dispensable for polarity estab - lishment but necessary for polarity maintenance in hyphal tip cells of Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot Cell 9 : 1504 – 1518 . Hinners , I . , and Tooze , S . A . ( 2003 ) Changing directions : clathrin - mediated transport between the Golgi and endo - somes . J Cell Sci 116 : 763 – 771 . Hoch , H . , and Howard , R . ( 1980 ) Ultrastructure of freeze - substituted hyphae of the basidiomycete Laetisaria arva - lis . Protoplasma 103 : 281 – 297 . Hoffmann , J . , and Mendgen , K . ( 1998 ) Endocytosis and membrane turnover in the germ tube of Uromyces fabae . Fungal Genet Biol 24 : 77 – 85 . Hohmann - Marriott , M . F . , Uchida , M . , Van De Meene , A . M . , Garret , M . , Hjelm , B . E . , Kokoori , S . , and Roberson , R . W . ( 2006 ) Application of electron tomography to fungal ultra - structure studies . New Phytol 172 : 208 – 220 . Horio , T . , and Oakley , B . R . ( 2005 ) The role of microtubules in rapid hyphal tip growth of Aspergillus nidulans . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 918 – 926 . Howard , R . J . ( 1981 ) Ultrastructural analysis of hyphal tip cell growth in fungi : Spitzenk € orper , cytoskeleton and endomem - branes after freeze - substitution . J Cell Sci 48 : 89 – 103 . Jones , L . A . , and Sudbery , P . E . ( 2010 ) Spitzenk € orper , exo - cyst , and polarisome components in Candida albicans hyphae show different patterns of localization and have distinct dynamic properties . Eukaryot Cell 9 : 1455 – 1465 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2005 ) A mod - ular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocyto - sis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . Kaminskyj , S . ( 2001 ) Fundamentals of growth , storage , genetics and microscopy of Aspergillus nidulans . Fungal Genet Newsl 48 : 25 – 31 . Kim , D . U . , Hayles , J . , Kim , D . , Wood , V . , Park , H . O . , Won , M . , et al . Analysis of a genome - wide set of gene dele - tions in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Nat Biotechnol 28 : 617 – 623 . Kim , J . J . , Lipatova , Z . , Majumdar , U . , and Segev , N . ( 2016 ) Regulation of golgi cisternal progression by Ypt / Rab GTPases . Dev Cell 36 : 440 – 452 . Kim , K . , Galletta , B . J . , Schmidt , K . O . , Chang , F . S . , Blumer , K . J . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) Actin - based motility during endocytosis in budding yeast . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 1354 – 1363 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) Clathrin . Annu Rev Biochem 69 : 699 – 727 . Kirchhausen , T . , Owen , D . , and Harrison , S . C . ( 2014 ) Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane traffic . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 : a016725 . K € ubler , E . , and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 12 : 2855 – 2862 . Kukulski , W . , Picco , A . , Specht , T . , Briggs , J . A . G . , and Kaksonen , M . ( 2016 ) Clathrin modulates vesicle scission , but not invagination shape , in yeast endocytosis . eLife 5 : e16036 . Lauvrak , S . U . , Torgersen , M . L . , and Sandvig , K . ( 2004 ) Effi - cient endosome - to - Golgi transport of Shiga toxin is dependent on dynamin and clathrin . J Cell Sci 117 : 2321 – 2331 . Le Borgne , R . , and Hoflack , B . ( 1997 ) Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors regulate the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles in the TGN . J Cell Biol 137 : 335 – 345 . Lee , S . C . , Schmidtke , S . N . , Dangott , L . J . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2008 ) Aspergillus nidulans ArfB plays a role in endocyto - sis and polarized growth . Eukaryot Cell 7 : 1278 – 1288 . Lee , S . C . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2008 ) Localization and function of ADP ribosylation factor A in Aspergillus nidulans . FEMS Microbiol Lett 283 : 216 – 222 . Lemmon , S . K . , and Jones , E . W . ( 1987 ) Clathrin require - ment for normal growth of yeast . Science 238 : 504 – 509 . Levine , T . P . , and Munro , S . ( 2002 ) Targeting of Golgi - specific pleckstrin homology domains involves both PtdIns 4 - kinase - dependent and - independent compo - nents . Curr Biol 12 : 695 – 704 . Liu , H . L . , Souza , C . P . D . , Osmani , A . H . , and Osmani , S . A . ( 2009 ) The three fungal transmembrane nuclear pore complex proteins of Aspergillus nidulans are dispensable in the presence of an intact An - Nup84 - 120 complex . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 616 – 630 . Liu , K . , Surendhran , K . , Nothwehr , S . F . , and Graham , T . R . ( 2008 ) P4 - ATPase requirement for AP - 1 / clathrin function in protein transport from the trans - Golgi network and early endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 3526 – 3535 . L € opez - Franco , R . , and Bracker , C . E . ( 1996 ) Diversity and dynamics of the Spitzenk € orper in growing hyphal tips of higher fungi . Protoplasma 195 : 90 – 111 . Lucena - Agell , D . , Galindo , A . , Arst , H . N . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2015 ) Aspergillus nidulans ambient pH signaling does not require endocytosis . Eukaryot Cell 14 : 545 – 553 . Mayor , S . , Parton , R . G . , and Donaldson , J . G . ( 2014 ) Cla - thrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 : a016758 . McMahon , H . T . , and Mills , I . G . ( 2004 ) COP and clathrin - coated vesicle budding : different pathways , common approaches . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 379 – 391 . Mioka , T . , Fujimura - Kamada , K . , and Tanaka , K . ( 2014 ) Asymmetric distribution of phosphatidylserine is gen - erated in the absence of phospholipid flippases in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . MicrobiologyOpen 3 : 803 – 821 . 316 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . , and Botstein , D . ( 1999 ) Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 799 – 817 . Mulholland , J . , Preuss , D . , Moon , A . , Wong , A . , Drubin , D . , and Botstein , D . ( 1994 ) Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma mem - brane . J Cell Biol 125 : 381 – 391 . Nayak , T . , Szewczyk , E . , Oakley , C . E . , Osmani , A . , Ukil , L . , Murray , S . L . , et al . ( 2006 ) A versatile and efficient gene - targeting system for Aspergillus nidulans . Genetics 172 : 1557 – 1566 . Newpher , T . M . , Smith , R . P . , Lemmon , V . , and Lemmon , S . K . ( 2005 ) In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor - dependent recruitment to the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast . Dev Cell 9 : 87 – 98 . Oakley , C . E . , Edgerton - Morgan , H . , and Oakley , B . R . ( 2012 ) Tools for manipulation of secondary metabolism path - ways : rapid promoter replacements and gene deletions in Aspergillus nidulans . In Fungal Secondary Metabolism . Methods in Moleculr Biology , Vol . 944 . Keller , N . P . , Turner , G . ( eds ) . Springer , pp . 143 – 161 . Osherov , N . , Mathew , J . , and May , G . S . ( 2000 ) Polarity - defective mutants of Aspergillus nidulans . Fungal Genet Biol 31 : 181 – 188 . Pantazopoulou , A . ( 2016 ) The Golgi apparatus : insights from filamentous fungi . Mycologia 108 : 603 – 622 . Pantazopoulou , A . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2009 ) Organization and dynamics of the Aspergillus nidulans Golgi during api - cal extension and mitosis . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 4335 – 4347 . Pantazopoulou , A . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2011 ) Characteriza - tion of Aspergillus nidulans RabC / Rab6 . Traffic 12 : 386 – 406 . Pantazopoulou , A . , Pinar , M . , Xiang , X . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2014 ) Maturation of late Golgi cisternae into RabE / RAB11 exocytic post - Golgi carriers visualized in vivo . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 2428 – 2443 . Pearse , B . ( 1976 ) Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 73 : 1255 – 1259 . Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2005 ) Tracing the endocytic pathway of Aspergillus nidulans with FM4 - 64 . Fungal Genet Biol 42 : 963 – 975 . Pinar , M . , Arst , H . N . , Pantazopoulou , A . , Tagua , V . G . , de los R (cid:2) ıos , V . , Rodr (cid:2) ıguez - Salarichs , J . , et al . ( 2015 ) TRAP - PII regulates exocytic Golgi exit by mediating nucleotide exchange on the Ypt31 ortholog RabERAB11 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 : 4346 – 4351 . Pinar , M . , Pantazopoulou , A . , Arst , H . N . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2013 ) Acute inactivation of the Aspergillus nidulans Golgi membrane fusion machinery : correlation of apical extension arrest and tip swelling with cisternal disorgani - zation . Mol Microbiol 89 : 228 – 248 . Prosser , D . C . , Drivas , T . G . , Maldonado - B (cid:2) aez , L . , and Wendland , B . ( 2011 ) Existence of a novel clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in yeast that depends on Rho1 and formin . J Cell Biol 195 : 657 – 671 . Puertollano , R . , Van Der Wel , N . N . , Greene , L . E . , Eisenberg , E . , Peters , P . J . , and Bonifacino , J . S . ( 2003 ) Morphology and dynamics of clathrin / GGA1 - coated car - riers budding from the trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 1545 – 1557 . Punt , P . J . , Strauss , J . , Smit , R . , Kinghorn , J . R . , Van den Hondel , C . , and Scazzocchio , C . ( 1995 ) The intergenic region between the divergently transcribed niiA and niaD genes of Aspergillus nidulans contains multiple NirA bind - ing sites which act bidirectionally . Mol Cell Biol 15 : 5688 – 5699 . Raiborg , C . , Bache , K . G . , Gillooly , D . J . , Madshus , I . H . , Stang , E . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2002 ) Hrs sorts ubiquiti - nated proteins into clathrin - coated microdomains of early endosomes . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 394 – 398 . Raiborg , C . , Bache , K . G . , Mehlum , A . , Stang , E . , and Stenmark , H . ( 2001 ) Hrs recruits clathrin to early endo - somes . EMBO J 20 : 5008 – 5021 . Rasband , W . ( 1997 ) ImageJ . Bethesda , MD : US National Institutes of Health . Read , N . D . , and Kalkman , E . R . ( 2003 ) Does endocytosis occur in fungal hyphae ? Fungal Genet Biol 39 : 199 – 203 . Riquelme , M . ( 2013 ) Tip growth in filamentous fungi : a road trip to the apex . Annu Rev Microbiol 67 : 587 – 609 . Riquelme , M . , Bartnicki - Garc (cid:2) ıa , S . , Gonz (cid:2) alez - Prieto , J . M . , S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on , E . , Verd (cid:2) ın - Ramos , J . A . , Beltr (cid:2) an - Aguilar , A . , and Freitag , M . ( 2007 ) Spitzenk € orper localization and intracellular traffic of green fluorescent protein - labeled CHS - 3 and CHS - 6 chitin synthases in living hyphae of Neurospora crassa . Eukaryot Cell 6 : 1853 – 1864 . Riquelme , M . , Bredeweg , E . L . , Callejas - Negrete , O . , Roberson , R . W . , Ludwig , S . , Beltr (cid:2) an - Aguilar , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) The Neurospora crassa exocyst complex tethers Spitzenk € orper vesicles to the apical plasma membrane during polarized growth . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 1312 – 1326 . Riquelme , M . , Roberson , R . , and S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on , E . ( 2016 ) 3 Hyphal tip growth in filamentous fungi . In Growth , Differentiation and Sexuality . The Mycota Volume I . Esser , K . , Wendland , J . ( Eds ) . Publisher Springer . Roberson , R . W . ( 1992 ) The actin cytoskeleton in hyphal cells of Sclerotium rolfsii . Mycologia 84 : 41 – 51 . Robinson , M . S . ( 1994 ) The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 6 : 538 – 544 . Robinson , M . S . ( 2015 ) Forty years of clathrin - coated vesicles . Traffic 16 : 1210 – 1238 . Rothman , J . E . , and Orci , L . ( 1990 ) Movement of proteins through the Golgi stack : a molecular dissection of vesicu - lar transport . FASEB J 4 : 1460 – 1468 . Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2009 ) Dis - tinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000191 . Salamero , J . , Sztul , E . S . , and Howell , K . E . ( 1990 ) Exocytic transport vesicles generated in vitro from the trans - Golgi network carry secretory and plasma membrane proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 : 7717 – 7721 . S (cid:2) anchez - Ferrero , J . C . , and Pe ~ nalva , M . A . ( 2007 ) Endocyto - sis . Aspergilli 177 – 197 . S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on , E . , Bowman , Seidel , B . , Fischer , C . , Novick , R . P . , and Riquelme , M . ( 2015 ) The Rab GTPase YPT - 1 associates with Golgi cisternae and Spitzenk € orper micro - vesicles in Neurospora crassa . Mol Microbiol . 26 : 472 – 490 . S (cid:2) anchez - Le (cid:2) on , E . , Verd (cid:2) ın , J . , Freitag , M . , Roberson , R . W . , Bartnicki - Garcia , S . , and Riquelme , M . ( 2011 ) Traffic of chitin synthase 1 ( CHS - 1 ) to the Spitzenk € orper and developing septa in hyphae of Neurospora crassa : actin ClathrininA . nidulans 317 V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318 dependence and evidence of distinct microvesicle popula - tions . Eukaryot Cell 10 : 683 – 695 . Schekman , R . , and Orci , L . ( 1996 ) Coat proteins and vesi - cle budding . Science 271 : 1526 – 1533 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Meth - ods 9 : 676 – 682 . Schultzhaus , Z . , Quintanilla , L . , Hilton , A . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2016 ) Live cell imaging of actin dynamics in the filamen - tous fungus Aspergillus nidulans . Microsc Microanal 22 : 1 – 11 . Schultzhaus , Z . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2016 ) The flippase DnfB is cargo of fimbrin - associated endocytosis in Aspergillus nidulans , and likely recycles through the late Golgi . Com - mun Integr Biol 9 : e1141843 . Schultzhaus , Z . S . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2015 ) Endocytosis and exocytosis in hyphal growth . Fungal Biol Rev . 29 : 43 – 53 . Schultzhaus , Z . , Yan , H . , and Shaw , B . ( 2015 ) Aspergillus nidulans flippase DnfA is cargo of the endocytic collar , and plays complementary roles in growth and phosphati - dylserine asymmetry with another flippase , DnfB . Mol Microbiol 97 : 18 – 32 . Sharpless , K . E . , and Harris , S . D . ( 2002 ) Functional charac - terization and localization of the Aspergillus nidulans for - min sepA . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 469 – 479 . Shaw , B . D . , Chung , D . W . , Wang , C . L . , Quintanilla , L . A . , and Upadhyay , S . ( 2011 ) A role for endocytic recycling in hyphal growth . Fungal Biol 115 : 541 – 546 . Shaw , B . D . , Momany , C . , and Momany , M . ( 2002 ) Aspergil - lus nidulans swoF encodes an N - myristoyl transferase . Eukaryot Cell 1 : 241 – 248 . Shaw , B . D . , and Upadhyay , S . ( 2005 ) Aspergillus nidulans swoK encodes an RNA binding protein that is important for cell polarity . Fungal Genet Biol 42 : 862 – 872 . Steinberg , G . ( 2007a ) Hyphal growth : a tale of motors , lip - ids , and the Spitzenk € orper . Eukaryot Cell 6 : 351 – 360 . Steinberg , G . ( 2007b ) On the move : endosomes in fungal growth and pathogenicity . Nat Rev Microbiol 5 : 309 – 316 . Sudbery , P . ( 2011 ) Fluorescent proteins illuminate the struc - ture and function of the hyphal tip apparatus . Fungal Genet Biol 48 : 849 – 857 . Surma , M . A . , Klose , C . , Klemm , R . W . , Ejsing , C . S . , and Simons , K . ( 2011 ) Generic sorting of raft lipids into secretory vesicles in yeast . Traffic 12 : 1139 – 1147 . Taheri - Talesh , N . , Horio , T . , Araujo - Baz (cid:2) an , L . , Dou , X . , Espeso , E . A . , Pe ~ nalva , M . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) The tip growth apparatus of Aspergillus nidulans . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 1439 – 1449 . Takagi , T . , Ishijima , S . A . , Ochi , H . , and Osumi , M . ( 2003 ) Ultrastructure and behavior of actin cytoskeleton during cell wall formation in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomy - ces pombe . J Electron Microsc 52 : 161 – 174 . Takeda , M . , Yamagami , K . , and Tanaka , K . ( 2014 ) Role of phosphatidylserine in phospholipid flippase - mediated ves - icle transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Eukaryot Cell 13 : 363 – 375 . That , T . , Hoang - Van , K . , Turian , G . , and Hoch , H . ( 1987 ) Isolation and characterization of coated vesicles from fila - mentous fungi . Eur J Cell Biol 43 : 189 – 194 . Tuo , S . , Nakashima , K . , and Pringle , J . R . ( 2013 ) Role of endocytosis in localization and maintenance of the spatial markers for bud - site selection in yeast . PLoS One 8 : e72123 . Upadhyay , S . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2008 ) The role of actin , fim - brin and endocytosis in growth of hyphae in Aspergillus nidulans . Mol Microbiol 68 : 690 – 705 . Vercauteren , D . , Vandenbroucke , R . E . , Jones , A . T . , Rejman , J . , Demeester , J . , De Smedt , S . C . , et al . ( 2010 ) The use of inhibitors to study endocytic pathways of gene carriers : optimization and pitfalls . Mol Ther 18 : 561 – 569 . Verd (cid:2) ın , J . , Bartnicki - Garcia , S . , and Riquelme , M . ( 2009 ) Functional stratification of the Spitzenk € orper of Neuro - spora crassa . Mol Microbiol 74 : 1044 – 1053 . Viotti , C . , Bubeck , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Krebs , M . , Langhans , M . , van den Berg , W . , et al . ( 2010 ) Endocytic and secre - tory traffic in Arabidopsis merge in the trans - Golgi net - work / early endosome , an independent and highly dynamic organelle . Plant Cell 22 : 1344 – 1357 . Wakeham , D . E . , Abi - Rached , L . , Towler , M . C . , Wilbur , J . D . , Parham , P . , and Brodsky , F . M . ( 2005 ) Clathrin heavy and light chain isoforms originated by independent mecha - nisms of gene duplication during chordate evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 7209 – 7214 . Wang , C . L . , and Shaw , B . D . ( 2016 ) F - actin localization dynamics during appressorium formation in Colletotri - chum graminicola . Mycologia 108 : 506 – 514 . Wedlich - S € oldner , R . , B € olker , M . , Kahmann , R . , and Steinberg , G . ( 2000 ) A putative endosomal t - SNARE links exo - and endocytosis in the phytopathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis . EMBO J 19 : 1974 – 1986 . Weinberg , J . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2012 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol 22 : 1 – 13 . Xu , D . , Jiang , B . , Ketela , T . , Lemieux , S . , Veillette , K . , Martel , N . , et al . ( 2007 ) Genome - wide fitness test and mechanism - of - action studies of inhibitory compounds in Candida albicans . PLoS Pathog 3 : e92 . Yang , L . , Ukil , L . , Osmani , A . , Nahm , F . , Davies , J . , De Souza , C . P . , et al . ( 2004 ) Rapid production of gene replacement constructs and generation of a green fluo - rescent protein - tagged centromeric marker in Aspergillus nidulans . Eukaryot Cell 3 : 1359 – 1362 . Yeung , T . , Gilbert , G . E . , Shi , J . , Silvius , J . , Kapus , A . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2008 ) Membrane phosphatidylserine regu - lates surface charge and protein localization . Science 319 : 210 – 213 . Zhang , J . , Qiu , R . , Arst , H . N . , Pe ~ nalva , M . A . , and Xiang , X . ( 2014 ) HookA is a novel dynein – early endosome linker critical for cargo movement in vivo . J Cell Biol 204 : 1009 – 1026 . Zhu , Y . , Drake , M . T . , and Kornfeld , S . ( 1999 ) ADP - ribosyla - tion factor 1 dependent clathrin - coat assembly on synthetic liposomes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 5013 – 5018 . Supporting information Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher’s web - site . 318 Z . Schultzhaus , T . B . Johnson , andB . D . Shaw (cid:2) V C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd , Molecular Microbiology , 103 , 299 – 318