Eukaryotic cells are highly compartmentalized , seg - regating specific functions within membrane - bound organelles . Compartmentalization probably evolved from the need to provide distinct environmental conditions for the optimal operation of individual metabolic pathways , and also to store energy as electrochemical gradients across the membrane dielectric . Protons ( and proton equivalents ) have a crucial role in this context . Virtually all proteins depend on pH to maintain their structure and function , and protonation – deprotonation events dic - tate the charge of biological surfaces and are an integral part of many metabolic reactions 1 . Moreover , the proton - motive force ( ψ H + ) is key to the generation and conver - sion of cellular energy . It is therefore not surprising that intracellular pH is stringently regulated , nor that it varies greatly among the different organelles ( FIG . 1 ) . The objec - tive of this Review is to provide an up - to - date overview of the sensors , determinants and regulators of the pH of individual subcellular compartments . For simplicity , our discussion will concentrate on the mechanisms that are present in most non - polarized mammalian cells , address - ing only occasionally the unique , but no less important , systems that have been developed by epithelial and other highly specialized cells . Buffering power : rapid but finite Because of its paramount importance , the pH of the cell is defended at multiple levels . Cellular compartments are protected from rapid , localized pH swings by their inher - ent pH buffering capacity ( β ) . The total buffer capacity ( β total ) consists of two components : β intrinsic and β HCO3 – . β intrinsic is provided by various intracellular weak acids and bases , including phosphate groups and side chains of amino acids 2 . Remarkably , the pK a values of most ionizable groups in the cell are considerably above or below neutrality . As a result , β intrinsic is comparatively low at physiological pH ( 10 – 20 mM at pH 7 . 2 ) , increasing at more extreme values ( for example , 40 mM at pH 6 . 4 ) 3 . This apparent shortcoming is alleviated by the second component of the total buffering capacity , β HCO3 – . Mammalian cells are con - tinuously exposed to CO 2 , which is uncharged and readily traverses most biological membranes 4 . The hydration of CO 2 and the subsequent deprotonation of carbonic acid generate HCO 3 – , an effective proton buffer ( BOX 1 ) . At the prevailing CO 2 pressure ( P CO2 ; ~ 37 mm Hg ) and using the equation in BOX 1 , β HCO3 – can be calculated to contribute 29 mM to the total buffering capacity at pH 7 . 1 . Together , β intrinsic and β HCO3 – reduce the impact of acute challenges on the intracellular pH , but are insufficient to counteract sustained stress . In the absence of other regu - latory processes , the continuous generation of metabolic acid equivalents , together with the ongoing transport of ions that alter the pH ( for example , H + , OH – and HCO 3 – ) , would promptly consume the passive ( physicochemical ) buffers , which are finite . Therefore other , more dynamic and sustained mechanisms are required to ensure long - term pH homeostasis . As discussed in detail below , vari - ous different , often redundant , mechanisms have evolved to regulate pH in individual compartments . Cytosolic pH Under physiological conditions , the extracellular pH is slightly alkaline ( ~ 7 . 3 – 7 . 4 ) . However , even when bathed in large volumes of this heavily buffered , alkaline medium , the cytosolic pH ( pH c ) is slightly more acidic ( FIG . 1 ) and , in fact , the cells have to guard against further acidification . Two reasons account for the tendency of the cytosol to acidify . First , the electrical potential across the membrane , which is negative inside , drives the uptake of positively charged protons and the efflux of negatively charged * Departments of Physiology and Biochemistry , University of Alberta , Canada . ‡ Cell Biology Program , The Hospital for Sick Children , Toronto , Canada . § Department of Physiology , McGill University , Montreal , Canada . Correspondence to S . G . e - mail : sga @ sickkids . ca doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2820 Published online 9 December 2009 Proton - motive force ( ψ H + ) . The driving force for proton ( or equivalent ) movement , consisting of the proton concentration gradient and the transmembrane electrical potential . pH buffering capacity A measure of the ability of a solution to withstand changes in pH . It is defined as β = dn / dpH , where n is the number of acid or base equivalents that need to be added to alter pH . Sensors and regulators of intracellular pH Joseph R . Casey * , Sergio Grinstein ‡ and John Orlowski § Abstract | Protons dictate the charge and structure of macromolecules and are used as energy currency by eukaryotic cells . The unique function of individual organelles therefore depends on the establishment and stringent maintenance of a distinct pH . This , in turn , requires a means to sense the prevailing pH and to respond to deviations from the norm with effective mechanisms to transport , produce or consume proton equivalents . A dynamic , finely tuned balance between proton - extruding and proton - importing processes underlies pH homeostasis not only in the cytosol , but in other cellular compartments as well . R E V I E W S 50 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology CO 2 + H 2 O HCO 3 – + H + CO 2 Cytosol Plasma membrane CA12 CA2 HCO 3 – + H + CO 2 + H 2 O Endoplasmicreticulum 7 . 2 Nucleus 7 . 2 Cytosol 7 . 2 Lysosome 4 . 7 Lateendosome 5 . 5 Earlyendosome 6 . 3 Recyclingendosome 6 . 5 Secretorygranule 5 . 5 Peroxisomes 7 Mitochondria 8 Cis Medial Trans Trans - golgi network Golgi network 6 . 7 6 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology pK a The acid dissociation constant . A quantitative measure of the tendency of an acid to dissociate in solution . It is calculated as pK a = – log 10 K a , where K a = [ A – ] [ H + ] / [ HA ] and [ A – ] , [ H + ] and [ HA ] are the concentration of the dissociated acid , protons and the undissociated ( protonated ) acid , respectively . bases , such as HCO 3 – , through conductive pathways . Second , net acid equivalents are generated by various metabolic reactions ( for example , ATP production in the cytoplasm by glycolysis and in mitochondria by oxidative phosphorylation ; see FIG . 2 ) , a situation that is exacerbated during bursts of activity , such as in muscle contraction or on activation of leukocytes by pathogens 5 . To prevent their gradual accumulation , protons must be continuously and actively extruded from the cytosol across the plasma membrane . The energy for proton extrusion can be provided directly or indirectly by ATP . Proton - pumping ATPases exist in the plasma membrane of some epithelial cells and in osteoclasts . These cells express on their surface vacuolar - type ( V ) electrogenic H + - ATP hydrolases ( V - ATPases ) — energy - driven active proton pumps that are similar to those found in endomembranes ( see below ) and are characteristically sensitive to macrolide antibiotics such as bafilomycin 6 . The acid - secreting parietal cells of the stomach and distal tubule cells of the kidney addition - ally express a different type of ATPase , which exchanges K + for H + in an electroneutral manner 7 . Although these ATPases effectively extrude protons from the cytosol , their primary role is not the regulation of intra cellular pH . Osteoclasts secrete acid into lacunae , where bone is resorbed , whereas the gastric and distal tubular ATPases , which are restricted to the apical surface of the cells , are intended for trans epithelial delivery of pro - tons to the lumen of the stomach and the renal tubules , respectively 7 , 8 . Thus , proton - pumping ATPases are not important participants in the regulation of pH c in most mammalian cells . Instead , protons are extruded from the cells against their electrochemical gradient by coupling to other substrates through exchangers ( antiporters ) or co - transporters ( symporters ) ( FIG . 2 ) . Alkali cation – H + exchangers . Alkali cation – H + exchangers ( FIG . 2 ) are homodimeric complexes that directly couple the transfer of H + across biological membranes to the counter - transport of monovalent cations such as na + or K + , and are an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for protect - ing cells against excess acidification . Mammals possess at least eleven distinct orthologues : na + – H + exchanger 1 ( nHE1 ; also known as SlC9A1 ) – nHE9 ( also known as SlC9A9 ) , na + – H + antiporter 1 ( nHA1 ; also known as nHEDC1 ) and nHA2 ( also known as nHEDC2 ) . These are expressed in a ubiquitous or tissue - specific manner ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) 9 , 10 . Box 1 | CO 2 , HCO 3 – and the regulation of pH Eukaryotic cells constantly produce CO 2 , an end product of mitochondrial energy production . In the presence of water , CO 2 is effectively a conjugate acid by virtue of the following reactions : CO 2 + H 2 O ↔ H 2 CO 3 ↔ HCO 3 – + H + Inter - conversion of CO 2 and HCO 3 – occurs spontaneously . Carbonic anhydrase ( CA ) enzymes ( see the figure ) , however , greatly accelerate the reaction , with catalytic rates of up to 10 6 s – 1 ( reF . 117 ) . The human genome encodes 11 different carbonic anhydrases 117 . Since they catalyse the production or consumption of H + ( depending on the prevailing substrate concentrations ) , carbonic anhydrase isoforms exercise some degree of control on the kinetics and location of pH changes . Their function is likely to differ depending on their site of expression : some isoforms are located in the cytosol ( CA1 , CA2 , CA3 , CA7 and CA8 ) , others are in mitochondria ( CA5 ) or at the plasma membrane , where they can be anchored to the extracellular surface by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor ( CA4 ) or a transmembrane segment ( CA9 , CA12 and CA14 ) . Other isoforms are secreted from the cell ( CA6 ) 117 . Small , rapidly diffusible buffers facilitate the displacement of proton equivalents in cells . In this context , CO 2 ( an uncharged acid equivalent ) can diffuse without transiently binding to immobilized charged macromolecules and , therefore , plays an important part in dissipating cytosolic pH gradients . By accelerating the conversion of CO 2 to H 2 CO 3 , carbonic anhydrases speed up the dissipation of localized pH gradients 110 . Figure 1 | pH of the different subcellular compartments . The pH of individual cellular organelles and compartments in a prototypical mammalian cell . The values were collected from various sources . The mitochondrial pH refers to the matrix , that is , the space contained by the inner mitochondrial membrane . Early endosomes refer to the sorting endosomal compartment . The pH of the multivesicular late endosome refers to the bulk luminal fluid ; the pH of the fluid contained by the internal vesicles might differ . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 51 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Mitochondrion Aerobic Anaerobic NHE NBC NDCBE AE HCO 3 – Na + Na + H + NKA PMCA Na + HCO 3 – Cl – Cl – HCO 3 – 3 Na + Ca 2 + 2 K + ATP ATP ADP + P i ADP + P i + + – – + + – – H + MCT Cytoplasm 6 CO 2 + 6 H 2 O 6 H 2 CO 3 6 H + + 6 HCO 3 – CA H + Lactate 2 Pyruvate + 2 H + 2 Lactate + 2 H + LDH NADH NAD + 36 ATP 2 ATP O 2 Glucose H + pH c 7 . 2 pH o 7 . 4 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 H + External Cytoplasm Na + Na + H + N C NHE 2 1 4 3 6 5 8 7 11 12 10 9 External Cytoplasm Cl – HCO 3 – C N AE Na + – K + - ATPase A ubiquitous plasmalemmal enzyme that uses ATP to extrude 3 Na + ions in exchange for 2 K + ions . Also known as the Na + – K + - pump or simply the Na - pump . In cells , these alkali cation – H + exchangers are differen - tially sorted not only to specific subdomains of the plasma membrane ( for example , lamellipodia of fibroblasts 11 , api - cal or basolateral surfaces of epithelia 12 , 13 and intercalated discs and T - tubules of cardiac myocytes 14 ) , but also to organelles along the secretory and endocytic pathways , in which they participate in a myriad of cellular and / or systemic processes . The nHE1 isoform has been studied extensively and is a useful paradigm for understanding this class of transporters . It is present at the cell surface of most cells ( with some exceptions , such as renal α - and β - intercalated cells and macula densa cells 13 , 15 ) and is the main isoform responsible for pH c homeostasis . nHE1 , along with other plasma membrane - type nHEs , are na + - selective and use the inwardly directed electrochemical na + gradient generated by Na + – K + - ATPases to export H + in an electro - neutral manner , although the precise na + / H + stoichiome - try ( 1 / 1 or 2 / 2 ) is a subject of debate 16 , 17 . The magnitude of this transmembrane gradient ( the extracellular na + con - centration is typically ~ 10 - fold greater than the cytosolic na + concentration ) should , in principle , provide a driving force that is sufficient for nHE1 to alkalinize the cytosol at least one pH unit above the extracellular pH . However , resting pH c is usually lower than the extracellular pH because the transporter becomes largely quiescent at pH c ≥7 . 2 by virtue of an internal pH - sensing regulatory site , known as the H + modifier , or H + sensor ( described in more detail below ) . This regulatory property has two important functions : it minimizes dissipation of the trans - membrane na + gradient , which is required for the activi - ties of other na + - coupled ion and nutrient transporters , Figure 2 | ion carriers that regulate cytoplasmic pH . The cytoplasm tends to acidify owing to the activities of various metabolic pathways , such as the ATP production in the cytoplasm by glycolysis that generates lactate ( the anaerobic component in the figure ) and the oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria that produces CO 2 ( the aerobic component shown in the figure ) . The predominant pH - regulatory transporters that are responsible for alkalinization are the plasma membrane Na + – H + exchangers ( NHEs ) and Na + – HCO 3 – co - transporters ( NBCs ) . A limited number of cell types also alkalinize their cytosol through the actions of Na + - dependent Cl – – HCO 3 – exchangers ( NDCBEs ) . These transporters use the energy stored in the inwardly directed electrochemical Na + gradient that is established by Na + – K + - ATPase pumps ( NKAs ) to drive solute transport . These alkalinizing mechanisms are counterbalanced by the actions of plasma membrane Cl – – HCO 3 – or anion exchangers ( AEs ) , which acidify the cell . Plasma membrane Ca 2 + - ATPases ( PMCAs ) , which exchange cytosolic Ca 2 + for extracellular H + , also acidify the cytosol in response to stimuli that elevate intracellular Ca 2 + . In tissues undergoing anaerobic metabolism , alkalinization might be favoured by monocarboxylate – H + co - transporters ( MCTs ; for example , in muscle ) . The proposed transmembrane topology of NHE and AE proteins is shown in the insets . CA , carbonic anhydrase ; LDH , lactate dehydrogenase ; pH c , cytosolic pH ; pH o , outside ( or extracellular ) pH . R E V I E W S 52 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Hill coefficient A measure of the cooperativity of a binding process . It is calculated by applying the Hill equation , which relates the fraction of filled ligand - binding sites to the ligand concentration . Aquaporin water channel One of a family of proteins that facilitate the passage of water across biological membranes . and it curtails undue alkalinization , thereby equilibrat - ing pH c near the level that is optimal for stable protein activities and interactions . Conversely , as the H + concen - tration of the cytosol rises , the activity of the transporter increases sharply and achieves near - maximal velocity in approximately one pH unit ( Hill coefficient > 1 ) , thereby minimizing exposure of the cytoplasm to excess acidifica - tion 16 , 18 . This complex kinetic behaviour has been widely attributed to the existence of not only a H + transport site but , as mentioned above , to an additional intracellular H + - binding site , the modifier site , that senses pH c and allosterically regulates transport activity 16 , 19 . Mechanistically , it has been proposed that the pH dependence of activation involves protonation or depro - tonation of one or more of the ionizable side chains of the transporter that are exposed to the cytoplasmic milieu . Such changes could conceivably modulate ion pairs or salt bridges involved in conformational trans - itions that facilitate access of H + to the transport site . This postulate is supported by detailed structural and functional studies of the bacterial na + – H + antiporter A ( nhaA ) , in which an amino acid cluster , identified as the H + sensor , at the entry of the cytoplasmic funnel is cou - pled electrostatically to conformational alterations that expose ionizable residues in another cluster involved in ion translocation 20 – 22 . Similarly , mutations of conserved charged residues located in intracellular loops of nHE1 alter its sensitivity to pH c ; these residues might constitute elements of the putative regulatory site 23 – 25 . However , the notion that the allosteric behaviour of nHE1 is explained by the presence of a discrete H + sensor has been ques - tioned 26 . Instead , it has been proposed that the kinetic data best fit a Monod – wyman – Changeux model 27 , in which the transporter exists as a symmetrical dimer in thermodynamic equilibrium between two conforma - tional states that are distinguished by their affinity ( low or high ) for H + at the transport site . At resting pH c , the bulk of the transporters reside in the low - affinity , cata - lytically inactive state . As the cytosolic concentration of H + increases , however , the high - affinity form binds H + and becomes activated . This , in turn , shifts the balance between the two conformational states and promotes the transition of the low - affinity form to a high - affinity , transport - competent form . These two mechanistic mod - els are not mutually exclusive and further experimenta - tion will determine which one most accurately accounts for the exchanger’s allosteric sensitivity to H + . In addition to its intrinsic sensitivity to cytosolic acidi - fication , the internal pH sensitivity of nHE1 can be altered by various signals ( for example , hormones , mitogens and physical stimuli such as mechanical stretch and hyper - osmolarity ) that modulate its state of phosphorylation 28 – 33 and its association with ancillary factors 34 – 43 . These asso - ciations are believed to elicit a change in the conformation of the cytoplasmic carboxy - terminal regulatory domain of nHE1 , enhancing its affinity for H + . Although the precise mechanism is uncertain , this produces an acute rise in pH c that is thought to provide a permissive environment for the progression of diverse cellular processes , includ - ing changes in cell shape 36 , adhesion 44 , migration 45 , 46 , chemotaxi s 47 , 48 and proliferation 49 – 51 . Lactate – H + co - transporters . Monocarboxylate transport - ers ( MCTs ) mediate the co - transport of mono carboxylic acids ( predominantly lactate ) with protons 52 . Cytosolic accumulation of lactate occurs in tissues undergoing anaerobic metabolism ( FIG . 2 ) . In such tissues , the out - ward gradient of lactate provides the energy to ferry protons to the extracellular space by MCTs . In muscle , for example , MCT - mediated H + – lactate efflux accounts for up to 40 % of the pH c recovery from ischemic acidosis — the accumulation of proton equivalents that results from oxygen deprivation 53 . However , because substan - tive lactate accumulation is limited to some types of skel - etal muscle and solid tumours , MCT is not a widespread pH regulatory mechanism . Bicarbonate transporters as acid extruders . Mammalian tissues are bathed in a milieu that typically contains about 25 mM HCO 3 – , and cells have developed a means to take up extracellular HCO 3 – to alkalinize their cytosol . In the process , carbonic acid is formed and subsequently converted by carbonic anhydrases into water and CO 2 , which can exit the cells to regen - erate HCO 3 – extracellularly ( BOX 1 ) . CO 2 is small and electroneutral and , therefore , membrane - permeant . whether CO 2 merely dissolves into the lipid bilayer or additionally permeates aquaporin water channels or the Rhesus - associated glycoprotein ( RHAG ) of eryth - rocytes remains the subject of controversy 4 , 54 , 55 . It is clear , however , that the larger , anionic HCO 3 – requires transport proteins to facilitate its passage across the plasma membrane . Predominant among the acid - extruding HCO 3 – transporters are the six mammalian na + - coupled HCO 3 – transporters ( nBCs ) 56 ( FIG . 2 ; see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) . These plasma membrane trans - porters translocate na + and HCO 3 – together in the same direction but , remarkably , the coupling stoichiometry varies among members of this family . The stoichiom - etry is 1 na + / 1 HCO 3 – for nBC electroneutral isoform 1 ( nBCn1 ; also known as solute carrier family 4 mem - ber 7 ( SlC4A7 ) ) , nBCn2 ( also known as SlC4A10 ) and SlC4A9 , which are therefore electroneutral 56 , but can be 1 na + / 2 HCO 3 – or 1 na + / 3 HCO 3 – for nBC electrogenic isoform 1 ( nBCe1 ; also known as SlC4A4 ) and nBCe2 ( also known as SlC4A5 ) , which are consequently elec - trogenic 57 . The electroneutral isoforms are unaffected by the transmembrane potential and the magnitude and directionality of transport are dictated solely by the combined chemical gradients of na + and HCO 3 – . In this case , the large na + gradient ( the extra cellular na + concentration is greater than the cytosolic na + concen - tration ) favours the net inward co - transport of HCO 3 – , which is equivalent to acid extrusion from the cells . For nBCe1 and nBCe2 , the driving force is compounded by the electrical potential , which is normally negative inside the cell . when the electrical component outstrips the driving force of the concentration gradients , net HCO 3 – extrusion results , causing cytosolic acidifica - tion . Such is the case for nBCe1 , which carries na + and HCO 3 – into the blood across the basolateral surface of renal proximal tubule cells 58 . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 53 Acid - loading transporters . Although the ongoing net acid generation by metabolic reactions requires continued pro - ton extrusion , cells have also developed acid - importing transport mechanisms . The most common acid - loading process is the exchange of Cl – for HCO 3 – . Two distinct protein families are responsible for Cl – – HCO 3 – exchange : anion exchangers ( AEs ; comprised of AE1 ( also known as SlC4A1 ) – AE3 ( also known as SlC4A3 ) ) and SlC26A proteins ( a group of five Cl – – HCO 3 – exchangers , some of which are electrogenic and others electroneutral ; see Supplementary information S2 ( table ) ) 56 . The inward Cl – gradient ( the cytosolic Cl – concentration is typically several - fold lower than the extracellular Cl – concentra - tion ) provides the driving force for net HCO 3 – efflux through these anion exchangers . Cellular acid loading by Cl – – HCO 3 – exchange has four principal functions : the control of pH c , the secretion of acids , the secretion of bases and naCl transport . The simultaneous operation of alkalinizing and acidi - fying systems working counter to each other enables the fine control of pH c . In the event of over - alkalinization by regulatory acid extruders , acid - loading transporters can rapidly restore pH c . Overcompensation is prevented by the intrinsic properties of the acid importers : trans - port activity of AE2 ( also known as SlC4A2 ) decreases by 80 – 90 % as pH c drops from 7 . 3 to 6 . 8 . The sensor for pH c cannot be discretely localized to one or even a few residues of AE2 ( FIG . 2 ) . Instead , a region of the trans - membrane domain and residues in the amino - terminal cytoplasmic domain all seem to contribute to inhibit AE2 activity at an acidic pH c59 . The combined action of AE2 ( which is silenced at acidic pH ) and nHE1 ( which is activated by acid but becomes quiescent at alkaline pH ) results in stringent control of pH c near 7 . 2 ( reFs 60 , 61 ) . Cells specialized in acid secretion , such as osteoclasts and gastric parietal cells , are susceptible to cytosolic alkalosis . In these cases , Cl – – HCO 3 – exchangers such as AE2 provide a cytosolic acid reservoir that supports sus - tained acid secretion while preventing pH c from reach - ing threateningly alkaline levels 62 . Other cells , such as those of the exocrine pancreas , are specialized in base secretion . Several systems cooperate to attain the high concentrations of HCO 3 – that are found in the fluid secreted by the pancreas ( up to 140 mM ) . These include the Cl – – HCO 3 – exchangers SlC26A3 and SlC26A6 ( reFs 63 , 64 ) and the channel defective in cystic fibrosis ( the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regu - lator ( CFTR ) ) . Although best known as a Cl – channel , CFTR is about one third as permeable to HCO 3 – as it is to Cl – , and contributes significantly to pancreatic base secretion by using the negative membrane potential to drive HCO 3 – out of the cells 63 . Seemingly futile coupling of acid loading and acid extrusion occurs commonly in cells to achieve naCl transport . Operation of Cl – – HCO 3 – exchange in parallel with na + – H + exchange results in no net change of pH c , but effectively loads a cell with naCl . Cells take advan - tage of net naCl uptake to regulate their volume , or for trans - epithelial secretion or resorption of salt and water . In lymphocytes , for instance , co - activation of AE2 with nHE1 restores cell volume following hyper - osmotic challenge , as water enters cells osmotically following the gain of naCl 65 . In the lumen of the colon , naCl is reabsorbed by the concerted action of SlC26A3 and nHE3 ( also known as SlC9A3 ) 66 . The importance of acid loading in colonic naCl – water uptake is evident in individuals with mutations in SlC26A3 , who suffer chronic diarrhea 67 . The nuclear pH Direct , reliable determinations of the pH of the nucleus are scarce , perhaps because most authors assume that the nuclear pH equals that of the cytosol . The nuclear envelope has an abundance of pores that are permeable to molecules 4 – 9 nm in diameter , the size of a small protein 68 . As such , the nuclear membrane presents only a weak diffusive barrier to H + and the pH of the nucleus is probably identical to that of the surrounding cytosol ( FIG . 1 ) . It is therefore assumed that the nuclear pH is indirectly controlled by the same mechanisms that safeguard the pH c . This assumption , however , requires experimental validation . The pH of the secretory pathway Accurate delivery of newly synthesized glycoproteins and lipids to their intended destination is crucial for cell survival . Cells have therefore developed sophisticated means to properly identify and target biosynthetic prod - ucts along the secretory pathway . One strategy is to con - trol the interaction between cargo molecules and their receptors by controlling their state of protonation . Hence , stringent regulation of the pH of the secretory pathway is fundamental for proper protein sorting and processing . Remarkably , the luminal pH is not homogeneous throughout the secretory pathway 69 ( FIG . 1 ) : whereas the pH of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is near neutral , similar to that of the cytosol , downstream compartments become progressively more acidic . The cis - Golgi is signif - icantly more acidic ( pH ~ 6 . 7 ) than the ER and the acidi - fication becomes more marked in subsequent cisternae of the Golgi complex , reaching pH ~ 6 . 0 in the trans - Golgi network ( TGn ) . The pH of secretory granules has been reported to be as low as 5 . 2 . Proton - pumping V - ATPases are the primary means of delivering protons to the organellar lumen . V - ATPases are multisubunit complexes composed of two distinct domains : V 0 , an integral membrane complex consist - ing of six different types of subunits , and V 1 , a periph - eral complex made up of eight subunit types ( FIG . 3 ) . V 1 converts the chemical energy stored in ATP into the mechanical force required for proton displacement and V 0 provides the path for proton translocation across the membrane . Macrolide antibiotics such as the bafilomy - cins and concanamycins , which are specific inhibitors of the V - ATPases , effectively dissipate the pH gradient across all compartments of the secretory pathway 6 . If the pH gradient across all secretory organelles is gen - erated by ostensibly similar V - ATPases , what accounts for the differences in pH of the individual compartments ? The existence of alternative isoforms of some subunits of the V - ATPase could , in principle , explain the varying pH . The presence of multiple isoforms is , however , often associated R E V I E W S 54 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology C A B d H + ATP ADP + P i H + Bafilomycin A 1 V - ATPase ATP ADP + P i H + + + + – + – – + – – + – H + H + 2 Cl – Ca 2 + K + K + ( Na + ) NHE ClC SERCASPCA H + H + Cl – ATP ADP + P i pH 4 . 5 – 6 . 5 ∆Ψ A H a c c c c c (cid:118) c (cid:118)(cid:118) Cytoplasm Lumen V 0 V 1 G F D A B B E Secretory or endocytic compartment Cytoplasm ? ? with the unique needs of specialized tissues , such as acid - secreting osteoclasts and epithelia 8 . Therefore , other fac - tors are likely to account for the gradation of pH along the secretory pathway . These might include variation in the density of V - ATPases or in their rate of transport , and differences in counter - ion conductance and / or in the magni tude of the dissipative proton ‘leak’ . In some systems , disassembly of the V 1 and V 0 subunits has been shown 70 and this mechanism might lead to varying rates of pumping . The RAVE complex ( regulator of the H + - ATPase of the vacuolar and endosomal membranes ) has been reported to regulate pump assembly . lastly , the pumping rate also depends on the redox state of the enzyme 71 . V - ATPases translocate ‘naked’ H + , unaccompanied by other ions . As a result , pumping generates a voltage ( inside positive ) across the membrane of the organelle , which antagonizes further inward transport of proton equivalents while promoting their outward leak . net translocation of a substantial number of H + ions ( that is , the development of luminal acidification ) requires the parallel movement of neutralizing counter - ions . Entry of anions ( probably Cl – ) or efflux of cations ( such as K + ) could equally counter act the build up of an electrical potential . Several anion - conductive pathways have been detected in endomem - branes , including Mid1 - related chloride channel ( MClC ; also known as ClCC1 ) , a large anion - conductance channel called the Golgi anion channel ( GOlAC ) , and members of the heterogeneous Cl – channel and transporter ClC family . In addition , CFTR has been proposed to act in secretory membranes , but this is controversial 72 , 73 . By comparison , little is known about the cation channels and transporters that operate in the secretory pathway . Cations such as K + , na + , Mg 2 + and Ca 2 + are all present in the lumen of the secretory pathway and might act as counter - ions , thereby contributing to pH homeostasis . when present , the counter - ion conductance dictates the rate , rather than the extent , to which an organelle can acidify . Given sufficient time , even a small neutral - izing conductance should enable the pump to reach the theoretical maximal pH gradient that can be generated by the V - ATPases , which , based on thermodynamic consid - erations , can be calculated to exceed four units . Because the pH c is near - neutral , the luminal pH can theoreti - cally attain levels of ≤ 3 . 0 . Such extreme values are never reached in secretory organelles . Two factors account for this . First , the secretory pathway is in a state of flux , such that the fluid in any one subcompartment is con - tinuously delivered anterogradely towards the membrane and ultimately the extracellular space . For this reason , the time available for luminal acidification is limited , and the degree of acidification reached is influenced by the organellar flow , the rate of H + pumping and the counter - ion permeation . Second , and perhaps more importantly , H + ions ( or equivalents ) leak back to the cytosol , offset - ting the ability of the pump to acidify the lumen . A steady state is attained when the rate of leakage ( which increases with acidification ) matches the rate of pumping ( which decreases with acidification ) . The precise mechanism or mechanisms responsible for the leak of H + equivalents have not been fully character - ized . A Zn 2 + - inhibitable , voltage - sensitive H + conductance Figure 3 | pH regulation in secretory and endocytic compartments . Acidification of compartments along the secretory and endocytic pathways involves an intricate balance between H + influx and efflux pathways , as well as counter - ion ( anion and cation ) conductances . Active accumulation of H + in compartments is largely achieved by vacuolar - type H + - translocating ATP - hydrolases ( V 1 V 0 - or V - ATPases ) . These are multimeric complexes comprised of 14 distinct types of subunit ( the V 1 domain comprises A 3 , B 3 , C 1 , D 1 , E 2 , F 1 , G 2 and H 1 – 2 subunits and the V 0 comprises a 1 , d 1 , e n , c 4 – 5 , c ′ 1 , c ′′ 1 subunits ; the subscript number denotes the stoichiometry ) , which are shown in the inset . V - ATPases are electrogenic , generating a transmembrane voltage ( Δψ ) . Electrogenic 2 Cl – / 1 H + exchangers belonging to the Cl – channel and transporter ClC family also make a large contribution to optimal luminal acidification by providing anions that tend to neutralize the build up of positive charge in the lumen , which would otherwise decrease V - ATPase activity . Moreover , this Cl – – proton exchange mechanism accounts in part for the rapid ( that is , in minutes ) dissipation of the transmembrane H + gradient that occurs upon inhibition of the V - ATPase by macrolide antibiotics such as bafilomycin A 1 . Other H + efflux pathways include sarcoplasmic , or endoplasmic , reticulum Ca 2 + - ATPases ( SERCAs ) and secretory pathway Ca 2 + - ATPases ( SPCAs ) , the non - selective alkali cation – H + exchangers Na + – H + exchanger 6 ( NHE6 ) – NHE9 and a Zn 2 + - inhibitable , voltage - sensitive H + conductance , although the precise molecular identity of this ion carrier is yet to be established . Cations such as K + are also present in the lumen of secretory and endocytic compartments and might act as counter - ions by extrusion through ill - defined carriers , thereby contributing to pH homeostasis . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 55 Phagosome A vacuole that forms inside cells following the engulfment of large ( ≥ 0 . 5 μ m ) particles by a receptor - mediated , actin - driven process . seems to contribute to the H + leak from the Golgi com - plex 74 , although the precise molecular identity of this ion carrier is yet to be established ( FIG . 3 ) . nHE7 ( also known as SlC9A7 ) has been localized to the trans - Golgi network ( TGn ) 75 and transports not only na + but also K + , the major intracellular alkali cation , in exchange for H + ( FIG . 3 ; see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . However , its relative contribution to pH regulation of the TGn remains to be confirmed . Similarly , anion exchangers are active as they transit the secretory pathway 76 , but no Golgi - resident anion exchanger has been identified and direct evidence that exchange of Cl – for OH – or bicar - bonate influences organellar pH homeostasis is lacking . Finally , Ca 2 + accumulates in the lumen of several secre - tory organelles , possibly as a result of Ca 2 + – H + exchange by sarcoplasmic , or endoplasmic , reticulum Ca 2 + - ATPase ( SERCA ) and secretory pathway Ca 2 + - ATPase ( SPCA ) pumps 77 ( FIG . 3 ) . Even if the molecular entities responsible for counter - ion and leak permeabilities have not been fully defined , the determinants of the pH of the secretory pathway can be estimated . This task was undertaken by Machen and colleagues 78 , who systematically analysed the absolute magnitude of the luminal pH of each subcompartment , as well as the rates of proton pumping and leakage and the permeability to counter - ions . The progressively more acidic luminal pH along the secretory path was attributed to two factors . First , proton - pumping activity ( presumably a reflection of the density of active V - ATPases ) increases progressively from the ER to the Golgi and thereafter . Secondly , the leak decreases progressively , favouring the retention of the protons pumped by the V - ATPase . These effects are synergistic and , as a result , the late compo - nents of the secretory pathway ( for example , secretory granules ) are much more acidic than the early ones ( for example , the ER ) . Of note , Machen et al . 78 concluded that the magnitude of the counter - ion permeability is unlikely to have much influence on the development of the pH gradient . The pH of the endocytic pathway Cargo and fluid - phase contents taken up by cells experi - ence an increasingly acidic environment as they progress through the endocytic pathway ( FIG . 1 ) . Endocytic vesicles are the least acidic , whereas lysosomes can reach pH values as low as 4 . 5 – 4 . 7 . Progressive luminal acidification seems to be key to various aspects of endocytosis and phago - cytosis . Uncoupling of ligands from receptors , activa - tion of proteases , protonation of microbicidal factors and other essential reactions depend on the changing pH of the endosomal compartment . Indeed , even the normal traffic of membranes between endocytic subcompartments seems to be controlled by luminal acidification 79 . The principles governing the gradual acidification of the endocytic pathway are the same as those described for the secretory pathway . Proton accumulation is driven by V - ATPases , while counter - ion and leak permeabilities dictate the steady - state pH of individual organelles ( FIG . 3 ) . Members of the ClC family , Cl – channel 3 ( ClCn3 ) – ClCn7 , have all been suggested to mediate conductive entry of Cl – into endosomes and lysosomes 80 . Of note , at least some of the ClC family members provide a neutral - izing charge by operating as electrogenic 2 Cl – / 1 H + exchangers , and not as channels as originally suspected . Additionally , CFTR has been proposed to function in lysosomes and thereby contribute to microbial killing in phagosomes 81 . Finally , cation - conductive pathways ( for example , K + channels ) might also dissipate the voltage generated by the V - ATPases . The existence of H + ( or equivalent ) leakage path - ways in endocytic organelles can be most readily deter - mined by acutely arresting the V - ATPase . The addition of macro lide inhibitors unmasks the presence of a leak , manifested as an alkalinization that is rapid in endo - somes but considerably slower in lysosomes . The rate of alkaliniz ation is governed by the activity of leak pathways , as well as by the buffering power and surface - to - volume ratio of the individual organelles . As in the secretory pathway , little is known about the molecular identity of the leak , but nHE6 ( also known as SlC9A6 ) and nHE9 are present in endocytic organelles ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) and might contribute to the dissipation of the H + gradient . Mitochondrial pH Unlike the lumen of compartments along the secretory and endocytic pathways , the mitochondrial matrix is markedly alkaline ( pH ~ 8 . 0 ) owing to H + extrusion across the inner membrane by components of the electron trans - port chain 82 , 83 ( FIG . 4 ) . Together with the electrical potential ( inside negative ) generated by the electrogenic proton - extrusion process , the transmembrane pH gradient con - stitutes a proton - motive force ( ψ H + ) that is harnessed by the inner membrane H + - ATP synthase ( F 1 F 0 - ATPase ) to generate ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate . The electrochemical H + gradient further acts to regulate na + , K + and Ca + homeostasis through the concerted actions of alkali cation – H + exchange , na + – Ca 2 + exchange and Ca 2 + uniport pathways 84 – 86 ( FIG . 4 ) . Matrix Ca 2 + , in turn , modulates various dehydrogenases of the tricarboxylic acid cycle , which is essential for mitochondrial energy generation 87 , 88 , the adenine nucleotide translocase 89 and the F 1 F 0 - ATPase 90 , and has been proposed as a means of synchronizing energy production with cellular needs 87 , 88 , 91 . Thus , the matrix pH has a central role in the basal regula - tion of mitochondrial metabolism . Alterations in mitochondrial pH homeostasis have been implicated as an important early event in mitochondrial - dependent apoptosis . Pro - apoptotic factors and stimuli , such as the endogenous apoptosis - inducing protein BAX , the kinase inhibitor staurosporine and ultra violet radiation , induce mitochondrial – matrix alkalin ization in para llel with cytosolic acidification . Matrix alkalinization seemingly requires F 1 F 0 - ATPase activity , suggesting that , contrary to its normal mode of operation as a synthase , during apoptosis the enzyme consumes ATP to pump protons from the lumen into the intermembrane space and ultimately into the cytosol 92 , 93 . However , this proposed mechanism has been challenged based on technical and thermodynamic considerations 94 . Alternatively , intracellu - lar acidification associated with mitochondrial - dependent R E V I E W S 56 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Oligomycin Cytoplasm Mitochondrion Respiratory electron transport chain F - ATPase H + H + H + H + H + H + H + Na + Na + ADP + P i ADP P i ATP ATP ( K + and Na + ) Ca 2 + PTP Ca 2 + OH – Benzamil CGP - 37157 Ruthenium red Cyclosporin A Quinine and propranolol NADH + H + NAD + – – – – + + + + Ψ H + O 2 2 H 2 O MatrixInner membrane Outer membrane TCA e e e – – – – – – apoptosis has been attributed to the inhibition of plasma membrane nHE activity 95 , 96 . Although the precise mecha - nism remains obscure and is likely to be multifaceted and cell - type dependent , it is clear that the cytosol becomes acidified , which enhances the activation of the proteolytic activity of caspases by cytochrome C release from the mitochondria . That being said , it is worth noting that cell death associated with intra cellular acidification elicited by blocking nHE activity is not necessarily linked to caspase - dependent apoptosis , but instead can resemble paraptosis — an alternative form of programmed cell death that is typified by cytoplasmic vacuolation and mitochondrial swelling 97 . Peroxisomal pH Peroxisomes emanate from the ER as nascent vesicles and undergo a dynamic maturation process to form active organelles responsible for several crucial metabolic processes 98 , 99 . These include the breakdown of long - and branched - chain fatty acids by β - oxidation , the formation of cholesterol , bile acids and ether phospholipids , the catabolism of purines and polyamines , the metabolism of amino acids and glyoxylate , and the detoxification of reactive oxygen species 100 . Despite considerable under - standing of their biogenesis and biochemical functions , knowledge of their luminal ionic composition — an important determinant of enzymatic activity — is sparse and conflicting . Earlier measurements in mammalian cells using the pH - sensitive organic probe carboxy - seminaphthofluorescein conjugated to a peroxisome - targeting sequence indicated that the luminal pH of peroxisomes was considerably alkaline 101 . However , the accuracy of these measurements is problematic owing to the limited dynamic range of the fluorophore ( ~ 10 % change in fluorescence per pH unit ) 102 . By contrast , subsequent analyses by others 102 , 103 using a different targeted fluorophore displaying broader pH sen - sitivity , the pH - sensitive green fluorescent protein variant pHluorin , were consistently unable to detect much of a H + gradient across the peroxisomal membrane . Steady - state peroxisomal pH ( pH p ) was found to be near neutral and perturbations that altered pH c were closely mirrored by parallel changes in pH p102 . These observations suggested that the peroxisomal membrane is highly permeable to H + ( or acid equivalents ) . Assuming that pHluorin is a more reliable indicator of pH p , this would indicate that peroxisomes , like the ER , lack an intrinsic pH regu latory system and instead use acid and base transporters at the plasma membrane and the buffering capacity of the cytoplasm to indirectly maintain pH p homeostasis . pH — homeostasis or signalling ? numerous proteins that have crucial roles in membrane excitability , intercellular communication , signal trans - duction , cytoskeletal dynamics and vesicle trafficking have been reported to be highly sensitive to minute Figure 4 | Mitochondrial pH regulation . In mitochondria , the respiratory electron transport ( e ) chain moves H + out of the matrix into the inter - membrane space , whereas the F - ATPase allows the re - entry of H + , a process that is coupled to ATP production . Intra - mitochondrial pH homeostasis is established by the interplay between the respiratory chain , F - ATPase and the transport of proton equivalents that are directly or indirectly coupled to other inorganic cations . Ca 2 + tends to accumulate in the mitochondrial matrix through a ruthenium red - inhibitable Ca 2 + uniport or channel , driven by the electrical potential generated by the respiratory chain . Excessive accumulation is averted by Na + - coupled Ca 2 + extrusion through an exchanger . Ca 2 + can also exit the matrix on transient opening of the permeability transition pore ( PTP ) . Na + taken up by Na + – Ca 2 + exchange is , in turn , prevented from accumulating by extrusion in exchange for H + . The molecular activities of the exchangers and uniporters responsible for the cycling of H + , Na + , K + and Ca 2 + across the inner membrane of mitochondria have primarily been distinguished by their sensitivities to various pharmacological antagonists ( such as oligomycin , benzamil , CGP - 37157 , ruthenium red , cyclosporin A , quinine and propanolol ) , but their precise molecular identities are yet to be established . Recent immunological analyses have detected the presence of the mammalian Na + – H + antiporter 2 ( NHA2 ) isoform , although this finding is complicated by other studies reporting the localization of this transporter at the cell surface ( see references 25 – 27 in Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . These findings require validation of the functional activity of NHA2 . TCA , tricarboxylic acid cycle . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 57 changes in the surrounding pH . Salient examples include various neurotransmitter - gated receptors , cation chan - nels , connexins , H + - sensing G protein - coupled receptors , actin - binding proteins ( cofilin , villin and gelsolin ; reviewed in reF . 104 ) and the V - ATPase a2 - isoform ( see Supplementary information S3 ( table ) for other exam - ples and references ) . Perhaps not unexpectedly , extreme metabolic disturbances or genetic perturbations that dis - rupt pH c or organellar pH homeostasis can lead to the development of distinct disease states ( BOX 2 ) . The exquisite sensitivity of these and other proteins to the concentration of H + might not be fortuitous and is suggestive of a role of pH in signalling . Accordingly , changes in pH c have been proposed to initiate cellular proliferation 105 , to initiate and direct cell migration 44 , 45 and to trigger apoptosis 106 . Although attractive , these hypotheses remain the subject of some controversy . The notion that alkalosis mediated by na + – H + exchange is essential for the initiation of cell proliferation was based in part on experiments in which nHE activity was inhibited for extended periods either pharmaco - logically or by omission of na + . Others found , however , that the impairment of nHE activity did not affect pro - liferation if bicarbonate was present in the medium 107 . These observations suggest that pH homeostasis is compromised when both na + – H + exchange and bicar - bonate - dependent mechanisms are inactivated , and that failure to proliferate may result from pleiotropic effects caused by dysregulation of pH c . In this context , pH can be regarded as permissive rather than as a sig - nal for proliferation . A similar conclusion was reached more recently regarding the role of na + – H + exchange in cell migration 47 , though most authors attribute a more direct signalling role for pH in cell spreading and motility 44 – 46 . whereas global changes in cellular pH seem danger - ous and unlikely to act as signals , transient , localized changes might have such a role . Intuitively , the small size of protons or hydronium ions — and hence their rapid diffusion — might be expected to rule out the generation of discontinuities in the profile of pH c . However , the diffusion rate of protons in the cytosol ( diffusion constant = 0 . 4 – 2 . 2 μm 2 s – 1 ) is surprisingly low , two orders of magnitude slower than proton dif - fusion in water 108 , 109 . The slow rate is attributed to the delay caused by the transient and reversible association of protons with ionizable groups on cytosolic macro - molecules ( mainly proteins ) , many of which are fixed or only slowly mobile . Repeated association and disso - ciation events effectively reduce the free concentration of protons , lengthening the time taken for them to traverse the cytoplasm of an average cell 108 , 110 . The presence of rapidly diffusing H + buffers mitigates this effect ( BOX 1 ) , but formation of intracellular pH gradients is nevertheless possible . Accordingly , when operating at high rates , pH regulatory transporters and solute carri - ers coupled to H + transport ( for example , H + – dipeptide co - transporters ) will change the pH in their immediate environment . not only can pH gradients form in the submembranous layers of the cytosol , but in cases where the expression of the transporters is polarized ( for example , in epithelial cells , which are asymmetric ) , gradients can form from one end of the cell to the other 110 , 111 . In this manner , the activation of na + – H + exchange at the leading edge of migrating cells might indeed generate a local pH gradient 112 , which has been suggested to induce or at least support cytoskeletal rearrangement ( FIG . 5a ) . Similarly , non - canonical wnt – Frizzled signalling that controls planar epithelial polar - ization in the Drosophila melanogaster eye is highly dependent on na + – H + exchange , which , in its absence , can be replaced by manipulations that alkalinize the cell 113 . whereas examination of the vast majority of pH - sensitive intracellular proteins suggests that cytosolic H + ions act only as secondary regulators of their activities , extracellular H + can seemingly operate as a bona fide signal . A recent example was provided by observations of Caenorhabditis elegans intestinal cells that periodically extrude H + across their baso - lateral surface through the nHE PBO - 4 ( also known as nHX - 7 ; the orthologue of mammalian nHE1 ) 114 ( FIG . 5b ) . The resulting acidification of the extracellular space specifically activated H + - gated cation channels ( comprised of PBO - 5 and PBO - 6 subunits ) located in the adjacent muscle cells , thereby inducing their con - traction during the defecation cycle of the nematode . This cyclic release of H + is reminiscent of the temporal and spatial release of neurotransmitters in the central nervous system . This raises the distinct possibility Box 2 | Diseases associated with dysregulation of intracellular pH Disturbances in cytoplasmic and organellar pH homeostasis , arising from either metabolic or genetic perturbations , are associated with the progression of distinct pathophysiologic states , as exemplified below . Cytoplasmic pH . Reductions in blood flow ( that is , ischemia ) decrease the supply of oxygen required to maintain tissue ATP levels , especially in excitable organs such as the heart and brain that have a high demand for energy . As ATP stores are depleted , lactate , pyruvate and protons accumulate owing to anaerobic metabolism of glycogen stores . The accompanying cytoplasmic acidification causes hyperactivation of plasma membrane Na + – H + exchanger 1 ( NHE1 ) and the consequent accumulation of intracellular Na + . The Na + overload reverses the mode of operation of Na + – Ca 2 + exchange , driving excess Ca 2 + into the cell . The resulting elevation in intracellular Ca + 2 concentration precipitates a cascade of deleterious effects , including altered membrane excitability and contractility , generation of toxic free radicals , cellular hypertrophy , apoptosis and necrosis — events that can culminate in cardiac arrhythmias or failure and stroke ( for further details , see reFs 118 , 119 ) . Organellar pH . Mutations of the electrogenic 2 Cl – / 1 H + exchanger Cl – channel 5 ( CLCN5 ) impair luminal acidification and biogenesis of apical early endosomes in renal proximal tubule epithelia , causing proteinuria , hypercalciuria , nephrolithiasis and ultimately renal failure ( Dent disease ) 120 , 121 . Mutations in other chloride carriers that are present in late endosomes and lysosomes , such as CLCN6 and CLCN7 , can also give rise to distinct pathophysiologic states , such as osteopetrosis 122 and lysosomal storage disease 123 , 124 . Surprisingly , however , mutations to these proteins do not seem to perturb organellar pH , raising questions about the underlying mechanistic basis for the phenotypes . Finally , mutations to the a2 subunit of the V - type H + – ATPase , which resides in endosomes and in a compartment overlapping with the trans - Golgi network , lead to cutis laxa or wrinkly skin syndrome 125 . These mutations are associated with abnormal glycosylation and delays in the retrograde trafficking of Golgi membranes to the endoplasmic reticulum . Although it is assumed that these defects are a consequence of altered Golgi pH , this is yet to be proven . R E V I E W S 58 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology + + + + – – – – + + + + – – – – + + + + – – – – + + + + – – – – Trailing edge F - actin stress fibres Cortical actin network Lamellipodium Leadingedge NHE1 Cell migration 7 . 6 6 . 9 pH Leadingedge H + H + H + H + H + Na + pH a H + H + H + H + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Coelomicspace H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + H + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Na + Coelomicspace ARP2 / 3 complex Cofilin G - actin monomer pH Diffusion of G - actin NHE1 H + Newly assembled actin filament Older actin filament PBO - 4 Gap junction Intestinal epithelial cell Basolateralmembrane Membranepolarized Resting state b Posterior body muscle PBO - 4 PBO - 5 and PBO - 6 Intestinal epithelial cell Basolateralmembrane Membranedepolarized PBO - 5 and PBO - 6 Contraction Posterior body muscle Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Gap junction that protons that are secreted or released at synapses might also act as primary intercellular messengers in the modulation of pH - sensitive ion channels and neuronal function 115 , 116 . Conclusions There is little doubt that the establishment and main - tenance of an appropriate pH inside individual cell ular compartments is of paramount importance to their normal physiology . whereas acute departures from the resting state can be minimized or at least blunted by the buffering capacity , more durable , responsive and accurate means of controlling proton concentration had to evolve for long - term pH homeostasis . For the most part , homeostasis is accomplished by the interplay of multiple transporters that either extrude or import pro - ton equivalents , and are tuned to the physiological state of the cell by coupling either physically or functionally to metabolic enzymes . The resulting ‘metabolons’ inte - grate proton production , conversion and transport to best regulate the intracellular pH . Because metabolic demands vary upon stimulation and during the course of the cell cycle , proton trans - porters must adapt accordingly . For this reason , acid and base transporters are often the targets of signalling pathways that couple the effectors of pH homeostasis with the varying metabolic output of the cell . In turn , the pH changes associated with acute metabolic activity have been suggested to act as signals to readjust the functional activities of cells . Although the importance of pH changes as signals remains the subject of debate , it is clear that pH homeostasis and the maintenance of proton gradients across organellar membranes are key to cell survival , function and proliferation . A more profound understanding of the players and the rules governing pH regulation is therefore essential . Figure 5 | role of protons in signal transduction . a | Localized changes in intracellular pH have important roles in cell polarity and migration ( reviewed in reFs 44 – 46 ) . Na + – H + exchanger 1 ( NHE1 ) clusters at the leading edge of stimulated cells and establishes a more alkaline intracellular environment that facilitates the de novo assembly and organization of the underlying cortical branched actin filament network . Elevations in intracellular pH activate cofilin , an actin - binding protein that increases the recycling of actin monomers ( globular actin ( G - actin ) ) at the rear of ‘older’ actin filaments ( filamentous actin ( F - actin ) ) . This promotes actin reorganization at the leading edge by severing established filaments , providing free barbed ends for further polymerization and nucleation by ARP2 / 3 . Remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton , in turn , pushes the plasma membrane forwards to attain unidirectional cell movement . NHE1 activity at the leading edge also results in a more acidic external pH , which modulates integrin - mediated cell – matrix adhesion dynamics and , ultimately , cell migration . b | Protons as a signal transmitter in the defecation cycle of Caenorhabditis elegans . The rhythmic defecation cycle of C . elegans is initiated by inositol trisphosphate ( Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) - induced release of Ca 2 + from intracellular stores in a pacemaking posterior intestinal epithelial cell . The Ca 2 + spikes then travel anterogradely as a wave to neighbouring cells through gap junctions . Elevated intracellular Ca 2 + leads to stimulation of the basolateral Na + – H + exchanger PBO - 4 ( also known as NHX - 7 ) , which expels H + into the extracellular coelomic space . The secreted H + ions diffuse across the coelomic space and activate the H + - gated cation channel PBO - 5 and PBO - 6 , which is located in the facing posterior muscle cells , leading to cation influx , membrane depolarization and muscle contraction , which are required for defecation . R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 59 1 . Whitten , S . T . , Garcia - Moreno , E . B . & Hilser , V . J . Local conformational fluctuations can modulate the coupling between proton binding and global structural transitions in proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 4282 – 4287 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Roos , A . & Boron , W . F . Intracellular pH . Physiol . Rev . 61 , 296 – 434 ( 1981 ) . 3 . Sperelakis , N . Cell Physiology Source Book ( Academic Press , San Diego , 1997 ) . 4 . Missner , A . et al . Carbon dioxide transport through membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 25340 – 25347 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Grinstein , S . , Furuya , W . & Biggar , W . D . Cytoplasmic pH regulation in normal and abnormal neutrophils . Role of superoxide generation and Na + / H + exchange . J . Biol . Chem . 261 , 512 – 514 ( 1986 ) . 6 . Forgac , M . Vacuolar ATPases : rotary proton pumps in physiology and pathophysiology . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 917 – 929 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Shin , J . M . , Munson , K . , Vagin , O . & Sachs , G . The gastric HK - ATPase : structure , function , and inhibition . Pflugers Arch . 457 , 609 – 622 ( 2009 ) . 8 . Brown , D . , Paunescu , T . G . , Breton , S . & Marshansky , V . Regulation of the V - ATPase in kidney epithelial cells : dual role in acid - base homeostasis and vesicle trafficking . J . Exp . Biol . 212 , 1762 – 1772 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Brett , C . L . , Donowitz , M . & Rao , R . Evolutionary origins of eukaryotic sodium / proton exchangers . Am . J . Physiol . , Cell Physiol . 288 , C223 - C239 ( 2005 ) . 10 . Orlowski , J . & Grinstein , S . Emerging roles of alkali cation / proton exchangers in organellar homeostasis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 483 – 492 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Grinstein , S . et al . Focal localization of the NHE - 1 isoform of the Na + / H + antiport : Assessment of effects on intracellular pH . EMBO J . 12 , 5209 – 5218 ( 1993 ) . 12 . Biemesderfer , D . et al . NHE3 : a Na + / H + exchanger isoform of renal brush border . Am . J . Physiol . 265 , F736 - F742 ( 1993 ) . 13 . Biemesderfer , D . , Reilly , R . F . , Exner , M . , Igarashi , P . & Aronson , P . S . Immunocytochemical characterization of Na + - H + exchanger isoform NHE - 1 in rabbit kidney . Am . J . Physiol . 263 , F833 - F840 ( 1992 ) . 14 . Petrecca , K . , Atanasiu , R . , Grinstein , S . , Orlowski , J . & Shrier , A . Subcellular localization of the Na + / H + exchanger NHE1 in rat myocardium . Am . J . Physiol . , Heart Circ . Physiol . 276 , H709 - H717 ( 1999 ) . 15 . Peti - Peterdi , J . et al . Macula densa Na + / H + exchange activities mediated by apical NHE2 and basolateral NHE4 isoforms . Am . J . Physiol . 278 , F452 - F463 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Aronson , P . S . Kinetic properties of the plasma membrane Na - H exchanger . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 47 , 545 – 560 ( 1985 ) . 17 . Fuster , D . , Moe , O . W . & Hilgemann , D . W . Steady - state function of the ubiquitous mammalian Na / H exchanger ( NHE1 ) in relation to dimer coupling models with 2Na / 2H stoichiometry . J . Gen . Physiol . 132 , 465 – 480 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Paris , S . & Pouysségur , J . Growth factors activate the Na + / H + antiporter in quiescent fibroblasts by increasing its affinity for intracellular H + J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 10989 – 10994 ( 1984 ) . 19 . Otsu , K . , Kinsella , J . L . , Koh , E . & Froehlich , J . P . Proton dependence of the partial reactions of the sodium - proton exchanger in renal brush border membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 8089 – 8096 ( 1992 ) . 20 . Olkhova , E . , Hunte , C . , Screpanti , E . , Padan , E . & Michel , H . Multiconformation continuum electrostatics analysis of the NhaA Na + / H + antiporter of Escherichia coli with functional implications . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 2629 – 2634 ( 2006 ) . The first in a series of detailed structural and mechanistic studies from this laboratory that define an electrostatic amino acid network , in which a Na + – H + antiporter that links pH sensing with the cation binding site is crucial for pH activation of the transporter . 21 . Olkhova , E . , Kozachkov , L . , Padan , E . & Michel , H . Combined computational and biochemical study reveals the importance of electrostatic interactions between the “pH sensor” and the cation binding site of the sodium / proton antiporter NhaA of Escherichia coli . Proteins 76 , 548 – 559 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Olkhova , E . , Padan , E . & Michel , H . The influence of protonation states on the dynamics of the NhaA antiporter from Escherichia coli . Biophys . J . 92 , 3784 – 3791 ( 2007 ) . 23 . Hisamitsu , T . , Yamada , K . , Nakamura , T . Y . & Wakabayashi , S . Functional importance of charged residues within the putative intracellular loops in pH regulation by Na + / H + exchanger NHE1 . FEBS J . 274 , 4326 – 4335 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Wakabayashi , S . , Hisamitsu , T . , Pang , T . & Shigekawa , M . Mutations of Arg440 and Gly455 / Gly456 oppositely change pH sensing of Na + / H + exchanger 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 11828 – 11835 ( 2003 ) . 25 . Wakabayashi , S . , Hisamitsu , T . , Pang , T . & Shigekawa , M . Kinetic dissection of two distinct proton binding sites in Na + / H + exchangers by measurement of reverse mode reaction . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 43580 – 43585 ( 2003 ) . 26 . Lacroix , J . , Poet , M . , Maehrel , C . & Counillon , L . A mechanism for the activation of the Na / H exchanger NHE - 1 by cytoplasmic acidification and mitogens . EMBO Rep . 5 , 91 – 96 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Monod , J . , Wyman , J . & Changeux , J . P . On the nature of allosteric transitions : a plausible model . J . Mol . Biol . 12 , 88 – 118 ( 1965 ) . 28 . Cuello , F . , Snabaitis , A . K . , Cohen , M . S . , Taunton , J . & Avkiran , M . Evidence for direct regulation of myocardial Na + / H + exchanger isoform 1 phosphorylation and activity by 90 - kDa ribosomal S6 kinase ( RSK ) : effects of the novel and specific RSK inhibitor fmk on responses to α 1 - adrenergic stimulation . Mol . Pharmacol . 71 , 799 – 806 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Khaled , A . R . et al . Trophic factor withdrawal : p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase activates NHE1 , which induces intracellular alkalinization . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 7545 – 7557 ( 2001 ) . 30 . Malo , M . E . , Li , L . & Fliegel , L . Mitogen - activated protein kinase - dependent activation of the Na + / H + exchanger is mediated through phosphorylation of amino acids Ser770 and Ser771 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 6292 – 6299 ( 2007 ) . 31 . Takahashi , E . et al . p90 RSK is a serum - stimulated Na + / H + exchanger isoform - 1 kinase . Regulatory phosphorylation of serine 703 of Na + / H + exchanger isoform - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 20206 – 20214 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Tominaga , T . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . & Barber , D . L . p160ROCK mediates RhoA activation of Na - H exchange . EMBO J . 17 , 4712 – 4722 ( 1998 ) . 33 . Yan , W . H . , Nehrke , K . , Choi , J . & Barber , D . L . The Nck - interacting kinase ( NIK ) phosphorylates the Na + - H + exchanger NHE1 and regulates NHE1 activation by platelet - derived growth factor . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 31349 – 31356 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Aharonovitz , O . et al . Intracellular pH regulation by Na + / H + exchange requires phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 213 – 224 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Bertrand , B . , Wakabayashi , S . , Ikeda , T . , Pouysségur , J . & Shigekawa , M . The Na + / H + exchanger isoform 1 ( NHE1 ) is a novel member of the calmodulin - binding proteins . Identification and characterization of calmodulin - binding sites . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 13703 – 13709 ( 1994 ) . 36 . Denker , S . P . , Huang , D . C . , Orlowski , J . , Furthmayr , H . & Barber , D . L . Direct binding of the Na - H exchanger NHE1 to ERM proteins regulates the cortical cytoskeleton and cell shape independently of H + translocation . Mol . Cell 6 , 1425 – 1436 ( 2000 ) . 37 . Inoue , H . et al . Calcineurin homologous protein isoform 2 ( CHP2 ) , Na + / H + exchangers - binding protein , is expressed in intestinal epithelium . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 26 , 148 – 155 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Lehoux , S . , Abe , J . , Florian , J . A . & Berk , B . C . 14 - 3 - 3 binding to Na + / H + exchanger isoform - 1 is associated with serum - dependent activation of Na + / H + exchange . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 15794 – 15800 ( 2001 ) . 39 . Li , X . , Liu , Y . , Alvarez , B . V . , Casey , J . R . & Fliegel , L . A novel carbonic anhydrase II binding site regulates NHE1 activity . Biochemistry 45 , 2414 – 2424 ( 2006 ) . 40 . Lin , X . & Barber , D . L . A calcineurin homologous protein inhibits GTPase - stimulated Na - H exchange . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 12631 – 12636 ( 1996 ) . 41 . Mailander , J . , Muller - Esterl , W . & Dedio , J . Human homolog of mouse tescalcin associates with Na + / H + exchanger type - 1 . FEBS Lett . 507 , 331 – 335 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Pang , T . , Su , X . , Wakabayashi , S . & Shigekawa , M . Calcineurin homologous protein as an essential cofactor for Na + / H + exchangers . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 17367 – 17372 ( 2001 ) . 43 . Pang , T . , Wakabayashi , S . & Shigekawa , M . Expression of calcineurin B homologous protein 2 protects serum deprivation - induced cell death by serum - independent activation of Na + / H + exchanger . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 43771 – 43777 ( 2002 ) . Identified the first bona fide , essential regulator of NHEs . 44 . Meima , M . E . , Mackley , J . R . & Barber , D . L . Beyond ion translocation : structural functions of the sodium - hydrogen exchanger isoform - 1 . Curr . Opin . Nephrol . Hypertens . 16 , 365 – 372 ( 2007 ) . 45 . Denker , S . P . & Barber , D . L . Cell migration requires both ion translocation and cytoskeletal anchoring by the Na - H exchanger NHE1 . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 1087 – 1096 ( 2002 ) . A seminal study , highlighting both a structural and a functional role for NHE1 in establishing polarity and directed migration of fibroblastic cells . 46 . Stock , C . & Schwab , A . Role of the Na / H exchanger NHE1 in cell migration . Acta Physiol ( Oxf . ) 187 , 149 – 157 ( 2006 ) . 47 . Hayashi , H . et al . Na + / H + exchange and pH regulation in the control of neutrophil chemokinesis and chemotaxis . Am . J . Physiol . , Cell Physiol . 294 , C526 – C534 ( 2008 ) . 48 . Patel , H . & Barber , D . L . A developmentally regulated Na - H exchanger in Dictyostelium discoideum is necessary for cell polarity during chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 321 – 329 ( 2005 ) . 49 . Kapus , A . , Grinstein , S . , Wasan , S . , Kandasamy , R . A . & Orlowski , J . Functional characterization of three isoforms of the Na + / H + exchanger stably expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells : ATP dependence , osmotic sensitivity and role in cell proliferation . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 23544 – 23552 ( 1994 ) . 50 . Pouysségur , J . , Sardet , C . , Franchi , A . , L’Allemain , G . & Paris , S . A specific mutation abolishing Na + / H + antiport activity in hamster fibroblasts precludes growth at neutral and acidic pH . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 81 , 4833 – 4837 ( 1984 ) . A classic paper identifying a crucial role for NHE1 in linking the regulation of intracellular pH to cell proliferation . 51 . Putney , L . K . & Barber , D . L . Na - H exchange - dependent increase in intracellular pH times G2 / M entry and transition . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 44645 – 44649 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Halestrap , A . & Meredith , D . The SLC16 gene family - from monocarboxylate transporters ( MCTs ) to aromatic amino acid transporters and beyond . Pflugers Arch . 477 , 619 – 628 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Vandenberg , J . I . , Metcalfe , J . C . & Grace , A . A . Mechanisms of pH i recovery after global ischemia in the perfused heart . Circ . Res . 72 , 993 – 1003 ( 1993 ) . Dissects the molecular mechanisms of pH regulation that are present in the intact heart . 54 . Musa - Aziz , R . , Chen , L . M . , Pelletier , M . F . & Boron , W . F . Relative CO 2 / NH 3 selectivities of AQP1 , AQP4 , AQP5 , AmtB , and RhAG . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 5406 – 5411 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Yang , B . et al . Carbon dioxide permeability of aquaporin - 1 measured in erythrocytes and lung of aquaporin - 1 null mice and in reconstituted proteoliposomes . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 2686 – 2692 ( 2000 ) . 56 . Cordat , E . & Casey , J . R . Bicarbonate transport in cell physiology and disease . Biochem . J . 417 , 423 – 439 ( 2009 ) . 57 . Gross , E . et al . The stoichiometry of the electrogenic sodium bicarbonate cotransporter NBC1 is cell - type dependent . J . Physiol . 531 , 597 – 603 ( 2001 ) . Provides evidence that the coupling stoichiometry for Na + – HCO 3 – co - transport changes in a cell - type dependent manner . 58 . Romero , M . F . , Hediger , M . A . , Boulpaep , E . L . & Boron , W . F . Expression cloning and characterization of a renal electrogenic Na + / HCO 3 – cotransporter . Nature 387 , 409 – 413 ( 1997 ) . Reports on the first identification of a Na + – HCO 3 – co - transporter gene , using an expression cloning approach . 59 . Alper , S . L . Molecular physiology and genetics of Na + - independent SLC4 anion exchangers . J . Exp . Biol . 212 , 1672 – 1683 ( 2009 ) . 60 . Sterling , D . & Casey , J . R . Transport activity of AE3 chloride / bicarbonate anion - exchange proteins and their regulation by intracellular pH . Biochem . J . 344 , 221 – 229 ( 1999 ) . 61 . Humphreys , B . D . , Jiang , L . , Chernova , M . N . & Alper , S . L . Functional characterization and regulation by pH of murine AE2 anion exchanger expressed in Xenopus oocytes . Am . J . Physiol . , Cell Physiol . 267 , C1295 – C1307 ( 1994 ) . 62 . Gawenis , L . R . et al . Mice with a targeted disruption of the AE2 Cl – / HCO 3 – exchanger are achlorhydric . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 30531 – 30539 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 60 | jAnUARy 2010 | VOlUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio 63 . Hug , M . J . , Tamada , T . & Bridges , R . J . CFTR and bicarbonate secretion by epithelial cells . News Physiol . Sci . 18 , 38 – 42 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Ko , S . B . et al . A molecular mechanism for aberrant CFTR - dependent HCO 3 – transport in cystic fibrosis . EMBO J . 21 , 5662 – 5672 ( 2002 ) . 65 . Mason , M . J . , Smith , J . D . , Garcia - Soto , J . J . & Grinstein , S . Internal pH - sensitive site couples Cl – - HCO 3 - exchange to Na + - H + antiport in lymphocytes . Am . J . Physiol . 256 , C428 – C433 ( 1989 ) . 66 . Melvin , J . E . , Park , K . , Richardson , L . , Schultheis , P . J . & Shull , G . E . Mouse down - regulated in adenoma ( DRA ) is an intestinal Cl – / HCO 3 – exchanger and is up - regulated in colon of mice lacking the NHE3 Na + / H + exchanger . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 22855 – 22861 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Hoglund , P . et al . Mutations of the Down - regulated in adenoma ( DRA ) gene cause congenital chloride diarrhoea . Nature Genet . 14 , 316 – 319 ( 1996 ) . 68 . Goldfarb , D . S . in Nuclear Transport ( ed . Kehlenbach , R . ) ( Landes Bioscience , Austin , 2009 ) . 69 . Paroutis , P . , Touret , N . & Grinstein , S . The pH of the secretory pathway : measurement , determinants , and regulation . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 19 , 207 – 215 ( 2004 ) . 70 . Kane , P . M . The long physiological reach of the yeast vacuolar H + - ATPase . J . Bioenerg . Biomembr . 39 , 415 – 421 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Cipriano , D . J . et al . Structure and regulation of the vacuolar ATPases . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1777 , 599 – 604 ( 2008 ) . 72 . Barasch , J . & al - Awqati , Q . Defective acidification of the biosynthetic pathway in cystic fibrosis . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 17 , 229 – 233 ( 1993 ) . 73 . Seksek , O . , Biwersi , J . & Verkman , A . S . Evidence against defective trans - Golgi acidification in cystic fibrosis . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 15542 – 15548 ( 1996 ) . 74 . Schapiro , F . B . & Grinstein , S . Determinants of the pH of the Golgi complex . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21025 – 21032 ( 2000 ) . 75 . Numata , M . & Orlowski , J . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel ( Na + , K + ) / H + exchanger localized to the trans - Golgi network . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 17387 – 17394 ( 2001 ) . 76 . Ruetz , S . , Lindsey , A . E . , Ward , C . L . & Kopito , R . R . Functional activation of plasma membrane anion exchangers occurs in a pre - Golgi compartment . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 37 – 48 ( 1993 ) . 77 . Shull , G . E . et al . Physiological functions of plasma membrane and intracellular Ca 2 + pumps revealed by analysis of null mutants . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 986 , 453 – 460 ( 2003 ) . 78 . Wu , M . M . et al . Mechanisms of pH regulation in the regulated secretory pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 33027 – 33035 ( 2001 ) . 79 . Weisz , O . A . Organelle acidification and disease . Traffic 4 , 57 – 64 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Jentsch , T . J . CLC chloride channels and transporters : from genes to protein structure , pathology and physiology . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 43 , 3 – 36 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Di , A . et al . CFTR regulates phagosome acidification in macrophages and alters bactericidal activity . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 933 – 944 ( 2006 ) . 82 . Abad , M . F . , Di Benedetto , G . , Magalhaes , P . J . , Filippin , L . & Pozzan , T . Mitochondrial pH monitored by a new engineered green fluorescent protein mutant . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 11521 – 11529 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Llopis , J . , McCaffery , J . M . , Miyawaki , A . , Farquhar , M . G . & Tsien , R . Y . Measurement of cytosolic , mitochondrial , and Golgi pH in single living cells with green fluorescent proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6803 – 6808 ( 1998 ) . 84 . Brierley , G . P . , Baysal , K . & Jung , D . W . Cation transport systems in mitochondria : Na + and K + uniports and exchangers . J . Bioenerg . Biomembr . 26 , 519 – 526 ( 1994 ) . 85 . Crompton , M . & Heid , I . The cycling of calcium , sodium , and protons across the inner membrane of cardiac mitochondria . Eur . J . Biochem . 91 , 599 – 608 ( 1978 ) . 86 . Garlid , K . D . , Sun , X . , Paucek , P . & Woldegiorgis , G . Mitochondrial cation transport systems . Methods Enzymol . 260 , 331 – 348 ( 1995 ) . 87 . Gunter , T . E . , Gunter , K . K . , Sheu , S . S . & Gavin , C . E . Mitochondrial calcium transport : physiological and pathological relevance . Am . J . Physiol . 267 , C313 – C339 ( 1994 ) . 88 . McCormack , J . G . , Halestrap , A . P . & Denton , R . M . Role of calcium ions in regulation of mammalian intramitochondrial metabolism . Physiol . Rev . 70 , 391 – 425 ( 1990 ) . 89 . Moreno - Sanchez , R . Inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation by a Ca 2 + - induced diminution of the adenine nucleotide translocator . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 724 , 278 – 285 ( 1983 ) . 90 . Yamada , E . W . & Huzel , N . J . Calcium - binding ATPase inhibitor protein of bovine heart mitochondria . Role in ATP synthesis and effect of Ca 2 + . Biochemistry 28 , 9714 – 9718 ( 1989 ) . 91 . Hajnoczky , G . , Robb - Gaspers , L . D . , Seitz , M . B . & Thomas , A . P . Decoding of cytosolic calcium oscillations in the mitochondria . Cell 82 , 415 – 424 ( 1995 ) . 92 . Matsuyama , S . , Llopis , J . , Deveraux , Q . L . , Tsien , R . Y . & Reed , J . C . Changes in intramitochondrial and cytosolic pH : early events that modulate caspase activation during apoptosis . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 318 – 325 ( 2000 ) . This paper identifies disruptions in mitochondrial and cytoplasmic pH homeostasis as important early events in mitochondrial - dependent apoptosis . 93 . Matsuyama , S . , Xu , Q . , Velours , J . & Reed , J . C . The mitochondrial F 0 F 1 - ATPase proton pump is required for function of the proapoptotic protein Bax in yeast and mammalian cells . Mol . Cell 1 , 327 – 336 ( 1998 ) . 94 . Nicholls , D . et al . Apoptosis and the laws of thermodynamics . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , E172 – E173 ( 2000 ) . 95 . Thangaraju , M . , Sharma , K . , Liu , D . , Shen , S . H . & Srikant , C . B . Interdependent regulation of intracellular acidification and SHP - 1 in apoptosis . Cancer Res . 59 , 1649 – 1654 ( 1999 ) . 96 . Lupescu , A . et al . Inhibition of Na + / H + exchanger activity by parvovirus B19 protein NS1 . Cell Physiol . Biochem . 23 , 211 – 220 ( 2009 ) . 97 . Schneider , D . et al . Intracellular acidification by inhibition of the Na + / H + - exchanger leads to caspase - independent death of cerebellar granule neurons resembling paraptosis . Cell Death Differ . 11 , 760 – 770 ( 2004 ) . 98 . Hoepfner , D . , Schildknegt , D . , Braakman , I . , Philippsen , P . & Tabak , H . F . Contribution of the endoplasmic reticulum to peroxisome formation . Cell 122 , 85 – 95 ( 2005 ) . 99 . Titorenko , V . I . & Rachubinski , R . A . Spatiotemporal dynamics of the ER - derived peroxisomal endomembrane system . Int . Rev . Cell . Mol . Biol . 272 , 191 – 244 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Reddy , J . K . & Mannaerts , G . P . Peroxisomal lipid metabolism . Annu . Rev . Nutr . 14 , 343 – 370 ( 1994 ) . 101 . Dansen , T . B . , Wirtz , K . W . , Wanders , R . J . & Pap , E . H . Peroxisomes in human fibroblasts have a basic pH . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 51 – 53 ( 2000 ) . 102 . Jankowski , A . et al . In situ measurements of the pH of mammalian peroxisomes using the fluorescent protein pHluorin . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 48748 – 48753 ( 2001 ) . 103 . Drago , I . , Giacomello , M . , Pizzo , P . & Pozzan , T . Calcium dynamics in the peroxisomal lumen of living cells . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 14384 – 14390 ( 2008 ) . 104 . Srivastava , J . , Barber , D . L . & Jacobson , M . P . Intracellular pH sensors : design principles and functional significance . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 22 , 30 – 39 ( 2007 ) . 105 . Pouysségur , J . , Franchi , A . , L’Allemain , G . & Paris , S . Cytoplasmic pH , a key determinant of growth factor - induced DNA synthesis in quiescent fibroblasts . FEBS Lett . 190 , 115 – 119 ( 1985 ) . 106 . Schelling , J . R . & Abu Jawdeh , B . G . Regulation of cell survival by Na + / H + exchanger - 1 . Am . J . Physiol . , Renal Physiol . 295 , F625 – F632 ( 2008 ) . 107 . Bierman , A . , Cragoe , E . J . , Jr , de Laat , S . W . & Moolenaar , W . H . Bicarbonate determines cytoplasmic pH and suppresses mitogen - induced alkalinization in fibroblastic cells . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 15253 – 15256 ( 1988 ) . 108 . Spitzer , K . W . , Skolnick , R . L . , Peercy , B . E . , Keener , J . P . & Vaughan - Jones , R . D . Facilitation of intracellular H + ion mobility by CO 2 / HCO 3 – in rabbit ventricular myocytes is regulated by carbonic anhydrase . J . Physiol . 541 , 159 – 167 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Vaughan - Jones , R . D . , Peercy , B . E . , Keener , J . P . & Spitzer , K . W . Intrinsic H + ion mobility in the rabbit ventricular myocyte . J . Physiol . 541 , 139 – 158 ( 2002 ) . Reveals the surprisingly slow rate of H + diffusion in the cytosol . 110 . Stewart , A . K . , Boyd , C . A . & Vaughan - Jones , R . D . A novel role for carbonic anhydrase : cytoplasmic pH gradient dissipation in mouse small intestinal enterocytes . J . Physiol . 516 , 209 – 217 ( 1999 ) . 111 . Stock , C . et al . pH nanoenvironment at the surface of single melanoma cells . Cell Physiol . Biochem . 20 , 679 – 686 ( 2007 ) . 112 . Stock , C . & Schwab , A . Protons make tumor cells move like clockwork . Pflugers Arch . 458 , 981 - 992 ( 2009 ) . 113 . Simons , M . et al . Electrochemical cues regulate assembly of the Frizzled / Dishevelled complex at the plasma membrane during planar epithelial polarization . Nature Cell Biol . 11 , 286 – 294 ( 2009 ) . 114 . Beg , A . A . , Ernstrom , G . G . , Nix , P . , Davis , M . W . & Jorgensen , E . M . Protons act as a transmitter for muscle contraction in C . elegans . Cell 132 , 149 – 160 ( 2008 ) . Elegant studies of C . elegans indicate that H + ions , secreted by an intestinal NHE , act on a proton - gated cation channel in muscle cells to signal muscle contraction , which provides evidence for a role of extracellular protons as a neurotransmitter . 115 . Waldmann , R . et al . H + - gated cation channels . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 868 , 67 – 76 ( 1999 ) . 116 . DeVries , S . H . Exocytosed protons feedback to suppress the Ca 2 + current in mammalian cone photoreceptors . Neuron 32 , 1107 – 1117 ( 2001 ) . 117 . Pastorekova , S . , Parkkila , S . , Pastorek , J . & Supuran , C . T . Carbonic anhydrases : current state of the art , therapeutic applications and future prospects . J . Enzyme Inhib . Med . Chem . 19 , 199 – 229 ( 2004 ) . 118 . Obara , M . , Szeliga , M . & Albrecht , J . Regulation of pH in the mammalian central nervous system under normal and pathological conditions : facts and hypotheses . Neurochem . Int . 52 , 905 – 919 ( 2008 ) . 119 . Vaughan - Jones , R . D . , Spitzer , K . W . & Swietach , P . Intracellular pH regulation in heart . J . Mol . Cell Cardiol . 46 , 318 - 331 ( 2008 ) . 120 . Hara - Chikuma , M . , Wang , Y . , Guggino , S . E . , Guggino , W . B . & Verkman , A . S . Impaired acidification in early endosomes of ClC - 5 deficient proximal tubule . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 329 , 941 – 946 ( 2005 ) . 121 . Piwon , N . , Gunther , W . , Schwake , M . , Bosl , M . R . & Jentsch , T . J . ClC - 5 Cl – - channel disruption impairs endocytosis in a mouse model for Dent’s disease . Nature 408 , 369 – 373 ( 2000 ) . 122 . Kornak , U . et al . Loss of the ClC - 7 chloride channel leads to osteopetrosis in mice and man . Cell 104 , 205 – 215 ( 2001 ) . 123 . Kasper , D . et al . Loss of the chloride channel ClC - 7 leads to lysosomal storage disease and neurodegeneration . EMBO J . 24 , 1079 – 1091 ( 2005 ) . 124 . Poet , M . et al . Lysosomal storage disease upon disruption of the neuronal chloride transport protein ClC - 6 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 13854 – 13859 ( 2006 ) . 125 . Kornak , U . et al . Impaired glycosylation and cutis laxa caused by mutations in the vesicular H + - ATPase subunit ATP6V0A2 . Nature Genet . 40 , 32 – 34 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgements Original work from the authors’ laboratories is supported by the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada , the Kidney Foundation and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . S . G holds the Pitblado Chair in Cell Biology . J . R . C is a scientist of the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / omim cutis laxa | Dent disease | wrinkly skin syndrome UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org AE1 | AE2 | AE3 | BAX | CFTR | CLCN3 | CLCN7 | MCLC | NBCe1 | NBCe2 | NBCn1 | NBCn2 | NhaA | NHA1 | NHA2 | NHE1 | NHE3 | NHE6 | NHE7 | NHE9 | PBO - 4 | PBO - 5 | PBO - 6 | SLC4A9 | SLC26A3 | SLC26A6 | FURTHER INFORMATION Joseph R . Casey’s homepage : http : / / www . physiology . ualberta . ca / casey / index . php Sergio Grinstein’s homepage : http : / / www . sickkids . ca / AboutSickKids / Directory / People / G / Sergio - Grinstein . html John Orlowski’s homepage : http : / / www . medicine . mcgill . ca / physio / orlowskilab SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) | S2 ( table ) | S3 ( table ) all links are active in tHe online pdf R E V I E W S nATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 11 | jAnUARy 2010 | 61