Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease Caroline Bonnans 1 , 2 , * , Jonathan Chou 1 , 3 , * , and Zena Werb 1 1 Department of Anatomy , University of California 2 Oncology Department , INSERM U661 , Functional Genomic Institute , 141 rue de la Cardonille , 34094 Montpellier , France 3 Department of Medicine , University of California , 513 Parnassus Avenue , San Francisco , California 94143 – 0452 , USA Abstract The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is a highly dynamic structure that is present in all tissues and continuously undergoes controlled remodelling . This process involves quantitative and qualitative changes in the ECM , mediated by specific enzymes that are responsible for ECM degradation , such as metalloproteinases . The ECM interacts with cells to regulate diverse functions , including proliferation , migration and differentiation . ECM remodelling is crucial for regulating the morphogenesis of the intestine and lungs , as well as of the mammary and submandibular glands . Dysregulation of ECM composition , structure , stiffness and abundance contributes to several pathological conditions , such as fibrosis and invasive cancer . A better understanding of how the ECM regulates organ structure and function and of how ECM remodelling affects disease progression will contribute to the development of new therapeutics . The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is a three - dimensional , non - cellular structure that is present in all tissues and is essential for life . Every organ has an ECM with unique composition that is generated in early embryonic stages . The function of the ECM goes beyond providing physical support for tissue integrity and elasticity : it is a dynamic structure that is constantly remodelled to control tissue homeostasis 1 . The functional importance of the ECM is illustrated by the wide range of tissue defects or , in severe cases , the embryonic lethality caused by mutations in genes that encode components of the ECM 2 , 3 . Loss - of - function studies have also shown the importance of ECM proteins in developmental processes , as genetic deletion of specific ECM proteins such as fibronectin and collagens are often embryonic lethal ( reviewed in REF . 4 ) . In mammals , the ECM is composed of around 300 proteins , known as the core matrisome , and includes proteins such as collagen , proteoglycans ( PGs ) and glycoproteins ( reviewed in REF . 5 ) . There are two main types of ECM that differ with regard to their location and © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Correspondence to : Z . W . , zena . werb @ ucsf . edu . * These authors contributed equally to this work . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . NIH Public Access Author Manuscript Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . Published in final edited form as : Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2014 December ; 15 ( 12 ) : 786 – 801 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3904 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t composition : the interstitial connective tissue matrix , which surrounds cells and provides structural scaffolding for tissues ; and the basement membrane , which is a specialized form of ECM that separates the epithelium from the surrounding stroma ( BOX 1 ) . Box 1 The mammalian matrisome Using different proteomic techniques and analysing the human and mouse genomes , Hynes and colleagues reported what is so far the most comprehensive list of proteins that define the matrisome in mammals . Among these , ~ 300 proteins constitute the core matrisome , which consists of 43 collagen subunits , 36 proteoglycans ( PCs ) and ~ 200 complex glycoproteins 5 . Collagens are the main structural proteins of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and are classified into both fibrillar ( collagens I – III , V and XI ) and non - fibrillar forms . Collagen fibrils provide tensile strength to the ECM , limiting the distensibility of tissues . PGs , such as aggrecan , versican , perlecan and decorin , are core proteins with attached glycosaminoglycan ( GAG ) side chains and are interspersed among collagen fibrils . PGs fill the extracellular interstitial space and confer hydration functions by sequestering water within the tissue . GAGs , especially heparin sulphates , also bind many growth factors , which sequester them in the ECM . Glycoproteins , such as laminins , elastin , fibronectins , thrombospondins , tenascins and nidogen , have diverse functions . In addition to their role in ECM assembly , they are also involved in ECM – cell interaction by acting as ligands for cell surface receptors such as integrins . Glycoproteins also function as a reservoir of growth factors , which are bound to the ECM and can be released after proteolysis . Cleavage of glycoproteins can generate fragments with different functions than in their original full - length protein . In addition , there are many ECM - associated proteins that are not part of the matrisome but are nonetheless important in ECM remodelling . These proteins are growth factors and cytokines , mucins , secreted C - type lectins , galectins , semaphorins , plexins and ECM - modifying enzymes that are involved in crosslinking ( for example , transglutaminase , lysyl oxidase and hydroxylase ) . There are two main types of ECM : the interstitial connective tissue matrix and the basement membrane , a specialized form of ECM separating epithelium from the surrounding stroma and controlling cell organization and differentiation through Bonnans et al . Page 2 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t interactions with cell surface receptors and ECM proteins ( see the figure ) . The interstitial matrix surrounds cells and is mainly composed of collagen I and fibronectin , which provide structural scaffolding for tissues . By contrast , the basement membrane is more compact than the interstitial matrix and mainly consists of collagen IV , laminins , heparan sulphate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) and proteins , such as nidogen and entactin , that are synthesized and secreted by epithelial cells , endothelial cells and underlying integrin - expressing myofibroblasts 95 . Basement membrane express different receptors , such as integrins and hemidesmosomes , that bind to ECM proteins . Hemidesmosomes include two transmembrane proteins , α 6 β 4 integrin and BP180 ( 180 kDa bullous pemphigoid antigen 2 ) and two cytoplasmic proteins , BP230 and plectin , that are related to the cytoskeleton . ECM proteins can bind other receptors such as dystroglycan , the Lutheran glycoprotein and sulphated glycolipids such as sulphatides 136 ( see the figure ) . Components of the ECM constantly interact with epithelial cells by serving as ligands for cell receptors such as integrins , thereby transmitting signals that regulate adhesion , migration , proliferation , apoptosis , survival or differentiation . The ECM can also sequester and locally release growth factors , such as epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) and other signalling molecules ( such as WNTs , transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) and amphiregulin ) . ECM components released through ECM cleavage also regulate ECM architecture and influence cell behaviour 1 . Moreover , cells are constantly rebuilding and remodelling the ECM through synthesis , degradation , reassembly and chemical modification 6 . These processes are complex and need to be tightly regulated to maintain tissue homeostasis , especially in response to injury . Indeed , dysregulated ECM remodelling is associated with pathological conditions and can exacerbate disease progression . For example , abnormal ECM deposition and stiffness are observed in fibrosis and cancer 7 , and excessive ECM degradation is linked to osteoarthritis 8 . Here , we review recent advances in our understanding of ECM dynamics in development and tissue homeostasis and discuss how dysregulation of ECM structure and composition leads to disease . We first describe the endopeptidases that degrade and cleave ECM components , which can also generate fragments with biological functions that differ from their full - length counterparts . We then summarize progress in elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the role of the ECM during normal morphogenesis , focusing on the best known examples : the development of the intestine , the lungs and the mammary and submandibular glands ( also known as salivary glands ) . Finally , we discuss how dysregulated ECM remodelling leads to diseases such as fibrosis and cancer and highlight some ECM - related targets with therapeutic potential that are currently being tested in clinical trials . These conceptual advances in understanding the ECM in physiological and pathological processes will guide us in developing better therapies for disease . ECM breakdown by proteases Cleavage of ECM components is the main process during ECM remodelling and is important for regulating ECM abundance , composition and structure , as well as for releasing Bonnans et al . Page 3 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t biologically active molecules ( such as growth factors ) . The ECM can be cleaved by different families of proteases . Matrix metalloproteinases Matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) are the main enzymes involved in ECM degradation . Their activity is low in normal conditions but increased during repair or remodelling processes and in diseased or inflamed tissue . MMPs are produced either as soluble or cell membrane - anchored proteinases and cleave ECM components with wide substrate specificities . MMPs were discovered in 1962 in a study of collagen remodelling during tadpole tail metamorphosis 9 . So far , 23 human MMPs have been identified ( FIG . 1 ) . Most MMPs are secreted as zymogens and are subsequently activated in the extracellular space . MMP activation primarily occurs via proteolytic cleavage ( by Ser proteases or other MMPs ) or by modifying the thiol group by oxidation ( for example , through reactive oxygen species generated by leukocytes ) . Collectively , MMPs can degrade all ECM proteins 6 ( FIG . 1 ) and their proteolytic actions on the ECM have crucial roles in organogenesis and branching morphogenesis . Adamalysins This protein family includes ADAMs ( a disintegrin and metalloproteinases ) 10 and ADAMTS ( ADAMs with a thrombospondin motif ) 11 . So far , 22 ADAM genes have been identified in humans but only 12 encode active proteinases . ADAMs are ‘sheddases’ : they can cleave transmembrane protein ectodomains that are adjacent to the cell membrane , thus releasing the complete ectodomain of cytokines , growth factors , receptors and adhesion molecules ( reviewed in REF . 12 ) . The disi ntegrin domains mediate cell – ECM interactions by binding integrins , and the Cys - rich domains interact with heparan sulphate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ; reviewed in REF . 13 ) . ADAM10 , ADAM12 and ADAM15 can also cleave ECM proteins such as collagens ( FIG . 1 ) . In contrast to ADAMs , ADAMTS are secreted proteinases with thrombospondin type I - like repeats in their carboxy - terminal sequences . The aggrecanases ( ADAMTS1 , ADAMTS4 , ADAMTS5 , ADAMTS8 , ADAMTS9 , ADAMTS15 and ADAMTS20 ) are proteo - glycanolytic . ADAMTS2 , ADAMTS3 and ADAMTS14 are pro - collagen N - propeptidases that process pro - collagens I , II and III and are important for depositing normal collagen fibrils onto the ECM in a tissue - specific manner ( reviewed in REF . 14 ) . ADAMTS13 , which cleaves von Willebrand factor , is involved in coagulation and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura ( TTP ) . The functions of ADAMTS6 , ADAMTS7 , ADAMTS10 , ADAMTS12 , ADAMTS16 , ADAMTS17 , ADAMTS18 and ADAMTS19 are still unclear . Meprins The meprins belong to the astacin family and are composed of two subunits ( α and β ) that are encoded by two different genes 15 . The subunits can form heterocomplexes and homocomplexes linked by disulphide bridges 16 . In contrast to meprin - α ( which is a secreted protein as it loses its transmembrane domain by cleavage during biosynthesis ) , meprin - β is Bonnans et al . Page 4 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t predominantly expressed on the cell surface but can be released from the membrane by shedding via ADAM10 ( REF . 17 ) . Meprins can cleave ECM proteins such as collagen IV , nidogen and fibronectin 18 ( FIG . 1 ) . In addition , meprins may be necessary for the generation of mature collagen molecules by cleaving pro - collagen I that is assembled into collagen fibrils , which are important for skin tensile strength 19 . Meprins can also indirectly regulate ECM remodelling by activating the other metalloproteinases . For example , ADAM10 is cleaved by meprin - β 20 , and both meprin - α and meprin - β promote the cleavage of pro - MMP9 by MMP3 , thus accelerating the activation of MMP9 ( REF . 21 ) . Compared with the other metallo - proteinases , the roles of meprins in ECM remodelling are poorly understood . Metalloproteinase inhibitors ECM proteolysis requires tight regulation to avoid excessive and deleterious tissue degradation . The activity of endogenous inhibitors that inactivate ECM proteinases is thus important for tissue integrity . The tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases ( TIMP ) family consists of four members ( TIMP1 – TIMP4 ) that reversibly inhibit the activity of MMPs , ADAMs and ADAMTS , but not of meprins . MMP - to - TIMP ratios determine the overall proteolytic activity , and each TIMP displays preferential MMP - binding specificity ( reviewed in REF . 22 ) . TIMP3 is sequestered in the ECM , whereas the other TIMPs are present in soluble form in vivo . Although TIMP3 is the main inhibitor of ADAMs and ADAMTS , the membrane - associated RECK ( reversion - inducing Cys - rich protein with Kazal motifs ) also regulates the activity of MMPs and ADAMs 23 . Cystatin C , elafin and fetuin A have been identified as natural inhibitors of meprins 20 . Other enzymes important in ECM remodelling Ser proteases can also target many ECM proteins . The two plasminogen activators urokinase and tissue plasminogen activator target plasminogen to generate plasmin , a protein that degrades fibrin , fibronectin and laminin 24 . Moreover , the Ser protease elastase is released by neutrophils and promotes the breakdown of fibronectin and elastin 25 , and the membrane - anchored Ser protease matriptase , which is expressed by epithelial cells , is important in maintaining the intestinal barrier ( reviewed in REF . 26 ) . In addition , cathepsins are found both extracellularly and intracellularly in lysosomes . Secreted cathepsins degrade extracellular ECM proteins , but many cells can also internalize ECM components such as collagen through endocytosis and degrade them in the lysosomes 27 . Families of cathepsins include the Ser cathepsins ( cathepsins A and G ) , Asp cathepsins ( cathepsins D and E ) and Cys cathepsins 28 . Finally , heparanases and sulphatases can alter the properties of ECM PGs ( reviewed in REF . 6 ) . Heparanase , an endoglucuronidase responsible for heparan sulphate ( HS ) cleavage , regulates the structure and function of HSPGs . This results in structural alterations of the ECM and the release of bioactive saccharide fragments and HS - bound growth factors and cytokines . Suphatase 1 and sulphatase 2 are secreted endosulphatases that remove 6 - O - sulphate residues from HS and modulate HS binding to many cytokines and growth factors , including FGF1 and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) 29 . Bonnans et al . Page 5 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t ECM dynamics in intestinal development In vertebrates , the intestine is formed from the embryonic endoderm layer , which undergoes multiple morphological changes to give rise to an adult epithelium with finger - like luminal projections called villi and epithelial invaginations called intestinal crypts . Within these crypts reside intestinal stem cells , which express Leu - rich - repeat - containing G protein - coupled receptor 5 ( LGR5 ) 30 . To illustrate the roles of the ECM in development , we discuss our current understanding of how the ECM regulates intestinal morphogenesis in anuran ( for example , frog and toad ) tadpoles and in other vertebrates . Intestinal morphogenesis in anurans The anuran tadpole intestine is composed of a simple tubular organ made of a monolayer of epithelial cells ( FIG . 2a ) . Metamorphosis from tadpole to the adult anuran involves the death of these cells , which undergo apoptosis induced by thyroid hormone ; meanwhile , the adult epithelial cells proliferate rapidly ( reviewed in REF . 31 ) . During intestinal metamorphosis , the basement membrane also thickens , which suggests that the ECM might have a role in intestinal morphogenesis . Moreover , the addition of the ECM proteins laminin , collagen and fibronectin in vitro inhibits tadpole epithelial cell apoptosis induced by thyroid hormone 32 , which supports the idea that ECM remodelling influences cell fate during intestinal morphogenesis . Several MMPs induced by thyroid hormone during metamorphosis have a pivotal role in remodelling the intestine . For example , MMP11 ( also known as stromelysin 3 ) is released and activated by fibroblasts after thyroid hormone stimulation 33 and is essential for epithelial cell apoptosis and invasion of the connective tissue during metamorphosis 34 ( FIG . 2a ) . Although the exact role of MMP11 is unknown , MMP11 can cleave laminin receptor and may therefore affect cell fate and migration during intestinal development 35 . Other MMPs , such as MMP2 , MMP9 and MMP14 ( also known as membrane type 1 MP ; MT1MMP ) 36 , are also upregulated during tadpole metamorphosis in response to thyroid hormone . The levels of MMP2 and MMP9 increase following epithelial cell death , suggesting that , in contrast to MMP11 , these MMPs may have a role in post - apoptosis ECM remodelling at later stages of intestinal morphogenesis . Despite the fact that both of these MMPs function cooperatively during metamorphosis by contributing to the MMP14 - mediated activation of pro - MMP2 , their exact biological role in intestinal development has not been elucidated 37 . Intestinal morphogenesis in other vertebrates In mammals , the involvement of ECM remodelling in intestinal development was first suggested by changes in the levels and localization of ECM proteins along the intestinal villus – crypt axis ( reviewed in REF . 38 ) . For example , in the perinatal rat intestine , there is a transient disappearance of fibronectin and pro - collagen III at the top of the outgrowing villus , whereas the basement membrane proteins are restricted to the base of the villi when crypts develop 39 . In addition , the levels of collagen IV mRNA synthesized by the mesenchyme are high during intestinal morphogenesis , suggesting an important role for this type of collagen in gut development 40 . Bonnans et al . Page 6 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Laminins also play an important part in cell – ECM interactions during intestinal morphogenesis and differentiation ( reviewed in REF . 41 ) . For example , mice lacking the laminin 511 α 5 chain in the small intestinal basement membrane compensate by depositing colonic laminins ( laminin 111 and laminin 411 ) , which results in the transformation of the small intestine to a tissue with a colon - like mucosal architecture characterized by high levels of cell proliferation , probably owing to decreases levels of the cell cycle regulator cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor B ( CDKN1B ) 42 ( FIG . 2b ) . These studies show that ECM content remodelling has a crucial role in guiding tissue architecture during intestinal development . Integrins are differentially expressed during intestinal development ( reviewed in REF . 43 ) . Interestingly , in vitro studies show that intestinal epithelial cells express RGD - dependent integrins , which recognize the RGD motif found in many ECM molecules , such as fibronectin , to anchor to the ECM and control their position and fate . In human intestinal epithelial crypt ( HIEC ) cells , which share features with intestinal epithelial stem cells , the interaction of α 8 β 1 integrin with the ECM regulates adhesion , migration and cell proliferation via a ROCK ( RHO - associated protein kinase ) - dependent mechanism 44 . This serves as a checkpoint to regulate anoikis sensitivity , with adhesion preventing anoikis through the recruitment of vinculin and the activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) – AKT signalling 45 ( FIG . 2c ) . In addition , another study showed that the amount of collagen VI in the basement membrane regulates fibronectin assembly by restraining cell – fibronectin interactions , which influences HIEC cell migration via the activation of myosin light chain kinases ( MLCKs ) 46 ( FIG . 2d ) . However , further in vivo or ex vivo studies are required to understand whether these phenomena occur only in the crypt area , where the LGR5 - expressing intestinal stem cells are localized or in other more differentiated areas of the intestine . How metalloproteinases are involved in ECM remodelling during intestinal development in vertebrates has not been well studied . Although meprin - α and meprin - β are differentially expressed during small intestine development in rats 47 , it is not clear how this affects ECM organization during this process . So , there is evidence showing that ECM remodelling is essential for intestinal development and maturation ; however , our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved is very limited and thus calls for further studies . Recent advances in ex vivo culture systems , such as the development of intestinal organoids 48 , will allow us to further study the ECM dynamics that govern intestinal development and differentiation . Characterizing ECM components and their role in the adult intestinal stem cell niche will also have implications in understanding stem cell self - renewal mechanisms . ECM remodelling in branching morphogenesis Many organs , including the lungs and the mammary and submandibular glands , are formed during embryonic development by epithelial branching , which establishes the architecture of these organs . Branching involves repetitive formation of epithelial clefts and buds that invade surrounding embryonic ECM , which changes in composition and distribution over time . Although they share some common structural features , each organ is characterized by Bonnans et al . Page 7 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t a specific structure and uses distinct molecular mechanisms for branching ( reviewed in REF . 49 ) . ECM remodelling plays a crucial part in governing organ branching by providing structural integrity and regulating diverse cellular processes such as cell shape , cell motility and cell growth . Deposition of ECM proteins controls morphogenesis Many ECM components are locally synthesized and reorganized to modulate cell behaviour and promote branching morphogenesis . For example , collagen I and III accumulate at the cleft points of the branching submandibular glands , and treatment with collagenase completely inhibits cleft formation and branching 50 , 51 . In mammary glands , collagen I is predominantly localized around the duct 52 , and collagen I fibres are oriented before branching initiation . Collagen I fibres direct epithelial branching by promoting an intracellular reorganization of epithelial cell actomyosin network . This process is mediated by the activation of the RHOA – ROCK pathway , which triggers cell contraction 53 ( FIG . 3Aa ) . Fibronectin is also essential for cleft formation during the initiation of epithelial branching in the submandibular gland 54 . The local accumulation of fibronectin rapidly induces the expression of the transcriptional regulator BTBD7 , which in turn induces local expression of the epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) - promoting factor SNAIL2 and suppresses E - cadherin levels , thus altering cell morphology and reducing cell – cell adhesion to promote cleft progression 55 ( FIG . 3Ab ) . This cascade is mediated by integrins , which , through the action of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , activate RHOA – ROCK - mediated actomyosin contraction to stabilize the newly formed cleft 56 , 57 . RHOA – ROCK inhibit the myosin phosphatase MYPT1 ( also known as PPP1R12A ) , stimulating the phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light chain ( MLC ) , tipping the balance towards contractility and enhancing α 5 β 1 integrin expression on the cell surface . This modulates fibronectin assembly involved in cell migration and branching morphogenesis in submandibular glands 58 . It will be interesting to investigate whether these signalling events also happen in other branching organs such as mammary glands , in which fibronectin levels are increased during development 59 . Finally , elastin is the most abundant ECM protein in the lungs , and its deposition and remodelling at the leading edge of a growing secondary alveolar septal ridge is crucial for the formation of alveoli in mice 60 . The molecular mechanisms of how elastin deposition controls lung morphogenesis have not been investigated . However , it has been proposed that elastin and collagen deposition increases ECM stiffness in the neonatal lung by facilitating signalling through the endothelial lipoprotein receptor - related protein 5 ( LRP5 ) – TIE2 ( also known as angiopoietin 1 receptor ) pathway , which is required for normal lung development . [ Au : OK ? ] Indeed , inhibition of collagen III and elastin expression through treatment with β - aminopropionitrile ( which inhibits the collagen crosslinking enzyme lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) ) results in softening of neonatal mouse lung tissue and downregulation of the expression of LRP5 and TIE2 , which leads to inhibition of the vascular and alveolar morphogenesis in neonatal mice 61 ( FIG . 3B ) . Bonnans et al . Page 8 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Taken together , these results demonstrate that local deposition of specific ECM proteins is crucial for branching organs , not only by giving a structural stability to guide tissue expansion in a certain direction but also by inducing signalling pathways to change cell shape and migration and favouring other events such as vascularization , which are important for a normal organ development . ECM cleavage facilitates branching morphogenesis The ECM at the end bud tip is much thinner than in cleft region and around ducts 62 , suggesting a need to cleave the ECM at the invasive front of the epithelium , giving the cells an opportunity to proliferate , migrate and invade the surrounding mesochyme ( FIG . 3A ) . The importance of ECM cleavage in this process is evident from the phenotype of mice lacking metalloproteinases : a lack of MMP11 leads to a decreased periductal collagen content and decreased mammary gland morphogenesis 63 . MMP14 is highly expressed at the invading edges of terminal end buds , and its expression increases during branching , indicating that it has a role in the branching process 64 . MMP3 and MMP2 are also involved mammary gland branching morphogenesis : Mmp2 - null mice have defects in primary branching , and mice lacking Mmp3 have a defect in side branching but not in primary branching 65 ( FIG . 3A ) . In addition to their proteolytic actions , recent studies show that several MMPs , such as MMP3 ( REFS 66 , 67 ) and MMP14 ( REF . 64 ) , regulate invasion and branching in the mammary gland independently of their proteolytic activity . For example , MMP3 uses its haemopexin domain to bind WNT5B and increase the number of mammary stem cells and branching morphogenesis 66 , whereas MMP14 uses its transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains to regulate the expression and activity of β 1 integrin to control cell invasion and mammary gland branching . These data show that MMPs function both proteolytically and non - proteolytically to regulate the extracellular microenvironment during branching morphogenesis . ECM remodelling releases growth factors The ECM functions as a ligand ‘reservoir’ by binding numerous growth factors . In this way , ECM can retain some growth factors that can be proteolytically released and can locally induce proliferation and branching morphogenesis 1 . For example , HSPGs are essential for biological processes that are regulated by FGFs ( reviewed in REF . 68 ) . The affinity of FGFs for HSPGs varies and regulates their gradient and effects on submandibular gland branching . As FGF10 binds HSPGs with high affinity , only a portion of the epithelium is exposed to this growth factor , resulting in directional outgrowth of elongating ducts in submandibular glands . By contrast , FGF7 binds HSPG with low affinity , and its gradient is broader , inducing the formation of many buds in multiple directions 69 ( FIG . 3Ca ) . In addition , heparanase endogenously colocalizes with perlecan in the basement membrane and in submandibular gland cleft . The addition of heparanase to submandibular gland cultures increases morphogenesis owing to the release of FGF10 from perlecan and the activation of mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) signalling 69 , 70 ( FIG . 3Cb ) These data show that ECM remodelling through proteolytic Bonnans et al . Page 9 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t degradation can release growth factors from the ECM reservoir , which can affect epithelial cell proliferation and migration and regulate organ morphogenesis . Aberrant ECM remodelling in disease Given the crucial importance of the ECM during development and for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis , it is not surprising that dysregulation of ECM components can lead to disease . For example , mutations in genes that encode factors that affect the composition and architecture of the ECM , such as COL1A1 ( α - chain of collagen I ) , result in severe defects in bone formation . However , aberrant ECM remodelling can also lead to various pathological states in more subtle ways such as in osteoarthritis , fibrosis and cancer . Increased ECM breakdown causes tissue destruction The importance of ECM homeostasis is clear from diseases characterized by abnormal ECM breakdown , a process primarily mediated by proteinases such as MMPs and ADAMs . For example , abnormally high levels of heart - specific MMP1 expression result in collagen loss and diminished contractility that leads to cardiomyopathy 71 . In osteoarthritis , ADAMTS4 and ADAMTS5 are abnormally overexpressed and are partially responsible for the pathological destruction of cartilage ECM 72 . The mechanisms mediating metalloproteinase upregulation remain unclear but may involve receptors involved in cell – ECM interactions , such as syndecan 4 , which activate MMP3 and ADAMTS5 to promote ECM breakdown 73 ( FIG . 4A ) . Interestingly , loss - of - function mutations in MMP2 also cause a severe osteolytic and arthritic syndrome 74 . This counterintuitive discovery that deficiency of a protease results in osteolysis and arthritis demonstrates that normal bone and cartilage homeostasis depends on balanced ECM breakdown and synthesis . Taken together , these studies highlight the importance of an intact ECM network in maintaining tissue architecture , support and homeostasis . Excess ECM leads to pathological fibrosis Chronic or severe tissue injuries leading to excessive ECM production and deposition without reciprocally balanced degradation can result in fibrosis ( FIG . 4B ) . This aberrant healing process can be so severe that it leads to organ failure , such as cirrhosis in the liver or myelofibrosis in the bone marrow . Fibrosis also increases the risk of cancer ; for example , liver cirrhosis increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma by 20 – 30 % 75 , and increased mammographic density , which reflects the amount of collagen in the breast , correlates with increased risk of breast cancer 76 . Fibrosis is mediated primarily by fibroblasts or myofibroblasts , as well as other stromal cells . The TGF β pathway is perhaps the most well - studied and potent stimulator of fibrosis 77 . TGF β induces the translocation of the SMAD2 – SMAD3 complex of transcription factors into the nucleus , where it directly promotes the expression of ECM genes such as COL1A1 , COL3A1 and TIMP1 , as well as about 60 other ECM - related genes 78 . Owing to space limitations , the reader is referred to several excellent recent reviews regarding additional molecular signals that regulate fibrosis 79 – 81 . Bonnans et al . Page 10 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Some cytokines , such as interleukin - 33 ( IL - 33 ) , promote fibrosis by activating immune cells 82 . In the liver , IL - 33 promotes the expansion of resident innate lymphoid cells , which produce IL - 13 to activate hepatic stellate cells , the main ECM producers in the liver . IL - 13 promotes fibrosis by stimulating collagen accumulation , downregulating MMPs and recruiting pro - fibrotic innate immune cells 83 . IL - 13 also promotes the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and increases TGF β expression 84 . How these cytokines and growth factors are upregulated in different tissues remains to be elucidated . In the case of the intestinal tract , recent studies have suggested that the micro - biome is an important pro - inflammatory component that stimulates fibrosis 85 . Interestingly , it was recently shown that a fibrotic ECM can stimulate fibroblasts to further increase ECM production 86 . Experiments in which ECM and fibro - blasts were isolated from patients with or without idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis ( IPF ) and then co - cultured indicated that the origin of the ECM had a greater effect on gene expression than the origin of the fibro - blasts . ECM derived from patients with IPF increased ECM production in both non - IPF and IPF fibroblasts by inducing downregulation of the microRNA miR - 29 , which regulates the expression of many ECM gene products 86 . In addition , fibronectin extra domain A ( EDA ) fragments , which are increased in patients with scleroderma , stimulate collagen production via Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) signalling and induce myofibroblast differentiation and ECM stiffness . This ultimately leads to chronic cutaneous fibrosis 87 . Taken together , these studies demonstrate that the ECM actively participates in stimulating further ECM synthesis . These ECM - driven pathways that further exacerbate fibrosis may be amenable to therapeutic intervention ( BOX 2 ) . Box 2 Extracellular matrix remodelling as a potential therapeutic target Targeting the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , the enzymes that remodel it and the receptors that transduce their signals offers promising therapeutic opportunities for many diseases . For example , one study found that injecting ECM scaffolds derived from decellularized porcine myocardial tissue into porcine models of myocardial infarction can improve cardiac function 137 . These ECM scaffolds seemed to be haemocompatible and to not induce a pathological pro - inflammatory reaction . Although the number of pigs tested in this study was small , the findings support advancing this strategy into human trials . Other ECM molecules such as perlecan have been shown to be neuroprotective after acute stroke by promoting the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and angiogenesis , which ultimately promotes motor function recovery in rodent models 138 . In addition , strategies to increase growth factor affinity to the ECM ( via a domain derived from placental growth factor 2 ( PIGF2 ) ) may improve repair of chronic wounds and bone defects 139 , but these studies are still in the preclinical stages . However , some ECM proteins compromise wound repair and regeneration . For example , chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) generated after trauma or spinal cord injury inhibit neuronal repair 140 , 141 . Treatment with chondroitinase ABC enzymes improves nerve regeneration in mouse models 142 . In addition , hyaluronan , which accumulates in patients with multiple sclerosis , prevents remyelination and inhibits oligodendrocyte Bonnans et al . Page 11 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t maturation . Consistent with this , degrading hyaluronan promotes oligodendrocyte maturation in vitro , which may improve nerve regrowth 143 . Therefore , therapeutics that degrade the abnormal ECM may be beneficial in these conditions . Strategies to target the enzymes involved in remodelling the ECM are also being pursued . For example , inhibiting lysyl oxidase - like 2 ( LOXL2 ) using the antibody simtuzumab showed promising results in mouse models of fibrosis 144 . Simtuzumab is currently being evaluated in Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials for scleroderma , idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis ( IPF ) and cancer . Matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) inhibitors ( such as marimastat and prinomastat ) , which were initially thought to be promising anticancer agents , have unfortunately not demonstrated efficacy in the clinic . This is due to their lack of specificity and also their poor tolerability 145 . Therefore , altering individual MMPs using monoclonal antibodies may be more promising 146 . In addition , MMPs have non - proteolytic functions and so inhibiting these other domains ( for example , the haemopexin domain ) needs to be considered , as well as the timing of MMP inhibitor administration as MMPs can have opposing functions at different stages of disease 147 . Furthermore , given the importance of transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) in regulating ECM gene expression , several trials are currently evaluating a TGF β - inhibitory antibody , fresolimumab , in systemic sclerosis , IPF and myelofibrosis . ECM stiffness can influence responses to anticancer agents by regulating access to chemotherapy 148 and potentially forming a physical barrier to promote resistance 149 ( FIG . 4c ) . In addition , lung cancer cells that express high levels of fibronectin , laminin and collagen IV are protected against chemotherapy - induced apoptosis 150 . Notably , recent work has shown that the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) inhibitor cetuximab actually self - attenuates its cytotoxic effects by inducing the synthesis of fibronectin and promoting radioresistance 151 . Therefore , targeting the ECM may be an important strategy to improve tumour responses to systemic and radiation therapy . Finally , several drugs targeting integrins , including natalizumab ( which targets α 4 integrin ) for multiple sclerosis and Crohn’s disease and abciximab ( which targets glycoprotein IIbx – IIIa ) for thrombotic disorders , are being investigated . Targeting α 5 integrin may also be promising for various fibrotic diseases 152 . Further work is clearly required to translate preclinical studies to the clinic . However , taken together , these studies illustrate several exciting advances in perturbing the ECM to treat several human diseases . Mechanisms that limit fibrosis Signalling mediators such as interferon - γ ( IFN γ ) and peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ ( PPAR γ ) exert their anti - fibrotic effects by antagonizing TGF β signalling . Vitamin D receptor ( VDR ) ligands , for example , decrease liver fibrosis by redirecting VDR to SMAD3 sites on the DNA , thereby reducing SMAD3 occupancy . This molecular competition for binding sites inhibits SMAD3 - mediated transcription of ECM targets and prevents hepatic stellate cell activation in the liver 88 . Bonnans et al . Page 12 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t In addition , MMPs have also been shown to be anti - fibrotic in specific tissue microenvironments 80 . For example , MMP12 limits fibrosis during corneal injury by altering the expression of CC - chemokine ligand 2 ( CCL2 ) and CXC - chemokine ligand 1 ( CXCL1 ) and therefore interfering with the infiltration of immune cells 89 . Similarly , the transmembrane HSPG syndecan 4 inhibits fibrosis by binding the chemokine CXCL10 and preventing fibroblast migration to areas of injury , so that new ECM cannot be deposited at these sites 90 . Of note , recent studies highlight the importance of divergent chemokine signals in the liver that control the balance between fibrosis and tissue repair 91 . Perturbing chemokine expression and gradients ( such that different cell types with varying propensities to deposit ECM are recruited ) is an important way to indirectly affect the local ECM . Interestingly , other mechanisms besides protease - mediated degradation of the ECM can also limit fibrosis . One such mechanism is cellular re - uptake of ECM proteins . For example , milk fat globule EGF 8 ( MFGE8 ; also known as lactadherin ) inhibits pulmonary fibrosis by binding collagen and promoting its uptake by macrophages 92 ; collagen can then be degraded by lysosomal pathways . This illustrates an important alternative process to facilitate the removal of collagen from the extracellular space . Additional receptors that promote endocytosis - mediated degradation of other ECM components and the basis for the specific uptake of individual components will be important to identify and may yield new strategies for attenuating fibrosis . ECM stiffness and remodelling in cancer progression The ECM provides essential signals to maintain tissue architecture and polarity and to regulate cell growth and apoptosis . In the appropriate context , the ECM is sufficient to restrain malignant tumour progression 93 . For example , a high molecular mass hyaluronan ( that is , more than five times larger than human or mouse hyaluronan ) protects against cancer in naked mole rats 94 . HA accumulates abundantly in naked mole - rat tissues owing to the decreased activity of HA - degrading enzymes and a unique sequence of hyaluronan synthase 2 ( HAS2 ) . However , the ECM can also promote tumour progression ( reviewed in REFS 1 , 6 , 95 ) . For example , collagen IV overexpression enhances cell survival and provides a growth advantage for lung cancer cells in the liver 96 . In fact , ECM gene signatures can stratify breast cancer into subclasses that predict patient outcome . Tumours with high expression of protease inhibitors correlate with good prognosis , whereas those with high MMPs correlate with poor prognosis and increased risk of recurrence 97 . In addition , high MMP1 expression stratifies atypical ductal hyperplasia into benign versus pre - malignant lesions that are at risk for becoming cancer 98 . Several recent studies also point to the importance of the ECM in facilitating metastatic tumour cell growth in the metastatic niche ( BOX 3 ) . Box 3 The extracellular matrix is a crucial component of the metastatic niche Successful metastasis requires not only a local niche to support primary tumour growth but also a metastatic niche to enable disseminated cancer cells to survive , colonize and proliferate at a distant site 153 . This niche consists of various extracellular matrix ( ECM ) Bonnans et al . Page 13 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t components and the enzymes that remodel them ( for example , matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) ) , as well as other cell types such as bone marrow - derived cells ( BMDCs ) , endothelial cells and fibroblasts . For example , before the arrival of tumour cells , Lewis lung carcinoma ( LLC ) cells upregulate fibronectin at sites of future metastasis , which promotes BMDC clustering through α 4 β 1 integrin 154 . These BMDCs are recruited to the metastatic site by tumour - derived factors and express MMP9 to facilitate breakdown of the basement membrane . Thus , ECM remodelling occurs as an early step in metastasis to help circulating tumour cells colonize and thrive in distant organs . In addition to fibronectin , other ECM components support the metastatic niche . Tenascin C , which is normally enriched in stem cell niches , is initially expressed by breast cancer cells and later by stromal cells to promote survival and outgrowth of lung metastases 155 . Periostin , another ECM component that is important in bone and tooth development , promotes metastatic colonization by recruiting WNT ligands , thereby increasing WNT signalling in cancer stem cells 156 . Periostin expression by fibroblasts is induced by infiltrating tumour cells via transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) , and is required for cancer stem cell maintenance . Interestingly , endothelial tip cells within new vascular sprouts secrete both periostin and TGF β , which promotes angiogenesis and micrometastatic outgrowth 157 . Furthermore , LLC - conditioned medium contains versican , which is a large chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan that is upregulated by many human tumours . Versican activates macrophages through Toll - like receptor 2 ( TLR2 ) to produce interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) and tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) , thereby establishing a pro - inflammatory microenvironment that is conducive for metastatic growth 123 . Osteopontin in gliomas also promotes stem cell - like properties and radioresistance via CD44 signalling 158 . A systematic approach to identify responses to ECM has further uncovered ECM molecules that promote metastasis 159 . Taken together , these studies illustrate how the ECM regulates metastasis and suggest that inhibiting the ECM niche may be therapeutically beneficial in cancer . Insights into ECM elasticity and stiffness , which is determined by ECM organization , orientation and chemical modification , have challenged our understanding of how cells interact with , and respond to , the micro - environment . For example , ECM stiffening , induced by increased collagen deposition and crosslinking , disrupts tissue morphogenesis and contributes to malignant progression 99 . Collagen crosslinking is mediated primarily by LOX and LOX - like ( LOXLs ) enzymes , which are frequently overexpressed in many cancers and at meta - static sites , and patients with high LOX expression have poor survival 100 . In breast cancer , LOX - induced collagen crosslinking increases stiffness , β 1 integrin clustering , PI3K signalling and focal adhesion formation to drive invasion and tumour progression ( FIG . 4C ) . Conversely , inhibiting LOX suppresses fibrosis and increases tumour latency 101 . ECM stiffening also facilitates metastatic colonization and infiltration of tumour - promoting immune cells 102 , and induces the expression of miR - 18a , which is pro - tumorigenic by targeting the tumour suppressor phosphatase and tensin homologue ( PTEN ) 103 . Collagen also signals to cells through the receptor Tyr kinases discoidin domain - containing receptor 1 ( DDR1 ) and DDR2 , both of which have been implicated in cancer ( reviewed in Bonnans et al . Page 14 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t REF . 104 ) ( FIG . 4C ) . DDR1 is required for collective cell migration 105 , and increased expression of DDR2 has been observed in invasive human breast tumours 106 . Notably , DDR2 activation stabilizes the transcription factor SNAIL1 , which induces collagen I and MMP14 , and promotes EMT and metastasis 106 . The extracellular collagen network can therefore alter cell - intrinsic properties such as epithelial plasticity through these cell receptors . Together , these data demon strate that collagen crosslinking activates signalling pathways and miRNA networks that promote malignant progression . Several studies have implicated miRNAs as potent regulators of the ECM . The miR - 29 family , for example , controls the expression of a network of genes involved in ECM remodelling , including several collagen chains , LOX and LOXLs , as well as MMP2 and MMP9 ( REFS 107 , 108 ) . In breast cancer , miR - 29 expression inversely correlates with cell adhesion and ECM gene expression 109 , and miR - 29b overexpression alters the tumour microenvironment and suppresses metastasis 108 . Additional studies are required to identify other miRNAs that are important in regulating the ECM and to determine whether other non - coding RNAs , such as long non - coding RNAs , might also regulate the chromatin state , and therefore transcription , of ECM genes . Factors upstream of these non - coding RNAs will also be important to identify . This exciting area of biology should yield additional insights into how ECM remodelling is controlled . The ECM promotes angiogenesis The ECM also modulates angiogenesis to promote tumour growth 110 . For example , in a pancreatic β - cell tumour model , tenascin C not only promotes tumour cell survival and proliferation but also induces angiogenesis and blood vessel permeability by downregulating Dickkopf 1 ( DKK1 ) and increasing WNT signalling 111 . In addition , ECM fragments generated by cleavage of the full - length ECM protein also have pro - and anti - angiogenic functions . These include endostatin , tumstatin , canstatin , arresten and hexastatin , all of which are derived from collagen IV and XVIII ( reviewed in REF . 112 ) and can bind to cell receptors such as integrins and EGFR 113 . For example , arresten , which is generated from the NC1 domain of the collagen a1 ( IV ) chain , binds to α 1 β 1 integrin and inhibits angiogenesis by antagonizing MAPK signalling 114 . Together , these studies demonstrate that the ECM also promotes non - cell autonomous mechanisms to enhance tumour growth ( FIG . 4C ) . The ECM regulates immune and cancer cell migration Immune responses occur in the context of integrin - mediated adhesive interactions with the ECM . For example , α 1 β 1 integrin , which binds collagen I and IV , is expressed by peripheral CD8 + T cells during influenza infection and mediates retention of influenza - specific memory T cells in the lung after viral clearance , which is important for secondary immunity 115 . Furthermore , the ECM niche within the spleen , which consists of laminin and agrin , promotes marginal zone B cell differentiation and survival to support antibody production 116 . These studies highlight the importance of the ECM in mediating immune responses . Bonnans et al . Page 15 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Many ECM proteins also contain cryptic domains with structures that are similar to chemokines and cytokines 117 . These domains can be exposed by proteolysis and elicit biological responses that are distinct from those of the full length ECM component ( FIG . 4C ) . These matrikines regulate many processes , including migration , adhesion and differentiation , and can affect immune and pro - inflammatory cell behaviour 118 . For example , N - acetyl Pro - Gly - Pro ( PGP ) is a bioactive collagen I fragment generated by MMP8 and MMP9 . PGP shares structural homology with CXC chemokines and signals through CXC - chemokine receptor 1 ( CXCR1 ) and CXCR2 to attract neutrophils to sites of inflammation 119 . Interestingly , these PGP collagen derivatives are found in patients with chronic inflammatory airway disorders , which illustrates their relevance in human disease 120 . Other ECM fragments , such those generated by overexpressing hyaluronidase 1 , promote dendritic cell egress from the skin to facilitate antigen presentation . This migration is mediated by TLR4 , as mice lacking this receptor do not exhibit hyaluronan - associated phenotypes 121 . These studies demonstrate the importance of ECM fragments in controlling immune cell migration , which may be exploited therapeutically to treat pro - inflammatory diseases . The density and orientation of the ECM fibres also controls immune cell migration . Loose areas of fibronectin and collagen facilitate T cell motility , whereas dense ECM areas impede migration . These ECM fibres also govern cell migratory tracks , which can restrict the inter action of immune cells with cancer cells 122 ( FIG . 4C ) . Notably , treatment with collagenase enhances the contact of T cells with cancer cells , suggesting that modulating ECM architecture might be an important way to improve immunotherapy access . Other ECM components , such as versican , recruit and activate pro - tumorigenic immune cells such as macrophages , thereby promoting inflammation and metastasis 123 . Interestingly , ECM geometry dictates the mode of cell migration , as cells can use both proteolytic and non - proteolytic mechanisms to migrate and squeeze through the ECM 124 . Confined ECM geometries alter cell deformability and shift the relationship between adhesion , contractility and velocity to promote bleb migration patterns at tumour margins 125 . Together , these studies illustrate how the ECM regulates immune and cancer cell migration . Abnormal release of growth factors during pathogenesis The ECM is a rich reservoir of growth factors and other bioactive molecules that can be released by proteolysis via MMPs ( FIG . 4C ) . For example , in pancreatic neuro - endocrine tumours , VEGF is abundant in the ECM , even in non - angiogenic islets . The switch from vascular quiescence to active angiogenesis involves upregulation of MMP9 , which releases sequestered VEGF from the ECM 126 . In addition to MMPs 127 , the Ser protease plasmin can also release ECM - bound VEGF into soluble forms 128 . The multiple isoforms of VEGF generated by alternative splicing have unique C - terminal domains , which allow some isoforms to bind collagen and fibrinogen 129 . In addition , HSPGs interact with platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) in a sulphation - dependent manner . Inhibition of sulphatase 2 decreases growth in glioblastomas by attenuating PDGF receptor signalling , indicating that the ECM and the enzymes that modify it control the bioavailability of growth factors 130 . Bonnans et al . Page 16 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t TGF β is also sequestered and bound to PGs in the ECM . In osteogenesis imperfecta , impaired collagen formation leads to reduced binding to decorin , a known regulator of TGF β activity , which results in over - active TGF β signalling 131 . Excessive TGF β signalling is a common driving mechanism in many mouse models of osteogenesis imperfecta , and treatment with TGF β - specific antibodies partially corrects the bone phenotype in mice . In addition , the fibrinogen - like domain of tenascin X interacts with the small latent TGF β complex and regulates the bioavailability of mature TGF β , which controls EMT in mammary epithelial cells 132 . These studies establish a role for the ECM as an important reservoir of growth factors and as an indirect regulator of signal transduction in multiple diseases . Summary and conclusions The ECM is a vital structure that has a dynamic and complex organization and can trigger multiple biological activities that are essential for a normal organ development and tissue homeostasis . Dysregulated ECM remodelling leads to many diseases , including fibrosis and cancer . In this Review , we describe how ECM remodelling affects organ morphogenesis , using the intestine , the lung , and the mammary and submandibular glands as examples . In all four cases , appropriate development requires the tight control and regulation of ECM assembly , modification and degradation . However , unique mechanisms must be at play for each organ , given their distinct structure and function . The exact nature of these organ - specific mechanisms remains elusive . Is the molecular mechanism involved in submandibular gland cleft formation ( which involves deposition of fibronectin at the cleft site driven by BTBD7 ) specific to this organ , or is it generalizable to other branched organs ? What is the role of the microenvironment , which includes immune cells , endothelial cells and fibroblasts , in ECM remodelling , and how does this influence the branched pattern of each organ ? It will be interesting to investigate the interactions between the ECM , epithelial cells and microenvironment in organogenesis . In addition , the role of the ECM in regulating the stem cell niche needs to be more extensively explored . For example , a single mammary stem cell can reproduce an entire organ when transplanted into a cleared fat pad . This suggests the presence of a niche in the mammary gland that contains all the signals required to programme stem cells . The ECM has a crucial role in the release of the niche signals that are essential for stem cell fate 133 , which probably has implication for diseases such as cancer , in which cancer stem cells might also be using such ECM signals to promote their survival and growth . A better understanding of the niche signals that regulate stem cell behaviour might also have therapeutic potential in regenerative medicine . Ex vivo three - dimensional organoids cultured in Matrigel has improved our understanding of the development of branching organs . However , these models do not recapitulate the complex microenvironment of the developing organ , nor do they reproduce the exact composition and stiffness of the native ECM . Organotypic tissue culture systems that incorporate native ECM and stromal cells will continue to improve our understanding of Bonnans et al . Page 17 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t cancer 134 and enable us to study developmental and disease processes in more physiologic environments that better model human disease 135 . The identification of the matrisome and key ECM remodelling effects that promote certain diseases opens several exciting possibilities for therapeutic intervention . Attention must be given to targeting specific individual ECM components as well as to timing the therapy correctly , given that the ECM is actively remodelled . Current clinical trials using inhibitors of ECM - related targets are ongoing and promising ( BOX 2 ) . However , a deeper understanding of the diverse biologic activities and properties of the ECM must be attained to uncover new targets for future therapy . Acknowledgments This study was supported by funds from the National Cancer Institute ( grant numbers CA057621 and CA138818 ) , a Department of Defense ( DOD ) Era of Hope Scholar Expansion grant ( BC122990 ) and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale ( INSERM ) . Glossary Basement membrane The ECM layer that is located basolaterally to all epithelium and endothelium in the body . It provides structural support to the tissue and modulates epithelial and endothelial cell functions . It is mostly composed of collagen IV and laminins TGF β ( Transforming growth factor - β ) . The TGF β isoforms ( TGF β 1 – TGF β 3 ) are synthesized as latent precursors in complex with both latency - associated peptide ( LAP ) and latent TGF β - binding proteins ( LTBPs ) . Proteinases such as plasmin and MMPs catalyse the release of active TGF β from the complex Zymogens Proenzymes that are inactive enzyme precursors . Zymogens need to be biochemically modified to become active enzymes Integrins Heterodimeric cell surface receptors that mediate cell – cell and cell – ECM interactions and orchestrate cell attachment , movement , growth , differentiation and survival von Willebrand factor A blood glycoprotein that is involved in haemostasis and is defective in von Willebrand disease . This factor is also increased in the plasma of cardiovascular , neoplastic and connective tissue diseases and can contribute to an increased risk of thrombosis Villi A finger - like projection that protrudes from the epithelium of the intestinal wall . Intestinal villi increase the epithelium surface area to promote the absorption of nutrients Intestinal crypts ( Also known as crypts of Lieberkühn ) . Proliferative compartments found in the small intestine and the colon ; they contain intestinal stem cells and other specialized cells such as Paneth cells ( only in the small intestine ) and goblet cells Bonnans et al . Page 18 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Intestinal stem cells Undifferentiated cells that can self - renew and differentiate into all of the specialized cell types of the tissue or organ . The main role of stem cells is to maintain and repair the tissue in which they reside RGD - dependent integrins A group of integrins that specifically recognize the RGD motif , a sequence of three amino acids ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) found in many ECM molecules such as fibronectin and osteopontin . Collectively , these interactions are termed the RGD - dependent adhesion system Anoikis A programmed cell death that is induced by lack of correct cell – ECM interactions . Invasive tumour cells may escape from anoikis to target different metastatic organs Organoids Organ epithelial fragments that resemble the whole organ in structure and function during three - dimensional culture Stem cell niche A specialized microenvironment that interacts with cells such as stem cells or tumour cells to regulate their fate E - cadherin A calcium - dependent cell – cell adhesion molecule with pivotal roles in epithelial cell behaviour , tissue formation and suppression of cancer Matrikines ECM fragments released from the ECM by proteolysis or by cryptic site exposurel ; they have biological activities that are different from those of the full - length protein Matrigel A gelatinous protein mixture secreted by Engelbreth – Holm – Swarm ( EHS ) mouse sarcoma cells . It contains structural proteins such as laminin , entactin , collagen and HSPGs . Growth factors such as TGF β and EGF are also present in Matrigel , although growth factor - reduced formulations are also available References 1 . Hynes RO . The extracellular matrix : not just pretty fibrils . Science . 2009 ; 326 : 1216 – 1219 . [ PubMed : 19965464 ] 2 . Jarvelainen H , Sainio A , Koulu M , Wight TN , Penttinen R . Extracellular matrix molecules : potential targets in pharmacotherapy . Pharmacol Rev . 2009 ; 61 : 198 – 223 . [ PubMed : 19549927 ] 3 . Bateman JF , Boot - Handford RP , Lamande SR . Genetic diseases of connective tissues : cellular and extracellular effects of ECM mutations . Nature Rev Genet . 2009 ; 10 : 173 – 183 . [ PubMed : 19204719 ] 4 . Rozario T , DeSimone DW . The extracellular matrix in development and morphogenesis : a dynamic view . Dev Biol . 2010 ; 341 : 126 – 140 . [ PubMed : 19854168 ] 5 . Hynes RO , Naba A . Overview of the matrisome—an inventory of extracellular matrix constituents and functions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2012 ; 4 : a004903 . This review gives a complete list of ECM proteins that are part of the matrisome , and describes the ECM structure and function modifiers and the evolution of the matrisome . [ PubMed : 21937732 ] 6 . Lu P , Takai K , Weaver VM , Werb Z . Extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling in development and disease . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2011 ; 3 : a005058 . [ PubMed : 21917992 ] 7 . Frantz C , Stewart KM , Weaver VM . The extracellular matrix at a glance . J Cell Sci . 2010 ; 123 : 4195 – 4200 . [ PubMed : 21123617 ] Bonnans et al . Page 19 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 8 . Zhen G , Cao X . Targeting TGF β signaling in subchondral bone and articular cartilage homeostasis . Trends Pharmacol Sci . 2014 ; 35 : 227 – 236 . [ PubMed : 24745631 ] 9 . Gross J , Lapiere CM . Collagenolytic activity in amphibian tissues : a tissue culture assay . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1962 ; 48 : 1014 – 1022 . [ PubMed : 13902219 ] 10 . Hite LA , Shannon JD , Bjarnason JB , Fox JW . Sequence of a cDNA clone encoding the zinc metalloproteinase hemorrhagic toxine from Crotalus atrox : evidence for signal , zymogen , and disintegrin - like structures . Biochemistry . 1992 ; 31 : 6203 – 6211 . [ PubMed : 1378300 ] 11 . Kuno K , et al . Molecular cloning of a gene encoding a new type of metalloproteinase - disintegrin family protein with thrombospondin motifs as an inflammation associated gene . J Biol Chem . 1997 ; 272 : 556 – 562 . [ PubMed : 8995297 ] 12 . Murphy G . The ADAMs : signalling scissors in the tumour microenvironment . Nature Rev Cancer . 2008 ; 8 : 929 – 941 . [ PubMed : 19005493 ] 13 . White JM . ADAMs : modulators of cell - cell and cell – matrix interactions . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2003 ; 15 : 598 – 606 . [ PubMed : 14519395 ] 14 . Apte SS . A disintegrin - like and metalloprotease ( reprolysin - type ) with thrombospondin type 1 motif ( ADAMTS ) superfamily : functions and mechanisms . J Biol Chem . 2009 ; 284 : 31493 – 31497 . [ PubMed : 19734141 ] 15 . Bond JS , Rojas K , Overhauser J , Zoghbi HY , Jiang W . The structural genes , MEP1A and MEP1B , for the α and β subunits of the metalloendopeptidase meprin map to human chromosomes 6p and 18q , respectively . Genomics . 1995 ; 25 : 300 – 303 . [ PubMed : 7774936 ] 16 . Bertenshaw GP , Norcum MT , Bond JS . Structure of homo - and hetero - oligomeric meprin metalloproteases . Dimers , tetramers , and high molecular mass multimers . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 278 : 2522 – 2532 . [ PubMed : 12399461 ] 17 . Herzog C , Haun RS , Ludwig A , Shah SV , Kaushal GP . ADAM10 is the major sheddase responsible for the release of membrane - associated meprin A . J Biol Chem . 2014 ; 289 : 13308 – 13322 . [ PubMed : 24662289 ] 18 . Kruse MN , et al . Human meprin α and β homooligomers : cleavage of basement membrane proteins and sensitivity to metalloprotease inhibitors . Biochem J . 2004 ; 378 : 383 – 389 . [ PubMed : 14594449 ] 19 . Broder C , et al . Metalloproteases meprin α and meprin β are C - and N - procollagen proteinases important for collagen assembly and tensile strength . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2013 ; 110 : 14219 – 14224 . [ PubMed : 23940311 ] 20 . Jefferson T , et al . The substrate degradome of meprin metalloproteases reveals an unexpected proteolytic link between meprin β and ADAM10 . Cell Mol Life Sci . 2013 ; 70 : 309 – 333 . [ PubMed : 22940918 ] 21 . Geurts N , et al . Meprins process matrix metalloproteinase - 9 ( MMP - 9 ) / gelatinase B and enhance the activation kinetics by MMP - 3 . FEBS Lett . 2012 ; 586 : 4264 – 4269 . [ PubMed : 23123160 ] 22 . Khokha R , Murthy A , Weiss A . Metalloproteinases and their natural inhibitors in inflammation and immunity . Nature Rev Immunol . 2013 ; 13 : 649 – 665 . [ PubMed : 23969736 ] 23 . Baker AH , Edwards DR , Murphy G . Metalloproteinase inhibitors : biological actions and therapeutic opportunities . J Cell Sci . 2002 ; 115 : 3719 – 3727 . [ PubMed : 12235282 ] 24 . Smith HW , Marshall CJ . Regulation of cell signalling by uPAR . Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2010 ; 11 : 23 – 36 . [ PubMed : 20027185 ] 25 . Bonnefoy A , Legrand C . Proteolysis of subendothelial adhesive glycoproteins ( fibronectin , thrombospondin , and von Willebrand factor ) by plasmin , leukocyte cathepsin G , and elastase . Thromb Res . 2000 ; 98 : 323 – 332 . [ PubMed : 10822079 ] 26 . Giuffrida P , Biancheri P , MacDonald TT . Proteases and small intestinal barrier function in health and disease . Curr Opin Gastroenterol . 2014 ; 30 : 147 – 153 . [ PubMed : 24445329 ] 27 . Mohamed MM , Sloane BF . Cysteine cathepsins : multifunctional enzymes in cancer . Nature Rev Cancer . 2006 ; 6 : 764 – 775 . [ PubMed : 16990854 ] 28 . Fonovic M , Turk B . Cysteine cathepsins and extracellular matrix degradation . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2014 ; 1840 : 2560 – 2570 . [ PubMed : 24680817 ] Bonnans et al . Page 20 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 29 . Uchimura K , et al . HSulf - 2 , an extracellular endoglucosamine - 6 - sulfatase , selectively mobilizes heparin - bound growth factors and chemokines : effects on VEGF , FGF - 1 , and SDF - 1 . BMC Biochem . 2006 ; 7 : 2 . [ PubMed : 16417632 ] 30 . Barker N , et al . Identification of stem cells in small intestine and colon by marker gene Lgr5 . Nature . 2007 ; 449 : 1003 – 1007 . [ PubMed : 17934449 ] 31 . Hasebe T , et al . Thyroid hormone - induced cell – cell interactions are required for the development of adult intestinal stem cells . Cell Biosci . 2013 ; 3 : 18 . [ PubMed : 23547658 ] 32 . Su Y , Shi Y , Stolow MA , Shi YB . Thyroid hormone induces apoptosis in primary cell cultures of tadpole intestine : cell type specificity and effects of extracellular matrix . J Cell Biol . 1997 ; 139 : 1533 – 1543 . [ PubMed : 9396758 ] 33 . Patterton D , Hayes WP , Shi YB . Transcriptional activation of the matrix metalloproteinase gene stromelysin - 3 coincides with thyroid hormone - induced cell death during frog metamorphosis . Dev Biol . 1995 ; 167 : 252 – 262 . [ PubMed : 7851646 ] 34 . Ishizuya - Oka A , et al . Requirement for matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin - 3 in cell migration and apoptosis during tissue remodeling in Xenopus laevis . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 150 : 1177 – 1188 . This paper showed that MMP11 is required for cell fate determination and cell migration during morphogenesis , most probably through ECM remodelling . [ PubMed : 10974004 ] 35 . Amano T , Kwak O , Fu L , Marshak A , Shi YB . The matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin - 3 cleaves laminin receptor at two distinct sites between the transmembrane domain and laminin binding sequence within the extracellular domain . Cell Res . 2005 ; 15 : 150 – 159 . [ PubMed : 15780176 ] 36 . Fujimoto K , Nakajima K , Yaoita Y . Expression of matrix metalloproteinase genes in regressing or remodeling organs during amphibian metamorphosis . Dev Growth Differ . 2007 ; 49 : 131 – 143 . [ PubMed : 17335434 ] 37 . Hasebe T , Hartman R , Fu L , Amano T , Shi YB . Evidence for a cooperative role of gelatinase A and membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase during Xenopus laevis development . Mech Dev . 2007 ; 124 : 11 – 22 . [ PubMed : 17055228 ] 38 . Simon - Assmann P , Kedinger M , De Arcangelis A , Rousseau V , Simo P . Extracellular matrix components in intestinal development . Experientia . 1995 ; 51 : 883 – 900 . [ PubMed : 7556570 ] 39 . Simon - Assmann P , Kedinger M , Haffen K . Immunocytochemical localization of extracellular - matrix proteins in relation to rat intestinal morphogenesis . Differentiation . 1986 ; 32 : 59 – 66 . [ PubMed : 3096801 ] 40 . Simon - Assmann P , Bouziges F , Freund JN , Perrin - Schmitt F , Kedinger M . Type IV collagen mRNA accumulates in the mesenchymal compartment at early stages of murine developing intestine . J Cell Biol . 1990 ; 110 : 849 – 857 . [ PubMed : 2307711 ] 41 . Simon - Assmann P , et al . The laminins : role in intestinal morphogenesis and differentiation . Ann NY Acad Sci . 1998 ; 859 : 46 – 64 . [ PubMed : 9928369 ] 42 . Mahoney ZX , Stappenbeck TS , Miner JH . Laminin α 5 influences the architecture of the mouse small intestine mucosa . J Cell Sci . 2008 ; 121 : 2493 – 2502 . [ PubMed : 18628307 ] 43 . Beaulieu JF . Integrins and human intestinal cell functions . Front Biosci . 1999 ; 4 : D310 – D321 . [ PubMed : 10077538 ] 44 . Benoit YD , et al . Integrin α 8 β 1 regulates adhesion , migration and proliferation of human intestinal crypt cells via a predominant RhoA / ROCK - dependent mechanism . Biol Cell . 2009 ; 101 : 695 – 708 . [ PubMed : 19527220 ] 45 . Benoit YD , et al . Integrin α 8 β 1 confers anoikis susceptibility to human intestinal epithelial crypt cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 2010 ; 399 : 434 – 439 . [ PubMed : 20678483 ] 46 . Groulx JF , et al . Collagen VI is a basement membrane component that regulates epithelial cell - fibronectin interactions . Matrix Biol . 2011 ; 30 : 195 – 206 . [ PubMed : 21406227 ] 47 . Henning SJ , et al . Meprin mRNA in rat intestine during normal and glucocorticoid - induced maturation : divergent patterns of expression of α and β subunits . FEBS Lett . 1999 ; 462 : 368 – 372 . [ PubMed : 10622727 ] 48 . Sato T , Clevers H . Growing self - organizing mini - guts from a single intestinal stem cell : mechanism and applications . Science . 2013 ; 340 : 1190 – 1194 . [ PubMed : 23744940 ] 49 . Kim HY , Nelson CM . Extracellular matrix and cytoskeletal dynamics during branching morphogenesis . Organogenesis . 2012 ; 8 : 56 – 64 . [ PubMed : 22609561 ] Bonnans et al . Page 21 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 50 . Grobstein C , Cohen J . Collagenase : effect on the morphogenesis of embryonic salivary epithelium in vitro . Science . 1965 ; 150 : 626 – 628 . [ PubMed : 5837103 ] 51 . Nakanishi Y , Sugiura F , Kishi J , Hayakawa T . Collagenase inhibitor stimulates cleft formation during early morphogenesis of mouse salivary gland . Dev Biol . 1986 ; 113 : 201 – 206 . [ PubMed : 3002886 ] 52 . Keely PJ , Wu JE , Santoro SA . The spatial and temporal expression of the α 2 β 1 integrin and its ligands , collagen I , collagen IV , and laminin , suggest important roles in mouse mammary morphogenesis . Differentiation . 1995 ; 59 : 1 – 13 . [ PubMed : 7589890 ] 53 . Brownfield DG , et al . Patterned collagen fibers orient branching mammary epithelium through distinct signaling modules . Curr Biol . 2013 ; 23 : 703 – 709 . [ PubMed : 23562267 ] 54 . Sakai T , Larsen M , Yamada KM . Fibronectin requirement in branching morphogenesis . Nature . 2003 ; 423 : 876 – 881 . This paper is the first to show that fibronectin expression is required for cleft formation in branching morphogenesis . [ PubMed : 12815434 ] 55 . Onodera T , et al . Btbd7 regulates epithelial cell dynamics and branching morphogenesis . Science . 2010 ; 329 : 562 – 565 . This paper is the first to give molecular mechanisms for cleft formation in branching morphogenesis , showing that BTBD7 is a regulatory gene that promotes epithelial tissue remodelling and formation of branched organs . [ PubMed : 20671187 ] 56 . Daley WP , Gulfo KM , Sequeira SJ , Larsen M . Identification of a mechanochemical checkpoint and negative feedback loop regulating branching morphogenesis . Dev Biol . 2009 ; 336 : 169 – 182 . [ PubMed : 19804774 ] 57 . Daley WP , Kohn JM , Larsen M . A focal adhesion protein - based mechanochemical checkpoint regulates cleft progression during branching morphogenesis . Dev Dyn . 2011 ; 240 : 2069 – 2083 . [ PubMed : 22016182 ] 58 . Joo EE , Yamada KM . MYPT1 regulates contractility and microtubule acetylation to modulate integrin adhesions and matrix assembly . Nature Commun . 2014 ; 5 : 3510 . [ PubMed : 24667306 ] 59 . Woodward TL , Mienaltowski AS , Modi RR , Bennett JM , Haslam SZ . Fibronectin and the α 5 β 1 integrin are under developmental and ovarian steroid regulation in the normal mouse mammary gland . Endocrinology . 2001 ; 142 : 3214 – 3222 . [ PubMed : 11416044 ] 60 . Liu S , Young SM , Varisco BM . Dynamic expression of chymotrypsin - like elastase 1 over the course of murine lung development . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2014 ; 306 : L1104 – L1116 . [ PubMed : 24793170 ] 61 . Mammoto T , Jiang E , Jiang A , Mammoto A . Extracellular matrix structure and tissue stiffness control postnatal lung development through the lipoprotein receptor - related protein 5 / Tie2 signaling system . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol . 2013 ; 49 : 1009 – 1018 . [ PubMed : 23841513 ] 62 . Daley WP , Yamada KM . ECM - modulated cellular dynamics as a driving force for tissue morphogenesis . Curr Opin Genet Dev . 2013 ; 23 : 408 – 414 . [ PubMed : 23849799 ] 63 . Tan J , et al . Stromal matrix metalloproteinase - 11 is involved in the mammary gland postnatal development . Oncogene . 2013 ; 33 : 4050 – 4059 . [ PubMed : 24141782 ] 64 . Mori H , et al . Transmembrane / cytoplasmic , rather than catalytic , domains of Mmp14 signal to MAPK activation and mammary branching morphogenesis via binding to integrin β 1 . Development . 2013 ; 140 : 343 – 352 . [ PubMed : 23250208 ] 65 . Wiseman BS , et al . Site - specific inductive and inhibitory activities of MMP - 2 and MMP - 3 orchestrate mammary gland branching morphogenesis . J Cell Biol . 2003 ; 162 : 1123 – 1133 . [ PubMed : 12975354 ] 66 . Kessenbrock K , et al . A role for matrix metalloproteinases in regulating mammary stem cell function via the Wnt signaling pathway . Cell Stem Cell . 2013 ; 13 : 300 – 313 . This paper shows that MMP3 is a regulator of WNT signaling and mammary stem cell activity ; through its haemopexin domain , MMP3 specifically binds and inactivates WNT5B , a noncanonical WNT ligand that inhibits canonical WNT signalling and mammary epithelial outgrowth in vivo . [ PubMed : 23871604 ] 67 . Correia AL , Mori H , Chen EI , Schmitt FC , Bissell MJ . The hemopexin domain of MMP3 is responsible for mammary epithelial invasion and morphogenesis through extracellular interaction with HSP90 β . Genes Dev . 2013 ; 27 : 805 – 817 . The authors show that the haemopexin domain of MMP3 , and not its proteolytic activity , is essential for mammary epithelial cells invasion ; this Bonnans et al . Page 22 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t domain interacts with the intracellular chaperone heat - shock protein 90 β to promote invasion . [ PubMed : 23592797 ] 68 . Goetz R , Mohammadi M . Exploring mechanisms of FGF signalling through the lens of structural biology . Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2013 ; 14 : 166 – 180 . [ PubMed : 23403721 ] 69 . Makarenkova HP , et al . Differential interactions of FGFs with heparan sulfate control gradient formation and branching morphogenesis . Sci Signal . 2009 ; 2 : ra55 . [ PubMed : 19755711 ] 70 . Patel VN , et al . Heparanase cleavage of perlecan heparan sulfate modulates FGF10 activity during ex vivo submandibular gland branching morphogenesis . Development . 2007 ; 134 : 4177 – 4186 . [ PubMed : 17959718 ] 71 . Kim HE , et al . Disruption of the myocardial extracellular matrix leads to cardiac dysfunction . J Clin Invest . 2000 ; 106 : 857 – 866 . [ PubMed : 11018073 ] 72 . Bondeson J , Wainwright S , Hughes C , Caterson B . The regulation of the ADAMTS4 and ADAMTS5 aggrecanases in osteoarthritis : a review . Clin Exp Rheumatol . 2008 ; 26 : 139 – 145 . [ PubMed : 18328163 ] 73 . Echtermeyer F , et al . Syndecan - 4 regulates ADAMTS - 5 activation and cartilage breakdown in osteoarthritis . Nature Med . 2009 ; 15 : 1072 – 1076 . [ PubMed : 19684582 ] 74 . Martignetti JA , et al . Mutation of the matrix metalloproteinase 2 gene ( MMP2 ) causes a multicentric osteolysis and arthritis syndrome . Nature Genet . 2001 ; 28 : 261 – 265 . [ PubMed : 11431697 ] 75 . El - Serag HB . Hepatocellular carcinoma . N Engl J Med . 2011 ; 365 : 1118 – 1127 . [ PubMed : 21992124 ] 76 . Boyd NF , Martin LJ , Yaffe MJ , Minkin S . Mammographic density and breast cancer risk : current understanding and future prospects . Breast Cancer Res . 2011 ; 13 : 223 . [ PubMed : 22114898 ] 77 . Biancheri P , et al . The role of transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - β in modulating the immune response and fibrogenesis in the gut . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev . 2013 ; 25 : 45 – 55 . [ PubMed : 24332927 ] 78 . Verrecchia F , Chu ML , Mauviel A . Identification of novel TGF - β / Smad gene targets in dermal fibroblasts using a combined cDNA microarray / promoter transactivation approach . J Biol Chem . 2001 ; 276 : 17058 – 17062 . [ PubMed : 11279127 ] 79 . Wynn TA , Ramalingam TR . Mechanisms of fibrosis : therapeutic translation for fibrotic disease . Nature Med . 2012 ; 18 : 1028 – 1040 . This review summarizes our current understanding of the molecular and cellular pathways controlling fibrosis , with special focus on the immune response , as well as the key pathways for therapeutic targeting . [ PubMed : 22772564 ] 80 . Giannandrea M , Parks WC . Diverse functions of matrix metalloproteinases during fibrosis . Dis Model Mech . 2014 ; 7 : 193 – 203 . [ PubMed : 24713275 ] 81 . Duffield JS , Lupher M , Thannickal VJ , Wynn TA . Host responses in tissue repair and fibrosis . Annu Rev Pathol . 2013 ; 8 : 241 – 276 . [ PubMed : 23092186 ] 82 . McHedlidze T , et al . Interleukin - 33 - dependent innate lymphoid cells mediate hepatic fibrosis . Immunity . 2013 ; 39 : 357 – 371 . [ PubMed : 23954132 ] 83 . Bailey JR , et al . IL - 13 promotes collagen accumulation in Crohn’s disease fibrosis by down - regulation of fibroblast MMP synthesis : a role for innate lymphoid cells ? PLoS ONE . 2013 ; 7 : e52332 . [ PubMed : 23300643 ] 84 . Clarke DL , Carruthers AM , Mustelin T , Murray LA . Matrix regulation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis : the role of enzymes . Fibrogen Tissue Repair . 2013 ; 6 : 20 . 85 . Rieder F . The gut microbiome in intestinal fibrosis : environmental protector or provocateur ? Sci Transl Med . 2013 ; 5 : 190ps10 . 86 . Parker MW , et al . Fibrotic extracellular matrix activates a profibrotic positive feedback loop . J Clin Invest . 2014 ; 124 : 1622 – 1635 . This paper demonstrates that fibrotic ECM stimulates fibroblasts to produce more ECM through downregulation of miR - 29 . [ PubMed : 24590289 ] 87 . Bhattacharyya S , et al . Fibronectin EDA promotes chronic cutaneous fibrosis through Toll - like receptor signaling . Sci Transl Med . 2014 ; 6 : 232ra50 . 88 . Ding N , et al . A vitamin D receptor / SMAD genomic circuit gates hepatic fibrotic response . Cell . 2013 ; 153 : 601 – 613 . [ PubMed : 23622244 ] Bonnans et al . Page 23 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 89 . Chan MF , et al . Protective effects of matrix metalloproteinase - 12 following corneal injury . J Cell Sci . 2013 ; 126 : 3948 – 3960 . [ PubMed : 23813962 ] 90 . Jiang D , et al . Inhibition of pulmonary fibrosis in mice by CXCL10 requires glycosaminoglycan binding and syndecan - 4 . J Clin Invest . 2010 ; 120 : 2049 – 2057 . [ PubMed : 20484822 ] 91 . Ding BS , et al . Divergent angiocrine signals from vascular niche balance liver regeneration and fibrosis . Nature . 2014 ; 505 : 97 – 102 . [ PubMed : 24256728 ] 92 . Atabai K , et al . Mfge8 diminishes the severity of tissue fibrosis in mice by binding and targeting collagen for uptake by macrophages . J Clin Invest . 2009 ; 119 : 3713 – 3722 . [ PubMed : 19884654 ] 93 . Bissell MJ , Hines WC . Why don’t we get more cancer ? A proposed role of the microenvironment in restraining cancer progression . Nature Med . 2011 ; 17 : 320 – 329 . [ PubMed : 21383745 ] 94 . Tian X , et al . High - molecular - mass hyaluronan mediates the cancer resistance of the naked mole rat . Nature . 2013 ; 499 : 346 – 349 . [ PubMed : 23783513 ] 95 . Lu P , Weaver VM , Werb Z . The extracellular matrix : a dynamic niche in cancer progression . J Cell Biol . 2012 ; 196 : 395 – 406 . [ PubMed : 22351925 ] 96 . Burnier JV , et al . Type IV collagen - initiated signals provide survival and growth cues required for liver metastasis . Oncogene . 2011 ; 30 : 3766 – 3783 . [ PubMed : 21478904 ] 97 . Bergamaschi A , et al . Extracellular matrix signature identifies breast cancer subgroups with different clinical outcome . J Pathol . 2008 ; 214 : 357 – 367 . [ PubMed : 18044827 ] 98 . Poola I , et al . Identification of MMP - 1 as a putative breast cancer predictive marker by global gene expression analysis . Nature Med . 2005 ; 11 : 481 – 483 . [ PubMed : 15864312 ] 99 . Paszek MJ , et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell . 2005 ; 8 : 241 – 254 . [ PubMed : 16169468 ] 100 . Erler JT , et al . Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Nature . 2006 ; 440 : 1222 – 1226 . [ PubMed : 16642001 ] 101 . Levental KR , et al . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell . 2009 ; 139 : 891 – 906 . This study describes how ECM stiffening through LOX drives tumour progression and shows that inhibiting collagen crosslinking delays tumorigenesis . [ PubMed : 19931152 ] 102 . Erler JT , et al . Hypoxia - induced lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to form the premetastatic niche . Cancer Cell . 2009 ; 15 : 35 – 44 . [ PubMed : 19111879 ] 103 . Mouw JK , et al . Tissue mechanics modulate microRNA - dependent PTEN expression to regulate malignant progression . Nature Med . 2014 ; 20 : 360 – 367 . [ PubMed : 24633304 ] 104 . Valiathan RR , Marco M , Leitinger B , Kleer CG , Fridman R . Discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinases : new players in cancer progression . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 2012 ; 31 : 295 – 321 . [ PubMed : 22366781 ] 105 . Hidalgo - Carcedo C , et al . Collective cell migration requires suppression of actomyosin at cell - cell contacts mediated by DDR1 and the cell polarity regulators Par3 and Par6 . Nature Cell Biol . 2011 ; 13 : 49 – 58 . [ PubMed : 21170030 ] 106 . Zhang K , et al . The collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor 2 stabilizes SNAIL1 to facilitate breast cancer metastasis . Nature Cell Biol . 2013 ; 15 : 677 – 687 . [ PubMed : 23644467 ] 107 . Sengupta S , et al . MicroRNA 29c is down - regulated in nasopharyngeal carcinomas , up - regulating mRNAs encoding extracellular matrix proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2008 ; 105 : 5874 – 5878 . [ PubMed : 18390668 ] 108 . Chou J , et al . GATA3 suppresses metastasis and modulates the tumour microenvironment by regulating microRNA - 29b expression . Nature Cell Biol . 2013 ; 15 : 201 – 213 . [ PubMed : 23354167 ] 109 . Enerly E , et al . miRNA - mRNA integrated analysis reveals roles for miRNAs in primary breast tumors . PLoS ONE . 2011 ; 6 : e16915 . [ PubMed : 21364938 ] 110 . Cheresh DA , Stupack DG . Regulation of angiogenesis : apoptotic cues from the ECM . Oncogene . 2008 ; 27 : 6285 – 6298 . [ PubMed : 18931694 ] 111 . Saupe F , et al . Tenascin - C downregulates wnt inhibitor dickkopf - 1 , promoting tumorigenesis in a neuroendocrine tumor model . Cell Rep . 2013 ; 5 : 482 – 492 . [ PubMed : 24139798 ] 112 . Mott JD , Werb Z . Regulation of matrix biology by matrix metalloproteinases . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2004 ; 16 : 558 – 564 . [ PubMed : 15363807 ] Bonnans et al . Page 24 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 113 . Burgess JK , Weckmann M . Matrikines and the lungs . Pharmacol Ther . 2012 ; 134 : 317 – 337 . [ PubMed : 22366287 ] 114 . Sudhakar A , et al . Human α 1 type IV collagen NC1 domain exhibits distinct antiangiogenic activity mediated by α 1 β 1 integrin . J Clin Invest . 2005 ; 115 : 2801 – 2810 . [ PubMed : 16151532 ] 115 . Ray SJ , et al . The collagen binding α 1 β 1 integrin VLA - 1 regulates CD8 T cell - mediated immune protection against heterologous influenza infection . Immunity . 2004 ; 20 : 167 – 179 . [ PubMed : 14975239 ] 116 . Song J , et al . Extracellular matrix of secondary lymphoid organs impacts on B - cell fate and survival . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2013 ; 110 : E2915 – E2924 . [ PubMed : 23847204 ] 117 . Sorokin L . The impact of the extracellular matrix on inflammation . Nature Rev Immunol . 2010 ; 10 : 712 – 723 . [ PubMed : 20865019 ] 118 . Monboisse JC , Oudart JB , Ramont L , Brassart - Pasco S , Maquart FX . Matrikines from basement membrane collagens : a new anti - cancer strategy . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2014 ; 1840 : 2589 – 2598 . This review summarizes the involvement of collagen - derived matrikines in cancer , particularly matrikines derived from the NC1 domains of the different constitutive chains of basement membrane - associated collagens , mainly collagen IV . [ PubMed : 24406397 ] 119 . Gaggar A , et al . A novel proteolytic cascade generates an extracellular matrix - derived chemoattractant in chronic neutrophilic inflammation . J Immunol . 2008 ; 180 : 5662 – 5669 . [ PubMed : 18390751 ] 120 . Weathington NM , et al . A novel peptide CXCR ligand derived from extracellular matrix degradation during airway inflammation . Nature Med . 2006 ; 12 : 317 – 323 . [ PubMed : 16474398 ] 121 . Muto J , et al . Hyaluronan digestion controls DC migration from the skin . J Clin Invest . 2014 ; 124 : 1309 – 1319 . [ PubMed : 24487587 ] 122 . Salmon H , et al . Matrix architecture defines the preferential localization and migration of T cells into the stroma of human lung tumors . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 : 899 – 910 . [ PubMed : 22293174 ] 123 . Kim S , et al . Carcinoma - produced factors activate myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis . Nature . 2009 ; 457 : 102 – 106 . [ PubMed : 19122641 ] 124 . Wolf K , Friedl P . Extracellular matrix determinants of proteolytic and non - proteolytic cell migration . Trends Cell Biol . 2011 ; 21 : 736 – 744 . [ PubMed : 22036198 ] 125 . Tozluoglu M , et al . Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nature Cell Biol . 2013 ; 15 : 751 – 762 . [ PubMed : 23792690 ] 126 . Bergers G , et al . Matrix metalloproteinase - 9 triggers the angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis . Nature Cell Biol . 2000 ; 2 : 737 – 744 . [ PubMed : 11025665 ] 127 . Lee S , Jilani SM , Nikolova GV , Carpizo D , Iruela - Arispe ML . Processing of VEGF - A by matrix metalloproteinases regulates bioavailability and vascular patterning in tumors . J Cell Biol . 2005 ; 169 : 681 – 691 . [ PubMed : 15911882 ] 128 . Ferrara N . Binding to the extracellular matrix and proteolytic processing : two key mechanisms regulating vascular endothelial growth factor action . Mol Biol Cell . 2010 ; 21 : 687 – 690 . [ PubMed : 20185770 ] 129 . Chen TT , et al . Anchorage of VEGF to the extracellular matrix conveys differential signaling responses to endothelial cells . J Cell Biol . 2010 ; 188 : 595 – 609 . [ PubMed : 20176926 ] 130 . Phillips JJ , et al . Heparan sulfate sulfatase SULF2 regulates PDGFR α signaling and growth in human and mouse malignant glioma . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 : 911 – 922 . [ PubMed : 22293178 ] 131 . Grafe I , et al . Excessive transforming growth factor - β signaling is a common mechanism in osteogenesis imperfecta . Nature Med . 2014 ; 20 : 670 – 675 . [ PubMed : 24793237 ] 132 . Alcaraz LB , et al . Tenascin - X promotes epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition by activating latent TGF - β . J Cell Biol . 2014 ; 205 : 409 – 428 . [ PubMed : 24821840 ] 133 . Watt FM , Huck WT . Role of the extracellular matrix in regulating stem cell fate . Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2013 ; 14 : 467 – 473 . [ PubMed : 23839578 ] 134 . Debnath J , Brugge JS . Modelling glandular epithelial cancers in three - dimensional cultures . Nature Rev Cancer . 2005 ; 5 : 675 – 688 . [ PubMed : 16148884 ] 135 . Ridky TW , Chow JM , Wong DJ , Khavari PA . Invasive three - dimensional organotypic neoplasia from multiple normal human epithelia . Nature Med . 2010 ; 16 : 1450 – 1455 . [ PubMed : 21102459 ] Bonnans et al . Page 25 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 136 . Yurchenco PD . Basement membranes : cell scaffoldings and signaling platforms . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2011 ; 3 : a004911 . [ PubMed : 21421915 ] 137 . Seif - Naraghi SB , et al . Safety and efficacy of an injectable extracellular matrix hydrogel for treating myocardial infarction . Sci Transl Med . 2013 ; 5 : 173ra25 . 138 . Lee B , et al . Perlecan domain V is neuroprotective and proangiogenic following ischemic stroke in rodents . J Clin Invest . 2011 ; 121 : 3005 – 3023 . [ PubMed : 21747167 ] 139 . Martino MM , et al . Growth factors engineered for super - affinity to the extracellular matrix enhance tissue healing . Science . 2014 ; 343 : 885 – 888 . [ PubMed : 24558160 ] 140 . Giger RJ , Hollis ER 2nd , Tuszynski MH . Guidance molecules in axon regeneration . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2010 ; 2 : a001867 . [ PubMed : 20519341 ] 141 . Busch SA , Silver J . The role of extracellular matrix in CNS regeneration . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 2007 ; 17 : 120 – 127 . [ PubMed : 17223033 ] 142 . Alilain WJ , Horn KP , Hu H , Dick TE , Silver J . Functional regeneration of respiratory pathways after spinal cord injury . Nature . 2011 ; 475 : 196 – 200 . [ PubMed : 21753849 ] 143 . Back SA , et al . Hyaluronan accumulates in demyelinated lesions and inhibits oligodendrocyte progenitor maturation . Nature Med . 2005 ; 11 : 966 – 972 . [ PubMed : 16086023 ] 144 . Barry - Hamilton V , et al . Allosteric inhibition of lysyl oxidase - like - 2 impedes the development of a pathologic microenvironment . Nature Med . 2010 ; 16 : 1009 – 1017 . This study demonstrates that inhibiting LOXL2 using a monoclonal antibody decreases fibrosis in models of lung and liver fibrosis and reduces metastasis in xenografted tumours . [ PubMed : 20818376 ] 145 . Coussens LM , Fingleton B , Matrisian LM . Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and cancer : trials and tribulations . Science . 2002 ; 295 : 2387 – 2392 . [ PubMed : 11923519 ] 146 . Devy L , Dransfield DT . New strategies for the next generation of matrix - metalloproteinase inhibitors : selectively targeting membrane - anchored MMPs with therapeutic antibodies . Biochem Res Int . 2011 ; 2011 : 191670 . [ PubMed : 21152183 ] 147 . Zeisberg M , et al . Stage - specific action of matrix metalloproteinases influences progressive hereditary kidney disease . PLoS Med . 2006 ; 3 : e100 . [ PubMed : 16509766 ] 148 . Junttila MR , de Sauvage FJ . Influence of tumour micro - environment heterogeneity on therapeutic response . Nature . 2013 ; 501 : 346 – 354 . [ PubMed : 24048067 ] 149 . Miyamoto H , et al . Tumor - stroma interaction of human pancreatic cancer : acquired resistance to anticancer drugs and proliferation regulation is dependent on extracellular matrix proteins . Pancreas . 2004 ; 28 : 38 – 44 . [ PubMed : 14707728 ] 150 . Sethi T , et al . Extracellular matrix proteins protect small cell lung cancer cells against apoptosis : a mechanism for small cell lung cancer growth and drug resistance in vivo . Nature Med . 1999 ; 5 : 662 – 668 . [ PubMed : 10371505 ] 151 . Eke I , Storch K , Krause M , Cordes N . Cetuximab attenuates its cytotoxic and radiosensitizing potential by inducing fibronectin biosynthesis . Cancer Res . 2013 ; 73 : 5869 – 5879 . [ PubMed : 23950208 ] 152 . Henderson NC , et al . Targeting of α v integrin identifies a core molecular pathway that regulates fibrosis in several organs . Nature Med . 2013 ; 19 : 1617 – 1624 . [ PubMed : 24216753 ] 153 . Psaila B , Lyden D . The metastatic niche : adapting the foreign soil . Nature Rev Cancer . 2009 ; 9 : 285 – 293 . [ PubMed : 19308068 ] 154 . Kaplan RN , et al . VEGFR1 - positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the pre - metastatic niche . Nature . 2005 ; 438 : 820 – 827 . [ PubMed : 16341007 ] 155 . Oskarsson T , et al . Breast cancer cells produce tenascin C as a metastatic niche component to colonize the lungs . Nature Med . 2011 ; 17 : 867 – 874 . [ PubMed : 21706029 ] 156 . Malanchi I , et al . Interactions between cancer stem cells and their niche govern metastatic colonization . Nature . 2011 ; 481 : 85 – 89 . References 156 and 157 show that ECM components are crucial for providing proliferative , survival and stemness signals during tumour metastasis . [ PubMed : 22158103 ] 157 . Ghajar CM , et al . The perivascular niche regulates breast tumour dormancy . Nature Cell Biol . 2013 ; 15 : 807 – 817 . [ PubMed : 23728425 ] Bonnans et al . Page 26 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 158 . Pietras A , et al . Osteopontin - CD44 signaling in the glioma perivascular niche enhances cancer stem cell phenotypes and promotes aggressive tumor growth . Cell Stem Cell . 2014 ; 14 : 357 – 369 . [ PubMed : 24607407 ] 159 . Reticker - Flynn NE , et al . A combinatorial extracellular matrix platform identifies cell - extracellular matrix interactions that correlate with metastasis . Nature Commun . 2012 ; 3 : 1122 . [ PubMed : 23047680 ] 160 . Kessenbrock K , Plaks V , Werb Z . Matrix metalloproteinases : regulators of the tumor microenvironment . Cell . 2010 ; 141 : 52 – 67 . [ PubMed : 20371345 ] 161 . Ishizuya - Oka A , Hasebe T . Establishment of intestinal stem cell niche during amphibian metamorphosis . Curr Top Dev Biol . 2013 ; 103 : 305 – 327 . [ PubMed : 23347524 ] Bonnans et al . Page 27 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . Structure and targets substrates of metalloproteinases Metalloproteinases belong to the metzincin enzyme family , which includes matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) , adamalysins ( which includes ADAMs ( a disintegrin and metalloproteinases ) and ADAMTS ( ADAMs with a thrombospondin motif ) ) and astacins ( including meprins ) . They are multidomain enzymes that contain the highly conserved motif HEXXHXXGXXH ( where X is any amino acid ) , in which three His residues chelate a zinc ion in the catalytic site . Metalloproteinases are produced either as soluble or membrane - anchored enzymes that cleave components of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . MMPs are composed of several shared functional domains : signal peptide domain , propeptide domain , catalytic domain and haemopexin - like domain ( except MMP7 , MMP23 and MMP26 ) . The amino - terminal signal peptide domain is required for the secretion of MMPs . The propeptide domain contains the Cys - switch motif PRCGXPD . The catalytic domain ( which has proteolytic activity ) contains the zinc - binding motif ; the Cys residue in this motif interacts Bonnans et al . Page 28 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t with the zinc ion that keeps pro - MMPs inactive until the propeptide domain is removed . The carboxy - terminal haemopexin - like domain , which is present in almost all MMPs , is involved in substrate specificity and in the non - proteolytic functions of MMPs 160 . Membrane - type MMPs ( MTMMPs ) such as MMP14 are anchored to the cell surface by either a transmembrane domain followed by a short cytoplasmic tail or a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) sequence . Some MMPs , including MTMMPs , MMP11 , MMP17 , MMP21 , MMP23 , MMP25 and MMP28 can be activated by the furin convertase , which cleaves the propeptide of inactive precursors in the Golgi apparatus , to release functional proteins . ADAMs are transmembrane proteins that are structurally similar to MTMMPs , except that they lack the haemopexin domain and instead have three other domains : the Cys - rich domain , the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - like repeat domain ( except ADAM10 and ADAM17 ) and the disintegrin domain . Only ADAM9 , ADAM10 , ADAM12 and ADAM15 are shown , as the other ADAMs do not have known ECM protein substrates . ADAMTSs are secreted proteinases and have thrombospondin type I - like repeats in their C - terminal sequence . In addition to the metalloproteinase domains , the meprins also have an astacin - like catalytic domain ( Ast - like Cat ) , a MAM ( meprin A5 protein Tyr phosphatase ) domain , a TRAF ( TNFR - associated factor ) domain and a C - terminal cytosolic tail . Meprin - α also contains a furin cleavage domain , cleavage of which results in the loss of the EGF - like transmembrane domain and the cytosolic domain and release of the enzyme into the extracellular space . MMP23 contains an immunoglobulin ( Ig ) domain that is unique among the MMPs . This Ig domain facilitates protein – protein or lipid – protein interactions similar to the haemopexin domain of other MMPs . Bonnans et al . Page 29 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . Extracellular matrix remodelling during intestinal development a | Tadpole - to - adult intestinal epithelium remodelling during Xenopus laevis morphogenesis . In the pre - metamorphosis tadpole , the small intestine consists of a single layer of larval epithelium ( also known as typhlosole ) , connective tissue and a thin muscle layer . During metamorphosis , thyroid hormone ( TH ) is produced in high levels , inducing the release of matrix metalloproteinase 11 ( MMP11 ) by stromal cells to trigger apoptosis of larval epithelial cells . At the same time , proliferating stem and progenitor cells give rise to new adult epithelial cells that replace the larval epithelium . During metamorphosis , the basement membrane and the muscle layer are thicker . The levels of other MMPs , such as MMP2 and / or MMP9 and MMP14 , increase during tadpole metamorphosis after epithelial cell death , suggesting that they may have a role post - apoptosis . At the end of metamorphosis , the differentiated adult intestine becomes capable of self - renewal and forms a multiply folded epithelium , similar to the mammalian adult intestine . Bonnans et al . Page 30 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t b – d | Intestinal epithelium remodelling in other vertebrates . Laminin distribution during mammalian intestine development determines small intestine and colon architecture . The basement membrane of villi in the intestine is composed mainly of laminin 511 α 5 chain . In mice , a lack of laminin 511 in the intestinal basement membrane leads to a compensatory deposition of colonic laminins ( laminin 111 and laminin 411 ) , which results in the transformation of the small intestinal to a tissue with a colon - like mucosal structure that shows high levels of cell proliferation , low levels of the cell cycle inhibitor cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor B ( CDKN1B ) , and higher numbers of goblet cells ( part b ) . RGD - dependent substrates such as fibronectin can bind to α 8 β 1 integrin . This anchorage prevents anoikis in undifferentiated human intestinal epithelial crypt ( HIEC ) cells through the recruitment of vinculin and the activation of the PI3K – AKT signalling pathway ( part c ) . Collagen VI is produced by HIEC cells and regulates fibronectin assembly by restraining cell – fibronectin interactions , which influences cell functions such as migration . A lack of collagen VI leads to recruitment of tensin at the fibrillar adhesion points via the activation of myosin light chain kinases ( MLCKs ) , which mediate actomyosin contractility , extensive fibrillogenesis and cell migration ( part d ) . FAK , focal adhesion kinase . Figure part a modified from Establishment of intestinal stem cell niche during amphibian metamorphosis . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol Volume 103 . Chapter 11 . Pages 305 – 327 . 2013 . With permission from Elsevier . 161 Bonnans et al . Page 31 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 3 . Extracellular matrix remodelling during branching morphogenesis A | Ductal elongation and branching of the mammary and submandibular glands . Aa | Collagen is locally synthesized and aligned to increase extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness and create a mechanical anisotropy that will drive branching . Collagen synthesis is mediated by the activation of the RHOA – RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) signalling pathway . The ECM at the end bud tip is much thinner than in cleft region and around the duct . Matrix metalloproteinase 2 ( MMP2 ) and MMP14 are expressed and active at the end bud tip , whereas MMP3 is involved inside branching . Ab | Cleft formation and deepening in the submandibular glands . Fibronectin is locally assembled in the basement membrane and Bonnans et al . Page 32 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t induces BTBD7 at the base of forming clefts , which in turn upregulates the transcription factor SNAIL2 and downregulates the adhesion molecule E - cadherin . These molecular events promote alterations in cell shape , decreasing cell – cell adhesion and promoting a motile phenotype to promote cleft progression . Fibronectin assembly requires focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) activation and RHOA – ROCK - mediated actomyosin contraction . B | Role of elastin and collagen deposition in alveolar branching in the lung . Elastin and collagen deposition promotes ECM stiffness in the neonatal lung and facilitates signalling through the endothelial lipoprotein receptor - related protein 5 ( LRP5 ) – TIE2 ( also known as angiopoietin 1 receptor ) pathway , which is required for normal lung development . Consistent with this , disrupting lung collagen I , III and VI and elastin expression and localization through treatment with β - aminopropionitrile , an inhibitor of the collagen crosslinking enzyme lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) , softens neonatal mouse lung tissue and downregulates the expression of LRP5 and TIE2 , which leads to an inhibition of vascular and alveolar morphogenesis in neonatal mice . Ca | Heparan sulphate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) bind fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) with different affinity and help to create a concentration gradient that can control cell fate in submandibular glands . In contrast to FGF10 , FGF7 binds HSPG with low affinity and diffuses broadly , promoting branching in the submandibular gland . Cb | HSPGs such as perlecan bind FGF10 with high affinity . Following cleavage by heparanase , perlecan releases FGF10 , which can then diffuse locally and promote duct elongation . FGFR2 , FGF receptor 2 ; MLC , myocin light chain ; MYPT , myosin phosphatase . Figure part Ca modified from Differential interactions of FGFs with heparin sulfate control gradient formation and branching morphogenesis . Sci . Signal . Volume 2 . Issue 88 . Page ra55 . 2009 . Reprinted with permission from AAAS . Bonnans et al . Page 33 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 4 . Aberrant extracellular matrix remodelling leads to numerous human diseases A | Over - degradation of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , mediated primarily by matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) and ADAMTS ( ADAMs with a thrombospondin motif ) , results in osteoarthritis and increased breakdown of the connective tissue . B | As a result of chronic inflammation or tissue injury , transforming growth factor - β ( TGF β ) , connective tissue growth factor ( CTGF ) , interleukin - 13 ( IL - 13 ) and other factors stimulate fibroblasts and myofibroblasts ( the main ECM producers ) to produce more ECM , resulting in pathological fibrosis . The excess ECM further stimulates fibroblasts to continue making ECM , forming a positive feedback loop . Fibrosis is a major risk factor for developing cancer , including hepatocellular carcinoma and breast cancer . C | The ECM contributes to cancer pathogenesis Bonnans et al . Page 34 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t by several mechanisms : functioning as a barrier to chemotherapy , to monoclonal antibodies such as cetuximab and to immune therapy mediated , for example , by cytotoxic T cells ( CTLs ) ( part Ca ) ; forming migration track ‘highways’ that regulate the interaction of immune cells with cancer cells ( part Cb ) ; stimulating integrin signalling through increased ECM stiffness , which promotes ECM synthesis , invasion and proliferation ( lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) and LOX - like 2 ( LOXL2 ) are enzymes that crosslink collagen and are the main enzymes responsible for increasing ECM stiffness ) ( part Cc ) ; forming a niche for new metastatic cells and providing survival and proliferative signals ( part Cd ) ; generating novel bioactive ECM fragments from native ECM chains , and stimulating cell migration or immune cell recruitment ( part Ce ) ; activating cell – ECM receptors such as discoidin domain - containing receptor 1 ( DDR1 ) and DDR2 , which bind directly to collagen and regulate transcriptional pathways to increase MMP and epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) marker expression ( part Cf ) ; and sequestering growth factors that can be released by proteolytic cleavage , which then diffuse to bind receptors to stimulate cell growth , EMT or angiogenesis ( part Cg ) . Bonnans et al . Page 35 Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2015 February 04 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t