Elastic Properties of Aspergillus nidulans Studied with Atomic Force Microscopy L . Zhao * , D . Schaefer * * , H . Xu 3 , S . Modi * * * , W . LaCourse * * * * , and M . Marten * * Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering , UMBC , lzhao @ umbc . edu * * Department of Physics , Astronomy , and Geosciences , Towson University , Towson , Maryland 21252 * * * Department of Biological Science , UMBC , Baltimore , MD 21250 * * * * Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Maryland Baltimore County ( UMBC ) , Baltimore , Maryland 21250 ABSTRACT In this study an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) was used as a nanoindentor to measure cell wall mechanical properties of the model fungus Aspergillus nidulans in both hyphal 5 and spore 6 forms . For fungal hyphae the nanoindentation data were compared to finite element analysis ( FEMLAB v3 . 0 , Burlington MA ) to simulate AFM indentation because no suitable analytical models were available . The elastic modulus of wild type hyphae grown in complete medium was determined to be 110 ± 10 MPa . This decreased to 64 ± 4 MPa when grown in 0 . 6 M KCl , implying growth medium osmotic conditions have significant effects on cell wall elasticity . These values are comparable with other microbial systems ( e . g . , yeast and bacteria ) . Comparisons with a mutant strain ( Δ csmA ) further indicate that the differences in mechanical properties may be dependent on varying molecular structure of hyphal cell walls as opposed to wall composition . AFM images showed characteristic “rodlet” protein structures covering spore surface . This feature can be removed by sonication . Nanoindentation measurements on the spores showed that rodlet - covered spores had surface stiffness of 110 ± 10 N / m and cell wall elastic modulus of 6 . 6 ± 0 . 4 GPa , both lower than those of rodlet - free spores . These results imply the rodlet layer is significantly softer than the underlying portion of the cell wall . Keywords : afm , fungi , elastic modulus , indent , spores Filamentous fungi are used to produce an exceptionally wide range of products [ 1 - 3 ] , comprising approximately half of the world’s pharmaceutical and biotechnology market [ 4 ] . Most of these products are produced in fermentations where productivity is strongly influenced by hyphal breakage or fragmentation . Fragmentation in turn , depends on the mechanical properties of the fungal hyphae , in particular the elastic modulus ( measure of stiffness ) . Unfortunately , relatively little information is available on the mechanical properties of any filamentous microbe , as the equipment used is typically difficult to operate and not commercially available [ 5 , 6 ] . In contrast , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is relatively straight forward and commercially available instruments can be used to measure mechanical properties of biological material [ 7 , 8 ] . This is generally accomplished by monitoring the deflection of an AFM cantilever , as its tip deforms a sample . “Force curves” are collected , and the resulting data is fit to models describing the mechanics of contact , allowing determination of mechanical properties . The goal in this study was to develop methods to determine the elastic moduli ( E ; measure of “stiffness” ) of filamentous fungus A . nidulans , in forms of both hyphae and spores , using an AFM approach . To accomplish this , both wild type A . nidulans and a mutant strain lacking an important cell wall chitin synthase gene ( Δ csmA ) were grown in shake flasks . During growth , hyphae were harvested and immobilized on polylysine - coated cover slips . Subsequent AFM testing was carried out in aqueous buffer . As shown in Fig . 1 , hyphae were considered to be a cylindrical shells with an internal pressure , deformed by an externalnormal force . A representative AFM force - displacement curve is shown in Fig . 2 . The contact region shows a linear response , and the slope m can be used to calculate cell wall spring constant k w according to the following equation : m m k k − ⋅ = 1 c w ( 1 ) where k c is cantilever spring constant . A shell model was defined and a finite element modeling was performed ( FEMLAB v3 . 0 , Burlington , MA ) and validated ( using analytical solutions ) . This allowed us to use k w , along with cell dimensions R and h ( determined via electron microscopy ) to calculate elastic modulus E . We note wild type hyphae have significantly lower elastic modulus ( from 100 to 59 MPa ) when grown in the presence of 0 . 6 M potassium chloride , implying high molarity stress has a strong effect on cell wall elasticity . R P h A Figure 1 Schematic illustrations of indentation experiment . The hypha is submerged in PBS buffer and immobilized on a polylysine - coated cover glass . The cantilever tip exerts a normal force and deforms the hyphal wall . The hypha is idealized as an infinitely long , circular cylindrical shell with outer radius R and wall thickness h , inflated with internal pressure P . NSTI - Nanotech 2005 , www . nsti . org , ISBN 0 - 9767985 - 0 - 6 Vol . 1 , 2005 243 In addition , AFM was also used to investigate both Figure 2 . A force curve taken on a wild type A . nidulans hypha . The cantilever deflection is zero in the noncontact region . In the sloped contact region the cantilever tip deforms the hyphal wall . The curve is linear with a slope m in the contact region . The spring constant of the cantilever is 0 . 47 N / m 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 50 100 150 200 Sample Height , nm C a n t il eve r D e f l ec t i on , n m m B surface topography and micromechanical properties of A . nidulans spores grown on potato dextrose agar plates . “Untreated” spores were scratched from sporulated mycelial mats and tapped over a poly - L - lysine coated coverslip which was then used for atomic force microscopy . Alternatively , “sonicated” spores were obtained from agar plates , suspended in sterile deionized water and subjected to sonication before being subjected to AFM testing . To assess the influence of proteins covering the spore surface , wild type spores were compared with spores from isogenic rodA + and rodA - strains . Tapping mode AFM images of wild type and rodA + spores in air showed characteristic “rodlet” protein structures covering a granular shaped spore surface ( Fig . 3 ) . In comparison , rodA - spores were rodlet free but showed a similar granular surface structure as the wild type and rodA + . Rodlets were removed A B C E D F Figure 3 . Images generated using AFM in tapping mode of the surface morphology of ( A - C ) “untreated” and ( D - F ) “sonicated” A . nidulans spores ; ( A and D ) wild type , ( B and E ) rodA + , and ( C and F ) rodA - . Untreated wild type ( A ) and rodA + ( B ) spores have rough surfaces with a rodlet layer on each , while rodA - spores ( C ) exhibited granular materials on a rodlet free surface . All spores were observed to lose nearly all rodlets after sonication ( D - F ) , uncovering the underlying region of granular materials . Bar length : 0 . 2 (cid:31)m . NSTI - Nanotech 2005 , www . nsti . org , ISBN 0 - 9767985 - 0 - 6 Vol . 1 , 2005 244 from rodA + spores by sonication , uncovering the underlying granular layer . Both rodlet - covered and rodlet - free spores were subjected to nanoindentation measurements , conducted in air , which showed the stiffness to be 110 ± 10 , 120 ± 10 and 300 ± 20 N / m , and elastic modulus to be 6 . 6 ± 0 . 4 , 7 . 0 ± 0 . 7 and 22 ± 2 GPa , for wild type , rodA + and rodA - , respectively . These results imply the rodlet layer is significantly softer than the underlying portion of the cell wall . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Rambosek , J . A . , Molecular Biology and Biochemistry of b - Lactam Antibiotics , in Biotechnology of Filamentous Fungi : Technology and Products , Finkelstein D . B . and Ball C . , Editors . Butterworth - Heinemann : Boston . 221 - 240 ( 1991 ) . [ 2 ] Masurekar , P . S . , Therapeutic Metabolites , in Biotechnology of Filamentous Fungi : Technology and Products , Finkelstein D . B . and Ball C . , Editors . Butterworth - Heinemann : Boston . 241 - 302 ( 1991 ) . [ 3 ] Bigelis , R . , Food Enzymes , in Biotechnology of Filamentous Fungi : Technology and Products , Finkelstein D . B . and Ball C . , Editors . Butterworth - Heinemann : Boston . 361 - 416 ( 1991 ) . [ 4 ] Arora , D . K . , Elander R . P . , and Mukerji K . G . , Introduction , in Handbook of Applied Mycology , Volume 4 : Fungal Biotechnology , Arora D . K . , Elander R . P . , and Mukerji K . G . , Editors . Marcel Dekker : New York . 3 - 4 ( 1992 ) . [ 5 ] Smith , A . E . , Moxham K . E . , and Middleberg A . P . J . , Wall material properties of yeast cells . Chemical Engineering Science , 55 : 2043 - 2053 ( 2000 ) . [ 6 ] Stocks , S . M . and Thomas C . R . , Strength of mid - logarithmic and stationary phase Saccharopolyspora erythraea hyphae during batch fermentation in defined nitrate - limited medium . Biotechnol . and Bioeng . , 73 : 370 - 378 ( 2001 ) . [ 7 ] A - Hassan , E . , Heinz W . F . , Antonik M . D . , D ' Costa N . P . , Nageswaran S . , Schoenenberger C . - A . , and Hoh J . H . , Relative microelastic mapping of living cells by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . , 74 : 1564 - 1578 ( 1998 ) . [ 8 ] Yao , X . , Jericho M . , Pink D . , and Beveridge T . , Thickness and elasticity of gram - negative murein sacculi measured by atomic force microscopy . J . Bacteriol . , 181 : 6865 - 6875 ( 1999 ) . NSTI - Nanotech 2005 , www . nsti . org , ISBN 0 - 9767985 - 0 - 6 Vol . 1 , 2005 245