Emobie TM : A Robot Companion for Children with Anxiety Lindsey Arnold Department of Human Centered Design and Engineering University of Washington Seattle , WA , USA lindseya @ uw . edu Abstract —Emobie TM is a concept for a social robot that provides companionship and comfort to children with anxiety . Emobie helps calm anxious children by responding to their emotions , both reflecting back emotions and helping them to increase coping skills . An additional goal of Emobie is to improve communication between children , parents , and therapists by sharing thoughts and feelings . Keywords—social robot ; robot design ; child - robot interaction I . I NTRODUCTION Anxiety disorders affect one in eight children and are the most common psychiatric disorders in children . Anxiety is treatable but 80 % of children with a diagnosable anxiety disorder are not getting treatment . The median age of onset for anxiety disorders is age 6 [ 1 ] . Emobie ( Fig . 1 ) , short for “emotional being” , is a design concept for an emotional , social robot that provides companionship and comfort to children with anxiety . It does this by listening ( through a storytelling application on a phone or tablet ) and reflecting back the child’s emotions through expression in eyes , sounds , arms , and stomach . Emobie also helps improve communication between children and their parents and therapists by communicating the child’s emotions . Social robots have been shown to be more effective than screen - based treatments when providing in - home therapeutic Fig . 1 . High - level sketch of Emobie concept . support [ 2 ] due to their embodiment and ability to engage patients in long - term relationships . Paro , a seal robot , was found to reduce stress and improve psychological outcomes for elderly residents in a care house [ 3 ] . DragonBot , a furry dragon robot , has shown to be an effective platforms for teaching children [ 4 ] . Not all children have access to professional therapists . A solution like Emobie is designed to provide support and companionship at home , whether the child is getting professional help or not . Emobie is a low - cost alternative to previous social robot designs . II . G OALS Emobie is designed for children age 5 to 10 who are experiencing anxiety . Emobie encourages engagement by listening to children’s stories ( via wireless communication with a storytelling application ) and reflecting their emotional states ( through eyes expression , stomach color , arm movements , and sound ) . Emobie provides calming responses ( e . g . colors , sounds , and purring ) to children when they are experiencing anxiety , sadness , or anger and also teaches them coping skills through the storytelling application . The goal for Emobie is for children to be able to carry it everywhere they go , building a long - term and meaninful relationship . It helps children to overcome their fears . For parents and therapists , Emobie helps them to better understand and communicate with the children in their lives . III . F UNCTIONALITY A . Encourages engagement Emobie is furry , expressive , and responsive . Emobie is made to be a companion that can travel with a child as they go through life . Emobie is small enough to be carried but also large enough to snuggle ( approximately 12” in height ) . B . Listens and reflects Emobie listens to children as they express emotions that the child shares through the storytelling application , which in turn communicates emotions through Emobie . This external 978 - 1 - 4673 - 8370 - 7 / 16 / $ 31 . 00 © 2016 IEEE 413 Fig . 2 . Diagram displaying Emobie’s emotional states . emotional feedback loop shows children that Emobie understands them and also that it empathizes with their feelings . Emobie has the ability to express the following emotions ( Fig . 2 ) through eye movements , sound , stomach color , and arm movements . C . Remembers children’s stories Emobie remembers what children tell it through the text - based storytelling application and can track the child’s emotions over time . Emobie also knows coping skills ( input by parents and therapists ) to suggest to the children when they are feeling anxious , sad , or angry . D . Facilitates communication Emobie helps children to express how they are feeling to their parents , therapists , and other caregivers by expressing the emotions that the child is feeling . Emobie can also be used to encourage children to share their stories of stressful events . IV . D ESIGN A . Design goals • Fun first – Emobie is a child’s new best friend that they will want to carry everywhere they go . • Autonomous – To be a companion , Emobie should interact with children without an adult operating it . • Able to learn – Emobie learns the children’s emotional states and can even learn new emotional states that are specific to a child ( e . g . grumpy ) . • Affordable – The materials were chosen to make a social robot accessible to more children . B . Prototype materials ( Fig . 3 . ) • Brain – Arduino Uno . Chosen for its lower price point and ability to run Emobie autonomously . • Eyes – 3 . 5” TFT 320x480 . Screen allows for expressive eye movements . • Stomach – NeoPixel Jewel covered with molded plastic creates an array of colors to express various emotions . • Arms – Micro servo ( x2 ) . Servos move the arms into set positions depending on Emobie’s emotional state . C . Storytelling application • Identify emotions – A tablet - or phone - based application will help children to identify their emotions through text - based storytelling and games . Fig . 3 . Low - fidelity Emobie prototype . • Communicate with Emobie – The application will wirelessly communicate with Emobie , so that Emobie can reflect back the child’s identified emotions . • Platform – The triad of child , application , and Emobie becomes a platform that can then be used for therapy and education , among other purposes . V . N EXT STEPS Next we will build the storytelling application that will communicate wirelessly with Emobie . We will conduct an evaluative study to get feedback from children at University of Washington’s KidsTeam , an intergenerational co - design group of children and adults developing new children’s technologies [ 5 ] . Lastly , our goal is to get Emobies to children who could benefit from having a social emotional robot in their lives for education , therapy , and companion purposes . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] K . R . Merikangas , J . He , M . E . Burstein , J . Swendsen , S . Avenevoli , B . Case , … M . Olfson . Service Utilization for Lifetime Mental Disorders in U . S . Adolescents : Results of the National Comorbidity Survey Adolescent Supplement ( NCS - A ) . Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 50 ( 1 ) , p . 32 – 45 , 2011 . [ 2 ] C . D . Kidd and C . Breazeal . Robots at home : Understanding long - term human - robot interaction . IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , p . 3230 - 3235 , 2008 . [ 3 ] K . Wada and T . Shibata . Living with seal robots—Its sociopsychological and physiological influences on the elderly at a care house . IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 23 ( 5 ) : p . 972 - 980 , 2007 . [ 4 ] E . Short , K . Swift - Spong , J . Greczek , A . Ramachandran , A . Litoiu , E . C . Grigore , et al . How to train your DragonBot : Socially assistive robots for teaching children about nutrition through play . IEEE RO - MAN ' 14 , p . 924 - 929 , 2014 . [ 5 ] J . Yip , T . Clegg , E . Bonsignore , H . Gelderblom , E . Rhodes A . Druin . Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? : Domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , p . 201 - 210 , 2013 . 414