Move to Design / Design to Move : A Conversation About Designing for the Body Danielle Wilde Monash University | CsIRO | d @ daniellewilde . com Thecla Schiphorst simon Fraser University | thecla @ sfu . ca Sietske Klooster Independent design - choreographer | info @ sietskeklooster . nl edge , expertise , or connoisseurship that otherwise eludes articulation . In traditional design education , we are encouraged to keep per - sonal viewpoints and experiences at arm’s length . Felt experience is idiosyncratic and difficult to articulate , and , despite the shared experience of being human , may vary dramatically . Bodies have dif - ferent fits , feelings , and ways of moving . These differences affect design processes and outcomes . By considering body - based design as an emergent , phenomenological process , the personal experiences of designers can become an impor - tant , if not central , part of the design process . Engaging in movement as dis - covery supports the exchange of bodily experiences with end users , as well as with the design itself . Emergent bodily knowledge thereby becomes an essential material of the design process . Through and To Movement Movement focuses attention ness that emerges from embodied engagement [ 1 ] . Designing for the body requires expertise in a broad range of disci - plines . Our toolkits include indus - trial design ; engineering ; interac - tion design ; architectural design ; computer systems design ; costume , garment , and theatrical artifact design ; dance and performance creation ; and a range of comple - mentary somatic ( body - based ) techniques . As designers and makers , we cross - pollinate these divergent fields to develop oppor - tunities for embodied interaction and sense - making , focused on the aesthetics of interaction . In this article we discuss indi - vidual projects , interweave notions and approaches common to the three of us , and report nuances of difference . In doing so we hope to provide material for reflection . For Movement The body is constantly in motion . By designing for the moving , expe - riential body we can access knowl - Being in our bodies is so natural that it can slip out of our awareness . Yet the simple act of paying atten - tion to our movement reconnects us with the body . In our technology - centered world , moving to design and designing to move restore the concept of design as bodily activity . Focusing on how moving can devel - op “knowing bodies” is an important design strategy that may radically impact the way designers work . As authors , we come from differ - ent contexts and have not worked together . Yet our approaches overlap through a shared pas - sion for designing for , with , and through the body in movement . We design through movement , rather than through the body . This is an important nuance—we engage people physically , phenomenologi - cally , imaginatively , and creatively throughout the design process . We use movement as an agent to support and inspire nonverbal or “extra - discursive” reflection that in turn informs our designs . Our research privileges the knowing - i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 22 The boundaries between ‘the digital’ and our everyday physical world are dissolving as we develop more physical ways of interacting with computing . This forum presents some of the topics discussed in the colorful multidisciplinary field of tangible and embodied interaction . Eva Hornecker , Editor LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum through the body and therefore sup - ports attentiveness to the body . By using movement - generated atten - tion as a material for design , we can focus on bodily experience . We approach this idea in differ - ent ways . Schiphorst uses somatic techniques throughout the design process to bring attention to the body’s inner and outer movements . Wilde extends the body to provoke shifts in attention from gesture to the technologically embod - ied results of gesture , to change qualities of attentiveness , and , as a result , the kinds of embodied knowledge a participant might access . Klooster creates cycles of attention to the body , through the body , to and through artifact , and back to the body . The artifacts’ evolution becomes an inherent part of the movement development [ 2 ] . This notion of cycling to and through movement as an iterative process is an important aspect of all three approaches . Being atten - tive to ( re ) experiencing the self in returning moments , so that move - ment may be ( re ) invented , supports the emergence of new perspectives and in - habitual practices . Useful somatic techniques employed in body - based design include activities such as slow - motion walking , focusing on the breath while moving , closing the eyes and following the path of sensations in the body , comparing two movements to assess comfort and fluidity , and “connecting” in space with another participant [ 3 ] . The resulting “data” reflect differ - ent movement qualities , including how they feel and communicate , and may be used as inspiration and material for tangible design . The value of attention in its relationship to movement lies in its ability to effect change in the body and in bodily knowledge . This aligns with the emerging focus within HCI of “design for the self . ” Extending Attention Networked , wearable , and tan - gible technologies allow us to use attention collectively to create group dynamics that simultane - ously focus inward and outward . A design may begin with the participants’ first - person interac - tions with their own body - states then extend through the network to allow numerous participants to share state data . For example , Schiphorst’s projects whisper and exhale prompt participants to turn their attention inward to the inter - nal movement of breath and heart rate , creating an ecology of col - lective movement and a space for common experience . whisper is a networked wear - able installation consisting of six kimono - like garments with breath and heart - rate sensors and embedded LED displays . The kimono garments are used to share real - time personal body data . The data is sonified and projected onto the floor in light pools to reflect the participants’ configurations . Through their awareness of the projected sounds and images , participants can “snap” together in a variety of playful and even absurd ways . whisper evolved out of five exploratory movement workshops that used attention as mate - rial , exploring ways to listen to and share one’s own body data . Outcomes of this design process included : an interaction model for sharing breath and heart - rate data between self and other ; networked wearable interactive garments that support movement in play - ful , extraordinary ways ; and the articulation of generalizable design techniques of somatic connois - seurship , which use the designer’s experience with movement to sup - port access to more subtle qualities of experience and emergent bodily knowledge for participants [ 4 ] . exhale consists of eight net - worked skirts embedded with sen - sors and LED patterns . Wireless “breathbands” send the wearer’s breath rhythms in real time to vibrators and small fans sewn into the linings of the skirts . Each par - ticipant can experience his or her own breath data or share it with other participants through the visceral , real - time reflection of the data close to the skin . The skirt’s exterior contains a visible , organic LED array pattern that dims and brightens with the breath rhythm . Participants’ autonomic nervous systems entrain their breathing rhythms to synchronize , creating an empathic group breath state shared through the networked wearable system . Such ecologies represent an extended body . Extension In a different kind of extended body , the Light Arrays project , ini - tiated by Wilde , then developed into a suite of works with Alvaro Cassinelli , explores extension of the body through light . An array of visible LEDs and lasers embedded into a garment project a dynamic representation of body movement and posture onto the environ - ment . The lights are visible for the garment wearer and observ - ers . This illustrates two lines of research : augmented proprioception , generated with an artificial visual feedback system , and enhanced body interaction , using an interactively augmented body with lights that reflect and respond to movement through time as well as space . The Light Arrays prompt wearers to interact through the lights with i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 23 LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum Extending the body outward paradoxically extends attention inward , resulting in an intense and in - habitual focus on internal physi - cal and emotional states . Such heightened awareness has been described as poetic and strange , and feelings of elation and a desire to share the idiosyncratic nature of the experience are common . The attention is brought full circle to an engagement with the outside world , with the other . Light Arrays and related research engage the body through imagina - tion , and imagination through the body . The systems are open and create vacuums for self - discovery through movement . Vacuums for Possibility Designing through movement also creates vacuums for artifacts to come into existence . Klooster’s Joint limb shield and Rings - ritual are two examples of artifacts that iteratively evolved through move - ment development . The evolving artifacts positioned themselves in vacuums in the movement , to fit into and elicit the movement . Joint limb shield emerged from the movement possibilities that arise when two people move together with touching palms . A number of artifacts were created to be worn so they join the right hands of both dancers . Based on its shape and material , each artifact tunes in to a specific characteristic of con - nected - hand duet movement . Joint limb shield is attuned to and elicits the spatial movement character - istics specific to scooping space between and around the participat - ing dancers . The shield extends the plane created by their touched hands . The device’s asymmetrical oval shape shifts in response to the changing length and angle of arm reach when the joined hands posture , movement , and dynamic spatial location . Wearers report being inspired to move and dis - cover their bodies through move - ment in ways that differ from their usual approaches and habits . Suggested uses include learning complex somatic techniques and speeding up rehabilitation , as well as exploring the body’s expres - sive capabilities . While the impact in rehabilitation contexts is yet to be tested , radical improve - ments in outcomes for patients and participants with physical challenges are suggested [ 5 ] . • whisper ( schiphorst , Kozel , Andersen et al . , 2002 - 2003 ) installa - tion interaction and garment design . • ( schiphorst and the whispers research group , 2004 - 2006 ) : exhale interactive skirt , movement workshops , and installation space . • whisper ( schiphorst , Kozel , Andersen et al . , 2002 - 2003 ) evolved out of five move - ment workshops . i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 24 LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum ordinary extra ordinary” [ 6 ] . The authors use this experiential con - cept in different ways . Klooster works through improvisational explorations , in which reflec - tion on action is essential , mak - ing design an act of discovering instead of devising . This allows her to find the extraordinary in the seemingly familiar , and results in design that is simple , yet new . Schiphorst often designs from inner movement sensations to defamiliarize collective movement contexts . Wilde defamiliarizes the movements of participants . assume different tilted positions . Two crevices in the oval shape allow the dancers’ forearms to move from one side of the shield plane to the other as they bend their wrists . Somewhat differently , Rings - ritual emerged from an exploration of a four - handed unfolding move - ment that aimed to form a ritual between a bride and groom as they put on each other’s wedding rings . The resulting ritual features , and is framed by , an intricately folded serviette that contains both rings . The serviette supports the fold - ing and holding of the bride and groom’s four hands as they reveal , take , and lovingly place each oth - er’s rings . The design choreography features a gentle movement from secluded attention while jointly holding the rings toward open attention when giving each other the rings . It is a gentle rhythm of four folding and holding hands , from groom to bride , then from bride to groom . Joint limb shield and Rings - ritual illustrate the cyclical nature of movement and artifact design , in which the artifact is developed to fit ( into ) the movement . Creating a vacuum for a product or an artifact through movement is similar to the somatic concept of slow - motion movement , creating a silence or “listening” space that can undo habitual movement and thereby create a space for emergence . For this vacuum to come into being , the attention must be shifted , the perspective turned , and in - habitual ways of moving and sensing move - ment provoked or supported . Defamiliarizing Defamiliarization is a common technique of ethnography , design , and art and is epitomized in the surrealist slogan “making the • hipDisk ( Wilde , 2007 - 2010 ) : the hipdiskettes explore choreographic composition . • hipDrawing ( Wilde , 2009 ) : A human hip - controlled Etch - a - sketch garment . • Light Arrays ( Wilde and Cassinelli , 2010 ) : inertia LED s , laserSpine , and the in - visible skirt . i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 25 LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum nor to suggest improvements in creation , but simply a way of wak - ing up to the very life we’re living” [ 7 ] . Bill Gaver reminds us that ludic design can support values such as curiosity , play , exploration , and reflection—important values that are essential to well - being . Play is an important element of our design processes . Schiphorst offers play - ful opportunities for networked engagement in both interior and collective connection ; Klooster creates designs that exploit body movement mechanisms to cre - ate opportunities for play through movement ; and Wilde’s systems democratize skilled , unskilled , and even clumsy use through play . The graceful beauty of clumsiness . We commonly assume that plea - Wilde’s hipDisk , for example , requires the wearer to move in exaggerated ways to force two body - worn disks to touch , and thereby generate simple tones . Twelve soft switches are spread around the disks so that different body positions trigger different tones . When wearing hipDisk , par - ticipants twist and distort their bodies into strange positions to create music , one ungainly tone at a time . It takes an inordinate amount of effort to play certain notes and rhythms . Multiple play - ers may combine their efforts to make more complex compositions . In contrast to Kooster’s Joint limb shield and Rings - ritual , designs that embody specific movement vari - ables , hipDisk embodies a question by providing specific opportunities for unusual movement as an expe - riential process . These works raise the notions of steering movement experi - ences and also of offering move - ment variations . As designers we try to offer clear affordances as well as undefined possibili - ties . By finding the right balance between these two polarities , a device may afford specific ges - tures , as well as offer the freedom to move in personal , idiosyn - cratic ways . This approach points toward opportunities for play . The purposeful purposelessness of play . John Cage speaks of “the pur - poseful purposelessness” of play as “an affirmation of life—not an attempt to bring order out of chaos • Joint limb shield ( Klooster , 2009 ) : A duet design - chore - ography where an artifact mediates movement possi - bilities ( and restric - tions ) between two hand - connected dancers . • Rings ritual ( Klooster , 2010 ) : A ritual during the wedding ceremony , where both hands of bride and groom lovingly and coop - eratively unfold and put on the rings . i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 26 LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum By privileging bodily experience over externalized notions of beauty , a design can prompt different qualities of aware - ness in relation to the body . Engaging in skillful activities is clearly plea - surable . Clumsiness research chal - lenges the hegemony of this idea . The systems are open , the inter - faces unrefined , and the mappings clumsy . This combination of design qualities seems to oppose tradi - tional notions of aesthetics and is more closely related to art and play than to purposefulness . It supports broad applications of movement - based design developed for , with , and through the body in motion . Conclusion The artifacts and experiences we design reflect inherent features of our embodiedness . They emerge through the knowing body and its innate ability to discover unex - pected possibilities . They engage the wearer , observer , and designer in an evolving process of creation and reflection , by encouraging movement to transform normative physical awareness into surprise and knowing . Our approach to design provides insights into the variety of ways in which people employ their bodily imagination . It provides opportunities to engage with experience in unexpected ways , in unusual or unexpected contexts . For both designer and participant , the entire process invites a balance between offering affordance and creating space for the unexpected . In writing this article , we discovered a common range of insights . Inviting the natural - ness of movement into design awareness is a fundamental concept within our design . We hope this conversation incites reflection and further explora - tion regarding design for , through , sure and fluency are the targets for movement experience , yet all new - ness requires the unfamiliar , and discovery is often characterized by mistaken , erroneous , clumsy , and inappropriate sensations . Our interest in the aesthetic nature of learning includes clumsiness as a partner of graceful discomfort . Schiphorst emphasizes mistakes within a poetics of experience ; Klooster practices design choreog - raphy in a multifunctional farm setting , offering contexts for low - profile experimentation and allow - ing the fruitful but unintended ; and Wilde works with clumsiness as a direct design material . hipDisk and related interfaces , such as hipDrawing —a human hip - controlled Etch - A - Sketch system— provoke unusual , often clumsy physical interaction . In direct opposition to the premise that we are most happy when we feel we perform an activity skillfully and gracefully , hipDisk and hipDrawing demonstrate that engaging physi - cally in freeform ways that are unconventional and ungainly may generate very high levels of happi - ness—even elation . The freedom from strict definitions or notions of skill and grace seems liberat - ing . The absence of solutions or required outcomes means that failure is irrelevant . These works bypass usual patterns of self - cen - sorship and open up unusual expe - riences that have poetic valence for both user and viewer , as well as rich opportunities for playful inter - action , regardless of the abilities or challenges a person might have . The research surrounding hipDisk and hipDrawing has resulted in surprisingly complex and detailed outcomes related to body - based learning among elite athletes , nov - ices , and people of a range of ( body - typical and altered ) abilities [ 8 ] . and with movement , highlight - ing its impact on the process of designing for the body . endnotes : 1 . sheets - Johnson , M . The Primacy of Movement . John Benjamins Publishing Co . , Amsterdam , 1998 . 2 . Klooster , s . , Overbeeke , C . J . Designing products as an integral part of choreography of interaction : the product’s form as an integral part of movement . Proc . of the 1st European Workshop on Design and Semantics of Form and Movement ( Newcastle , U K ) . 2 005 , 2 3 - 35 . 3 . Cohen , B . B . Sensing , Feeling , and Action : The Experiential Anatomy of Body - Mind Centering . Contact Editions , Northampton , MA , 1993 . 4 . schiphorst , t . self - evidence applying somatic connoisseurship to experience design . Proc . of the 29th Intl . Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada , May 7 - 12 ) . ACM , New york , 2011 . 5 . Wilde , D . , Cassinelli , A . , Zerroug , A . , Helmer , R . J . N . , and Ishikawa , M . Light arrays : A system for extended engagement . Proc . of the 8th Intl . Conf . on Disability , Virtual Reality and Assoc . Technologies ( Valparaíso , Chile , Aug . 31 - sept . 2 ) . ICDVRAt / University of Reading , Reading , UK , 2010 , 157 - 64 . 6 . Lefebvre , H . towards a leftist cultural politics : Remarks occasioned by the centenary of Marx’s death ( 1988 ) . In Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture , C . Nelson and L . grossberg , eds . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1991 , 75 - 88 . 7 . Kostelanetz , R . , ed . John Cage . the Penguin Press , Allen Lane , UK , 1971 . 8 . Helmer , R . , Mestrovic , M . , taylor , K . , Philpot , B . , Wilde , D . , and Farrow , D . Physiological tracking , wearable interactive systems and human per - formance . Proc . of the 20th Intl . Conf . on Artificial Reality and Telexistence ( Adelaide , Australia ) . the Virtual Reality society of Japan , tokyo , 2010 , 57 - 62 . About the Authors Danielle Wilde is based at Monash University , Melbourne ( fine art ) and CsIRO , Australia ( materials sciences , engineering ) . Until March 2011 she was the Australian prime minister’s Endeavour Award scholar at the University of tokyo Ishikawa Komuro Laboratory . thecla schiphorst is a media art - ist / designer and associate profes - sor in the school of Interactive Arts and technology at simon Fraser University . Her background in dance , choreography , somat - ics , and computing forms the basis for her research . sietske Klooster’s design - chore - ography approach was developed in cooperation with the Department of Industrial Design at the Eindhoven University of technology . Currently her work develops through the agricultural facilities on Zonnehoeve ( www . zonnehoeve . net ) . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978828 © 2 011 A CM 1 072 - 5220 / 11 / 07 $ 10 . 00 i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 27 LeT’S GeT PhySicaL Forum