Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / action / journalInformation ? journalCode = pqje20 Download by : [ University of Florida ] Date : 08 November 2015 , At : 14 : 10 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology ISSN : 1747 - 0218 ( Print ) 1747 - 0226 ( Online ) Journal homepage : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / pqje20 The influence of category representations on exemplar generation Moyun Wang & Liuqing Xie To cite this article : Moyun Wang & Liuqing Xie ( 2015 ) : The influence of category representations on exemplar generation , The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2015 . 1082141 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2015 . 1082141 Accepted author version posted online : 14 Aug 2015 . Published online : 27 Oct 2015 . Submit your article to this journal Article views : 12 View related articles View Crossmark data The in ﬂ uence of category representations on exemplar generation Moyun Wang and Liuqing Xie School of Psychology , Shaanxi Normal University , Xi ’ an , China ( Received 19 December 2014 ; accepted 21 July 2015 ) The present study examined the in ﬂ uence of category representations on exemplar generation , which has been neglected in previous category research . An experiment on college students manipulated the category representation of insects in three conditions ( prototypes , exemplars , and the hybrid of pro - totypes and exemplars ) . Participants were asked to generate as many exemplars as possible . The results demonstrate that category representations affect and constrain exemplar generation . The new ﬁ ndings are as follows . In the prototype and hybrid conditions with the prototype representation , people tend to generate more valid exemplars by using the prototype mutation mechanism , and exemplar generation conforms to the family resemblance structure . Exemplar generation in the hybrid condition is addition - ally constrained by known exemplars . In the exemplar condition , people tend to generate fewer valid exemplars by using miscellaneous strategies , and their exemplar generation may not conform to the family resemblance structure . Keywords : Exemplar generation ; Category representation ; Prototype mutation ; Sample - by - parts ; Exemplar mutation . Category cognition includes two main aspects : cat - egory induction and exemplar generation . Category induction is a cognitive process in which people form the general representation for a category on the basis of their observation of some concrete exemplars of the category . Conversely , exemplar generation is a cognitive process in which people generate some individual exemplars of a category on the basis of the category representation or knowledge . The category representation is the basis of exemplar generation of the category . Therefore , the content of category representations may affect exemplar generation . Generating novel category exemplars is an important component of problem solving and creativity . People can generate new category exemplars on the basis of their cat - egory knowledge or representation for the purposes such as problem solving and conceptual combi - nation . However , most category research neglects how people use category knowledge to generate new category exemplars . As far as I know , there is no systematic study on the problem . The present study aims to examine the problem . Previously , most studies on category cognition have focused on category induction such as category learning or categorization ( Kruschke , 2005 , 2008 ; Murphy , 2002 ; Wisniewski , 2002 ) . The studies on category learning show that there are the Correspondence should be addressed to Moyun Wang , School of Psychology , Shaanxi Normal University , Xi ’ an 710062 , China . E - mail : wangmoyun @ snnu . edu . cn We thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions regarding this research . This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under a General Grant [ grant number 30170901 ] . © 2015 The Experimental Psychology Society 1 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2015 . 1082141 D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 following main category representations : exem - plars , prototypes , rules , and theories ( Kruschke , 2005 , 2008 ; Murphy , 2002 ; Wisniewski , 2002 ) . Some models of category representations adopt some hybrids of these representations such as the hybrid of exemplars and prototypes , or the hybrid of exemplars and rules ( Anderson & Betz , 2001 ; Ashby & Ell , 2002 ; Erickson & Kruschke , 2002 ; Kruschke , 2005 , 2008 ; Wisniewski , 2002 ) . There are a few psychological studies on exem - plar generation . Some studies on creative thinking have focused on how people create new exemplars of a novel category ( Feldman , 1997 ; Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1996 ; Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ; Ward , 1994 ; Ward , Patterson , & Sifonis , 2004 ) . Jern and Kemp ( 2013 ) have devel - oped an account of general exemplar and category generation . They proposed that category knowledge is represented by probability distributions over exemplars and parts , and that new exemplars are generated by sampling from these distributions . Especially , they proposed a sample - by - parts account of exemplar generation . It assumes that the way to generate an exemplar from an exemplar distribution is to sample some separate parts from the part probability distribution of some exemplars in turn , then to combine these parts into an exem - plar . They used the genome of a strain of ﬂ u virus as exemplar stimuli . A ﬂ u virus genome consisted of some slot parts , which consisted of some letter combinations . Thus , the genome consisted of some abstract letter codes such as DB , XM , HF . Given some ﬂ u virus genomes within a category , participants were asked to generate three best exem - plars of the other ﬂ u virus genomes in the category . The results showed that participants were able to generate novel exemplars by combining parts that had not been previously paired and by sampling from probability distributions over parts . In their experiments , participants generated novel exemplars on the basis of some given exemplars and probability distributions over exemplar parts . Some given exem - plars of a category constituted a known represen - tation of the category . However , they did not examine the role of cat - egory representations such as prototypes in exem - plar generation . Rosch argued that categories are organized around family resemblances with proto - types ( Mervis & Rosch , 1981 ; Rosch , 1975 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) . The prototype of a cat - egory consists of the most common ( typical ) fea - tures of the members of the category . The prototype is the general representation for the cat - egory . In a given category prototype , people may generate exemplars by holding constant the most parts or features of the prototype and mutating a few typical parts or features of the prototype into atypical parts or features in turn . Thus , they can generate various exemplars that are variants of the prototype . We call this way the prototype mutation mechanism . In this mechanism , people take a pro - totype as a reference master , then mutate it into various exemplars by varying a few parts or features of the prototype in turn . The whole prototype is a starting point of exemplar generation . Thus , people will generate more exemplars that are more similar to the prototype than exemplars that are less similar to the prototype . Exemplar generation will conform to the family resemblance structure . This mechanism is different from the sample - by - parts account of exemplar generation given some exemplars of a category . The latter is that people sample some separate parts from the part probability distribution of some exemplars in turn , then combine these parts into an exemplar . However , as far as I know , there is no research exploring the possibility that people may use the prototype mutation mechanism in exemplar gener - ation . Besides the sample - by - parts mechanism and the prototype mutation mechanism , there may be other mechanisms of exemplar generation such as the exemplar mutation mechanism . The exemplar mutation mechanism is that stored exemplars can be copied and varied into novel exemplars in some way . Jern and Kemp ( 2013 ) named this approach as the copy - and - tweak account , and the same basic approach has been proposed by several previous authors ( Barsalou , 1999 ; Ward , 1995 ; Ward et al . , 2004 ; Ward , Patterson , Sifonis , Dodds , & Saunders , 2002 ) . Moreover , Jern and Kemp ’ s ( 2013 ) categories including exemplars consisted of abstract genome codes are not natural perceptual categories , such as insects . Ward ( 1994 ) and Ward et al . ( 2004 ) 2 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 WANG AND XIE D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 used imaginary categories as stimuli . Participants ’ exemplar generation in their experiments was crea - tive thinking rather than usual exemplar generation for natural categories . The present study aims to examine the in ﬂ uence of category representations on exemplar generation . Because we use natural categories ( perceptual insects ) with the family resemblance as stimuli , and , generally , there are three main types of general representations of natural categories ( proto - types , exemplars , and the hybrid of prototypes and exemplars ) , the present study examines the in ﬂ u - ence of category representations on exemplar gen - eration . An experiment on college students manipulated given category representation of insects into three conditions ( prototypes , exem - plars , and the hybrid of prototypes and exemplars ) . Participants were asked to generate possible exem - plars in each given category representation as much as possible . The prototype and hybrid conditions had the common prototypes . Thus , in the two conditions , if people use the prototype mutation mechanism , then the two conditions will show similar perform - ance on exemplar generation , and people will gen - erate more exemplars with high similarity to the prototypes than with low similarity to the proto - types . The exemplar and hybrid conditions had the common probability distributions over parts from the common exemplars . Thus , in the two con - ditions , if people use the sample - by - parts mechan - ism , then the two conditions will show similar performance on exemplar generation , and people will also generate more valid exemplars than invalid exemplars on the basis of the common prob - ability distribution over given exemplars and parts . The present experiment aims to test the above different predictions . EXPERIMENTAL STUDY Method Participants A total of 112 undergraduates from Shaanxi Normal University in China voluntarily participated in the experiment . A total of 36 participants were assigned to the condition of prototype representations ; 36 participants were assigned to the condition of exem - plar representations ; 40 participants were assigned to the condition of hybrid representations . Design and materials The experiment used a 3 × 2 quasi - experimental design with frequency of exemplars as the depen - dent variable . The between - subjects factor was insect category representation , which varied into three conditions : prototypes , exemplars , and the hybrid of prototypes and exemplars . The prototype and hybrid conditions had the common prototypes . The exemplar and hybrid conditions had the common given exemplars . The frequency of exem - plars generated was broken down according to a second factor of valid versus invalid . Valid exem - plars had high similarity ( . 3 / 6 ) to the prototypes so that they certainly belonged to a target category . Invalid exemplars had low similarity ( ≤ 3 / 6 ) to the prototypes so that they were not certainly classi ﬁ ed into a target category or certainly belonged to an opposite target category . Like classi ﬁ cation tasks , for exemplar gener - ation , there were two opposite categories that had opposite feature values in term of category proto - types and exemplars . In the exemplar represen - tation , the most frequent ( 2 / 3 ) parts of the given three exemplars of each category were the typical parts of the category . They constituted the category prototype , which is the same as the corresponding category prototype in the other two conditions of category representation . Each of the given three exemplars contained four out of the six features of a corresponding category prototype and two out of the six features of a opposite category prototype . Therefore , the three conditions had the same category prototypes , and had the common typical parts and common atypical parts . Participants were randomly assigned to the three conditions . In each condition , participants were asked to gener - ate possible exemplars as much as possible on the basis of the given category representations . After they completed the task of exemplar generation , they were asked to write down their generation strategies on a paper . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 3 CATEGORY REPRESENTATIONS D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 Materials were perceptual insects including two opposite categories : Category A and Category B . The two categories had opposite feature values on six dimensions . There were two opposite features on each dimension : tentacles ( dot / fork ) , heads ( oval / circular ) , torsos ( dot - pattern / bar - pattern ) , wings ( fan - shaped / butter ﬂ y - shaped ) , legs ( spindly / thick ) , and tails ( fork / not - forked ) . The six dimensions combined into 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 = 64 possible exemplars . The prototype of Category A consisted of the former features in the brackets , whereas the prototype of Category B con - sisted of the latter features in the brackets . Each valid exemplar of a category contained most ( four , or ﬁ ve , or six ) features of the corresponding category prototype . Exemplars containing three features of a category prototype were uncertain in term of categ - orization . Thus , they were invalid exemplars . The parts of the insects are shown in Figure 1 . The wings consisted of the left and right parts . The legs also consisted of the left and right parts . The top parts in the ﬁ gure are the parts of the prototype of Category A . The bottom parts in the ﬁ gure are the parts of the prototype of Category B . These different parts were printed on different cards , respectively . In each condition of category representation , participants were given enough parts ( each part had 32 copies ) to piece together possible exemplars in accord with the condition instruction . In each condition , the instruction including insect pictures as category representations was presented on a paper . The Chinese instructions of the three conditions are translated into the following English version . Instruction The instruction in the condition of the prototype representation . You are welcome to participate in this experiment . There are some insects that live on a sea island . Among these insects , some belong to Category A , some belong to Category B , and some belong to neither Category A nor Category B . The common features of most members of each category constitute the prototype of the category . The prototypes of the two cat - egories are presented in the ﬁ gure below . The left is the proto - type of Category A . The right is the prototype of Category B . Now , please imagine possible individual shapes of each cat - egory as much as possible on the basis of the prototypes . The parts of each possible individual are from the parts of the two prototypes . Please use the given parts to piece together possible individual shapes of each category as much as possible . Put the individuals of Category A on the left of the tables , and put indi - viduals of Category B on the right of the tables . Note that the left and right of each insect are symmetric , and there should be no duplicate exemplar . Figure 2 was presented below the instruction . The instruction in the condition of the exemplar representation . You are welcome to participate in this experiment . There are some insects that live on a sea island . Among these insects , some belong to Category A , some belong to Category B , and some belong to neither Category A nor Category B . In the ﬁ gure below , on the left are the three exemplars of Category A , and on the right are the three exemplars of Category B . Now , please imagine possible individual shapes of each Figure 1 . The parts of Category A and Category B . 4 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 WANG AND XIE D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 category as much as possible on the basis of the given exemplars . The parts of each possible individual are from the parts of the exemplars . Please use the given parts to piece together possible individual shapes of each category as much as possible . Put the individuals of Category A on the left of the tables , and put indi - viduals of Category B on the right of the tables . Note that the left and right of each insect are symmetric , and there should be no duplicate exemplar . Figure 3 was presented below the instruction . The instruction in the condition of the prototype - plus - exemplar representation . You are welcome to participate in this experiment . There are some insects that live on a sea island . Among these insects , some belong to Category A , some belong to Category B , and some belong to neither Category A nor Category B . In the ﬁ gure below , the top left is the prototype of Category A , and the top right is the prototype of Category B . The common features of most members of each category constitute the prototype of the category . In the bottom left are the three exemplars of Category A , and in the bottom right are the three exemplars of Category B . Now , please imagine possible individual shapes of each category as much as possible on the basis of the given prototypes and exemplars . The parts of each possible individual are from the parts of the prototypes and exemplars . Please use the given parts to piece together possible individual shapes of each category as much as possible . Put the individuals of Category A on the left of the tables , and put indi - viduals of Category B on the right of the tables . Note that the left and right of each insect are symmetric , and there should be no duplicate exemplar . Figure 4 was presented below the instruction . Procedure Participants voluntarily participated in the exper - iment for a reward . The experiment was conducted in a large classroom with many tables . Participants were randomly arranged to the three conditions . In each condition , each participant received the instruction and the 32 copies of all the parts of both Category A and Category B . Participants completed the task on the tables without time limit . The average completion time was about 40 min . After they completed the task , they were asked to write out their strategies of exemplar gen - eration on a paper . Figure 2 . The prototypes in the prototype condition . Figure 3 . The given exemplars in the exemplar condition . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 5 CATEGORY REPRESENTATIONS D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 Results The results of exemplar generation The numbers of exemplars generated were col - lapsed over Category A and Category B because exemplar generation showed no obvious difference between Category A and Category B . The results of exemplar generation are shown in Table 1 . For both conditions of the prototype and hybrid rep - resentations , the average number of valid exem - plars generated was signi ﬁ cantly larger than that of invalid exemplars generated [ t ( 35 ) = 5 . 19 ; t ( 35 ) = 6 . 45 , respectively , p , . 001 ] . For the exemplar condition , there was no signi ﬁ cant number difference between valid and invalid exemplars . For the data in Table 1 , we conducted a 3 ( cat - egory representation : prototype , exemplar , hybrid ) × 2 ( exemplar validity : valid , invalid ) mixed analy - sis of variance ( ANOVA ) . This ANOVA revealed a signi ﬁ cant main effect of category representation , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 15 . 84 , MSE = 38 . 72 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 23 , and a signi ﬁ cant main effect of exemplar validity that the number of valid exemplars was larger than that of invalid exemplars , F ( 1 , 109 ) = 66 . 02 , MSE = 79 . 83 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 38 . The Category Representation × Exemplar Validity interaction was signi ﬁ cant , F ( 1 , 109 ) = 8 . 62 , MSE = 79 . 83 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 14 . To further test the simple effects , we conducted one - way ANOVA of category representation , for valid and invalid exemplars in Table 1 , respectively . For the number of valid exemplars , the main effect of category representation was signi ﬁ cant , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 17 . 99 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 25 . The post hoc test showed that the number of valid exemplars was larger in the prototype and hybrid conditions than in the exemplar condition . The number of valid exemplars did not differ between the proto - type and hybrid conditions . For the number of invalid exemplars , the main effect of category rep - resentation was not signi ﬁ cant . We further conducted one - way ANOVA of cat - egory representation , for the indexes of similarity ( 6 / 6 , 5 / 6 , 4 / 6 ) of valid exemplars generated to the prototypes in Table 1 , respectively . For the number of exemplars with 6 / 6 similarity to the pro - totypes , the main effect of category representation was signi ﬁ cant , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 7 . 44 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 12 . The post hoc test showed that the number of exemplars was larger in the prototype and hybrid conditions than in the exemplar condition . The number of exemplars did not differ between the prototype and hybrid conditions . For the number of exemplars with 4 / 6 similarity to the pro - totypes , the main effect of category representation was signi ﬁ cant , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 11 . 03 , p , . 001 , η 2 Figure 4 . The prototypes and exemplars in the hybrid condition . 6 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 WANG AND XIE D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 = . 17 . The post hoc test showed that the number of exemplars was larger in the prototype and hybrid conditions than in the exemplar condition . The number of exemplars did not differ between the prototype and hybrid conditions . For the number of exemplars with 5 / 6 similarity to the prototypes , the main effect of category representation was sig - ni ﬁ cant , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 23 . 81 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 30 . The post hoc test showed that the number of exem - plars was larger in the prototype condition than in the exemplar and hybrid conditions . The number of exemplars did not differ between the exemplar and hybrid conditions . In summary , for exemplars with 6 / 6 and 4 / 6 similarity to the prototypes , participants generated more exemplars in the prototype and hybrid con - ditions than in the exemplar condition . For exem - plars with 5 / 6 similarity to the prototypes , participants generated more exemplars in the pro - totype condition than in the exemplar and hybrid conditions . Moreover , we conducted one - way ANOVA of category representation , for the average number of overall valid exemplars with high similarity ( 6 / 6 and 5 / 6 ) to the prototypes . It revealed a signi ﬁ cant main effect of category representation , F ( 2 , 109 ) = 26 . 51 , p , . 001 , η 2 = . 33 . The post hoc test showed that the average number of exemplars was larger in the prototype condition ( 10 . 25 ) than in the exem - plar and hybrid conditions ( 4 . 92 and 6 . 47 ) . The average number of exemplars did not differ between the exemplar and hybrid conditions . Strategies of exemplar generation In the two conditions with the prototype represen - tation , most participants ( 26 out of 36 persons in the prototype condition , 25 out of 40 persons in the hybrid condition ) reported that they used the method of permutation and combination to generate exemplars . They ﬁ rst pieced together the category prototypes , then varied one part of a category proto - type into the opposite part in turn , and then varied two parts of the category prototype into the two opposite parts in turn . Some even varied three or four parts of the category prototype into the opposite parts in turn . This method is essentially the proto - type mutation mechanism . The other participants ’ strategies were miscellaneous . In the exemplar condition , participants ’ exem - plar generation showed miscellaneous strategies such as the sample - by - parts and exemplar mutation mechanisms , and so on . The majority of partici - pants ( 17 out of 36 ) reported that they ﬁ rst held constant two parts of the three exemplars of a cat - egory , then varied the other parts in turn . Two con - stant parts came from an exemplar or different exemplars and included typical parts or atypical parts of a category . For instance , some participants held the head and torsos constant , and some par - ticipants held the wing and torsos constant . When two constant parts came from different exemplars , the generation mechanism was essen - tially the sample - by - parts mechanism . When two constant parts came from an exemplar , participants used the same strategy as the one that the other eight participants de ﬁ nitely reported . This was the exemplar mutation strategy , in which they mutated an exemplar of a category into various new exemplars by varying some parts of the exem - plar in turn . Only four participants reported that they ﬁ rst formed the category prototypes , then varied the prototypes into new exemplars . Table 1 . The results of participants ’ exemplar generation in the three conditions of category representations Condition Valid exemplars Sum Invalid exemplars Sum 6 / 6 5 / 6 4 / 6 3 / 6 , 3 / 6 Prototypes 1 . 53 ( 0 . 74 ) 8 . 72 ( 2 . 54 ) 12 . 33 ( 7 . 22 ) 22 . 58 ( 8 . 44 ) 6 . 58 ( 5 . 08 ) 4 . 03 ( 4 . 37 ) 10 . 61 ( 8 . 68 ) Exemplars 0 . 81 ( 0 . 79 ) 4 . 11 ( 2 . 44 ) 7 . 31 ( 5 . 14 ) 12 . 22 ( 6 . 21 ) 6 . 22 ( 4 . 17 ) 3 . 17 ( 3 . 46 ) 9 . 39 ( 6 . 26 ) Prototypes + exemplars 1 . 25 ( 0 . 87 ) 5 . 23 ( 3 . 68 ) 15 . 03 ( 8 . 69 ) 21 . 50 ( 9 . 23 ) 4 . 45 ( 4 . 11 ) 2 . 68 ( 3 . 46 ) 7 . 13 ( 6 . 71 ) Note : Means with standard deviations in parentheses . 6 / 6 , 5 / 6 , 4 / 6 , 3 / 6 , and , 3 / 6 denote the index of similarity of exemplars generated to the corresponding prototypes , respectively . THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 7 CATEGORY REPRESENTATIONS D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 Discussion Participants generated more valid exemplars in the prototype and hybrid conditions than in the exem - plar condition . The number of valid exemplars gen - erated did not differ between the prototype and hybrid conditions . The results conformed to the prediction by the prototype mutation mechanism rather than by the sample - by - parts mechanism in the introduction . This suggested that participants might use the prototype mutation mechanism in the two conditions with the prototype represen - tation , and participants might not use the sample - by - parts mechanism in the two conditions with the exemplar representation . Moreover , in the two conditions with the proto - type representation , participants ’ strategy reports provided the evidence of their using the prototype mutation mechanism . Most participants ( 26 out of 36 persons in the prototype condition , 25 out of 40 persons in the hybrid condition ) reported the prototype mutation mechanism . For the proto - type and hybrid conditions , participants generated more valid exemplars than invalid exemplars . This suggested that the major exemplars generated by participants conformed to the family resemblance structure of a category . This family resemblance structure with a category prototype was a conse - quence of using the prototype mutation mechan - ism . In the hybrid condition , the given three exemplars with 4 / 6 similarity to the prototypes are the only representative exemplars of the cat - egories . According to the probability distribution over the given exemplars predicted by the sample - by - parts mechanism , participant should generate more exemplars with 4 / 6 similarity to the proto - types than with other similarity to the prototypes . However , they showed no obvious number differ - ence between exemplars with 4 / 6 similarity to the prototypes ( M = 15 . 03 ) and with other similarity to the prototypes ( M = 13 . 91 ) . The probability dis - tribution over the actual exemplars generated by participants did not conform to the above predic - tion . This implied that participants did not use the sample - by - parts mechanism to generate exem - plars . Therefore , in the hybrid condition , partici - pants preferred using the prototype mutation mechanism rather than using the sample - by - parts mechanism . Although in the prototype and hybrid conditions , participants used the prototype mutation mechan - ism , the average number ( 22 . 58 and 21 . 5 ) of actual valid exemplars generated by them only was about one half of the number ( 44 ) of all the possible valid exemplars . This suggested that participants were unable to exhaust all the possible valid exem - plars , and their exemplar generation was not very systematic so that many exemplars were omitted . In the exemplar condition , participants ’ exemplar generation showed miscellaneous strategies such as the sample - by - parts and exemplar mutation mech - anisms , and so on . Only four participants reported the prototype mutation mechanism . There were greater individual differences . The standard devi - ation of valid exemplars was 6 . 21 . The number of valid exemplars generated by each participant ranged from 5 to 42 . As a result of the miscellaneous strategies , they generated the number of invalid exemplars that was approximately equal to the number of valid exemplars . Moreover , they gener - ated fewer valid exemplars ( M = 12 . 22 ) and more invalid exemplars ( M = 9 . 39 ) than participants did ( M = 21 . 50 , M = 7 . 13 , respectively ) in the hybrid condition with the prototype representation . The above results implied that participants ’ exemplar generation did not conform to the family resem - blance structure of a category , and they were unable to form the category prototypes . Therefore , the lack of the prototype representation in the exem - plar condition resulted in participants lacking clear criteria of categorization that make an insect a member of Category A or B . This result is consistent with the previous ﬁ nding that the family resemblance structure is dif ﬁ cult for people to detect or to use as a categorization rule in exemplar sorting tasks ( Spalding & Murphy , 1996 ) . They found that people can construct more family resemblance categories with thematic materials than with nonthematic materials in exem - plar sorting tasks . But our results show that even for the same thematic materials such as insects , it is dif - ﬁ cult for people to generate category exemplars with the family resemblance structure . This difference 8 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 WANG AND XIE D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 may be because exemplar generation tasks are more dif ﬁ cult than exemplar sorting tasks . This result also did not conform to the prob - ability distribution over the given exemplars and parts predicted by the sample - by - parts mechanism . Both the family resemblance structure and the sample - by - parts mechanism predicted that there would be more valid exemplars than invalid exem - plars . Thus , in the exemplar condition , the overall pattern of exemplar generation did not support the prediction by the sample - by - parts mechanism , although there were some participants using the sample - by - parts mechanism . This result pattern is different from the result pattern of Jern and Kemp ’ s ( 2013 ) experiments , which supported the prediction by the sample - by - parts mechanism . There may be two reasons to explain the difference . The ﬁ rst reason is that their instruction asked par - ticipants to generate the three best exemplars . This requirement led to their participants generating the representative exemplars on the basis of the prob - ability distribution of the known exemplars and parts . The second reason is that their category stimuli had a larger known exemplar sample ( 8 known exemplars from a population with 16 possible exemplars ) and had only two feature dimensions , whereas our category stimuli had a small known exemplar sample ( 6 known exemplars from a popu - lation with 64 possible exemplars ) and had six feature dimensions . The probability distribution over their known exemplars and parts is simpler than that in our category stimuli . It was easy for their participants to form a more suf ﬁ cient under - standing of the simple probability distribution over the known exemplars and parts . Therefore , their experiments produced the result pattern that was consistent with the probability distribution predicted by the sample - by - parts mechanism . However , the perceptual insects as category stimuli in the present experiment have higher ecological validity than their abstract genome materials do . Compared with the prototype condition , the hybrid condition produced fewer valid exemplars with 6 / 6 and 5 / 6 similarity to the prototypes , and fewer invalid exemplars , t ( 74 ) = 1 . 97 , p = . 053 . This is because the exemplar representation contained in the hybrid condition constrained exemplar generation . In the hybrid condition , the given exem - plars had the 4 / 6 similarity to the given prototypes . This similarity was not high , nor was it low . On the basis of this similarity constraint , participants tended to generate fewer exemplars with high simi - larity ( 6 / 6 and 5 / 6 ) to the prototypes , and fewer invalid exemplars with low similarity ( ≤ 3 / 6 ) to the prototypes . They generated more exemplars ( M = 15 . 03 ) with the 4 / 6 similarity to the prototypes than in the prototype condition ( M = 12 . 33 ) . These exemplars had the same similarity to the pro - totypes as the given exemplars had . Some partici - pants reported that they mutated the prototypes into novel exemplars by only varying the two parts of the prototypes in turn . Therefore , although the major participants in the hybrid condition used the prototype mutation mechanism , their exemplar gen - eration was additionally constrained by the degree of the similarity of given exemplars to the prototypes . But the prototype condition lacked this constraint . Thus , participants in the prototype condition tended to generate more exemplars with high simi - larity to the prototypes , and more invalid new exemplars . This exemplar constraint is consistent with the previous ﬁ nding that conformity of exemplars gen - erated by participants to given examples increases with the numbers of given examples ( Marsh et al . , 1996 ) . However , the present experiment has a new ﬁ nding that in the hybrid condition , par - ticipants generated fewer invalid novel exemplars that were more dissimilar to the prototypes . This means that known exemplars inhibit generation of more novel exemplars — namely , creativity of exem - plar generation . This constraint of known exem - plars is consistent with the representativeness assumption of exemplar generation that people tend to retrieve representative instances of a cat - egory and to project the properties of these instances onto novel ideas ( Ward et al . , 2002 ) . In summary , the present experiment makes the following new ﬁ ndings . In the prototype and hybrid conditions with the prototype represen - tation , people tend to generate more valid exem - plars by using the prototype mutation mechanism , and their exemplar generation conforms to the family resemblance structure . Compared with THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 9 CATEGORY REPRESENTATIONS D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015 the prototype condition , exemplar generation in the hybrid condition is additionally constrained by known exemplars . In the exemplar condition , people tend to generate fewer valid exemplars by using miscellaneous strategies such as the sample - by - parts and exemplar mutation mechanisms , and so on . Because it is dif ﬁ cult for people to form the prototype representation of known exemplars , their exemplar generation may not conform to the family resemblance structure . The present study demonstrates that category representations affect people ’ s exemplar generation . On the basis of known category representations , people generated novel exemplars by using speci ﬁ c mechanisms . Human category knowledge con - strains exemplar generation . There are many speci ﬁ c issues about this topic that are worthy of further exploration . For example , one limitation of the present study is that the example condition only provided three given exemplars of each category such that participants might not form the category prototype on the basis of fewer exem - plars . Another experiment in which an exemplar condition with a greater number of exemplars is examined is necessary in order to allow participants to determine the nature of the category structure . REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . , & Betz , J . ( 2001 ) . A hybrid model of categorization . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 8 , 629 – 647 . Ashby , F . G . , & Ell , S . W . ( 2002 ) . Single versus multiple systems of category learning : Reply to Nosofsky and Kruschke ( 2002 ) . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 9 , 175 – 180 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 – 660 . Erickson , M . A . , & Kruschke , J . K . ( 2002 ) . Rule - basisd extrapolation in perceptual categorization . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 9 , 160 – 168 . Feldman , J . ( 1997 ) . The structure of perceptual cat - egories . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 41 , 145 – 170 . Jern , A . , & Kemp , C . ( 2013 ) . A probabilistic account of exemplar and category generation . Cognitive Psychology , 66 , 85 – 125 . Kruschke , J . K . ( 2005 ) . Category learning . In K . Lamberts & R . L . Goldstone ( Eds . ) , The handbook of cognition ( Ch . 7 , pp . 183 – 201 ) . London : Sage . Kruschke , J . K . ( 2008 ) . Models of categorization . In R . Sun ( Ed . ) , The Cambridge handbook of computational psychology ( pp . 267 – 301 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1996 ) . How examples may ( and may not ) constrain creativity . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 669 – 680 . Mervis , C . B . , & Rosch , E . ( 1981 ) . Categorization of natural objects . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 89 – 115 . Murphy , G . L . ( 2002 ) . The big book of concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rosch , E . ( 1975 ) . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 192 – 233 . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . B . ( 1975 ) . Family resemblance : Studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 573 – 605 . Smith , S . S . , Ward , T . B . , & Schumacher , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Constraining effects of examples in a creative gener - ation task . Memory & Cognition , 21 , 837 – 845 . Spalding , T . L . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1996 ) . Effects of background knowledge on category construction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 525 – 538 . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 , 1 – 40 . Ward , T . B . ( 1995 ) . What ’ s old about new ideas ? In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 157 – 178 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of speci ﬁ city and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 , 1 – 9 . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , Sifonis , C . M . , Dodds , R . A . , & Saunders , K . N . ( 2002 ) . The role of graded cat - egory structure in imaginative thought . Memory & Cognition , 30 , 199 – 216 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 2002 ) . Concepts and categorization . In D . L . Medin ( Ed . ) , Steven ’ s handbook of experimen - tal psychology ( pp . 467 – 532 ) . New York : Wiley . 10 THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 2015 WANG AND XIE D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f F l o r i d a ] a t 14 : 10 08 N ov e m b e r 2015