Chemistry novice teachers’ professional knowledge , know - how and the support needs in professional development Heidi Handolin - Kiilo This article discusses the knowledge , know - how and the support needs of the chemistry teachers ' during their first years of teaching . Finnish chemistry teacher education gives its students an academic education , qualification to teach and at the same time equipment for lifelong learning . The construction of teachers ' knowledge and know - how is especially based on the Grossman theory model . This article is based on a licentiate thesis , which deals with chemistry teacher graduates of first years of expertise in the schools and the challenges of the work and the needs for support . Research information on chemistry subject teachers’ knowledge and wellbeing at their profession and at the school community is needed when developing relevant chemistry subject teacher education . Knowledge and research information of the possible support needs in professional development is also needed when developing forms of aid and supporting novice teachers ( beginning teachers ) to stay in the profession of teaching , continuous life - long learning , professional knowledge and know - how . Newly qualified teachers , the so - called novice teachers ( beginning teachers ) , transition from education to working life ( induction ) and it is seen as a major challenge from the perspective of the Finnish educational system and also worldwide ( e . g . Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 ; . Heikkinen , Markkanen , Pennanen & Tynjälä , 2014 ; Ulvik & Hellevi , 2009 ) . Support needs for science teachers professional development has been a concern for a long time ( e . g . Lin & Chiu , 2000 ) . These challenges have been studied widely , but novice science and chemistry teachers and their skills form challenges , which have been studied yet quite a bit ( e . g . , Abell 2008 ; . Davis , Petish , & Smithey , 2006 ; Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 , the Mediterranean island , 2009 ) . Chemical subject teacher knowledge and know - how refers to everything that is associated with the teacher ' s knowledge , awareness , know - how , competence and skills , as well as the entire teacher ' s job description . Shulman’s ( 1987 ) studies suggest that the teacher ' s expertise should include at least the following seven areas : content knowledge , general pedagogical knowledge ( GPK ) , curriculum knowledge , pedagogical content knowledge ( PCK ) , knowledge of learners and their characteristics , knowledge of educational contexts and knowledge of educational ends , purposes and values . The Grossman ( 1990 ) theory model of teacher knowledge is built from pedagogical content knowledge , subject matter knowledge , knowledge of context and general pedagogical knowledge . The beginning of a novice teacher ' s career is full of stressful and time - consuming challenges and learning new things , of which he or she must survive to continue the teacher ' s career ( e . g . Kyriacou & Kunc , 2007 ; . Taimisto , 2013 ) . Challenges for the chemistry novice teachers are e . g . issues concerning practical working ( experiments ) , safety , discipline , assessment , planning , lack of peer support , workload , stress , large group sizes in the class , subject content and application of the subject content , as well as other tasks by the teacher in the school community ( Handolin et al . 2010 ) . In particular , the workload is felt as a great challenge for novice teachers ( Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 ) . On the other hand , teachers like their own job very much ( Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 ) . In order to survive with honor from the first years in working life the novice teachers think that they need support to overcome the challenges and to develop their teaching skills ( e . g . Davis et al , 2006 ) . To continue the development of their own skills , capabilities already arise in the chemistry teacher education . For example , in the chemistry subject teacher education , one of the initial and center objectives of the University of Helsinki is to educate chemistry teachers who are lifelong learners , researchers and are able to follow the teaching of chemistry and emerging applications in the future ( Aksela , 2010 ) . To secure a quality education for the future continuum in teacher training programs is needed , where the teachers of basic training , new teachers’ induction programs and continuing education ( professional development programs ) form an unbroken whole path of lifelong learning ( e . g . Handolin & Aksela , 2011 ; Innola & Mikkola , 2014 ) . The induction phase refers to a teaching career stage at which the teacher is a graduate of the teacher and the teacher has moved to teach in a school ( e . g . Bianchini & Brenner , 2009 ; . The European Commission , 2010 ; Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 ) . Support aids aimed at novice teachers could be , for example , internal support help provided from the school or organized by other parties , such as further training ( continuing education , professional development programs ) or so called induction programs ( Handolin - Kiilo , 2015 ) . Other support mechanisms could be e . g . mentoring , reflection and peer support , as well as the applicable education teaching materials ( e . g . Abbot , Moran & Clarke , 2010 ; . Nielsen , 2010 ) . Also , novice teachers , community and school leaders could support novice teachers : for example , by providing a planned induction which may have an important role for the novice teacher when they enter a new school ( e . g . Gavish & Friedman , 2010 . ) . When developing the teacher ' s professional skills , know - how and knowledge by delineated chemistry teacher education and continuing education ( professional development ) programs , at the same time influencing the entire teaching and , therefore , also it may contribute to pupils ' learning ( Abell , 2008 ; European Commission , 2010 ) . For Finnish science and mathematics teachers professional development programs ( continuing education ) have been organized systematically since 1996 . Since 2002 , the LUMA Centre has organized a diverse teacher training , which is conducted every year in the virtual in Finland ( Aksela , 2008 ) . There is not only one solution to support the chemistry novice teachers . There are different kinds of teachers and each of them wants to survive in their own way and style ( Ulvik et al , 2006 ; Davis et al , 2006 ) . Novice teachers should not be left alone with the challenges that they are facing every day . Today’s novice teachers are the ones who will teach the following decades , if they get a chance to develop and improve themselves . They manage to teach and stay at work if they feel that they are necessary and an important part of society ( Handolin - Kiilo & Aksela , 2015 ) . It seems that the meaning of systematic teacher professional development in the field of lifelong learning partway has increased when at the same time a high rate of digitalizing and the winds of change in the school systems are blowing . These also bring with them , from the perspective of the research , a number of interesting new questions . Heidi Handolin - Kiilo Ph . D . student , Ph . Lic . ( chemistry and mathematics lecturer ) The Unit of Chemistry Teacher Education , Department of Chemistry , University of Helsinki heidi . handolin @ helsinki . fi Specialization : Interested in the development of teachers ' professional skills and support , and using ICT in teaching chemistry . The topic of the doctoral dissertation concerns the use of ICT in Chemistry teaching . References Abbot , L . , Moran , A . & Clarke , L . ( 2010 ) Northern Ireland beginning teachers’ experiences of induction : the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’ . European journal of teacher education , 32 ( 2 ) , 95 - 110 . Abell , S . K . ( 2008 ) . Research on science teacher knowledge . In Abell , S . K . & Lederman , N . G . ( Ed . ) . Handbook of research on science education ( s . 1105 - 1149 ) . New York , Routledge . Aksela , M . ( 2008 ) . The Finnish LUMA centre : Supporting teachers and students in science , mathematics and technology for life - long learning . Lifelong Learning in Europe . 13 ( 1 ) , 70 - 72 . Aksela , M . ( 2010 ) . Evidence - based teacher education : becoming a lifelong research - oriented chemistry teacher ? Chemistry Education Research and Practice , 11 , 84 - 91 . Bianchini , J . A . & Brenner , M . E . ( 2009 ) . The role of induction in learning to teach toward equity : A study of beginning science and mathematics teachers . Science education , 93 , 164 - 195 . Davis , E . A . , Petish , D . & Smithey , J . ( 2006 ) . Challenges new science teacher face . Review of Educational Research , 76 ( 4 ) , 607 - 651 . Euroopan komissio ( 2010 ) . Developing coherent and system - wide induction programmes for beginning teachers : a handbook for policymakers . European Commission Staff Working Document SEC ( 2010 ) 538 final . Retrieved from : http : / / ec . europa . eu / education / policy / school / doc / handbook0410 _ en . pdf Gavish , B . & Friedman , I . A . ( 2010 ) . Novice teachers’ experience of teaching : a dynamic aspect of burnout . Social Psychology of Education , 13 , 141 – 167 Grossman , P . L . ( 1990 ) . The making of a teacher : teacher knowledge and teacher education . New York , Teachers College Press . Handolin - Kiilo , H . ( 2015 ) . Kemian noviisiopettajien osaaminen ja sen tukeminen työelämän ensimmäisinä vuosina ( Chemistry novice teachers’ professional knowledge , know - how and the support need in professional development during their first years in working life ) . Licenciate thesis . Handolin , H . & Aksela , M . ( 2011 ) . Kemian noviisiopettajien käsityksiä opettajan työstä ensimmäisinä työvuosina ( Chemistry novice teachers’ perceptions of school work during first years of teaching ) . In M . Aksela , J . Pernaa , & M . Happonen ( Ed . ) . Kansainvälinen kemian vuosi : Kemia osaksi hyvää elämää . ( s . 72 - 83 ) . Helsinki , Unigrafia Oy . Heikkinen , H . , Markkanen , I . , Pennanen , M . & Tynjälä , P . ( 2014 ) . In ( Ed . ) . Opettajankoulutuksen tilannekatsaus : Muistiot 2014 : 4 ( Teacher training reports : Memos 2014 : 4 ) . ( s . 45 - 54 ) . Helsinki , Opetushallitus . Innola , M . & Mikkola , A . ( 2014 ) . In Kumpulainen , T . ( Ed . ) , Opettajat Suomessa 2013 ( Teachers in Finland 2013 ) . Koulutuksen seurantaraportti 2014 : 8 . ( s . 13 - 21 ) . Retrieved from : http : / / www . oph . fi / download / 156282 _ opettajat _ suomessa _ 2013 . pdf Kyriacou , C . & Kunc , R . ( 2007 ) . Beginning teachers’ expectations of teaching . Teaching and Teacher Education , 23 , 1246 - 1257 . Lin , H - S . & Chiu , H - L . ( 2000 ) . Using computers to support a beginning teacher’s professional development . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 9 ( 4 ) , 367 - 373 . Nielsen , B . L . ( 2010 ) . Need for Danish science teachers’ continual professional development after pre - service training ( s . 739 - 750 ) . In XIV IOSTE Symposium , Bled , Slovenia , Socio cultural and Human Values in Science and Technology Education . Slovenia , Institute for Innovation and development of University of Ljubljana . Shulman , L . S . ( 1987 ) . Knowledge and teaching : Foundations of the new reform . Harvard Educational Rewiew , 57 ( 1 ) , 1 - 21 Taimisto , S . ( 2013 ) . Noviisiopettajan ensimmäiset kuukaudet työelämässä ( Novice teachers’ first months in working life ) . Master thesis . Jyväskylän Yliopisto . Retrieved from : http : / / urn . fi / URN : NBN : fi : jyu - 201306252039 Ulvik , M . Smith , K . & Helleve , I . ( 2009 ) . Novice in secondary school – the coin has two sides . Teaching and teacher education , 25 , 835 – 842 . Välisaari , J . ( 2009 ) . Jyväskylän yliopiston kemian opettajankoulutuksen arviointi opiskelijapalautteen pohjalta . ( Teacher training program of University of Jyväskylä and its assessment based on student feeback ) . In : Kemian Opetuksen Päivät 2009 : Arkipäivän kemia , kokeellisuus ja työturvallisuus kemian opetuksessa perusopetuksesta korkeakouluihin . 264 - 271 . Helsinki , Yliopistopaino Oy .