1 The structure of the Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein , a leading malaria vaccine candidate Matthew L . Plassmeyer a , Karine Reiter a , Richard L . Shimp Jr . a , Svetlana Kotova b , Paul D . Smith b , Darrell E . Hurt c , Brent House d , Xiaoyan Zou d , Yanling Zhang a , Merrit Hickman a , Onyinyechukwu Uchime a , Raul Herrera a , Vu Nguyen a , Jacqueline Glen a , Jacob Lebowitz b , Albert J . Jin b , Louis H . Miller a , Nicholas J . MacDonald a , Yimin Wu a , David L . Narum a , * a Malaria Vaccine Development Branch , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease , National Institutes of Health , Rockville , MD 20852 , USA b Laboratory of Bioengineering and Physical Science , National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA c Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch , Office of Cyber Infrastructure and Computational Biology , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA d U . S . Navy , Naval Medical Research Center , Silver Spring , MD 20910 , USA Running title : Structure of Plasmodium falciparum CSP * To whom correspondence should be addressed : Malaria Vaccine Development Branch , 5640 Fishers Lane , Twinbrook 1 , Rockville , MD 20852 , phone : 301 - 435 - 2185 , fax : 301 - 480 - 1962 , email : dnarum @ niaid . nih . gov The Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein ( CSP ) is critical for sporozoite function and invasion of hepatocytes . Given its critical nature , a phase III trial evaluating a CSP based malaria vaccine is ongoing . The CSP is comprised of three regions : an amino - terminus that binds heparin sulfate proteoglycans , a four amino acid repeat region ( NANP ) and carboxyl - terminus which contains a thrombospondin - like type I repeat ( TSR ) domain . Despite the importance of CSP , little is known about its structure . Therefore , recombinant forms of CSP were produced by expression in both Escherichia coli ( Ec ) and then refolded ( Ec CSP ) , or in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris ( Pp CSP ) for structural analyses . To analyze the TSR domain of recombinant CSP , conformation dependent mAbs that recognized unfixed P . falciparum sporozoites and inhibited sporozoite invasion of HepG2 cells in vitro were identified . These mAbs recognized all rCSPs , indicating the rCSPs contain a properly folded TSR domain structure . Characterization of both Ec CSP and Pp CSP by dynamic light scattering and velocity sedimentation demonstrated that both forms of CSP appeared as highly extended proteins ( R h 4 . 2 nm and 4 . 58 nm , respectively ) . Further , high - resolution atomic force microscopy revealed flexible , rod - like structures with a ribbon - like appearance . Using this information , we modeled the NANP repeat and TSR domain of CSP . Consistent with the biochemical and biophysical results , the repeat region formed a rod - like structure about 21 - 25 nm in length and 1 . 5 nm in width . Thus native CSP appears as a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchored , flexible , rod - like protein on the sporozoite surface . http : / / www . jbc . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 013706 The latest version is at JBC Papers in Press . Published on July 24 , 2009 as Manuscript M109 . 013706 Copyright 2009 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 2 Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum ( Pf ) is a serious global health issue , resulting in an estimated 1 . 5 million deaths annually , primarily amongst infants and young children [ WHO . World Malaria Report 2008 . http : / / www . who . int / malaria / wmr2008 / malaria200 8 . pdf ] . Ongoing multifaceted global intervention strategies to control malaria include drug treatment , insecticide usage , bed - net use , and vaccine development . However , parasite and mosquito control measures have met with limited success resulting from an increased drug and insecticide resistance within the Plasmodia and mosquito populations , respectively . Vaccine development represents an encouraging approach given that previous animal and human studies using irradiated sporozoites demonstrated the feasibility of producing an efficacious vaccine ( 1 - 3 ) . While the exact immunologic correlates of protection remain elusive , an abundance of evidence indicates that protection against liver stage parasites is complex , involving multiple immune mechanisms ( 4 - 11 ) . To date the majority of the pre - erythrocytic stage vaccine development has focused on the circumsporozoite protein ( CSP ) , the predominant surface antigen on sporozoites . CSP can be segmented into three regions : the N - terminal region containing region I ; the central repeat region ; and the C - terminal region containing the thrombospondin - like type I repeat ( TSR ) . Initial CSP vaccine development focused on the central repeat region which contains the immunodominant B cell epitope ( 12 ) . However , vaccine constructs quickly evolved to incorporate both the central repeat region containing the B - cell epitopes and the C - terminus containing the TSR domain , T - cell epitopes and B - cell epitopes ( 13 , 14 ) . Currently , the most advanced and moderately effective malaria vaccine , RTS , S , is comprised of a portion of the central repeat and the C - terminal regions linked to the hepatitis B surface antigen ( 15 ) . However , recent studies have highlighted the physiological importance of the N - terminal region ( 16 - 19 ) . Rathore et . al . ( 2002 ) not only demonstrated the role of the N - terminal region in liver cell attachment but also identified along with Ancsin and Kisilevsky ( 2004 ) an epitope within the N - terminal region that interacted with liver cells through heparin sulfate ( 16 , 18 , 19 ) . Moreover , this epitope was not only found to be immunogenic , but the resulting antibodies were determined to be inhibitory in a sporozoite invasion assay ( 18 ) . Peptides corresponding to the N - terminal region ( PpCS 22 - 110 and PpCS 65 - 110 ) were also recognized by sera obtained from individuals living in malaria - endemic regions ( 17 ) . In order better understand the structure of CSP , as well as , produce good quality recombinant protein for human vaccine directed studies , we generated full - length and near full - length recombinant CSP . We examined two expression systems , Escherichia coli ( Ec ) and Pichia pastoris ( Pp ) , to determine their feasibility to generate CSP . To assist the characterization of the rCSPs , we generated a panel of monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) which were characterized biologically prior to being used to examine the rCSPs . Additionally , each of the rCSP molecules was extensively biochemically and biophysically characterized . The results collated together have enabled the molecular modeling of CSP as a long flexible , rod - like protein . Experimental Procedures Antibody production - To generate antibodies toward CSP , we utilized a Saccharomyces cerevisiae expressing CSP ( Sc CSP ) clone generated by David Kaslow ( unpublished data ) . The 3D7 DNA sequence ( GenBank accession no . XM _ 001351086 ) corresponding to CSP amino acids Phe 20 to Ser 384 was cloned into the Saccharomyces expression vector YEpRPEU3 using the cloning sites NheI and ApaI . The resulting transcribed gene contained a 6 - HIS tag . The sequence of CSP was verified prior to fermentation . Fermentation material was produced as described in ( 20 ) and purified using a two step purification scheme : Nickel Affinity Chromatography followed by Size Exclusion Chromatography . Purified Sc CSP was supplied to A & G Pharmaceutical , Inc . ( Columbia , MD ) to generate a panel of mAbs . Mice were boosted twice with a fragment ScCSP with an N - terminal sequence beginning at amino acid Ser 301 ( GenBank accession no . XM _ 001351086 ) , Hybridoma supernatants were screened by Western blot against sporozoite lysates and confocal microscopy of live sporozoites . Antibodies by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 3 determined to be reduction - sensitive were isotyped and subclassed using the Thermo Scientific Pierce Rapid Isotyping Kit per manufacturer’s instructions ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Rockford , Il ) . Inhibition of Sporozoite Invasion ( ISI ) Assay - In order to ascertain whether or not the mAbs generated towards the Sc CSP had biological significance , they were examined using an in vitro assay to determine their ability to inhibit sporozoite invasion of HepG2 cells . In brief , analysis of the invasion of HepG2 clone A16 cells ( 21 ) by Pf sporozoites ( strain NF54 ) in the presence or absence of test anti - CSP IgG was performed using qRT - PCR to determine the percent invasion of the HepG2 cells . The details for the ISI assay are provided below . ISI Assay : Preparation of host hepatocytes and Pf sporozoites - Each well of a 48 - well plate ( Nalge Nunc International , Rochester , NY ) was coated with ECL Cell Attachment Matrix ( Millipore , Billerica , MA : Cat # 08 - 110 ) in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution ( HBSS ) ( Invitrogen Corp . , Carlsbad , CA ) at 37°C for 1 hr . This ECL solution was aspirated immediately prior to adding the HepG2 cells . HepG2 cells were maintained in EMEM complete medium ( ECM ) , EMEM medium ( Invitrogen Corp . , Carlsbad , CA ) containing 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) , 1 % 100X L - glutamine and 1 % Penicillin / Streptomycin ( 10 , 000 U / ml ) ( Invitrogen Corp . , Carlsbad , CA ) . In preparation for seeding , HepG2 cells were trypsinized , washed and re - suspended in ECM to a final concentration of 300 , 000 cells / ml . After aspiration of ECL solution , 300 μ l of the HepG2 cell suspension was added to each well and incubated O / N at 37°C . Pf sporozoites ( strain NF54 ) , were grown in Anopheles stephensi adult female mosquitoes until harvest . Mosquitoes were collected in a cylindrical chamber , placed at - 20°C for 5 - 10 minutes and soaked in 70 % ethanol . They were then serially washed in DMEM medium ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) containing Penicillin / Streptomycin plus Antibiotic - Antimycotic ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) and ECM . Each mosquito was dissected by separating the head from the thorax and removing the salivary glands from the head and / or thorax . The salivary glands were stored in ECM at room temperature ( RT ) until use . After all mosquitoes were dissected , the salivary glands were pooled and disrupted by passing through a 28½ - gauge needle . The sporozoites released from the salivary glands were counted and diluted in ECM to a final concentration of 500 , 000 sporozoites / ml . ISI Assay : Sporozoite invasion of HepG2 cells and preparation of HepG2 cells / parasites for RNA isolation - Each serum sample to be tested was diluted in ECM to 2X the desired final concentration . The anti - sporozoite ( CSP ) antibody , navy falciparum sporozoite antibody 1 ( NFS1 ) ( developed by immunizing mice with whole sporozoites ) , used as a positive control , was diluted to a concentration of 200 μ g / ml . For each well , fifty five μ l of the test or control serum was mixed with 55 μ l of the sporozoite suspension and incubated at RT for 20 min . Old medium was aspirated , and then 100 μ l of each sporozoite - serum mixture was added to each well and incubated for 3 hrs at 37°C . After the 3 - hr invasion incubation , each well was washed twice with fresh ECM and incubated overnight ( 15 - 21 hrs ) at 37°C . To generate a standard curve for the qRT - PCR , sporozoites were serially diluted in ECM ( 4 , 860 to 20 sporozoites ) , added to HepG2 mono - layers . Total host - cell / parasite material was collected and stored at - 80°C until RNA extraction . Following an overnight incubation at 37  C , HepG2 cells were washed at RT , trypsinized at 37  C , and transferred to an RNase - free micro - centrifuge tube . Free sporozoites were removed by twice pelleting the host cells at 1500 rpm for 2 minutes . The pellet was stored at - 80°C or used directly for RNA extraction . ISI Assay : RNA extraction and quantitative real - time PCR ( qRT - PCR ) - RNA was extracted and isolated from host cell / parasite material using the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) , and RNA quality assessed in a GeneQuant Pro DNA / RNA Calculator ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) using Quartz Capillaries ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) . Only RNA with an A260 / 280 ratio greater than 1 . 9 was used in further experiments . RNA was uniformly diluted to < 100 ng / ml , added to PCR reaction plates then by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 4 transcribed to cDNA using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) . Reaction volumes of 20 μ l were used in a Thermal Cycler ( MJ Research Inc . , Waltham , MA ) set at the following amplification cycle : 25°C for 10 min ; 37°C for 120 min ; 85°C for 5 sec ; hold at 4°C . The resulting cDNA was used immediately or stored at - 20°C . The following probe and primers were used to detect parasite 18S rRNA : Taqman® MGB Probe ( Applied Biosystems , Sequence : 5 ' – 6FAM - CAG GTC TGT GAT GTC C - MGBNFQ - 3 ' ) ; Sequence Detection Primer 1 ( Applied Biosystems , Sequence : 5 ' - TAA CAC AAG GAA GTT TAA GGC AAC A - 3 ' ) ; Sequence Detection Primer 2 ( Applied Biosystems , Sequence : 5 ' - CGC GTG CAG CCT AGT TTA TCT - 3 ' ) . To prepare the qRT - PCR reaction plate , cDNA ( ~ 15 - 20 ng / ml ) , probe ( 250 nM ) and primers ( 600 nM ) were mixed with TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix ( Applied Biosystems ) to a total volume of 20 μ l per reaction in a MicroAmp Fast Optical 96 - Well Reaction Plate ( Applied Biosystems ) . The reaction plate was then placed in a 7500 Fast Real - Time PCR System ( Applied Biosystems ) to quantify parasite 18S rRNA using the default thermal cycling conditions : Stage 1 – enzyme activation : 95°C for 20 sec ; Stage 2 ( repeated 40 times ) – melting at 95°C for 3 sec , annealing and polymerizing at 60°C for 30 sec . Results were analyzed automatically once each run was completed . Experimental samples were compared to the standard curve generated from host cell / sporozoite mixtures containing known numbers of sporozoites . The percent inhibition was determined by comparing the number of sporozoites invaded after mAb treatment with the number of sporozoites invaded without mAb treatment . SDS - PAGE and Western Blot - Sporozoite extract , equivalent to approximately 2 × 10 6 sporozoites per lane , was loaded onto a 4 – 12 % gradient Bis - Tris gel under reducing and non - reducing conditions . Samples analyzed under reduced conditions were either mixed with dithiothreitol ( DTT ) ( Sigma ) at a final concentration of 50mM ( reduced ) or mixed with DTT followed by treatment with Iodoacetamide ( Sigma ) at a final concentration of 200mM ( reduced and alkylated ) . Following the electrophoretic separation , proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane for immunoblotting using standard methods ( 22 , 23 ) . All washes were performed in 1x PBS with 0 . 5 % Tween 20 . Development of the membrane was performed by incubating the nitrocellulose membrane with 0 . 5 µg / ml purified IgG from the CSP specific mAbs diluted in blocking buffer ( 1x PBS , 0 . 5 % Tween 20 , and 5 % skim milk ) . Primary antibody was detected with goat anti - mouse alkaline phosphatase - conjugated secondary antibody . Detection was achieved using the BCIP / NBT 1 - component phosphatase substrate ( KPL , Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories Inc . , Gaithersburg , Maryland ) , as per manufacturer ' s instructions . SDS - PAGE analysis of recombinant protein was performed on 4 - 12 % gradient Bis - Tris polyacrylamide gels ( Bio - Rad ) under non - reducing and reduced / alkylated conditions . Immunoblotting was performed as described above using 4 - 12 % gradient Bis - Tris polyacrylamide gels ( Bio - Rad ) under non - reducing , reducing and reduced / alkylated conditions . Immunofluorescence Assay ( IFA ) and Confocal Microscopy - IFA analysis was performed as per standard protocol ( 24 ) . Sporozoites collected by Ozaki method were washed with RMPI and incubated with blocking media ( 1x PBS , 3 % BSA ) at 4ºC ( 25 ) . All primary and secondary antibody incubations were carried out at 4ºC separated by extensive washing with PBS containing 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ( Bio - Rad ) . The samples were mounted under coverslips using Vectashield hard - set mounting medium then stored at 4°C until images were acquired by confocal microscopy as described previously ( 24 ) . A Leica SP2 confocal microscope using Leica confocal software was used for image acquisition . All images were collected by using a PL APO ×100 / 1 . 4 oil immersion objective and a confocal zoom of ×6 . Alexa 488 conjugate wase excited by an Argon laser ( 488 nm ) . All images were collected as 3 - D data sets ( z - stacks ) with a step size of 0 . 1221 nm between the successive optical sections . De - convolution of all image stacks was performed using Huygens Essential ( Scientific Volume Imaging ) to improve the maximum resolution of the data , as well as to minimize background noise . Deconvolved images were saved and analyzed by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 5 through Imaris image analysis software ( version 5 . 7 . 2 , Bitplane ) . Confocal images in this study are displayed as maximum projection of the 3D image stacks . Expression and Production of EcCSP - The amino acid sequence of CSP ( Indian isolate , GenBank accession no . AAN87606 ) was used to generate a codon optimized synthetic gene for expression in E . coli ( GeneArt , Regensburg , Germany ) . The construct , corresponding to amino acids 19 L to 411 S of the full length CSP , was subcloned into the E . coli pET - 24a + expression vector downstream of the T7 promoter using the NdeI and XhoI restriction sites ( EMD Chemicals Inc . , Gibbstown , New Jersey ) . The resulting transcribed gene incorporates the additional amino acid sequence LEHHHHHH . Recombinant Ec CSP was expressed using E . coli BL21 ( DE3 ) cells . Fermentation of BL21 ( DE3 ) - Ec CSP was performed in a 5L bioreactor using defined medium at 37°C as described previously ( 26 ) . When the optical density at 550 nm reached 40 - 45 , the temperature was reduced to 25ºC and induced by adding isopropyl - 1 - thio - β - galactopyranoside ( IPTG ) to a final concentration of 1mM for 3 hours . Cell culture was harvested by centrifugation and stored at - 80°C . The frozen cell pellet was disrupted using either mechanical lysis or chemical lysis . For mechanical lysis , the cell pellet was resuspended in 10 volumes of lysis buffer ( 20mM Tris pH8 . 0 , 100mM NaCl , 1M Urea , 5mM DTT ) and passed through a microfluidizer ( M110Y , Microfluidics Corp . , Newton , MA ) three times at 19 , 000 lb / in 2 . The lysate was centrifuged for 30 minutes at 10 , 000 x g to pellet and remove the inclusion bodies and cellular debris . Ec CSP was then captured from the soluble fraction using a Nickel Sepharose Fast Flow ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) column under reducing and denaturing conditions using a buffer containing 6M Guanadine - HCl and 5mM DTT . For chemical lysis , the cell pellet was resuspended in 10 volumes of lysis buffer ( 20mM Citrate , 1 % SB3 - 12 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 1 % ABS - 14 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 75mM NaCl , pH 7 . 7 ) and mixed for 2hrs at RT . Following the addition of lysis buffer to the cell pellet , 25U of Benzonase ( Novagen / EMD Chemicals , Inc . , Gibbstown , NJ ) per ml of lysis buffer was added . The lysate was centrifuged for 30 minutes at 10 , 000 x g to pellet inclusion bodies and cellular debris . Inclusion bodies were washed with water then solubilized in solubilization buffer ( 11mM Tris , 111mM Sodium Phosphate , 6M Guanadine - HCl , pH 8 . 0 ) overnight at RT . Solubilized Ec CSP was captured under reducing and denaturing conditions using a Nickel Sepharose 6 Fast Flow ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) column . Nickel captured Ec CSP was refolded on a Sephacryl S - 300 HR column . A sample load of approximately 2 – 3 % of a column volume was loaded on a preequilibrated column with refold buffer 1 ( 20mM Sodium Phosphate , 50mM Guanadine - HCl , 1M Urea , 500mM Arginine , 150mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , 1mM DTT , pH 7 . 2 ) and eluted from the column using refold buffer 2 ( 20mM Sodium Phosphate , 1M Urea , 500mM Arginine , 150mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , pH 7 . 2 ) . Ec CSP was subsequently dialyzed and purified on a Q Sepharose HP ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) column and polished using a size - exclusion Superdex 75 ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) column . Expression and Production of PpCSP - As with the E . coli expression of CSP , the amino acid sequence of CSP ( GenBank accession no AAN87606 ) was used to produce a Pichia codon optimized synthetic gene for expression in the methylotrophic yeast P . pastoris ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , Ca ) . A shortened CSP construct corresponding to amino acids G 86 to S 410 was cloned into the XhoI and XbaI sites of the Pichia expression vector pPICZ α A as per manufacturer’s instructions . The resulting transcribed gene lacked a 6 - HIS tag . Prior to linearization with SacI and transformation into P . pastoris , the gene sequence of CSP was verified . Recombinant protein was produced in 5L bioreactors as described previously ( 22 , 27 ) . A scalable purification process will be detailed elsewhere . However , in brief , secreted Pp CSP was subjected to depth filtration ( Sartorius , Goettingen , Germany ) , followed by capture on a CM Hyper Z column ( Pall , East Hills , NY ) , purification by Q Sepharose HP column ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) and polished with a size - exclusion Superdex 75 column ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) . The final bulk antigen was diluted to 1 . 0 mg / ml in saline pH 7 . 4 , sterile filtered and stored at - 80°C . by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 6 BiaCore Chip Preparation and Interaction Studies - Surface Plasmon Resonance ( SPR ) measurements were performed using a Biacore 3000 biosensor , operating with the BiaCore Control software ( BIAcore 3000 , BIAcore AB , Sweden ) . All experiments were performed at 25°C . Three kinetic binding assays were employed to ascertain the binding properties of the recombinant CS proteins . Three mAbs : 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 , were immobilized to the CM5 sensor chip using an amine coupling kit according to manufacturer’s instructions ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) . The CM5 chip surface was activated with an equal - molar mix of N - hydroxysuccinimide / N - ethyl - N - ( dimethyaminopropyl ) carbodiimide , followed by immobilization of mAbs 1G12 in 10mM HEPES pH 6 . 8 , 4B3 in 10mM Acetate pH 6 . 5 or 4C2 in 10mM Acetate pH6 . 0 . Un - reacted sites were blocked with ethanolamine ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) . Each of the mAbs were immobilized in either flow cell 2 or 4 at 600 response units , while flow cells 1 and 3 were activated then de - activated to serve as reference surfaces . For the interaction studies , recombinant CS proteins were serially diluted in HBS buffer ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) at concentrations from 10nM to 1µM . Samples were injected at a flow rate of 30µl / min for 2 minutes . The sensor chip was regenerated using 2 injections at 30µl / min of 10mM Glycine pH 3 . 0 for 30 seconds and 10 seconds with a 2 minute stabilization period . Data were analyzed using BiaEvaluation ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) and fit a 1 : 1 model . For the indirect kinetic analysis , mAb 4B3 was immobilized on a CM5 chip as previously stated . CS protein was diluted in HBS buffer to a concentration of 100 nM . CS protein was injected as stated above . 4C2 and 1G12 were diluted in HBS buffer at two concentrations , 50 and 500 nM and injected similarly to the CS protein . The sensor chip was regenerated using 2 injections at 30µl / min of 10mM Glycine pH 3 . 0 for 30 seconds and 10 seconds with a 2 minute stabilization period . As a negative control , 4C2 was diluted to 50nM , 10 times the K D , and injected as stated above . Circular Dichroism - To examine secondary structure , samples in 1x PBS were diluted 1 : 10 in deionized ( MilliQ ) water . CD spectra were recorded over the wavelength range 185 – 260 nm in a 1 mm path - length quartz cuvette using a step size of 0 . 2 nm , a slit bandwidth of 1 . 0 nm and a signal averaging time of 1 . 0 second . Analysis of temperature on secondary structure was performed in 5ºC temperature increments from 5ºC to 80ºC . Secondary structure content was calculated using the DICHROWEB web server ( http : / / dichroweb . cryst . bbk . ac . uk ) ( 28 , 29 ) . SEC - MALS - QELS - HPLC - To assess the identify , purity and solution aggregation state of purified Ec CSP and Pp CSP , analytical size exclusion chromatography with in - line multi - angle light scattering ( MALS ) and quasi - elastic light scatter detection ( QELS ) was performed . Chromatography was done on an Alliance HPLC system ( Waters , Milford MA ) connected to a multi - angle DAWN EOS light scattering detector and a quasi - electric light scattering detector ( Wyatt Technology , Santa Barbara CA ) . Samples were prepared and analyzed as described by Tsai et . al . ( 2009 ) ( 30 ) . Analytical ultracentrifugation characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP - Boundary sedimentation velocity ( SV ) measurements were made in Optima XLA analytical ultracentrifuge ( Beckman - Coulter Instruments ) . SV analysis was performed at 20 ˚ C at a rotor speed of 58 , 000 rpm . The centrifuge cell was filled with 400  l of protein solution at a concentration of 1 . 0 mg / ml of Pp CSP or Ec CSP . Absorbance scans were obtained at 235 nm . Sedimentation coefficient distribution analysis to deconvolute the boundary velocity data into sedimenting species was performed as previously described ( 31 ) , using the public domain software Sedfit developed by Peter Schuck ( http : / / www . analyticalultracentrifugation . com / ) . The result of this computational analysis is a presentation of the distribution of sedimenting species in the form of a c ( s ) vs . s plot . In this computational treatment , the sedimentation boundary velocity data were subjected to maximum entropy regularization statistical analysis for the most parsimonious distribution of sedimenting species ( 31 ) that best fits the data . A weight average shape factor ( f / f o ) is extracted from the boundary spreading and this allows for the conversion of the c ( s ) vs . s distribution to a c ( M ) by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 7 vs . M graphical presentation , thereby providing the molar mass of each sedimenting peak . The software program Sednterp developed by Hayes , Laue , and Philo ( http : / / www . bbri . org / RASMB / rasmb . html ) was also used to determine the partial specific volume of the Pp CSP and the viscosity (  ) and density (  ) for the PBS solution used in the sedimentation analyses and for the hydrodynamic analysis to be reported below . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) - Samples for AFM were prepared and analyzed basically as described by Tsai et . al . ( 2009 ) ( 30 ) with modifications as noted . Biological AFM imaging of the protein products was carried out under a range of conditions , both in fluid and air , using gentle tapping - mode AFM , mostly with a PicoForce Multimode AFM ( Veeco , CA ) consisting of a Nanoscope® V controller , a type E scanner head , and a sharpened TESP - SS ( Veeco , CA ) or similar AFM cantilever ( 30 , 32 ) . For rCSP visualization , suitable protein attachment was readily achieved by one minute incubation of 7 μ l of ca 1 μ g / ml solution of rCSP in PBS ( pH = 7 . 4 ) buffer on freshly peeled mica substrates , followed by rinsing with ca 1 ml of deionized water and complete drying under an inert gas flow . The sample was then sealed into the instrument compartment dehumidified by Drierite® particles ( 30 ) . AFM images were evaluated within the Nanoscope software ( version 7 . 2 , Veeco , CA ) , and exported to Image J ( version 1 . 41o , NIH , Bethesda , MD ) and Mathcad ( version 14 , Mathsoft , MA ) for further analyses and display . Modeling - Tertiary structure modeling of the truncated N - terminal domain was not attempted . Secondary structure was predicted using PSIPRED ( 33 ) and JUFO ( 34 , 35 ) . The repeat region was modeled by building up experimentally determined structures of the repeating unit ( NPNA ) . The crystal structure of Ac - ANPNA - NH2 ( 36 ) was aligned to the average NMR structure of ( NPNA ) 3 at each of the NPNA repeats ( 37 ) to verify the agreement between them ( 0 . 47 , 0 . 46 , 0 . 39 Å C  RMSD ) . The NMR structure of ( NPNA ) 3 was extended by aligning residues 1 - 8 of a second ( NPNA ) 3 to residues 5 - 12 of the first . Repeating this procedure , ( NPNA ) 43 was built up , corresponding to residues 103 - 274 of the native CSP sequence . Mutations were introduced into the N - terminus of the repeat region to correctly model the DPNA and NPNV repeats found there . Side chains rotamers were optimized using SCWRL3 ( 38 ) . The TSR domain was modeled using the automatic threading and homology modeling service LOMETS ( 39 ) . High confidence models were selected and evaluated for the presence of the characteristic disulfide formation of the TSR . Alignments by SAM - T02 ( 40 ) , FUGUE ( 41 ) , and PPA - II ( 39 ) to TSR template 1lsl ( 42 ) generated acceptable models using MODELLER ( 43 ) . Secondary structure composition for the repeat region and the TSR domain was measured by DSSP ( 44 ) and structure analysis and visualization were accomplished using Chimera ( 45 ) and PyMOL ( 46 ) . Results Generation and characterization of CSP specific mAbs - In order to evaluate the folding of recombinant CSP expressed in E . coli ( Ec CSP ) and P . pastoris ( Pp CSP ) ( Fig 1 ) , a panel of 18 mAbs was first screened by Western blot analysis against sporozoite lysates to identify reduction - sensitive mAbs . Representative Western blots for three of the mAbs are shown in Fig 2a . Both 1G2 and 1B3 displayed the characteristic CSP doublet banding pattern at approximately 60 kDa ( 47 , 48 ) on both non - reduced ( NR ) and reduced plus alkylated sporozoite lysates , as represented by 1G2 ( Fig 2a ) . These mAbs also recognize the NANP repeats ( data not shown ) . In contrast , three other mAbs : 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 , maintained reactivity with the non - reduced sporozoite lysate , but displayed a markedly reduced interaction with the reduced and alkylated sporozoite lysate , depicted by 1G12 and 4C2 ( Fig . 2a ) . To further characterize the mAbs for biological significance , the panel of mAbs was examined for reactivity to live sporozoites by confocal microscopy . All three mAbs reacted with viable sporozoites , demonstrating a characteristic surface staining . Shown in Fig . 2b are maximum projection images from confocal microscopy using mAbs 1G12 , 4C2 and 1G2 . Since the reduction - sensitive mAbs recognized CSP on the live parasites , we examined their ability to inhibit invasion of liver cells by live by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 8 Pf sporozoites ( strain NF54 ) , where the invasion rate ranges between 0 . 3 % – 6 % . 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 exhibited inhibitory activity of sporozoite invasion of HepG2 cells ( Table I ) . Expression , purification and biological characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP - Two different synthetic CSP genes were used to express CSP in E . coli and P . pastoris ( Fig 1 ) . Following expression and purification as described in the Experimental Prodecures , two forms of refolded and purified Ec CSP were generated and identified based on the lysis method , Ec CSP - ML ( mechanical microfluidization lysis ) and Ec CSP - CL ( chemical detergent lysis ) . The integrity and purity of Ec CSP - ML and Ec CSP - CL , as well as the Pp CSP are shown by Coomassie blue stained SDS - PAGE gel ( Fig . 3a ) and immunoblot ( Fig . 3b ) . A reduction - sensitive high molecular weight band migrating at 120 kDa is only observed in Ec CSP - CL ( Fig . 3a ) likely due to the presence of an amino - terminal free cysteine ( see below ) . As shown in Fig . 3b , Ec CSP - ML / CL and Pp CSP react with the mAb , 1G12 , in a reduction sensitive manner by Western blot . Similar reactivity by Western blot using mAbs 4C2 and 4B3 was observed with all three recombinant CS proteins , Ec CSP - ML / CL and Pp CSP ( data not shown ) . MAbs 1G12 , 4C2 and 4B3 were also shown to react by Western blot with a protein product corresponding to the TSR domain in a reduction - sensitive manner ( data not shown ) . These three reduction - sensitive mAbs were isotyped and subclassed , and determined to be IgG 1 . The interaction of Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP with the three reduction - sensitive mAbs - 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 was further characterized by surface plasmon resonance . To examine the affinity or K D of the three mAbs : 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 , to Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP , each of the mAbs were amine coupled to the surface of a CM5 chip ( see supplemental figure 1a for example 4C2 ) . The K D of the mAbs toward the two recombinant CS proteins was comparable . The affinity of the reduction - sensitive mAbs 4B3 , 4C2 and 1G12 for Ec CSP - ML was 8nM , 40nM and 100nM respectively . Similarly for Pp CSP , the affinity of the three mAbs 4B3 , 4C2 and 1G12 was 4nM , 40nM and 60nM . Analysis by surface plasmon resonance demonstrated the mAb combinations 4B3 / 4C2 and 4B3 / 1G12 shared an overlapping epitope ( see supplemental figure 1b ) . Additional biological and biophysical characterization of the three recombinant CS proteins using electrospray ionization mass spectrometry ( ESI - MS ) , N - terminal sequencing and endotoxin concentration was performed to ascertain the identity and purity of the purified proteins . Using reversed phase - HPLC , the primary elution peak from each of the samples was analyzed by ESI - MS ( Table 2 ) . The observed mass for the non - reduced form of Pp CSP was 33 , 078 . 9 Da , ( Table 2 ) , which is within 1Da of the non - reduced theoretical mass 33 , 079 . 9 Da , indicating the biochemical integrity of the protein is good . Results obtained with Ec CSP - CL showed that the observed mass is similar to the theoretical mass ( Table 2 ) . Identity of both proteins was confirmed by N - terminal sequence analysis , which yielded the expected N - terminal sequence for Ec CSP - CL and Pp CSP ( Table 2 ) . Contrary to Ec CSP - CL and Pp CSP , the major observed mass for Ec CSP - ML did not correspond to the expected theoretical mass for the designed product . Further examination based on mass spectrometry and N - terminal sequencing analyses identified a mixture of several different CSP species with amino - terminal truncations ( Table 2 ) . Analysis for endotoxin concentration of our purified proteins showed endotoxin levels ranged between 5EU / mg and 68 EU / mg ( Table 2 ) . Biophysical and Biochemical Characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP : Circular Dichroism ( CD ) spectroscopy and thermal stability - CD spectra of purified Pp CSP and Ec CSP were generated to examine their secondary structures . Analysis of the far UV spectra for secondary structure outputs for Pp CSP using the Dichroweb server ( 28 , 29 ) indicated Pp CSP was comprised of 10 % ± 4 % α - helix , 23 % ± 7 % β - sheet , 17 % ± 5 % β - turn and 49 ± 13 % random structure . Similar spectral results were obtained for both of the Ec CSPs . All three recombinant proteins were evaluated for changes in secondary structure due to heating by a step procedure that generated a temperature ramp in 5ºC increments , beginning at 5ºC and ending at 80ºC . As shown in Figure 4 , a change in the secondary structure of Pp CSP was observed with increased temperature as indicated by increased intensity in negative ellipticity between 215 and by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 9 235 nm and a decrease from 190 - 215 nm ( Fig 4 ) . The reversibility of the temperature induce secondary structure transitions was shown by the cooling back to either 5ºC or 20ºC from 80ºC , where secondary structure was reformed , as indicated by a shift in the ellipticity spectra of the heated samples back toward the original 5ºC spectra . Similar results were also obtained for Ec CSP - ML and Ec CSP - CL ( data not shown ) . The spectra for Pp CSP in the near - UV , 250 – 320 nm , showed very little signal , which is indicative of a low amount of tertiary structure ( data not shown ) . These results were consistent with results obtained from Ec CSP - ML and Ec CPS - CL ( data not shown ) . Biophysical and Biochemical Characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP : SEC - MALS - QELS - HPLC - Each of the three recombinant CS proteins was examined by analytical SEC - MALS - QELS - HPLC to determine solution state , molar mass and hydrodynamic radius . Analysis of Pp CSP by SEC - HPLC indicated 93 . 6 % of the protein was monomeric in solution with 6 . 4 % product related impurities . Examination of the Ec CSPs by SEC - HPLC indicated Ec CSP - ML was comprised of two populations , a monomer population at 79 . 6 % and a dimer population at 20 . 4 % , whereas Ec CSP - CL was composed of two additional species , yielding a composition of 24 % aggregates , 33 % dimer , 17 % monomer and 26 % product related degradants . Examination of the monomer peaks from SEC - HPLC reveals Pp CSP , Ec CSP - ML and Ec CSP - CL have similar retention times ( RT ) ( Table 2 ) , similar to the RT of immunoglobulin G ( 158 kDa ) at approximately 17 minutes ( data not shown ) . Further analysis of the three CS proteins by in - line MALS indicated the weight average molar mass of the monomeric peaks corresponded to the theoretical mass of each protein ( Table 2 and Fig 5a ) . To further characterize the recombinant CS proteins , the hydrodynamic radii ( R h ) of the monomeric recombinant CS proteins were examined by QELS . The R h of Pp CSP was 4 . 2 nm ( Fig 5b ) , indicating the monomeric form of Pp CSP is highly extended compared to a typical globular protein like BSA ( 66 . 4 kDa ) for which R h  3 . 4 ( 30 ) . Similarly , the R h of Ec CSP - ML was 4 . 7 nm . For Ec CSP - CL , there was insufficient signal for the monomer to obtain a valid R h value . Biophysical and Biochemical Characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP : Boundary sedimentation velocity characterization of Pp CSP - In order to better characterize the recombinant CS proteins , an orthogonal approach was used to determine the mass and hydrodynamic radius . Boundary sedimentation velocity was used to obtain the sedimentation coefficient distribution of the Pp CSP sample . The absorbance scans of the sedimenting boundaries vs . time ( data not shown ) were analyzed by the computational program Sedfit to give the sedimentation distribution of protein components shown in Fig . 5c . The weight average frictional ratio ( f / f o ) of 2 . 10 was extracted in the fitting process to account for boundary diffusion . Integration of the entire c ( s ) peak gives a weight average uncorrected s value of 1 . 90S . Correcting for the effects of the density and viscosity of PBS we obtain an s 20 , w value of 1 . 96S . The weight average sedimentation coefficient coupled with the weight average f / f o provides for the conversion of the c ( s ) distribution into a c ( M ) vs . M distribution as shown in the inset of Fig . 5c . The weight average molar mass of the major peak is 30 , 980 ( Table 2 ) . This is in excellent agreement with the sequence molar mass of 33 , 076 . Using the latter and the s 20 , w value of 1 . 96S we obtain the following hydrodynamic results : a calculated f / f o of 2 . 19 and a Stokes radius of 4 . 58nm . Based on the large f / f o for CSP , it is reasonable to model the shape of this protein as a cylinder . Using this hydrodynamic model with an estimated hydration of 0 . 3g of water per g of protein the CSP cylinder or rod would have length and diameter dimensions of 20 . 9 nm and 1 . 52 nm respectively . A sedimentation analysis of Ec CSP - ML was also performed under identical conditions used for Pp CSP ( results not shown ) . It is of interest to compare the sedimentation and hydrodynamic properties of Ec CSP - ML with Pp CSP . For the former we obtained an uncorrected s value of 2 . 16S which corrects to an s 20 , w value of 2 . 26S . The increase in s would be anticipated given the molar mass of 41 , 743 for Ec CSP . The weight average f / f o from the c ( s ) vs s analysis was 2 . 16 . The weight average molar mass from the c ( M ) vs M analysis was 39 , 139 in good agreement with the sequence molar mass ( Table 2 ) . A f / f o of 2 . 26 was obtained from the sequence molar mass and s 20 , w value . The Stokes radius for by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 10 Ec CSP is 5 . 09 nm . Again modeling this CSP construct as a cylinder or rod we obtain length and diameter dimensions of 34 nm and 1 . 6nm respectively . It is evident that the sedimentation and hydrodynamic behavior of Pp CSP and Ec CSP - ML are quite comparable . A similar analysis was performed with Ec CSP - CL in which comparable results were obtained with Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP . The weight average molar mass determined from the sedimentation analysis of Ec CSP - CL is presented in Table 2 . The AFM results that will be presented below support the rod / ribbon shape modeling for CSP . Biophysical and Biochemical Characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP : AFM - AFM images directly reveal that Pp CSP protein is an extended linear and flexible molecule with variable twisted - ribbon - like appearance ( Fig . 6A ) . In agreement with the solution studies , AFM images suggest about 92 % Pp CSP protein mass is in a monomeric state with the measured protein volume around the value of 33 nm 3 ( Fig . 6B ) . The balance of the protein mass suggests a small amount of dimers and very sporadic occurrence of small oligomers . The protein particles are varied in shape , but all consistent with extended twisted - ribbon forms , when quantified by the number histogram of the circularity , defined as 4 π •Area / ( perimeter ) 2 ( Fig . 6C ) . Assuming a straight ribbon shape for a fully extended molecule , these measured circularity values suggest the typical length to width ratio to be between two to six . Restricting to the more typical Pp CSP monomers , having a measured protein volume between about 25 to 41 nm 3 , the number histogram of the molecular area is tightly distributed and falls within the range of approximately 120 to 220 nm 2 ( Fig . 6D ) . Taken together , the AFM images suggest an “average” ribbon shape of the dimensions around 25 nm x 7 nm x 0 . 2 nm for Pp CSP monomers as appeared on mica surfaces . AFM imaging for Ec CSP also reveals twisted - ribbon - like appearance with rod - like dimensions , but with more complex monomer - dimer - oligomerization hierarchies ( data not shown ) . Therefore , our high - resolution AFM images fully support the interpretations of the structures deduced from the solution measurements . Modeling of CSP - Molecular modeling as detailed within the Methods section was successful for the repeat region and for part of the TSR domain . The overall secondary structure composition for the combination of the repeat region , the TSR domain , and the truncated N - terminal domain corresponding to the Ec CSP construct was about 5 % α - helix , 27 % β - sheet , 28 % β - turn , and 36 % random structure , in good agreement with the circular dichroism measurements . Stretches of about 45 residues before and after the repeat region were predicted to have little secondary structure . The TSR domain itself contains characteristic disulfide bonds between C 334 and C 369 and between C 338 and C 374 and forms an extended structure about 4 . 9 nm in length and 1 . 3 nm in width . It may be followed by a membrane - associated helix from about V 377 to the C - terminus . ( Fig . 7A ) . The repeat region forms a stem - like superhelix about 18 nm in length and 1 . 5 nm in width composed of regular β - turns with a pitch of about 28 residues or 7 repeat units ( NPNA ) . Substitution of DPNA in the first turn of the superhelix adds a - 5 formal charge to the otherwise electrically neutral structure and imparts a significant negative electrostatic potential to the N - terminus of the repeat region . ( Fig . 7B , C and D ) . Discussion Recently , multiple vaccine trials examining the effectiveness of RTS , S , a CSP vaccine , have reported efficacy rates against infection ranging from 30 % – 66 % , and against clinical malaria in children 1 to 4 years at 30 % ( 49 - 51 ) . However , the RTS , S construct lacks the N - terminal region of CSP which has been shown to be a critical functional domain ( 16 - 19 ) . Our objective was to generate and subsequently characterize recombinant CSP incorporating the N - terminus , repeat region and C - terminus , with the intention of gaining a better understanding of the struture of CSP . Here we describe the bench scale production and the extensive biological , biochemical and biophysical characterization of CSP derived from two expression systems , E . coli and P . pastoris . The recombinant products from each expression system were similar in all of the biochemical and biophysical characteristics by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 11 reported here providing strong support to the conclusion that CSP is a highly extended , rod - like protein on the surface of sporozoites . In order to biologically characterize the rCSP and to demonstrate that both Ec CSP and Pp CSP have structural compatibility to native CSP , we generated a panel of mAbs to purified Sc CSP . The S . cerevisiae expression system was not selected for production of recombinant CSP due to low levels of expression ( data not shown ) . To facilitate production of mAbs specific to the TSR domain of CSP , mice were boosted with a purified degraded product corresponding to the TSR domain as determined by N - terminal sequencing ( data not shown ) . The subsequent CSP specific mAbs were screened by Western blot against sporozoite lysates , confocal microscopy of live sporozoites and a sporozoite invasion inhibition assay to determine their biological activity as well as to determine their applicability for examination of recombinant CSP conformation . The results obtained by Western blot of the sporozoite lysate demonstrated mAbs 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 were reduction - sensitive , indicating they recognize a conformation dependent epitope ( Fig 2a ) , while confocal microscopy results showed the characteristic surface reactivity to live sporozoites for the whole mAb panel ( Fig . 2b ) . Lastly , mAbs 1G2 , 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 were examined for their ability to inhibit sporozoite invasion of liver cells ( Table 1 ) . All three conformation - dependent mAbs , 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 , were able to demonstrate inhibition of liver cell invasion . These data are consistent with results published by Roggero et . al . ( 1995 ) demonstrating antibodies generated to a 102 - mer peptide corresponding to the C - terminal region of CSP are able to inhibit sporozoite invasion of hepatoma cells ( 52 ) . To assess folding of the TSR domain in the purified recombinant proteins , Western blot analysis of Ec CSP - ML , - CL and Pp CSP was performed using 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 ( Fig 3 ) . Reactivity was diminished following treatment with DTT and further reduced following subsequent treatment with iodoacetamide which prevented reformation of the disulfide bonds in the TSR domain ( Fig 3 ) . Given that 1G12 , 4B3 and 4C2 reacted similarly with native CSP ( Figs 2a ) , the results indicate Ec CSP and Pp CSP share a common conformational epitope in the TSR domain with native CSP . Further examination of the interaction between the recombinant proteins and mAbs 1G12 , 4B3 , 4C2 via Biacore indicated only slight affinity differences between Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP with the respective mAbs , indicating both Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP likely share a common structural epitope . Interaction between Ec CSP - CL and the conformational sensitive mAbs was not examined using Biacore due to the propensity of Ec CSP - CL to form aggregates in solution . Biochemical characterization of purified Ec CSP - ML showed that neither the N - terminal sequence nor the mass spectrum directly corresponded to the expected results . The N - terminal sequence contained a mixture of sequences ( Table 2 ) , which is consistent with the disparity observed between the theoretical ESI - MS and the observed ESI - MS . Given that Ec CSP - ML was captured from the soluble fraction following mechanical disruption of the E . coli cellular membrane , it is feasible that CSP was exposed to active E . coli proteases , which consequently led to a mixed N - terminal population of Ec CSP . Subsequent modification of the lytic process from mechanical to detergent lysis lead to the production of purified Ec CSP - CL for which the N - terminal sequence and ESI - MS results were comparable with the expected results . The instability of the designed amino - terminus of EcCSP - ML may be due to the presence of the PEXEL domain that accounts for an additional proteolytic site ( 53 - 55 ) . This is further supported by the absence of any detectable native CSP dimers which would be expected if a free thiol was present as detected by Western blot ( Fig 2 ) . Similar to Ec CSP - CL , N - terminal and ESI - MS results for Pp CSP corresponded to the designed product . Evaluation of each of the three recombinant proteins for impurities indicated the endotoxin levels were within acceptable levels for human studies ( Table 2 ) . Both Ec CSP and Pp CSP were examined by CD in order to first examine secondary and tertiary structure . Analysis of the results from the far UV examination of both proteins using the Dichroweb server , indicates that both Ec CSP and Pp CSP contain very little α - helical structure , while approximately 40 % of the protein is comprised of β - sheets and β - turns and 49 % random structure . Inspection of both proteins in the near UV by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 12 indicated very little tertiary structure . This would fit , since the only structural domain based on sequence parsimony is the TSR domain , which has an elongated anti - parallel two - β - sheet fold ( 42 , 56 ) . However , more important for vaccine development is knowledge of the thermal stability or temperature effects on the structure . Examination of both proteins via a temperature ramp indicated the recombinant proteins underwent an alteration of secondary structure upon heating . Further , we sought to understand should a temperature excursion from 4ºC or room temperature occur during storage or formulation , if the secondary structure would reform upon cooling ? The results for both Ec CSP and Pp CSP indicated secondary structure is regained following cooling from 80°C back to either 4ºC or 20°C . Consequently , if there is a short temperature deviation , the resulting change in temperature is unlikely to have a detrimental effect on secondary structure for either recombinant protein . Further biophysical studies of the Ec CSP and Pp CSP by SEC - MALS and QELS indicated a predominant monomeric solution state for both Ec CSP - ML and Pp CSP whereas Ec CSP - CL aggregated in solution as mentioned previously . The weight average molar mass of 52 kDa for Ec CSP - CL is 10kDa larger than the theoretical mass of our designed product , which is likely due to an incomplete separation between the monomer and dimer peak . Further , QELS data indicate Ec CSP and Pp CSP are extended molecules based on the observed hydrodynamic radii , which was corroborated by sedimentation velocity . Both QELS and sedimentation velocity data support the concept that CSP acquires a non - globular highly extended structure . To further investigate and begin to resolve the structural features of CSP , we examined all three recombinant proteins by high resolution AFM that permitted visualization of individual rCSP molecules . Such studies allowed the examination of monomeric rCSP using an orthogonal technique to both SEC - QELS and sedimentation velocity in the solution state of CSP . The AFM images and the subsequent measurements via direct visualizations on a substrate indicate that CSP is an extended linear , twisted - ribbon - like , and flexible molecule with measurements centered around 25 nm x 7 nm x 0 . 2 nm . These data are the first direct evidence demonstrating CSP has an elongated structure , and are consistent with previous studies that examined the structure of the NANP repeat region of CSP . Several studies examined conformationally constrained NANP mimetics by NMR and CD ( 37 ) , cyclic ANPNAA peptides by NMR ( 57 ) , and Ac - ANPNA - NH 2 peptides by crystallography ( 36 ) , all of which demonstrated the NPNA motif adopts a β - turn ( 58 ) . Speculation by Nanzer et . al ( 1997 ) suggest that by affixing multiple NPNA repeats together , a stable “stem - like” structure may be formed ( 59 ) . Our SEC - MALS - QELS , sedimentation velocity and AFM data support the concept that the NANP repeat region of CSP does form a stem like structure , creating an elongated and flexible molecule . Molecular modeling also supports the stem - like nature of the repeat region ( Fig . 7a - e ) . In addition to the repeat region , the TSR domain is also an elongated structure . A long linker exists between the N - terminal domain and the repeat region . Another linker exists between the repeat region and the TSR domain . These elements combine to support the experimental observations of non - globularity and multiple morphology with a three - dimensional shape of approximately 21 – 25 nm x 1 . 5 nm x 1 . 5 nm . The difference between the AFM measurements versus the solution and computational measurements is partly due to compression by the AFM tip . While gentle AFM can quantitatively characterize delicate biological samples ( e . g . ( 30 , 32 ) , it is logical for the CSP protein with its particular elongation , flexibility and high content of random coiled structure to be visualized in the twisted - ribbon - like forms between the substrate and the AFM tip . Overall there is very good agreement for the relative shape in both the length and the cross sectional area of CSP between the different analytical methods . Sporozoite entry of mammalian cells has been well studied in vitro ( 60 , 61 ) and characterized as to include both traversal of cells in which no parasitophorous vacuole is formed and infection of cells accompanied by formation of a parasitophorous vacuole ( 62 - 65 ) . However , the definitive role for the CS protein within this traversal and infection process is unclear . An abundance of evidence suggests both the N - terminal domain and C - terminal domain are by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 13 involved in the invasion process of host organisms , ranging from motility to liver cell attachment via heparin sulfate proteoglycans displayed on the surface of receptors ( 16 - 19 , 66 , 67 ) . How the unique structure of the CS protein as an extended , flexible rod - like structure impacts on the process of gliding , traversal or infection is worthy of further evaluation . Here , we have generated extensively characterized rCSP expressed from two expression systems . Pp CSP corresponded to our designed construct and was purified to greater than > 99 % purity , as determined by SEC - HPLC , without the use of an affinity tag and remained monomeric in solution following purification . These data not only present evidence of a highly purified rCSP , but they provide the first analytical evidence describing CSP as an elongated , flexible rod - like protein on the surface of sporozoites . References 1 . Clyde , D . F . , Most , H . , McCarthy , V . C . , and Vanderberg , J . P . ( 1973 ) Am J Med Sci 266 , 169 - 177 2 . Nussenzweig , R . S . , Vanderberg , J . , Most , H . , and Orton , C . ( 1967 ) Nature 216 , 160 - 162 3 . Nussenzweig , R . S . , Vanderberg , J . P . , Most , H . , and Orton , C . ( 1969 ) Nature 222 , 488 - 489 4 . Franke , E . D . , Sette , A . , Sacci , J . , Jr . , Southwood , S . , Corradin , G . , and Hoffman , S . L . ( 2000 ) Infect Immun 68 , 3403 - 3411 5 . Hollingdale , M . R . , Zavala , F . , Nussenzweig , R . S . , and Nussenzweig , V . ( 1982 ) J Immunol 128 , 1929 - 1930 6 . Rodrigues , E . G . , Claassen , J . , Lee , S . , Wilson , J . M . , Nussenzweig , R . S . , and Tsuji , M . ( 2000 ) Parasite Immunol 22 , 157 - 160 7 . Weiss , W . R . , Mellouk , S . , Houghten , R . A . , Sedegah , M . , Kumar , S . , Good , M . F . , Berzofsky , J . A . , Miller , L . H . , and Hoffman , S . L . ( 1990 ) J Exp Med 171 , 763 - 773 8 . Weiss , W . R . , Sedegah , M . , Beaudoin , R . L . , Miller , L . H . , and Good , M . F . ( 1988 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 85 , 573 - 576 9 . Weiss , W . R . , Sedegah , M . , Berzofsky , J . A . , and Hoffman , S . L . ( 1993 ) J Immunol 151 , 2690 - 2698 10 . Kumar , S . , Miller , L . H . , Quakyi , I . A . , Keister , D . B . , Houghten , R . A . , Maloy , W . L . , Moss , B . , Berzofsky , J . A . , and Good , M . F . ( 1988 ) Nature 334 , 258 - 260 11 . Schofield , L . , Villaquiran , J . , Ferreira , A . , Schellekens , H . , Nussenzweig , R . , and Nussenzweig , V . ( 1987 ) Nature 330 , 664 - 666 12 . Herrington , D . A . , Clyde , D . F . , Losonsky , G . , Cortesia , M . , Murphy , J . R . , Davis , J . , Baqar , S . , Felix , A . M . , Heimer , E . P . , Gillessen , D . , and et al . ( 1987 ) Nature 328 , 257 - 259 13 . Nardin , E . H . , Oliveira , G . A . , Calvo - Calle , J . M . , Castro , Z . R . , Nussenzweig , R . S . , Schmeckpeper , B . , Hall , B . F . , Diggs , C . , Bodison , S . , and Edelman , R . ( 2000 ) J Infect Dis 182 , 1486 - 1496 14 . Stoute , J . A . , Slaoui , M . , Heppner , D . G . , Momin , P . , Kester , K . E . , Desmons , P . , Wellde , B . T . , Garçon , N . , Krzych , U . , and Marchand , M . ( 1997 ) N Engl J Med 336 , 86 - 91 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 14 15 . Bejon , P . , Lusingu , J . , Olotu , A . , Leach , A . , Lievens , M . , Vekemans , J . , Mshamu , S . , Lang , T . , Gould , J . , Dubois , M . C . , Demoitié , M . A . , Stallaert , J . F . , Vansadia , P . , Carter , T . , Njuguna , P . , Awuondo , K . O . , Malabeja , A . , Abdul , O . , Gesase , S . , Mturi , N . , Drakeley , C . J . , Savarese , B . , Villafana , T . , Ballou , W . R . , Cohen , J . , Riley , E . M . , Lemnge , M . M . , Marsh , K . , and von Seidlein , L . ( 2008 ) N Engl J Med 359 , 2521 - 2532 16 . Ancsin , J . B . , and Kisilevsky , R . ( 2004 ) J Biol Chem 279 , 21824 - 21832 17 . Bongfen , S . E . , Ntsama , P . M . , Offner , S . , Smith , T . , Felger , I . , Tanner , M . , Alonso , P . , Nebie , I . , Romero , J . F . , Silvie , O . , Torgler , R . , and Corradin , G . ( 2009 ) Vaccine 27 , 328 - 335 18 . Rathore , D . , Nagarkatti , R . , Jani , D . , Chattopadhyay , R . , de la Vega , P . , Kumar , S . , and McCutchan , T . F . ( 2005 ) J Biol Chem 280 , 20524 - 20529 19 . Rathore , D . , Sacci , J . B . , de la Vega , P . , and McCutchan , T . F . ( 2002 ) J Biol Chem 277 , 7092 - 7098 20 . Stowers , A . W . , Zhang , Y . , Shimp , R . L . , and Kaslow , D . C . ( 2001 ) Yeast 18 , 137 - 150 21 . Hollingdale , M . R . , Leland , P . , and Schwartz , A . L . ( 1983 ) Am J Trop Med Hyg 32 , 682 - 684 22 . Narum , D . L . , Nguyen , V . , Zhang , Y . , Glen , J . , Shimp , R . L . , Lambert , L . , Ling , I . T . , Reiter , K . , Ogun , S . A . , Long , C . , Holder , A . A . , and Herrera , R . ( 2008 ) Infect Immun 76 , 4876 - 4882 23 . Narum , D . L . , Ogun , S . A . , Thomas , A . W . , and Holder , A . A . ( 2000 ) Infect Immun 68 , 2899 - 2906 24 . Singh , S . , Plassmeyer , M . , Gaur , D . , and Miller , L . H . ( 2007 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 20043 - 20048 25 . Ozaki , L . S . , Gwadz , R . W . , and Godson , G . N . ( 1984 ) J Parasitol 70 , 831 - 833 26 . Singh , S . , Kennedy , M . C . , Long , C . A . , Saul , A . J . , Miller , L . H . , and Stowers , A . W . ( 2003 ) Infect Immun 71 , 6766 - 6774 27 . Tsai , C . W . , Duggan , P . F . , Shimp , R . L . , Jr . , Miller , L . H . , and Narum , D . L . ( 2006 ) J Biotechnol 121 , 458 - 470 28 . Whitmore , L . , and Wallace , B . A . ( 2004 ) Nucleic Acids Res 32 , W668 - 673 29 . Whitmore , L . , and Wallace , B . A . ( 2008 ) Biopolymers 89 , 392 - 400 30 . Tsai , C . W . , Duggan , P . F . , Jin , A . J . , Macdonald , N . J . , Kotova , S . , Lebowitz , J . , Hurt , D . E . , Shimp , R . L . , Jr . , Lambert , L . , Miller , L . H . , Long , C . A . , Saul , A . , and Narum , D . L . ( 2009 ) Mol Biochem Parasitol 164 , 45 - 56 31 . Schuck , P . ( 2000 ) Biophys J 78 , 1606 - 1619 32 . Jin , A . J . , Prasad , K . , Smith , P . D . , Lafer , E . M . , and Nossal , R . ( 2006 ) Biophys J 90 , 3333 - 3344 33 . Bryson , K . , McGuffin , L . J . , Marsden , R . L . , Ward , J . J . , Sodhi , J . S . , and Jones , D . T . ( 2005 ) Nucl . Acids Res . 33 , W36 - 38 34 . Meiler , J . , and Baker , D . ( 2003 ) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100 , 12105 - 12110 35 . Meiler , J . , Müller , M . , Zeidler , A . , and Schmäschke , F . ( 2001 ) Journal of Molecular Modeling 7 , 360 - 369 36 . Ghasparian , A . , Moehle , K . , Linden , A . , and Robinson , J . A . ( 2006 ) Chem Commun ( Camb ) , 174 - 176 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 15 37 . Bisang , C . , Weber , C . , Inglis , J . , Schiffer , C . A . , van Gunsteren , W . F . , Jelesarov , I . , Bosshard , H . R . , and Robinson , J . A . ( 1995 ) Journal of the American Chemical Society 117 , 7904 - 7915 38 . Canutescu , A . A . , Shelenkov , A . A . , and Dunbrack , R . L . J . ( 2003 ) Protein Science 12 , 2001 - 2014 39 . Wu , S . , and Zhang , Y . ( 2007 ) Nucl . Acids Res . 35 , 3375 - 3382 40 . Karplus , K . , Karchin , R . , Draper , J . , Casper , J . , Mandel - Gutfreund , Y . , Diekhans , M . , and Hughey , R . ( 2003 ) Proteins : Structure , Function , and Genetics 53 , 491 - 496 41 . Shi , J . , Blundell , T . L . , and Mizuguchi , K . ( 2001 ) Journal of Molecular Biology 310 , 243 - 257 42 . Tan , K . , Duquette , M . , Liu , J . H . , Dong , Y . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . , Lawler , J . , and Wang , J . H . ( 2002 ) J Cell Biol 159 , 373 - 382 43 . Eswar , N . , Webb , B . , Marti - Renom , M . A . , Madhusudhan , M . S . , Eramian , D . , Shen , M . - y . , Pieper , U . , and Sali , A . ( 2007 ) Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using MODELLER . in Current Protocols in Protein Science , John Wiley & Sons , Inc . pp 5 . 6 . 1 - 5 . 6 . 30 44 . Kabsch , W . , and Sander , C . ( 1983 ) Biopolymers 22 , 2577 - 2637 45 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Couch , G . S . , Greenblatt , D . M . , Meng , E . C . , and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2004 ) Journal of Computational Chemistry 25 , 1605 - 1612 46 . DeLano , W . L . ( 2002 ) The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System . DeLano Scientific , San Carlos , CA , USA 47 . Cochrane , A . H . , Collins , W . E . , and Nussenzweig , R . S . ( 1984 ) Infect Immun 45 , 592 - 595 48 . Yoshida , N . , Potocnjak , P . , Nussenzweig , V . , and Nussenzweig , R . S . ( 1981 ) J Exp Med 154 , 1225 - 1236 49 . Alonso , P . L . , Sacarlal , J . , Aponte , J . J . , Leach , A . , Macete , E . , Milman , J . , Mandomando , I . , Spiessens , B . , Guinovart , C . , Espasa , M . , Bassat , Q . , Aide , P . , Ofori - Anyinam , O . , Navia , M . M . , Corachan , S . , Ceuppens , M . , Dubois , M . C . , Demoitié , M . A . , Dubovsky , F . , Menéndez , C . , Tornieporth , N . , Ballou , W . R . , Thompson , R . , and Cohen , J . Lancet 364 , 1411 - 1420 50 . Aponte , J . J . , Aide , P . , Renom , M . , Mandomando , I . , Bassat , Q . , Sacarlal , J . , Manaca , M . N . , Lafuente , S . , Barbosa , A . , Leach , A . , Lievens , M . , Vekemans , J . , Sigauque , B . , Dubois , M . C . , Demoitié , M . A . , Sillman , M . , Savarese , B . , McNeil , J . G . , Macete , E . , Ballou , W . R . , Cohen , J . , and Alonso , P . L . ( 2007 ) Lancet 370 , 1543 - 1551 51 . Bojang , K . A . , Milligan , P . J . , Pinder , M . , Vigneron , L . , Alloueche , A . , Kester , K . E . , Ballou , W . R . , Conway , D . J . , Reece , W . H . , Gothard , P . , Yamuah , L . , Delchambre , M . , Voss , G . , Greenwood , B . M . , Hill , A . , McAdam , K . P . , Tornieporth , N . , Cohen , J . D . , and Doherty , T . ( 2001 ) Lancet 358 , 1927 - 1934 52 . Roggero , M . A . , Filippi , B . , Church , P . , Hoffman , S . L . , Blum - Tirouvanziam , U . , Lopez , J . A . , Esposito , F . , Matile , H . , Reymond , C . D . , Fasel , N . , and et al . ( 1995 ) Mol Immunol 32 , 1301 - 1309 53 . Chang , H . H . , Falick , A . M . , Carlton , P . M . , Sedat , J . W . , DeRisi , J . L . , and Marletta , M . A . ( 2008 ) Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 160 , 107 - 115 54 . Justin A Boddey , R . L . M . R . J . S . A . F . C . ( 2009 ) Traffic 10 , 285 - 299 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 16 55 . Singh , A . P . , Buscaglia , C . A . , Wang , Q . , Levay , A . , Nussenzweig , D . R . , Walker , J . R . , Winzeler , E . A . , Fujii , H . , Fontoura , B . M . , and Nussenzweig , V . ( 2007 ) Cell 131 , 492 - 504 56 . Tossavainen , H . , Pihlajamaa , T . , Huttunen , T . K . , Raulo , E . , Rauvala , H . , Permi , P . , and Kilpeläinen , I . ( 2006 ) Protein Sci 15 , 1760 - 1768 57 . Bisang , C . , Jiang , L . , Freund , E . , Emery , F . , Bauch , C . , Matile , H . , Pluschke , G . , and Robinson , J . A . ( 1998 ) Journal of the American Chemical Society 120 , 7439 - 7449 58 . Matsushima , N . , Yoshida , H . , Kumaki , Y . , Kamiya , M . , Tanaka , T . , Izumi , Y . , and Kretsinger , R . H . ( 2008 ) Curr Protein Pept Sci 9 , 591 - 610 59 . Nanzer , A . P . , Torda , A . E . , Bisang , C . , Weber , C . , Robinson , J . A . , and van Gunsteren , W . F . ( 1997 ) J Mol Biol 267 , 1012 - 1025 60 . Frevert , U . ( 2004 ) Trends in Parasitology 20 , 417 - 424 61 . Frevert , U . , Usynin , I . , Baer , K . , and Klotz , C . ( 2008 ) Subcell Biochem 47 , 182 - 197 62 . Mota , M . M . , Hafalla , J . C . , and Rodriguez , A . ( 2002 ) Nat Med 8 , 1318 - 1322 63 . Mota , M . M . , Pradel , G . , Vanderberg , J . P . , Hafalla , J . C . R . , Frevert , U . , Nussenzweig , R . S . , Nussenzweig , V . , and Rodriguez , A . ( 2001 ) Science 291 , 141 - 144 64 . Prudêncio , M . , and Mota , M . M . ( 2007 ) Cell Host Microbe 2 , 286 - 288 65 . Amino , R . , Giovannini , D . , Thiberge , S . , Gueirard , P . , Boisson , B . , Dubremetz , J . F . , Prevost , M . C . , Ishino , T . , Yuda , M . , and Menard , R . ( 2008 ) Cell Host Microbe 3 , 88 - 96 66 . Coppi , A . , Tewari , R . , Bishop , J . R . , Bennett , B . L . , Lawrence , R . , Esko , J . D . , Billker , O . , and Sinnis , P . ( 2007 ) Cell Host Microbe 2 , 316 - 327 67 . Cerami , C . , Frevert , U . , Sinnis , P . , Takacs , B . , Clavijo , P . , Santos , M . J . , and Nussenzweig , V . ( 1992 ) Cell 70 , 1021 - 1033 Acknowledgements We are thankful to Dominique Jones for collecting the CD data ; Drs . Owen Schwartz and Juraj Kabat ( Biological Imaging , Research Technologies Branch , NIH ) for advice and help on confocal microscopy ; Dr . Michael B . Murphy ( GE Healthcare Live Sciences - Biacore ) for all of his assistance with the Biacore ; Olga Muratova for providing sporozoites for Western Blot analysis ; Drs . Carl Hammer and Mark Garfield for mass spectrometry and protein sequencing , respectively . This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH , including NIAID and NIBIB . Figure Legends Fig 1 . Schematic of the E . coli and P . pastoris CSP constructs . The diagram represents the full length CSP gene ( Top ) and the shortened CSP amino acid sequences Leu 19 - Ser 411 and Gly 86 - Ser 410 corresponding to the Ec CSP ( Middle ) and Pp CSP ( Bottom ) constructs respectively . The signal sequence , region 1 , repeat region , TSR domain and GPI signal are shown . The start site for the ScCSP degraded protein used to immunize mice , Ser 301 , as indicated in the methods section is indicated by an asterisk ( * ) on the diagram of the full length CSP gene . by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 17 Fig 2 . Characterization of CSP specific mAbs . ( A ) Representative immunoblot of a sporozoite lysate analyzed reacted with three mAbs : 1G12 , 4C2 and 1G2 under non - reducing ( NR ) and reducing + alkylated ( R + A ) conditions . ( B ) Confocal microscopy analysis of live sporozoites . Sporozoites were stained with the indicated monoclonal antibody at 4º C and detected using species specific secondary antibodies coupled with Alexa 488 . Fig 3 . Biophysical and biochemical characterization of Ec CSP and Pp CSP by SDS - PAGE and Immunoblot . ( A ) Coomassie blue stained SDS - PAGE of 1µg of purified recombinant Ec CSP and Pp CSP under NR and R + A conditions . ( B ) Representative immunoblot of 0 . 5µg of purified recombinant Ec CSP - ML ( Lanes 1 , 4 and 7 ) , Ec CSP - CL ( Lanes 2 , 5 and 8 ) and Pp CSP ( Lanes 3 , 6 and 9 ) under non reducing ( Lanes 1 - 3 ) , reducing ( Lanes 4 - 6 ) and reducing + alkylated ( Lanes 7 - 9 ) conditions , shown are results obtained using mAb 1G12 . Fig 4 . Circular dichroism ( CD ) analysis of Pp CSP in aqueous solution . The ellipticity ( deg cm 2 / dmol ) was plotted as a function of wavelength ( nm ) . Raw data measured in millidegrees was converted into ellipticity ( deg cm 2 / dmol ) . Spectra were obtained at 5ºC , 20 ºC , 80ºC and at 5ºC and 20 ºC following heating at 80ºC . Inset : The ellipticity ( deg cm 2 / dmol ) was plotted as a function of wavelength ( nm ) during heating . Spectra were obtained in 5ºC increments beginning at 5ºC , however data are presented in 10ºC increments beginning at 5ºC . Fig 5 . Biochemical characterization of Pp CSP by SEC - MALS - QELS HPLC and analytical ultracentrifugation . ( A ) Analysis of Pp CSP by SEC - MALS - HPLC provided the molar mass distribution of the main peak ( molar mass line indicated by arrow ) compared to the absorbance at 280nm . ( B ) The QELS goodness of fit of the auto - correlation function plot at the apex of the peak . ( C ) Sedimentation coefficient distributions and molar mass obtained from the boundary sedimentation velocity data ( not shown ) of the Pp CSP sample by the computational analysis described in the Materials and Methods . The Molar mass distribution c ( M ) vs . M shown in the inset is calculated from the c ( s ) vs . s distribution using the fitted weight average f / f o . The differential c ( s ) scale is in units of absorbance per Svedberg unit and differential c ( M ) scale is in units of absorbance per molar mass multiplied by 100 , 000 . Fig 6 . AFM characterization of Pp CSP deposited from PBS pH7 . 4 on Mica . ( A ) Panel of representative images , in three - dimensional plots ( 70 nm square viewed from the scan direction vertically , colored scale bar for height up to 0 . 4 nm bottom left , and 30 nm bars in the x – y representing scale ) , showing Pp CSP protein monomer shapes as seen in AFM topographies of uniformly dispersed Pp CSP particles on a mica surface . ( B ) Mass distribution histogram from ca 2600 computed particles reveals that about 92 % Pp CSP is seen in a monomeric state ( under the blue curve centered at the monomer volume of 33 nm 3 ) . ( C ) The histogram of the circularity , defined as 4 π ·Area / ( perimeter ) 2 , of these particles suggests flexible rod - like molecules , showing twisted - ribbon - like morphologies with a typical length to width ratio between 2 to 6 . ( D ) Histogram of the molecular area for 711 Pp CSP monomers , having a more typical measured protein volume between 0 . 75 to 1 . 25 of the monomer value in ( B ) , reveals a distribution range of approximately 120 to 200 nm 2 . Fig 7 . Molecular models . ( A ) The TSR domain of CSP ( Tyr 319 to Ser 375 ) was modeled by homology . PDB entry 1lsl is shown in gray and the model for the CSP TSR domain in green . The important disulfide bonding pattern is retained in the model ( arrows ) . Red indicates portions of the TSR region with poorly predicted structure . ( B ) NMR ( green ) and crystal ( pink ) structures for the NPNA repeat agree to less than 0 . 5 Å RMSD . ( C ) The NMR structure was extended by sequential superposition of the NPNA repeats . This view is down the long axis . ( D ) The repeat region forms a long stem - like superhelix composed of regular β - turns . The electrostatic potential mapped to the solvent - accessible surface of the repeat region indicates an area of significant negative charge in the first turn of the superhelix . ( E ) Scaled graphic by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 18 depiction of CSP extending from the lipid membrane relative to Pf AMA1 . The graphical image of Pf AMA1 was generated from a composite of the structural data for Pf AMAI and Pv AMAI ( PDB ID files : 2Q8A and 2J4W , respectively ) . The TSR domain is represented in blue , repeat region in red and the N - terminus in purple . The N - terminus depiction has been added solely to symbolize the N - terminal space . The shape of the N - terminus is a graphical illustration and is not based on structural data . by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 19 Table 1 . Inhibition of sporozoite invasion ( ISI ) assay using Plasmodium falciparum ( strain NF54 ) sporozoites and HepG2 liver cells HepG2 Liver cells were invaded by P . falciparum sporozoites in the presence of anti - CSP mAbs at the indicated concentrations . Quantification of percent inhibition was performed as described in the Experimental procedures section . Antibody Isotype Region Recognized Concentration Percent Inhibition ± SD 1G2 IgG1 Repeat 190 . 0 µg / ml 72 . 6 ± 16 . 2 1G12 IgG1 TSR 196 . 0 µg / ml 54 . 7 ± 29 . 6 4B3 IgG1 TSR 155 . 0 µg / ml 62 . 9 ± 24 . 8 4C2 IgG1 TSR 178 . 5 µg / ml 32 . 4 ± 20 . 2 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m 20 Table 2 . Biochemical and biophysical characterization of Ec CSP - ML , Ec CSP - CL and Pp CSP * The N - terminal sequence for Ec CSP - CL and Pp CSP match the expected sequence , corresponding to amino acids Leu - 19 and Gly - 86 , respectively . Ec CSP - ML contains a mixture of N - terminal sequences . The indicated amino acid start sites correspond to the amino acid positions within the Indian isolate ( Amino Acid GenBank accession no . XP _ 001351122 . 1 ) . EcCSP - ML EcCSP - CL PpCSP N - terminal Sequence * Mixture MLFQ 26 YGS 65 LKK MLFQEYQX GREGKDED Theoretical MS ( Da ) 42 , 126 . 5 42 , 125 . 5 33 , 079 . 9 Observed ESI - MS ( Da ) Mass ranging from 36 , 403 – 41 , 158 42 , 154 . 0 33 , 078 . 9 SEC - HPLC Monomer Peak Retention Time ( Minutes ) 16 . 83 16 . 08 16 . 60 SEC - MALS - HPLC ( Weight Average Molar Mass , Da ) 40 , 900 52 , 000 30 , 700 Sedimentation Velocity ( Weight Average Molar Mass , Da ) 39 , 139 42 , 409 . 5 30 , 980 Endotoxin ( EU / mg ) 5 . 3 67 . 7 5 . 0 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Repeat TSR Signal PfCSP EcPfCSP PpPfCSP Region 1 GPI Signal Figure 1 * by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Figure 6 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Albert J . Jin , Louis H . Miller , Nicholas J . MacDonald , Yimin Wu and David L . Narum Onyinyechukwu Uchime , Raul Herrera , Vu Nguyen , Jacqueline Glen , Jacob Lebowitz , Darrell E . Hurt , Brent House , Xiaoyan Zou , Yanling Zhang , Merrit Hickman , Matthew L . Plassmeyer , Karine Reiter , Richard L . Shimp , Svetlana Kotova , Paul D . Smith , malaria vaccine candidate The structure of the Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein , a leading published online July 24 , 2009 J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 013706 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here Supplemental material : http : / / www . jbc . org / content / suppl / 2009 / 07 / 24 / M109 . 013706 . DC1 by gu e s t on N ov e m b e r 7 , 2017 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m