864 • CID 2008 : 47 ( 15 September ) • BOOK REVIEWS B O O K R E V I E W S Gary P . Wormser , Section Editor Clinical Infectious Diseases 2008 ; 47 : 864 – 6 (cid:2) 2008 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America . All rights reserved . For permission to reuse , please contact journalpermissions @ press . uchicago . edu . 1058 - 4838 / 2008 / 4706 - 0027 $ 15 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1086 / 591197 Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals By Matthew James Keeling and Pejman Rohani Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 2008 . 408 pp . , Illustrated . $ 65 . 00 ( hardcover ) . Mathematical modeling of infectious dis - eases has progressed dramatically over the past 3 decades and continues to ﬂourish at the nexus of mathematics , epidemiol - ogy , and infectious diseases research . Now recognized as a valuable tool , mathemat - ical models are being integrated into the public health decision - making process more than ever before . However , despite rapid advancements in this area , a formal training program for mathematical mod - eling is lacking , and there are very few books suitable for a broad readership . To support this bridging science , a common language that is understood in all con - tributing disciplines is required . Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals is a timely and successful at - tempt to ﬁll this gap . In this volume , Kee - ling and Rohani cover many important topics in mathematical modeling of infec - tious diseases epidemiology and introduce a number of classic and modern tech - niques , with a vigilant approach that in - troduces and emphasizes the concepts but avoids the inclusion of extensive mathematical details . This recipe is ideal for a multidisciplinary ﬁeld of researchlike infectious diseases epidemiology . To intro - duce basic modeling concepts to readers who may not be familiar with mathemat - ical modeling literature , Keeling and Rohani begin with simple deterministic models . In addition , they establish fun - damental notions , such as the basic re - productive number , epidemic curve , dy - namic equilibrium , age of infection , and oscillatory dynamics . They further intro - duce more - reﬁned and advanced models by incorporating heterogeneity with be - havior or age , which accounts for vari - ability in transmission risk in real pop - ulations . An important feature of this book is its attempt to connect models with real - world outbreaks and / or epidemics and to parameterize each model with relevant disease - notiﬁcation data . Throughout the book , various examples are used , includ - ing childhood respiratory infections and inﬂuenza , HIV and other sexually trans - mitted infections , foot - and - mouth dis - ease , and West Nile virus . The book also deals with more - ad - vanced concepts , such as the circulation of multiple pathogens in a population and multihost transmission—ranging from vector - borne infections , which require persistent exchange of the pathogen be - tween (cid:1) 2 species ( such as malaria or West Nile virus infection ) , to infections that are spread throughout an animal population until they are eventually transmitted to humans ( such as avian inﬂuenza , severe acute respiratory syndrome , and rabies ) . The book also devotes a complete chapter to another feature of import to several dis - eases—that is , the characteristic oscillatory pattern of disease spread ( as seen in the case of measles , chickenpox , and rubella ) . This oscillatory behavior may arise from variability in contact rate among individ - uals ( e . g . , contacts among school children may vary during the school year vs . during summer holidays ) , seasonal variability in the size of the host population for vector - borne infections ( e . g . , malaria or dengue ) , or other environmental factors . Furthermore , the book addresses the role of chance and randomness in disease transmission . The transmission of disease is probabilistic in nature ; when an infec - tious person comes into contact with a susceptible person , there is a probability ( not certainty ) that the infection will be transmitted to the susceptible person . These models are used in mathematical epidemiology to capture realistic aspects of disease transmission . However , Mod - eling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals deals with the stochasticity in a limited way , by expanding the use of sim - ple compartmental models with randomly chosen parameters ( noise ) . It also high - lights other techniques , such as event - driven approaches and individual - based modeling , and discusses important fea - tures of stochasticity , such as spontaneous disease extinction . The book also gives an account of various techniques that are em - ployed to understand the spatial distri - bution of disease and the corresponding phenomenon of synchrony in epidemics between neighboring geographic areas . Overall , the book covers the application of classic compartmental models—and their more recent variants—extremely well . However , the book is less inclusive when it comes to the application of net - work models to the understanding of in - fectious diseases epidemiology . Despite re - cent advances in this area and increases in the application of network - based tech - niques to address disease spread , only 1 subsection of the book is allocated to the topic ; this section is very brief and much less coherent than other sections of the book . To make the book accessible to a broad range of readers , the authors encountered the difﬁcult task of striking the right bal - ance between including an adequate num - ber of mathematical formulas , to justify BOOK REVIEWS • CID 2008 : 47 ( 15 September ) • 865 quantitative and qualitativereasoning , and avoiding a deep examination of the math - ematical aspects of the models . Although the content of the book is a good testi - mony of the authors’ commitment to achieve this objective , it seems that the mathematical rigor sometimes overshad - ows the delivery of conceptual elements to readers who have different levels of fa - miliarity with mathematics . Babak Pourbohloul Division of Mathematical Modeling , British Columbia Centre for Disease Control , School of Population & Public Health , Faculty of Medicine , University of British Columbia Bennett & Brachman’s Hospital Infections Edited by William R . Jarvis Philadelphia : Wolters Kluwer / Lippincott Williams & Wilkins , 2007 . 832 pp . , Illustrated . $ 210 . 00 ( hardcover ) . A lot has happened in the ﬁeld of infection control since Bennett and Brachman pro - duced the last edition of this classic text - book . A continuous parade of pathogens has emerged that could conceivably be in - troduced into health care settings and be - come widespread . In 1998 , resistance to vancomycin in Staphylococcus aureus was possible only in theory . Recent transmis - sion of avian inﬂuenza from birds to hu - mans did not result in efﬁcient spread from human to human , which raised hopes that such an event would not recur in one’s lifetime . The coronavirus was a common cause of mild self - limited upper respiratory tract infections . Smallpox had become a pathogen of historical interest . Although the use of anthrax for purposes of bioterrorism was well recognized , prep - aration for such an attack was low on the list of local and national priorities . In hindsight , we recognize only too well that increased vigilance to detect and contain these organisms is required from a health care system that has limited resources . Changes in medical technology and treatments have facilitated the emergence of these infectious agents . More patients receive care in nonhospital settings , and rates of infection continue to rise as the population ages and survives illnesses that were previously fatal . Transmission of in - fection has become an issue of much wider scale and reaches beyond the walls of hos - pitals and , in some instances , assumes global proportions . Epidemiologists and infection - control practitioners can no longer conﬁne their practices to within acute care hospitals . A bright new cover announces that the latest edition of this textbook has been extensively revised to meet the needs of the 21st century . The new editor , Dr . Wil - liam Jarvis , has taken the helm and has conscripted an impressive list of experts with national and international perspec - tives . Although the book titleremains Hos - pital Infections by necessity , the content of the 5th edition clearly focuses on the big - ger picture of health care epidemiology and infection control . New chapters discuss important topics that range from hand hygiene , antimicro - bial stewardship , sterilization , and disin - fection to global issues . Public reporting of rates of health care – associated infection and patient safety and making a business case for infection control are also included as areas of recent and signiﬁcant concern for the ﬁeld . Not surprisingly , there is also a proliferation of electronic resources for infection - control surveillance and regula - tory issues . The index provides an exhaustive listing of potential pathogens , new and old , that have been associated with health care – as - sociated infection ; metapneumovirus , se - vere acute respiratory syndrome , and West Nile virus are just a few of the neweragents listed . The chapter about blood - borne in - fections is extended well beyond a discus - sion of HIV . Fungi have also assumed their rightful place as the cause of increasingly important infections that occur in com - promised hosts . This book is well written and organized , with up - to - date references and graphics that help to amplify points made in the text . Overall , a “how to do it” format for the neophyte is liberally interspersed with “pearls” for the experienced epidemiolo - gist and practitioner . Needless to say , there is always room to improve even the best textbook . Omissions from this textbook are few . In recent years , acts of terrorism and natural disasters have prompted health care fa - cilities to develop disaster and epidemic preparedness plans . This new and time - consuming challenge for the infection - control community is mentioned all too brieﬂy . In future editions , a chapter pro - viding some practical guidance would be most welcome . There is some overlap of information between chapters that could be more ex - tensively cross - referenced ; mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance and infection - control deﬁnitions are some examples of redundancy . In addition , there are only so many ways that infections can be clinically deﬁned , transmitted , and prevented , even if they occur in different health care set - tings . However , when areas of controversy arise , discussion of a topic from multiple viewpoints is always welcome . In summary , Hospital Infections is a most worthy successor to the previous 4 editions . This authoritative textbook will continue to educate newcomers and to provide advice to both experienced epi - demiologists and practitioners as they an - ticipate new challenges in the ever - chang - ing ﬁeld of health care epidemiology and infection control . Suzanne F . Bradley Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Geriatric Medicine , University of Michigan Medical School , Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System , Ann Arbor , Michigan New Books Received Barton LL , Friedman NR . The Neurological Manifestations of PediatricInfectiousDis - eases and Immunodeﬁciency Syndromes . Totowa , NJ : Humana Press , 2008 . 409 866 • CID 2008 : 47 ( 15 September ) • BOOK REVIEWS pages . $ 139 . 00 ( hardcover ) . ISBN : 978 – 1 - 588 – 29 - 967 – 3 . Dembek ZF . Medical Aspects of Biological Warfare . Washington , DC : Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General at TMM Publications , 2007 . 694 pages ( hardcover ) . ISBN : 978 - 0160797316 . Dodet B . Vaccination : A Tool for the Control of Avian Inﬂuenza . Basel , Switzerland : Karger , 2008 . 196 pages . $ 188 . 00 ( soft cover ) . ISBN : 978 - 3 - 8055 - 8484 - 5 . Gisselquist D . Points to Consider . London , UK : Adonis & Abbey Publishers , 2008 . 223 pages . $ 25 . 00 ( soft cover ) . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 90568 - 45 - 6 . Glasziou PP , Irwig L , Aronson JK . Evidence - Based Medical Monitoring . Malden , MA : Blackwell Publishing / BMJI Books , 2008 . 356 pages . $ 100 . 00 ( soft cover ) . ISBN : 1405153997 . Mak TW , Saunders ME . Primer to the Im - mune Response . Boston , MA : Academic Press , 2008 . 445 pages . $ 59 . 95 ( soft cover ) . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 12 - 374163 - 9 . Nachamkin I , Szymanski CM , Blaser MJ . Campylobacter . Washington , DC : Amer - ican Society for Microbiology , 2008 . 732 pages . $ 159 . 95 ( hardcover ) . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 55581 - 473 - 3 . Skolnik NS , Albert RH . Essential Infectious Disease Topics for Primary Care . Totowa , NJ : Humana Press , 2008 . 300 pages . $ 89 . 95 ( hardcover ) . ISBN : 978 - 1 - 588 - 29 - 520 - 0 . variability and infectious disease occurrence . The second looks at early indicators of already - emerging infectious disease impacts of long - term climate change . The third uses the above evidence to create predictive models to estimate the future burden of infectious disease under projected climate change scenarios . Historical Evidence There is much evidence of associations between climatic conditions and infectious diseases . Malaria is of great public health concern , and seems likely to be the vector - borne disease most sensitive to long - term climate change . Â Table 6 . 1 : Examples of how diverse environmental changes affect the occurrence of various infectious diseases in humans ( Refernce 5 ) . Environmental changes Dams , canals , irrigation . Agricultural intensification .