18 Years of Ethics in Child - Computer Interaction Research : A Systematic Literature Review Maarten Van Mechelen Center for Computational Thinking and Design Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark mvanmechelen @ cc . au . dk Gökçe Elif Baykal Center for Computational Thinking and Design Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark elif . baykal @ cc . au . dk Christian Dindler Center for Computational Thinking and Design Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark dindler @ cc . au . dk Eva Eriksson Center for Computational Thinking and Design Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark evae @ cc . au . dk Ole Sejer Iversen Center for Computational Thinking and Design Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark oivesen @ cc . au . dk ABSTRACT Recent years have seen growing interest in ‘ethics’ within the Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) community . In this paper , we take stock of 18 years of CCI research by conducting a systematic literature study exploring how and to what extent ethics has been dealt with in the community’s leading venues : the Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) conference and the International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) . Searching all papers in the IDC conference proceedings and IJCCI , 157 papers were found that use the word stem ‘ethic * ’ . Based on our analysis of these papers , our study demonstrates that while ethics is frequently mentioned , the literature remains underdeveloped in a number of areas including deﬁnition and theoretical basis , the reporting of formal ethical approval pro - cedures , and the extent to which design and participation ethics is dealt with . Based on our study we provide ﬁve avenues of future research in the interests of developing a more explicit discourse on ethics in CCI . Author Keywords Ethics ; Children ; Child - Computer Interaction ; Systematic Literature Review CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Interaction design theory , concepts and paradigms ; Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IDC’20 , June 21 – 24 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom © 2020 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7981 - 6 / 20 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394407 INTRODUCTION Recent years have seen an increased interest in ethics in Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) research . At the IDC 2018 con - ference , a panel emphasized the need for a more developed understanding of ethics in IDC research raising questions such as what do children gain from participating in our research and what constitutes evidence of those beneﬁts , how can we explain to children what the research is that we want them to participate in , and as researchers , what are our obligations to the community of children we work with after the research ends ? This was followed by a similar 2019 initiative , which ‘broadened the discussion of ethics in the Interaction Design and Children’ [ 74 ] . Also , recent IDC conferences have re - quired a mandatory section on child participation and recruit - ment for all research papers including ethical considerations on how children are engaged in the design process and what consent processes were followed , how they were treated , how data sharing was communicated , and especially any additional ethical considerations . In this paper , we extend the concern for addressing ethics in CCI by exploring how and to what extent ethics has been dealt with in CCI research . We address this question by conducting a systematic literature review of 18 years of CCI research as presented in the IDC conference pro - ceedings and in the International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( IJCCI ) , the two primary venues of the CCI com - munity . Merriam - Webster deﬁnes ‘ethic’ as “ . . . the discipline dealing with what is good and bad , and with moral duty and obliga - tion” . While overarching deﬁnitions , such as this one , provide a starting point , the ambition of this study is to investigate to what extent CCI research contains more contextualized articu - lations of ‘ethics’ in relation to designing technology for and with children , acknowledging that this area of research comes with “ . . . unique ethical challenges and responsibilities , related both to the inclusion of children in the research and design processes and to the outcomes of that work” [ 71 ] . Others have pursued this line of inquiry before . Markopoulos et al . [ 121 ] , for instance , address ethical and legal issues related to evaluating interactive products for children , whereas Antle [ 9 ] discussed the ethics of doing research with vulnerable popu - lations in CCI . In a 2011 study , Yarosh et al . examined the values held by the IDC community by analysing nine years of research . Their ambition was to provide a tool in which par - ticipants could deﬁne its culture , conduct informed research , and reﬂect on their own design process [ 202 ] . In their study , ‘ethics’ is deﬁned in relation to ‘personal growth’ . Yarosh et al . found that only 2 percent of all IDC papers focuses on supporting children in developing morally and ethically [ 202 ] . However , as pointed out by Frauenberger et al . [ 74 ] , ethics also includes a broader concern for children’s well - being be - fore , during and after their engagement in the design process . What is labeled as ‘co - design’ and ‘diversity’ values in Yarosh et al . [ 202 ] is referred to by Spiel et al . as research ethics and thereby included in a more diverse understanding of ethics that reaches beyond personal growth [ 179 ] . According to Spiel et al . [ 179 ] , research ethics includes the normative or formal aspects of ethics determined by laws , norms and guidelines , but also applied ethics that includes how we can think ethically about speciﬁc issues . Finally , besides from research ethics , Spiel et al . [ 179 ] also remind us to reﬂect on the level of micro - ethics understood as the ethics of what happens in concrete interactions between individuals in the design process ( ibid , p . 2 ) . This is in line with the In - Action Ethics framework , that calls for ethical processes to be responsive to issues as they arise in design , inclusive of stakeholders and reﬂective as an activity [ 75 ] . Hence , ethics in CCI research can be considered in relation to personal growth , as normative research ethics , as applied ethics and at the level of in situ interactions between individuals . The study provided in this paper seeks to give a comprehensive account of the multi - faceted and multi - layered use of ethics in the CCI community’s primary venues : IDC and IJCCI . Our mission is to provide a broad overview of the past 18 years of ethics in CCI research and , more importantly , to develop a starting point to more thoroughly discuss the ethical challenges of designing digital technology with and for children . The paper reads as follows . First , we brieﬂy discuss how ethics are a concern in related research areas . Second , we discuss our methodological considerations for conducting the system - atic literature review including the selection and analysis of research papers , and the limitations of our study . Third , we present the results of our analysis by looking at deﬁnitions and theoretical groundings of ethics , types of ethics , actors concerned with ethics , and different contexts of ethics . Finally , we discuss the main ﬁndings and formulate actions points to guide the CCI community forward . BACKGROUND Ethics is not only a concern in CCI but has been addressed in many research areas , often from a multidisciplinary perspec - tive . Looking beyond CCI , ethics has a long tradition within ﬁelds such as philosophy , medicine and the social sciences , and is also evident in more closely - related research areas that deal with children , technology and design . In terms of the ethics of technology , the related area of HCI has a relatively well - developed discourse on ethics , dealing with the design and use of digital technology [ 169 ] and HCI - speciﬁc research ethics [ 72 ] . In terms of the ethics of design , there are also resources to be found in related areas . Within design studies , the discourse on design ethics stretches back to , at least , the 1990’s ( e . g . [ 61 , 126 ] ) with a recent overview provided by Chan [ 34 ] . Also , the related area of participatory design has covered issues ranging from the micro - ethics of participatory work [ 179 ] to broader issues of ethical theories and repre - sentation [ 158 ] . Finally , the issue of engaging with children in research has been addressed in a wealth of research areas from social sciences ( e . g . [ 131 ] ) to medicine ( e . g . [ 46 ] ) to more general considerations on conducting research with chil - dren ( e . g . [ 4 ] ) . The abundance of work in these areas speak to the relevance and importance of addressing ethics in the intersection between children , technology and design . METHOD We conducted a systematic literature review [ 79 ] to explore how and to what extent ‘ethics’ is addressed in 18 years of CCI research . In our review , we delimit the scope to IDC and IJCCI which are the leading venues for the CCI community . The review is a response to this year’s conference theme “that invites critical and generative perspectives that take stock of two decades of IDC research to conceptualize the role and impact of digital technology for children . ” The systematic review process can be divided into two main parts : ( 1 ) data extraction and selection , and ( 2 ) data analysis . Data Extracting and Selection Search Query We included all conference proceedings of IDC which cover the period between 2003 and 2019 . No proceedings of the ﬁrst edition of the conference in 2002 are available and , hence , could not be included in our review . In addition , we included all articles published in IJCCI from the start of the journal in 2013 until September 2019 . For extracting IDC papers in the ACM Digital Library and IJCCI articles in the ScienceDirect database , we used the search query ethic * , which allowed us to search for all stemmed words at once ( e . g . , ethics , ethical ) . This resulted in a total of 181 papers . Exclusion Criteria Since we are interested in how ethics is dealt with in research and design , we applied the following exclusion criteria to our initial set of 181 papers : • Papers using the term ethic * exclusively in keywords and / or references were excluded , as they provide no or little in - formation about how ethics is addressed in research and design . • Panels , keynote abstracts , workshop proposals and position papers , course proposals , doctoral consortium papers , and editorials were excluded , because these formats either do not report on research and design or present less mature work . Based on these criteria , 24 papers were excluded , resulting in 157 papers for analysis , including 122 IDC papers ( i . e . , full , short , work - in - progress , demo and art installation papers ) and 35 IJCCI papers . The data extraction and selection process was conducted by only one author , but all ﬁve authors were involved in deﬁning the exclusion criteria . Data Analysis Deﬁning categories To analyze the selected papers , we used the template approach for qualitative analysis described by Robson and McCartan [ 159 ] . We derived a set of categories from our research ques - tion ‘How and to what extent is ethics addressed in CCI re - search ? ’ on an a priori basis . These categories served as a template or ‘bins’ for data analysis , and were reﬁned in two rounds . For each round , the ﬁve authors analyzed 10 randomly selected papers individually , and then compared the results and inductively revised the categories . This was done to assure that the categories reﬂected the ethics - related content of the papers , and to create a common understanding of the categories . The resulting template is as follows : • Deﬁnitions of ethics , if any • Theoretical positions with regard to ethics , if any • Types of ethics : formal / informal procedural , design , situa - tional , participation , or everyday ethics • Primary actors concerned with ethics : researchers / designers , children , parents , teachers , or domain experts • Primary context of ethics : in the research / design process , in formal education , or in the product In addition , we collected meta - data about each paper , includ - ing the year of publication and the number of instances of ethic * . Deductive and Inductive Analysis All ﬁve authors were involved in the analysis . The 157 pa - pers were randomly assigned to reviewer dyads ; each author analyzed 32 papers as a primary reviewer and another 32 as secondary reviewer . The primary reviewer read the paper thor - oughly and categorized the ethics - related content by applying the template . Text segments that are empirical evidence for categories were identiﬁed , extracted into an Excel sheet , and provided with a descriptive summary . The secondary reviewer then checked the categorization and discussed any disagree - ments with the primary reviewer until consensus was reached . If needed , the other three team members were invited in the discussion . All disagreements could be resolved this way . To improve reliability and consistency , each author was primary reviewer in one dyad , and secondary reviewer in another dyad , which means that each reviewer was paired with two different peers in the review process . For the second round of analysis , the content of each category of the template was analyzed and subcategories were identi - ﬁed inductively . This was done in plenum , and resulted in between three to eight subcategories per main category . The subcategories were color - coded in the Excel sheet to provide a visual overview ( i . e . , a matrix ) , enabling the authors to look for patterns across categories . The categories , subcategories and patterns are presented in the results section . Limitations In terms of limitations , our systematic literature review only includes papers that explicitly use the term ethic * . It may be argued that papers can address ethical issues or deal with the nature of ethics without explicitly using the term or by using related terms such as ‘values’ or ‘moral’ . We are , however , speciﬁcally interested in the discourse on ethics in relation to CCI , and hence conﬁned the search as described . Also , this study only includes papers that are published in IDC proceedings and IJCCI , although there will likely be relevant work outside these venues ( e . g . CHI , TEI ) . This choice of scope was done in the interest of maintaining a manageable corpus of papers and based on the fact that IDC and IJCCI are the leading venues for publishing CCI research . Moreover , the review is a response to this year’s conference theme to take stock of the past two decades of research . Finally , in terms of reproducibility , we experienced problems with the ACM Digital Library . Some papers from 2005 , 2012 and 2014 did not show up in the search results , because the pdf ﬁles are stored in an unsearchable format . In our study we have acquired readable versions of the missing proceedings to make the search complete , but this workaround makes the reproducibility of this study cumbersome . RESULTS In this section , we present the results from the analysis of the 157 included papers . An overview of all included papers is given in Table 1 . In the analysis , we used the category ‘Def - initions of ethics’ to indicate explicit deﬁnitions of ethics in CCI , and the category ‘Theoretical position’ to code papers in regards to what references and frameworks are used for ethics . The category ‘Types of ethics’ was used to identify different types of ethics that are being addressed in CCI , result - ing in eight subcategories : formal procedural research ethics , informal procedural research ethics , situational ethics , partici - pation ethics , design ethics , everyday ethics , teaching design ethics , and teaching everyday ethics . In the category ‘Actors concerned with ethics’ , we distinguished between six actors responsible for ethical concerns : researchers and designers , children , parents and primary caregivers , educators , and do - main experts . Lastly , the category ‘Context of ethics’ was used to identify various contexts in which ethics is practiced , resulting in three subcategories : in the research and design process , in formal education and in the product . The percentage of all papers published in IDC proceedings ( 2003 - 2019 ) and IJCCI ( 2013 - 2019 ) that mentions ethic * in the body text is 13 , 7 % ( 157 out of 1143 ) . We can see an increasing tendency , from 3 % ( 1 out of 31 ) of all papers published in IDC proceedings in 2003 , to 32 % ( 34 out of 106 ) of all papers published in IDC proceedings and IJCCI in 2019 . However , from the 157 papers included in this re - view , 91 ( 58 % ) mention ethic * only once , 25 ( 16 % ) mention ethic * twice , 22 ( 14 % ) mention ethic * three times , 9 papers ( 6 % ) mention ethic * four times , and 10 papers ( 12 % ) mention YEAR NR % REFERENCE 2003 1 3 [ 155 ] 2004 1 3 [ 92 ] 2005 2 12 , 5 [ 138 , 99 ] 2006 1 3 [ 70 ] 2007 2 5 [ 54 , 45 ] 2008 3 9 [ 194 , 154 , 117 ] 2009 2 3 [ 24 , 119 ] 2010 3 5 [ 120 , 82 , 76 ] 2011 4 8 [ 202 , 49 , 133 , 149 ] 2012 4 7 [ 73 , 97 , 101 , 173 ] 2013 12 10 IJCCI 1 [ 157 ] IDC 11 [ 38 , 145 , 52 , 93 , 174 , 69 ] [ 172 , 163 , 183 , 59 , 187 ] 2014 6 8 IJCCI 2 [ 2 , 53 ] IDC 4 [ 43 , 151 , 58 , 113 ] 2015 9 10 IJCCI 3 [ 21 , 139 , 23 ] IDC 6 [ 60 , 175 , 197 , 118 , 81 , 29 ] 2016 26 29 IJCCI 2 [ 66 , 147 ] IDC 24 [ 28 , 78 , 110 , 8 , 129 , 208 ] [ 123 , 86 , 132 , 100 , 12 , 161 ] [ 85 , 148 , 176 , 111 , 146 , 33 ] [ 209 , 19 , 201 , 55 , 18 , 207 ] 2017 18 14 IJCCI 5 [ 195 , 206 , 180 , 130 , 88 ] IDC 13 [ 35 , 57 , 98 , 200 , 114 , 144 ] [ 17 , 94 , 3 , 143 , 37 , 106 , 107 ] 2018 29 23 , 5 IJCCI 9 [ 15 , 105 , 156 , 103 , 68 ] [ 104 , 185 , 108 , 160 ] IDC 20 [ 203 , 192 , 196 , 178 , 199 ] [ 189 , 164 , 166 , 65 , 64 ] [ 182 , 168 , 84 , 95 , 39 ] [ 87 , 205 , 171 , 198 , 134 ] 2019 34 32 IJCCI 13 [ 137 , 177 , 190 , 22 , 5 , 191 , 48 ] [ 140 , 20 , 181 , 204 , 125 , 40 ] IDC 21 [ 7 , 210 , 16 , 170 , 184 , 115 ] [ 80 , 162 , 30 , 6 , 211 , 25 , 32 , 193 ] [ 109 , 10 , 42 , 44 , 124 , 63 , 26 , 136 ] Table 1 . Overview of the 157 included papers according to year and venue . ’ % ’ details the percentage of total papers that mention ’ethic * ’ . Before 2013 , all papers derive from IDC . One 58 % Two 16 % Three 14 % Four 6 % ≥ Five 6 % Figure 1 . Number of times ethic * is mentioned in the body text of the included papers . ethic * ﬁve times or more in the body text , see Figure 1 for an overview . Deﬁnitions and Theoretical Positions The results revealed 73 unique references for ethics , but no deﬁnitions of the term ethics are provided . However , one pa - per on immersive virtual reality in classrooms [ 177 ] , divides research ethics in procedural ethics [ 83 ] and ethics - in - practice [ 142 ] . Procedural ethics is deﬁned as the process of seek - ing institutional approval for research by demonstrating that ethical principles have been applied in research design and protocols . Ethics in - practice is deﬁned as researchers making judgements and decisions in real time through careful observa - tion , awareness and sensitivity [ 142 ] . Another paper , focused on ethical concerns in participatory design with children [ 151 ] , argues for ‘ethical symmetry’ in addition to consent . Ethical symmetry between researchers and children is deﬁned as the understanding of children as social actors , meaning that re - searchers take as their starting point the view that the ethical relationship between researchers and informant is the same whether they conduct research with adults or with children [ 41 ] . The most common type of references found are for formal procedural research ethics , meaning national or organisational ethical policies or guidelines , such as National Science Foun - dation ( NSF ) , National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , American Psychological Association ( APA ) , Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , European union , Danish ministry of educa - tion , British Educational Research Association ( BERA ) , and similar guidelines provided by national or state organizations . Another common type of references relates to doing research with children with disabilities , e . g . [ 89 , 141 , 52 , 31 , 13 ] , and includes the most cited paper on ethics that presents socially and ethically aware inclusive design guidelines for people with disabilities [ 1 ] . The three papers citing this work all have a focus on children with autism or special needs education . Eight unique references on ethics derive from within the IDC conference [ 11 , 52 , 56 , 82 , 112 , 111 , 151 , 202 ] . The most cited author is from inside the CCI community , Janet Read , who is cited 6 times , with 4 unique papers [ 151 , 153 , 152 , 150 ] . Eight unique references on ethics derive from CHI [ 91 , 89 , 122 , 127 , 128 , 153 ] including a mention of a special interest group meeting at CHI 2001 [ 127 ] . Seven unique references derive from ﬁelds such as medicine and psychology [ 167 , 165 , 67 , 62 , 14 , 141 , 116 ] , while four references derives from learning sciences [ 77 , 135 , 47 ] . One reference stemming from social sciences [ 186 ] argues that ethical problems in research involving direct contact with children can be overcome by using a participatory approach . However , participatory design activities raise ethical questions that are not always considered in a standard ethics review . Some references on ethics in CCI research are concerned with this issue , such as the CHECK tool to inform and encourage ethical practice in participatory design with children [ 153 ] . Other examples of references on ethical considerations in participatory design include [ 122 , 27 , 151 ] . Types of Ethics We can distinguish eight different types of ethics in CCI re - search . The ﬁrst type concerns formal procedural research ethics . This entails procedures to protect participants from physical and / or psychological harm , obtaining informed con - sent from children and their parents , procedures to prevent an invasion of privacy including data collection and storage proto - cols , and , if applicable , argumentation for the use of deception . These formal procedures are typically developed before the re - search and design process , and result in institutional approval from the university’s review board or ethics committee . How - ever , the requirements to obtain such formal approval vary across countries , universities and even faculties . Out of 157 papers , 78 ( 49 % ) ﬁt the category formal procedural research ethics . These papers can be divided into two groups ; papers that brieﬂy mention institutional approval without giving any further information ( e . g . [ 114 , 206 , 15 , 48 , 193 ] ) , and papers that give more details about ethics procedures and how these were implemented after obtaining institutional approval . For instance , in the context of a digital game to collect data about children’s awareness of law in their everyday lives , Law et al . [ 110 ] describe how they verbally informed children and their parents about the goal of the study , the purpose of the research tools , their rights as participants , the type of data they would collect and how it would be anonymized and securely stored in encrypted devices . A summary of this information was provided in jargon - free language in a consent form that parents had to sign before their children could partake in the research activities . Similarly , Allsop [ 5 ] discusses how she dealt with formal procedural research ethics to conduct fo - cus groups in schools to evaluate children’s computational thinking processes . Adhering to the British Psychological So - ciety Ethical guidelines , she obtained informed consent from head - teachers of participating schools and parents , informed children about the goal of the focus groups , explained that she would audio - record and transcribe their dialogues , and reminded them of their right to withdraw from the study at any time . The second type , informal procedural research ethics deals with similar challenges as the previous category , but in a less formalised way , and both before and during the research and design process . Whereas formal procedural research ethics typically results in institutional approval , this is not the case for informal procedural research ethics . 32 papers ( 20 % ) ﬁt this category . Examples include considerations about good ethical practice when working with children ( e . g , [ 82 , 144 , 42 ] ) , the inclusion of vulnerable children in the research and design process , such as children with special needs ( e . g . [ 73 , 53 , 176 ] ) , and challenges regarding data protection and privacy ( e . g . [ 70 , 157 , 106 ] ) . Another example concerns the use of deception in research activities , meaning that children are not fully informed about the aims of the study they partake in . Höysniemi et al . [ 92 ] , for instance , describe the use of the Wizard of Oz method in the design of computer vision based action games controlled by body movements . The authors engage in an ethical discussion related to the use of the method , and claim that existing ethical codes and principles are of little help to deal with concerns regarding deception of participants . The third type , situational ethics , considers moments of eth - ical importance during the research and design process , also referred to as ‘in - action ethics’ and ‘micro ethics’ . These are often unexpected events , such as a child participant showing signs of personal distress , to which researchers have to respond on the spot in ethical ways . When reported , instances of situa - tional ethics can result in new formal procedural standards in the long run . Only 3 papers ( 2 % ) mention situational ethics . Pares et al . ( 2005 ) discuss ethical challenges that emerged when involving children with autism and their parents in the research and design process . They had to tone down the partic - ipants’ expectations because they seemed to have unjustiﬁed hope that the project would result in “the technical solution” to autism . Yarosh et al . [ 203 ] , in turn , explain how they gave priority to ethical considerations over procedural consistency when involving children as testers of a speech interface ; they wanted to ensure that every child left the study feeling as if they succeeded . Another example of situational ethics is pro - vided by Sim et al . [ 172 ] , who compared three prototypes ranging from low to high ﬁdelity within the context of mobile games . They allowed children who were assigned to test low - ﬁdelity prototypes to play the high - ﬁdelity version after the study because it was perceived as more fun . The fourth type , participation ethics , concerns the value of participation and representation , and how we engage children actively in the research and design process . This type of ethics also concerns the interpersonal bonds between researchers and children , and what children can gain from participating in the research and design process . Only 9 papers ( 6 % ) ) ﬁt in this category . Chen et al . [ 39 ] , for instance , acknowledge the im - portance of participation ethics , emphasizing that researchers and designers have to be sensitive to children’s values when giving them a voice . In a similar line of thought , Lindberg et al . [ 113 ] point out that participation in research should not be too demanding , especially when working with vulnerable populations such as children diagnosed with cancer . Iversen and Smith [ 97 ] , in turn , reﬂect on the shift from politics to ethics in their participatory design work with teenagers , and how this approach affects key design activities including the establishment of the design space , the power relations among participants , and the ﬁnal outcome of the project which is not conﬁned to the research prototype but instead aims to provide children with meaningful alternatives to existing technologies . Lastly , Read et al . [ 150 ] highlight ethical concerns about par - ticipatory design with children . To address these concern , they developed a method to help children understand how their de - sign ideas are used which itself challenges researchers to seek a fair and equitable process that is describable and defensible . The ﬁfth type , design ethics , concerns the actual or potential impact of technology on our lives and society at large . Design ethics can relate to existing technology and technology that is currently being developed , and is also referred to as ‘ethics of technology’ . 13 papers ( 8 % ) in our selection refer to design ethics . For instance , Fitton and Read [ 63 ] , identiﬁed a set of problematic dark design patterns in free - to - play mobile apps for children , which often include advertising and other mech - anisms for monetization . With their study , they aim to raise awareness and stimulate further research on this important ethical challenge . Antle et al . [ 10 ] , in turn , reﬂect on the possible negative impact of technology advances in robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence in the context of an interactive socio - emotional learning system that aims to teach children how to regulate their emotions and develop empathy . Other examples include concerns raised by researchers about data privacy in the design of robotic agents that monitor children’s behaviour and collect sensitive data ( e . g . [ 175 , 78 , 86 , 111 ] ) . The sixth type , everyday ethics , deals with ethical concerns in daily life and social interactions between people without an explicit link to technology . 18 papers ( 11 % ) with a wide range of topics ﬁt in this category . Fields et al . [ 60 ] , for in - stance , discuss everyday ethics in the context of children’s online communication . Based on an extensive analysis of children’s feedback on user - generated content in the online Scratch community , they explain how children negotiate ethics ( e . g . , dealing with rude behaviour and copyright infringe - ments ) . Cuthbertson [ 45 ] , in turn , refers to everyday ethics when presenting a collaborative discovery - based educational model that simultaneously addresses different learning styles . This model , that was implemented with emerging interactive media technologies , resulted in a strong sense of group ethic among the students , which facilitated their learning . Another example stems from the work of Malinverni and Pares [ 118 ] who compared children’s collaborative learning experiences based on two different interaction paradigms ( full body and desktop computer interaction ) . They mention ethics in relation to educational policies on the use of technology in learning contexts . A last example provided by Brevik et al . [ 30 ] refers to ethics in relation to child marriage and presents a mobile application aimed at informing youth in Malawi about the prevalence and dangers of child marriage . The seventh type , teaching design ethics , focuses on raising critical awareness about the impact of technology on people’s lives and society at large . Here , ethics is conceived as an explicit learning goal . This is also the case for the eighth type , teaching everyday ethics , aimed at learning children to become ethical actors and deal with ethical challenges in daily life . Teaching everyday ethics does not necessarily mention ethics in relation to technology . Only 2 papers ( 1 % ) report on teaching design ethics , and 3 papers ( 2 % ) report on teaching everyday ethics . Radu and Antle [ 148 ] provide a good exam - ple of teaching design ethics . They present a concept for an augmented human system that allows students to experience life from the perspective of different organisms by control - ling a nanobot entering living creatures . Albeit a simulation , this approach raises ethical concerns about experimentation on living creatures for the purpose of learning . The idea is that , while interacting with the system , students learn to be - come ethical actors in reﬂecting on this and similar issues . Tuhkala et al . [ 191 ] , in turn , discuss teaching design ethics in the context of a new learning subject for secondary edu - cation , technology comprehension , initiated by the Danish Ministry of Education . An important aspect of technology comprehension is the ability to critically reﬂect on technology , its applicability and impact , and ethical concerns related to the broader socio - political context in which the technology is applied . An example of teaching everyday ethics can be found in the work of Robertson and Good [ 155 ] who present a virtual role - playing environment designed for educational drama development and writing instruction . They demonstrate how the system can be used to help children explore difﬁcult ethical problems through simulation . Two papers ( 1 . 5 % ) were labelled as ‘miscellaneous’ because it was unclear which type of ethics was referred to , and for three papers ( 2 % ) , two types of ethics could be identiﬁed , one of which being ‘formal procedural research ethics’ . Actors Concerned with Ethics We distinguished six different actors for whom ethics is of pri - mary importance in CCI research . In 136 papers ( 86 % ) , ethics was mentioned in relation to researchers and designers who are responsible for dealing with ethical concerns before , dur - ing and / or after the research and design process . One such responsibility is obtaining institutional approval from the uni - versity’s institutional review board or ethics committee . Since this is usually done beforehand , participants do not yet come into play and , hence , papers that mention ethics in relation to obtaining institutional approval were categorised as ‘re - searchers and designers’ to indicate the primary actor . ( e . g . [ 8 , 12 , 160 , 6 ] ) . Not surprisingly , researchers and designers could be identiﬁed as a primary actor in almost all papers that deal with formal procedural research ethics ( 75 out of 78 ) , informal procedural research ethics ( 29 out of 32 ) , situational ethics ( 3 out of 3 ) , participation ethics ( 9 out of 9 ) , design ethics ( 13 out of 13 ) , and roughly half of the papers ( 7 out of 18 ) that deal with everyday ethics . In 33 of the 136 papers that refer to researchers and designers , one or two additional actors could be identiﬁed to whom ethics is important , and in 26 cases this additional actor is children . Closely related to researchers and designers is the actor ‘research community’ , in this case the Child - Computer Interaction community . Here , the community of a particular research ﬁeld as a whole is addressed , for in - stance to share ethical guidelines for working with children in the research and design process . Only one paper by Yarosh et al . [ 202 ] addresses the community as a whole ; the authors mention ethics as one of the core values of the CCI community based on a content analysis of nine years of research . Children were referred to in 46 papers ( 29 % ) as a primary actor in relation to ethics . Although different wordings were used across papers ( e . g . , teens , adolescents , youth , students , toddlers ) , we use the term children to refer to all people up to 18 years old . As expected in CCI research , a wide range of children is included in the research and design process , ranging from typically developing children over vulnerable and underprivileged children to children with special needs . Moreover , children have different roles in the research and de - sign process , ranging from passive research subjects to active participants . Children could be identiﬁed as a primary actor in all papers that deal with situational ethics ( 3 out of 3 ) and teaching everyday or design ethics ( 5 out of 5 ) , in the majority of papers that deal with design ethics ( 9 out of 14 ) and ev - eryday ethics ( 11 out of 18 ) , and in approximately one third of the papers concerned with informal procedural research ethics ( 12 out of 32 ) and participation ethics ( 3 out of 9 ) . In 33 out of 46 papers that refer to children , one or two additional actors could be identiﬁed to whom ethics is important , and in 26 papers this additional actor is researchers and designers . Examples of papers in which children are a primary actor in - clude the work of Robertson and Good [ 155 ] and Radu and Antle [ 148 ] who are concerned with teaching ethics . They developed technology that aims to teach children how to deal with ethical challenges in daily life . Other papers that focus primarily on children include the previously discussed work of Fields et al . [ 60 ] , who shed light on how children negoti - ate ethics in online communities , and Cuthbertson [ 45 ] , who discusses how interactive media technologies can facilitate learning by creating a sense of group ethic . In these exam - ples of everyday ethics , ethical behaviour emerges between children without it being an explicit goal of the researchers and designers . Another ethics actor is parents and primary caregivers . They can be passive research subjects , active par - ticipants and / or proxies for children ( e . g . , when participating on behalf of their children , when providing consent for their children ) . Only four papers ( 2 . 5 % ) address ethics in relation to parents and other primary caregivers whilst also referring to children and researchers and designers . For instance , Fraser et al . [ 70 ] discuss challenges related to negotiating ethics when involving families in the design of technology that keeps track of personal data to support children in their transition between home and school . Such technology raises ethical concerns about the rights of children to privacy as it aims to increase links between home and school while children often actively resist such information transfer . Similarly , Hartikainen et al . [ 86 ] reﬂect on the results of a public discourse survey about children’s online privacy . They argue that parents risk losing their children’s trust if they restrict internet access and monitor children’s online behaviour . In designing technical mediation tools , it is therefore important to aim for transparency and trust , and to incorporate views of both parents and children . Educators are another actor mentioned in relation to ethics , and refers to both school teachers and all kinds of education facilitators , such as people who work with children in fablabs and maker spaces . Only four papers ( 2 . 5 % ) refer to educators whilst also referring to children , and three of these papers deal with everyday ethics . A good example is the work of Smith et al . [ 174 ] who reﬂect on ethical conﬂicts that may occur between parents and teachers when involving social technolo - gies in teaching , especially since children may appropriate the technology in unintended ways that subvert positive learning experiences . A different example is provided by Sobel et al . [ 175 ] who discuss the current state of inclusive play in CCI research based on extensive empirical work . They identiﬁed key facilitators that can support children , parents and teach - ers with inclusive play , and show how ethics ( e . g . , privacy issues ) might introduce trade - offs and barriers when designing inclusive play technologies . A ﬁnal actor is domain experts , which refers to all third parties and external stakeholders in the research and design process ( e . g . , hospitals , companies ) . Domain experts were mentioned in 3 papers ( 2 % ) in relation to ethics , whilst simul - taneously referring to researchers and designers . For instance , Ferrarini et al . [ 59 ] report on a project in which academia and industry partners joined forces to design for vulnerable generations , whereas Benveniste et al . [ 24 ] and Mora - Guiard et al . [ 129 ] collaborated with hospitals and needed ethical approval to work in these contexts . Five papers ( 3 % ) were categorised as miscellaneous because no actor could be identiﬁed , and in approximately one fourth of the papers ( 26 % ) ethics was mentioned in relation to two or three actors ; the most common combination are children , researchers and designers . Context of Ethics We distinguished three different contexts in which ethics is primarily dealt with . A majority of 125 papers ( 79 % ) is con - cerned with ethics in the research and design process . Re - search and design are merged because they are often inter - twined in CCI literature ( e . g . , in Research through Design approaches ) . Not surprisingly , the research and design pro - cess was referred to in most papers ( 75 out of 78 ) that deal with formal procedural research ethics ( 75 out of 78 ; e . g . , [ 43 , 161 ] ) , informal procedural research ethics ( 30 out of 32 ; e . g . , [ 154 , 53 ] ) , situational ethics ( 2 out of 3 ; [ 203 , 172 ] ) , and participation ethics ( 9 out of 9 ; e . g . , [ 168 , 196 ] ) . A further dis - tinction can be made based on the timing in the research and design process . Whereas formal procedural research ethics typically deals with ethics before the start of the process in order to obtain institutional approval , situational ethics deals with emerging challenges during the process . For informal procedural research ethics and participation ethics , the timing is not as deﬁned . 13 papers ( 8 % ) primarily deal with ethics as an issue in formal education . An example is provided by Tinapple et al . [ 187 ] who outline a project - based digital arts curriculum through which novice secondary school students develop a work ethic to learn and apply science , technology , engineering and math - ematics ( STEM ) skills and computational thinking . Stager [ 183 ] also reﬂects on students’ work ethic , but in the context of Papert’s ideas for education and school reform ( i . e . , the Constructionist Learning Laboratory ) and his inﬂuence on the maker movement more than a decade later . Abrahamson [ 2 ] , in turn , points to design researchers ethical obligation to in - form the commercial production of educational technology for the school context by explicating their tacit design practice in workable structures and language . A last example stems from the work of Tuhkala et al . [ 191 ] who discuss the imple - mentation of a new learning subject for secondary education in which students are taught about ethical challenges related to technology . Whereas the latter example deals with teach - ing design ethics ( i . e , raising awareness about the impact of technology on people’s lives and society at large ) in formal education , the ﬁrst three examples deal with everyday ethics ( i . e . , ethical concerns in daily life and social interactions ) in the context of formal education . Formal education was identi - ﬁed as the most occurring context for papers concerned with everyday ethics ( 10 out of 18 ) . From the ﬁve papers that focus on teaching design or everyday ethics , two papers do so in formal education . 17 papers ( 11 % ) deal with ethics in the product , which means that ethics is primarily addressed as an issue embedded in the qualities of the product or in the use of the product . Gram - menos [ 78 ] , for instance , presents a design concept for a robotic companion that comes to life the day a child is born and grows along with it . He highlights both positive and nega - tive implications , including ethical challenges for children’s emotional and social wellbeing , and issues related to data privacy when using robotic companions in everyday life . In a similar line of thought , Leite and Lehman [ 111 ] ) discuss privacy concerns in the context of a social robot that secretly collects information about a child , and then discloses that in - formation in conversation in an effort to personalise the child’s experience . Zaman et al . [ 205 ] , in turn , reﬂect on three de - sign concepts for hybrid , internet - connected toys , and point to the risk for unethical data treatment when children are being dataﬁed . All three examples have in common that they deal with actual or potential ethical implications of technology on our lives and society at large ( i . e . , design ethics ) , and do so by focusing on the qualities of the product in use . ‘In the product’ is the primary context in the majority of papers concerned with design ethics ( 9 out of 13 ) . It is also the preferred context for papers that focus on teaching design or everyday ethics ( 3 out of 5 ) , which means that teaching ethics is not per deﬁnition realised in a the context of formal education . Four papers ( 2 . 5 % ) were categorised as miscellaneous , be - cause it was impossible to determine the context of ethics , and in one paper ethics was dealt with in both the research and design process and the product ( see , Pantoja et al . [ 136 ] ) . DISCUSSION CCI embraces the design , evaluation , and implementation of interactive computer systems for children , and the wider impact of technology on children and society [ 90 ] . As our ﬁndings show , this ﬁeld of research comes with unique ethical challenges and responsibilities that are addressed in multi - faceted and multi - layered ways . Below , we highlight the most striking ﬁndings of our systematic literature review , and formu - late a set of action points . We leave it to the CCI community to decide on the relative importance and the priority that should be given to each of these actions points . A lack of deﬁnitions and shared theoretical groundings of ethics When analysing the 157 papers that mention ethics , it became evident that ethics is poorly deﬁned in CCI research . Moreover , the majority of papers does not provide explicit theoretical grounding , and those papers that ground their ethical concerns relate to literature from a wide range of disciplines including medicine , learning science , psychology , and social science . This lack of deﬁnitions and a common theoretical grounding of ethics may come as no surprise since CCI emerged as an inter - disciplinary research area . However , it can also be interpreted as both a lack of focus on ethics and a lack of CCI - speciﬁc lit - erature to which researchers can refer , despite previous efforts by Markopoulos et al . [ 121 ] . The fact that the vast majority of papers matching the inclusion criteria mentions ethics very few times ( see , Figure 1 ) supports this argument . This is striking in light of arguments from within the community stressing the unique ethical challenges and responsibilities related to CCI research [ 71 ] . Nevertheless , the uniqueness of CCI - related ethics has not yet led to a clear deﬁnition nor to a shared theo - retical understanding of ethics . After 18 IDC conferences , CCI is at a stage of maturity in which shared text - book material on the unique ethical challenges could strengthen the research community signiﬁcantly . CCI ethics is most often black - boxed in inaccessible IRB documents Our ﬁndings revealed eight different types of ethics in CCI research , but formal and informal procedural research ethics makes up for 69 % of all papers that mention ethics . These two types of ethics are concerned with protecting participants from harm , obtaining informed consent and preventing an invasion of privacy , but they differ in their degree of formality . Whereas formal procedural research ethics ( 49 % of papers ) typically results in Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) approval , this is not the case for informal procedural research ethics ( 20 % of papers ) . It is encouraging that many IDC papers address ethi - cal concerns by gaining institutional approval . This formalized way of dealing with ethical concerns testiﬁes that CCI research emerges from rigorous and statutory procedures . However , as IRBs do not follow international or national standards and thus apply rules and regulations adjusted to a state , university , or even department level , the content , scope and rigorousness of the IRB procedures remains opaque for the broader CCI community . Whereas each of the studies mentioning IRB approval undoubtedly followed the ethical standards of their university , we have to consider the wider consequences of this approach . A large part of CCI papers conceal their ethical procedures and concerns in an IRB dossier which is inacces - sible to the community at large . This black - boxing hinders a shared understanding of ethical concerns ( and cultural diversi - ties ) on a global scale , which is inappropriate for a maturing international research ﬁeld such as CCI . Dissemination of situational ethics could lead to new for - mal procedures Situational ethics is addressed in only 2 % of all included pa - pers , and concerns responding in real - time to often unexpected events during the research and design process . The surpris - ingly low number of papers that report on situational ethics , also referred to as micro - ethics [ 179 ] , is critical in the sense that thorough accounts of situational ethics could eventually provide the basis for new formal procedures when reported in academic publications . Despite panels on ethics in recent years [ 74 , 71 ] and the mandatory section on “selection and participation of children” in the paper template ( see IDC 2016 , 2018 , 2019 and 2020 ) , this has not yet led to an increase of papers dealing with critical cases of situational ethics during the research and design process . This is striking since the in - struction for the mandatory section states that “authors should describe how children were selected , what consent processes were followed , how they were treated , how data sharing was communicated , and especially any additional ethical consid - erations” . Except for the last instruction , the emphasis is on procedural research ethics . We suggest that the IDC commu - nity reconsiders the scope and requirements of this mandatory section to animate researchers to unveil and reﬂect on their work with situational ethics . Participation is a hallmark in CCI research , but not partic - ipation ethics Participation has been a hallmark of CCI research for many years , especially in relation to giving children a voice [ 51 ] or , more recently , enabling them to become the main actor in design processes [ 98 ] . Therefore , it is surprising to ﬁnd only 6 % of the included papers explicitly dealing with partic - ipation ethics . This type of ethics concerns children’s active engagement in the research and design process , the interper - sonal bonds between researchers and children that emerge during this process , and what children gain from their partici - pation . We acknowledge the fact that discussions on the value of participation can be done using other terms than ‘ethics’ . However , we suggest that the relationship between participa - tion and ethics should be made explicit in a research ﬁeld that pioneers child participation in design . Design ethics is underdeveloped in CCI research Design ethics , also referred to as the ethics of technology and its qualities in use , is addressed as an overall concern in 8 % of all papers and as an explicit learning goal in only 1 % of all papers . The relatively low number of papers on design ethics is signiﬁcant since related research areas such as Design Studies ( e . g . , [ 61 , 126 , 34 ] , Participatory Design ( e . g . , [ 179 , 158 ] and Human - Computer Interaction ( e . g . , [ 169 , 72 ] have a relatively long tradition of highlighting ethical concerns in relation to the design of technology and its potential impact on people’s lives and society at large . As design with and for children accentuates these ethical issues , one would expect that the weight of design ethics in CCI research would be higher . Especially since design ethics closely relates to the topic of digital empowerment of children , which is gaining interest among scholars in CCI research and related areas [ 98 , 102 , 188 ] . Digital empowerment is concerned with how digital technology affects children’s lives and social interactions in general . Our literature review found that the increased interest in digital empowerment is not reﬂected in the number of pa - pers on design ethics in CCI . This ﬁnding relates to previous research by Kuutti and Iivari [ 96 ] . They reported that there are very few studies in CCI explicitly addressing critical de - sign for , with and by children nor studies explicitly embracing critical research traditions leading to a better understanding of how technology shapes the lives of children . However , as studies on children in relation to emerging technologies , such as AI [ 50 ] and child - robotic interaction ( e . g . , [ 36 ] ) begin to emerge , there is perhaps a need for addressing the issue of de - sign ethics , both as an overall concern and an explicit learning goal , more explicitly in future CCI research . CONCLUSION This study has addressed the question of how and to what extent ethics has been dealt with in 18 years of CCI research , thereby focusing on the community’s two leading venues : IDC and IJCCI . Our review demonstrates that while 157 papers use the word ethics , the term remains largely undeﬁned and the the - oretical points of reference are scattered . In terms of the ways in which ethics is dealt with , our review identiﬁes eight differ - ent types of ethics . Formal and informal procedural research ethics make up for the majority of papers , and references to approval from institutional review boards are frequently used to account for ethical aspects of conducting research . Our study also demonstrates the relative scarcity of work dealing with situational and participation ethics which is remarkable given that CCI research has a long standing commitment to participatory practices in design and research . Lastly , our re - view shows that design ethics , which is concerned with the impact of digital technology , is addressed by only a few papers . Given the acknowledged relevance and importance of ethics in CCI , we consider the results of this study critical and we suggest that the community needs to commit to developing a more explicit discourse on the ethics of CCI research and practice . To this end , we propose ﬁve speciﬁc avenues of work that we believe should be leveraged by the CCI community : • Provide a better understanding and theoretical grounding of the unique ethical challenges of CCI research . • Unpack and communicate the practices related to institu - tional review boards in order to increase transparency about procedural research ethics . • Address issues related to situational ethics in research pa - pers , as this could lead to new formal procedures that are better attuned to CCI research . • Account for the relationship between participation and ethics , especially since CCI pioneers child participation in design . • Address the issue of design ethics more explicitly , both as an overall concern and a learning goal for children . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by VILLUM FONDEN ( grant no . 28831 ) , AUFF - E - 2017 - 7 - 5 , and EU Erasmus + ( ID : 2018 - 1 - SE01 - KA203 - 039072 ) . SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN No children participated in this work . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Julio Abascal and Colette Nicolle . 2005 . Moving Towards Inclusive Design Guidelines for Socially and Ethically Aware HCI . Interact . Comput . 17 , 5 ( Sept . 2005 ) , 484 – 505 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2005 . 03 . 002 [ 2 ] Dor Abrahamson . 2014 . Building educational activities for understanding : An elaboration on the embodied - design framework and its epistemic grounds . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 2 , 1 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 1 – 16 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 07 . 002 [ 3 ] Daiya Aida , Kiyoshi Suganuma , Kazuhiro Jo , and Abe Kazunao . 2017 . The KOROGARU Park Series : Three Features of the Park of the Future . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 379 – 384 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079738 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 4 ] Priscilla Alderson and Virginia Morrow . 2011 . The ethics of research with children and young people : A practical handbook . SAGE publications Ltd . [ 5 ] Yasemin Allsop . 2019 . Assessing computational thinking process using a multiple evaluation approach . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 19 ( 2019 ) , 30 – 55 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 10 . 004 [ 6 ] Valentina Andries and Judy Robertson . 2019 . Designing Social Play to Support Young Hospitalised Children . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 550 – 555 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325317 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 7 ] Lisa Anthony . 2019 . Quantitative Methods for Child - Computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 710 – 713 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325166 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 8 ] Lisa Anthony , Kathryn A . Stofer , Annie Luc , and Jacob O . Wobbrock . 2016 . Gestures by Children and Adults on Touch Tables and Touch Walls in a Public Science Center . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 344 – 355 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930682 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 9 ] Alissa N . Antle . 2017 . The Ethics of Doing Research with Vulnerable Populations . Interactions 24 , 6 ( Oct . 2017 ) , 74 – 77 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3137107 [ 10 ] Alissa N . Antle , Oﬁr Sadka , Iulian Radu , Boxiao Gong , Victor Cheung , and Uddipana Baishya . 2019 . EmotoTent : Reducing School Violence Through Embodied Empathy Games . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 755 – 760 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3326596 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 11 ] Alissa N . Antle , Jillian L . Warren , Aaron May , Min Fan , and Alyssa F . Wise . 2014 . Emergent Dialogue : Eliciting Values During Children’s Collaboration with a Tabletop Game for Change . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 37 – 46 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593971 [ 12 ] Panagiotis Apostolellis and Doug A . Bowman . 2016 . Audience Involvement and Agency in Digital Games : Effects on Learning , Game Experience , and Social Presence . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 299 – 310 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930700 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 13 ] Gustavo Armagno . 2012 . The Role of HCI in the Construction of Disability . BCS Learning & Development . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / hci2012 . 71 [ 14 ] Jeffrey Jensen Arnett . 2000 . Emerging adulthood : A theory of development from the late teens through the twenties . American Psychologist 55 , 5 ( 2000 ) , 469 – 480 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066x . 55 . 5 . 469 [ 15 ] Hala Assal , Ahsan Imran , and Sonia Chiasson . 2018 . An exploration of graphical password authentication for children . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 18 ( 2018 ) , 37 – 46 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 06 . 003 [ 16 ] Daryl B . Axelrod and Jennifer Kahn . 2019 . Intergenerational Family Storytelling and Modeling with Large - Scale Data Sets . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 352 – 360 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323153 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 17 ] Karla Badillo - Urquiola , Scott Harpin , and Pamela Wisniewski . 2017 . Abandoned but Not Forgotten : Providing Access While Protecting Foster Youth from Online Risks . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 – 26 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079724 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 18 ] David Bar - El , Oren Zuckerman , and Yaron Shlomi . 2016 . Social Competence and STEM : Teen Mentors in a Makerspace . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 595 – 600 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2936005 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 19 ] Wolmet Barendregt , Tilde M . Bekker , Peter Börjesson , Eva Eriksson , and Olof Torgersson . 2016 . Legitimate Participation in the Classroom Context : Adding Learning Goals to Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 167 – 174 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930686 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 20 ] G . E . Baykal , M . Van Mechelen , T . Göksun , and A . E . Yantaç . 2019 . Embedded ﬁgures in stories ( EFiS ) : A method to observe preschoolers’ interactions with spatial manipulatives . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 21 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 121 – 129 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 06 . 004 [ 21 ] Tilde Bekker , Saskia Bakker , Iris Douma , Janneke van der Poel , and Koen Scheltenaar . 2015 . Teaching children digital literacy through design - based learning with digital toolkits in schools . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 ( 2015 ) , 29 – 38 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 12 . 001 Digital Fabrication in Education . [ 22 ] Beth T . Bell . 2019 . “You take ﬁfty photos , delete forty nine and use one” : A qualitative study of adolescent image - sharing practices on social media . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 20 ( 2019 ) , 64 – 71 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 03 . 002 [ 23 ] Laura Benton and Hilary Johnson . 2015 . Widening participation in technology design : A review of the involvement of children with special educational needs and disabilities . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 3 - 4 ( Jan . 2015 ) , 23 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 07 . 001 [ 24 ] Samuel Benveniste , Pierre Jouvelot , Edith Lecourt , and Renaud Michel . 2009 . Designing Wiimprovisation for Mediation in Group Music Therapy with Children Suffering from Behavioral Disorders . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 18 – 26 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1551788 . 1551793 event - place : Como , Italy . [ 25 ] Ceylan Be¸sevli , Elif Salman , Tilbe Goksun , Hakan Urey , and O˘guzhan Özcan . 2019 . MaR - T : Designing a Projection - Based Mixed Reality System for Nonsymbolic Math Development of Preschoolers : Guided by Theories of Cognition and Learning . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 280 – 292 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323147 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 26 ] Arpita Bhattacharya , Calvin Liang , Emily Y . Zeng , Kanishk Shukla , Miguel E . R . Wong , Sean A . Munson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2019 . Engaging Teenagers in Asynchronous Online Groups to Design for Stress Management . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 26 – 37 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323140 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 27 ] Gro Bjerknes and Tone Bratteteig . 1995 . User Participation and Democracy : A Discussion of Scandinavian Research on Systems Development . Scand . J . Inf . Syst . 7 , 1 ( April 1995 ) , 73 – 98 . [ 28 ] Elizabeth Bonsignore , Derek Hansen , Anthony Pellicone , June Ahn , Kari Kraus , Steven Shumway , Kathryn Kaczmarek , Jeff Parkin , Jared Cardon , Jeff Sheets , Carlea Holl - Jensen , and Jes Koepﬂer . 2016 . Traversing Transmedia Together : Co - designing an Educational Alternate Reality Game For Teens , With Teens . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 – 24 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930712 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 29 ] Petra Boström and Eva Eriksson . 2015 . Design for Self - reporting Psychological Health in Children with Intellectual Disabilities . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 279 – 282 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771896 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 30 ] Jostein Brevik , Letizia Jaccheri , and Juan Carlos Torrado Vidal . 2019 . Designing Software to Prevent Child Marriage Globally . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 452 – 457 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325322 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 31 ] David J . Brown , David McHugh , Penny Standen , Lindsay Evett , Nick Shopland , and Steven Battersby . 2011 . Designing location - based learning experiences for people with intellectual disabilities and additional sensory impairments . Computers & Education 56 , 1 ( Jan . 2011 ) , 11 – 20 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2010 . 04 . 014 [ 32 ] Lautaro Cabrera , John H . Maloney , and David Weintrop . 2019 . Programs in the Palm of Your Hand : How Live Programming Shapes Children’s Interactions with Physical Computing Devices . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 227 – 236 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323138 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 33 ] Elizabeth J . Carter , Moshe Mahler , Maryyann Landlord , Kyna McIntosh , and Jessica K . Hodgins . 2016 . Designing Animated Characters for Children of Different Ages . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 421 – 427 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930681 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 34 ] Jeffrey KH Chan . 2018 . Design ethics : Reﬂecting on the ethical dimensions of technology , sustainability , and responsibility in the Anthropocene . Design Studies 54 ( 2018 ) , 184 – 200 . [ 35 ] Shruti Chandra , Pierre Dillenbourg , and Ana Paiva . 2017 . Classiﬁcation of Children’s Handwriting Errors for the Design of an Educational Co - writer Robotic Peer . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 215 – 225 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079750 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 36 ] Vicky Charisi , Alyssa M . Alcorn , James Kennedy , Wafa Johal , Paul Baxter , and Chronis Kynigos . 2018 . The Near Future of Children’s Robotics . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 720 – 727 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3205868 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 37 ] Vicky Charisi , Azra Habibovic , Jonas Andersson , Jamy Li , and Vanessa Evers . 2017 . Children’s Views on Identiﬁcation and Intention Communication of Self - driving Vehicles . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 399 – 404 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084300 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 38 ] Timothy Charoenying . 2013 . Graph Hopping : Learning Through Physical Interaction Quantiﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 495 – 498 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485850 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 39 ] Ying - Yu Chen , Kelda Baljon , Bonnie Tran , Daniela K . Rosner , and Alexis Hiniker . 2018 . The Stamp Plate and the Kicking Chair : Playful Productivity for Mealtime in Preschools . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 373 – 380 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202759 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 40 ] Bester Chimbo and Helene Gelderblom . 2018 . TitanTutor : An educational technology solution co - designed by children from different age groups and socio - economic backgrounds . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 15 ( March 2018 ) , 13 – 23 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 11 . 004 [ 41 ] Pia Christensen and Alan Prout . 2002 . Working with Ethical Symmetry in Social Research with Children . Childhood 9 , 4 ( Nov . 2002 ) , 477 – 497 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0907568202009004007 [ 42 ] Merijke Coenraad , Jen Palmer , Diana Franklin , and David Weintrop . 2019 . Enacting Identities : Participatory Design As a Context for Youth to Reﬂect , Project , and Apply Their Emerging Identities . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 185 – 196 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323148 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 43 ] Luca Colombo and Monica Landoni . 2014 . A Diary Study of Children’s User Experience with EBooks Using Flow Theory As Framework . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 135 – 144 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593978 [ 44 ] Clare Cullen and Oussama Metatla . 2019 . Co - designing Inclusive Multisensory Story Mapping with Children with Mixed Visual Abilities . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 361 – 373 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323146 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 45 ] Aaron Cuthbertson , Sarah Hatton , Gary Minyard , Harper Piver , Christopher Todd , and David Birchﬁeld . 2007 . Mediated Education in a Creative Arts Context : Research and Practice at Whittier Elementary School . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 65 – 72 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1297277 . 1297290 event - place : Aalborg , Denmark . [ 46 ] Andrew J Davidson and MIKE O’BRIEN . 2009 . Ethics and medical research in children . Pediatric Anesthesia 19 , 10 ( 2009 ) , 994 – 1004 . [ 47 ] Sharon J . Derry , Roy D . Pea , Brigid Barron , Randi A . Engle , Frederick Erickson , Ricki Goldman , Rogers Hall , Timothy Koschmann , Jay L . Lemke , Miriam Gamoran Sherin , and Bruce L . Sherin . 2010 . Conducting Video Research in the Learning Sciences : Guidance on Selection , Analysis , Technology , and Ethics . Journal of the Learning Sciences 19 , 1 ( Jan . 2010 ) , 3 – 53 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10508400903452884 [ 48 ] Shital Desai , Alethea Blackler , and Vesna Popovic . 2019 . Children’s embodied intuitive interaction — Design aspects of embodiment . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 21 ( 2019 ) , 89 – 103 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 06 . 001 [ 49 ] Audrey Desjardins and Ron Wakkary . 2011 . How Children Represent Sustainability in the Home . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 37 – 45 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1999030 . 1999035 event - place : Ann Arbor , Michigan . [ 50 ] Stefania Druga , Randi Williams , Cynthia Breazeal , and Mitchel Resnick . 2017 . “Hey Google is It OK If I Eat You ? ” : Initial Explorations in Child - Agent Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 595 – 600 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084330 [ 51 ] Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour & Information Technology 21 , 1 ( Jan . 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01449290110108659 [ 52 ] Abigail Durrant , Jonathan Hook , Roisin McNaney , Keir Williams , Thomas Smith , Mathew Kipling , Tony Stockman , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Design to Support Interpersonal Communication in the Special Educational Needs Classroom . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 46 – 55 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485778 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 53 ] Abigail Durrant , Jonathan Hook , Roisin McNaney , Keir Williams , Thomas Smith , Tony Stockman , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . Interpersonal expression in the special educational needs classroom : An experience - centred design case study . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 2 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 34 – 47 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 06 . 002 [ 54 ] Helen Edwards and Rachel Benedyk . 2007 . A Comparison of Usability Evaluation Methods for Child Participants in a School Setting . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 9 – 16 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1297277 . 1297280 event - place : Aalborg , Denmark . [ 55 ] Ryohei Egusa , Tsugunosuke Sakai , Haruya Tamaki , Fusako Kusunoki , Miki Namatame , Hiroshi Mizoguchi , and Shigenori Inagaki . 2016 . Preparatory Development of a Collaborative / Interactive Learning Game Using Bodily Movements for Deaf Children . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 649 – 653 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2936011 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 56 ] Michael Eisenberg . 2004 . Tangible Ideas for Children : Materials Sciences As the Future of Educational Technology . In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children : Building a Community ( IDC ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 – 26 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1017833 . 1017836 [ 57 ] Michael Eisenberg . 2017 . The Binding of Fenrir : Children in an Emerging Age of Transhumanist Technology . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 328 – 333 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079744 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 58 ] Lia Emanuel and Danaë Stanton Fraser . 2014 . Exploring Physical and Digital Identity with a Teenage Cohort . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 67 – 76 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593984 [ 59 ] Chiara Ferrarini , Eva Eriksson , Roberto Montanari , and Ruth Sims . 2013 . The DEVICE Project : Development of Educational Programs with a Speciﬁc Focus on Design for Children . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 360 – 363 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485843 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 60 ] Deborah A . Fields , Katarina Pantic , and Yasmin B . Kafai . 2015 . & Ldquo ; I Have a Tutorial for This & Rdquo ; : The Language of Online Peer Support in the Scratch Programming Community . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 229 – 238 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771863 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 61 ] Alain Findeli . 1994 . Ethics , aesthetics , and design . Design issues 10 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 49 – 68 . [ 62 ] Celia B . Fisher . 2004 . Informed Consent and Clinical Research Involving Children and Adolescents : Implications of the Revised APA Ethics Code and HIPAA . Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology 33 , 4 ( Nov . 2004 ) , 832 – 839 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15374424jccp3304 _ 18 [ 63 ] Dan Fitton and Janet C . Read . 2019 . Creating a Framework to Support the Critical Consideration of Dark Design Aspects in Free - to - Play Apps . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 407 – 418 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323136 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 64 ] Daniel Fitton , Janet C Read , Gavin Sim , and Brendan Cassidy . 2018 . Co - designing Voice User Interfaces with Teenagers in the Context of Smart Homes . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 55 – 66 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202744 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 65 ] Stéphanie Fleck , Charlotte Baraudon , Jérémy Frey , Thibault Lainé , and Martin Hachet . 2018 . " Teegi’s So Cute ! " : Assessing the Pedagogical Potential of an Interactive Tangible Interface for Schoolchildren . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 156 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202731 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 66 ] S . Fletcher - Watson , H . Pain , S . Hammond , A . Humphry , and H . McConachie . 2016 . Designing for young children with autism spectrum disorder : A case study of an iPad app . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 7 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 14 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 03 . 002 [ 67 ] Rosie Flewitt . 2005 . Conducting research with young children : some ethical considerations . Early Child Development and Care 175 , 6 ( 2005 ) , 553 – 565 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03004430500131338 [ 68 ] Christa Flores . 2018 . Problem - based science , a constructionist approach to science literacy in middle school . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 16 ( June 2018 ) , 25 – 30 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 11 . 001 [ 69 ] Elizabeth Foss , Allison Druin , and Mona Leigh Guha . 2013 . Recruiting and Retaining Young Participants : Strategies from Five Years of Field Research . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 313 – 316 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485798 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 70 ] Katie Fraser , Tom Rodden , and Claire O’Malley . 2006 . Home - school Technologies : Considering the Family . In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 153 – 156 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1139073 . 1139111 event - place : Tampere , Finland . [ 71 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Alissa N . Antle , Monica Landoni , Janet C . Read , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2018 . Ethics in Interaction Design and Children : A Panel and Community Dialogue . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 748 – 752 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210802 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 72 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Amy S . Bruckman , Cosmin Munteanu , Melissa Densmore , and Jenny Waycott . 2017 . Research Ethics in HCI : A Town Hall Meeting . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1295 – 1299 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3051135 [ 73 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Alyssa Alcorn , and Helen Pain . 2012 . Supporting the design contributions of children with autism spectrum conditions . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ' 12 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307112 [ 74 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Monica Landoni , Jerry Alan Fails , Janet C . Read , Alissa N . Antle , and Pauline Gourlet . 2019 . Broadening the Discussion of Ethics in the Interaction Design and Children Community . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 – 7 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3331886 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 75 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Marjo Rauhala , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2016 . In - Action Ethics . Interacting with Computers ( June 2016 ) . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww024 [ 76 ] Franca Garzotto , Paolo Paolini , and Amalia Sabiescu . 2010 . Interactive Storytelling for Children . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 356 – 359 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810613 event - place : Barcelona , Spain . [ 77 ] Wendy Goff and Nikolai Veresov . 2015 . Examining teacher - researcher collaboration through the cultural interface . Cultural Studies of Science Education 10 , 3 ( July 2015 ) , 621 – 627 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11422 - 015 - 9665 - 9 [ 78 ] Dimitris Grammenos . 2016 . roboTwin : A Modular & Evolvable Robotic Companion for Children . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 742 – 744 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2955210 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 79 ] Maria J . Grant and Andrew Booth . 2009 . A typology of reviews : an analysis of 14 review types and associated methodologies . Health Information & Libraries Journal 26 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 91 – 108 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 1842 . 2009 . 00848 . x [ 80 ] Stuart Gray , Rachel Hahn , Kirsten Cater , Debbie Watson , Chloe Meineck , and Tom Metcalfe . 2019 . Trove : A Digitally Enhanced Memory Box for Looked After and Adopted Children . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 458 – 463 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325305 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 81 ] Stuart Gray , Judy Robertson , and Gnanathusharan Rajendran . 2015 . BrainQuest : An Active Smart Phone Game to Enhance Executive Function . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 59 – 68 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771846 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 82 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2010 . Investigating the Impact of Design Processes on Children . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 198 – 201 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810570 event - place : Barcelona , Spain . [ 83 ] Marilys Guillemin and Lynn Gillam . 2004 . Ethics , Reﬂexivity , and “Ethically Important Moments” in Research . Qualitative Inquiry 10 , 2 ( April 2004 ) , 261 – 280 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077800403262360 [ 84 ] Adam Hair , Penelope Monroe , Beena Ahmed , Kirrie J . Ballard , and Ricardo Gutierrez - Osuna . 2018 . Apraxia World : A Speech Therapy Game for Children with Speech Sound Disorders . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 119 – 131 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202733 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 85 ] Lynne Hall , Colette Hume , and Sarah Tazzyman . 2016 . Five Degrees of Happiness : Effective Smiley Face Likert Scales for Evaluating with Children . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 311 – 321 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930719 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 86 ] Heidi Hartikainen , Netta Iivari , and Marianne Kinnula . 2016 . Should We Design for Control , Trust or Involvement ? : A Discourses Survey About Children’s Online Safety . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 367 – 378 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930680 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 87 ] Tom Hitron , Iddo Wald , Hadas Erel , and Oren Zuckerman . 2018 . Introducing Children to Machine Learning Concepts Through Hands - on Experience . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 563 – 568 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210776 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 88 ] Samantha Holt and Nicola Yuill . 2017 . Tablets for two : How dual tablets can facilitate other - awareness and communication in learning disabled children with autism . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 72 – 82 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 005 [ 89 ] Anthony Hornof . 2008 . Working with Children with Severe Motor Impairments As Design Partners . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 69 – 72 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463721 [ 90 ] Juan Pablo Hourcade . 2015 . Child - Computer Interaction . US . [ 91 ] Lara Houston , Steven J . Jackson , Daniela K . Rosner , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Meg Young , and Laewoo Kang . 2016 . Values in Repair . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ' 16 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858470 [ 92 ] Johanna Höysniemi , Perttu Hämäläinen , and Laura Turkki . 2004 . Wizard of Oz Prototyping of Computer Vision Based Action Games for Children . In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children : Building a Community ( IDC ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 27 – 34 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1017833 . 1017837 event - place : Maryland . [ 93 ] Marikken Høiseth , Michail N . Giannakos , Ole A . Alsos , Letizia Jaccheri , and Jonas Asheim . 2013 . Designing Healthcare Games and Applications for Toddlers . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 137 – 146 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485770 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 94 ] Marikken Høiseth and Maarten Van Mechelen . 2017 . Identifying Patterns in IDC Research : Technologies for Improving Children’s Well - being Connected to Overweight Issues . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 107 – 116 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079739 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 95 ] Netta Iivari and Kari Kuutti . 2018a . Critical Design in Interaction Design and Children : Impossible , Inappropriate or Critical Imperative ? . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 456 – 464 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202773 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 96 ] Netta Iivari and Kari Kuutti . 2018b . Critical Design in Interaction Design and Children : Impossible , Inappropriate or Critical Imperative ? . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 456 – 464 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202773 [ 97 ] Ole Sejer Iversen and Rachel Charlotte Smith . 2012 . Scandinavian participatory design . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ' 12 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307109 [ 98 ] Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , and Christian Dindler . 2017 . Child As Protagonist : Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 27 – 37 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079725 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 99 ] Janne J . Jensen and Mikael B . Skov . 2005 . A review of research methods in children ' s technology design . In Proceeding of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children - IDC ' 05 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1109540 . 1109551 [ 100 ] Rose Johnson , Venus Shum , Yvonne Rogers , and Nicolai Marquardt . 2016 . Make or Shake : An Empirical Study of the Value of Making in Learning About Computing Technology . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 440 – 451 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930691 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 101 ] Susan Jones , Lynne Hall , and Janette Hilton . 2012 . Exploring children ' s ' indexical encounter ' with real and digitised archive photographs using tablet and large ﬂat screen technologies . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ' 12 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307101 [ 102 ] Yasmin Kafai , Chris Proctor , and Debora Lui . 2019 . From Theory Bias to Theory Dialogue : Embracing Cognitive , Situated , and Critical Framings of Computational Thinking in K - 12 CS Education . In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research ( ICER ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 101 – 109 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3291279 . 3339400 [ 103 ] Yasmin B . Kafai . 2018 . Constructionist visions : Hard fun with serious games . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 18 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 19 – 21 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 04 . 002 [ 104 ] Eva - Sophie Katterfeldt , Mutlu Cukurova , Daniel Spikol , and David Cuartielles . 2018 . Physical computing with plug - and - play toolkits : Key recommendations for collaborative learning implementations . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 17 ( Sept . 2018 ) , 72 – 82 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 03 . 002 [ 105 ] Alex Kayal , M . Birna van Riemsdijk , Mark A . Neerincx , and Willem - Paul Brinkman . 2018 . Socially adaptive electronic partners for improved support of children’s values : An empirical study with a location - sharing mobile app . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 18 ( 2018 ) , 79 – 89 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 09 . 001 [ 106 ] Dev Raj Lamichhane and Janet C . Read . 2017 . Investigating Children’s Passwords Using a Game - based Survey . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 617 – 622 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084333 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 107 ] Monica Landoni , Anton Fedosov , and Evangelos Niforatos . 2017 . Promoting CARE : Changes via Awareness , Recognition and Experience . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 783 – 787 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3105877 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 108 ] Monica Landoni , Elisa Rubegni , and Emma Nicol . 2018 . A comparative study into how pupils can play different roles in co - design activities . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 17 ( Sept . 2018 ) , 28 – 38 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 04 . 003 [ 109 ] Margaret Holmes Laurie , Andrew Manches , and Sue Fletcher - Watson . 2019 . Design Implications from Cognitive Event Analysis : A Case Study of Digitally Mediated Interaction in Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 476 – 481 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325325 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 110 ] Efﬁe Lai - Chong Law , Dawn E . Watkins , Joanna P . L . Barwick , and Elee S . Kirk . 2016 . An Experiential Approach to the Design and Evaluation of a Gamiﬁed Research Tool for Law in Children’s Lives . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 322 – 333 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930722 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 111 ] Iolanda Leite and Jill Fain Lehman . 2016 . The Robot Who Knew Too Much : Toward Understanding the Privacy / Personalization Trade - Off in Child - Robot Conversation . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 379 – 387 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930687 [ 112 ] Iolanda Leite , André Pereira , and Jill Fain Lehman . 2017 . Persistent Memory in Repeated Child - Robot Conversations . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ' 17 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079728 [ 113 ] Susanne Lindberg , Pontus Wärnestål , Jens Nygren , and Petra Svedberg . 2014 . Designing Digital Peer Support for Children : Design Patterns for Social Interaction . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 47 – 56 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593972 [ 114 ] Stefan Liszio and Maic Masuch . 2017 . Virtual Reality MRI : Playful Reduction of Children’s Anxiety in MRI Exams . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 127 – 136 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079713 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 115 ] Naja A . Mack , Dekita G . Moon Rembert , Robert Cummings , and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . Co - Designing an Intelligent Conversational History Tutor with Children . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 482 – 487 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325336 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 116 ] Rita Mack , Ellen Giarelli , and Barbara A . Bernhardt . 2009 . The Adolescent Research Participant : Strategies for Productive and Ethical Interviewing . Journal of Pediatric Nursing 24 , 6 ( Dec . 2009 ) , 448 – 457 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pedn . 2008 . 07 . 009 [ 117 ] Peter Malcolm , Tom Moher , Darshan Bhatt , Brian Uphoff , and Brenda López - Silva . 2008 . Embodying Scientiﬁc Concepts in the Physical Space of the Classroom . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 234 – 241 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463761 event - place : Chicago , Illinois . [ 118 ] Laura Malinverni and Narcís Parés Burguès . 2015 . The Medium Matters : The Impact of Full - body Interaction on the Socio - affective Aspects of Collaboration . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 89 – 98 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771849 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 119 ] Evi Indriasari Mansor , Antonella De Angeli , and Oscar de Bruijn . 2009 . The Fantasy Table . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 70 – 79 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1551788 . 1551801 event - place : Como , Italy . [ 120 ] Javier Marco , Sandra Baldassarri , and Eva Cerezo . 2010 . Bridging the Gap Between Children and Tabletop Designers . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 98 – 107 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810555 event - place : Barcelona , Spain . [ 121 ] Panos Markopoulos , Janet Read , Stuart MacFarlane , and Johanna Hoysniemi . 2008 . Evaluating Children ' s Interactive Products . Elsevier . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / b978 - 0 - 12 - 374111 - 0 . x0001 - 1 [ 122 ] Brenna McNally , Mona Leigh Guha , Matthew Louis Mauriello , and Allison Druin . 2016 . Children ' s Perspectives on Ethical Issues Surrounding Their Past Involvement on a Participatory Design Team . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ' 16 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858338 [ 123 ] Sarah McRoberts , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Tamara Peyton , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2016 . Do It for the Viewers ! : Audience Engagement Behaviors of Young YouTubers . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 334 – 343 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930676 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 124 ] Sarah McRoberts , Ye Yuan , Kathleen Watson , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2019 . Behind the Scenes : Design , Collaboration , and Video Creation with Youth . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 173 – 184 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323134 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 125 ] Pekka Mertala . 2019 . Young children’s conceptions of computers , code , and the Internet . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 19 ( March 2019 ) , 56 – 66 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 11 . 003 [ 126 ] Carl Mitcham . 1995 . Ethics into design . R . Buchanan , R . & V . Margolin , V . ( Eds . ) . Discovering design : explorations in design studies ( 1995 ) , 173 – 189 . [ 127 ] Rolf Molich , Rolf Molich , Brenda Laurel , Carolyn Snyder , Whitney Quesenbery , and Chauncey E . Wilson . 2001 . Ethics in HCI . In CHI ’01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’01 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 217 – 218 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 634067 . 634197 [ 128 ] Andrés Monroy - Hernández , Benjamin Mako Hill , Jazmin Gonzalez - Rivero , and danah boyd . 2011 . Computers can ' t give credit . In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ' 11 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979452 [ 129 ] Joan Mora - Guiard , Ciera Crowell , Narcis Pares , and Pamela Heaton . 2016 . Lands of Fog : Helping Children with Autism in Social Interaction Through a Full - Body Interactive Experience . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 262 – 274 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930695 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 130 ] Joan Mora - Guiard , Ciera Crowell , Narcis Pares , and Pamela Heaton . 2017 . Sparking social initiation behaviors in children with Autism through full - body Interaction . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 62 – 71 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 006 [ 131 ] Virginia Morrow and Martin Richards . 1996 . The ethics of social research with children : An overview 1 . Children & society 10 , 2 ( 1996 ) , 90 – 105 . [ 132 ] Heiko Müller , Christian Pieper , Wilko Heuten , and Susanne Boll . 2016 . It’s Not That Long ! : Helping Children to Understand Time with an Ambient Light Display . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 356 – 366 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930684 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 133 ] Marianna Obrist , Christiane Moser , Verena Fuchsberger , Manfred Tscheligi , Panos Markopoulos , and Jörg Hofstätter . 2011 . Opportunities and Challenges when Designing and Developing with Kids @ School . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 264 – 267 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1999030 . 1999078 event - place : Ann Arbor , Michigan . [ 134 ] Netta Ofer , Hadas Erel , Idan David , Tom Hitron , and Oren Zuckerman . 2018 . A Little Bit of Coding Goes a Long Way : Effects of Coding on Outdoor Play . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 599 – 604 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210782 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 135 ] Michela Ott and Laura Freina . 2015 . A Literature review on immersive virtual reality in education : state of the art and perspectives . [ 136 ] Luiza Superti Pantoja , Kyle Diederich , Liam Crawford , and Juan Pablo Hourcade . 2019 . Voice Agents Supporting High - Quality Social Play . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 314 – 325 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323151 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 137 ] Stamatios Papadakis , Nikolas Zaranis , and Michail Kalogiannakis . 2019 . Parental involvement and attitudes towards young Greek children’s mobile usage . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( 2019 ) , 100144 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 100144 [ 138 ] Narcís Parés , Miquel Soler , Àlex Sanjurjo , Anna Carreras , Jaume Durany , Jaume Ferrer , Pere Freixa , David Gómez , Orit Kruglanski , Roc Parés , and J . Ignasi Ribas . 2005 . Promotion of creative activity in children with severe autism through visuals in an interactive multisensory environment . In Proceeding of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children - IDC ' 05 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1109540 . 1109555 [ 139 ] Sarah Parsons . 2015 . Learning to work together : Designing a multi - user virtual reality game for social collaboration and perspective - taking for children with autism . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 6 ( 2015 ) , 28 – 38 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 12 . 002 [ 140 ] Sarah Parsons , Efstathia Karakosta , Michael Boniface , and Simon Crowle . 2019 . Prosocial games for inclusion : Interaction patterns and game outcomes for elementary - aged children . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( 2019 ) , 100142 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 100142 [ 141 ] Elizabeth Pellicano and Marc Stears . 2011 . Bridging autism , science and society : moving toward an ethically informed approach to autism research . Autism Research 4 , 4 ( May 2011 ) , 271 – 282 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aur . 201 [ 142 ] Shanon K . Phelan and Elizabeth Anne Kinsella . 2012 . Picture This . . . Safety , Dignity , and Voice—Ethical Research With Children . Qualitative Inquiry 19 , 2 ( Dec . 2012 ) , 81 – 90 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077800412462987 [ 143 ] Anthony T . Pinter , Pamela J . Wisniewski , Heng Xu , Mary Beth Rosson , and Jack M . Caroll . 2017 . Adolescent Online Safety : Moving Beyond Formative Evaluations to Designing Solutions for the Future . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 352 – 357 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079722 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 144 ] Caroline Pitt and Katie Davis . 2017 . Designing Together ? : Group Dynamics in Participatory Digital Badge Design with Teens . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 322 – 327 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079716 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 145 ] Erika S . Poole and Tamara Peyton . 2013 . Interaction Design Research with Adolescents : Methodological Challenges and Best Practices . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 211 – 217 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485766 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 146 ] Nora Ptakauskaite , Priscilla Chueng - Nainby , and Helen Pain . 2016 . Supporting Social Innovation in Children : Developing a Game to Promote Health Eating . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 688 – 693 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2935980 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 147 ] Michal Ptaszynski , Fumito Masui , Taisei Nitta , Suzuha Hatakeyama , Yasutomo Kimura , Rafal Rzepka , and Kenji Araki . 2016 . Sustainable cyberbullying detection with category - maximized relevance of harmful phrases and double - ﬁltered automatic optimization . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 8 ( 2016 ) , 15 – 30 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 07 . 002 [ 148 ] Iulian Radu and Alissa N . Antle . 2016 . All Creatures Great and Small : Becoming Other Organisms Through the EmbodySuit . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 751 – 758 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2955209 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 149 ] Janet C . Read . 2011 . Creating a Child Computer Interaction Curriculum . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 268 – 270 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1999030 . 1999079 event - place : Ann Arbor , Michigan . [ 150 ] Janet C . Read . 2015 . Working with Child Participants in Interaction Design . In Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2015 . Springer International Publishing , 655 – 656 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 22723 - 8 _ 87 [ 151 ] Janet C . Read , Daniel Fitton , and Matthew Horton . 2014 . Giving Ideas an Equal Chance : Inclusion and Representation in Participatory Design with Children . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 105 – 114 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593986 [ 152 ] Janet C . Read and M . Fredrikson . 2011 . What do we take ? What do we keep ? What do we tell ? Ethical concerns in the design of inclusive socially connected technology for children . In Proceedings of Ethicomp 2011 . [ 153 ] Janet C . Read , Matthew Horton , Gavin Sim , Peggy Gregory , Daniel Fitton , and Brendan Cassidy . 2013 . CHECk . In CHI ' 13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ' 13 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468391 [ 154 ] Milena Reichel and Heidi Schelhowe . 2008 . Living Labs : Driving Innovation Through Civic Involvement . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 141 – 144 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463741 event - place : Chicago , Illinois . [ 155 ] Judy Robertson and Judith Good . 2003 . Ghostwriter : A Narrative Virtual Environment for Children . In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’03 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 85 – 91 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 953536 . 953549 event - place : Preston , England . [ 156 ] Judy Robertson , Andrew Macvean , Samantha Fawkner , Graham Baker , and Ruth G . Jepson . 2018 . Savouring our mistakes : Learning from the FitQuest project . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 16 ( 2018 ) , 55 – 67 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 12 . 003 [ 157 ] Judy Robertson , Andrew Macvean , and Katy Howland . 2013 . Robust evaluation for a maturing ﬁeld : The train the teacher method . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 1 , 2 ( May 2013 ) , 50 – 60 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2013 . 05 . 001 [ 158 ] Toni Robertson and Ina Wagner . 2012 . Ethics : Engagement , representation and politics - in - action . In Routledge international handbook of participatory design . Routledge , 84 – 105 . [ 159 ] Colin Robson and Kieran McCartan . 2016 . Real World Research . Wiley . https : / / www . amazon . com / Real - World - Research - Colin - Robson / dp / 111874523X ? SubscriptionId = AKIAIOBINVZYXZQZ2U3A & tag = chimbori05 - 20 & linkCode = xm2 & camp = 2025 & creative = 165953 & creativeASIN = 111874523X [ 160 ] Marcos Román - González , Juan - Carlos Pérez - González , Jesús Moreno - León , and Gregorio Robles . 2018 . Can computational talent be detected ? Predictive validity of the Computational Thinking Test . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 18 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 47 – 58 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 06 . 004 [ 161 ] Elisa Rubegni and Monica Landoni . 2016 . Evaluating Engagement in Reading : Comparing Children and Adult Assessors . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 113 – 124 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930696 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 162 ] Elisa Rubegni , Monica Landoni , Antonella De Angeli , and Letizia Jaccheri . 2019 . Detecting Gender Stereotypes in Children Digital StoryTelling . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 386 – 393 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323156 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 163 ] Petri Saarinen , Timo Partala , and Kaisa Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila . 2013 . Little Backpackers : Studying Children’s Psychological Needs in an Interactive Exhibition Context . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 415 – 418 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485844 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 164 ] Oﬁr Sadka , Hadas Erel , Andrey Grishko , and Oren Zuckerman . 2018 . Tangible Interaction in Parent - child Collaboration : Encouraging Awareness and Reﬂection . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 157 – 169 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202746 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 165 ] J Santelli . 2003 . Guidelines for Adolescent Health Research , A position paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine . Journal of Adolescent Health 33 , 5 ( Nov . 2003 ) , 396 – 409 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jadohealth . 2003 . 06 . 009 [ 166 ] Nitin Sawhney , Cleve Graver , and Emily Breitkopf . 2018 . Audio Journaling for Self - reﬂection and Assessment Among Teens in Participatory Media Programs . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 93 – 105 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202752 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 167 ] S . Sharkey , R . Jones , J . Smithson , E . Hewis , T . Emmens , T . Ford , and C . Owens . 2011 . Ethical practice in internet research involving vulnerable people : lessons from a self - harm discussion forum study ( SharpTalk ) . Journal of Medical Ethics 37 , 12 ( Sept . 2011 ) , 752 – 758 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2011 - 100080 [ 168 ] Sumita Sharma , Pekka Kallioniemi , Tomi Heimonen , Jaakko Hakulinen , Markku Turunen , and Tuuli Keskinen . 2018 . Overcoming Socio - technical Challenges for Cross - cultural Collaborative Applications . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 325 – 336 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202730 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 169 ] Katie Shilton and others . 2018 . Values and ethics in human - computer interaction . Foundations and Trends® Human – Computer Interaction 12 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 107 – 171 . [ 170 ] Ji Youn Shin and Bree E . Holtz . 2019 . Towards Better Transitions for Children with Diabetes : User Experiences on a Mobile Health App . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 623 – 628 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325319 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 171 ] Ji Youn Shin , Jacob Kedroske , Rebecca Vue , Roshun Sankaran , Dima Chaar , Tracey Churay , and Sung Won Choi . 2018 . Design Considerations for Family - centered Health Management : Preliminary Findings with Pediatric BMT Patients . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 593 – 598 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210781 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 172 ] Gavin Sim , Brendan Cassidy , and Janet C . Read . 2013 . Understanding the Fidelity Effect when Evaluating Games with Children . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 193 – 200 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485769 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 173 ] Gavin Sim and Matthew Horton . 2012 . Investigating children ' s opinions of games . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ' 12 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307105 [ 174 ] Rachel C . Smith , Ole S . Iversen , Thomas Hjermitslev , and Aviaja B . Lynggaard . 2013 . Towards an Ecological Inquiry in Child - computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 183 – 192 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485780 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 175 ] Kiley Sobel , Katie O’Leary , and Julie A . Kientz . 2015 . Maximizing Children’s Opportunities with Inclusive Play : Considerations for Interactive Technology Design . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 39 – 48 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771844 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 176 ] Tobias Sonne , Paul Marshall , Jörg Müller , Carsten Obel , and Kaj Grønb \ a ek . 2016 . A Follow - up Study of a Successful Assistive Technology for Children with ADHD and Their Families . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 400 – 407 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930704 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 177 ] Erica Southgate , Shamus P . Smith , Chris Cividino , Shane Saxby , Jivvel Kilham , Graham Eather , Jill Scevak , David Summerville , Rachel Buchanan , and Candece Bergin . 2019 . Embedding immersive virtual reality in classrooms : Ethical , organisational and educational lessons in bridging research and practice . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 19 ( 2019 ) , 19 – 29 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 10 . 002 [ 178 ] Amani Indunil Soysa , Abdullah Al Mahmud , and Blair Kuys . 2018 . Co - designing Tablet Computer Applications with Sri Lankan Practitioners to Support Children with ASD . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 413 – 419 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202764 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 179 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 12 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 180 ] Katharina Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2017 . Experiences of autistic children with technologies . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 ( 2017 ) , 50 – 61 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 007 Designing with and for Children with Special Needs . [ 181 ] Priyashri K . Sridhar , Samantha W . T . Chan , Yvonne Chua , Yow Wei Quin , and Suranga Nanayakkara . 2019 . Going beyond performance scores : Understanding cognitive – affective states in Kindergarteners and application of framework in classrooms . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 21 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 37 – 53 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 04 . 002 [ 182 ] Priyashri K . Sridhar , Samantha W . T . Chan , and Suranga Nanayakkara . 2018 . Going Beyond Performance Scores : Understanding Cognitive - affective States in Kindergarteners . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 253 – 265 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202739 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 183 ] Gary S . Stager . 2013 . Papert’s Prison Fab Lab : Implications for the Maker Movement and Education Design . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 487 – 490 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485811 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 184 ] Antonia Clasina Södergren and Maarten van Mechelen . 2019 . Towards a Child - led Design Process A Pilot Study : When Pre - schoolers’ Play Becomes Designing . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 629 – 634 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325330 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 185 ] Issey Takahashi , Mika Oki , Baptiste Bourreau , Itaru Kitahara , and Kenji Suzuki . 2018 . FUTUREGYM : A gymnasium with interactive ﬂoor projection for children with special needs . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 15 ( March 2018 ) , 37 – 47 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 12 . 002 [ 186 ] Nigel Thomas and Claire O ' Kane . 1998 . The ethics of participatory research with children . Children and Society 12 , 5 ( Nov . 1998 ) , 336 – 348 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1099 - 0860 . 1998 . tb00090 . x [ 187 ] David Tinapple , John Sadauskas , and Loren Olson . 2013 . Digital Culture Creative Classrooms ( DC3 ) : Teaching 21st Century Proﬁciencies in High Schools by Engaging Students in Creative Digital Projects . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 380 – 383 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485803 event - place : New York , New York , USA . [ 188 ] Mike Tissenbaum , Josh Sheldon , and Hal Abelson . 2019 . From Computational Thinking to Computational Action . Commun . ACM 62 , 3 ( Feb . 2019 ) , 34 – 36 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3265747 [ 189 ] Anthony Trory , Kate Howland , and Judith Good . 2018 . Designing for Concreteness Fading in Primary Computing . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 278 – 288 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202748 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 190 ] Damyanka Tsvyatkova and Cristiano Storni . 2019 . Designing an educational interactive eBook for newly diagnosed children with type 1 diabetes : Mapping a new design space . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 19 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 18 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 10 . 001 [ 191 ] Ari Tuhkala , Marie - Louise Wagner , Ole Sejer Iversen , and Tommi Kärkkäinen . 2019 . Technology Comprehension — Combining computing , design , and societal reﬂection as a national subject . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 20 ( 2019 ) , 54 – 63 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 03 . 004 [ 192 ] Maarten Van Mechelen , Alice Schut , Mathieu Gielen , and Remke Klapwijk . 2018 . Developing Children’s Empathy in Co - design Activities : A Pilot Case Study . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 669 – 674 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210797 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 193 ] Maarten Van Mechelen , Alice Schut , Mathieu Gielen , and Antonia Clasina Södergren . 2019 . Children’s Assessment of Co - design Skills : Creativity , Empathy and Collaboration . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 520 – 526 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3325334 event - place : Boise , ID , USA . [ 194 ] Marjo Virnes , Erkki Sutinen , and Eija Kärnä - Lin . 2008 . How Children’s Individual Needs Challenge the Design of Educational Robotics . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 274 – 281 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463766 event - place : Chicago , Illinois . [ 195 ] Soledad Véliz , Victoria Espinoza , Ignacia Sauvalle , Rodrigo Arroyo , Marcelo Pizarro , and Marion Garolera . 2017 . Towards a participative approach for adapting multimodal digital books for deaf and hard of hearing people . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 ( 2017 ) , 90 – 98 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 003 Designing with and for Children with Special Needs . [ 196 ] Greg Walsh . 2018 . Towards Equity and Equality in American Co - design : A Case Study . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 434 – 440 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202768 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 197 ] Mary Webster , Emma Foster , Rob Comber , Simon Bowen , Tim Cheetham , and Madeline Balaam . 2015 . Understanding the Lived Experience of Adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes : Opportunities for Design . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 140 – 149 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771854 event - place : Boston , Massachusetts . [ 198 ] Randi Williams , Christian Vázquez Machado , Stefania Druga , Cynthia Breazeal , and Pattie Maes . 2018 . " My Doll Says It’s Ok " : A Study of Children’s Conformity to a Talking Doll . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 625 – 631 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210788 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 199 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2018 . MyWord : Enhancing Engagement , Interaction and Self - expression with Minimally - verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum Through a Personal Audio - visual Dictionary . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 106 – 118 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202755 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 200 ] Matthew Wood , Gavin Wood , and Madeline Balaam . 2017 . Sex Talk : Designing for Sexual Health with Adolescents . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 137 – 147 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079747 event - place : Stanford , California , USA . [ 201 ] Xiao Xiao , Pablo Puentes , Edith Ackermann , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2016 . Andantino : Teaching Children Piano with Projected Animated Characters . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 37 – 45 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930689 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 202 ] Svetlana Yarosh , Iulian Radu , Seth Hunter , and Eric Rosenbaum . 2011 . Examining Values : An Analysis of Nine Years of IDC Research . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 136 – 144 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1999030 . 1999046 event - place : Ann Arbor , Michigan . [ 203 ] Svetlana Yarosh , Stryker Thompson , Kathleen Watson , Alice Chase , Ashwin Senthilkumar , Ye Yuan , and A . J . Bernheim Brush . 2018 . Children Asking Questions : Speech Interface Reformulations and Personiﬁcation Preferences . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 300 – 312 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202207 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 204 ] Ye Yuan , Stryker Thompson , Kathleen Watson , Alice Chase , Ashwin Senthilkumar , A . J . Bernheim Brush , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2019 . Speech interface reformulations and voice assistant personiﬁcation preferences of children and parents . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 21 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 77 – 88 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 04 . 005 [ 205 ] Bieke Zaman , Maarten Van Mechelen , and Lizzy Bleumers . 2018 . When Toys Come to Life : Considering the Internet of Toys from an Animistic Design Perspective . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 170 – 180 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202745 event - place : Trondheim , Norway . [ 206 ] Leah Zhang - Kennedy , Yomna Abdelaziz , and Sonia Chiasson . 2017 . Cyberheroes : The design and evaluation of an interactive ebook to educate children about online privacy . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 13 ( 2017 ) , 10 – 18 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 05 . 001 [ 207 ] Leah Zhang - Kennedy and Sonia Chiasson . 2016 . Teaching with an Interactive E - book to Improve Children’s Online Privacy Knowledge . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 506 – 511 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2935984 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 208 ] Leah Zhang - Kennedy , Christine Mekhail , Yomna Abdelaziz , and Sonia Chiasson . 2016 . From Nosy Little Brothers to Stranger - Danger : Children and Parents’ Perception of Mobile Threats . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 388 – 399 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930716 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 209 ] Kening Zhu , Xiaojuan Ma , Gary Ka Wai Wong , and John Man Ho Huen . 2016 . How Different Input and Output Modalities Support Coding As a Problem - Solving Process for Children . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 238 – 245 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930697 event - place : Manchester , United Kingdom . [ 210 ] Heather Toomey Zimmerman , Zachary A . McKinley , Soo Hyeon Kim , and Katharine E . Grills . 2019 . Discussion Prompts to Support Family Engagement in Science . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children on ZZZ - IDC ' 19 . ACM Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323122 [ 211 ] Abigail Zimmermann - Nieﬁeld , Makenna Turner , Bridget Murphy , Shaun K . Kane , and R . Benjamin Shapiro . 2019 . Youth Learning Machine Learning Through Building Models of Athletic Moves . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 121 – 132 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323139 event - place : Boise , ID , USA .