POLICY BRIEF published : 09 October 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / fped . 2020 . 582798 Frontiers in Pediatrics | www . frontiersin . org 1 October 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 582798 Edited by : Henrique Barros , University of Porto , Portugal Reviewed by : Mariane De Montalembert , Assistance Publique Hopitaux De Paris , France Eitan Naaman Berezin , Santa Casa of São Paulo , Brazil * Correspondence : Danilo Buonsenso danilobuonsenso @ gmail . com Specialty section : This article was submitted to General Pediatrics and Pediatric Emergency Care , a section of the journal Frontiers in Pediatrics Received : 13 July 2020 Accepted : 01 September 2020 Published : 09 October 2020 Citation : Buonsenso D , Valentini P , Moscato U , Ricciardi W and Roland D ( 2020 ) A Pediatric Strategy for the Next Phase of the SARS – CoV - 2 Pandemic . Front . Pediatr . 8 : 582798 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fped . 2020 . 582798 A Pediatric Strategy for the Next Phase of the SARS – CoV - 2 Pandemic Danilo Buonsenso 1 , 2 , 3 * , Piero Valentini 1 , 4 , Umberto Moscato 1 , 3 , Walter Ricciardi 1 , 3 , 5 and Damian Roland 6 , 7 1 Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health , Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A . Gemelli IRCCS , Rome , Italy , 2 Dipartimento di Scienze Biotecnologiche di Base , Cliniche Intensivologiche e Perioperatorie , Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore , Rome , Italy , 3 Center for Global Health Research and Studies , Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore , Rome , Italy , 4 Istituto di Pediatria , Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore , Rome , Italy , 5 Sezione di Igiene , Istituto di Sanità Pubblica , Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore , Rome , Italy , 6 SAPPHIRE Group , Health Sciences , Leicester University , Leicester , United Kingdom , 7 Paediatric Emergency Medicine Leicester Academic Group , Children’s Emergency Department , Leicester Royal Inﬁrmary , Leicester , United Kingdom Although the ﬁrst wave of the SARS – CoV - 2 pandemic relatively spared children , the next winter season will put a strain on health systems including pediatric services . Clinical staff managing children will need to deal not only with suspected cases of COVID - 19 , but also with the classic infectious agents that involve children during cold seasons . It will be necessary for physicians , institutions , policy makers , and families to prepare themselves for difﬁculties of this phase of the pandemic . Otherwise , the same problems experienced during the ﬁrst wave of SARS – CoV - 2 , including shortages of human resources , personal protective equipment , and uncertainty , will be exacerbated by signiﬁcant issues in hospital capacity . Here we highlight the potential role of improved vaccination services , school reorganization , home – outpatient – inpatients ﬂows and telemedicine services in order to face the coming winter season . Keywords : COVID - 19 , SARS - CoV - 2 , children , policy , vaccination INTRODUCTION Initially described in China , SARS – CoV - 2 rapidly spread all over the world being declared as a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11 , 2020 . Despite the virus causing millions of infections and thousands of deaths worldwide , the impact on children has been relatively mild . The number of infected children is much lower than in adults , and mortality is an extremely uncommon outcome in this age group ( 1 ) . Although a more serious condition involving children has been recently described , the pediatric inﬂammatory multisystem syndrome temporally related with COVID - 19 ( PIMS - TS ) , this is a rare post – COVID - 19 complication and in a minority of cases leads to death ( 2 ) . As a likely result of parents’ fear of going to hospital , the impact of lockdown , and reduced circulation of infectious diseases , the number of sick children presenting to hospital has dropped signiﬁcantly , and most pediatric wards have been relatively empty ( 3 ) . Although we do not know yet if there will be a second wave of COVID - 19 in the next months , it is likely the pediatric practice will not be as unscathed as during the ﬁrst wave of COVID - 19 . During the coming autumn and winter seasons in Europe , active surveillance will be necessary in order to understand if SARS – CoV - 2 will circulate again and to prompt recognize new cases . This means that routine health care cannot be the same as in a pre – COVID - 19 era . Importantly , the ﬁrst COVID - 19 wave began at the end of the winter seasons when inﬂuenza and bronchiolitis were diminishing and school closures strongly contributed to the reduction of other infectious diseases . In the next autumn , children will be readmitted at school , and the autumn – winter seasons will Buonsenso et al . The Next Pediatric Phase of the SARS - CoV - 2 Pandemic FIGURE 1 | Summary of the most common signs and symptoms of SARS – CoV - 2 infection in children and overlaps with other common infectious diseases in children . Preventable diseases with active immunization strategies ( or with immunoglobulins in case of respiratory syncytial virus ) are highlighted . bring back the most common pathogens , such as inﬂuenza viruses , respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) , pertussis , main bacterial pathogens ( such as meningococcal and pneumococcal diseases , streptococcus , Mycobacteria pneumoniae ) , gastroenteritis , and other relatively less common but important pediatric pathogens . Considering that most of these conditions present several overlaps with SARS – CoV - 2 ( Figure 1 ) , this will pose challenges to pediatricians and health system to appropriately manage all these conditions and properly allocate resources , because COVID - 19 will need to be considered until exclusion , in order to reduce nosocomial transmission and new outbreaks . Therefore , while the ﬁrst wave relatively spared all services that see children , the next autumn / winter will be extremely diﬃcult to be managed from a logistic and clinical point of view . Timely preparedness is needed to be ready to face this new scenario unlike for the initial pandemic ( 3 ) . In particular , pediatricians and policymakers should focus on prevention of communicable diseases in children and reorganization of pediatric care , improving the logistic of inpatient and outpatients services , the appropriateness of access to outpatient and inpatient settings , the interaction between families and general practitioners and between GPs and hospitalists , and the role of telemedicine . In this article , we suggest a number of preventive strategies that pediatricians , institutions , medical societies , and policy makers should address in order to appropriately face the near future , whether or not a second wave of SARS – CoV - 2 will come . POLICY OPTIONS AND IMPLICATIONS , AND ACTIONABLE RECOMMENDATIONS Vaccination Among the possible preventive strategies aiming to reduce the rates of pediatric communicable diseases and indirectly reduce the overﬂow of children to outpatients / inpatients pediatric services , vaccinations would be the easiest , most eﬀective , and fastest strategy available . Infants and young children are typically at high risk of admission to hospital after respiratory tract infection with viruses such as RSV and inﬂuenza virus , probably due to immaturity of the respiratory tract and immune system in this age group ( 4 , 5 ) . Therefore , an active vaccination strategy supported by communication strategies is now a public health priority . The latest version of the recommended childhood and adolescent immunization schedules for 2020 has been released 1 . Although several countries have diﬀerent policies , in most places the obligatory vaccinations are those against diphtheria , tetanus , pertussis , Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b , and hepatitis B , whereas 1 Available online at : https : / / redbook . solutions . aap . org / SS / Immunization _ Schedules . aspx ( accessed June 18 , 2020 ) . Frontiers in Pediatrics | www . frontiersin . org 2 October 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 582798 Buonsenso et al . The Next Pediatric Phase of the SARS - CoV - 2 Pandemic the others are recommended . However , this year will be of pivotal importance trying to achieve the highest immunization levels for all vaccinations , including measles , mumps , and rubella ; meningococcal serogroups A , C , W , Y , and B ; pneumococcal vaccination ; and , extremely important , inﬂuenza . The highest rates should be achieved not only in the pediatric population , but also vaccination services should focus on all the family members ( including pregnant women ) and health care workers , in order to update catch - up immunizations and reach high levels of inﬂuenza immunizations among the health care workers . Currently , rates of inﬂuenza immunization are unacceptably low among health care providers . Typically , fewer than 70 % of health care providers receive inﬂuenza vaccine 2 . Any of the mentioned preventable disorders has overlapping signs and symptoms with COVID - 19 ; therefore , reducing the burden of these disorders will allow a more sustainable care within inpatient and outpatient services . Sustainable systems for vaccinating children , adolescents , and adults must be developed in the context of a changing health care system in the era of COVID - 19 . Families should understand that now , other than the known advantages of vaccinations on child deaths , immunizations have the indirect eﬀect of reducing the workload for a resource - limited health system . Most probably , a child with symptoms suggestive of an infectious disease will be considered possible COVID - 19 cases for the next 6 months at least . This means that each child will be isolated , that only one caregiver will be allowed to be with the child during the clinical evaluation or admission , and that bed capacity will not allow the isolation of all sick children until COVID - 19 is excluded with a high probability . A similar scenario will impair appropriate ﬂows in the PEDs and admission wards , lengthen waiting times in the emergency departments , and ultimately impair or delay the appropriate care for children . Importantly , high immunization rates cannot rest upon one - time or short - term eﬀorts 2 . Parents and patients need educating about each recommended vaccine , the disease it prevents , and the indirect eﬀects on the health system . This step to achieve the highest immunization rates is now more necessary than ever . Vaccine education and usefulness should be highlighted during each visit , via social media and oﬃcial national communication channels , allowing parents to provide questions , receive answers , and discuss their concerns 3 . These strategies are neither novel or innovative communication strategies and therefore would require insigniﬁcant funds compared to the beneﬁts to health system impact . School Reorganization Multiple studies have shown serious consequences of COVID - 19 in children are relatively rare , and there is growing evidence that children themselves are more resistant to carriage and transmission compared with adults ( 6 ) . Somekh et al . ( 7 ) also conﬁrmed these data examining the dynamics of COVID - 19 2 Available online at : https : / / www . cdc . gov / vaccines / pubs / pinkbook / strat . html ( accessed June 18 , 2020 ) . 3 Available online at : https : / / www . aap . org / en - us / advocacy - and - policy / aap - health - initiatives / immunizations / Practice - Management / Pages / oﬃce - strategies . aspx ( accessed on June 18 , 2020 ) . transmission within families . They demonstrated signiﬁcantly lower rates of COVID - 19 positivity in children compared with adults residing in the same household . Children 5 – 17 years of age were 61 % and children 0 – 4 years of age were 47 % less likely to have positive microbiological results ( 7 ) . Although these results do not necessarily indicate that school reopening is safe , in any case children will need to be readmitted at school . Instruction is a priority right of every child and a fundamental instrument for the growth of every society ; therefore , children cannot continue a home - only education process , because this can be associated with reduction in socialization skills , poorer education outcomes , reduced activity , inappropriate nutrition , visual problems , increase in domestic accidents ( 8 ) , or violence . Even assuming that children will need to be admitted back to school , there are no doubts that the school closure during this pandemic had an indirect beneﬁt on the reduction of communicable diseases . French authors found a signiﬁcant decrease ( 70 % ) of acute gastroenteritis , common cold , and acute otitis media compared to the expected values , and a 63 . 5 % decrease in bronchiolitis . In general , a dramatic decrease in overall PEDs visits ( − 68 . 5 % ) and hospitalization ( − 44 . 7 % ) was observed ( 9 ) . However , the reduction of PED presentation can also be due to diﬀerent parents’ decision - making motives and reasoning on bringing their child to hospital or not . During these months of the COVID - 19 pandemic , an intense debate has started about possible late , belated , or “not - at - all” presentations in the PED related to the pandemic ; however , strong evidences suggesting why the PED attendances have changed that much during the pandemic are still lacking ( 10 ) . Although the assumption that children have higher risks of contagion within close communities , such as schools , is well known among pediatricians , this is the ﬁrst time in the recent history that this ﬁnding has been methodologically demonstrated . Although school closure aiming to reduce pediatric infectious disease burden is neither ethically feasible nor sustainable for families , the results from Angoulvant et al . ( 9 ) and Bressan et al . ( 3 ) provide unique evidence to implement new guidelines and new routines to provide child education at school . Currently , most classrooms are overcrowded with 20 or more students per class , and lunch is usually served in large common spaces where students from all the schools are collected to eat . In light of new evidences and the need to reduce as much as possible the diﬀusion of infectious diseases among children during the next season ( because this would lead to include all cases in the diﬀerential diagnosis with COVID - 19 because of similar symptoms ) , a reorganization of school environments should be a priority for policy makers . Institution should plan to reduce the number of students in each room and practicing physical distance within the class , separating desks of 1 m from each other , and providing sanitizers at the entrance of each class . The reduction of students per class would also allow a better students - to - teacher ratio and potentially improve school outcomes . Also , the ﬁgure of a school medical doctor / nurse might be considered ( or implemented if already in place ) in order to detect early cases of suspected infectious diseases Frontiers in Pediatrics | www . frontiersin . org 3 October 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 582798 Buonsenso et al . The Next Pediatric Phase of the SARS - CoV - 2 Pandemic FIGURE 2 | Child health care reorganization in the early post – COVID - 19 pandemic . A better ﬂow and interaction between families , family pediatrician / general practitioners , and hospital pediatricians , as well implementation of telemedicine services , are needed to prevent overﬂow of patients in the emergency departments and saturation of hospital resource . to be sent home and to ensure catch - up immunizations are up - to - date . Preparing schools will be a challenge both logistically and ﬁnancially , and it is likely underlying inequities will be exacerbated with the most deprived settings likely to be disproportionately aﬀected . However , given the importance of returning children to school , it may well be that governments prioritize education in a manner that they have not done so before . Child Health Care in the Early Post – COVID - 19 Pandemic The SARS – CoV - 2 pandemic has signiﬁcantly altered health care systems with shortages of personal protective equipment ( PPEs ) ( 3 ) , human resources , and bed capacity not only related to intensive care unit ones . Emergency departments and admission wards changed their assets , allowing dedicated ﬂows for high - risk and low - risk COVID - 19 patients ( 11 ) . Outpatient services have been postponed to the end of the peak unless necessary , and telemedicine services implemented in order to allow routine controls . In most countries , the peak of the SARS – CoV - 2 arrived when the ﬂu season was over or close to the end , and school closures determined a strong reduction of common pediatric infectious diseases . The reduction of common seasonal infections helped health systems focus most of their eﬀorts on COVID - 19 . However , the next autumn / winter will probably not be the same , no matter whether a second wave of SARS – CoV - 2 infection begins or not . Outpatient services cannot be postponed again , because a clear impact on other major contributors to mortality and morbidity , such as reduced number of new diagnoses of cancers and missed diagnosis , have been documented ( 12 ) . Children will be back at school , and as discussed , the reoccurrence of common infections is expected . Therefore , even though the direct clinical impact of the SARS – COV - 2 virus on children has been limited with a very low mortality rate , and the COVID - 19 – related pediatric inﬂammatory multisystem syndrome remains a relatively rare consequence of the disease , pediatricians will still need to include SARS – CoV - 2 in the diﬀerential diagnosis . This will be necessary to assess the reoccurrence of SARS – CoV - 2 and to prevent the spread of the virus in the health facilities and communities . Because parents / caregivers always accompany the child , they may need to be screened as well if the child needs hospital admission . In this context , a review of the necessity of regular outpatient follow - up , family education about the management of fever in children and recognition of red ﬂags , implementation of technology , and more appropriateness in the access to emergency departments is needed ( Figure 2 ) ( 13 ) . Ideally , parents of every sick child should be able to have relatively prompt access to their family pediatrician ( FP ) or general practitioner ( GP ) before bringing the child to medical attention , unless critical conditions that require immediate access to the hospital by ambulance ( Figure 2 ) . Pediatricians should develop screening and telematics visit forms to perform a ﬁrst evaluation of a child with telemedicine . This televisit Frontiers in Pediatrics | www . frontiersin . org 4 October 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 582798 Buonsenso et al . The Next Pediatric Phase of the SARS - CoV - 2 Pandemic should allow the pediatrician to discuss with both the mother and child , see how the child behave , and take an appropriate clinical history . At this moment , the FP / GP should decide if the child can be reassessed with telemedicine in 12 – 24 h or a real visit should be performed , at home or in the outpatient service . Depending on the health system model of that country , the outpatient service and up - to - date FP / GP should be able to perform a comprehensive examination . This may include the use of point of care ultrasound , assessing major causes of diseases including pneumonia , appendicitis , intussusception , and pyloric stenosis , which can be easily diagnosed at point of care by trained physicians or other near patients testing interventions . Only after this examination , the child should be sent to hospital if needed . This would be a radical change of service ﬂow in some settings and may require signiﬁcant short - term investment in training and capacity . However , to not do this may confront services with an impossible capacity challenge . Real - time platforms should allow the communication between the FP / GP and hospital pediatrician in order to share clinical decisions and agree with the most appropriate ﬂow of the single patient . This last point will be necessary also for the follow - up of children with documented SARS – CoV - 2 infection or known exposure that does not initially deserve admission because of their clinical condition . We now know that a minority of these children will develop PIMS - TS weeks after the initial exposure to the virus ; therefore , family education , telemedicine daily updates , and proper interaction between family , FP / GP , and hospital will be of pivotal importance . CONCLUSIONS The next winter season will put a strain on the health system , including all child health services . It is necessary that physicians , institutions , policy makers , and families all together prepare themselves on time to face in the best way the diﬃculties of the near future ; otherwise , we will ﬁnd ourselves facing the same problems experienced during the ﬁrst wave of SARS – CoV - 2 , including shortages of human resources , PPEs , and hospital capacity . In this context , improved vaccination services , school reorganization , a renewed concept of health system with appropriateness of the home – outpatient – inpatients ﬂows , and strengthening of telemedicine services are public health priorities , right now . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS DB and DR has the initial concept and wrote a preliminary draft . PV contributed to the writing of the clinical overview of the COVID - 19 in children . UM actively work in immunizations and contributed in the writing of the immunization strategies . WR provided his expertise in the proposal of new future strategies to be prepared in facing the next phase of SAR - CoV - 2 pandemic in children . The collaboration between experts in diﬀerent ﬁelds from diﬀerent countries was pivotal in writing a comprehensive manuscript on a particularly important topic on child health . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . REFERENCES 1 . Parri N , Lenge M , Buonsenso D . Coronavirus Infection in Pediatric Emergency Departments ( CONFIDENCE ) Research Group . Children with Covid - 19 in pediatric emergency departments in Italy . N Engl J Med . ( 2020 ) 383 : 187 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMc20 07617 2 . Whittaker E , Bamford A , Kenny J , Kaforou M , Jones CE , Shah P , et al . Clinical characteristics of 58 children with a pediatric inﬂammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS - CoV - 2 . JAMA . ( 2020 ) 24 : 259 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1001 / jama . 2020 . 10369 3 . Bressan S , Buonsenso D , Farrugia R , Oostenbrink R , Titomanlio L , Roland D , et al . Preparedness and response to pediatric CoVID - 19 in European Emergency Departments : a survey of the REPEM and PERUKI networks . Ann Emerg Med . ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . annemergmed . 2020 . 05 . 018 . [ Epub ahead of print ] . 4 . Hong L , Luo Y . Respiratory viral infections in infants : causes , clinical symptoms , virology , and immunology . Clin Microbiol Rev . ( 2010 ) 23 : 74 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1128 / CMR . 00032 - 09 5 . Kelvin AA , Halperin S . COVID - 19 in children : the link in the transmission chain . Lancet Infect Dis . ( 2020 ) 20 : 633 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1473 - 3099 ( 20 ) 30236 - X 6 . Munro A , Roland D . The Missing Link ? Children and Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 , Don’t Forget the Bubbles ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 31440 / DFTB . 25585 7 . Somekh E , Gleyzer A , Heller E , Lopian M , Kashani - Ligumski L , Czeiger S , et al . The role of children in the dynamics of intra family coronavirus 2019 spread in densely populated area . Pediatr Infect Dis J . ( 2020 ) 39 : e202 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002783 8 . Bressan S , Gallo E , Tirelli F , Gregori D , Da Dalt L . Lockdown : more domestic accidents than COVID - 19 in children . Arch Dis Child . ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1136 / archdischild - 2020 - 319547 . [ Epub ahead of print ] . 9 . Angoulvant F , Ouldali N , Yang DD , Filser M , Gajdos V , Rybak A , et al . COVID - 19pandemic : impactcausedbyschoolclosureandnationallockdown on pediatric visits and admissions for viral and non - viral infections , a time series analysis . Clin Infect Dis . ( 2020 ) ciaa710 . doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa710 10 . Roland D , Nijman JR , Ponmani C , Munro APS . Arriving late , delayed , or not at all—presentations to paediatric emergency departments during covid - 19 pandemic . BMJ Open . ( 2020 ) . [ Epub ahead of print ] . 11 . Buonsenso D , Onesimo R , Valentini P , Chiaretti A , Gatto A , Attinà G , et al . Children’s healthcare during corona virus disease 19 pandemic : the Italian experience . Pediatr Infect Dis J . ( 2020 ) 39 : e137 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1097 / INF . 0000000000002732 12 . Hartnett KP , Kite - Powell A , DeVies J , et al . Impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic on emergency department visits - United States , January 1 , 2019 – May 30 , 2020 . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . ( 2020 ) 69 : 699 – 704 . doi : 10 . 15585 / mmwr . mm6923e1 13 . Rolad D , Munro A . Covid - 19 in Children : Develop Solutions Rather Than Look for Problems . Available online at : https : / / blogs . bmj . com / bmj / 2020 / 06 / 12 / covid - 19 - in - children - develop - solutions - rather - th ( accessed on June 18 , 2020 ) . Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Buonsenso , Valentini , Moscato , Ricciardi and Roland . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Pediatrics | www . frontiersin . org 5 October 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 582798