Developmental Cell , Vol . 6 , 525 – 538 , April , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Clathrin Adaptor epsinR Is Required for Retrograde Sorting on Early Endosomal Membranes routes is commonly termed clathrin - independent endo - cytosis ( Nichols and Lippincott - Schwartz , 2001 ; Johan - nes and Lamaze , 2002 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . The Agne ` s Saint - Pol , 1 , 6 Bele´n Ye´lamos , 1 , 6 Mohamed Amessou , 1 Ian G . Mills , 4 , 7 Marc Dugast , 3 Danie ` le Tenza , 2 Peter Schu , 5 molecular mechanismsof clathrin - independentendocy - Claude Antony , 4 Harvey T . McMahon , 4 tosis remain to be established . Recent data have shown Christophe Lamaze , 1 and Ludger Johannes 1 , * that multiple pathways exist . Some of the clathrin - inde - 1 Laboratoire Trafic et Signalisation pendent uptake pathways , including IL2 receptor endo - 2 Unite´ de Microscopie Electronique cytosis ( Lamaze et al . , 2001 ) and SV40 endocytosis UMR144 Curie / CNRS ( Pelkmans and Helenius , 2002 ) , are controlled by the 3 INSERM U520 GTPase dynamin . Other uptake pathways , including Institut Curie those used by some GPI - anchored proteins , are inde - 26 rue d’Ulm pendent of the commonly used dynamin isoforms 75248 Paris Cedex 05 ( Skretting et al . , 1999 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . France Many endocytosed molecules reach the conventional 4 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology transferrin receptor ( TfR ) - positive early endosome ( EE ) , Neurobiology Division which serves as a sorting station ( Gruenberg and Max - Hills Road field , 1995 ; Mellman , 1996 ) . Somereceptorsarerecycled Cambridge CB2 2QH to the plasma membrane to be recharged with ligands , United Kingdom whereas others enter the late endocytic pathway for 5 Georg - August - Universita¨t Go¨ttingen degradation . The retrograde route bypasses the recy - Zentrum fu¨r Biochimie und Molekulare Zellbiologie cling and degradation pathways , allowing specific pro - Heinrich - Du¨ker - Weg 12 teins and lipids to reach other intracellular compart - 37073 Go¨ttingen ments such as the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , the Golgi Germany cisternae , the endoplasmic reticulum and , in some in - stances , the cytosol ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ; for a review , see Johannes and Goud , 1998 ) . This pathway has been Summary studied in detail to explain the cellular entry of some protein toxins , such as cholera toxin , ricin , and Shiga Retrograde transport links early / recycling endosomes toxin ( Lord and Roberts , 1998 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , thereby connecting 2000 ) . Other studies have shown that the cellular pro - the endocytic and the biosynthetic / secretory path - teins TGN38 / 46 ( Mallard et al . , 1998 , 2002 ; Ghosh et ways . To determine how internalized molecules are al . , 1998 ) , GPP130 , and GP73 ( Puri et al . , 2002 ) , all of targeted to the retrograde route , we have interfered unknown function , use the retrograde route . with the function of clathrin and that of two proteins In some cases , clathrin - independent endocytosis has that interact with it , AP1 and epsinR . We found that been described to be linked to endosomes that are de - the glycosphingolipid binding bacterial Shiga toxin en - void of classical markers of the early endocytic pathway tered cells efficiently when clathrin expression was ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ; Nichols et al . , 2001 ) . The relation - inhibited . However , retrogradetransportofShigatoxin ship between theses structures and the conventional to the TGN was strongly inhibited . This allowed us to EE has remained debatable ( see Nichols , 2002 , versus show that for Shiga toxin , retrograde sorting on early / Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . recycling endosomes depends on clathrin and epsinR , Although the conventional EE is known to be a sorting but not AP1 . EpsinR was also involved in retrograde station , themolecular mechanismsunderlyingthediffer - transport of two endogenous proteins , TGN38 / 46 and ential distribution of internalized molecules have not mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . In conclusion , our been studied in detail . COP - type coats are localized on work reveals the existence of clathrin - independent the EE and implicated in sorting into the late endocytic and - dependent transport steps in the retrograde pathway ( Whitney et al . , 1995 ; Aniento et al . , 1996 ) . The route , and establishes a function for clathrin and ep - role of clathrin in the early endocytic pathway is more sinR at the endosome - TGN interface . uncertain , even though ultrastructural imaging has clearly shown that it is present on this compartment ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1996 ; Mallard et al . , 1998 ; Sachse et Introduction al . , 2002 ) . Clathrin may play a role in transferrin ( Tf ) recycling ( Bennett et al . , 2001 ; Wettey et al . , 2002 ) , pos - Clathrin plays a central role in endocytosis at the plasma sibly via perinuclear recycling endosomal ( RE ) tubules membrane . However , alternative internalization path - ( van Dam and Stoorvogel , 2002 ) . Several studies have ways also exist . Cellular uptake via these alternative suggested that clathrin coats containing the adaptor protein 1 ( AP1 ) are involved in retrograde transport ( Mal - * Correspondence : johannes @ curie . fr lard et al . , 1998 ; Meyer et al . , 2000 ; Folsch et al . , 2001 ; 6 These authors contributed equally to this work . Crump et al . , 2001 ; Valdivia et al . , 2002 ) . 7 Present address : Department of Oncology , University of Cam - EpsinR , one of the proteins that interacts with AP1 , bridge , c / o Hutchinson / MRC Cancer Research Centre , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 2XZ , United Kingdom . can also directly associate with clathrin ( Kalthoff et al . , Developmental Cell 526 2002 ; Wasiak et al . , 2002 ; Mills et al . , 2003 ; Hirst et To address the function of clathrin in STxB trafficking , al . , 2003 ) . In addition , epsinR can bind to phosphatidyl we designed an RNA interference ( RNAi ) tool that al - inositol ( PtdIns ) lipids via its ENTH domain . Like AP1 , lowedustoinhibitclathrinheavychain ( CHC ) expression epsinR has been localized to Golgi membranes and pe - to 20 % of control levels ( Figure 1F ) . We carried out ripheral structures that are most likely endosomes ( Mills whole - mount analysis of clathrin RNAi cells and mock - et al . , 2003 ; Hirst et al . , 2003 ) . However , this localization transfected cells after 15 min internalization of STxB / of epsinR does not depend on AP1 expression ( Hirst et HRP at 37 (cid:1) C . This confirmed that clathrin was present al . , 2003 ) . Unlike epsins involved in coated pit formation on STxB - containing early / recycling endosomal buds of at the plasma membrane , epsinR is strongly enriched different sizes both at low temperatures ( Figure 1E ) and in clathrin - coated vesicles and stably associates with at 37 (cid:1) C ( Figure 1G , left ) . Interestingly , even in CHC RNAi - them ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) . treated cells , in which clathrin immunolabeling was al - In this study , we showed that the bacterial Shiga toxin mostlost , STxB / HRPstillenteredtheendosomalsystem can enter cells efficiently even when clathrin expression ( Figure 1G , left ) . STxB - containing endosomal mem - was inhibited . However , the retrograde transport of the branes were strongly labeled for the (cid:2) - adaptin subunit ShigatoxinfromEE / REtotheTGNwasstronglyreduced of the clathrin adaptor AP1 , even in CHC RNAi - treated in these conditions . EpsinR was localized to endosomal cells that were recognized via thick tubular elements in membranes , and involved in the retrograde transport of their cytoplasm ( Figure 1G , middle ) . Similar observa - exogenous Shiga toxin and endogenous TGN38 / 46 and tions were made for the clathrin , AP1 , and PtdIns lipid mannose 6 - phosphate receptor of 300 kDa ( MPR300 , binding protein epsinR ( Kalthoff et al . , 2002 ; Wasiak et also termed cation - independent MPR ) . Thus , our study al . , 2002 ; Mills et al . , 2003 ; Hirst et al . , 2003 ) , another establishes a role for epsinR / clathrin in retrograde sort - candidate for recruiting clathrin to internal membranes ing at the EE / RE - TGN interface . ( Figure 1G , right ) . These data clearly show that a specific clathrin machinery is present on STxB - containing early / Results recycling endosomal membranes . A Specific Clathrin Machinery on Endosomal Functional Analysis of Clathrin Membranes of the Retrograde Route in the Retrograde Route The whole - mount technique developed by Stoorvogel We first studied the effect of CHC RNAi treatment on and colleagues allows the in - depth inspection of cyto - the retrograde transport of STxB by using immunofluo - plasmic membranes by using an ultrastructural method rescence . In control conditions , Tf was efficiently inter - ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1996 ) . For the analysis of the retro - nalized and STxB was transported to the TGN ( Figure grade route , horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) was cova - 2A ) . In CHC RNAi - treated cells , the uptake of Tf was lently linked to a variant of the Shiga toxin B - subunit strongly inhibited ( Figure 2B ) , as expected . In these con - ( STxB ) that was specifically constructed for site - directed ditions , STxB appeared in tubular and vesicular struc - chemical coupling ( Haicheur et al . , 2003 ) . STxB is a non - tures , instead of being concentrated in perinuclear Golgi toxic protein used as a bona fide retrograde transport membranes ( Figure 2B ) . The tubular structures con - marker ( see Johannes , 2002 , for a review ) . Immunofluo - tained TfR ( Figure 2C ) , suggesting that they were of rescence ( Figure 1A ) and immunoelectron microscopy early / recycling endosomal origin . The TfR cell surface ( Figures 1B – 1C ) showed that HRP - coupled STxB was signal was 8 - fold stronger in these conditions than in targeted normally to the TGN and Golgi cisternae . This control conditions , indicating that a significant fraction confirms that the trafficking of STxB was not altered by of the receptor was blocked at the plasma membrane chemical crosslinking . ( data not shown ) . We then used the whole - mount technique ( Stoorvogel To characterize further the TfR - positive compartment et al . , 1996 ) to compare the intracellular distribution of in which STxB accumulated in CHC RNAi cells , we used STxB / HRP to that of Tf / HRP , which has previously been three known early and recycling endosomal markers . used for these studies . Both Tf / HRP and STxB / HRP The STxB - containing tubules were strongly labeled with were internalized by HeLa cells at 19 . 5 (cid:1) C , i . e . , in condi - anti - Rab11 antibody and with GFP - tagged Rab4 ( Fig - tions in which retrograde transport of STxB to the TGN / ures 2D – 2E ) , clearly indicating that they belong to the Golgi is inhibited ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ) . Cells were pre - recycling branch of the early endocytic pathway ( Son - pared for whole - mount analysis and stained with anti - nichsen et al . , 2000 ) . Consistently , they were only lightly clathrin antibody . Membranes containing HRP - coupled labeled by EEA1 ( Figure 2F ) , a PtdIns ( 3 ) P binding protein ligands appeared dark due to the deposit of a polymer - that interacts with Rab5 on the EE ( Simonsen et al . , ization product . Some Tf / HRP was detected in early 1998 ) . endosomal vacuoles while most was found in tubules Morphological analysis suggested that the transport and in 60 nm clathrin - coated buds ( Figure 1D , arrows ) , of STxB to the TGN / Golgi , but not endocytosis into as describedbefore ( Stoorvogelet al . , 1996 ) . In contrast , EE / RE , was inhibited in CHC RNAi - treated cells . We large amounts of STxB / HRP were found in clathrin - con - used quantitative biochemical techniques to test this taining early endosomal vacuoles ( Figure 1E , arrow - hypothesis . When measuring endocytosis with biotinyl - heads ) , endosomal tubules , and clathrin - coated buds ated ligands ( i . e . , Tf or STxB ) , we observed that in CHC of different size ( arrows ) . Thus , although STxB and Tf RNAi - treated cells , Tf uptake was inhibited ( Figure 3A ) colocalize extensively when examined by immunofluo - to a similar extent to cells in which the clathrin gene rescence microscopy ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ) , both pro - was genetically inactivated ( Wettey et al . , 2002 ) . In con - teins appeared to be differentially enriched in subdo - trast to that of Tf , the endocytosis of STxB was only mains of the early / recycling endosomal membrane system . slightly affected in these conditions ( Figure 3B ) . The EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 527 Figure 1 . Analysis of the Clathrin Machinery on the STxB - Containing Early / Recycling Endosome ( A ) HRP was chemically coupled to a STxB variant . The coupling product was bound to HeLa cells on ice and incubated for 45 min at 37 (cid:1) C before fixation and immunolabeling with antibodies against HRP and the Golgi / TGN marker Rab6 . Note that when coupled to STxB , HRP efficiently accumulated in perinuclear Golgi membranes . Bar (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . ( B and C ) STxB / HRP was internalized into HeLa cells for 45 min at 37 (cid:1) C . After cryosectioning , cells were fixed and immunolabeled . Note that HRP and STxB were readily detected in the TGN and in the cisternae of the Golgi apparatus . Bar (cid:3) 100 nm . ( D and E ) Whole - mount preparations with ( D ) Tf / HRP and ( E ) STxB / HRP internalized at 19 . 5 (cid:1) C . STxB - HRP - or Tf / HRP - containing membranes appear dark due to the formation of the DAB precipitate . Clathrin : 10 nm gold particles . Bar (cid:3) 200 nm . ( F ) RNAi efficiently down - modulated CHC expression in HeLa cells as detected by Western blot analysis . The histogram shows the mean of two determinations . ( G ) Whole - mount analysis of clathrin ( CHC ) , (cid:2) - adaptin , and epsinR ( EpsR ) localization on EE / RE of HeLa cells . STxB / HRP was internalized for 15 min at 37 (cid:1) C into mock - transfected ( CTL ) or CHC RNAi - transfected cells before sample preparation . Note that (cid:2) - adaptin and epsinR labeling on membranes could be detected independently of clathrin expression . Bar (cid:3) 100 nm . initial rate of STxB uptake and the plateau reached after 2001 ; Nichols et al . , 2001 ) , meaning that it is possible to study its intracellular fate in these conditions . about20 minwerelargelyunaltered comparedtocontrol cells transfected with the empty vector . These data con - Sulfation analysis was chosen to quantify retrograde transport of sulfation site - carrying STxB to the TGN ( Jo - firmthatSTxBcanentercellsevenwhenclathrin - depen - dent endocytosis is severely impaired ( Falguie ` res et al . , hannes et al . , 1997 ; Mallard et al . , 1998 , 2002 ) . In CHC Developmental Cell 528 Figure 2 . Immunofluorescence Analysis of Retrograde Transport of STxB in CHC RNAi HeLa Cells ( A – F ) STxB was internalized for 45 min at 37 (cid:1) C by mock - transfected ( A ) or CHC RNAi - transfected ( B – F ) HeLa cells . During the last 15 min , Tf was added continuously and accumulated in EE / RE . In ( E ) , the cells were also transfected with GFP - Rab4 . The cells were then stained for the indicated markers . Bars (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . RNAi cells , only a small fraction of sulfation site - carrying inhibited in cells expressing the CHC Hub fragment ( Ben - nett et al . , 2001 ) ( Figure 3C ) , whereas STxB endocytosis STxB was transported to the TGN ( 9 % of that observed in control cells ) ( Figure 3C ) . A correlation was observed again was unaffected in these conditions ( data not shown ) . between the level of CHC expression and retrograde transport efficiency ( data not shown ) . To confirm the To determine whether the observed effects of CHC depletion on the retrograde transport of STxB were effect of the CHC RNAi tool , we showed that the retro - grade transport of STxB to the TGN was also strongly direct or indirect , we used an assay that measures EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 529 Figure 3 . Biochemical Analysis of Endocytosis and Retrograde Transport under Clathrin Dysfunction Conditions ( A and B ) HeLa cells were transfected with control plasmid ( CTL ) or RNAi plasmid against CHC ( RNAi ) . The following experiments were done in the indicated conditions : ( A ) endocytosis of Tf ; ( B ) endocytosis of STxB . Means of three independent experiments are shown . Note that in CHC RNAi - treated cells , Tf uptake was strongly inhibited , as opposed to STxB uptake . ( C ) HeLa cells were transfected with empty vector ( CTL ) or CHC RNAi ( RNAi ) . Alternatively , HeLa Hub cells were induced ( I ) or not ( NI ) . Retrograde transport to the TGN ( 20 min at 37 (cid:1) C ) was measured by sulfation analysis on intact cells . ( D ) Permeabilized cell approach . STxB - Sulf 2 was internalized by HeLa cells at low temperatures . The cells were permeabilized and sulfation analysis was done in the presence of the indicated concentrations of X22 or 0 . 4 mg / ml control mouse IgGs . ( E ) In the same experimental conditions as shown in ( D ) , cytosol - dependent degradation of EGF was not inhibited by 0 . 4 mg / ml X22 , demonstrating the specificity of the observed effect on retrograde transport . ( C – E ) Means of three to seven independent experiments . EE / RE - to - TGN transport on permeabilized cells ( Mallard the AP1 subunit (cid:2) - adaptin by using RNAi . No effect was detected on STxB transport to the TGN in cells that et al . , 2002 ) . In this assay , STxB is internalized into the EE / RE of HeLa cells at low temperatures . The cells are expressed as little as 20 % of endogenous (cid:2) - adaptin ( Figure 4A ) , as shown by quantitative sulfation analysis then permeabilized and retrograde transport to the TGN measured in the presence or absence of exogenous ( Figure 4B ) . To exclude the possibility that RNAi - medi - ated (cid:2) - adaptin downmodulation was not efficient enough molecules . The interfering anti - clathrin antibody X22 ( Doxseyetal . , 1987 ) had astrongdose - dependentinhib - to produce an effect on retrograde transport , we used fibroblasts from mice in which the (cid:4) 1A subunit of AP1 itory effect in this assay , whereas even the highest con - centration of the control antibody had no effect ( Figure had been genetically inactivated ( Meyer et al . , 2000 ) . Again , no effect was detected on the retrograde trans - 3D ) . STxBwas not relocalizedto the lateendocytic path - way in the presence of X22 , as indicated by the fact that portof STxBtothe TGN , asobserved byimmunofluores - cence ( Figure 4C ) . Transport in (cid:4) 1A - positive control STxB was not degraded over time ( data not shown ) . As a further control , we showed that the degradation of fibroblasts was identical ( data not shown ) . In the perme - abilized cell assay described above , concentrations of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) was not affected by the X22 antibody ( Figure 3E ) in identical experimental condi - up to 3 mg / ml of the anti - (cid:2) - adaptin antibody 100 / 3 had no effect on retrograde transport to the TGN ( data not tions to those used in Figure 3D . These observations demonstrate that clathrin directly and specifically con - shown ) . We concluded that AP1 could not be the only adaptor involved in clathrin - dependent transport inter - trols retrograde transport at the EE / RE - TGN interface . mediate formation on EE / RE . AP1 Is Not Required for the Retrograde Transport of STxB Our previous data ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ) and the whole - The Clathrin Binding Protein epsinR Is Involved in Retrograde Transport to the TGN mount analysis presented in this study ( Figure 1G , mid - dle ) revealed the presence of the clathrin adaptor AP1 The clathrin binding protein epsinR is localized on the STxB - containing endosome ( Figure 1G , right ) . To ad - on STxB - containing early / recycling endosomal mem - branes . To test whether AP1 is required for the retro - dress its function in retrograde transport , we overex - pressed myc - tagged wild - type epsinR and analyzed grade transport of STxB , we inhibited the expression of Developmental Cell 530 Figure 4 . Analysis of the Role of AP1 in Retrograde Transport of STxB ( A ) Expression of the AP1 subunit (cid:2) - adaptin was efficiently down - modulated using RNAi , as determined by Western blotting ( see inset ) . ( B ) In conditions of RNAi - mediated inhibition of (cid:2) - adaptin expression , retrograde transport was not inhibited , as assessed quantitatively using sulfation analysis on intact cells ( 20 min at 37 (cid:1) C ) . ( C ) In fibroblasts from (cid:4) 1A knockout mice , STxB was efficiently transported to the Golgi apparatus , labeled with Rab6 . Bar (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . STxB transport to the Golgi apparatus by immunofluo - Toaddressthisissue , weusedmutationsthatinterfere with AP1 or clathrin interactions . The D422R mutant rescence . This approach is based on the previous ob - servation that overexpression of epsinR impairs pro - shows a reduced binding affinity for clathrin , whereas its interaction with adaptors is not affected ( Mills et cathepsin D trafficking ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) . In cells that strongly expressed myc - epsinR , STxB could not be de - al . , 2003 ) . The expression of this mutant inhibited STxB transport to the TGN and led to the accumulation of tected in perinuclear Golgi membranes labeled with the Golgi marker CTR433 ( Figure 5A ) or the TGN marker STxB in TfR - positive membranes that were also decor - ated by the mutant ( Figure 5D ) . Combining the D34G / Rab6 ( data not shown ) . STxB accumulated in membrane structures that contained the TfR ( Figure 5B ) or cointer - R67L mutations with D422R yielded a triple mutant with strongly reduced inhibitory activity on retrograde trans - nalized Tf ( see below ) , showing that they were of endo - somal origin . Sulfation analysis of these cells confirmed port ( Figure 5E ) . Similar observations were made with the D349R mutant , which is selectively deficient in adap - that retrograde transport was indeed inhibited ( data not shown ) . tor binding but can still interact with clathrin ( data not shown ) . These data suggest that the ENTH domain is The capacity of epsinR to bind the PtdIns lipids PtdIns ( 4 ) P and PtdIns ( 5 ) P via its ENTH domain ( Kalthoff necessary for localizing epsinR to endosomal mem - branes and that concomitant inactivation of lipid and et al . , 2002 ; Mills et al . , 2003 ; Hirst et al . , 2003 ) positions the molecule as a potential adaptor between mem - clathrin or lipid and adaptor binding is required to re - lease the inhibitory impact of myc - epsinR overexpres - branes and clathrin . To understand the contribution of the different interactions to the observed overexpres - sion on retrograde transport . To characterize further the endosomal TfR - positive sion phenotype , we used epsinR mutants with selec - tively affected binding to specific partners , as described structures that accumulate in myc - epsinR - expressing cells , we double labeled cells for endosomal markers . previously ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) . The D34G / R67L double mutation in the ENTH domain drastically reduces bind - The early endosomal antigen EEA1 was clearly detected on myc - epsinR membranes ( Figure 6A ) . Only partial ing to PtdIns lipids ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) . When the double mutant was expressed in HeLa cells , STxB transport to overlap was observed with Rab11 ( Figure 6B ) , a marker that is enriched in recycling endosomal membranes the TGN was inhibited ( Figure 5C ) . The mutant pheno - type was somewhat less robust , when compared to ( Sheff et al . , 1999 ) , and GFP - Rab4 ( Figure 6C ) . Thus , myc - epsinR membranes appear to be mostly of early wild - type transfected cells , and the peripheral STxB - positive structures contained the TfR but were not dec - endosomal origin . Strikingly , they were also strongly decorated with clathrin and the AP1 subunit (cid:2) - adaptin orated by the epsinR mutant ( Figure 5C ) . This suggests that the mutant inhibits transport through interaction ( s ) ( Figures 6D – 6E ) , in agreement with a role for epsinR as a coat - recruiting protein . with cytosolic partners . By analogy , an epsin1 lipid bind - ing mutant inhibits Tf uptake by mislocalizing adaptors The effect of myc - epsinR overexpression was not re - stricted to the retrograde transport of STxB . Indeed , from the membrane ( Ford et al . , 2002 ) . EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 531 Figure 5 . Morphological Analysis of epsinR Function in Retrograde Transport In all conditions , HeLa cells were transfected for 1 day with the indicated myc - tagged epsinR mutants . STxB was internalized for 45 min at 37 (cid:1) C with these cells , before fixation and immunostaining , as indicated . ( A ) In cells expressing myc - tagged epsinR , retrograde transport of STxB to the Golgi apparatus , labeled with CTR433 , was inhibited . ( B ) In these cells , STxB accumulated in membranes of early / recycling endosomal origin , labeled with TfR . ( C – E ) Mutational analysis of epsinR interactions with membranes and coat components . ( C ) In cells expressing the ENTH domain double mutation , D34G / R67L , the transport of STxB to the Golgi apparatus was inhibited and STxB staining substantially overlapped with TfR staining . Unlike in cells overexpressing wild - type epsinR ( see above ) , no mutant protein was detected on STxB - containing membranes . ( D ) In cells expressing the clathrin interaction - deficient D422R mutant , STxB did not reach the Golgi apparatus and accumulated on TfR - positive mem - branes that also were decorated by the D422R mutant . ( E ) When combined with the D34G / R67L double mutation , D422R was no longer inhibitory . Bar (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . endogenous MPR300 and TGN46 were relocalized to theseconditionswasnotaddresseddirectly . Inantibody uptake experiments on rat TGN38 - expressing HeLa myc - epsinR - containing endosomal membranes ( Fig - ures 6F and 6G ) . The labeling for endogenous TGN46 cells , antibodies to TGN38 also accumulated in myc - epsinR membranes , whereas they were transported to was lost in the most strongly myc - epsinR - expressing cells , similar to the apparent disappearance of the pro - the TGN in control conditions ( data not shown ) . Thus , proteins that depend on endosome - to - TGN tein in CHC and (cid:2) - adaptin RNAi - treated cells ( data not shown ) . Whether the protein is actually degraded in transport for their intracellular localization , i . e . , Shiga Developmental Cell 532 Figure 6 . Characterization of Membranes Accumulating in Cells Overexpressing myc - epsinR ( A – E ) HeLa cells were transfected with myc - epsinR for 24 hr and stained for the indicated markers . In ( C ) , the cells were cotransfected with GFP - Rab4 . Inallconditions , myc - epsinR - positivemembranescontainedinternalizedSTxB ( datanotshown ) . Notethatmyc - epsinRmembranes are well recognized by anti - EEA1 antibody ( A ) and are strongly decorated with CHC ( D ) and the AP1 subunit (cid:2) - adaptin ( E ) . ( F and G ) Endogenous MPR300 and TGN46 relocalized from their steady - state localization at the TGN to myc - epsinR membranes . ( H and I ) Fluorophore - labeled EGF ( H ) or Tf ( I ) were internalized by myc - epsinR - transfected HeLa cells for 40 min . The cells were then washed and fixed ( H ) or chased for 40 min ( I ) before fixation . Bar (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . toxin , TGN38 / 46 , andMPR300 , accumulateinmyc - epsinR shown ) . In agreement withthese observations , we found that the endogenous EGF receptor was not relocalized membranes . Golgi markers that are not known to cycle , i . e . , CTR433 and Rab6 , were not relocalized . To explore tothemyc - epsinRcompartment ( datanotshown ) . When cells that had accumulated intracellular Tf were washed the specificity of the transport block , fluorophore - la - beled Tf and EGF were internalized by myc - epsinR - and then chased for 40 min , Tf labeling decreased in transfected and nontransfected cells , indicating that re - transfected and nontransfected cells . The distribution of EGF was similar in both conditions , and the fraction cycling was not inhibited . In the conditions that were used to detect the Tf remaining in these cells ( Figure of the EGF labeling that was found in or close to myc - epsinR membranes was low ( Figure 6H ) . Upon chase , 6I ) , it became apparent that in nontransfected cells , Tf was located in short tubular membranes distributed EGF labeling disappeared in all conditions ( data not EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 533 throughout the cell , characteristic of the RE in HeLa clathrin - independent endocytosis followed by clathrin - dependent retrograde sorting at the level of the early / cells ( Lin et al . , 2002 ) . In transfected cells , Tf was still in the myc - epsinR membranes and appeared to recycle recycling endosome . Our data suggest that epsinR acts as a structural adaptor between lipids and clathrin on from there . These morphological data suggest that nei - ther access to the late endocytic pathway nor access endosomal membranes , and that it is involved in the retrograde transport of Shiga toxin and the endogenous to the recycling pathway is inhibited when epsinR func - tion is perturbed . These conclusions were supported by proteins TGN38 / 46 and MPR300 to the TGN . quantitative biochemical techniques ( see below ) . The permeabilized cell assay showed that epsinR Uncoupling of Clathrin - Independent and Clathrin - plays a direct role in transport from endosomal mem - Dependent Transport Steps in the branes to the TGN . A polyclonal antibody against full - Retrograde Route length epsinR significantly inhibited retrograde trans - The molecular demonstration of the existence of clathrin - port , whereas the corresponding preimmune serum did independentendocytosis raisedthequestion ofwhether not ( Figure 7A ) . The recombinant clathrin / adaptor bind - different internalization routes lead to the same EE and ing N3 fragment of epsinR ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) also dis - couple to the same intracellular pathways ( Johannes played significant inhibitory activity in this assay when and Lamaze , 2002 ) . It appears possible that clathrin - fused with glutathione - S - transferase or after cleavage , independent endocytosis connects to intracellular routes , whereas GST had no effect ( Figure 7A ) . The purified bypassing the conventional TfR - positive EE / RE reached epsinR ENTH domain was not inhibitory at the concen - by many markers of the endocytic clathrin pathway trations used ( up to 50 (cid:4) M ; data not shown ) . ( Pelkmansetal . , 2001 ; Nichols , 2002 ; LeandNabi , 2003 ) . To address whether epsinR is required for retrograde Unlike the above - mentioned studies , our data show that transport , we used siRNA to inhibit its expression . Ep - in the retrograde route to the Golgi apparatus , the con - sinR expression was 60 % lower in siRNA - treated cells ventional EE / RE can be reached by clathrin - indepen - than in control cells ( Figure 7B , inset ) . Stronger reduc - dent endocytosis . These observations are similar to tion resulted in reduced growth ( data not shown ) . Sul - those described by Pagano and colleagues on the cellu - fation analysis ( Figure 7B ) showed that STxB transport lar uptake of fluorophore - labeled sphingomyelin ( Puri et to the TGN was inhibited in epsinR siRNA - treated cells al . , 2001 ) . Strikingly , theendosomaltargeting ofendoge - ( 45 % residual transport ) , strongly suggesting that ep - nous and exogenous markers to the retrograde route sinR is a necessary componentof the clathrin machinery depends on clathrin function . Thus , Shiga toxin is re - involved in retrograde sorting . Immunofluorescence cruited either into clathrin - coated or non - clathrin - coated studies showed that when compared to control cells in structures depending on its molecular environment . which STxB had efficiently accumulated in the Golgi Earlier studies had suggested that clathrin located at ( Figure 7C , left ) , STxB was still present in peripheral the plasma membrane is involved in Shiga toxin endocy - membranes in epsinR siRNA - treated cells where it colo - tosis ( Sandvig et al . , 1989 ; but see also Falguie ` res et calized with the TfR ( Figure 7C , right ) . al . , 2001 ; Nichols et al . , 2001 ) . Our data do not contradict We developed a method that allowed us to follow the these findings . However , they show that when the retrograde transport of cellular proteins to the TGN by clathrin pathway is blocked , Shiga toxin can use other coupling specific antibodies to a sulfation site peptide . endocytic routes , although the exact molecular nature We found that the retrograde transport of antibodies of these routes remains to be established . to GFP - tagged MPR300 ( Waguri et al . , 2003 ) and to The role of clathrin / adaptors at the level of the EE / RE endogenous TGN46 was inhibited in epsinR siRNA - is a controversial matter ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1996 ; Mallard treated cells ( Figures 7D – 7E ) . This was expected for etal . , 1998 ; Futteretal . , 1998 ; Meyeretal . , 2000 ; Bennett TGN38 / 46 as this protein uses the same molecular ma - et al . , 2001 ; Valdivia et al . , 2002 ; Wettey et al . , 2002 ; chinery as STxB to reach the TGN ( Mallard et al . , 2002 ) . Deneka et al . , 2003 ) . Our study clearly shows that However , it was more surprising for MPR300 ( see Dis - clathrin plays a functional role in retrograde transport . cussion ) . Therefore , we showed that siRNAs to syntaxin For endogenous cargo proteins of the retrograde route , 16 , the heavy chain t - SNARE involved in EE / RE - to - TGN such as TGN38 / 46 and VAMP4 , coupling to the clathrin transport ( Mallard et al . , 2002 ) , not only inhibited retro - machinery may occur via AP1 - interacting peptide sig - grade transport of STxB but also that of antibodies to nals in their cytosolic tails ( Rapoport et al . , 1998 ; Peden MPR300 ( Figure 7D ) . In contrast to the inhibition of retro - et al . , 2001 ; Hinners et al . , 2003 ; see below ) . Such direct grade trafficking of STxB , TGN46 , and MPR300 , degra - interactions with elements of the cytosolic sorting ma - dation of EGF was barely affected in epsinR siRNA - chinery are not possible for Shiga toxin , which is associ - treated cells ( Figure 7F ) , and Tf recycling was not affected ated with the exoplasmic leaflet . Shiga toxin may inter - at all ( Figure 7G ) . This suggests that epsinR plays a act directly or indirectly via coclustering in membrane specific role in the clathrin - dependent retrograde trans - microdomains ( Falguie ` res et al . , 2001 ) with trans - mem - port of endogenous and exogenous proteins and lipids brane domain proteins that are themselves targeted to at the EE / RE - TGN interface . the retrograde route . Alternatively , a specific lipid com - position of the cytoplasmic leaflet of membrane micro - domains that are implicated in Shiga toxin targeting to Discussion the retrograde route could allow the recruitment of clathrin , possibly via PtdIns lipid - binders such as Using exogenous Shiga toxin as a marker for the retro - grade route , we observed an unexpected sequence of epsinR . Developmental Cell 534 Figure 7 . Biochemical Analysis of epsinR Function in Retrograde Transport ( A ) Use of the permeabilized cell assay ( see Figure 3D ) with different epsinR - specific tools : GST - tagged N3 domain ( residues 291 – 426 ; 1 mg / ml ) , GST ( 1 mg / ml ) , N3 domain ( 0 . 3 mg / ml ) , preimmune serum ( CTL ) , and anti - epsinR serum Ra43 at 4 - fold dilutions . As a control , the efficiency of retrograde transport in the absence of exogenous cytosol is shown . Means of three independent experiments . ( B ) Use of siRNA to down - modulate epsinR expression . In siRNA - transfected cells , retrograde transport of STxB to the TGN ( 20 min at 37 (cid:1) C ) wasefficientlyinhibited , asindicatedbysulfationanalysis . Meansoffiveindependentexperiments . Inset : WesternanalysisofepsinRexpression in mock - transfected ( CTL ) and epsinR siRNA - transfected cells ( siEpsR ) . ( C ) In epsinR siRNA - transfected cells ( siEpsR , right ) , STxB was retained in peripheral TfR - positive membranes , whereas the protein was efficiently transported to the TGN / Golgi in control cells ( CTL , left ) . Transfected cells were recognized using Ra43 anti - epsinR serum ( data not shown ) . Bar (cid:3) 10 (cid:4) m . ( D ) Retrograde transport to the TGN ( 60 min at 37 (cid:1) C ) of sulfation site - tagged anti - GFP antibody ( MPR ) and of sulfation site - tagged STxB was inhibitedin HeLaGFP - MPR300 cellsinwhich epsinR ( siEpsR ) or syntaxin16 ( siSyn16 ) expressionwere down - modulatedusing specificsiRNAs . ( E ) Similar to ( D ) , sulfation site - tagged anti - TGN46 antibody was used to show that retrograde transport ( 60 min at 37 (cid:1) C ) of this marker was similarly inhibited to STxB in epsinR siRNA - transfected cells . ( F ) Radiolabeled EGF was bound to mock - transfected ( CTL ) and epsinR siRNA - transfected ( siEpsR ) HeLa cells on ice . These were then shifted to 37 (cid:1) C for the indicated times and degradation of EGF was measured . Means of three independent experiments . Note that error bars are not visible under the symbols . ( G ) Biotinylated Tf was internalized by HeLa cells for 40 min at 37 (cid:1) C . The cells were washed , and incubated at 37 (cid:1) C for the indicated times . Cell - associated Tf was determined in cells using ELISA . Means of two independent experiments . EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 535 A Specific Clathrin Machinery ( Chidambaram et al . , 2004 ) , and whether epsinR has on Endosomal Membranes other functions in transport intermediate formation , re - We found that epsinR is a clathrin binding protein pres - mains to be established . ent on endosomal membranes where it functions in ret - In summary , our study reveals the existence of an rogradesortingofendogenousandexogenousproteins . epsinR / clathrin coat on endosomes involved in retro - We mutated the interactions with PtdIns lipids , clathrin , grade sorting . Future work will focus on the functional and clathrin adaptors to release the inhibition of retro - interaction of epsinR with other endosomal clathrin grade transport that was observed upon overexpression adaptors and cargo proteins , and on the lipid organiza - of epsinR , suggesting that epsinR functions as a tion that underlies epsinR / clathrin - dependent retro - multivalent linker between membranes and coats . grade sorting . Several ENTH domain proteins exist in yeast , includ - Experimental Procedures ing a potential epsinR ortholog ( Duncan et al . , 2003 ; Chidambaram et al . , 2004 ) . Deletion of these proteins Cells results in distinct phenotypes at the TGN - endosome HeLa cells stably transfected with GFP - CI - MPR ( B . Hoflack , Dres - interface . Interestingly , a double deletion including the den , Germany ) and HeLa - T7Hub cells ( F . Brodsky , UC San Fran - potential epsinR ortholog Ent3p and the ENTH protein cisco ) were grown in the presence of 0 . 5 mg / ml G418 , or 0 . 2 mg / ml Ent5p results in the secretion of precursor (cid:5) factor ( Dun - G418 and 0 . 4 mg / ml hygromycin ( Life Technologies ) , respectively . The expression of the Hub domain was induced with 2 (cid:4) g / ml of can et al . , 2003 ) . This observation could be explained if doxycycline ( Sigma ) . (cid:4) 1A knockout fibroblasts were grown as de - the processing protease Kex2p failed to recycle from scribed previously ( Meyer et al . , 2000 ) . (cid:4) 1A knockout fibroblasts endosomes to the TGN to meet its substrate . However , stably expressing Gb3 synthase were obtained after selection in the other mutant combinations involving Ent3p result in al - presence of G418 ( 2 mg / ml ) . tered vacuolar transport pathways ( Duncan et al . , 2003 ; Chidambaram et al . , 2004 ) , similar to the cathepsin D Recombinant Proteins and Antibodies STxB - Cy3 , Tf - Cy5 , and STxB - Sulf 2 , monoclonal ( 13C4 ) and poly - processingphenotypeobservedinmammaliancellsthat clonal anti - STxB , and polyclonal anti - epsinR antibodies were ob - overexpress myc - epsinR ( Mills et al . , 2003 ) . tained as described previously ( Johannes et al . , 1997 ; Mallard et The finding that retrograde sorting of MPR300 in - al . , 1998 ; Mills et al . , 2003 ) . Polyclonal anti - Tf antibodies , polyclonal volves epsinR is intriguing in the light of recent data anti - Rab11 antibodies , and monoclonal antibodies against clathrin that showed that MPR300 was relocalized to peripheral ( X - 22 ) were kindly provided by E . Smythe ( Sheffield , United King - cytoplasmic structures in cells in which PtdIns 4 - kinase dom ) , Bruno Goud ( Institut Curie , Paris ) , and F . Brodsky ( UC San Francisco ) , respectively . The polyclonal anti - Rab6 antibody ( Santa II (cid:5) was inactivated ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting that Cruz ) , the monoclonal antibodies against GFP ( Roche ) , TfR ( H68 . 4 , the endosomal retrieval of the receptor is deficient in Zymed ) , clathrin ( BD Bioscience ) , and anti - CD71 , Sigma , actin these conditions . We also showed that retrograde traf - ( AC - 74 , Sigma ) , TGN46 ( Serotec ) , and FITC - , Cy3 - , Cy5 - , or AMCA - ficking of MPR300 depends on the TGN t - SNARE syn - coupledsecondaryantibodies ( JacksonImmunoresearch ) werepur - taxin 16 , which we have previously shown to be involved chased from the indicated suppliers . in the retrograde route of Shiga toxin ( Mallard et al . , 2002 ) . This surprising result is in agreement with other RNA Interference Synthetic oligonucleotides ( 64 - mers ) containing the human clathrin recent studies ( Medigeshi and Schu , 2003 ; Umeda et ( AAGACCAAUUUCAGCAGACAG ) or (cid:2) - adaptin ( AAACCGAAUUAA al . , 2003 ; Lin et al . , 2003 ) , and suggests that MPR300 GAAAGUGGU ) target sequencesfor cloninginto pSUPERwere syn - uses two different pathways to cycle between endo - thesized ( MWG - Biotech , Germany ) , annealed , and ligated into the somes and the TGN : the late endosome - to - TGN path - pSUPER construct , as described previously ( Brummelkamp et al . , way described by Pfeffer and colleagues ( Lombardi et 2002 ) . HeLa cells ( 8 (cid:6) 10 6 ) were transfected with pSUPER vectors al . , 1993 ) , and the EE / RE - to - TGN pathway that we and by electroporation using OptiMIX according to the manufacturer’s others have identified ( Johannes , 2002 ) . instructions ( Ozyme ) . Cells were split after 2 days and used 4 days after transfection . CHC siRNA - transfected cells were not apoptotic Unlike epsinR , AP1 is not required for retrograde when used for experiments , as shown by intact nuclear morphology transport of Shiga toxin , despite its localization on the and the absence of annexin V labeling ( data not shown ) . At later Shiga toxin - containing EE / RE ( Mallard et al . , 1998 , and timepoints , cellsurvivalwascompromised , asdescribedpreviously this study ) . This is in contrast to earlier studies on AP1 ( Wettey et al . , 2002 ) . For epsinR , synthetic siRNA duplexes were function in the retrograde transport of endogenous pro - purchased from Dharmacon ( Lafayette , CO ) . The sequence was : teins ( Meyer et al . , 2000 ; Folsch et al . , 2001 ; Crump et AAGUGCCAGAGAACACAUUUA ( Hirst et al . , 2003 ) . HeLa cells were al . , 2001 ; Valdivia et al . , 2002 ) . Notably , the resialylation transfected using oligofectamine ( Invitrogen ) according to the man - ufacturer’s recommendations . Experiments were carried out 3 days of MPR46 ( also termed cation - dependent MPR ) is inhib - after transfection . itedincellsinwhichthe (cid:4) 1AsubunitofAP1isgenetically inactivated , strongly suggesting that the return of Immunoelectron Microscopy and Whole - Mount Analysis MPR46fromendosomestothe TGNisseverelyimpaired STxB - Cys ( Haicheur et al . , 2003 ) was conjugated to horseradish in these cells ( Meyer et al . , 2000 ) . One explanation for peroxidase by chemical coupling with the heterobifunctional cross - this apparent discrepancy is that AP1 might not be es - linker Sulfo - m - maleimidobenzoyl - N - hydroxysuccinimide ester ( Sulfo - sential for the formation of retrograde transport interme - MBS , Pierce ) . Cryosectioning and immunoelectron microscopy were done as described previously ( Johannes et al . , 1997 ) . In the diates , similarly to the recent observation that AP2 has caseof mAbs , a rabbitanti - mouselinker antibodywas used ( DAKO - cargo - specific functions at the plasma membrane ( Mot - PATTS AB , A¨lvsjo¨ , Sweden ) . ley et al . , 2003 ) . The role of these adaptors may be For whole - mount analysis , HeLa cells were cultured directly on to recruit trans - membrane proteins to budding sites , electron microscopy grids ( Jose´ Delville Technology ) , and STxB / similar to the role of arrestins in G protein - coupled re - HRP or Tf / HRP ( Jackson Immunoresearch ) was internalized after ceptor internalization ( Goodman et al . , 1996 ) . Whether binding on ice , as described in the figure legends . The cells were then put on ice again and incubated in DAB - containing buffer to fix epsinR is another cargo adaptor , as suggested recently Developmental Cell 536 HRP - containingcompartmentswithDAB - polymer ( Stoorvogeletal . , Grac¸a Raposo for helpful discussions . This work was supported by grantsfromtheLigueNationalecontreleCancer , Associationpourla 1996 ) . In brief , cells were washed and incubated on ice in freshly prepared DAB buffer ( 1 . 5 mg / ml DAB , 70 mM NaCl , 50 mM ascorbic Recherche sur le Cancer ( n (cid:1) 5177 ) , Fondation de France , and Action concerte´e incitative – Jeune chercheurs ( n (cid:1) 5233 ) to L . J . and C . L . , acid , 20 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 0 ] , adjusted to 300 mosM with NaCl , and supplemented with 0 . 02 % H 2 O 2 ) . After HRP - mediated crosslinking , and grants European Union Marie Curie Fellowship ( HPMF - CT - 202 - 01745 ) and Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer to B . Y . and soluble cytosolic proteins were removed by permeabilizing the cells on ice with 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin in PBS containing 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 A . S . - P . , respectively . mM MgCl 2 . Cells were fixed for with 1 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , and free reactive aldehyde groups were blocked by incubation in Received : August 25 , 2003 PBS , 20 mM glycine . The immunolabeling was done in blocking Revised : February 19 , 2004 buffer ( PBS , 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin , 20 mM glycine , 0 . 1 % cold water Accepted : February 20 , 2004 fish gelatin , and 0 . 02 % NaN 3 ) . Labeling was performed using 10 Published : April 12 , 2004 nm Protein A colloidal gold particles . Monoclonal antibodies were detected using rabbit anti - mouse Ig as an intermediate step . After References immunolabelingandfixation , thecellswereextensivelywashedwith H 2 O , dehydrated in ethanol , and critical point dried . The grids were Aniento , F . , Gu , F . , Parton , R . G . , and Gruenberg , J . ( 1996 ) . An endo - examined using a Philips CN120 transmission electron microscope . somal betaCOP is involved inthe pH - dependent formationof trans - port vesicles destined for late endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 29 – 41 . Endocytosis and Recycling Assay Bennett , E . M . , Lin , S . X . , Towler , M . C . , Maxfield , F . R . , and Brodsky , STxB and human diferric transferrin were biotinylated using NHS - F . M . ( 2001 ) . Clathrin hub expression affects early endosome distri - SS - Biotin ( Pierce ) . Endocytosis was measured as described pre - bution with minimal impact on receptor sorting and recycling . Mol . viously ( Mallard and Johannes , 2002 ) with the following modifica - Biol . Cell 12 , 2790 – 2799 . tions . Serum - starved cells were detached from plates with 2 mM EDTA in PBS and incubated in the presence of 1 (cid:4) M biotin - STxB Brummelkamp , T . R . , Bernards , R . , and Agami , R . ( 2002 ) . A system and 200 nM biotin - Tf for 30 min on ice . After washing , cells were for stable expression of short interfering RNAs in mammalian cells . incubated at 30 (cid:1) C for the indicated times ( 1 . 5 (cid:6) 10 5 cells per data Science 296 , 550 – 553 . point ) . The biotin on cell surface - exposed STxB or transferrin was Chidambaram , S . , Mullers , N . , Wiederhold , K . , Haucke , V . , and von cleaved by subsequent treatment with 100 mM nonmembrane per - Mollard , G . F . ( 2004 ) . Specific interaction between SNAREs and meable reducing agent sodium 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonic acid ENTH domains of epsin - related proteinsin TGN to endosome trans - ( MESNA ) on ice for 20 min . After washing , excess MESNA was port . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 4175 – 4179 . quenched with 150 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min . Cells were lysed Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry in blocking buffer ( 10 mM Tris [ pH 7 . 4 ] , 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM NaCl , into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . 0 . 2 % BSA , 0 . 1 % SDS , and 1 % Triton X - 100 ) before loading on Crump , C . M . , Xiang , Y . , Thomas , L . , Gu , F . , Austin , C . , Tooze , S . A . , ELISAplatescoatedeitherwithanti - Tforanti - STxBantibody ( 13C4 ) . and Thomas , G . ( 2001 ) . PACS - 1 binding to adaptors is required for Biotinylated STxB or transferrin was detected using streptavidin - acidic cluster motif - mediated protein traffic . EMBO J . 20 , 2191 – HRP ( Roche ) . For the transferrin recycling experiments , biotinylated 2201 . Tf was internalized into HeLa cells for 40 min at 37 (cid:1) C . After washing on ice , the cells were incubated at 37 (cid:1) C for the indicated times . The Deneka , M . , Neeft , M . , Popa , I . , van Oort , M . , Sprong , H . , Oorschot , cells were directly lysed in blocking buffer , and Tf was quantified V . , Klumperman , J . , Schu , P . , andvanderSluijs , P . ( 2003 ) . Rabaptin - by ELISA . 5alpha / rabaptin - 4 serves as a linker between rab4 and gamma ( 1 ) - adaptininmembranerecyclingfromendosomes . EMBOJ . 22 , 2645 – Transfection and Immunofluoresence 2657 . HeLa cells were transfected with myc - tagged epsinR and mutants Doxsey , S . J . , Brodsky , F . M . , Blank , G . S . , and Helenius , A . ( 1987 ) . usingFUGENEreagentaccordingtothemanufacturer’sinstructions Inhibition of endocytosis by anti - clathrin antibodies . Cell 50 , ( Roche ) . Immunofluorescence experiments were carried out 24 hr 453 – 463 . after transfection , as described previously ( Johannes et al . , 1997 ) . Duncan , M . C . , Costaguta , G . , and Payne , G . S . ( 2003 ) . Yeast epsin - In Figure 2 , Tf was not stripped before fixation . related proteins required for Golgi - endosome traffic define a gamma - adaptin ear - binding motif . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 77 – 81 . Retrograde Transport and EGF Degradation Assays on Intact Falguie ` res , T . , Mallard , F . , Baron , C . L . , Hanau , D . , Lingwood , C . , Cells and in SLO - Permeabilized HeLa Cells Goud , B . , Salamero , J . , and Johannes , L . ( 2001 ) . Targeting of Shiga Anti - GFP ( Roche ) and anti - TGN46 ( Serotec ) antibodies were conju - toxin B - subunit to retrograde transport route in association with gatedtoapeptidecarryingatandemsulfationsite . Theexperimental detergent resistant membranes . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2453 – 2468 . procedure will be described elsewhere . Sulfation analysis on intact or SLO - permeabilized cells was carried out as described previously Folsch , H . , Pypaert , M . , Schu , P . , andMellman , I . ( 2001 ) . Distribution ( Mallard et al . , 2002 ) . Sulfation of endogenous proteins was used andfunctionofAP - 1clathrinadaptorcomplexesinpolarizedepithe - tonormalizedataobtainedinvariousconditions . Tomeasuredegra - lial cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 595 – 606 . dation of EGF on intact cells , 125 I - EGF ( Amersham ) was bound to Ford , M . G . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . , Evans , cells on ice . These were then shifted to 37 (cid:1) C for the indicated times . P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits TCA - precipitable counts were determined in the culture medium driven by epsin . Nature 419 , 361 – 366 . and cell lysate . To measure EGF degradation on SLO permeabilized Futter , C . E . , Gibson , A . , Allchin , E . H . , Maxwell , S . , Ruddock , L . J . , cells , 125 I - EGF wasinternalized at19 . 5 (cid:1) C , asdescribed inthe perme - Odorizzi , G . , Domingo , D . , Trowbridge , I . S . , andHopkins , C . R . ( 1998 ) . abilizedcellretrogradetransportprotocol ( Mallardetal . , 2002 ) . After In polarized MDCK cells basolateral vesicles arise from clathrin - permeabilizationandincubationat37 (cid:1) Cfor30min , TCA - precipitable gamma - adaptin - coateddomainsonendosomaltubules . J . CellBiol . counts were determined in the conditions indicated in the figure 141 , 611 – 623 . legends . Ghosh , R . N . , Mallet , W . G . , Soe , T . T . , McGraw , T . E . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1998 ) . An endocytosed TGN38 chimeric protein is delivered to Acknowledgments the TGN after trafficking through the endocytic recycling compart - ment in CHO cells . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 923 – 936 . We would like to thank the following people for kindly providing reagents : Frances Brodsky , Joe¨lle Wiels , Georges Banting , Bruno Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Krupnick , J . G . , Santini , F . , Gurevich , V . V . , Penn , R . B . , Gagnon , A . W . , Keen , J . H . , and Benovic , J . L . ( 1996 ) . (cid:7) - arrestin Goud , Ernst Ungewickell , Elizabeth Smythe , and Bernard Hoflack . We thank Lucien Cabanie ´ for protein purification , Aime ´ e Wiltz for actsasaclathrinadaptorinendocytosisofthe (cid:7) 2 - adrenergicrecep - tor . Nature 383 , 447 – 450 . the initial studies on STxB endocytosis , and Philippe Benaroch and EpsinR / Clathrin Coat for Retrograde Sorting 537 Gruenberg , J . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1995 ) . Membrane transport in the Mills , I . G . , Praefcke , G . J . , Vallis , Y . , Peter , B . J . , Olesen , L . E . , Gallop , J . L . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2003 ) . EpsinR : endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 552 – 563 . an AP1 / clathrin interacting protein involved in vesicle trafficking . J . Haicheur , N . , Benchetrit , F . , Amessou , M . , Leclerc , C . , Falguie ` res , Cell Biol . 160 , 213 – 222 . T . , Fayolle , C . , Bismuth , E . , Fridman , W . H . , Johannes , L . , andTartour , E . ( 2003 ) . The B - subunit of Shiga toxin coupled to full - size protein Motley , A . , Bright , N . A . , Seaman , M . N . , and Robinson , M . S . ( 2003 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J . Cell Biol . elicits humoral and cellular immune responses associated with a TH1 dominant polarization . Int . Immunol . 15 , 1161 – 1171 . 162 , 909 – 918 . Nichols , B . J . ( 2002 ) . Adistinct classofendosome mediatesclathrin - Hinners , I . , Wendler , F . , Fei , H . , Thomas , L . , Thomas , G . , and Tooze , S . A . ( 2003 ) . AP - 1recruitmenttoVAMP4ismodulatedbyphosphory - independent endocytosis to the Golgi complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 374 – 378 . lation - dependent binding of PACS - 1 . EMBO Rep . 4 , 1182 – 1189 . Hirst , J . , Motley , A . , Harasaki , K . , Peak Chew , S . Y . , and Robinson , Nichols , B . J . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2001 ) . Endocytosis with - out clathrin coats . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 406 – 412 . M . S . ( 2003 ) . EpsinR : an ENTH domain - containing protein that inter - acts with AP - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 625 – 641 . Nichols , B . J . , Kenworthy , A . K . , Polishchuk , R . S . , Lodge , R . , Roberts , T . H . , Hirschberg , K . , Phair , R . D . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2001 ) . Johannes , L . ( 2002 ) . The Shiga toxin B - subunit system : Retrograde transport , intracellular vectorization , and more . Am . J . Physiol . Gas - Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 529 – 541 . trointest . Liver Physiol . 283 , G1 – G7 . Johannes , L . , and Goud , B . ( 1998 ) . Surfing on a retrograde wave : Peden , A . A . , Park , G . Y . , and Scheller , R . H . ( 2001 ) . The di - leucine motif of vesicle - associated membrane protein 4 is required for its howdoesShigatoxinreach theendoplasmicreticulum ? TrendsCell Biol . 8 , 158 – 162 . localization and AP - 1 binding . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 49183 – 49187 . Pelkmans , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis via caveolae . Johannes , L . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2002 ) . Clatrin - dependent or not : is it still the question ? Traffic 3 , 443 – 451 . Traffic 3 , 311 – 320 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2001 ) . Caveolar en - Johannes , L . , Tenza , D . , Antony , C . , andGoud , B . ( 1997 ) . Retrograde transport of KDEL - bearing B - fragment of Shiga toxin . J . Biol . Chem . docytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - trans - port pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 . 272 , 19554 – 19561 . Kalthoff , C . , Groos , S . , Kohl , R . , Mahrhold , S . , and Ungewickell , E . J . Puri , S . , Bachert , C . , Fimmel , C . J . , and Linstedt , A . D . ( 2002 ) . Cycling of early Golgi proteins via the cell surface and endosomes upon ( 2002 ) . Clint : a novel clathrin - binding ENTH - domain protein at the golgi . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 4060 – 4073 . lumenal pH disruption . Traffic 3 , 641 – 653 . Puri , V . , Watanabe , R . , Singh , R . D . , Dominguez , M . , Brown , J . C . , Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin2receptorsanddetergent - resis - Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization of plasma membrane tant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 535 – 547 . Le , P . U . , andNabi , I . R . ( 2003 ) . Distinctcaveolae - mediatedendocytic pathwaystargettheGolgiapparatusandtheendoplasmicreticulum . Rapoport , I . , Chen , Y . C . , Cupers , P . , Shoelson , S . E . , and Kirch - hausen , T . ( 1998 ) . Dileucine - based sorting signals bind to the beta J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1059 – 1071 . chain of AP - 1 at a site distinct and regulated differently from the Lin , S . X . , Gundersen , G . G . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 2002 ) . Export from tyrosine - based motif - binding site . EMBO J . 17 , 2148 – 2155 . pericentriolar endocytic recycling compartment to cell surface de - pends on stable , detyrosinated ( glu ) microtubules and kinesin . Mol . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a Biol . Cell 13 , 96 – 109 . distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Lin , S . X . , Mallet , W . G . , Huang , A . Y . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 2003 ) . Endo - Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . cytosedcation - independentmannose6 - phosphatereceptortraffics via the endocytic recycling compartment en route to the trans - Golgi Sachse , M . , Urbe , S . , Oorschot , V . , Strous , G . J . , and Klumperman , J . ( 2002 ) . Bilayered clathrin coats on endosomal vacuoles are in - network and a sub - population of late endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 721 – 733 . Published online October 31 , 2003 . 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - volvedinprotein sortingtowardlysosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 1313 – 1328 . 07 - 0497 Lombardi , D . , Soldati , T . , Riederer , M . A . , Goda , Y . , Zerial , M . , and Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Entry of ricin and shiga toxin into cells : molecular mechanisms and medical perspectives . EMBO Pfeffer , S . R . ( 1993 ) . Rab9 functions in transport between late endo - somes and the trans Golgi network . EMBO J . 12 , 677 – 682 . J . 19 , 5943 – 5950 . Sandvig , K . , Olsnes , S . , Brown , J . E . , Petersen , O . W . , and van Deurs , Lord , J . M . , and Roberts , L . M . ( 1998 ) . Toxin entry : retrograde trans - port through the secretory pathway . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 733 – 736 . B . ( 1989 ) . Endocytosis from coated pits of Shiga toxin : a glycolipid - binding protein from Shigella dysenteriae 1 . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1331 – Mallard , F . , and Johannes , L . ( 2002 ) . Shiga toxin B - subunit as a tool 1343 . to study retrograde transport . In Methods Mol . Med . Shiga Toxin Methods and Protocols , Vol . 73 , Chapter 17 , D . Philpott and F . Ebel , Sheff , D . R . , Daro , E . A . , Hull , M . , and Mellman , I . ( 1999 ) . The receptor recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early endo - eds . ( Totowa , NJ : Humana Press ) , pp . 209 – 220 . somes with different sorting functions . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 123 – 139 . Mallard , F . , Tenza , D . , Antony , C . , Salamero , J . , Goud , B . , andJohan - nes , L . ( 1998 ) . Direct pathway from early / recycling endosomes to Simonsen , A . , Lippe´ , R . , Christoforidis , S . , Gaullier , J . - M . , Brech , A . , Callaghan , J . , Toh , B . - H . , Murphy , C . , Zerial , M . , and Stenmark , H . the Golgi apparatus revealed through the study of Shiga toxin B - fragment transport . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 973 – 990 . ( 1998 ) . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 , 494 – 498 . Mallard , F . , Tang , B . L . , Galli , T . , Tenza , D . , Saint - Pol , A . , Yue , X . , Antony , C . , Hong , W . J . , Goud , B . , and Johannes , L . ( 2002 ) . Early / Skretting , G . , Torgersen , M . L . , vanDeurs , B . , andSandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Endocytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - linked diph - recycling endosomes - to - TGN transport involves two SNARE com - plexes and a Rab6 isoform . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 653 – 664 . theria toxin receptor . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3899 – 3909 . Sonnichsen , B . , DeRenzis , S . , Nielsen , E . , Rietdorf , J . , andZerial , M . Medigeshi , G . R . , and Schu , P . ( 2003 ) . Characterization of the in vitro retrograde transport of MPR46 . Traffic 4 , 802 – 811 . ( 2000 ) . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathwayvisualizedbymulticolorimagingofRab4 , Rab5 , andRab11 . Mellman , I . ( 1996 ) . Endocytosis and molecular sorting . Annu . Rev . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 901 – 914 . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 575 – 625 . Stoorvogel , W . , Oorschot , V . , and Geuze , H . J . ( 1996 ) . A novel class Meyer , C . , Zizioli , D . , Lausmann , S . , Eskelinen , E . L . , Hamann , J . , of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J . Cell Biol . Saftig , P . , von Figura , K . , and Schu , P . ( 2000 ) . (cid:4) 1A - adaptin - deficient 132 , 21 – 33 . mice : lethality , loss of AP - 1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . EMBO J . 19 , 2193 – 2203 . Umeda , A . , Fujita , H . , Kuronita , T . , Hirosako , K . , Himeno , M . , and Developmental Cell 538 Tanaka , Y . ( 2003 ) . DistributionandtraffickingofMPR300isnormalin cells with cholesterol accumulated in late endocytic compartments : evidencefor earlyendosome - to - TGNtraffickingof MPR300 . J . Lipid Res . 44 , 1821 – 1832 . Valdivia , R . H . , Baggott , D . , Chuang , J . S . , and Schekman , R . W . ( 2002 ) . The yeast clathrin adaptor protein complex 1 is required for the efficient retention of a subset of late Golgi membrane proteins . Dev . Cell 2 , 283 – 294 . van Dam , E . M . , and Stoorvogel , W . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin - dependent transferrin receptor recycling by endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 169 – 182 . Waguri , S . , Dewitte , F . , Le Borgne , R . , Rouille , Y . , Uchiyama , Y . , Dubremetz , J . F . , and Hoflack , B . ( 2003 ) . Visualization of TGN to endosome trafficking through fluorescently labeled MPR and AP - 1 in living cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 142 – 155 . Wang , Y . J . , Wang , J . , Sun , H . Q . , Martinez , M . , Sun , Y . X . , Macia , E . , Kirchhausen , T . , Albanesi , J . P . , Roth , M . G . , and Yin , H . L . ( 2003 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 phosphate regulates targeting of clathrin adaptor AP - 1 complexes to the Golgi . Cell 114 , 299 – 310 . Wasiak , S . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Puertollano , R . , Blondeau , F . , Girard , M . , de Heuvel , E . , Boismenu , D . , Bell , A . W . , Bonifacino , J . S . , and McPherson , P . S . ( 2002 ) . Enthoprotin : a novel clathrin - associ - ated protein identified through subcellular proteomics . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 855 – 862 . Wettey , F . R . , Hawkins , S . F . , Stewart , A . , Luzio , J . P . , Howard , J . C . , and Jackson , A . P . ( 2002 ) . Controlled elimination of clathrin heavy - chain expression in DT40 lymphocytes . Science 297 , 1521 – 1525 . Whitney , J . A . , Gomez , M . , Sheff , D . , Kreis , T . E . , and Mellman , I . ( 1995 ) . Cytoplasmic coat proteins involved in endosome function . Cell 83 , 703 – 713 .