When Empathy Is Not Enough : Assessing the Experiences of Autistic Children with Technologies Katharina Spiel 1 , Christopher Frauenberger 1 , Eva Hornecker 2 , Geraldine Fitzpatrick 1 1 TU Wien ( Vienna University of Technology ) , Austria 2 Bauhaus - Universitaet Weimar , Germany katharina . spiel @ tuwien . ac . at christopher . frauenberger @ tuwien . ac . at eva . hornecker @ uni - weimar . de geraldine . ﬁtzpatrick @ tuwien . ac . at ABSTRACT Capturing and describing the multi - faceted experiences autis - tic children have with technologies provides a unique research challenge . Approaches based on pragmatist notions of experi - ence , which mostly rely on empathy , are particularly limited if used alone . To address this we have developed an approach that combines Actor - Network Theory and Critical Discourse Analysis . Drawing on this approach , we discuss the experi - ences autistic children had with technologies resulting from the collaborative design process in the OutsideTheBox project . We construct a holistic picture of the experience by drawing on diverse data sources ranging from interviews to log - data , and most importantly , the ﬁrst - hand perspective of autistic chil - dren . In four case studies , we demonstrate how this approach allowed us to develop unique individual and structural insights into the experiences of autistic children with technology . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous Author Keywords Experience ; Co - Design Evaluation ; Autism ; Children INTRODUCTION When evaluating technologies for autistic children 1 re - searchers rarely take their experiences into account . The de - sign and evaluation of such technologies typically focuses on the perceived deﬁcits of individuals diagnosed with autism . Examples include diagnostic tools ( e . g . , [ 38 ] ) , or assistive technologies in the everyday life ( e . g . , a communication aid 1 While the discussion about advantages and disadvantages of person - ﬁrst language is still ongoing , we opt for label - ﬁrst in order to respect the predominant self - chosen form ( cf . , [ 20 ] ) . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst p age . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2017 , May 06 - 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4655 - 9 / 17 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025785 [ 35 ] or a visual schedule [ 18 ] ) . Others target speciﬁc interven - tion goals ( e . g . , [ 3 ] following SCERTS 2 ) , or investigate the potential therapeutic effects of playful technology ( e . g . , [ 12 , 37 ] on Topobos and Reactable respectively ) . It is uncommon that technologies are designed for experiences that are mean - ingful for autistic children or that aim at fun and enjoyment ( notable exceptions include [ 27 ] or [ 33 ] ) . Often , these are then evaluated along extrinsically deﬁned mea - sures . For example , technologies for diagnostic procedures are assessed based on whether they correctly identify autism [ 38 ] . Those aimied at everyday life are assessed based on whether they provide the intended support and whether the children like it – as reported by parents , teachers and formal carers [ 35 , 18 ] . Others , involved with intervention or therapy evaluations , ask whether a child can do a given task better than before [ 12 , 37 ] . Such evaluations use extrinsic benchmarks of success of a technology , but ignore the multi - faceted experience of autistic children and most importantly the child’s own perspective . Within OutsideTheBox we take a different approach that is focused on positive experiences of autistic children . The tech - nologies we develop are aimed to make sense in an autistic child’s life without reducing them to psychosocial limitations . The only two pre - deﬁned requirements are that the technology enables children to make positive experiences through them and that they scaffold the children in sharing those experi - ences with others . While we have reported on the participatory design process elsewhere [ 15 ] , this paper reports on the evalua - tion of the resulting artifacts . When preparing the evaluation of these technologies , we faced the challenge of needing to assess or qualify the experience autistic children have with technolo - gies . To address this , we use a novel approach , based on Actor - Network - Theory ( ANT ) and Critical Discourse Analy - sis ( CDA ) , to understand and capture the experience of autistic children with technology [ 32 ] . The main contribution of this paper is to show how that approach to experience evaluation can be applied across a range of case studies and what insights can be yielded from this . 2 SC - Social Communication , ER - Emotional Regulation , TS - Transactional Support , see http : / / www . scerts . com Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2853 Figure 1 . All Technologies developed during the ﬁrst year of OutsideTheBox – from left to right : ProDraw , ThinkM , Adaja and DSmart We start by providing background in autism before contin - uing with experience is currently used in Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . We then highlight the challenges in elic - iting feedback from autistic children , which , we speculate , is one of the reasons that their perspective often remains ex - cluded . We present four case - studies from OutsideTheBox , drawing out individual as well as structural insights and show - ing how we combined diverse data sources to paint a holistic and multi - faceted picture of the children’s experience with the technology . We end by reﬂecting on the implications of our results on experience - centred design with autistic children . BACKGROUND To describe our research context better , we present related work in the areas of autism and sense making and discuss strategies to elicit ﬁrst - hand perspectives from autistic children . We then review a prominent HCI experience concept and show the structural frame in which we embed our empathic research acknowledging , the unique situatedness of autistic children and including their direct opinions . Autism & Sense Making Current research suggests that autism is caused by a com - bination of environmental and genetic factors [ 11 ] . While symptoms differ greatly for each individual , differences of reciprocal socio - communicative interaction along with repeti - tive interests and behaviours are almost always present . It is estimated that about 1 in 68 children are autistic [ 29 ] . Ultimately , the symptoms are suspected to be rooted in an underlying perceptual difference . Through experiencing the world differently and , hence , making sense of it differently as well [ 5 ] , communication between autistic and allistic 3 people can be difﬁcult . Consequently , allistic researchers may have difﬁculties when trying to make sense of the reactions of autistic users appropriately . this is further complicated with non - verbal autistic children . Given this challenge , we deem it necessary to try and gather ﬁrst - hand perspectives from autistic children via several elicitation strategies . Eliciting Feedback from Autistic Children Common strategies to gather data explaining the interaction between autistic children and technology are indirect measures such as observations or interaction logging . Since researchers can ﬁnd it difﬁcult to directly communicate with autistic chil - dren , qualitative feedback is often gathered from proxies such 3 Meaning non - autistic , as coined by [ 22 ] as parents or carers ( see e . g . , [ 27 ] or [ 1 ] ) . Doing so , however , partly ignores the limits of an outside perspective on felt ex - perience . Egilson et al . showed recently , for example , that parents tend to report a lower quality of life for their autistic children than those children report for themselves [ 10 ] . Even though it might be challenging to consider direct input from autistic children [ 34 ] , Kirby et al . provide an illustrative ex - ample of what a ﬁrst - person perspective on the experiences of autistic children might offer [ 21 ] . In their research , children used normalising , storytelling and the description of responses as conversational strategies . Little previous work is available that directly includes the perspective of autistic or non - verbal children in qualitative research . Dockett et al . successfully used video , photogra - phy and drawings to elicit feedback from very young allistic children who were non - verbal [ 7 ] . Other potential avenues to enable input from autistic children can be found in participa - tory design approaches . Qualitative interviews with autistic children with verbal skills , for example , should rely on con - textual , closed questions [ 14 ] . Annotated screen - shots [ 2 ] or smileys [ 28 ] have also been used successfully . Experience in HCI Traditionally in HCI , quantitative methods such as question - naires have often been used to evaluate user experiences ( e . g . , for games [ 19 ] ) . However , these often just address issues such as usefulness , usability , engagement etc . and are unable to access or capture the nuances or emergent aspects of many uniquely situated experiences . Exploring another perspective on experience , McCarthy and Wright conceptualised a pragma - tist understanding of experience in HCI [ 25 ] . This established a notion of felt experience and aesthetic pleasure that puts the person in the centre . McCarthy and Wright’s concept relies heavily on the notion of researchers’ empathy with users [ 39 ] . While they focus on the dialectical kind of empathy more than on the affective kind of ’being in another person’s shoes’ , being empathic helps to inform design and evaluation with neurotypical users as long as they can draw from a similar set of lived experiences . It is limited , however , when daily life and experiences differ greatly between designers and the people they are designing with / for – as is the case with autistic children . There has been recent work into how potential tensions arising by the limits of empathy between researchers and autistic children can be addressed [ 17 ] . However , we deem the gap between the life worlds of allistic researchers and autistic children so Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2854 fundamental , that we require an approach that does not solely rely on researchers’ empathy , even though we are acutely aware of how necessary empathy is in our research context . By itself , it just is not enough . Assessing Experience Beyond Empathy In assessing the experiences autistic children have when inter - acting with technology we were driven by an understanding of disability that acknowledges the uniquely situated interplay be - tween medically determined aspects and socially constructed conceptions that disabled people encounter ( cf . [ 31 , 13 ] ) . To meet this unique situatedness appropriately for every indi - vidual case , we require an approach that considers multiple viewpoints , is ﬂexible in terms of data acquisition and open for contradicting statements , allows for constant critical reﬂection and , most importantly , goes beyond empathy . Figure 2 . Core Actors Establishing the Experience an Autistic Child has with Technologies Spiel et al . [ 32 ] offer such an approach using Actor - Network Theory and Critical Discourse analysis . ANT allows for the identiﬁcation of human and non - human actors as well as the importance of actants , and then combined with CDA , the rela - tionship between actors and actants can be critically qualiﬁed . The child is very prominent in our concept and their ﬁrst - hand perspective is essential . Understanding the child as uniquely situated within their social context makes it important to di - rectly elicit the ﬁrst - hand perspectives of autistic children , while not solely relying on them because the perspectives of others are also included . We identiﬁed three core actors contributing to the experiences an autistic child has with a technology in a research project : The child , the technology and the research context in which the experience is assessed . Further conceptual actors include the interaction between artifact and child , the researchers’ re - sources , as well as the co - design process between researchers and children . Those address the mutual effects core actors have on each other ( see also the nucleus of actors Figure 2 ) . Through an iteratively applied process , the structured approach allows for insights into the experiences autistic children have with technologies . The ﬁve steps of the process are 1 . Deﬁne Context and Discourse 2 . Gather Data 3 . Analyse Data and Identify Statements 4 . Contextualise Statements 5 . Repeat previous steps until no new insights occur These steps complement our empathic research in a ﬂexible structure that can be adapted to unique research contexts as we show in our four case studies below . CASE STUDIES The goal of the OutsideTheBox is to develop individual smart objects with autistic children . We do this through a series of co - design sessions over the span of a school year , where we meet regularly with the children for several design sessions every other week . Table 1 shows the individual children of the ﬁrst year who will be the basis of the case studies we present 4 . With each child we go through four phases : • Contextual Explorations – to get to know each other • Ideation and Conceptualisation – to ﬁnd an idea of what we build • Design and Prototyping – to establish how we are going to build the object • Testing and Evaluation – to assess whether the object fulﬁls jointly deﬁned research goals The project consists of three core researchers , two of whom directly work with the children as either Play Partner or Active Observer . The Play Partner engages directly with the child , supports them and assists in solving tasks that the Active Observer poses . The Active Observer is gives out the tasks to the child and the Play Partner and structure the sessions as a whole . Both of the researchers played a consistent role during all of the collaborations with one child , but experienced both roles across children . All four parts of the process with the ﬁrst year co - operations presented here have been completed . We handed the ﬁnal prototypes to the individual children , if wanted , and conducted a series of evaluation sessions with each of them . The ﬁnished objects are shown in Figure 1 . We have described the design processes [ 15 ] as well as the ﬁnal prototypes in more detail elsewhere [ 33 ] , as well as the theoretical and conceptual foun - dation of our experience approach using ANT and CDA [ 32 ] . Here , we report on the ﬁnal phase – testing and evaluation to illustrate how ANT and CDA were applied and what they can offer for design . For each case study we performed the steps mentioned in the description of our methodological approach . Our data sources 4 All of the children we worked with during the ﬁrst year were male and will be identiﬁed with male pronouns . However , we recognise that autistic experiences differ for female individuals and that part of that experience is framed by the invisibility of the condition in women [ 4 ] . Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2855 Figure 3 . Evaluation Actor - Network for Andy Name ( Age ) Diagnosis Method Object name # Andy ( 8 ) PDD - NOS CI ProDraw 10 Blaine ( 6 ) HFA CI ThinkM 14 Claude ( 6 ) HFA FW Adaja 13 Dean ( 8 ) Autism FW DSmart 14 Table 1 . Research Partners in the ﬁrst year of OutsideTheBox together with age , diagnosis , design method used , name of the ﬁnished object and number of meetings ; FW : Future Workshops , CI : Co - Operative Inquiry ; HFA : High Functioning Autism , PDD - NOS : Pervasive Devel - opmental Disorder - Not Otherwise Speciﬁed ; included contextual interviews with parents and teachers , re - search diaries from the researchers , protocols of meetings within OutsideTheBox , session plans , evaluation question - naires , logs , protocols of team meetings , reﬂection on the prototypes , sketches , workshop materials , audio recordings of evaluation meetings within the university as well as video recordings and photos of the design and evaluation sessions . Since neither the research institution nor the funding body requires a formal ethics procedure , we developed our own ethical framework inspired by the ethics procedures of the Economic and Social Research Council in the UK and an applied in - action reﬂective approach [ 16 ] – including a review board consisting of members of the same institution who were not part of the project . In order to provide the necessary depth and breadth , we show only selected steps of the process for each case study . Andy’s case illustrates the construction of actor - networks , Blaine’s case shows how log data can be converted in statements , Claude’s actor - network is presented in contrast to Andy’s to extract more general knowledge and with Dean’s case we emphasise the importance of diverse data gathering methods . To identify which of the concept step we performed , we use the icons assigned to each step above . Repetitions of steps are not explicitly detailed , but rather , all results identiﬁed in one step are discussed together . Each case study ﬁrst describes the design context before the evaluation steps are presented . Furthermore , every case includes a paragraph about direct elicitation of ﬁrst - hand perspectives of the autistic children and closes on a description of their experiences with their tech - nologies . We argue that our systematic approach uncovered a richer and more detailed picture about these experiences than an evaluation solely relying on designers’ empathetic assessment . Andy and ProDraw We always met Andy 5 in the same room directly next to his classroom . He used the German language on a very basic level and refused to speak in the language his family was mainly communicating in . However , he loved drawing and was quite good at it . He communicated his thoughts and 5 All names have been changed to protect the children’s identities . Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2856 ideas with sketches , which he was eager to share . Using Co - operative Inquiry [ 9 ] we explored several materials during the initial session . It soon became clear , that Andy’s preferred pastime as well as mode of communication were expressed using pen and paper . As a result of the co - design process , Andy’s ﬁnal object , called ProDraw , facilitates the sharing of these drawings by allowing Andy to project them on a wall and animate them through body movements . Our main interest in the evaluation was whether Andy used ProDraw as an enjoyable communicative device . Deﬁne Context and Discourse Figure 3 shows the actor network as established by the ﬁnal iteration of our methodological ap - proach . Of Andy’s social network , we have mostly interacted with his teacher who also joined us for the ﬁrst session and was available in the adjacent room if needed for later ones . Andy’s classmates played a role by continu - ously showing appreciation for what he did together with us . At early prototype stages they were impressed by what Andy might be building . When they investigated the ﬁnal prototype , they expressed jealousy and admiration . As per feedback of the teacher , this was rarely the case before . The interaction paradigm for ProDraw was based on both Andy’s desire for drawing and controlling the process in shar - ing it with others , as well as the parents’ and teachers’ remarks that it was difﬁcult to get Andy to exercise . So , for example , since Andy enthusiastically jumped up and down to animate the drawings , this aspect was implemented in the ﬁnal object . Resources available to the research team determine the mate - rial properties of any ﬁnalised object . We reﬂect on this by showing how access to certain tools and certain skills of the team members shaped ProDraw aesthetically and determined which hard - and software components were used . All of the project members come with individual motivations and are at different stages of their career . Their morals inﬂu - ence their actions and decisions not only within OutsideThe - Box , but also in their own everyday lives . We also identify as activists for disability rights to different degrees . Each session was ﬁlled with little rituals between Andy and the research team . For example , Andy started out refusing to work with the research team every single time . He sat in a corner and tried to hide . One time , a researcher grabbed a nearby blanket and encouraged a hide and seek game . Andy took it and used it as a security blanket that encouraged him to interact with us . Without this ritual our cooperation could not have happened . It is crucial for the existence of ProDraw . Gather Data We gathered ﬁrst - hand impressions of Andy on his experiences with ProDraw in several ways . In an evaluation session we asked him to freely draw on ProDraw and then draw the interaction scenario and how he felt about it on a piece of paper . We also recorded his interactions with ProDraw on video so that we could analyse utterances and behaviours during that interaction . Analyse Data and Identify Statements Table 2 shows selected statements for actors con - tributing to Andy’s experience , together with the data sources they were extracted from . It shows that an actor can have multiple statements assigned to them to express dif - ferent aspects . A statement can be a salient quote from the data ( as might be the case with human actors ) or a paraphrased sentences ( as is the case for non - human actors ) . More details about this process can be found in Blaine’s case study . For quite a while , we did not know anything about Andy’s pre - ferred placing for ProDraw or how the family integrated the object into their daily life . The process of identifying state - ments helped us uncover these missing perspectives and ﬁll this gap in our knowledge . Contextualise Statements The actor - network , together with the statements , let us determine individual insights for Andy’s experience with ProDraw . The object enabled Andy to express control and execute it ( compare the ﬁrst state - ment attributed to him in Table 2 ; this insight is established by content analysis of statements ) . Andy was proud about building the object together with us , especially because envy and admiration was expressed by classmates , teachers and his parent ( this insight is established by a contextual analysis of statements ) . However , Andy did not want to use and share the object in the home environment – probably also because there was a bug that made it crash upon certain actions ( this insight is established by contextual and power analysis ) . Hence , Andy wanted ProDraw to be placed within the school environment , where it could facilitate positive experiences . Andy’s experiences with ProDraw were deeply entangled with different use contexts and how other people reacted to him using it . To Andy it was a sharing device that could be used to communicate with all the positive and negative feedback that comes with communicating with others . While Andy’s class - mates and teachers gave positive and encouraging feedback , Andy’s brother teased and made fun of the drawings . ProDraw , hence , mediated communicative experiences for Andy . It was only enjoyable as much as the communication was enjoyable . Blaine and ThinkM Blaine’s interest in science and technology inspired us to follow a very technical approach with him . Using Future Workshops [ 36 ] to conceptually rid ourselves from current technological limitations , we developed ThinkM together . He expressed pride in what he co - created by presenting and ex - plaining ThinkM happily to others , but refrained from using it much . During the last evaluation session he enquired about potential ﬁxes we implemented , but was especially enthusi - astic when allowed to use prototyping tools he knew already from the main design phase . We were interested in evaluating the effect ThinkM had on Blaine and whether it supported reﬂection on situations , actions and reactions . Gather Data With Blaine’s case study we demonstrate how log data can be converted into a statement . ThinkM consists of two parts : a headband recording pic - tures and pulse data and a base station which allows for ret - Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2857 Actor Statements Source Classmates Wow , Andy , you’ve made this ? I want to have what Andy has . video recordings researchers’ diaries Parent Andy preferred playing outside during summer . Andy did not interact with us through ProDraw . interviews Andy Look , what I do . Don’t look now ! I don’t want to take ProDraw home . It’s ok , if ProDraw stays in school . Let me show you , what I’ve seen on TV . session recordings researchers’ diaries drawings ProDraw I couldn’t function properly due to a bug . logs OutsideTheBox ProDraw enables embodied sharing . protocols of team discussions Blankets I provided Andy with security . video recordings Table 2 . Selection of Statements Identiﬁed in Andy’s Actor - Network rospective analysis of those pictures together with the pulse data . The base station deletes pictures over time to emulate for - getfulness and counteract privacy concerns . ThinkM records pulse data alongside the pictures taken with the headband . The timestamps of the recordings give implicit information about when the headband was used and for how long . Additionally the base station recorded whenever it was switched on or off , when it acquired new pictures from the headband and when - ever it would delete pictures . During evaluation , the pictures were only moved and not actually deleted to be available for later analysis . While Blaine had high verbal skills , he preferred talking about concrete things that were to his core interest and remained largely silent when prompted about abstract qualifying judge - ments . We gathered ﬁrst - hand data by asking closed contextual questions and observing situations in which Blaine explained ThinkM to other children during an exhibition . Analyse Data and Identify Statements The pulse data shows us that the headband was used two times during the time ThinkM was with Blaine for evaluation purposes . Since on both those occasions , the data was split into separate ﬁles ( the headband had been put on and off again ) , we can see that the initial pulse was higher when the headband was put on the ﬁrst time ( mean : 108 and 99 ) compared to the second time ( mean : 78 and 75 ) . Two statements can be attributed to ThinkM from this data : " I’m barely used . " and " It’s exciting to use me , but the excitement doesn’t seem to last long . " According to parents , the ﬁrst set of pictures shows the inside of the home environment , when Blaine initially presented ThinkM to family members . The second set consists of only one picture in which Blaine’s grandparent can be seen . This event was also tied to demonstrating the functionality of the object . The statement attributed to ThinkM from the picture data ( contextually analysed ) can then be : " If I’m used it’s to explain to others how I work . " The base station repeats the pattern , but was used for a total of seven times during the evaluation phase . Pictures had been transferred at the beginning of two of those , which coincides with the data of the headband . The base station conﬁrms the statement given by the headband : " I’m barely used . " Contextualise Statements Both parts of ThinkM combined provided us with three statements . Critically analysing how they were constructed , though , we have to reject the statement " It’s exciting to use me , but the excitement doesn’t seem to last long . " , because we did not have enough data to conﬁrm this . The statement coming from the pictures relied heavily on the interpretation of the parents , which means , the statement should be attributed to them instead of the pictures . This leaves us with one statement for ThinkM : " I’m barely used . " This does not describe all aspects of the experience , but the main perspective of the object on it . Combining more statements and putting them in context to each other , we have several insights . During evaluation ses - sions and in the ﬁnal phases of design , Blaine expressed a close connection to ThinkM and the way it was designed and built . Despite these ﬁndings , the object was barely used outside in the home environment . This might indicate , that Blaine con - sidered ThinkM more as a tangible token of our cooperation than an object that can be used . Hence , ThinkM facilitates an ’in - memento’ experience for Blaine . Using the object evokes the experiences of the design process anew instead of creating newly situated ones . Blaine shares this experience with others , which could be interpreted as following the design brief of OutsideTheBox , even if in unexpected ways . While this does not answer the question we were initially set out to answer , the methodology allowed us to learn more about the failure of the device as intended next to the positive effects of the process of designing it . Claude and Adaja In Claude’s school we were ﬁrst located in a nurse’s room that was equipped with only a table and three chairs . Our collaboration drew on Co - Operative Inquiry as design method . After a couple of sessions we met in a brighter and more engaging therapy room . Claude was verbal , but sometimes switched to his mother tongue , which was not spoken by any of the researchers . Claude’s interests constantly changed , which made it hard for the researchers to extract a core interest . More consistently , though , Claude was fascinated by visual patterns that he could manipulate . Still , his smart object , Adaja , only temporarily caught Claude’s attention . The evaluation was driven by the question of how and what Claude investigated . Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2858 Figure 4 . Evaluation Actor - Network for Claude Deﬁne Context and Discourse Figure 4 shows Claude’s actor network , which we analyse in contrast to Andy’s actor network ( see Figure 3 ) . Regarding his immediate environment , Claude had a close friend in class . Additionally , Claude’s life was more impacted by the diagnosis . There were therapy sessions and dietary rules to consider . While both children’s families came from foreign countries , for Claude this was much more part of his identity , which was expressed e . g . , by singing in his mother tongue . There was no overlap in interests between Andy and Claude that we could identify . Consequently , their objects follow dif - ferent interaction paradigms , aesthetics and even hardware , which also required different resources from the researchers . Adaja has the form of a lens and displays the intensity of noise around it . If there is too much noise , it has a regulatory func - tion in that it displays the words ’too loud’ . Claude constructed the name Adaja through a play with letters and words which reﬂected interests in that area . While OutsideTheBox and its sub - actors remained stable , the interaction in the design process was volatile , even though method and roles stayed the same . We used different mate - rials and rituals played a less important role . Different tools addressed the different interests and needs of Claude . We can explore which actors remain stable and which are ﬂexible by comparing two or more actor networks directly . Gather Data To account for Claude’s perspective on the in - teraction , we developed a small game inspired by Theater Workshop methods [ 30 ] . Three large pieces of paper signiﬁed answers of ’yes’ , ’no’ and ’don’t know’ at different spots on the ﬂoor in the room . One facilita - tor asked closed contextual questions while the other together with Claude each answered the question by moving to their answer spot in the room . He quickly picked up on the rules of the game and moved around consistently . We tested the validity of answers given with a couple of test questions about things we knew Claude liked or disliked . When directly inter - acting with the object , he referred to how it had been created together , but did not engage with it in a self - driven manner . He seemed to enjoy playing with Adaja during the evaluation sessions , but handed it back afterwards and was not interested in keeping it . Contextualise Statements As insights for Claude we determined that the experience with Adaja was tied to the design pro - cess . While he liked meeting and spending time with us , he had limited interest in taking the object with him Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2859 or using it outside of dedicated meetings . The researchers expressed frustration and a feeling of Adaja not being made from a co - design procedure as much as made for Claude out of time pressure and the need to create an object . However , the re - searchers gathered valuable insights about the design process , which helped them restructure future design co - operations . For Claude , the object in its actualisation was less important than the experiences made while designing it . Dean and DSmart Dean’s main interest lies in movies and stories . Our sessions took place at a room in school as well as at his home as per request of his parents . Through Future Workshops in combination with Fictional Inquiry [ 6 ] , we developed DSmart , a tool to support storytelling and show trailers of upcoming movies . When encouraged , he liked using it ( according to the parents ) , but did not suggest doing so on his own . Dean also expressed a strong preference for the trailer function . The focus of our evaluation was on the feelings Dean had when interacting with DSmart . Gather Data At the time we conducted evaluations , Dean was quite friendly with the researchers . Even though he was shy about expressing his own opinion un - ﬁltered . Because of that , we conducted a dedicated evaluation session with them that was based on a mix of Fictional Inquiry and Theater Methods . In a social outing Dean and one of the facilitators watched the movie Inside Out [ 8 ] in a cinema . In - spired by the ﬁve emotions in the movie ( Joy , Sadness , Anger , Fear , Disgust ) , we supplied ﬁve chairs with ﬁve coloured cloths as props . We also provided three different scenarios that were familiar to Dean . He could pick any emotion for each scenario and show us how he would interact with DSmart in that context . Through that we could identify core emotions affecting the experiences Dean had with DSmart . Analyse Data and Identify Statements In Table 3 we show selected statements for actors in Dean’s actor network and the data sources we analysed to extract these statements . It shows how the silver carpet , a piece of cloth that spatially marked the area of future in form of ’the Year 3000’ , was relevant to the experience of designing DSmart , but not any more for the ﬁnal physical realisation . Dean expressed a lot of frustration in cases where DSmart did not function properly or as quickly as expected . This explained why the buttons had been damaged . Contextualise Statements More generally : Dean had to be encouraged to make direct experiences with DSmart , but did ex - press preferences in how to use it then . Positive experiences were also provided by the acknowledgement of what he achieved through our design work together in that others wanted to engage with him through it . While the sto - rytelling function was tied to an audience , to Dean it was also related to the task of telling a story . The experience of watching trailers of upcoming movies together and deeply engaging with others in their topic of interest was more im - portant to Dean . The feelings they had when interacting with the prototype were determined by the robustness with which it worked . While this overshadows the experiences they had with DSmart , it gave us the valuable insight on how important it is to create more robust research products [ 26 ] instead of research prototypes when designing for the lived experiences of autistic children . DISCUSSION Through the application of our approach on evaluating the experiences of autistic children with technology [ 32 ] on a range of case studies , we were able to gain methodological insights , especially into potential research settings in which the approach could be used . Additionally , we could extract im - plications for experience - centred design with autistic children . We did so by combining the children’s ﬁrst - hand perspective on their experience with the perspective of other important actors such as the technology , the social environment or the research team . Andy’s case showed how an experience can be mediated by a technology , whereas Blaine re - appropriated the object into a memento of a school project . Claude refused to make experiences with Adaja and Dean created speciﬁc use cases for the interaction with DSmart . Methodological Insights Several insights help us understand the methodological ap - proach better . We present these here , again tied graphically to the step within the process , if a clear one can be attributed . Deﬁne Context and Discourse We found a set of stable actors that played a role for all of the case studies ( see Figure 5 ) within OutsideTheBox . This does not mean that they are the only actors or actor groups that are relevant to a single case study , but that they , in principle , span over all of ours . As can be seen by the comparative analysis of Andy’s and Claude’s actor networks , each child brings their own unique contexts . Due to the nature of research projects , the actors tied to the project are comparatively stable . The sub - actors for the nucleus are partly stable ( such as family , diagnosis and school as sub - actors to the child ) and the sub - sub - actors are even more volatile . The further an actor is away from their core actor , the more ﬂexible it is . For future case studies , we can draw on this to set up initial actor networks faster . The actor networks show us what kinds of information we can get from the child’s environment and teach us about the involvement of the child . By adapting , for example , materials , methods and tools , we can see that our process addresses the skills and abilities for every single child and , hence , fulﬁls the part of the research goal where we desire to conduct research in which the child can express their own agency . Contextualise Statements Across all case studies , we could see that accep - tance in the home setting was lacking . Parents re - ported in three of the four cases that their children rarely tell them anything about school . For Blaine , this was especially pronounced . All of our design sessions , however , were done within the school building of each child , although our goal was to design holistically for their lives . With a strict separation of these contexts , we worked in a limited space . Hence , for future case studies we will attempt to carefully Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2860 Actor Statements Source Teacher I’m very impressed by what Dean achieved with you . interviews Parent Dean never uses DSmart on his own . Dean only uses DSmart with me . Dean is in an ABA therapy programme . interviews Dean Let’s look at trailers ! I am frustrated by DSmart not working properly . session recordings researchers’ diaries DSmart My buttons have been pressed a lot and hard ; some of them are damaged . object appearance OutsideTheBox Within DSmart reactive embodiment emerges . protocols of team discussions Silver Carpet With me , Dean travels into the year 3000 . video recordings Table 3 . Selection of Statements Identiﬁed in Dean’s Actor - Network Figure 5 . Stable Actors in an Actor Networks within the Context of OutsideTheBox bridge into the everyday lives of the children by conducting dedicated sessions at other places such as the university and occasionally also visiting the home or meeting the parents together with their children . This way , the design activities might be associated less with the school environment . Gather Data In terms of data acquisition we found that dedi - cated evaluation meetings with parents and chil - dren yielded more than continuous little tasks . None of the children or parents ﬁlled in their evaluation di - aries although the intervals were designed so that they required comparatively little time investment ( about 10 min / week ) – re - gardless of how involved the parents were within the project . It could be that keeping track of regularly answering diary questions requires more cognitive effort than dedicating time to an evaluation meeting . While we initially tried to tax the parents less in terms of time it appears to be more respectful of their time management and overall resources to schedule dedicated evaluation sessions and prepare these with speciﬁc questions and starting points for discussions . During evaluation sessions with the children we found how closed contextually situated questions yielded results that re - quire less interpretation ( reproducing the ﬁndings in [ 14 ] ) . We also made good experiences with playing out different use contexts with the children . For the next evaluation we will involve the children directly in the deﬁnition of evaluation goals and data gathering methods . This should increase the acceptance for those methods and yield richer results . Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2861 Implications for Experience - Centred Co - Design Our evaluation brought forward several implications for de - signing assistive technologies for autistic children that focus on their well - being and abilities . First of all , it is important to create a space that is individually tailored to the creative abilities of an autistic child . Freedoms and structures need to be carefully negotiated so that the design space does not be - come too arbitrary or too restricted [ 23 ] . Materials , methods , tools and some rituals provide conceptual ﬂexibility to address unique preferences , whereas roles and other rituals should be pre - deﬁned as a form of structuring the interaction . We see another implication in the non - use we noticed among the children . The physical space in which co - design happens and the actual space for which we design should overlap – at least to some degree . Children in general view school and home environments as distinctly different spaces in which different rules are at play [ 24 ] . For some autistic children , this is even more pronounced . When designing for everyday life , designers tend to implicitly refer to the home environment ( or away from school environment of a child ) . If a technology is supposed to be used outside of school , design sessions need to be conducted in that space as well , if not exclusively . Otherwise , the developed technologies will only be tokens of the design process , that are exhibited , but not used . While we as researchers might be frustrated by the non - use especially because we hoped to have a tangible positive impact on an autistic child’s life , we recognise there are also limits to participatory engagement . For one , autistic children are usually embedded in a rigorously planned environment with school , therapy and family events as structures and activities . Participatory design activities have to compete for attention in this space . Additionally , children’s technological space is framed by parents’ encouragements . We speculate that parents , who do not necessarily understand the technology and how it might be important to the child , might be less inclined to encourage its use . It appears crucial to ensure a mutual understanding of a resulting technology between a child and their social environment . Designers should make an effort to facilitate this understanding . In the evaluation of the designs , researchers might have more success if they actively seek out interaction with the stake - holders they are interested in hearing from ( be it e . g . , the child themselves , their family or their teachers ) . Families with younger children are very busy . Regular questionnaires – even if the time used to ﬁll them in is comparatively short – require constant reﬂection and mental effort to keep them in the rou - tine . If there is no obvious intrinsic incentive for the families to provide the data , the acquisition will fail . It is easier for them to have dedicated evaluation sessions with interviews together with the child . Ultimately , we could show how essential it is to include multi - ple perspectives when assessing user experiences of autistic children . Researchers’ empathy is limited as it essentially assumes the researchers’ perspective as privileged . We show how the children can be attributed with agency in an analytic framework that does not neglect associated difﬁculties . CONCLUSION We presented the practical application of a novel approach to assessing experience in the context of how autistic children experience their interaction with technologies . For each case we provided a detailed account about how the experiences of the children come together using Actor Network Theory combined with Critical Discourse Analysis . Through that , the assessment of experiences of autistic children does not solely rely on the empathy of researchers , instead it considers multi - ple viewpoints and makes sure that autistic children contribute to the construction of the experience as well . While the case studies presented here are situated in a very speciﬁc context , we argue that our approach can initiate a wider discussion about the conception of experience in HCI . While the pragmatic perspective advocated by McCarthy and Wright [ 25 ] has meant a step forward in terms of a situated and nuanced understanding of experience , we argue that our approach can make a signiﬁcant contribution towards a con - ceptualisation that is increasingly multi - faceted , multi - sourced and both extrinsic as well as intrinsic . Future work includes more case studies so that we can report further on the structural aspects of the experiences autistic children have with technologies . We see additional potential for our approach to be applied in design , i . e . , as a reﬂective tool that allows designers to reﬂect on their work . To this end , we have started to use ANT to document our current collaborations in OutsideTheBox and use the insights to plan participatory design activities . In order to increase the agency and discursive power the children have over the process , we intend to explore methods of participatory evaluation and how the actor - networks could be co - constructed . With this paper we have reported on the ﬁrst application of a novel concept of experience in the context of evaluating the interactions of autistic children with technology . We have demonstrated how our approach leads to unique insights , grounded in diverse data sources , most importantly including the perspective of children themselves . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research is funded by the Austrian Science Fund ( FWF ) : [ P26281 - N23 ] “OutsideTheBox - Rethinking Assistive Tech - nologies with Children with Autism” project . Our deepest gratitude to Julia Makhaeva for being part of this research endeavour . Francisco Nunez , Petr Slovak and anonymous re - viewers helped reﬁne earlier versions of this paper . Kearsley Schieder - Wethy assisted in proof reading and grammatical corrections . We would also like to thank our participating families , schools and the city of Vienna , in particular the department for in - clusion in public education which facilitated access to our participants . Above all , we thank the children who continue to inspire our work . REFERENCES 1 . Andrea Alessandrini , Alessandro Cappelletti , and Massimo Zancanaro . 2013 . Audio - augmented Paper for the Therapy of Low - functioning Autism Children . In CHI Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2862 ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , Paris , France , 505 – 510 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468445 2 . Laura Benton , Hilary Johnson , Emma Ashwin , Mark Brosnan , and Beate Grawemeyer . 2012 . Developing IDEAS : Supporting Children with Autism Within a Participatory Design Team . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2599 – 2608 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208650 3 . Sara Bernardini , Kaska Porayska - Pomsta , and Tim J . Smith . 2014 . ECHOES : An intelligent serious game for fostering social communication in children with autism . Information Sciences 264 , 0 ( April 2014 ) , 41 – 60 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ins . 2013 . 10 . 027 4 . Elizabeth K . Cridland , Sandra C . Jones , Peter Caputi , and Christopher A . Magee . 2014 . Being a Girl in a Boys’ World : Investigating the Experiences of Girls with Autism Spectrum Disorders During Adolescence . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 44 , 6 ( 2014 ) , 1261 – 1274 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 013 - 1985 - 6 5 . Hanne De Jaegher . 2013 . Embodiment and sense - making in autism . Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 7 ( 2013 ) , 15 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnint . 2013 . 00015 6 . Christian Dindler and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2007 . Fictional Inquiry - design collaboration in a shared narrative space . CoDesign 3 , 4 ( Dec . 2007 ) , 213 – 234 . 7 . Sue Dockett , Sarah Main , and Lynda Kelly . 2011 . Consulting Young Children : Experiences from a Museum . Visitor Studies 14 , 1 ( April 2011 ) , 13 – 33 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10645578 . 2011 . 557626 8 . Pete Docter and Ronnie Del Carmen . 2015 . Inside Out . ( 2015 ) . 9 . Allison Druin . 1999 . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 592 – 599 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 10 . Snoefridur T . Egilson , Linda B . Olafsdottir , Thora Leosdottir , and Evald Saemundsen . 2016 . Quality of life of high - functioning children and youth with autism spectrum disorder and typically developing peers : Self - and proxy - reports . Autism April , 2016 ( 2016 ) , 1362361316630881 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361316630881 11 . Marc Fakhoury . 2015 . Autistic spectrum disorders : A review of clinical features , theories and diagnosis . International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience 43 ( June 2015 ) , 70 – 77 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijdevneu . 2015 . 04 . 003 12 . William Farr , Nicola Yuill , and Hayes Rafﬂe . 2010 . Social beneﬁts of a tangible user interface for children with Autistic Spectrum Conditions . Autism 14 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 237 – 252 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361310363280 13 . Christopher Frauenberger . 2015 . Disability and Technology - A Critical Realist Perspective . In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility . ACM Press , Lisbon , Portugal , 8 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2700648 . 2809851 14 . Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Alyssa Alcorn , and Helen Pain . 2012 . Supporting the Design Contributions of Children with Autism Spectrum Conditions . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 134 – 143 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307112 15 . Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . 2016a . Designing Smart Objects with Autistic Children : Four Design Exposès . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 130 – 139 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858050 16 . Christopher Frauenberger , Marjo Rauhala , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2016b . In - Action Ethics . Interacting with Computers 28 ( 2016 ) , published online ﬁrst . Issue 6 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / iwc / iww024 17 . Katie Gaudion , Ashley Hall , Jeremy Myerson , and Liz Pellicano . 2015 . Design and wellbeing : Bridging the empathy gap between neurotypical designers and autistic adults . In Design for Sustainable Well - being and Empowerment . IISc Press and TU Delft , Delft , Netherlands , 61 – 77 . 18 . Sen H . Hirano , Michael T . Yeganyan , Gabriela Marcu , David H . Nguyen , Lou Anne Boyd , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2010 . vSked : evaluation of a system to support classroom activities for children with autism . In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , Atlanta , Georgia , USA , 1633 – 1642 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753569 19 . Wijnand IJsselsteijn , Karolien Poels , and Yvonne De Kort . 2008 . The Game Experience Questionnaire : Development of a self - report measure to assess player experiences of digital games . ( 2008 ) . 20 . Lorcan Kenny , Caroline Hattersley , Bonnie Molins , Carole Buckley , Carol Povey , and Elizabeth Pellicano . 2015 . Which terms should be used to describe autism ? Perspectives from the UK autism community . Autism 20 , 4 ( July 2015 ) , 442 – 462 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361315588200 21 . Anne V . Kirby , Virginia A . Dickie , and Grace T . Baranek . 2015 . Sensory experiences of children with autism spectrum disorder : In their own words . Autism 19 , 3 ( April 2015 ) , 316 – 326 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361314520756 Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2863 22 . Andrew Main . 2003 . allism : an introduction to a little - known condition . ( 2003 ) . http : / / www . fysh . org / ~ zefram / allism / allism _ intro . txt 23 . Julia Makhaeva , Christopher Frauenberger , and Katharina Spiel . 2016 . Creating Creative Spaces for Co - designing with Autistic Children : The Concept of a " Handlungsspielraum " . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 51 – 60 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940306 24 . Berry Mayall . 1994 . Children in action at home and school . Childrenâ ˘A ´Zs childhoods : Observed and experienced ( 1994 ) , 114 – 127 . 25 . John McCarthy and Peter Wright . 2007 . Technology as Experience . MIT Press , Cambridge , USA . 26 . William Odom , Ron Wakkary , Youn - kyung Lim , Audrey Desjardins , Bart Hengeveld , and Richard Banks . 2016 . From Research Prototype to Research Product . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2549 – 2561 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858447 27 . Narcis Pares , Paul Masri , Gerard van Wolferen , and Chris Creed . 2005 . Achieving dialogue with children with severe autism in an adaptive multisensory interaction : the " MEDIATE " project . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11 , 6 ( Nov . 2005 ) , 734 – 743 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2005 . 88 28 . Sarah Parsons and Sue Cobb . 2013 . Who chooses what I need ? Child voice and user - involvement in the development of learning technologies for children with autism . ( July 2013 ) . http : / / eprints . soton . ac . uk / 356044 / 29 . Ginny Russell , Stephan Collishaw , Jean Golding , Susan E Kelly , and Tamsin Ford . 2015 . Changes in diagnosis rates and behavioural traits of autism spectrum disorder over time . British Journal of Psychiatry Open 1 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 110 – 115 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1192 / bjpo . bp . 115 . 000976 30 . Steve Sato and Tony Salvador . 1999 . Methods & Tools : Playacting and Focus Troupes : : Theater Techniques for Creating Quick , Intense , Immersive , and Engaging Focus Group Sessions . interactions 6 , 5 ( Sept . 1999 ) , 35 – 41 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 312683 . 312715 31 . Tom Shakespeare . 2014 . Disability Rights and Wrongs Revisited ( second endition ed . ) . Routledge , Oxon , UK . 32 . Katharina Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2016a . Experiences of Autistic Children with Technologies . International Journal of Child Computer Interaction Under Review ( 2016 ) . 33 . Katharina Spiel , Julia Makhaeva , and Christopher Frauenberger . 2016b . Embodied Companion Technologies for Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 245 – 252 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839495 34 . Laura Sterponi , Kenton de Kirby , and Jennifer Shankey . 2015 . Rethinking Language in Autism . Autism 19 , 5 ( July 2015 ) , 517 – 526 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361314537125 35 . Ippei Torii , Kaoruko Ohtani , Nahoko Shirahama , Takahito Niwa , and Naohiro Ishii . 2012 . Voice output communication aid application for personal digital assistant for autistic children . In 2012 IEEE / ACIS 11th International Conference on Computer and Information Science ( ICIS ) . IEEE , Orlando , FL , USA , 329 – 333 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICIS . 2012 . 117 36 . Giasemi Vavoula and Mike Sharples . 2007 . Future technology workshop : A collaborative method for the design of new learning technologies and activities . International Journal of Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning 2 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 393 – 419 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11412 - 007 - 9026 - 0 37 . Lilia Villafuerte , Milena Markova , and Sergi Jorda . 2012 . Acquisition of Social Abilities Through Musical Tangible User Interface : Children with Autism Spectrum Condition and the Reactable . In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 745 – 760 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2212847 38 . Tracy L . Westeyn , Gregory D . Abowd , Thad E . Starner , Jeremy M . Johnson , Peter W . Presti , and Kimberly A . Weaver . 2012 . Monitoring childrenâ ˘A´Zs developmental progress using augmented toys and activity recognition . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 16 , 2 ( Feb . 2012 ) , 169 – 191 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0386 - 0 39 . Peter Wright and John McCarthy . 2008 . Empathy and experience in HCI . In Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , Florence , Italy , 637 – 646 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357156 Autism , Disabilities and Assistive Technology CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2864