This document is downloaded from DR - NTU , Nanyang Technological University Library , Singapore . Title PADLs : supporting digital scholarship in digital libraries Author ( s ) Goh , Dion Hoe - Lian Citation Goh , D . ( 2001 ) . PADLs : supporting digital scholarship in digital libraries . Aslib Proceedings , 53 ( 8 ) , 325 - 337 . Date 2001 URL http : / / hdl . handle . net / 10220 / 6168 Rights i Goh , D . H . ( 2001 ) . PADLs : Supporting digital scholarship in digital libraries . Aslib Proceedings , 53 ( 8 ) , 325 - 337 . PADLs : Supporting Digital Scholarship in Digital Libraries Author Information Dion Goh Division of Information Studies , School of Computer Engineering Nanyang Technological University Blk N4 , # 2a - 32 , Nanyang Avenue Singapore 639798 Singapore Tel : ( 65 ) 790 - 6290 Fax : ( 65 ) 792 - 6559 Email : ashlgoh @ ntu . edu . sg ii PADLs : Supporting Digital Scholarship in Digital Libraries Abstract This paper introduces digital scholarship , a process in which individuals perform all scholarly work electronically , working entirely with digital media . A proposal is made for patron - augmented digital libraries ( PADLs ) , a class of digital libraries designed to support the digital scholarship of its patrons . PADLs not only provide facilities for search and retrieval of library artifacts , but also allow patrons to augment the library’s collection with new artifacts such as annotations , original compositions and organizational structures . Finally , a prototype PADL ( called Synchrony ) providing access to digitized video segments and associated textual transcripts is described . Synchrony allows patrons to search its collection for artifacts , create annotations / original compositions , integrate these artifacts to form synchronized mixed text and video presentations and , after suitable review , publish these presentations into the digital library if desired . 1 Introduction Digital library research is mostly focused on the development of large collections of multimedia resources and advanced tools for their indexing and retrieval . While these efforts are essential , it is important to recognize that the ultimate goal of a library , whether physical or digital , is to serve the scholarly needs of its users – whose objectives are not solely the retrieval of library artifacts . Users instead seek these artifacts ( the items that constitute a library’s holdings ) in order to manipulate and combine them to produce new artifacts . This observation is especially evident in scholarly ( work - oriented ) settings in which patrons peruse existing artifacts in order to produce new ones . Consider as examples , three commonly occurring scenarios : ( 1 ) a faculty member of a university would invariably seek library artifacts ( such as books or journals ) for the purposes of composing a journal article ; ( 2 ) an information analyst working for a privately owned organization must acquire various artifacts in order to produce a report for a staff meeting ; ( 3 ) a student assigned to produce a term paper must acquire and peruse library artifacts for its successful completion . The Use of Library Artifacts While these examples portray users of library artifacts in various situations , two common themes are apparent : ( 1 ) library artifacts are sought in order to complete a task – typically the production of a new information artifact such as a journal article , a staff report or a term paper 2 ( 2 ) these new information artifacts are disseminated – through a formal publication process for the journal article , through handouts and a presentation in the case of the staff report , or through the submission of the paper to an instructor in the case of the student’s term paper . Studies of library artifact use support these observations . For example , Levy and Marshall [ 11 ] observed and interviewed a group of information analysts , their managers , information assistants , and technology providers in two organizations in order to gain insights into the use of libraries . While acquiring documents ( artifacts ) was a crucial component , this represented only an initial step in the analysts’ task . Once completed , these analysts would then annotate the documents as a means of interpreting them , produce new artifacts , and finally disseminate them . In addition , analysts would commonly share documents and other interpretative structures of documents with other analysts , as well as establish and maintain “reading rooms” which serve as collections of reference materials for the benefit of others involved in similar work . Likewise , Stone [ 22 ] studied humanities scholars and identified five steps that scholars performed in their studies : ( 1 ) thinking and talking to others , ( 2 ) reading existing material on a topic , ( 3 ) studying original sources of information and making observations and notes , ( 4 ) drafting a document on what has been found , and ( 5 ) producing a final document based on the draft . If library use indeed extends beyond search and retrieval , what types of activities do patrons perform ? In a study of library use by O’Hara et al . [ 18 ] , 25 PhD students in the arts and humanities at Cambridge University were asked to complete a diary of their document - related 3 research activities during a working day . Information recorded included the nature of the research activity , time taken , documents used , support activities performed ( such as annotating ) , and place where the activity was conducted . At the end of the working day , the subjects were interviewed for approximately an hour . They were asked to elaborate on the information recorded in their respective diaries . Using the data collected , a model for document - related activities by library users was developed . The model characterized scholarly research as a complex process involving searching , information retrieval , reading , information extraction , annotation , review and writing new compositions . These processes were iterative in nature and occurred over varying periods of time . These activities are similar to those found by Case [ 3 ] in interviews with 20 historians to determine their use of information . After searching from a variety of information sources , historians would make annotations and copies of the material , arrange and index the material according to their needs , and then produce an original work using the information gathered . Case also found that these activities were often performed concurrently within and across projects . Four activities that occur over library artifacts may thus be identified . Firstly , they are acquired from a library’s collection to solve some specific problem . This is typically performed through an iterative searching and / or browsing process [ 2 , 12 ] . A second activity involves organizing the acquired artifacts to make better sense of the information at hand within the context of the prescribed task . Also known as information triage [ 15 ] , patrons filter the artifacts to determine the relevancy of each artifact , as well as create various organizations for the artifacts to allow them to be used efficiently and effectively . 4 The third activity involves the authoring of new artifacts using the artifacts already acquired . Artifact types are varied and may range from annotations , to documents and organizational structures ( such as indexes ) . Finally , artifacts are published , that is , the newly authored artifacts are disseminated . The audience of this artifact may be personal ( for private use ) , public ( for use by interested parties ) , or a selected group of users . Methods of publication are also varied and may occur through formal print channels ( such as books and journals ) , presentations , informal handouts , and through the World - Wide Web . Digital Scholarship Traditional ( as opposed to digital ) libraries , with the majority of their holdings in physical form , typically promote a form a scholarship termed in this paper as paper - based scholarship . Here , physical media , predominately paper , play a major role in the scholarly use of library artifacts . For example , although patrons may use electronic databases to search for artifacts , the resulting metadata records point to both physical and digital artifacts , requiring patrons to switch between digital and physical domains in order to accomplish their tasks . Figure 1 depicts paper - based scholarship as a cyclic set of transitions occurring in both the physical and digital domains . Artifacts ( physical and digital ) are located electronically through their metadata records . Since scholarship is ( mostly ) paper - based , copies of physical artifacts ( or their proxies ) are made for incorporation into the work process . Digital artifacts must also be converted to physical form before they are used [ 11 ] . These copies are then organized , and used to author and ultimately publish new artifacts which again may either be physical or digital . The work cycle is completed when the artifacts are incorporated into the library and metadata records are generated for them . 5 Figure 1 . Paper - based scholarship in traditional libraries Digital libraries however provide new service opportunities to patrons as well as an expanded set of informational data types [ 17 ] , and thus have the ability to promote digital scholarship . As shown in Figure 2 , patrons can now perform their scholarly work electronically , working entirely with digital media . Using tools that interface with the digital library , patrons are able to search and acquire library artifacts , organize them to form coherent structures suitable to the task at hand , author new artifacts , and publish them electronically for future use . Digital scholarship offers several advantages over paper - based scholarship . These include : ( 1 ) A single access point for library artifacts . Patrons are able to acquire all library artifacts in one location – at the computer . There is no longer a need for a two - step acquisition process in which patrons first search electronic records for artifacts of interest and then physically locate them . Search Electronic Database Metadata Records Acquire Copy and Organize Author Publish L Li Library Artifacts Library Artifact Proxies New Artifact ( physical and / or digital ) Physical Media Digital Media Library Artifacts ( physical and digital ) 6 ( 2 ) New data types and new ways of access and manipulation . Digital media provide new opportunities for patrons to interact with library artifacts not previously possible with paper - based artifacts . Data types such as audio and video can now be used directly in the scholarly process . Patrons can search within artifacts , combine and edit portions of existing artifacts to form new ones , create links / associations between artifacts , and so on . ( 3 ) Shorter publication times . Paper - based artifacts typically take between 12 to 36 months from submission to publication excluding actual authoring time [ 5 ] . The digital medium has the potential to shorten such times by supporting online layout / formatting / editing , and electronic refereeing services , as well as removing the transitions between physical and digital media . Figure 2 . Digital scholarship in digital libraries Search Electronic Database Metadata Records Acquire Copy and Organize Author Publish Library Library Library Artifact Library Artifact New Artifact Digital Media Library Artifacts 7 Patron - Augmented Digital Libraries There is no doubt that traditional library models , in which searching is the main service provided to patrons and scholarly work is mostly paper - based , have utility . However , we postulate that in many instances , an expanded model of digital library services would benefit patrons . That is , digital libraries should provide services that encompass not only searching , browsing and retrieval , but an entire range of services that support patrons’ digital scholarship from task inception to task completion . The question becomes one of the types of services that should be supported . Returning to the discussion of artifact use , a plausible starting point would include services for acquiring and organizing library artifacts , together with services for authoring and publishing new artifacts . Hence , we propose patron - augmented digital libraries as a class of digital libraries that provide acquiring , organizing , authoring and publishing services to patrons . A patron - augmented digital library ( PADL ) is one whose holdings are enhanced by the digital scholarship of its users – both librarians and patrons contribute to the evolution of a library’s holdings . In the PADL model of use , librarians populate the digital library with artifacts that meet the goals of the library . At the same time , patrons may augment the PADL’s holdings to meet specific needs through new artifacts such as documents , annotations or other organizational structures over the existing holdings of the library via the support services offered by the PADL . Often , the results of a patron’s task ( the newly authored artifacts ) are deemed useful to the community at - large . When this happens , the patron may want to publish the artifacts for the benefit of others . 8 The term “artifact” used in our research refers to any information - bearing object that is accessible by a patron . Two major classes of artifacts are distinguished . Information artifacts are artifacts that contain information about a topic and are obtained either by librarians for the purpose of populating the library or by patrons who create and publish them into the library . Examples include electronic books , journals , and so on . Patron - augmented artifacts on the other hand , refer to artifacts produced by patrons and incorporated into the digital library after a review process . These may fall into three categories : ( 1 ) structuring artifacts which are used to organize other artifacts , ( 2 ) annotations which provide commentary and context to other artifacts , and ( 3 ) original compositions created by patrons . Patron - augmented artifacts become reusable information artifacts through the publication process . It is important to note that while a PADL is designed as an environment for digital scholarship where patrons author and publish artifacts , a system of checks and balances must be in place to ensure the quality of the artifacts produced . For this reason , PADLs must include support for publishing policies that determine if an artifact considered for publication meets the goals and standards of the PADL . In other words , artifacts are subject to reviews , and these may be as stringent or flexible as necessary depending on the stakeholders of the PADL . PADL Services The facilities provided by a PADL are based on a model of digital scholarship termed ASAP [ 8 ] . This model suggests the need for tools that allow patrons to acquire artifacts from the PADL , organize these to put them into the context of the task , create new artifacts , and finally publish these new artifacts back into the PADL for future use . Hence , the minimal requirements for establishing a PADL would include the following services . 9 Storage and Retrieval A fundamental requirement in all digital libraries is the support for services to store and retrieve artifacts , and in the case of PADLs these artifacts would encompass both information and patron - augmented artifacts . Two important features of a storage and retrieval service are : ( 1 ) the ability to accommodate artifacts of different multimedia types , and ( 2 ) the ability to deliver artifacts to patrons through browsing and searching modes . Publishing The publishing service functions as an intermediary between a patron who wishes to publish an artifact and the storage and retrieval service responsible for incorporating it into the PADL . A typical publishing service would acquire the artifact from the patron , obtain the necessary metadata for it ( from the patron and / or analysis of the artifact ) , forward it for review , and upon acceptance , communicate with the storage and retrieval service for the purposes of storing the artifact in the PADL . Once again , it must be stressed that publishing policies must be implemented to ensure that published artifacts meet the standards and needs of the PADL . Manipulation The manipulation service is responsible for delivering the model of digital scholarship to the user , and provides the interface through which the patron interacts with the PADL . All user requests come from this subsystem and all results are returned to this subsystem . The tasks supported by this service include searching / browsing of artifacts , organizing / structuring of acquired artifacts , and authoring and publishing of new artifacts . While these tasks may be provided by separate tools , one advantage of a single tool functioning as the access point to 10 the entire PADL is the lower cognitive overhead required by patrons in learning and using the PADL facilities . Security / Privacy A PADL may be utilized by a large number of patrons , and as such , mechanisms must be present to ensure that artifacts , service requests , and personal information about patrons are secured from unauthorized access [ 1 ] . For example , a system for enforcing access rights is necessary to determine if a patron is able to manipulate ( read / write / annotate / reference ) published artifacts . Likewise , mechanisms are necessary to ensure that only a patron has access to his / her own personal artifacts and work areas in the PADL . Figure 3 shows the conceptual architecture underpinning PADLs . Each service is supported by a separate subsystem that interacts with other subsystems in response to users’ requests or actions . Figure 3 . A conceptual architecture for PADLs service requests artifacts / service results Information / Patron - Augmented Artifacts Storage and Retrieval Subsystem Manipulation Subsystem ( User Interface ) patron - augmented artifact accepted patron - augmented artifact Security / Privacy Subsystem Publication Subsystem Publishing Polices library artifacts approved service requests 11 Synchrony Synchrony [ 7 , 8 ] is a prototype PADL system that is designed for the purposes of digital scholarship . It allows patrons to search and retrieve artifacts from the library’s collection , organize these artifacts to meet the needs of their tasks , author new artifacts , and publish these new artifacts into the digital library . Synchrony’s collection of artifacts consists of digitized videos of speeches given by former President George Bush ( Senior ) and their corresponding textual transcripts acquired in collaboration with archivists at the George Bush Presidential Library and Museum . The transcripts are full - text indexed at the paragraph - level and made available to patrons via standard query operations . In addition , each paragraph is associated with its streaming video segment , allowing patrons to view search results in text - only , video - only , or synchronized text and video formats . The collection also contains artifacts authored by patrons and these fall into three classes : original compositions , annotations and structuring artifacts . Original compositions are text - based documents that patrons author and publish into the digital library . Annotations are also text - based documents , but are designed to provide commentary and context to other artifacts . Presentations serve as structuring artifacts in Synchrony . These composite entities consist of sequences of artifacts , each of which may contain a video segment of a speech , its corresponding textual transcript and an annotation / original composition displayed in synchrony . Associated with each presentation is a table of contents that allows patrons to navigate to any sequence within the presentation . Artifacts contained within the presentations are referenced , not copied . This allows modifications made to individual artifacts to automatically propagate to presentations if desired . 12 Synchrony is so named because it allows patrons to author and publish synchronized text and video presentations . The User Interface Synchrony’s user interface is patterned on a spatial metaphor and represents a large , 2 1 / 2 dimensional direct manipulation workspace in which patrons manipulate and organize objects of different types such as text and presentations . The interface is depicted in Figure 4 and consists of two major entities : the workspace and library objects . Figure 4 . Synchrony’s user interface The workspace forms the background of the interface and functions much like a physical desktop on which items are placed and a patron’s tasks are performed . Library objects , that is Query Object Workspace Text Object Presentation Object 13 the information and patron - augmented artifacts in use by the patron , are positioned on this workspace . Objects may be arranged ( by selecting and dragging an object on the workspace ) , resized ( by selecting and dragging an object’s borders ) and visually altered ( by modifying an object’s properties such as color ) by the patron to create information structures suitable to the current task . In addition , scrolling and panning are supported to allow patrons to view different portions of the workspace . Library objects are the means with which a patron accomplishes his / her digital scholarship . They represent the information and patron - augmented artifacts as well as the results of a patron’s tasks in the PADL . Library objects fall into four basic categories : ( 1 ) Query objects represent the results of a search , with each query object representing one result set . Queries are performed against information artifacts ( speeches ) and / or patron - augmented artifacts ( original compositions , annotations and presentations ) depending on the search options selected by the patron . ( 2 ) Text objects represent text - based information and may be of two content types : information artifacts ( speeches ) and patron - augmented artifacts ( original compositions and annotations ) . Text objects allow editing if their underlying content types are editable . In Synchrony , published artifacts ( those that are part of a PADL’s collection ) are not editable while unpublished patron - augmented artifacts are editable by those having the appropriate access rights . For editable text objects , text is typed directly on the objects themselves . ( 3 ) Presentation objects contain presentations authored by patrons and consist of sequences of artifacts each of which may contain a video segment of a speech , its corresponding textual transcript and / or an annotation / original composition displayed in synchrony . The contents of a presentation are displayed in tabular form , with each row corresponding to a 14 single sequence in the presentation while columns contain the types of artifacts in use within each sequence . ( 4 ) Container objects are workspaces within the main workspace and may contain query , document , presentation or even other container objects . While positioning may be used to divide a workspace , containers provide a more formal means of doing so , and are thus typically used to organize a workspace into various tasks and subtasks . Synchrony shares common goals with digital library interfaces such as Artemis [ 23 ] , DLITE [ 4 ] and NaviQue [ 6 ] in its support for an integrated , direct - manipulation environment for library - related tasks . In terms of design philosophy however , Synchrony is similar to VIKI [ 16 ] in that both systems derive their interfaces from the branch of hypertext / hypermedia systems known as spatial hypertext [ 14 ] . Spatial hypertext is characterized by the use of space in the creation and perception of structure . Whereas traditional hypertext systems employ explicit linking mechanisms to associate objects ( e . g . unidirectional links between HTML documents ) to create information structures , spatial hypertext systems describe associations among objects through space , that is , by geometrical relationships ( e . g . proximity ) , visual characteristics ( e . g . font size , color , shape ) , and recurrence ( e . g . relative positioning of an object within a group of objects ) . Studies have demonstrated the utility of such systems . For example , an analysis of Aquanet use ( a collaborative hypertext tool ) [ 13 ] found that for drawing relationships between objects , users preferred spatial positioning of objects to communicate structure rather than through predefined schemas ( a collection of objects and relationship types ) . Further , in the Walden ' s Paths project [ 20 ] , the spatial hypertext system VIKI has been used to some success in the authoring of paths - linear presentations of existing and new web pages . 15 A Scenario of Use The following scenario illustrates how users may potentially use Synchrony and highlights the operation of the system . An educator is preparing a lesson about the Bush presidency and the Soviet Union for his history class and decides to prepare a multimedia presentation of speeches and press conferences given by George Bush on the subject from Synchrony’s collection as a resource for his students . After logging onto Synchrony , the educator is presented with an empty workspace . As this will be a new presentation , his first task is to locate relevant information by querying the PADL collection . He thus right - clicks at any point on the workspace to display a list of PADL services , and after selecting the query service , he enters the query ( together with any options ) in the dialog box that appears on the workspace . When the query has been processed by Synchrony , a query object appears at the click location showing the results of the query . To view an artifact , the educator selects it from the query object , drags it onto the workspace and drops it at a desired location . Depending on the artifact type , a text object or a presentation object appears at the drop location . Figure 5 depicts the results of these actions . After enough information has been retrieved , the educator ' s next step is to author the presentation . Synchrony simplifies the authoring process through a technique known as incremental formalization [ 21 ] which attempts to make a system understand informally represented information . This feature allows users to rapidly create presentations by first positioning document objects linearly within the workspace and then later specifying which objects to include into the presentation . 16 Figure 5 . Selecting and viewing artifacts Returning to the scenario , the educator uses familiar drag - and - drop operations to assemble the text objects ( which may include his annotations ) to form two vertical adjacent list structures as depicted in Figure 6 . He then invokes the presentation building service , causing Synchrony to automatically map these list structures to presentation sequences . In the current version , Synchrony assumes that the leftmost list contains video segments of speeches and their textual transcripts , while the adjacent list to its right is assumed to contain the corresponding annotation / original composition . In other words , sequences are mapped to the rows in the lists in a top - to - bottom manner while content is mapped to the columns . ( Synchrony also supports a left - to - right mapping ) . When Synchrony completes the mapping , a presentation object is displayed depicting the contents of the presentation in a tabular format ( see Figure 4 ) . In addition to providing a formalized representation of a presentation , the presentation object also allows patrons to 17 modify its contents . Patrons are able to add / remove sequences , add / move / remove content in any sequence , and shift the display order of sequences . Figure 6 . Authoring a presentation When the educator is ready to view the presentation , he clicks a button on the presentation object . This causes Synchrony to assemble the sequences into a SMIL ( Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language ) [ 9 ] presentation and invoke a presentation viewer to display it . Figure 7 shows the presentation viewer . The viewer provides playback controls to allow patrons to play , pause , stop and seek . Each presentation sequence consists of three regions – a content region for displaying the text of a speech segment , a video region for presenting the associated video segment , and an annotation region for displaying associated annotations / original compositions . 18 Figure 7 . Viewing a presentation When the educator has finished authoring the presentation , he forwards it for review and possible publication by completing a form provided within Synchrony . Here , the educator provides the title of the presentation , a description , and an explanation of why the presentation should be published . Synchrony then uploads the completed form and presentation to the publication subsystem which stores them in a temporary holding area pending review . At this point , the educator’s task is complete . He will later be notified through electronic mail about the outcome of his submission . In the current version of Synchrony , all presentations submitted for publication are routed to a designated person ( a librarian , a reviewer , an editor , etc . ) . Using a submissions viewing facility , reviewers may accept or reject submissions , or reroute submissions to other reviewers if necessary . When a submission is accepted or rejected , the author is informed via 19 electronic mail . Further , if the submission is accepted , it is indexed and incorporated into the PADL . To conclude the scenario , the author , upon receiving the acceptance message from the reviewer , informs his students about the presentation . The students may then begin their own Synchrony sessions , retrieve the presentation , and view and interact with it . Note that for clarity , this scenario portrays the authoring process as a fixed sequence of tasks , that is , querying , organizing , viewing and publishing . In reality , Synchrony provides an environment in which these tasks may be performed in a fluid , iterative process . Patrons would move effortlessly among these activities depending upon the need at hand . Implementation Synchrony consists of a suite of client - server tools implemented mainly in Java together with two third - party applications . MG [ 24 ] , a public domain full - text indexing and retrieval system , is used for the storage and retrieval of the textual content of speeches . Synchrony also utilizes RealNetworks’ video server [ 19 ] for the delivery of streaming video and its implementation of the Java Media Framework [ 10 ] for the rendering of video segments and SMIL presentations . Conclusion Digital libraries must offer more than advanced collection maintenance and retrieval services since patrons often do not solely retrieve library artifacts for their own sake . In scholarly settings , patrons instead seek these artifacts to manipulate and integrate them to produce new artifacts . Traditionally , these activities have occurred mainly in physical media ( predominantly paper ) , and as such , may be classified as paper - based scholarship . Digital 20 libraries however provide new service opportunities as well as an expanded set of informational data types , and when combined , have the ability to promote digital scholarship . Patrons are now able to perform their scholarly work electronically , working entirely with digital media . We thus propose patron - augmented digital libraries as a class of digital libraries that support the digital scholarship of its patrons . A patron - augmented digital library ( PADL ) is one in which librarians and patrons both contribute to the evolution of the library’s holdings . Librarians provide the seed material ( information artifacts ) to form an initial collection and maintain the collection while patrons augment the library with patron - augmented artifacts over the existing collection . To support this new role , a PADL departs from the traditional library model of service provision and supports authoring , structuring and publishing services in addition to search and retrieval . Synchrony was developed to determine the feasibility of the PADL concept . The system provides access to a collection of digitized videos of speeches given by former President George Bush and their corresponding textual transcripts together with artifacts authored by patrons . A pilot study was also conducted on Synchrony and results were encouraging [ 8 ] . In particular , the study found that attitudes toward PADLs in general were positive , provided that appropriate security and quality control ( through publication policies ) mechanisms were employed . However , because this study was performed in a laboratory setting with a small number of subjects , these results cannot be generalized . Consequently , in the next phase of Synchrony’s development , we envision a larger - scale longitudinal study that will require 21 participants to use Synchrony to author and publish presentations for actual homework assignments over a semester . These results will be used to guide future work in the development of Synchrony and patron - augmented digital libraries . References 1 . Adam , N . and Yesha Y . Strategic directions in electronic commerce and digital libraries : towards a digital agora . ACM Computing Surveys , 28 ( 4 ) , 1996 , 818 - 835 . 2 . Belkin , J . , Oddy , R . and Brooks , H . ASK for information retrieval : Part I . Background and theory . Journal of Documentation , 38 ( 2 ) , 1982 , 61 - 71 . 3 . Case , D . The collection and use of information by some American historians : a study of motives and methods . Library Quarterly , 61 ( 1 ) , 1991 , 61 - 82 . 4 . Cousins , S . , Paepcke , A . , Winograd , T . , Bier , E . and Pier , K . The digital library integrated task environment ( DLITE ) . In : Proceedings of the 2nd ACM International Conference on Digital Libraries , Philadelphia , 23 - 26 July 1997 . New York : ACM Press , 1997 , 142 - 151 . 5 . Denning , P . and Rous , B . The ACM electronic publishing plan . Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 4 ) , 1995 , 97 - 103 . 6 . Furnas , G . and Rauch , S . Considerations for information environments and the NaviQue workspace . In : Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference on Digital Libraries , Pittsburgh , 24 - 26 June 1998 . New York : ACM Press , 1998 , 79 - 88 . 7 . Goh , D . and Leggett , J . A spatial approach for the access , manipulation and publication of digital library artifacts . In : Museums and the Web 1999 , New Orleans , 11 - 14 March 1999 . Pittsburgh : Archives & Museum Informatics , 1999 , 103 - 110 . 22 8 . Goh , D . and Leggett , J . Patron augmented digital libraries . In : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Digital Libraries , San Antonio , 2 - 7 June 2000 . New York : ACM Press , 2000 , 153 - 163 . 9 . Hoschka , P . Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language . 1998 . Available via http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / REC - smil / . 10 . Javasoft . JMF Home Page . 2001 . Available via http : / / www . javasoft . com / products / java - media / jmf / index . html . 11 . Levy , D . and Marshall , C . Going digital : a look at assumptions underlying digital libraries . Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 4 ) , 1995 , 77 - 84 . 12 . Marchionini , G . Information Seeking in Electronic Environments . New York : Cambridge University Press , 1995 . 13 . Marshall , C . and Rogers , R . Two years before the mist : experiences with Aquanet . In : Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Hypertext 1992 , Milan , 30 November - 4 December 1992 . New York : ACM Press , 1992 , 53 - 62 . 14 . Marshall , C . and Shipman , F . Searching for the missing link : discovering implicit structure in spatial hypertext . In : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , 14 - 18 November 1993 . New York : ACM Press , 1993 , 217 - 230 . 15 . Marshall , C . , and Shipman , F . Spatial hypertext and the practice of information triage . In : Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Southampton , 6 - 18 April , 1997 . New York : ACM Press , 1997 , 124 - 133 . 16 . Marshall , C . , Shipman , F . and Coombs , J . VIKI : spatial hypertext supporting emergent structure . In : Proceedings of the 1994 ACM European Conference on Hypermedia Technology , Edinburgh , 19 - 23 September 1994 . New York : ACM Press , 1994 , 13 - 23 . 23 17 . Nürnberg , P . , Furuta , R . , Leggett , J . , Marshall , C . and Shipman , F . Digital libraries : issues and architectures . In : Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries , Austin , June 1995 . College Station : Hypermedia Research Laboratory , 1995 , 147 - 153 . 18 . O’Hara , K . , Smith , F . , Newman , W . and Sellen , A . Student readers’ use of library documents : implications for library technologies . In : Conference Proceedings on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’98 , Los Angeles , 18 - 23 April 1998 . New York : ACM Press , 1998 , 233 - 240 . 19 . RealNetworks . RealNetworks . com - The Home of Digital Media . 2001 . Available via http : / / www . realnetworks . com / . 20 . Shipman , F . , Furuta , S . , Brenner , D . , Chung , C . and Hsieh , H . Using paths in the classroom : Experiences and adaptations . In : Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia , Pittsburgh , 20 - 24 June 1998 . New York : ACM Press , 1998 , 267 - 276 . 21 . Shipman , F . and McCall , R . Supporting knowledge - based evolution with incremental formalization . In : Conference Proceedings on Human factors in Computing Systems CHI 94 , Boston , 24 - 28 April 1994 . New York : ACM Press , 1994 , 285 - 291 . 22 . Stone , S . Humanities scholars : information needs and uses . Journal of Documentation , 38 ( 4 ) , 1982 , 292 - 313 . 23 . Wallace , R . , Soloway , E . , Krajcik , J . , Bos , N . , Hoffman , J . , Eccleston , H . , Kiskis , D . , Klann , E . , Peters , G . , Richardson , D . and Ronen O . ARTEMIS : learner - centered design of an information seeking environment for K - 12 education . In : Conference Proceedings on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’98 , Los Angeles , 18 - 23 April 1998 . New York : ACM Press , 1998 , 195 - 202 . 24 24 . Witten , I . , Moffat , A . and Bell , T . Managing Gigabytes . Second Edition . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . , 1999 .