Ž . Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 www . elsevier . nl r locate r econbase The dynamics of innovation : from National Systems and ‘‘Mode 2’’ to a Triple Helix of university – industry – government relations Henry Etzkowitz a , ) , Loet Leydesdorff b , 1 a Science Policy Institute , Social Science Di Õ ision , State Uni Õ ersity of New York at Purchase , 735 Anderson Hill Road , Purchase , NY 10577 - 1400 , USA b Department of Science and Technology Dynamics , Nieuwe Achtergracht 166 , 1018 WV Amsterdam , Netherlands Abstract The Triple Helix of university – industry – government relations is compared with alternative models for explaining the current research system in its social contexts . Communications and negotiations between institutional partners generate an overlay that increasingly reorganizes the underlying arrangements . The institutional layer can be considered as the retention mechanism of a developing system . For example , the national organization of the system of innovation has historically been important in determining competition . Reorganizations across industrial sectors and nation states , however , are induced by Ž . Ž . new technologies biotechnology , ICT . The consequent transformations can be analyzed in terms of neo - evolutionary mechanisms . University research may function increasingly as a locus in the ‘‘laboratory’’ of such knowledge - intensive network transitions . q 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Mode 2 ; Triple helix ; University – industry – government relations ; Innovation 1 . Introduction : From the endless frontier to an endless transition The Triple Helix thesis states that the university can play an enhanced role in innovation in increas - ingly knowledge - based societies . The underlying model is analytically different from the national sys - Ž . Ž tems of innovation NSI approach Lundvall , 1988 , . 1992 ; Nelson , 1993 , which considers the firm as having the leading role in innovation , and from the Ž . ‘‘Triangle’’ model of Sabato 1975 , in which the ´ Ž . state is privileged cf . Sabato and Mackenzi , 1982 . ´ We focus on the network overlay of communications ) Corresponding author . Tel . : q 1 - 914 - 251 - 6600 ; fax : q 1 - 914 - 251 - 6603 ; e - mail : spi @ interport . net 1 E - mail : loet @ chem . uva . nl . and expectations that reshape the institutional ar - rangements among universities , industries , and gov - ernmental agencies . As the role of the military has decreased and academia has risen in the institutional structures of contemporary societies , the network of relationships among academia , industry , and government have also been transformed , displacing the Cold War Ž . ‘‘Power Elite’’ trilateral mode of Mills 1958 with an overlay of reflexive communications that increas - Ž ingly reshape the infrastructure Etzkowitz and Ley - . desdorff , 1997 . Not surprisingly , the effects of these transformations are the subject of an international debate over the appropriate role of the university in technology and knowledge transfer . For example , the Swedish Research 2000 Report recommended the withdrawal of the universities from the envisaged 0048 - 7333 r 00 r $ - see front matter q 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Ž . PII : S0048 - 7333 99 00055 - 4 ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 110 ‘‘third mission’’ of direct contributions to industry Ž . see Benner and Sandstrom , this issue . Instead , the ¨ university should return to research and teaching tasks , as traditionally conceptualized . However , it can be expected that proponents of the third mission from the new universities and regional colleges , which have based their research programmes on its premises , will continue to make their case . Science and technology have become important to regional Ž . developments e . g . , Braczyk et al . , 1998 . Both R & D and higher education can be analyzed also in terms Ž . of markets Dasgupta and David , 1994 . The issues in the Swedish debate are echoed in the critique of academic technology transfer in the Ž USA by several economists e . g . , Rosenberg and . Nelson , 1994 . The argument is that academic tech - nology - transfer mechanisms may create unnecessary transaction costs by encapsulating knowledge in patents that might otherwise flow freely to industry . But would the knowledge be efficiently transferred to industry without the series of mechanisms for identifying and enhancing the applicability of re - search findings ? How are development processes to be carried further , through special grants for this purpose or in new firms formed on campus and in university incubator facilities ? The institutional innovations aim to promote closer relations between faculties and firms . The ‘‘endless frontier’’ of basic research funded as an end in itself , with only long - term practical results expected , is being replaced by an ‘‘endless transition‘‘ model in which basic research is linked to utilization through Ž . a series of intermediate processes Callon , 1998 , often stimulated by government . The linear model either expressed in terms of ‘‘market pull’’ or ‘‘technology push’’ was insuffi - cient to induce transfer of knowledge and technol - ogy . Publication and patenting assume different sys - tems of reference both from each other and with reference to the transformation of knowledge and technology into marketable products . The rules and regulations had to be reshaped and an interface strategy invented in order to integrate market pull and technology push through new organizational Ž mechanisms e . g . , OECD , 1980 ; Rothwell and . Zegveld , 1981 . In the USA , these programs include the Small Ž . Business Innovation Research program SBIR and the Small Business Technology Transfer Program Ž . Ž . STTR , the Advanced Technology Program ATP , the Industry r University Cooperative Research Cen - Ž . ters IUCRC and Engineering Research Centers Ž . ERC of the National Science Foundation , etc . Ž . Etzkowitz et al . , 2000 . In Sweden , the Knowledge Competency Foundation and the Technology Bridge Foundation were established as public venture capi - tal source , utilizing the Wage Earners Fund , origi - nally intended to buy stock in established firms on behalf of the public . The beginnings of a Swedish movement to involve academia more closely in this direction has occasioned a debate similar to the one that took place in the US in the early 1980s . At that time , Harvard University sought to establish a firm jointly with one of its professors , based on his research results . Can academia encompass a third mission of eco - nomic development in addition to research and teaching ? How can each of these various tasks con - tribute to the mission of the university ? The late 19th century witnessed an academic revolution in which research was introduced into the university mission and made more or less compatible with teaching , at least at the graduate level . Many universities in the USA and worldwide are still undergoing this trans - formation of purpose . The increased salience of knowledge and research to economic development has opened up a third mission : the role of the university in economic development . A ‘‘second academic revolution’’ seems under way since World War II , but more visibly since the end of the Cold Ž . War Etzkowitz , forthcoming . In the USA in the 1970s , in various Western European countries during the 1980s , and in Sweden at present , this transition has led to a reevaluation of the mission and role of the university in society . Similar controversies have taken place in Latin America , Asia , and elsewhere in Europe . The Triple Ž Helix series of conferences Amsterdam , 1996 ; Pur - . chase , New York , 1998 ; and Rio de Janeiro , 2000 have provided a venue for the discussion of theoreti - cal and empirical issues by academics and policy Ž . analysts Leydesdorff and Etzkowitz , 1996 , 1998 . Different possible resolutions of the relations among the institutional spheres of university , industry , and government can help to generate alternative strate - gies for economic growth and social transformation . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 111 2 . Triple Helix configurations The evolution of innovation systems , and the current conflict over which path should be taken in university – industry relations , are reflected in the varying institutional arrangements of university – in - dustry – government relations . First , one can distin - guish a specific historical situation which one may wish to label Triple Helix I . In this configuration the nation state encompasses academia and industry and Ž . directs the relations between them Fig . 1 . The strong version of this model could be found in the former Soviet Union and in Eastern European coun - tries under ‘‘existing socialism’’ . Weaker versions were formulated in the policies of many Latin Amer - ican countries and to some extent in European coun - tries such as Norway . Ž . A second policy model Fig . 2 consists of sepa - rate institutional spheres with strong borders dividing them and highly circumscribed relations among the spheres , exemplified in Sweden by the noted Re - search 2000 Report and in the US in opposition to the various reports of the Government – University – Ž . Industry Research Roundtable GUIRR of the Na - Ž tional Research Council MacLane , 1996 ; cf . GUIRR , . 1998 . Finally , Triple Helix III is generating a knowledge infrastructure in terms of overlapping Fig . 1 . An etatistic model of university – industry – government relations . Fig . 2 . A ‘‘laissez - faire’’ model of university – industry – govern - ment relations . institutional spheres , with each taking the role of the other and with hybrid organizations emerging at the Ž . interfaces Fig . 3 . The differences between the latter two versions of the Triple Helix arrangements currently generate normative interest . Triple Helix I is largely viewed Fig . 3 . The Triple Helix Model of University – Industry – Govern - ment Relations . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 112 as a failed developmental model . With too little room for ‘‘bottom up’’ initiatives , innovation was discouraged rather than encouraged . Triple Helix II entails a laissez - faire policy , nowadays also advo - cated as shock therapy to reduce the role of the state in Triple Helix I . In one form or another , most countries and re - gions are presently trying to attain some form of Triple Helix III . The common objective is to realize an innovative environment consisting of university spin - off firms , tri - lateral initiatives for knowledge - based economic development , and strategic alliances Ž among firms large and small , operating in different . areas , and with different levels of technology , gov - ernment laboratories , and academic research groups . These arrangements are often encouraged , but not controlled , by government , whether through new ‘‘rules of the game , ’’ direct or indirect financial assistance , or through the Bayh – Dole Act in the USA or new actors such as the abovementioned foundations to promote innovation in Sweden . 3 . The Triple Helix of innovation The Triple Helix as an analytical model adds to the description of the variety of institutional arrange - ments and policy models an explanation of their dynamics . What are the units of operation that inter - act when a system of innovation is formed ? How can such a system be specified ? In our opinion , typifications in terms of ‘‘national Ž systems of innovation’’ Lundvall , 1988 ; Nelson , . Ž 1993 ; ‘‘research systems in transition’’ Cozzens et . Ž al . , 1990 ; Ziman , 1994 , Mode 2 Gibbons et al . , . Ž 1994 or ‘‘the post modern research system’’ Rip . and Van der Meulen , 1996 are indicative of flux , reorganization , and the enhanced role of knowledge in the economy and society . In order to explain these observable reorganizations in university – industry – government relations , one needs to transform the sociological theories of institutional retention , re - combinatorial innovation , and reflexive controls . Each theory can be expected to appreciate a different Ž . subdynamic Leydesdorff , 1997 . Ž In contrast to a double helix or a coevolution . between two dynamics , a Triple Helix is not ex - pected to be stable . The biological metaphor cannot work because of the difference between cultural and biological evolutions . Biological evolution theory as - sumes variation as a driver and selection to be naturally given . Cultural evolution , however , is driven by individuals and groups who make con - scious decisions as well as the appearance of unin - tended consequences . A Triple Helix in which each strand may relate to the other two can be expected to develop an emerging overlay of communications , Ž networks , and organizations among the helices Fig . . 4 . The sources of innovation in a Triple Helix con - figuration are no longer synchronized a priori . They do not fit together in a pregiven order , but they generate puzzles for participants , analysts , and poli - cymakers to solve . This network of relations gener - ates a reflexive subdynamics of intentions , strategies , and projects that adds surplus value by reorganizing and harmonizing continuously the underlying infras - Fig . 4 . The overlay of communications and expectations at the network level guides the reconstruction of institutional arrange - ments . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 113 tructure in order to achieve at least an approximation of the goals . The issue of how much we are in control or non - control of these dynamics specifies a research program on innovation . Innovation systems , and the relationships among them , are apparent at the organizational , local , re - gional , national , and multinational levels . The inter - acting subdynamics , that is , specific operations like markets and technological innovations , are continu - ously reconstructed like commerce on the Internet , yet differently at different levels . The subdynamics and the levels are also reflexively reconstructed through discussions and negotiation in the Triple Helix . What is considered as ‘‘industry’’ , what as ‘‘market’’ cannot be taken for granted and should not be reified . Each ‘‘system’’ is defined and can be redefined as the research project is designed . For example , national systems of innovation can be more or less systemic . The extent of systemness Ž remains an empirical question Leydesdorff and . Ž . Oomes , 1999 . The dynamic ‘‘system s of innova - tion’’ may consist of increasingly complex collabora - tions across national borders and among researchers and users of research from various institutional Ž . spheres Godin and Gingras , this issue . There may be different dynamics among regions . The systems of reference have to be specified analytically , that is , as hypotheses . The Triple Helix hypothesis is that systems can be expected to remain in transition . The observations provide an opportunity to update the analytical expectations . 4 . An endless transition The infrastructure of knowledge - intensive economies implies an endless transition . Marx’s great Ž vision that ‘‘all that is solid , melts into air’’ Ber - . man , 1982 underestimated the importance of seem - ingly volatile communications and interactions in Ž . recoding the complex network system . Particularly , when knowledge is increasingly utilized as a re - source for the production and distribution system , reconstruction may come to prevail as a mode of Ž ‘‘creative destruction’’ Schumpeter , 1939 , 1966 ; . Luhmann , 1984 . Can the reconstructing forces be specified ? One mode of specification is provided by evolutionary economics in which the three functional mechanisms are : technological innovation provides the variation , markets are the prevailing selectors , and the institu - tional structures provide the system with retention Ž . and reflexive control Nelson , 1994 . In advanced and pluriform societies , the mechanisms of institu - tional control are again differentiated into public and private domains . Thus , a complex system is devel - oped that is continuously integrated and differenti - ated , both locally and globally . Innovation can be defined at different levels and from different perspectives within this complex dy - namics . For example , evolutionary economists have argued that one should consider firms as the units of analysis , since they carry the innovations and they Ž have to compete in markets Nelson and Winter , . 1982 ; cf . Andersen , 1994 . From a policy perspec - tive , one may wish to define national systems of innovation as a relevant frame of reference for gov - ernment interventions . Others have argued in favour of networks as more abstract units of analysis : the semi - autonomous dynamics of the networks may Ž exhibit lock - ins , segmentation , etc . e . g . , David and . Foray , 1994 . Furthermore , the evolving networks may change in terms of relevant boundaries while Ž . developing Maturana , 1978 . In our opinion , these various perspectives open windows of appreciation on the dynamic and com - plex processes of innovation , but from specific an - gles . The complex dynamics is composed of subdy - namics like market forces , political power , institu - tional control , social movements , technological tra - jectories and regimes . The operations can be ex - pected to be nested and interacting . Integration , for example , within a corporation or within a nation state , cannot be taken for granted . Technological innovation may also require the reshaping of an Ž organization or a community Freeman and Perez , . 1988 . But the system is not deterministic : in some phases intentional actions may be more successful in shaping the direction of technological change than in Ž . others Hughes , 1983 . The dynamics are nonlinear while both the inter - action terms and the recursive terms have to be declared . First , there are ongoing transformations within each of the helices . These reconstructions can be considered as a level of continuous innovations under pressure of changing environments . When two ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 114 helices are increasingly shaping each other mutually , coevolution may lead to a stabilization along a tra - jectory . If more than a single interface is stabilized , the formation of a globalized regime can be ex - pected . At each level , cycles are generated which guide the phasing of the developments . The higher - Ž . order transformations longer - term are induced by the lower - order ones , but the latter can seriously be disturbed by events at a next - order system’s level Ž . Schumpeter , 1939 ; Kampmann et al . , 1994 . Although this model is abstract , it enables us to specify the various windows of theoretical apprecia - Ž tion in terms of their constitutive subdynamics e . g . , . Leydesdorff and Van den Besselaar , 1997 . The different subdynamics can be expected to select upon each other asymmetrically , as in processes of negoti - ation , by using their specific codes . For example , the markets and networks select upon technological fea - sibilities , whereas the options for technological de - velopments can also be specified in terms of market forces . Governments can intervene by helping create a new market or otherwise changing the rules of the game . When the selections ‘‘lock - in’’ upon each other , next - order systems may become relevant . For exam - ple , airplane development at the level of firms gener - ates trajectories at the level of the industry in coevo - lutions between selected technologies and markets Ž . e . g . , Nelson , 1994 ; cf . McKelvey , 1996 . Nowa - days , the development of a new technological trajec - tory invokes the support of national governments and Ž . even international levels like the EU , using increas - Ž ingly a Triple Helix regime Frenken and Leydes - . dorff , forthcoming . We have organized this theme issue about the Triple Helix of university – industry – government re - lations in terms of three such interlocking dynamics : institutional transformations , evolutionary mecha - nisms , and the new position of the university . This approach allows us to pursue the analysis at the network level and then to compare among units of analysis . For example , both industries and govern - ments are entrained in institutional transformations , while the institutional transformations themselves change under the pressure of information and com - Ž . munication technologies ICT or government poli - cies . Before explaining the organization of the theme issue in detail , however , we wish to turn briefly to the analytical position of the Triple Helix model in relation to other nonlinear models of innovation , like Mode 2 and national systems of innovation . 5 . Nonlinear models of innovation As noted , nonlinear models of innovation extend upon linear models by taking interactive and recur - sive terms into account . These nonlinear terms can be expected to change the causal relations between input and output . The production rules in the systems under study , for example , can be expected to change with the further development of the input r output Ž . relations e . g . , because of economies of scale . Thus , the unit of operation may be transformed , as is typical when a pilot plant in the chemical industry is scaled up to a production facility . By changing the unit of analysis or the unit of operation at the reflexive level , one obtains a differ - ent perspective on the system under study . But the system itself is also evolving . In terms of methodolo - gies , this challenges our conceptual apparatus , since one has to be able to distinguish whether the variable has changed or merely the value of the variable . The analysis contains a snapshot , while the reality pro - vides a moving picture . One needs metaphors to reduce the complexity for the discursive understand - ing . Geometrical metaphors can be stabilized by higher - order codifications as in the case of paradigms . Ž The understanding in terms of fluxes that is , how the variables as well as the value may change over . time , however , calls for the use of algorithmic simulations . The observables can then be considered as special cases which inform the expectations Ž . Leydesdorff , 1995 . Innovation , in particular , can be defined only in Ž . terms of an operation . Both the innovator s and the Ž . innovated system s are expected to be changed by the innovation . Furthermore , one is able to be both a participant and an observer , and one is also able to change perspectives . In the analysis , however , the various roles are distinguished although they can sometimes be fused in ‘‘real life’’ events . Langton Ž . 1989 proposed to distinguish between the ‘‘pheno - typical’’ level of the observables and the ‘‘genotypi - cal’’ level of analytical theorizing . The ‘‘pheno - types’’ remain to be explained and the various expla - ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 115 nations compete in terms of their clarity and useful - ness for updating the expectations . Confusion , how - ever , is difficult to avoid given the pressure to jump to normative conclusions , while different perspec - tives are continuously competing , both normatively and analytically . Let us first focus on the problem of the unit of analysis and the unit of operation . In addition to Ž . extending the linear input r output models of neo - classical and business economics , evolutionary economists also changed the unit of analysis . Whereas neoclassical economics focused on markets as networks in terms of input r output relations among Ž . individual rational agents , evolutionary economists Ž have tended to focus on firms as the specific and . bounded carriers of an innovation process . Both the unit of analysis and the unit of operation were Ž . changed Andersen , 1994 ; cf . Alchian , 1950 . Ž . Lundvall 1988 , at p . 357 noted that the interac - tive terms between demand and supply in user – pro - ducer relations assume a system of reference in addition to the market . The classical dispute in inno - vation theory had , in his opinion , referred to the role of demand and supply , that is , market forces , in determining the rate and direction of the process of Ž innovation cf . Mowery and Rosenberg , 1979 ; Free - . man , 1982 , p . 211 . If , however , the dynamics of Ž . innovation e . g . , product competition are expected Ž to be different from the dynamics of the market e . g . , . price competition , an alternative system of reference for the selection should also be specified . For this purpose , Lundvall proposed ‘‘to take the national system of production as a starting point when defin - Ž . ing a system of innovation’’ p . 362 . Lundvall added that the national system of pro - duction should not be considered as a closed system : ‘‘the specific degree and form of openness deter - mines the dynamics of each national system of pro - duction’’ . In our opinion , as a first step , innovation systems should be considered as the dynamics of change in systems of both production and distribu - tion . From this perspective , national systems com - pete in terms of the adaptability of their knowledge infrastructure . How are competencies distributed for solving ‘‘the production puzzle’’ which is generated by uneven technological developments across sectors Ž . Nelson , 1982 ; Nelson and Winter , 1975 ? The in - frastructure conditions the processes of innovation which are possible within and among the sectors . In particular , the distribution of relevant actors contains an heuristic potential which can be made reflexive by a strategic analysis of specific strengths and Ž . weaknesses Pavitt , 1984 . The solution of the production puzzle typically brings government into the picture shifting the dy - namics from a double to a triple helix . The conse - quent processes of negotiation are both complex and Ž . dynamic : one expects that the institutional actors will be reproduced and changed by the interactions . Trilateral networks and hybrid organizations are cre - ated for resolving social and economic crises . The actors from the different spheres negotiate and define new projects , such as the invention of the venture capital firm in New England in the early postwar era Ž . Etzkowitz , forthcoming . Thus , a Triple Helix dy - namics of university – industry – government relations is generated endogeneously . Ž . Gibbons et al . 1994 argued that this ‘‘new mode of the production of scientific knowledge’’ has be - come manifest . But : how are these dynamics in the network arrangements between industries , govern - ments , and academia a consequence of the user – pro - Ž . ducer interactions foregrounded by Lundvall 1988 ? Are national systems still a relevant unit of analysis ? Ž Since the new mode of knowledge production Mode . 2 is characterized as an outcome , it should , in our opinion , be considered as an emerging system . The emerging system rests like a hyper - network on the Ž networks on which it builds such as the disciplines , . the industries , and the national governments , but the knowledge - economy transforms ‘‘the ship while a Ž storm is raging on the open sea’’ Neurath et al . , . 1929 . Science has always been organized through net - works , and to pursue practical as well as theoretical interests . Centuries before ‘‘Mersenne’’ was trans - mogrified into an Internet site , he was an individual , who by visits and letters , knitted the European scien - tific community together . The Academies of Science played a similar role in local and national contexts from the 16th century . The practical impetus to scientific discovery is Ž . long - standing . The dissertation of Merton 1938 reported that between 40 % and 60 % of discoveries in the 17th century could be classified as having their origins in trying to solve problems in naviga - ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 116 tion , mining , etc . Conversely , solution of practical problems through scientific means has been an im - portant factor in scientific development , whether in German pharmaceutical science in the 17th century Ž . Gustin , 1975 or in the British - sponsored competi - Ž tion to provide a secure basis for navigation Sobel , . 1995 . The so - called Mode 2 is not new ; it is the original format of science before its academic institutional - ization in the 19th century . Another question to be answered is why Mode 1 has arisen after Mode 2 : the original organizational and institutional basis of science , consisting of networks and invisible colleges Ž . cf . Weingart , 1997 ; Godin , 1998 . Where have these ideas , of the scientist as the isolated individual and of science separated from the interests of society , come from ? Mode 2 represents the material base of science , how it actually operates . Mode 1 is a con - struct , built upon that base in order to justify auton - omy for science , especially in an earlier era when it was still a fragile institution and needed all the help it could get . In the USA , during the late 19th century , large fortunes were given to found new universities , and expand old ones . There were grave concerns among many academics that the industrialists making these gifts would try to directly influence the universities , by claiming rights to hire and fire professors as well as well as to decide what topics were acceptable for Ž . research and instruction Storr , 1953 . To carve out an independent space for science , beyond the control of economic interests , a physicist , Henry Rowland , propounded the doctrine that if anyone with external interests tried to intervene , it would harm the con - duct of science . As president of the American Asso - ciation for the Advancement of Science , he promoted the ideology of pure research in the late 19th cen - tury . Of course , at the same time as liberal arts universities oriented toward pure research were be - ing founded , land grant universities , including MIT , pursued more practical research strategies . These two contrasting academic modes existed in parallel for many years . Decades hence , Merton posited the normative structure of science in 1942 and strengthened the ideology of ‘‘pure science . ’’ His emphasis on uni - versalism and skepticism was a response to a particu - lar historical situation , the need to defend science from corruption by the Nazi doctrine of a racial basis for science and from Lysenko’s attack on genetics in the Soviet Union . Merton’s formulation of a set of norms to protect the free space of science was accepted as the basis for an empirical sociology of science for many years . The third element in establishing the ideology of pure science was , of course , the Bush Report of 1945 . The huge success of science in supplying practical results during World War II in one sense supplied its own legitimation for science . But with the end of the war at hand and wanting to insure that science was funded in peacetime , a rationale was needed in 1944 when Bush persuaded President Roo - sevelt to write a letter commissioning the report Ž . Bush , 1980 . In the first draft of his report , Bush proposed to follow the then current British method of funding science at universities . It would be distributed on a per capita basis according to the number of students at each school . In the contemporary British system of a small number of universities , the funds automati - cally went to an elite . However , if that model had been followed in the US , even in the early postwar era , the flow of funds would have taken a different course . The funding would not only have flowed primarily to a bicoastal academic elite but would have been much more broadly distributed across the academic spectrum , especially to the large state uni - versities in the Midwest . In the time between the draft and the final report , the mechanism for distribution of government funds to academic research was revised and ‘‘peer review’’ was introduced . Adapted from foundation practices in the 1920s and 1930s , it could be expected that ‘‘the peers’’ , the leading scientists who would most surely be on those committees , would distribute the funds primarily to a scientific elite . The status sys - tem of U . S . universities that had been in place from the 1920s was reinforced . This model of ‘‘best science’’ is no longer accept - able to many as the sole basis for distribution of public research funds . Congresspersons who repre - sent regions with universities that are not significant recipients of research funds have disregarded peer review and distributed research funds by direct ap - propriation , much as roads and bridges are often sited through ‘‘log rolling’’ and ‘‘pork barrel’’ pro - ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 117 cesses . Nevertheless , these politically directed funds support also serious scientific research and instru - mentation projects . Even when received by schools with little or no previous research experience , these ‘‘one - time funds’’ are typically used to rapidly build up competencies in order to compete within the peer - review system . Indeed , when a leading school , Columbia Univer - sity , needed to renew the infrastructure of its chem - istry department , it contracted with the same lobby - ing firm in Washington , DC as less well - known schools . Through public relations advice , Columbia relabeled its chemistry department ‘‘The National Center for Excellence in Chemistry’’ . A special fed - eral appropriation was made and the research facili - ties were renovated and expanded . To hold its fac - ulty , the university could not afford to wait for the slower route of peer review , and likely smaller amounts of funding . Increasing competition for research funds among new and old actors has caused an incipient break - down of ‘‘peer review’’ , a system that could best adjudicate within a moderate level of competition . As competition for research funds continues to ex - pand , how should the strain be adjusted ? Some propose shrinking the research system ; others sug - gest linking science to new sources of legitimation such as regional development . 6 . The future legitimation of science It is nowadays apparent that the development of science provides much of the basis for future indus - trial development . These connections , however , have been present from the creation of science as an organized activity in the 17th century . Marx pointed them out again in the mid - 19th century in connection with the development of chemical industry in Ger - many . At the time , he developed a thesis of the growth of science - based industry on the basis of a single empirical example : Perkins researches on dyestuffs in the UK leading to the development of an industry in Germany . The potential of science to contribute to economic development has become a source of regional and international competition at the turn of the millen - nium . Until recently , the location of research was of little concern . The relationship between the site where knowledge is produced and its eventual utilization was not seen to be tightly linked , even as a first mover advantage . This view has changed dramati - cally in recent years , as has the notion that high - tech conurbations , like Route 128 and Silicon Valley , are unique instances that cannot be replicated . The more recent emergence of Austin , TX , for example , is based in part on the expansion of research at the University of Texas , aided by state as well as indus - try and federal funds . Less research - intensive regions are by now well aware that science , applied to local resources , is the basis of much of their future potential for economic and social development . In the USA , it is no longer acceptable for research funds to primarily go to the east and west coasts with a few places in between in the Midwest . The reason why funding is awarded on bases other than the peer review system , is that all regions want a share of research funding . The classic legitimation for scientific research as a contribution to culture still holds and military and health objectives also remain a strong stimulus to research funding . Nevertheless , the future legitima - tion for scientific research , which will keep funding at a high level , is that it is increasingly the source of new lines of economic development . Newly created disciplines are often the basis for these heightened expectations . Such disciplines do not arise only from the subdivision of new disci - Ž plines from old ones , as in the 19th century Ben . David and Collins , 1966 . New disciplines have arisen , more recently , through syntheses of practical and theoretical interests . For example , computer sci - ence grew out of elements of older disciplines such as electrical engineering , psychology , philosophy , and a machine . Materials science and other fields such as nanotechnology that are on every nation’s critical technology list were similarly created . The university can be expected to remain the core institution of the knowledge sector as long as it Ž retains its original educational mission Etzkowitz , . Webster , Gebhardt , and Terra , this issue . Teaching is the university’s comparative advantage , especially when linked to research and economic development . Students are also potential inventors . They represent a dynamic flow - through of ‘‘human capital’’ in aca - demic research groups , as opposed to more static ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 118 industrial laboratories and research institutes . Al - though they are sometimes considered a necessary distraction , the turnover of students insures the pri - macy of the university as a source of innovation . The university may be compared to other recently proposed contenders for knowledge leadership , such as the consulting firm . A consulting company draws together widely dispersed personnel for individual projects and then disperses them again after a pro - ject , solving a client’s particular problem , is com - pleted . Such firms lack the organizational ability to pursue a cumulative research program as a matter of course . The university’s unique comparative advan - tages is that it combines continuity with change , organizational and research memory with new per - sons and new ideas , through the passage of student generations . When there is a break in the genera - tions , typically caused by a loss of research funding , one academic research group disappears and can be replaced by another . Of course , as firms organize increasingly higher Ž level training programs e . g . , Applied Global Uni - versity at the Applied Materials Devices , a semicon - . ductor equipment manufacturer in Silicon Valley they might in the future also , individually or jointly , attempt to give out degrees . Companies often draw upon personnel in their research units , as well as external consultants , to do some of the teaching in their corporate universities . Nevertheless , with a few notable exceptions , such as the RAND , they have not yet systematically drawn together research and train - ing into a single framework . However , as the need for life - long learning increases , a university tied to the workplace becomes more salient . 7 . Implications of the Triple Helix model The Triple Helix denotes not only the relationship of university , industry and government , but also internal transformation within each of these spheres . The university has been transformed from a teaching institution into one which combines teaching with research , a revolution that is still ongoing , not only in the USA , but in many other countries . There is a tension between the two activities but nevertheless they coexist in a more or less compatible relationship with each other because it has been found to be both more productive and cost effective to combine the two functions . The Triple Helix overlay provides a model at the level of social structure for the explanation of Mode 2 as an historically emerging structure for the pro - duction of scientific knowledge , and its relation to Mode 1 . First , the arrangements between industry and government no longer need to be conceptualized as exclusively between national governments and specific industrial sectors . Strategic alliances cut across traditional sector divides ; governments can act at national , regional , or increasingly also at interna - tional levels . Corporations adopt ‘‘global’’ postures either within a formal corporate structure or by alliance . Trade blocks like the EU , NAFTA , and Mercosul provide new options for breaking ‘‘lock - ins’’ , without the sacrifice of competitive advantages from previous constellations . For example , the Air - bus can be considered as an interactive opportunity Ž for recombination at the supra - national level Fren - . ken , this issue . Second , the driving force of the interactions can be specified as the expectation of profits . ‘‘Profit’’ may mean different things to the various actors involved . A leading edge consumer , for example , provides firms and engineers with opportunities to perceive ‘‘reverse salients’’ in current product lines and software . Thus , opportunities for improvements and puzzle - solving trajectories can be defined . Note that analytically the drivers are no longer conceptual - ized as ex ante causes , but in terms of expectations that can be evaluated only ex post . From the evolu - Ž . tionary perspective , selection ex post is structure Ž determined , while variation may be random Arthur , . 1988 ; Leydesdorff and Van den Besselaar , 1998 . Third , the foundation of the model in terms of expectations leaves room for uncertainties and chance processes . The institutional carriers are expected to be reproduced as far as they have been functional hitherto , but the negotiations can be expected to lead to experiments which may thereafter also be institu - tionalized . Thus , a stage model of innovation can be specified . The stages of this model do not need to corre - Ž . spond with product life cycle theory . Barras 1990 , for example , noted that in ICT ‘‘a reverse product life’’ cycle seems to be dominant . Bruckner et al . Ž . 1994 proposed niche - creation as the mechanism of ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 119 potential lock - out in the case of competing technolo - gies . A successful innovation changes the landscape , that is , the opportunity structure for the institutional actors involved . Structural changes in turn are ex - pected to change the dynamics . Fourth , the expansion of the higher - education and academic - research sector has provided society with a realm in which different representations can be enter - tained and recombined in a systematic manner . Ž . Kaghan and Barnett 1997 have used in this context the term ‘‘desktop innovation’’ as different from the Ž . laboratory model cf . Etzkowitz , 1999 . Knowledge - intensive economies can no longer be based on simple measures of profit maximization : utility func - tions have to be matched with opportunity structures . Over time , opportunity structures are recursively driven by the contingencies of prevailing and possi - ble technologies . A laboratory of knowledge - inten - sive developments is socially available and can be Ž . improved upon Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff , 1995 . As this helix operates , the human capital factor is further developed along the learning curves and as an antidote to the risk of technological unemploy - Ž . ment Pasinetti , 1981 . Fifth , the model also explains why the tensions need not to be resolved . A resolution would hinder the dynamics of a system which lives from the perturbations and interactions among its subsystems . Thus , the subsystems are expected to be reproduced . When one opens the black - box one finds Mode 1 within Mode 2 , and Mode 2 within Mode 1 . The system is neither integrated nor completely differen - tiated , but it performs on the edges of fractional differentiations and local integrations . Using this model , one can begin to understand why the global regime exhibits itself in progressive instances , while the local instances inform us about global develop - ments in terms of the exceptions which are replicated and built upon . Case materials enable us to specify the negative selection mechanisms reflexively . Selection mecha - nisms , however , remain constructs . Over time , the inference can be corroborated . At this end , the func - tion of reflexive inferencing based on available and new theories moves the system forward by drawing attention to possibilities for change . Sixth , the crucial question of the exchange media Ž — economic expectations in terms of profit and . growth , theoretical expectations , assessment of what can be realized given institutional and geographic constraints — have to be related and converted into one another . The helices communicate recursively over time in terms of each one’s own code . Reflex - ively , they can also take the role of each other , to a certain extent . While the discourses are able to inter - act at the interfaces , the frequency of the external Ž . interaction is at least initially lower than the fre - quency within each helix . Over time and with the availability of ICT , this relation is changing . The balance between spatial and virtual relations is contingent upon the availability of the exchange media and their codifications . Codified media pro - vide the system with opportunities to change the Ž . meaning of a communication given another context Ž while maintaining its substance Cowan and Foray , . 1997 . Despite the ‘‘virtuality’’ of the overlay , this system is not ‘‘on the fly’’ : it is grounded in a Ž . culture which it has to reproduce Giddens , 1984 . The retention mechanism is no longer given , but ‘‘on the move’’ : it is reconstructed as the system is reconstructed , that is , as one of its subdynamics . As the technological culture provides options for recombination , the boundaries of communities can be reconstituted . The price may be felt as a loss of traditional identities or alienation , or as a concern with the sustainability of the reconstruction , but the reverse of ‘‘creative destruction’’ is the option of increasing development . The new mode of knowl - edge production generates an endless transition that continuously redefines the borders of the endless frontier . 8 . The organization of the theme issue As noted above , this issue is organized in three Ž . main parts , addressing 1 institutional transforma - Ž . Ž . tion , 2 evolutionary mechanisms , and 3 the sec - ond academic revolution . Each part contains five contributions . Ž . In Part One Institutional Transformations , Michael Nowak and Charles Grantham open the discussion with a paper about the impact of the Internet on incubation as an institutional mechanism for technological innovation . The increased complex - ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 120 ity of the process induces reflexivity about the choices to be made , and human capital becomes increasingly crucial for carrying the transformations . The failure of the ‘‘opening to the market’’ as an answer to the state - dominated economies in the for - mer Soviet Union , because of the neglect of the knowledge - intensive dimension , is discussed by test - ing three models against each other in Judith Sedaitis’ paper entitled ‘‘Technology Transfer in Transitional Economies : Comparing Market , State , and Organiza - tional Frameworks’’ . The author concludes that pro - cesses of transfer in these cases can be understood at the intermediate network level . Norma Morris , in ‘‘Vial Bodies : Conflicting In - terests in the Move to New Institutional Relation - ships in Biological Medicines Research and Regula - tion’’ , discusses normative issues that arise when the borders are no longer defined institutionally and governmentally . The case of the EU places the role of safety regulation at national and transnational levels on the agenda . In a paper entitled ‘‘The Evolution of Rules for Access to Megascience Re - search Environments Viewed from Canadian Experi - ence’’ , Cooper Langford and Martha Whitney Lang - ford document what it means for the organization of Canadian science that government and industry rela - tions are deeply involved in this enterprise . Are the Ž . Kudos - norms of Merton 1942 increasingly being Ž . replaced by a new set of norms Ziman , 1994 ? If so , what are the expected effects on reward systems and funding ? In a contribution to the latter question , Shin - Ichi Kobayashi argues that a third form of Ž funding can be distinguished nowadays in addition . to peer recognition and institutional allocation . The author develops the new format using the metaphor of the audition system for the performing arts . Thus , not only the institutions themselves are transformed , but also their mechanisms of transfor - mation . These evolutionary mechanisms are central to the second part of the theme issue . The contribu - Ž tion from the Aveiro team Eduardo Anselmo de Castro , Carlos Jose Rodrigues , Carlos Esteves , and ´ . Artur da Rosa Pires returns to the impact of ICT on changing the stage . How can institutional arrange - ments be shaped to match the options which telemat - ics provide ? How can a retention mechanism be organized as a niche or a habitat for knowledge - in - tensive developments ? While the Portuguese team focuses on the re - gional level , Susanne Giesecke takes the analysis to the level of comparing national governments in her contribution entitled ‘‘The Contrasting Roles of Government in the Development of the Biotechnol - ogy Industries in the US and Germany’’ . She notes the counter - effective policies of German govern - ments which have operated on the basis of assump - tions about previous developments . Policies have to be updated in terms of bottom - up processes and thus come to be understood in terms of reflexive feed - Ž . backs instead of control . Rosalba Casas , Rebeca de Gortari , and Ma . Josefa Santos from Mexico combine the issues of regional developments and differences between the technolo - gies involved by cross - tabling them for the case of Mexico . These authors focus on what they call ‘‘the building of knowledge spaces’’ . How is the interrela - tionship between knowledge - intensity , industrial ac - tivity , and institutional control shaped in terms of interhuman and interinstitutional relations ? What is the function of shared culture , values , and trust ? Is the region a habitat for the technology , or the tech - nology a precondition for restructuring the region ? In a contribution entitled ‘‘The Triple Helix : An Evolutionary Model of Innovations’’ , Loet Leydes - dorff uses simulations to show how a lock - in can be enhanced using a coevolution like the one between regions and technologies . A third source of random variation , however , may intervene , reversing the or - der in a later stage and leading to more complex Ž arrangements of market segmentation that is , differ - . ent suboptima . A mechanism for lock - out can also be specified . Koen Frenken takes the complexity approach one step further by confronting it with empirical data in the case of the aircraft industry . Using Kauffman’s Ž . 1993 model of ‘‘rugged fitness landscapes’’ he shows the working of a Triple Helix in different Ž phases of this industry cf . Frenken and Leydesdorff , . forthcoming . The model can be extended to account for the additional degree of freedom in international collaborations to develop new aircraft . The failure of Fokker Aircraft , for example , can be explained using these concepts : one cannot bet on two horses at the same time , since the markets are fiercely competi - tive , technological infrastructures are expensive , and learning curves are steep . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 121 In the third part of the issue , we turn to the second academic revolution . In their contribution entitled ‘‘The Place of Universities in the System of Knowledge Production’’ , Benoıt Godin and Yves ˆ Gingras argue against the thesis that the university would have lost its salient position in the university – industry – government relations of Mode 2 . Using scientometric data , they show that collabo - ration with academic teams is central to the opera - tions of the networks which transform this knowl - edge infrastructure . Although based on Canadian data , the argument is made that this holds true also for other OECD countries . From another world region , Judith Sutz reports about university – industry – government relations in Latin America . These young democracies , on one hand , wish to free themselves from the limitation of the so - called ‘‘import substitution’’ regime by open - ing up to the market . On the other hand , the connec - tions are then established through the world system , and regional infrastructures tend to remain underde - veloped . The issue will be central to the Third Triple Helix Conference to be held in Rio de Janeiro , 26 – 29 April 2000 . How can social , economic , and scientific developments be networked at the regional level ? What does niche management mean in an open system’s environment ? In a contribution entitled ‘‘Institutionalizing the Triple Helix : Research Funding and Norms in the Academic System’’ , Mats Benner and Ulf Sandstrom ¨ take a neo - institutional approach to the transforma - tion of the university system in Europe . How does Ž . the system react resist and embody institutional transformation and neo - evolutionary pressures ? In a further article , Eric Campbell and his colleagues raise the question of how this affects research prac - tices in terms of ‘‘Data Withholding in Academic Medicine’’ . Can characteristics of faculty denied ac - cess to research results and biomaterials be distin - guished ? In a final article , Henry Etzkowitz , Andrew Web - ster , Christiane Gebhardt , and Branca Terra substan - tiate their claim that the transformation of the univer - sity system is a worldwide phenomenon . In addition to research and higher eduction , the university nowa - days has a third role in regional and economic development because of the changing nature of both knowledge production and economic production . While a ‘‘hands off’’ may have been functional to previous configurations , the exigencies of today de - mand a more intensive interrelationship . As noted , a Triple Helix arrangement that tends to reorganize the knowledge infrastructure in terms of possible over - lays , can be expected to be generated endogenously . Acknowledgements We acknowledge support from the US National Science Foundation , the European Commission DG XII , the Fundac ¸ ao Coppetec in Brazil , the CNRS in ˜ France , the Netherlands Graduate School for Sci - ence , Technology and Modern Culture WTMC , the Center for Business and Policy Studies in Stock - holm , the State University of New York SUNY , and our respective departments . We thank Alexander Et - zkowitz for assistance with graphics . References Alchian , A . A . , 1950 . Uncertainty , evolution , and economic the - ory . Journal of Political Economy 58 , 211 – 222 . Andersen , E . S . , 1994 . Evolutionary Economics : Post - Schumpe - terian Contributions . Pinter , London . Arthur , W . B . , 1988 . Competing technologies . In : Dosi , G . , Free - Ž . man , C . , Nelson , R . , Silverberg , G . , Soete , L . Eds . , Techni - cal Change and Economic Theory . Pinter , London , pp . 590 – 607 . Barras , R . , 1990 . Interactive innovation in financial and business services : the vanguard of the service revolution . Research Policy 19 , 215 – 237 . Ben David , J . , Collins , R . , 1966 . Social factors in the origins of new science : the case of psychology . American Sociological Review 3 , 45 – 85 . Benner , M . , Sandstrom , U . , this issue . Institutionalizing the Triple ¨ Helix : research funding and norms in the academic system , Research Policy . Berman , M . , 1982 . All that is Solid Melts into Air : The Experi - ence of Modernity . Simon and Schuster , New York . Ž . Braczyk , H . - J . , Cooke , P . , Heidenreich , M . Eds . , Regional Inno - vation Systems . University College London Press , London . Bruckner , E . , Ebeling , W . , Jimenez Montano , M . A . , Scharnhorst , ´ ˜ A . , 1994 . Hyperselection and innovation described by a stochastic model of technological evolution . In : Leydesdorff , Ž . L . , Van den Besselaar , P . Eds . , Evolutionary Economics and Chaos Theory : New Directions in Technology Studies . Pinter , London , pp . 79 – 90 . Bush , V . , 1980 . The Endless Frontier : A Report to the President , Ž . reprinted by Arno Press , New York 1945 . Callon , M . , 1998 . An essay on framing and overflowing : eco - nomic externalities revisited by sociology . In : Callon , M . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 122 Ž . Ed . , The Laws of the Market . Macmillan , London , pp . 244 – 269 . Cowan , R . , Foray , D . , 1997 . The Economics of Codification and the Diffusion of Knowledge . MERIT , Maastricht . Ž . Cozzens , S . , Healey , P . , Rip , A . , Ziman , J . Eds . , 1990 . The Research System in Transition . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston . Dasgupta , P . , David , P . , 1994 . Towards a new economics of science . Research Policy 23 , 487 – 522 . David , P . A . , Foray , D . , 1994 . Dynamics of competitive technol - ogy diffusion through local network structures : the case of EDI document standards . In : Leydesdorff , L . , Van den Besse - Ž . laar P . Eds . , Evolutionary Economics and Chaos Theory : New Directions in Technology Studies . Pinter , London , pp . 63 – 78 . Etzkowitz , H . , 1999 . Bridging the gap : the evolution of industry – university links in the United States . In : Branscomb , L . , Ž . Kodama , F . Eds . , Industrializing Knowledge : University – In - dustry Linkages in Japan and the United States . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Etzkowitz , H . , forthcoming . The Second Academic Revolution : MIT and the Rise of Entrepreneurial Science . Gordon & Breach , London . Etzkowitz , H . , Leydesdorff , L . , 1995 . The triple helix – university – industry – government relations : a laboratory for knowledge - based economic development . EASST Review 14 Ž . 1 , 14 – 19 . Ž . Etzkowitz , H . , Leydesdorff , L . Eds . , 1997 . Universities in the Global Economy : A Triple Helix of University – Industry – Government Relations . Cassell Academic , London . Etzkowitz , H . , Gulbrandsen , M . , Levitt , J . , 2000 . Public Venture Capital : Government Funding Sources for Technology En - trepreneurs . Harcourt - Brace , New York . Freeman , C . , 1982 . The Economics of Industrial Innovation . Pinter , London . Freeman , C . , Perez , C . , 1988 . Structural crises of adjustment , business cycles and investment behaviour . In : Dosi , G . , Free - Ž . man , C . , Nelson , R . , Silverberg , G . , Soete , L . Eds . , Techni - cal Change and Economic Theory . Pinter , London , pp . 38 – 66 . Frenken , K . , this issue . A complexity approach to innovation Ž . networks . The case of the aircraft industry 1909 – 1997 . Research Policy . Frenken , K . , Leydesdorff , L . , forthcoming . Scaling trajectories in Ž . civil aircraft 1913 – 1997 . Research Policy . Gibbons , M . , Limoges , C . , Nowotny , H . , Schwartzman , S . , Scott , P . , Trow , M . , 1994 . The New Production of Knowledge : The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies . Sage , London . Giddens , A . , 1984 . The Constitution of Society . Polity Press , Cambridge . Godin , B . , 1998 . Writing performative history : is this a new Ž . Atlantis ? . Social Studies of Science 38 3 , 465 – 483 . Godin , B . , Gingras , Y . , this issue . The Place of Universities in the System of Knowledge Production . Research Policy . Government – University – Industry Research Roundtable GUIRR , 1998 . National Science and Technology Strategies in a Global Context . Report of an International Symposium . National Academy Press , Washington , DC . - http : rr bob . nap . edu r readingroom r books r nst r ) Gustin , B . , 1975 . The emergence of the German chemical profes - sion , 1790 – 1867 . PhD dissertation , University of Chicago . Hughes , T . P . , 1983 . Networks of Power : Electrification of West - ern Society 1880 – 1930 . Johns Hopkins Univ . Press , Balti - more , MD . Kaghan , W . N . , Barnett , G . B . , 1997 . The desktop model of innova - Ž . tion . In : Etzkowitz , H . , Leydesdorff , L . Eds . , Universities in the Global Economy : A Triple Helix of University – Industry – Government Relations . Cassell Academic , London , pp . 71 – 81 . Kampmann , C . , Haxholdt , C . , Mosekilde , E . , Sterman , J . D . , 1994 . Entrainment in a disaggregated long - wave model . In : Leydes - Ž . dorff , L . , Van den Besselaar , P . Eds . , Evolutionary Eco - nomics and Chaos Theory : New Directions in Technology Studies . Pinter , London , pp . 109 – 124 . Ž . Langton , C . G . Ed . , 1989 . Artificial Life . Addison Wesley , Red - wood City , CA . Leydesdorff , L . , 1995 . The Challenge of Scientometrics : The Development , Measurement , and Self - organization of Scien - tific Communications . DSWO Press , Leiden University , Lei - den . Leydesdorff , L . , 1997 . The non - linear dynamics of sociological reflections . International Sociology 12 , 25 – 45 . Leydesdorff , L . , Etzkowitz , H . , 1996 . Emergence of a Triple Helix of university – industry – government relations . Science and Public Policy 23 , 279 – 286 . Leydesdorff , L . , Etzkowitz , H . , 1998 . The Triple Helix as a model Ž . for innovation studies . Science and Public Policy 25 3 , 195 – 203 . Leydesdorff , L . , Oomes , N . , 1999 . Is the European monetary system converging to integration ? . Social Science Information Ž . 38 1 , 57 – 86 . Leydesdorff , L . , Van den Besselaar , P . , 1997 . Scientometrics and communication theory : towards theoretically informed indica - tors . Scientometrics 38 , 155 – 174 . Leydesdorff , L . , Van den Besselaar , P . , 1998 . Competing tech - Ž . nologies : lock - ins and lock - outs . In : Dubois , D . M . Ed . , Computing Anticipatory Systems , Proceedings of the Ameri - can Institute of Physics 437 . American Institute of Physics , Woodbury , NY , pp . 309 – 323 . Luhmann , N . , 1984 . Soziale Systeme . Grundriß einer allgemeinen Ž . w Theorie Suhrkamp , Frankfurt am Main . Social Systems Ž . x Stanford University Press , Stanford 1995 . ˚ Lundvall , B . - A . , 1988 . Innovation as an interactive process : from user – producer interaction to the national system of innovation . In : Dosi , G . Freeman , C . , Nelson , R . , Silverberg , G . , Soete , L . Ž . Eds . , Technical Change and Economic Theory . Pinter , Lon - don , pp . 349 – 369 . ˚ Ž . Lundvall , B . - A . Ed . , 1992 . National Systems of Innovation . Pinter , London . MacLane , S . , 1996 . Should universities imitate industry ? . Ameri - Ž . can Scientist 84 6 , 520 – 521 . Maturana , H . R . , 1978 . Biology of language : the epistemology of Ž . reality . In : Miller , G . A . , Lenneberg , E . Eds . , Psychology and Biology of Language and Thought . Essays in Honor of Eric Lenneberg . Academic Press , New York , pp . 27 – 63 . ( ) H . Etzkowitz , L . Leydesdorff r Research Policy 29 2000 109 – 123 123 McKelvey , M . D . , 1996 . Evolutionary Innovations : The Business of Biotechnology . Oxford Univ . Press , Oxford . Merton , R . K . , 1938 . Science , Technology and Society in Seven - teenth Century England . Sainte Catherine Press , Burges . Merton , R . K . , 1942 . Science and technology in a democratic order . Journal of Legal and Political Sociology 1 , 115 – 126 . Mills , C . W . , 1958 . The Power Elite . Oxford Univ . Press , New York . Mowery , D . C . , Rosenberg , N . , 1979 . The influence of market demand upon innovation : a critical review of some empirical studies . Research Policy 8 , 102 – 153 . Ž . Nelson , R . R . Ed . , 1982 . Government and Technical Progress : A Cross - Industry Analysis . Pergamon , New York . Ž . Nelson , R . R . Ed . , 1993 . National Innovation Systems : a Com - parative Study . Oxford Univ . Press , New York . Nelson , R . R . , 1994 . Economic growth via the coevolution of technology and institutions . In : Leydesdorff , L . , Van den Ž . Besselaar , P . Eds . , Evolutionary Economics and Chaos The - ory : New Directions in Technology Studies . Pinter , London , pp . 21 – 32 . Nelson , R . , Winter , S . , 1975 . Growth theory from an evolutionary perspective : the differential productivity growth puzzle . Amer - ican Economic Review 65 , 338 . Nelson , R . R . , Winter , S . G . , 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Belknap Press , Cambridge , MA . Neurath , O . , Carnap , R . , Hahn , H . , 1929 . Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung - Der Wiener Kreis . Veroffentlichungen des ¨ Vereins Ernst Mach , Vienna . OECD , 1980 . Technical Change and Economic Policy . OECD , Paris . Pasinetti , L . , 1981 . Structural Change and Economic Growth . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . Pavitt , K . , 1984 . Sectoral patterns of technical change : towards a theory and a taxonomy . Research Policy 13 , 343 – 373 . Rip , A . , VanderMeulen , B . , 1996 . The post - modern research Ž . system . Science and Public Policy 23 6 , 343 – 352 . Rosenberg , N . , Nelson , R . R . , 1994 . American universities and technical advance in industry . Research Policy 23 , 323 – 348 . Rothwell , R . , Zegveld , W . , 1981 . Industrial Innovation and Public Policy . Pinter , London . Sabato , J . , 1975 . El pensamiento latinoamericano en la ´ problematica ciencia – technologıa – desarrollo - dependencia . ´ ´ Paidos , Buenos Aires . ´ Sabato , Jorge , Mackenzi , M . , 1982 . La Produccion de Technologıa . ´ ´ ´ Autonoma o Transnacional . Nueva Imagen , Mexico . ´ Schumpeter , J . , 1964 . Business Cycles : A Theoretical , Historical and Statistical Analysis of Capitalist Process . McGraw - Hill , w x New York 1939 . Schumpeter , J . , 1966 . Invention and Economic Growth . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Sobel , D . , 1995 . Longitude . Penguin , Harmondsworth . Storr , R . , 1953 . The Beginnings of Graduate Education in Amer - ica . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Weingart , P . , 1997 . From ‘‘Finalization’’ to ‘‘Mode 2’’ : old wine Ž . in new bottles ? . Social Science Information 36 4 , 591 – 613 . Ziman , J . , 1994 . Prometheus Bound : Science in a Dynamic Steady State . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge .