Stranger Danger ! Cross - Community Interactions with Fringe Users Increase the Growth of Fringe Communities on Reddit Giuseppe Russo , 1 Manoel Horta Ribeiro , 2 Robert West 2 1 ETH Zurich 2 EPFL giusepperusso @ ethz . ch , manoel . hortaribeiro @ epfl . ch , robert . west @ epfl . ch Abstract Fringe communities promoting conspiracy theories and ex - tremist ideologies have thrived on mainstream platforms , raising questions about the mechanisms driving their growth . Here , we hypothesize and study a possible mechanism : new members may be recruited through fringe - interactions : the exchange of comments between members and non - members of fringe communities . We apply text - based causal infer - ence techniques to study the impact of fringe - interactions on the growth of three prominent fringe communities on Reddit : r / Incel , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald . Our re - sults indicate that fringe - interactions attract new members to fringe communities . Users who receive these interac - tions are up to 4 . 2 percentage points ( pp ) more likely to join fringe communities than similar , matched users who do not . This effect is influenced by 1 ) the characteristics of communities where the interaction happens ( e . g . , left vs . right - leaning communities ) and 2 ) the language used in the interactions . Interactions using toxic language have a 5 pp higher chance of attracting newcomers to fringe communities than non - toxic interactions . We find no effect when repeating this analysis by replacing fringe ( r / Incel , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald ) with non - fringe com - munities ( r / climatechange , r / NBA , r / leagueoflegends ) , sug - gesting this growth mechanism is specific to fringe commu - nities . Overall , our findings suggest that curtailing fringe - interactions may reduce the growth of fringe communities on mainstream platforms . 1 Introduction Mainstream platforms enacted various moderation policies to curtail fringe communities due to their association with real - world violence and online harassment ( Collins and Zadrozny 2020 ) . For instance , r / The Donald , a Reddit com - munity that was key in planning the 2021 US Capitol in - vasion ( Washington Post 2020 ) , was extensively sanctioned by Reddit , having its visibility reduced and being removed from the main feed . However , even amidst sanctions , fringe communities still flourish and attract new members ( Trujillo and Cresci 2022 ; Horta Ribeiro et al . 2021 ) , e . g . , even after the sanctions , r / The Donald remained one of the most active communities on Reddit , with over 790 , 000 users before be - ing banned . This observation suggests that visibility through Copyright © 2021 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . ( Fringe Interaction ) ( No Fringe Interaction ) Post Comment Comment Comment Post Non - Fringe Communities Fringe Communities Figure 1 : We study whether interacting with fringe users ( (cid:160) ) causes non - fringe users ( (cid:160) ) to join fringe communities . We match users that involuntarily received comments from fringe users ( (cid:160) ; “treatment” ) with users who did not , but had similar chances to do so ( (cid:160) ; “control ; ” (cid:160) ≃ (cid:160) ) . Then , we estimate the causal effect of fringe interactions by com - paring the fraction of users that went on to join the fringe community in the treatment ( P ( (cid:160) → • ) ) and in the control group ( P ( (cid:160) → • ) ) . platform affordances ( e . g . , Reddit’s front page ) may not be the sole mechanism driving the attraction of new members . Present work . Here , we consider another potential mecha - nism for the growth of fringe communities on mainstream platforms : fringe - interactions , defined as an exchange of comments between users of fringe communities and other users active on the same platform ( e . g . , Reddit ) but not in the fringe community ( e . g . , r / The Donald ) at the time of the interaction . We hypothesize that fringe - interactions boost the visibility of fringe communities by exposing non - fringe users to ideas or concepts associated with the fringe com - munity via either the profile of fringe users or the content of the interactions . We center our analysis around three research questions : RQ1 : Do fringe - interactions drive newcomers toward fringe communities ? If so , is this specific to fringe com - munities ? RQ2 : In which communities are fringe - interactions more successful in attracting newcomers ? RQ3 : What linguistic traits characterize fringe - interactions that successfully attract newcomers ? a r X i v : 2310 . 12186v1 [ c s . S I ] 18 O c t 2023 To answer these questions , we study three prominent fringe communities on Reddit ( r / Incel , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald ) using the quasi - experimental setup illustrated in fig . 1 . First ( RQ1 ) , we use regression analysis to measure the probability of users joining fringe subreddits after interact - ing with fringe users . We then compare this probability to that of users who did not interact with fringe users . Via balanced risk set matching ( Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983 ) , we ensure that these two groups of users have compara - ble propensities to interact with fringe users . To under - stand if this mechanism is specific to fringe communities , we repeat the analysis , considering interactions between members of non - fringe subreddits ( r / climatechange , r / NBA , r / leagueoflegends ) and other users not yet active in these subreddits . Second ( RQ2 ) , we analyze how the effect of fringe - interactions varies depending on the characteristics of the community ( e . g . , political leaning ) where the fringe - interaction occurred . Third ( RQ3 ) , we characterize the con - tent of fringe - interactions that successfully attract newcom - ers across a variety of linguistic traits ( e . g . , toxicity ) . Findings . Our analysis shows that fringe - interactions in - crease the likelihood of a user posting on a fringe commu - nity by up to 4 . 2 percentage points ( pp ) ( RQ1 ) . We do not find evidence that interactions with non - fringe users ( e . g . , members of r / climatechange ) drive newcomers towards non - fringe communities ( r / climatechange itself ) , suggesting that the growth through interactions is specific to fringe commu - nities . Additionally , we find that the strength of the effect of fringe - interactions varies depending on the characteristics ( political orientation , gender , and age ) of the subreddits where the interactions occur ( RQ2 ) . For instance , users in - teracting with fringe users in right - leaning subreddits are 15 . 6 pp more likely to join fringe communities than those active in the same subreddit who have not interacted with fringe users . Finally , our analysis indicates that interactions containing toxic language increase the chances of attracting newcomers to fringe communities by 5 pp on average ( RQ3 ) . Implications . Mainstream online platforms have attempted to curtail fringe communities by banning them or reducing their visibility . However , neither of these interventions is a silver bullet , as they are remarkably resilient ( Horta Ribeiro et al . 2021 ; Trujillo and Cresci 2022 ) . The growth mecha - nism studied here shows that fringe - interactions are another target for stakeholders . For instance , platforms could reduce the visibility of fringe community members outside of fringe communities or proactively target users who receive mes - sages from fringe community members with information that may reduce their chance to join fringe communities . 2 Related Work Why do people join online communities ? Scholars have extensively studied user motivations for joining online com - munities ( Ridings and Gefen 2004 ; Ren et al . 2012 ) . Past research indicates that users deliberately seek communi - ties that align with their social identities ( Ammari and Schoenebeck 2015 ; Lingel , Naaman , and Boyd 2014 ) , and has highlighted the importance of content quality ( Lu , Phang , and Yu 2011 ; Zhang et al . 2017 ; Russo , Stoehr , and Ribeiro 2023 ) , effective moderation ( Lampe and Johnston 2005 ) , and meta - characteristics like size , activity levels , and network structures ( Hwang and Foote 2021 ) . Further , Back - strom et al . ( 2008 ) has found that interpersonal interactions with other users draw individuals to online communities . In the case of fringe communities , research on why users par - ticipate in these communities focused on users’ psychologi - cal characteristics ( Schmid 2013 ) , finding that hopelessness , sadness , and anxiety are the primary psychological drivers of participation ( Caren , Jowers , and Gaby 2012 ; Lauckner and Hsieh 2013 ) . Fringe communities . We briefly describe the fringe com - munities considered in this study . r / The Donald , created in June 2015 to support Donald Trump’s presidential cam - paign , became associated with the ”alt - right” movement , hosting discussions involving racism , sexism , and Islam - ophobia . It also spread conspiracy theories and was mo - bilized for “political trolling” ( Lyons 2017 ; Paudel et al . 2021 ) . r / GenderCritical , created in September 2013 , hosted the trans - exclusionary radical feminists ( TERFs ) commu - nity , known for doxing and harassing trans women ( Kaitlyn 2020 ; Williams 2020 ) . r / Incel , created in August 2013 , was a community of self - denominated ”involuntary celibates” ad - hering to “The Black Pill , ” the belief that unattractive men are doomed to romantic loneliness and unhappiness ( Ribeiro et al . 2021 ) . Since their inception , the Incels community has been closely related to terrorist attacks and the production of misogynistic content online ( Jaki et al . 2019 ; Hoffman , Ware , and Shapiro 2020 ) . Interventions against fringe communities . r / Incel , r / The Donald , and r / GenderCritical have all been banned due to breaching Reddit’s guidelines . Previous work has studied the effectiveness of these bans , showing that banned users reduce their activity on mainstream platforms ( Chan - drasekharan et al . 2017 ; Jhaver et al . 2021 ) . However , part of the banned community migrates to other fringe platforms ( Monti et al . 2023 ; Russo et al . 2023a ) causing possible spillovers of antisocial behavior back onto the mainstream platform ( Russo et al . 2023b ; Schmitz , Muric , and Burghardt 2022 ) . Other works have examined softer interventions like limiting the visibility of fringe commu - nities and warning new visitors about the potential issues with content posted in these communities ( Chandrasekharan et al . 2022 ; Trujillo and Cresci 2022 ) , finding that these measures reduce the number of newcomers to some extent . Overall , this literature suggests that interventions against fringe communities are no silver bullet , as they are highly adversarial and have highly engaged members . Relation between present and prior work . Here , we ex - plore fringe - interactions , a potential mechanism that may contribute to the growth of fringe communities . The ex - istence of this mechanism is backed by previous research highlighting the importance of interpersonal interaction in drawing users to new online communities ( Backstrom et al . 2008 ) . Given how challenging it is to reduce the influence of fringe communities in our online ecosystem ( Horta Ribeiro Table 1 : Data collection summary — For the three fringe subreddits considered in this paper , we show the number of comments , users , and users obtained ( columns 2 – 4 ) , as well as the treated and potential control units associated with these users’ fringe - interactions ( columns 6 – 7 ) across one - year periods ( column 5 ) . We also show the same statistics for non - fringe subreddits that we use to repeat the experiment . Comments Users Selected Users Period Considered Treated Potential Controls Fringe subreddits r / Incels 2 , 041 , 313 177 , 095 38 , 145 06 / 2016 − 06 / 2017 86 , 556 5 , 275 , 321 r / GenderCritical 1 , 629 , 169 48 , 243 9 , 624 01 / 2019 − 01 / 2020 54 , 142 2 , 250 , 641 r / The Donald 12 , 387 , 349 482 , 796 72 , 371 05 / 2018 − 05 / 2019 97 , 823 6 , 481 , 223 Non - Fringe subreddits r / climatechange 632 , 674 93 , 256 19 , 374 01 / 2019 − 01 / 2020 81 , 307 3 , 912 , 866 r / NBA 1 , 483 , 631 468 , 321 67 , 481 01 / 2018 − 01 / 2019 72 , 321 2 , 973 , 364 r / leagueoflegends 3 , 573 , 974 694 , 522 71 , 944 01 / 2019 − 01 / 2020 95 , 763 6 , 514 , 447 et al . 2021 ; Monti et al . 2023 ) , we argue that understanding why these communities thrive is key to increasing the arse - nal of interventions available to curtail their growth . 3 Material and Methods 3 . 1 Data Reddit data . To answer our research questions , we selected three prominent fringe subreddits r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald ( see Section 2 ) . Using the Pushshift API ( Baumgartner et al . 2020 ) , we retrieve all comments made in these three fringe subreddits from their creation to their banning from Reddit . We consider as part of r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , or r / The Donald only those users that post more than five comments in one of these three subred - dits . This is similar to what has been done in previous re - search ( Kumar et al . 2018 ; Samory and Mitra 2018 ) . In cases where a user exceeds the threshold in multiple fringe sub - reddits , we consider the user as a member of the subreddit where they have posted the most ; this prevents fringe users from being considered multiple times across different fringe subreddits . We collect roughly 15M posts from 700K users from these three fringe subreddits . To understand if the growth through interactions is spe - cific to fringe communities , we repeat our analyses , re - placing fringe with non - fringe subreddits ( r / climatechange , r / NBA , and r / leagueoflegends ) . Therefore , we collect all posts made on three non - fringe subreddits , r / climatechange , r / NBA , and r / leagueoflegends , chosen to represent a diverse set of communities . 1 We collect roughly 5M posts from 1M users from these three non - fringe subreddits . We pro - vide statistics for these collection processes in Table 1 . Treatment and control groups . Our study centers on un - derstanding how interactions with fringe users influence the attraction of newcomers to fringe subreddits . To achieve this , we compare the likelihood of users joining a fringe subreddit 1 Respectively , a political movement , a community centered around an “offline” event , and a community centered around an online video game . after a fringe - interaction ( treatment group ) with the likeli - hood of other users joining the same fringe subreddit without any interaction ( control group ) . To identify users in the treat - ment group , we gather all fringe - interactions made by users of fringe subreddits on subreddits other than fringe ones . In other words , we look for interactions occurring in subreddits different from r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , or r / The Donald or related to them ( e . g . , Incels2 ) . A fringe - interaction consists of a comment c fringe made by a fringe user u fringe on a non - fringe subreddit s non - fringe in response to a comment c non - fringe made by a non - fringe user u non - fringe on the same non - fringe subreddit s non - fringe . We include non - fringe users in our treatment group if the following conditions are met : 1 . the non - fringe user u non - fringe did not post in the fringe subreddit ( e . g . , r / Incels ) associated with the fringe user u fringe prior to the interaction . 2 . u fringe has never interacted before with u non - fringe . In other words , they never exchanged a comment 3 . The comment c fringe , authored by u fringe , occurred within a week from the comment c non - fringe posted by u non - fringe . Finally , following previous research from Phadke , Samory , and Mitra ( 2022 ) , we collect our data only from subreddits that received at least five contributions from users of fringe subreddits and consider fringe - interactions that happened within one year . To define a control group , we col - lect all comments made in the same weeks and subreddits as the ones in the treatment group where no fringe - interaction happened . We provide these statics in Table 1 Outcome . Given users that receive ( treatment ) or not ( con - trol ) an interaction from a user active on a fringe subred - dit ( e . g . , r / Incels ) , our outcome variable is the number of users joining the same fringe subreddit in the weeks fol - lowing the interaction . Specifically , we analyze users’ post and comment activity in the eight weeks following the date of comments associated with users in our treatment / control groups . We consider that a user “joined” a fringe subreddit if they post or comment at least once in that subreddit after the interaction . We operationalize these covariates following the same approach when repeating our analysis considering fringe int . joining profile post comment user Figure 2 : Causal diagram . Given a comment c non - fringe made by a non - fringe user u non − fringe , we assume that a fringe - interaction depends exclusively on ( 1 ) the profile of the non - fringe who posted the comment c non - fringe , ( 2 ) on the post where the comment was made , and ( 3 ) on the content of the comment itself . We control for these factors to estimate the effect of a fringe - interaction in subsequent participation in a fringe community ( fringe int . → joining ) . the interactions of non - fringe users from r / climatechange , r / NBA , and r / leagueoflegends . 3 . 2 Identification Our analysis uses observational data to mimic a hypotheti - cal experiment . Suppose Reddit implemented a filter where whenever a user who is active in a fringe community replies to someone in a non - fringe community , the comments of the fringe user do not get shown . Then , for a select , randomly as - signed treatment group , this filter gets removed . Conversely , nothing changes for the remaining control users ; the filter remains as is . We are interested in the difference in the rate at which treatment vs . control group users join the fringe community . Since this experiment is not feasible , we use observa - tional data as a substitute . Our treatment group consists of users who interacted with a fringe user from either r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , or r / The Donald . On the other hand , our control group consists of users who were equally likely to interact with a fringe user but did not . To identify the effect of fringe - interactions on non - fringe users , we formalize our assumptions in the causal graph in fig . 2 . We assume that given a comment c non - fringe ( comment in the causal graph ) whether it receives a fringe - interaction depends on ( 1 ) the profile of the user u non - fringe ( profile in the causal graph ) who posted the comment c non - fringe , ( 2 ) the content of the com - ment c non - fringe ( comment ) , and ( 3 ) the content of the post p ( post ) that corresponds to the Reddit submission the com - ment c non - fringe refers to . Under these assumptions , we can control for confounders by blocking the biasing paths ( Glymour , Pearl , and Jew - ell 2016 ) to isolate the causal effect of fringe - interactions . We do so by controlling the user profiles , the content , and the structure of comments and posts , respectively . Indeed , different comments / posts may draw attention differently , stimulating possible interactions from fringe users . How - ever , other confounders may affect the likelihood of non - fringe users to join fringe subreddits regardless of fringe - interactions , e . g . , being a young male with relationship is - sues makes someone more likely to join r / Incels , we address this issue in detail in Section 5 . 3 . 3 Operationalization Below , we describe how we operationalize the con - founding variables in the causal diagram in Figure 2 . Note that these covariates are computed for a triplet ⟨ comment , post , profile ⟩ , where , in the treatment group , the user who made the comment interacted with a fringe user , and in the control group , they did not . Comment . When comparing comments that received fringe - interactions with those that did not , we want the con - tent of these comments to be semantically similar . In a recent comparison of text - level adjustment strategies , Weld et al . ( 2022 ) found that transformer - based representations outper - formed other text representations , and thus , we use a fine - tuned version of the BERT architecture ( Devlin et al . 2018 ) to obtain a representation for each comment in our dataset . We describe this in detail in Section 3 . 4 . Post . We also want the posts associated with comments ( potentially ) receiving fringe - interaction to be similar . This is partially addressed by matching comments within simi - lar subreddits , but in addition , we also consider , for each post , the number of ( 1 ) direct replies that a post received , ( 2 ) unique users that directly replied to the post , ( 3 ) comments in the post , and ( 4 ) unique user commenting in the post . Im - portantly , these variables are computed prior to the creation of the comment of interest . Profile . Fringe users may choose to interact with a non - fringe user ( via a comment ) because of the profile of the non - fringe user that posted the comment . To control for the pro - file , we characterize each non - fringe user using their activ - ity and its relatedness to the fringe subreddit ( e . g . , r / Incels ) . Specifically , we operationalize ( 1 ) user activity as the total number of posts made in the 8 weeks before the comment , and ( 2 ) the fringe score as the proportion of the user’s Reddit activity dedicated to discussion related to the fringe subred - dit . To calculate the fringe score , we follow Phadke , Samory , and Mitra ( 2022 ) : for a non - fringe user u that write N u posts in a set S u of subreddits the fringe score f u is f u = ∑ s ∈ S u n s sim ( s fringe , s ) N u , ( 1 ) where n s is the number of comments made on the subred - dit s , sim ( s fringe , s ) is the cosine similarity between the em - beddings ( from Waller and Anderson ( 2021 ) ) of the fringe subreddit s fringe , ( e . g . , r / Incels ) and a subreddit s . 3 . 4 Estimation Having operationalized the treatment , the outcome , and the control variables of interest , we then estimate the causal effect of fringe - interactions . Our approach is two - fold : we match comment - user pairs ( c non − fringe , u non − fringe ) that re - ceived fringe - interactions with similar pairs that did not . We then conduct a regression analysis in the subset of matched comments posted by non - fringe users . This approach allows us to obtain robust results by combining the strengths of both approaches ( Gelman 2014 ) . 0 % 1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % Fringe Interactions Non - Fringe Interactions The _ Donald GenderCritical leagueoflegends Incels NBA climatechange Effect Size Figure 3 : The effect of fringe - interactions on joining fringe communities— Differential increase in the probability of joining fringe subreddits after interacting with fringe users . Significant effect observed for r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald . We repeat the experiment considering in - teractions with users of non - fringe communities finding not significant or very small effects . Significance level at 0 . 05 Balanced Risk Set Matching . In our setting , users in the treatment group receive the treatment ( fringe - interactions ) at different times . This is because fringe users reply to comments of non - fringe users at different times . When a treatment is given at various times , it is important to form matched pairs in which subjects are similar prior to treat - ment but avoid matching on events subsequent to treatment . This is done using risk - set matching , in which a newly treated individual at time t is matched to one control not yet treated at time t based on covariate information describing subjects prior to time t . The covariates we must control for with the matching ( see Figure 2 ) vary with time , e . g . , a non - fringe user have a similar profile to another non - fringe user only in time t 1 , not t 2 . We address this issue by performing Balanced Risk Set Matching ( Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983 ) , a procedure that consists of ( 1 ) creating “risk sets , ” groups of individuals that did not receive the treatment up to a point in time ; ( 2 ) estimating the propensity score of individuals in the risk sets , i . e . , the probability of being treated given pre - treatment characteristics ; and ( 3 ) using the propensity score to match individuals who went on to receive the treatment ( here , fringe - interactions ) with those who did not . We de - scribe this process below . 1 . Creating risk sets – Each treated user u non − fringe is treated at a different treatment time ( i . e . , receive a fringe - interactions ) , where the treatment time corresponds to the day a treated user u non − fringe posted on the sub - reddit s non − fringe the comment c non − fringe that received the fringe - interaction . We subsample the set of possible control users to those controls that posted a comment c ′ non − fringe on the same subreddit s non − fringe on the same week of the interaction ( treatment ) . By following this pro - cedure , we create comparable sets of users . We represent each of these users considering the comment - , post - , and profile - related covariates calculated eight weeks before the treatment time t of each risk set . 2 . Training propensity score model – We compute the propensity to receive an interaction from a fringe user u fringe for each comment c non − fringe written by a treated or control user u non − fringe in a risk set . Specifically , we fine - tune BERT ( Devlin et al . 2018 ) with an additional lin - ear layer to compute the propensity that a comment writ - ten by a user receives a fringe - interaction , providing as input to the model the text of the content c non − fringe and the title of the corresponding Reddit submission . Before the final linear layer , we concatenate the [ CLS ] token with user and post - level covariates ( computed considering the user u non − fringe activities in the eight weeks before time t ) to compute the propensity of a comment c non − fringe to receive a comment from a fringe user u non − fringe . 3 . Matching – Finally , we match each treated user to a con - trol user ( within in each risk set ) using the nearest neigh - bor algorithm on the propensity score considering a cal - liper of 0 . 001 . Further , for each treated user , we only con - sider control users who posted in the same subreddit in the same week . This procedure yields 82 , 725 pairs of users , and there were 3 , 831 treated users we could not match . We assess the quality of the matching by measur - ing the standardized mean difference of user - , comment - and post - level covariates , obtaining absolute standardized mean differences smaller than the standard 0 . 1 thresh - old ( Austin 2011 ) for most covariates considered ( 13 / 15 for r / Incels , 14 / 15 for r / GenderCritical , and 12 / 15 for r / The Donald ( see Section 7 ) . We provide examples of matched comments written by the treated and control users that we match according to our matching procedure in Table 2 . Regression Analysis . Considering matched users , we esti - mate the effect of fringe - interactions with the linear model y ut = β 0 + β 1 treated ut + γγγ T X u + F t , ( 2 ) where y ut represents a binary variable indicating whether a non - fringe user u joined a fringe community in the eight weeks after the fringe - interaction at week t ; treated ut in - dicates if user u received the treatment ( fringe - interaction ) in week t . Therefore , β 1 captures the effect of the fringe - interaction on the non - fringe user u . X u represents the ar - ray of control variables introduced in Section 3 . 3 at the user level computed in the pre - treatment period ; and F w are weekly fixed effects , which control for potential latent time trends that could impact our results . Note that , coefficients here must be interpreted as percentage point ( pp ) increases . 4 Results 4 . 1 RQ1 : Effect of fringe - interactions Overall Interaction Effect . Non - fringe users who receive a fringe - interaction exhibit a significant increase in the proba - bility of joining the said fringe community relative to those who do not ( see Figure 3 ) . Specifically , considering the re - gression analysis described in Equation ( 2 ) , we find that - 0 . 5 % 0 . 0 % 0 . 5 % 1 . 0 % 1 . 5 % ( a ) Incels ( b ) GenderCritical ( c ) The Donald 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 0 . 4 % - 0 . 2 % 0 . 0 % 0 . 2 % 0 . 4 % ( d ) ClimateChange 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Weeks ( e ) NBA 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ( f ) leagueoﬂegends Figure 4 : Top row shows the effect size of fringe - interactions on users that interacted with members of fringe communities ( r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , r / The Donald ) . Bottom row shows the effect of interactions when users interact with members of non - fringe communities ( r / climatechange , r / NBA , r / leagueoflegends ) . The effect is stratified over a follow - up period of eight weeks ( x - axis ) . Note that the y - axis scale is different between top and bottom row . fringe - interactions with r / Incels users increase by 4 . 2 pp the likelihood of posting on r / Incels in the eight weeks fol - lowing the interaction with a fringe user of r / Incels ( 2 . 4 pp for r / GenderCritical ; 2 . 2 pp for r / The Donald ) . To under - stand if such an effect is specific to fringe communities , we repeat the same analysis considering interactions with users of non - fringe communities . Practically , we substitute the three fringe subreddits with r / climatechange , r / NBA , and r / leagueoflegends . We then repeat our observational study . We find effects to be smaller and not statistically signifi - cant , 0 . 5 pp for r / ClimateChange and r / leagueoflegends ; and 0 . 0006 pp for r / NBA . Time - Stratified Interaction Effect . To study the variation of the effect within the observation window , we re - run Equa - tion ( 2 ) considering the data associated with each week in the post - intervention follow - up period , i . e . , we estimate the effect of the user joining the community on the first , sec - ond , third week and so on after the fringe - interaction . For the fringe communities considered ( Figure 4 ; top row ) , we find that the effect is strongest during the second week follow - ing the interaction with fringe users ( 1 . 3 pp for r / Incels ; 0 . 7 pp for r / GenderCritical ; 0 . 8 pp for r / TheDonald ; all results statistically significant with p < 0 . 05 ) . This likely happens because the very first week can encompass fewer days in our setup ( e . g . , if the external interaction happened on a Fri - day , fewer days are being considered in week # 1 ) . After the second week , the effect gradually wanes for all three com - munities . For the non - fringe communities considered ( Fig - ure 4 ; bottom row ) , weekly effects are only significant for the r / leagueoflegend community , which , interestingly , does not exhibit the peak in the second week . 4 . 2 RQ2 : In which subreddits are fringe - interactions successful ? To investigate which characteristics make subreddits more susceptible to the effect of fringe - interactions , we catego - rize subreddits across three “social dimension scores” as computed by Waller and Anderson ( 2021 ) . These represent the social positioning based on the partisanship , age , and gender of a subreddit . Each score is a value between − 1 and + 1 , describing how left or right , old or young , and how feminine or masculine a subreddit is . We assign subreddits where a fringe - interaction occurred in one of ten groups ( D1 - D10 ) . These groups are obtained by ( 1 ) computing the ten deciles of the social scores and ( 2 ) assigning each subreddit to one of these groups based on its social score . We repeat this procedure for all three social dimensions . To study in which subreddits fringe - interactions are most effective , we run the following regression : y u = β 0 + β 1 treated u + βββ T DDD s ( u ) treated u + γγγ T X u + F t ( 3 ) here D s ( u ) is a one hot encoded vector that is zero ev - erywhere but in the position of the decile assigned to the subreddit s where the non - fringe user u received the fringe - interaction . We index this subreddit with s ( u ) . Therefore , the vector of coefficients βββ captures the effect of an interaction occurred in a subreddit associated in a specific group ( D1 - D10 ) . The other variables are as described in Equation ( 2 ) . Considering the partisan dimension , interactions with r / Incels and r / The Donald users are most successful in right - leaning subreddits ( 15 . 3 pp D9 for r / Incels ) and ( 2 . 5 pp D9 for r / The Donald interactions ) . For example , interactions - 5 % 0 % 6 % 13 % 19 % P a rt i s a n E ﬀ ec t ( a ) Incels Left ← Partisanship → Right - 1 % 0 % 1 % 2 % 4 % 5 % ( b ) GenderCritical - 2 % 0 % 1 % 2 % 4 % ( c ) The Donald 0 % 2 % 5 % 7 % 10 % A g e E ﬀ ec t Young ← Age → Old - 6 % - 3 % 0 % 3 % 6 % 9 % - 1 % 0 % 1 % 2 % 4 % D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 D10 - 2 % 0 % 3 % 6 % 9 % G e nd e r E ﬀ ec t D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 D10 Male ← Gender → Female - 2 % 0 % 3 % 6 % 9 % D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 D9 D10 0 % 1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % Figure 5 : Stratification of External Interaction Effects Based on Social Dimension Scores . Effects of fringe - interactions are categorized according to the partisan ( top row ) , age ( middle row ) , and gender ( bottom row ) scores of the subreddits where the fringe - interaction occurred . Subreddits are grouped into ten distinct categories ( D1 - D10 ) , see Table 3 , according to their social dimension scores ( x - axis ) . Each column illustrates the effect of fringe - interactions with users of r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , or r / The Donald . All results statistically significant with p < 0 . 05 are effective in subreddits like r / GunsForSale , r / russia , and r / totalwar which are part of D9 group . Differently , fringe - interactions with r / Incels and r / The Donald users are least successful in left - leaning subreddits , where we found statis - tically significant negative effects . Examples of subreddits in the D1 and D2 along the partisan scores are r / democrats , r / Marijuana , and r / Impeach Trump . No similar political di - vide is observed for r / GenderCritical . For the age dimension , interactions with r / Incels users are most successful on “young” subreddits ( D1 - D4 ) with an average effect of 6 . 2 pp , whereas for interactions with r / GenderCritical and r / The Donald users , the effect is more pronounced in “older” subreddits ( D5 - D10 ) with average scores of 6 . 6 pp and 1 . 5 pp , respectively . Interestingly , the effect on young subreddits is negative for r / GenderCritical ( − 3 . 3 pp ) and negligible for r / The Donald ( 0 . 06 pp ) . For the gender dimension , interactions with r / Incels users show higher effects in masculine subreddits , while r / GenderCritical interactions have a higher impact on femi - nine subreddits . No clear trend is observed for interactions with r / The Donald users . 4 . 3 RQ3 : The Effect of Linguistic Traits Last , we investigate whether linguistic traits of fringe - interactions ( i . e . , comments from fringe to non - fringe users ) impact their effectiveness in attracting newcomers with the following linear model : y u = β 0 + β 1 treated u + βββ T L c ( u ) L c ( u ) L c ( u ) treated u + γγγ T X u + F t ( 4 ) where L c ( u ) represents the vector of linguistic traits of the comment c written by the fringe user and received by the non - fringe user u in the fringe - interaction ( we index this comment with c ( u ) ) . The vector of coefficients βββ represents the effect of each linguistic trait considered . The other vari - ables are as described in Equation ( 2 ) and Equation ( 3 ) . Specifically , the linguistic traits we consider are ( 1 ) anxi - ety , sadness , and “they vs . we” language computed accord - ingly to LIWC ( Pennebaker , Francis , and Booth 2001 ) , ( 2 ) toxicity as computed by Perspective’s API ( Jigsaw 2022 ) and binarized by considering texts with a score above 0 . 8 as toxic ( similarly to Ribeiro et al . ( 2021 ) ) , and ( 3 ) community - specific lingo ( see Section 7 ) . We chose these linguistic traits because involvement in fringe groups is linked to an under - lying psychological disposition that includes tendencies to experience emotions such as sadness and anxiety , as well as receptiveness to fringe narratives ( e . g . , community lingo and highly toxic content ) ( Chandrasekharan et al . 2017 ; Butter and Knight 2020 ) . We code all these traits to assign values of 1 if the linguistic trait is present in the interaction and 0 otherwise . Figure 6 shows the observed effects for selected linguis - tic traits . Toxic fringe - interactions increase the attraction of newcomers by 5 . 8 , 4 . 2 , 6 . 1 pp for r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald , respectively . Also , we find that com - ments containing anxious messages and “they vs . we” have a positive effect on attracting newcomers . Interestingly , for r / Incels , we find a negative effect for fringe - interactions con - taining community - specific lingo . - 3 % - 2 % - 1 % 0 % 1 % 2 % 3 % 4 % 5 % 6 % 7 % 8 % Toxicity Sadness Anxiety We vs They L i ngu i s ti c T r a it s Incels GenderCritical The Donald Effect Size Lingo Figure 6 : The effectiveness of linguistic traits of fringe - interactions — On the y - axis , the linguistic traits considered . On the x - axis , the effect size of each linguistic traits associ - ated with each fringe subreddit . 5 Robustness Checks 5 . 1 Content - Level Exact Matching Our findings rely on the semantic similarity of comments we matched using the approach described in section 3 . 4 . To ensure the validity of our results , we established a strict criterion that the content of treated and control interac - tions ( i . e . , comments ) must be exactly the same . To ful - fil this requirement , we collected 2 , 312 treated ( received a fringe - interaction ) and 5 , 627 control comments with the same hyperlink as their sole content . Due to possible user and post - level confounders , we matched comments that re - ceived an interaction with those that did not , taking into ac - count all user and post - level covariates . We obtain 2 , 274 pairs of matched comments considering fringe - interactions from r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald together . We run our regression analysis , finding average treatment effect of 1 . 3 pp with ( p < 0 . 001 ) . 5 . 2 Sensitivity Analysis Our results rely on the assumption that the treatment assign - ment is not biased . Meaning that the only difference be - tween treated and control users is a simple coin flip . Sen - sitivity analysis is a way of quantifying how the results of our study would change if this assumption is violated ( Rosenbaum 2005 ) , This notion is quantified by the sensi - tivity Γ , which specifies the ratio by which the treatment of two matched persons would need to differ to result in a p - value above the significance threshold . Large values of Γ corresponding to more robust conclusions . For the cho - sen p = 0 . 05 , we measured for the three fringe commu - nities that we study Γ s of 2 . 3 , 1 . 35 , and 1 . 65 , which im - plies that , within matched pairs , an individual’s probability of being the treated one could take on any value between 1 / ( 1 + Γ ) = 0 . 3 and Γ / ( 1 + Γ ) = 0 . 69 for r / Incels , between 0 . 42 and 0 . 57 for r / GenderCritical , and between 0 . 38 and 0 . 62 for r / The Donald without changing our decision of re - jecting the null hypothesis of no effect . 6 Discussion Understanding how fringe communities grow holds im - mense significance for mainstream platforms and policy - makers alike – it is a stepping stone for interventions aimed at limiting their ( well - documented ) harm . While previous work has pointed at algorithmic visibility and platform af - fordances as means by which fringe communities grow ( ? ) , here we hypothesize and study another , more social mech - anism . We show that users who involuntarily receive inter - actions from fringe users increase their likelihood of par - ticipating in their fringe communities , and that this effect is modulated by where the interaction happens and what is said by the fringe user . Implications . Our results raise an important question : Is this mechanism relevant enough to warrant the attention of moderation policies ? Within the observation period consid - ered , 40 , 321 , 32 , 306 , and 123 , 562 users joined r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , r / The Donald , respectively . Based on our estimated effects , approximately 7 . 2 % , 3 . 1 % , and 2 . 3 % of the newcomers joined after interacting with users from r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , or r / The Donald . This observa - tion suggests that community - level moderation policies could be combined with sanctions applied to individual users . These sanctions might include reducing the visibil - ity of their posts or limiting the number of comments they can make in more susceptible communities . Such a combi - nation could diminish the impact of fringe - interactions and slow down the growth of fringe communities on mainstream platforms . Limitations and Future Work . As our conclusions rely on observational data , potential confounders could limit the validity of our study . However , the robustness checks we conducted ( content exact matching , sensitivity analy - sis ) mitigate potential threats to our study’s validity . More - over , while our analysis centers on Reddit , where the sub - reddit structure offers an ideal context for our study , it’s worth noting that prior research has stressed the significance of comprehending these mechanisms across various plat - forms ( Horta Ribeiro et al . 2021 ) . Future studies could ex - tend this analysis to platforms lacking distinct communities , potentially yielding broader insight into the spread of fringe ideologies online . Broader Impact , While our results suggest that curtail - ing fringe - interactions may effectively reduce the growth of fringe communities on mainstream platforms , it raises eth - ical concerns about potential censorship . We make two ob - servations on that matter . First , the ethical implications of limiting specific platform interactions deserve careful con - sideration . Balancing the need to mitigate harmful fringe communities with respect for free expression is a complex challenge , and platform stakeholders must weigh the poten - tial harm of fringe communities against the principles of free speech . Second , the narrative of ”free speech” is a crucial mechanism that fringe platforms , such as Parler , use to lure users away from mainstream platforms . Limiting users’ abil - ity to post may result in migrations toward fringe platforms , putting users at risk of further radicalization . References Ammari , T . ; and Schoenebeck , S . 2015 . Understanding and sup - porting fathers and fatherhood on social media sites . In Proceed - ings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in com - puting systems , 1905 – 1914 . Austin , P . C . 2011 . An introduction to propensity score methods for reducing the effects of confounding in observational studies . Multivariate behavioral research 46 ( 3 ) : 399 – 424 . Backstrom , L . ; Kumar , R . ; Marlow , C . ; Novak , J . ; and Tomkins , A . 2008 . Preferential behavior in online groups . In Proceedings of the 2008 international conference on web search and data mining , 117 – 128 . Baumgartner , J . ; Zannettou , S . ; Keegan , B . ; Squire , M . ; and Black - burn , J . 2020 . The PushShift Reddit dataset . In ’20Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media , vol - ume 14 , 830 – 839 . Butter , M . ; and Knight , P . 2020 . Routledge handbook of conspiracy theories . Routledge . Caren , N . ; Jowers , K . ; and Gaby , S . 2012 . A social movement on - line community : Stormfront and the white nationalist movement . In Media , movements , and political change , 163 – 193 . Emerald Group Publishing Limited . Chandrasekharan , E . ; Jhaver , S . ; Bruckman , A . ; and Gilbert , E . 2022 . Quarantined ! Examining the effects of a community - wide moderation intervention on Reddit . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 29 ( 4 ) : 1 – 26 . Chandrasekharan , E . ; Pavalanathan , U . ; Srinivasan , A . ; Glynn , A . ; Eisenstein , J . ; and Gilbert , E . 2017 . You can’t stay here : The ef - ficacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Pro - ceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 ( CSCW ) : 1 – 22 . Collins , B . ; and Zadrozny , B . 2020 . Facebook bans QAnon across its platforms . https : / / www . nbcnews . com / tech / tech - news / facebook - bans - qanon - across - its - platforms - n1242339 . Devlin , J . ; Chang , M . - W . ; Lee , K . ; and Toutanova , K . 2018 . Bert : Pre - training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under - standing . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1810 . 04805 . Dodge , J . ; Ilharco , G . ; Schwartz , R . ; Farhadi , A . ; Hajishirzi , H . ; and Smith , N . 2020 . Fine - tuning pretrained language models : Weight initializations , data orders , and early stopping . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2002 . 06305 . Gelman , A . 2014 . It’s not matching or regression ; it’s matching and regression . URL https : / / statmodeling . stat . columbia . edu / 2014 / 06 / 22 / matching - regression - matching - regression / . Glymour , M . ; Pearl , J . ; and Jewell , N . P . 2016 . Causal inference in statistics : A primer . John Wiley & Sons . Hoffman , B . ; Ware , J . ; and Shapiro , E . 2020 . Assessing the threat of incel violence . Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 43 ( 7 ) : 565 – 587 . Horta Ribeiro , M . ; Jhaver , S . ; Zannettou , S . ; Blackburn , J . ; Stringh - ini , G . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; and West , R . 2021 . Do platform migra - tions compromise content moderation ? evidence from r / the donald and r / incels . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Inter - action 5 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 24 . Hwang , S . ; and Foote , J . D . 2021 . Why do people participate in small online communities ? Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 25 . Jaki , S . ; De Smedt , T . ; Gw´o´zd´z , M . ; Panchal , R . ; Rossa , A . ; and De Pauw , G . 2019 . Online hatred of women in the Incels . me fo - rum : Linguistic analysis and automatic detection . Journal of Lan - guage Aggression and Conflict 7 ( 2 ) : 240 – 268 . Jhaver , S . ; Boylston , C . ; Yang , D . ; and Bruckman , A . 2021 . Eval - uating the effectiveness of deplatforming as a moderation strategy on Twitter . Proceedings of the CSW2’21 on Human - Computer In - teraction 5 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 30 . Jigsaw . 2022 . Perspective API . https : / / perspectiveapi . com / . Kaitlyn , T . 2020 . The Secret Internet of TERFs . https : / / www . theatlantic . com / technology / archive / 2020 / 12 / reddit - ovarit - the - donald / 617320 / . Accessed on 2022 - 08 - 26 . Kumar , S . ; Stecher , G . ; Li , M . ; Knyaz , C . ; and Tamura , K . 2018 . MEGA X : molecular evolutionary genetics analysis across com - puting platforms . Molecular biology and evolution 35 ( 6 ) : 1547 . Lampe , C . ; and Johnston , E . 2005 . Follow the ( slash ) dot : effects of feedback on new members in an online community . In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work , 11 – 20 . Lauckner , C . ; and Hsieh , G . 2013 . The Presentation of Health - Related Search Results and Its Impact on Negative Emotional Outcomes . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu - man Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’13 , 333 – 342 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery . ISBN 9781450318990 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470702 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470702 . Lingel , J . ; Naaman , M . ; and Boyd , D . M . 2014 . City , self , network : transnational migrants and online identity work . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , 1502 – 1510 . Lu , X . ; Phang , C . W . ; and Yu , J . 2011 . Encouraging participation in virtual communities through usability and sociability develop - ment : An empirical investigation . ACM SIGMIS Database : The DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems 42 ( 3 ) : 96 – 114 . Lyons , M . N . 2017 . Ctrl - alt - delete : The origins and ideology of the alternative right . Political Research Associates 20 . Monti , C . ; Cinelli , M . ; Valensise , C . ; Quattrociocchi , W . ; and Starnini , M . 2023 . Online conspiracy communities are more re - silient to deplatforming . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2303 . 12115 . Paudel , P . ; Blackburn , J . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; Zannettou , S . ; and Stringhini , G . 2021 . Soros , child sacrifices , and 5G : under - standing the spread of conspiracy theories on web communities . arXiv : 2111 . 02187 . Pennebaker , J . W . ; Francis , M . E . ; and Booth , R . J . 2001 . Linguistic inquiry and word count : LIWC 2001 . Mahway : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Phadke , S . ; Samory , M . ; and Mitra , T . 2022 . Pathways through con - spiracy : the evolution of conspiracy radicalization through engage - ment in online conspiracy discussions . In Proceedings of the Inter - national AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 16 , 770 – 781 . Ren , Y . ; Harper , F . M . ; Drenner , S . ; Terveen , L . ; Kiesler , S . ; Riedl , J . ; and Kraut , R . E . 2012 . Building member attachment in on - line communities : Applying theories of group identity and inter - personal bonds . MIS quarterly 841 – 864 . Ribeiro , M . H . ; Blackburn , J . ; Bradlyn , B . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; Stringhini , G . ; Long , S . ; Greenberg , S . ; and Zannettou , S . 2021 . The evolution of the manosphere across the web . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , volume 15 , 196 – 207 . Ridings , C . M . ; and Gefen , D . 2004 . Virtual community attrac - tion : Why people hang out online . Journal of Computer - mediated communication 10 ( 1 ) : JCMC10110 . Rosenbaum , P . R . 2005 . Sensitivity analysis in observational stud - ies . Encyclopedia of statistics in behavioral science . Rosenbaum , P . R . ; and Rubin , D . B . 1983 . The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects . Biometrika 70 ( 1 ) : 41 – 55 . Russo , G . ; Horta Ribeiro , M . ; Casiraghi , G . ; and Verginer , L . 2023a . Understanding online migration decisions following the banning of radical communities . In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Web Science Conference 2023 , 251 – 259 . Russo , G . ; Stoehr , N . ; and Ribeiro , M . H . 2023 . Acti at evalita 2023 : Overview of the conspiracy theory identification task . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2307 . 06954 . Russo , G . ; Verginer , L . ; Ribeiro , M . H . ; and Casiraghi , G . 2023b . Spillover of antisocial behavior from fringe platforms : The unin - tended consequences of community banning . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , vol - ume 17 , 742 – 753 . Samory , M . ; and Mitra , T . 2018 . Conspiracies online : User dis - cussions in a conspiracy community following dramatic events . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and So - cial Media , volume 12 . Schmid , A . P . 2013 . Radicalisation , de - radicalisation , counter - radicalisation : A conceptual discussion and literature review . ICCT research paper 97 ( 1 ) : 22 . Schmitz , M . ; Muric , G . ; and Burghardt , K . 2022 . Quantifying how hateful communities radicalize online users . In 2022 IEEE / ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining ( ASONAM ) , 139 – 146 . IEEE . Trujillo , A . ; and Cresci , S . 2022 . Make reddit great again : assessing community effects of moderation interventions on r / the donald . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer In - teraction 6 ( CSCW2 ) : 1 – 28 . Waller , I . ; and Anderson , A . 2019 . Generalists and specialists : Us - ing community embeddings to quantify activity diversity in online platforms . In The World Wide Web Conference , 1954 – 1964 . Waller , I . ; and Anderson , A . 2021 . Quantifying social organization and political polarization in online platforms . Nature . Washington Post . 2020 . ‘Reddit closes long - running forum supporting President Trump after years of policy violations’ . URL https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / technology / 2020 / 06 / 29 / reddit - closes - long - running - forum - supporting - president - trump - after - years - policy - violations / . Weld , G . ; West , P . ; Glenski , M . ; Arbour , D . ; Rossi , R . A . ; and Al - thoff , T . 2022 . Adjusting for confounders with text : Challenges and an empirical evaluation framework for causal inference . In ICWSM . Williams , C . 2020 . The ontological woman : A history of deauthen - tication , dehumanization , and violence . The Sociological Review 68 ( 4 ) : 718 – 734 . Zhang , J . ; Hamilton , W . ; Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , C . ; Jurafsky , D . ; and Leskovec , J . 2017 . Community identity and user engage - ment in a multi - community landscape . In Proceedings of the in - ternational AAAI conference on web and social media , volume 11 , 377 – 386 . Zhang , T . ; Kishore , V . ; Wu , F . ; Weinberger , K . Q . ; and Artzi , Y . 2019 . Bertscore : Evaluating text generation with bert . arXiv : 1904 . 09675 . 7 Appendix Finetuning of BERT . We fine - tune BERT ( Devlin et al . 2018 ) with an additional linear layer to compute the propen - sity that a comment written by a user receives a fringe - interaction . To do so , this model takes as input the content of the comment c non − fringe and the title of the corresponding Reddit submission . We , then , concatenate the [ CLS ] token with user and post - level covariates to compute the propen - sity of a comment c non − fringe to receive a comment from a fringe user u non − fringe We fine - tune this model by following the recommenda - tion of Dodge et al . ( 2020 ) . Specifically , we balance our training data including all comments c non − fringe written by a non - fringe user u non − fringe that received a fringe - interaction ( treatment group ) and a subsample of possible controls such as to build a balanced dataset for the training of BERT and the additional linear layer . We then repeat the fine - tuning using five different random seeds for fifty differ - ent subsamples of the control group . We do not observe a statistical difference between the values of the loss func - tion for the different subsamples . We fine - tune an instance of this model for each of groups of interactions wit users of r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald . We trained each of these instances for 5 epochs in total . A Tesla T4 GPU for the fine - tuning of the model . Finally , Table 3 shows a list of examples of comments written by treated and control users that that we matched using the model described above . Robustness of Balanced Risk Set Matching We have evaluated the robustness of our results against two differ - ent matching procedure . The first is described in Section 3 . 4 which is based on propensity score matching and nearest neighbour algorithm . The second approach we match treat - ment and control unitis directly in the covariates space . To do so , we compute the cosine similarity between the vectoral representations ( i . e . , [ CLS ] - token concatenated with post and user - level covariates ) and match them using the nearest neighbor algorithm . We do not find any statistically signifi - cant difference in our results using these two approaches . To show the quality of our matching , we show in Figure 7 ”love plots” for the absolute standardized mean differences of all post and user profile covariates described in Section 3 . 3 . To further check the average similarity of our matched com - ments at semantic level considering we measure the average BERTScore ( Zhang et al . 2019 ) of the treatment comments with ( i ) the matched control comments and ( ii ) ten random samples of all possible control comments . Moreover , we also consider other linguistic traits like toxicity and LIWC dimensions to obtain a more interpretable representation of the similarity between matched comments . We show the val - ues of the absolute standardized mean errors ( ASMD ) before and after matching for all three subreddits we analyzed . Subreddits Social Dimensions In Section 4 . 2 , we stratify the effect of fringe - interactions across three ”social dimen - sions” representing subreddits partisanship , age and gender . We assign each subreddit to one of ten groups based on its social dimension score ( deciles ) . Table 3 ( bottom ) provides a list of examples of subreddits in each of the decile for par - tisan , age and gender score computed accordingly to Waller and Anderson ( 2019 ) . Collection of Communities Lingo . To collect the lingo of r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald specific com - munity lingo we build a specialized web - crawler . We then collected from the offical websites of these three commu - nities the list of the terms creating the glossary of these three communities . We then count for each of the comments in our analysis the number of Incels , GenderCritical , and The Donald related terms . 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 Activity Foc . Score Post Dir . Replies Post Users Post Comments Comment Users BERTScoreSexualMaleFemaleSwearSadnessAngerAnxietyToxicity ( a ) Incels Unmatched Matched 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 Absolute SMD ( b ) GenderCritical 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 ( c ) The _ Donald Figure 7 : Absolute standardized mean differences ( SMD ) for fringe interactions before and after matching for all the covari - ates used for the balanced risk set matching . The SMDs have been computed for all three considered subreddits r / Incels , r / GenderCritical , and r / The Donald Treatment Control Maybe you are dressing or groomed so you look somewhat gay and why women aren’t going out with you and men are hitting on you . Just a thought , no disrespect intended . The whole point of being gay is that you are attracted to other men . Not men dressed as women or people born a woman and identify as a man and use a strap on . Sorry honey but maybe try Tinder China’s top politicians are mainly scientists , The USA’s top politi - cians are mainly religious zealots and dumbfucks . Guess who in - vests more in climate change . If anyone is going to speak of climate change , they must be armed with the true facts . Unfortunately , the major data points are very skewed . This was uncovered via Wikileaks . Follow the money . Trump is the symptom of everything that is wrong with US politics while Hillary is the cause . Real talk that was worded beautifully , I wholeheartedly agree . You’re welcome , but please enlighten me on why Hillary should be president without mentioning Donald Trump . If survival requires that we keep the environment to a certain level of stability , then we must . And what is your stance in the current pollution situation as well as big oil industry ? Yeah , because oil and gas companies are totally struggling for prof - its - notwithstanding the recent and temporary drop in oil prices . Also , you’re aware that a focus on renewables would increase sup - ply , which would decrease prices ? It balances out and is certainly better for the environment . Table 2 : Examples of comments that received a fringe - interaction ( treated ) matched with comments that did not ( control ) Decile Partisan Age Gender D1 democrats , Marijuana knifeparty , teenagers malelifestyle , fuckingmanly D2 drugstore , TwoXSex skateboarding , Jokes SRSMen , Machinists D3 TVDetails , help uncharted , studyAbroad DestructionPorn , Archery D4 see , giantbomb ImaginaryMonsters , GirlTalk porngifs , adorableporn D5 happygirls , MOMs Xsome , kickasstorrents AdPorn , xxxcaptions D6 Magic , porn SugarBaby , KingstonOntario weirdal , CryptoKitties D7 DebateCommunism , ideas exmormon , MadMax PalaceClothing , WWE D8 FTC , BitcoinBeginners LifeProTips , vermont gaymers , GirlsXBattle D9 Gunsforsale , russia Plumbing , tuckedinkitties DDLC , BattleCatsCheats D10 Conservative , Military RedditForGrownups , MealPrepSunda againstmensrights , TheGirlSurvivalGuide Table 3 : Examples of subreddits in each decile according to Partisan , Age and Gender Scores . Top rows are most left - leaning ( □ ) , young ( □ ) , male ( □ ) subreddits , respectively . Bottom rows are most right - leaning ( □ ) , old ( □ ) , and female ( □ ) subreddits , respectively .