Using Cultures of Participation to Change Behaviors Holger Dick University of Colorado at Boulder Campus Box 430 , Boulder , CO 80309 - 0430 + 1 - 303 - 335 - 0330 holger . dick @ colorado . edu ABSTRACT My doctoral research addresses two major systemic problems : energy sustainability and education , specifically how to engage learners as active contributors and decision makers rather than passive consumers . I design , develop , and evaluate socio - technical environments that facilitate cultures of participation in order to change human behavior towards energy sustainability . I analyze group interactions that influence and determine cultures of participation and I am conducting crowd - sourced user studies with the goal of creating theoretically - based and empirically - supported frameworks for the creation of socio - technical environments . Categories and Subject Descriptors K . 4 . 2 Computing Milieux : COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY : Social Issues General Terms Measurement , Design , Human Factors . Keywords cultures of participation ; sustainability ; meta - design . 1 . INTRODUCTION Two of the most important and challenging problems pursued by the current US administration are energy sustainability and education , for the 21 st century . These are systemic problems that require fundamental changes in human behavior , technological environments , and mindsets . In my PhD research , I am addressing these two topics with an approach that facilitates cultures of participation to cause changes in society . Cultures of participation , building upon Web 2 . 0 software environments , are highly relevant to GROUP and at the same time insufficiently understood and supported . 2 . MY RESEARCH ACTIVITIES Building upon my own research on collaborative environments to support research communities and classroom activities [ 1 ] , I am working to create a meta - design environment [ 2 ] , called eViz , in which participants learn and teach about the effects of their consumption behaviors . My major objective with eViz is to gain a better understanding of interactions within cultures of participation and groups of users [ 3 ] . Boundary objects are generally accepted to play an important role in group interactions [ 4 ] . In my PhD research , I am combining the concept of boundary objects with insights into the effects cultures have on cognition , perception , and decision making . I am analyzing how the knowledge of individuals interacts with their immediate environment and with their cultural background , influencing their actions and perceptions . An individual’s cultural background and beliefs also have an impact on their perception and cognition [ 5 ] , and thus the boundary objects that work for them . People might understand , agree with , or perceive things differently based on their existing values and world - views . For example , as easterner tend to have a more holistic and social perception than westerners [ 6 ] , a system that focus on the money - savings and individual can achieve might be effective for Americans , but not for Chinese . And a system that tells users how to reduce CO2 emissions might not work for those who deny global warming , while the same people might be motivated by a system showing how to reduce energy costs . To support more innovations and productive collaborations , I am extending the design methodology of meta - design that is focused on “design for designers” . It enables end - users and domain users to adapt , extend , and modify a system to their unique and specific needs and preferences . Meta - design is a framework that is well suited for cultures of participation because it is built around the notion that every user can become an active contributor rather than remain a passive consumer . My focus on energy education allows me to pursue a topic that is inherently social . Not only does the social environment influence energy consumption behaviors [ 7 , 8 ] : everyone , the ‘group of all’ , is impacted by the choices and actions individuals take . As such , the energy domain is meaningful to everyone but often neglected by people – something that could be changed if decision makers as well as designers understand better questions of group interactions and common boundary objects . 2 . 1 ANALYZING GROUP INTERACTION As a first step , I analyzed group interactions in studies run through Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) . AMT allows registered internet users – so - called turkers – to take on small , paid tasks . AMT has been shown to produce reliable results for user studies [ 9 ] . By default , AMT tasks are open to all turkers . This might lead to noisy results for questions of group cognition if researchers don’t control for cultural backgrounds . To test my hypothesis that turkers with different cultural backgrounds produce significantly different results for cognitive studies , I ran a study based on earlier work by Nisbett . Two hundred turkers , half from the US , half from India , were asked to choose the “subjectively best - fitting” word - pair out of word - triplets ( e . g . train , track , bus ) . The results showed that Indian turkers were significantly more likely to choose functional relationship ( e . g . train and track – the train runs on tracks ) than US turkers , who were more likely to choose categorical pairs ( e . g . train Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . GROUP’10 , November 7 – 10 , 2010 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0387 - 3 / 10 / 11 . 349 and bus – both are means of mass transportation ) . This confirms their cultural background inherently determines an individual’s cognition . Building upon those results , I ran two studies in which I controlled for cultural background and that were especially relevant to GROUP : I analyzed how online communities influence individual participants in terms of involvement and expressed perceptions of written text . These studies tested whether peer pressure [ 10 , 11 ] would lead people to express different opinions on a text about energy waste and ways to save energy . The studies showed that while the group’s activity - level influences participants in their involvement , the group did not have a significant effect on how they perceived a given text about everyday energy waste . 3 . FUTURE WORK Previously , I only looked at immediate effects of a community on its members and did not analyze how cultural backgrounds and community activities interact . I could not clearly answer how designers can react to the findings and facilitate knowledge about group and cultural cognition to make systems more useful and interesting to a more diverse spectrum of people . I am currently developing eViz , a software system and research framework that addresses these issues . The system will be used for after - school club projects teaching students about how to save energy in smart ways . It allows all students to find , extend , or create visualizations that are meaningful to them , thereby increasing motivation and playfully providing deeper insights into the domain . Developed as a meta - design environment , users can build upon provided seeds [ 12 ] and collaborate to create meaningful representations of energy usage . The existing crowd - sourced studies are going to be combined with data and ethnographic observations of eViz users . Using eViz in after - school clubs allows me to observe and analyze long - term effects of the groups’ activities and expressed opinions on individuals’ perception of the energy domain without the artificial extrinsic motivation common in class activities . Students are free to explore and create as much or as little as they like – giving aan accurate picture of how different aspects of eViz impact motivation . In brief , I am trying to answer the following the research questions in my PhD research : 1 . What is the influence of the environment – culturally as well as within the class community – on the kind of representations that are being created and their usefulness to students ? To answer this , a data analysis of the representations and the ratings that students gave them will be combined with ethnographic studies focusing on the students’ cultural background ( long - term ) and the class’s cultural environment ( short term ) . 2 . Can a meta - design approach help to provide environments that are more meaningful to individuals and beneficial to cultures of participation ? To answer this , reactions to the student - created and extended systems will be compared with reactions to systems designed by domain experts and teachers . The hypothesis is that meta - design environments allow for coverage of diverse cultural backgrounds and should thus be more effective in motivating more users . 4 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank the Center for Lifelong Learning and Design ( L3D ) , especially my advisor Gerhard Fischer . 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Dick , H . , Eden , H . and Fischer , G . 2009 . Increasing and Sustaining Participation to Support and Foster Social Creativity . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the International Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C ' 2009 ) ( Berkeley , CA , USA , 2009 ) . 363 - 364 . [ 2 ] Fischer , G . 2009 . End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation . In End - User Development , V . Pipek , M . B . Rossen , B . deRuyter and V . Wulf . Springer , Heidelberg , 3 - 14 . [ 3 ] Stahl , G . 2009 . For a science of group interaction . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work - GROUP ' 09 ( Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , 2009 ) . ACM Press , 129 - 138 . [ 4 ] Phelps , A . F . and Reddy , M . 2009 . The influence of boundary objects on group collaboration in construction project teams . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work - GROUP ' 09 ( Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , 2009 ) . ACM Press , 125 - 128 . [ 5 ] Kahan , D . 2010 . Fixing the communications failure . Nature , 463 ( February 18 2010 ) , 296 - 297 . [ 6 ] Nisbett , R . E . and Masuda , T . 2003 . Culture and point of view . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 100 ( 2003 ) , 11163 - 11170 . [ 7 ] Schultz , P . W . 1999 . Values As Predictors of Environmental Attitudes : Evidence for Consistency Across 14 Countries . Journal of Environmental Psychology , 19 ( 1999 ) , 255 - 265 . [ 8 ] Schultz , P . W . , Nolan , J . M . , Cialdini , R . B . , Goldstein , N . J . and Griskevicius , V . 2007 . The constructive , destructive , and reconstructive power of social norms . Psychological science : a journal of the American Psychological Society / APS , 18 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 429 - 434 . [ 9 ] Kittur , A . , Chi , E . H . and Suh , B . 2008 . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the CHI 2008 ( Florence , Italy , April 5 - 10 , 2008 ) . ACM New York , NY , USA , [ 10 ] Brown , B . , Clasen , D . and Eicher , S . 1986 . Perceptions of peer pressure , peer conformity dispositions , and self - reported behavior among adolescents . DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY , 22 ( 1986 ) , 521 - 530 . [ 11 ] Brzozowski , M . J . , Sandholm , T . and Hogg , T . 2009 . Effects of feedback and peer pressure on contributions to enterprise social media . In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work - GROUP ' 09 ( Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , 2009 ) . ACM Press , 61 - 70 . [ 12 ] Fischer , G . and Ostwald , J . 2002 . Seeding , Evolutionary Growth , and Reseeding : Enriching Participatory Design with Informed Participation . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( Malmö , Sweden , 2002 ) . 135 - 143 . 350