This article was downloaded by : [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] On : 24 June 2016 , At : 15 : 21 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Organization Science Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Competitive Implications of Interfirm Mobility Filippo Carlo Wezel , Gino Cattani , Johannes M . Pennings , To cite this article : Filippo Carlo Wezel , Gino Cattani , Johannes M . Pennings , ( 2006 ) Competitive Implications of Interfirm Mobility . Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) : 691 - 709 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1060 . 0219 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . Copyright © 2006 , INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org Organization Science Vol . 17 , No . 6 , November – December 2006 , pp . 691 – 709 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:1) 06 (cid:1) 1706 (cid:1) 0691 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1060 . 0219 ©2006 INFORMS Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Filippo Carlo Wezel Faculty of Communication Sciences , University of Lugano , Via Giuseppe Bufﬁ 13 , CH - 6904 Lugano , Switzerland , and Department of Organization and Strategy , Tilburg University , Tilburg , The Netherlands , wezelf @ lu . unisi . ch Gino Cattani Department of Management , Stern School of Business , New York University , New York , New York 10012 , gcattani @ stern . nyu . edu Johannes M . Pennings Department of Management , The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania , Steinberg Hall 2107 , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 , and Faculty of Economics and Business Administration , Tilburg University , Tilburg , The Netherlands , pennings @ wharton . upenn . edu T his paper examines the competitive consequences of interﬁrm mobility . Because the loss of key members ( deﬁned as top decision makers ) to competing ﬁrms may amount to a replication of a ﬁrm’s higher - order routines , we investigate the conditions under which interﬁrm mobility triggers transfer of routines across organizational boundaries . We examine membership lists pertinent to the Dutch accounting industry to study key member exits and ﬁrm dissolutions over the period 1880 – 1986 . We exploit information on the type of membership migration ( individual versus collective ) and the competitive saliency of the destination ﬁrm as inferred from the recipient status ( incumbent versus start - up ) and its geographic location ( same versus different province ) . The dissolution risk is highest when collective interﬁrm mobility results in a new venture within the same geographic area . The theoretical implications of this study are discussed . Key words : interﬁrm mobility ; routines replication ; competition 1 . Introduction The recruitment , development , and retention of employ - ees are central factors for organizational survival . While focus on people as a source of superior performance is hardly new ( e . g . , Penrose 1959 , Pfeffer 1994 , Grant 1996 ) , it has recently become even more salient on the grounds that a ﬁrm’s stock of routines is enacted by its members ( Cyert and March 1963 , Nelson and Win - ter 1982 , Coff 1997 , Pennings and Wezel 2006a ) . Not surprisingly , recruiting individuals from rival organiza - tions has been a technique increasingly used to access resources and routines not available in - house ( see Rao and Drazin 2002 ) . Likewise , ﬁrms attempt to limit out - bound movement of members to competing ﬁrms ( see , e . g . , Coff 1997 ) . Much of the theory and research to date has focused on the antecedents of turnover with general inquiries on voluntary turnover ( for a review , see Williams and O’Reilly III 1998 , e . g . ) . Inquiries on possible turnover consequences have revolved around the impact on the transferring member’s performance ( Harris and Helfat 1997 , Huckman and Pisano 2006 ) . Another subset of research studies has examined cases of turnover lim - ited to interﬁrm mobility , and their consequences for the source ﬁrm ( Sørensen 1999 ) , the destination ﬁrm ( Agarwal et al . 2004 , Rao and Drazin 2002 , Wezel and Saka 2006 ) , or both the source and destination ﬁrms ( Phillips 2002 ) . Evidence suggests that spin - offs are speedier than de novo ﬁrms in mobilizing resources ( Ruef 2005 ) and tend to replicate or modify an idea encountered through their previous employment history ( Bhide 1994 ) . In their study of the U . S . commercial laser industry , Klepper and Sleeper ( 2005 ) have further conﬁrmed that spin - offs inherit knowledge from their sources . The rationale of these studies is that members moving to a peer ﬁrm bring along not only their skills and experience ( McKelvey 1982 , Boeker 1997 , Rao and Drazin 2002 ) , but also those organizational routines in which they have played a part ( Phillips 2002 ) . Despite this large body of research , several issues remain unresolved . Many studies assume that interﬁrm mobility entails the transfer of resources and routines without any further qualiﬁcation . However , resources and routines are distinct and so are the conditions under which they can be successfully transferred . As they move from ﬁrm to ﬁrm , members bring along their human and social capital , but the extent to which they can replicate existing routines in the destination ﬁrm is less obvious because routines are less dependable on single individuals . Previous studies treat such behav - ioral templates as homogeneous and do not distinguish between high - order and operating routines . This distinc - tion is particularly important for explaining the com - petitive implications of interﬁrm mobility . Lower - order routines are decomposable and portable ( Baldwin and Clark 2002 ) and readily replicated across time and space . 691 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 692 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS By contrast , higher - order routines attend to the creation and coordination of lower - level routines as well as orga - nizational resources ( Dosi et al . 2000 , Winter 2000 , Zollo and Winter 2002 ) , and it remains unclear whether their value can be captured in the destination ﬁrm ( see Edmondson et al . 2001 ) . This paper explicitly studies the competitive impli - cations for the donor organization of higher - order rou - tine replication due to interﬁrm mobility . Our theoret - ical argument rests on the premise that recruiting key organizational members from rivals is a critical mecha - nism by which ﬁrms can appropriate not only routines , but also resources ( e . g . , Rao and Drazin 2002 ) . Prior research has also suggested how the consequences of personnel mobility are not conﬁned to the recipient ﬁrm because inﬂows or outﬂows , or both , may eventually increase the competitive similarity between donor and recipient organizations ( Sørensen 1999 , Phillips 2002 , but see Boone et al . 2006 ) . We argue that a critical con - dition for the emergence of interorganizational similar - ity can be attributed to the transfer of higher - order rou - tines due to personnel outﬂows . Because these routines govern processes of resource acquisition and allocation , their successful replication is a source of competitive interdependence . A review of the conditions facilitat - ing higher - order routine replication , therefore , helps us understand when interﬁrm mobility produces competi - tive consequences that undermine the donor’s survival chances . It is worth noting that whether or not the recipi - ent beneﬁts from this routine transfer remains a separate issue . Our main concern is with the competitive interde - pendence between the donor and the recipient produced by increased similarity . That is why we investigate the conditions that preserve the integrity of routines being transferred rather than the performance implication of the transfer for the recipient . Based on the deﬁnition of routines adopted in this paper ( see § 2 ) , three sets of distinct but interdependent conditions conducive to routine replication are spelled out . First , replication is more likely to succeed when organizational members leave as a group , and even more so if they have worked together for an extended time . Second , organizational members have more free - dom in replicating routines when leaving and starting a new venture than joining an incumbent already endowed with a well - engrained set of routines . Finally , success - ful replication is a function of the co - location of the two ﬁrms because routines embody both organization - and context - speciﬁc characteristics . Because success - ful replication increases the interdependence between organizations , this study sheds light on the competi - tive implication of routine replication due to interﬁrm mobility . The present study analyzes the entire population of Dutch accounting ﬁrms over the period 1880 – 1986 . Because the concern is with the competitive implications for the donor organization of higher - order routine repli - cation due to interﬁrm mobility , we focus on the depar - ture of so - called key members , i . e . , members with decision - making authority ( e . g . , members of the board of directors , or senior partners ) . Following previous research on interﬁrm routine transfer as a function of departing individuals’ position or rank in the origin ﬁrm ( Phillips 2002 ) , we track the departure of partners , dis - regarding exits of other members , such as associates , whose participation in the creation of higher - order rou - tines is much less critical . Other forms of turnover , including death , retirement , or transfer to a nonrival ﬁrm , are rather inconsequential in competitive terms . Such turnover is unlikely to engender replication of organiza - tional routines in rival ﬁrms , which is the focus of this paper . The paper is organized as follows . Section 2 presents the theory and its ﬁve hypotheses . Section 3 describes the study’s empirical setting , data , and independent and control variables . Section 4 explains the motivation behind the models estimated and the method employed to test the hypotheses . Section 5 presents the results . We conclude by discussing the main implications of the ﬁndings and identifying important topics for future re - search ( § 6 ) . 2 . Theoretical Background We start with the premise that interﬁrm mobility may produce a transformation of a ﬁrm’s competitive sur - roundings . Previous studies showed how personnel mobility might increase similarity of routines and re - sources across organizations ( Boeker 1997 , Sørensen 1999 , Phillips 2002 , Pennings and Wezel 2006b ) and their competitive interdependence . We concern ourselves only with the competitive implications occasioned by organizational routines replication resulting from inter - ﬁrm mobility . The focus is on routines because resources such as human and social capital are typically attached to individuals . Even when resources are ﬁrm speciﬁc and therefore less valuable in a different context , members may bring them along as they move from ﬁrm to ﬁrm . By contrast , successful replication of ﬁrm - entrenched routines is a less - obvious outcome of interﬁrm mobil - ity . Routines usually originate from repeated interaction among multiple actors inside or outside the ﬁrm over an extended period of time , which render them less sticky to single individuals . As a result , the odds of success at replicating them are contingent on a much broader range of conditions to be satisﬁed . Previous research showed how existing routines are more effectively transferred between a ﬁrm and its offspring or progeny ( Phillips 2002 , Klepper 2001 ) , but this is just one condition facil - itating their replication that requires us to elaborate on the mechanisms that allow preserving their integrity and value in a different context than the one in which they D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 693 originally developed . The present paper moves beyond existing research on the competitive implications of interﬁrm mobility , precisely because it provides an effort to embrace a whole set of interdependent conditions rooted in the deﬁnition of routines . Routines are hierarchical in their conﬁguration . Their categorization has followed an ordering from operational to metaroutines ( Cyert and March 1963 , Nelson and Winter 1982 ) . While the former dictate day - to - day ﬁrm behavior , the latter refer to the managerial discretion to coordinate , integrate , and deploy resources throughout the organization ( see Knott 2001 ) . Higher - order routines govern the use , combination , or recalibration of lower - order ones ( Nelson and Winter 1982 , Teece et al . 1997 ) . This integrative role renders higher - order routines read - ily transferable when moved by groups rather than indi - viduals . Such view is in line with Nelson and Winter ( 1982 , p . 105 ) who underscored that “to view organiza - tional memory as reducible to individual member mem - ories is to overlook , or undervalue , the linking of those individual memories by shared experience in the past , experiences that have established the extremely detailed and communication system that underlies routine perfor - mance . ” When people migrate to other ﬁrms , therefore , the propensity to replicate routines will be higher as they move with peers who have experienced similar histories and display equivalent cognitive dispositions . We claim that three conditions affect the efﬁcacy of higher - order routine replication and its impact on the donor’s performance . First , it is important to distinguish between solitary and group migrations of members . Next , because existing organizations soon after their birth become imprinted with high - order routines that are unlikely to be modiﬁed during their existence ( see Baron et al . 1996 ) , we should examine how the classiﬁcation of the destination ﬁrm—established or entrepreneurial— impedes or facilitates that routine transfer . Finally , as a partial replica of the donor ﬁrm , the competitive fallout will be more intensive if that replica resides in the same environment because the ﬁrm with reproduced template is more likely to secure resources ( e . g . , funding , employ - ees , goodwill ) that mirror those of the donor . 2 . 1 . Interﬁrm Mobility : Individual vs . Collective Replication Following Cohen and Bacdayan ( 1994 , p . 555 ) , routines can be deﬁned as “patterned sequences of learned behav - ior involving multiple actors who are linked by rela - tions of communication and / or authority . ” For instance , landing a commercial aircraft is a highly standardized but complex task , involving multiple actors performing interconnected subtasks that require proper coordination . One cannot fully understand how that routine actually works by examining only the pilot’s part ( Cohen and Bacdayan 1994 , p . 555 ) . Routines depend on “the con - nections , the stitching together of multiple participants and their actions to form a pattern that people can recog - nize and talk about as a routine” ( Pentland and Feldman 2005 , p . 6 ) . They are , therefore , anchored in the context or interactions of actors , whether internal or external to the ﬁrm , whose behavior they govern . Replication varies depending on whether routines are operational or metaroutines . This view ﬁts that of Cyert and March ( 1963 ) and Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) who elaborated on a dual routines perspective , where orga - nizational behavior stems from two sets of hierarchi - cally ordered routines : a set of operational routines that control day - to - day actions , and a set of metaroutines that govern operational routines ( see Knott 2001 ) . Meta - or higher - order routines lie at the core of managerial intervention . They entail learned sequences of conduct regarding governance , idiosyncratic , procedural knowl - edge of the competitive environment and organization of work ﬂows—in short , the arrangement and coordina - tion of ﬁrm activities ( Teece et al . 1997 , Henderson and Cockburn 1994 ) . Their directive role and involvement of people and processes permeate the behavior of the entire organization . In this respect , higher - order routines are holistic in their use and are harder to replicate than atomistic or modular ones such as those associated with operational tasks such as sales , production , and other functional activities . Furthermore , higher - order routines are inherently social and success of replication hinges on retention of their integrity . Being socially constructed , higher - order routines tran - scend individual skills . That is why several authors ( e . g . , Kogut and Zander 1992 , Levitt and March 1988 , Nel - son and Winter 1982 ) have argued that turnover does not necessarily compromise the integrity of existing rou - tines and ﬁrm performance , on the premise that orga - nizational routines are partly independent from individ - uals ( for a more comprehensive review , see Felin and Foss 2005 ) . Empirical research has likewise shown that routines are strongly embedded in the behavior and cog - nition of organizational members ( Song et al . 2003 ) : When migrating elsewhere , those very individuals could replicate previously developed routines . Therefore , inter - ﬁrm mobility may lower the donor’s ﬁrm performance through the leakage of proprietary routines as a result of the migration of members who have internalized the donor ﬁrm’s legacy . Successful transfer of routines to another ﬁrm is also a function of the position or rank of a departing individual in the origin ﬁrm . As Phillips ( 2002 , p . 476 ) puts it , the “more critical the potential founder’s position is , the more likely that the parent organization’s resources and routines will be affected as that founder exits to entrepreneurship . ” However , because routines usually involve multiple actors , whether internal or external to the ﬁrm , their replication in other ﬁrms depends on preserving existing patterns of interaction among those actors ( Nelson and Winter 1982 ) . The ability to preserve their integrity , and D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 694 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS thereby their successful replication , is diminished when organizational members leave alone . This also accords with the ﬁnding from a study showing that surgeons’ performance declines when they try to move their indi - vidual skills set toward other hospitals ( so - called split - ting of membership ) : Existing surgical routines combine with hospital - speciﬁc cultural and institutional elements to produce well - integrated operation room teams of medical personnel ( Huckman and Pisano 2006 ) . When ported into other organizations , those routines become dislodged and produce comparatively inferior postoper - ative results—i . e . , higher patient mortality . However , when groups rather than individuals export their routines , the tacit coordination and alignment of any replication is more readily attained ( see Edmondson et al . 2001 ) . Individuals are only partially engaged in the ﬁrm’s bundle of routines because their skills are com - plementary with those of their colleagues . In contrast , collective departure is more conducive to holistic repli - cation since preexisting systems of coordinated roles can be maintained . Successful replication of routines , there - fore , is contingent on whether mobility entails groups or single individuals . If a group of members departs together for a new ﬁrm , its routines can be transferred with greater integrity and at greater risk to the source ﬁrm . Accordingly , we hypothesize Hypothesis 1A ( H1A ) . The risk of organizational dissolution is higher when key members leave collec - tively rather than individually . Although collective movements engender successful replication , not all groups are homogeneous . Groups vary along dimensions that affect successful rou - tine transfer across organizational boundaries . Member homogeneity hinges on shared internalization of rou - tines among individual members . The accumulation of a common mind - set is subject to time compression dis - economies because compliance with or attachment to certain routines depends on the amount of time spent together . As Groysberg and colleagues ( 2006 , p . 94 ) recently showed , similar considerations hold even in the case of an executive’s mobility because “individual manager’s effectiveness can be attributed to his expe - rience working with colleagues or as part of a team . ” Central to the present perspective is both the notion of repeated interaction among actors and the idea that this interaction must unfold over an extended time . As members have been congealed into a common mind - set , they will preserve their stock of routines and therefore stand a better chance at replicating them . The longer the departing members have kept company , the more likely they are to subscribe to a common logic and a well - institutionalized template . This argument is consistent with empirical research on the relevance of team cohesiveness in building group coordination and trust . For example , in their study on start - ups in the semiconductor industry , Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven ( 1990 ) argued that “executives who have a history together have probably learned how to get along and communicate with each other” ( p . 509 ) . Ruef and his coauthors ( 2003 ) similarly found that trust and familiar - ity are more critical to founding team composition than are complementary skill sets . The implication is that , under conditions of collective out - migration , members who have spent a signiﬁcant amount of time together manifest better odds of successful replication . We thus hypothesize Hypothesis 1B ( H1B ) . The risk of organizational dissolution due to collective exit is higher the more time departing members have spent together before turning over . 2 . 2 . Member Exit and Firm Destination : Start - ups vs . Incumbents Prior research has shown that individuals formerly em - ployed by established ﬁrms often start new ventures ( Freeman 1986 , Burton et al . 2002 ) . This phenomenon is common to both high - tech ( Braum and MacDonald 1978 , Klepper and Sleeper 2005 , Agarwal et al . 2004 ) and service ( Phillips 2002 ) industries . Replication of routines in a start - up typically results in a more reli - able and authentic copy of routines than replication in an existing ﬁrm . Departing members enjoy less leeway in transferring existing routines from other ﬁrms when they join an incumbent with an established set of rou - tines . The competitive implications of routines replica - tion are bound to be more harmful when the source ﬁrm is new and not yet endowed with such institutionalized practices . The reason is that high - order routines become imprinted during early stages of the organizational life cycle and shape future actions and behaviors ( see , e . g . , Baron et al . 1996 ) . Knowledge stored in individual memories is “mean - ingful and effective only in some context” ( Nelson and Winter 1982 , p . 105 ) . Lacking the conditions that prompted the emergence of certain routines , the replica - tion of routines might be severely compromised . Using a genealogical framework , Phillips ( 2002 ) showed how members who leave an existing ( parent ) organization to found a new venture ( progeny ) within the same popula - tion are more likely to transfer resources and to repli - cate routines from their former employer . Because they are not constrained by preexisting patterns of interaction in the destination ﬁrm , those members enjoy more lati - tude in creating conditions similar to those of the source ﬁrm . As a result , the parent organization’s blueprint will “carry over to the new organization through the career experiences of the offspring’s founders” ( Phillips 2002 , p . 474 ) . Similarly , the literature on spin - offs ( e . g . , Bhide 2000 , Agarwal et al . 2004 , Klepper and Sleeper 2005 ) has shed new insights on the role of departing mem - bers for the build - up of a new ﬁrm . Because spin - offs D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 695 exploit their parents’ knowledge to offer products or ser - vices similar to those of their parents , they are competi - tively more threatening . As Agarwal and her colleagues ( 2004 , p . 501 ) noticed , “spin - outs pose a special threat to incumbents since they can capitalize on knowledge gained from discoveries made during the course of their founders’ employment in the incumbent ﬁrm . ” Unlike start - ups , established ﬁrms exhibit an array of routines . Because routines—especially higher - order routines—become imprinted in organizations early on ( Stinchcombe 1965 ) , any incumbent recipient exhibits a pattern of interaction producing resistance against the import of extramural routines . Internal resistance is likely to ensue because transferring routines from another ﬁrm might jeopardize the functioning of rou - tines in the destination ﬁrm by questioning what Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) called the truce —i . e . , the presence of an implicit understanding reducing the conﬂict between the divergent interests among organizational members . Attempts at replicating routines from another source may undermine the truce and require new processes and objectives , together with reestablishing a political equi - librium among the membership . In the case of newly founded ﬁrms , no truce is under threat and the replica - tion of routines does not face any internal resistance . It is therefore plausible to expect successful transfer of exist - ing routines to be more likely if the host organization is an entrepreneurial rather than an incumbent ﬁrm—and , by implication , to observe greater harm to the source ﬁrm . We thus hypothesize Hypothesis 2 ( H2 ) . The risk of organizational disso - lution due to key members’ interﬁrm mobility is higher when the recipient ﬁrm is a newly founded rather than an incumbent ﬁrm . 2 . 3 . Member Exit and Spatial Routines Replication Collective turnover and start - ups as destination are con - ditions conducive to routine replication . The departure of organizational members , however , takes on a rather different signiﬁcance depending on whether or not the source and the destination ﬁrms are co - located . Repli - cation is context dependent in that the actors whose conduct reﬂects the enactment of routines are institution - ally embedded . As Nelson and Winter ( 1982 , p . 125 ) put it , “a routine may involve extensive direct interac - tions with the organization’s environment and the mak - ing of numerous ‘choices’ that are contingent both upon the state of the environment and the state of the orga - nization itself . ” While geographic proximity is recog - nized as an important condition for routine replication , it becomes relevant only if proximity implies similarity in the broader organizational context . To put it differ - ently , it is not physical distance per se that matters , but whether that distance corresponds to historical , socioe - conomic , and institutional differences . Previous research has showed the existence of signiﬁcant historical , socio - economic , and institutional differences across spatially proximate locations ( see , e . g . , Putnam 1996 , Linz and de Miguel 1966 ) . As this stream of research suggests , the replication of routines due to interﬁrm mobility among co - located ﬁrms is more likely to succeed when they share the same context . This line of reasoning is consistent with Stinchcombe’s ( 1965 ) original insights . As Lounsbury and Ventresca ( 2002 , p . 21 ) recognized , “Stinchcombe focuses on the capacity for new organizations to develop new roles and routines that vary based on the distribu - tion of generalized skills outside an organization , the initiative of employees in the labor force , the degree of trust among workers based on competence in work roles . ” Because we deﬁned routines as sequences of learned behavior involving multiple actors both inter - nal and external to the ﬁrm , we expect institutions , customers , and competitors to signiﬁcantly shape them . When actors share the same context , existing patterns of interaction—including relations of communication or authority relations , or both—among such actors become geographically embedded . The connection between routines and their context has been emphasized in recent theorizing on the origins of organizational capabilities , deﬁned as high level or metaroutines ( Winter 2000 ) . In elaborating on capabil - ity learning , for instance , Winter ( 2000 ) asserted that metaroutines are meaningful only “in relation to a par - ticular competitive context” ( p . 982 ) and “are wired directly to the environment” ( p . 983 ) . This line of rea - soning seems also to be consistent with the insights of ecological research ( Hannan and Freeman 1977 , 1984 ) , whose framing of inertia implies a close correspondence between the organizational routines and the broader institutional and historical , not merely competitive , con - text . The same bundle of routines that enhances the ﬁt between the organization and its external environment might prove of little value when applied to a different context . The implication is that successful replication , and its associated competitive threat , is contingent on whether or not the donor and recipient organizations share the same context . Accordingly , we hypothesize Hypothesis 3 ( H3 ) . The risk of organizational disso - lution due to key members’ interﬁrm mobility is higher when they migrate to co - located competitors . These three dimensions—collective versus individ - ual , start - up versus incumbent , same versus different context—can generate diverse survival consequences for the donor . For instance , while the movement of groups of key members harms survival , this effect varies with the destination ﬁrm being new or established , or shar - ing the same environment . A complete appreciation of the survival consequences of interﬁrm mobility requires considering all three conditions jointly . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 696 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS Interﬁrm mobility should have greater competitive implications for the donor when the departure of mem - bers amounts to a collective rather than an individual act and results in an entrepreneurial rival residing in the same competitive environment . Groups of members that move to newly founded ﬁrms exhibit substantial discretion in replicating previously acquired routines , especially within the same context . With any other com - bination of these three dimensions ( e . g . , the rival is located in a different environment , or is an established ﬁrm , or the departure involves a single member ) , the competitive effects of interﬁrm mobility diminish . We thus hypothesize Hypothesis 4 ( H4 ) . The risk of organizational dis - solution due to interﬁrm mobility is highest when key members leave in groups to start a new ﬁrm in the same context . 3 . Empirical Setting To test our hypotheses , we traced the composition of the Dutch accounting industry over the period 1880 – 1986 . In line with more recent studies using data on this indus - try ( see Pennings and Wezel 2006a ) , we divided the overall population of accounting ﬁrms into 11 subpopu - lations , each corresponding to a different province . Our rationale is that each province represents a distinct selec - tion environment . Cattani et al . ( 2003 ) offered a detailed discussion of the historical , socioeconomic , and institu - tional factors making provinces the appropriate unit of analysis to study how spatial heterogeneity affects orga - nizational founding rates within each subpopulation . We argue that the same factors and geographic boundaries are critical for the likelihood of replicability of existing routines across organizations . Because organizations and their routines are designed to match a speciﬁc environ - ment , successful replication is contingent on whether or not the origin and the destination environments are the same . Over the period spanned by our study ( i . e . , 1880 – 1986 ) , the Netherlands , the setting of the current study , comprised eleven provinces : North Holland , South Hol - land , Fryslan , Groningen , Drenthe , Overijssel , Gelder - land , Utrecht , North Brabant , Zeeland , and Limburg . In the seventeenth century , the seven northern provinces included autonomous regions held together through a confederation , the Republic of the United Provinces . Perhaps it was the extraordinary degree of autonomy and home rule that accounts for the disinclination of provinces to secede . Such autonomy further engendered their unique socioeconomic identity . Two of the three southern provinces , very much like Italy’s Mezzogiorno , are located below the Rhine and the Meuse Rivers and were ruled partly by the Republic and partly by Spain and Austria . Although those provinces showed a delayed economic development as compared to the northern provinces , they exhibit patterns of development that are comparable to European standards . Apart from history , the provinces vary in soil struc - ture , geology , religion , economic development , urban - ization , and language or dialect ( Frysk is an ofﬁcially recognized language , spoken in the northern province of Fryslan , while provinces such as Groningen , Zeeland , and Limburg speak a distinct sublanguage , or dialect . Inhabitants from other provinces are not able to com - municate ﬂuently in the local language . The provinces are not merely administrative units , but are also his - torically , culturally , institutionally , and economically distinct entities . Historically , provinces are path depen - dent in their socioeconomic developments , endowed with unique socioeconomic legacies to which locally active accounting ﬁrms have become attached and which further evolved into geographically deﬁned strategic groups . The idiosyncratic historical path to industrializa - tion that Dutch provinces took has generated a distinc - tive pattern of regulating social groups that continues to inﬂuence the evolution of individual ﬁrms as well as entire industries . Altogether , we believe that these reasons justify our choice of mapping the geographic dimension along a dichotomous indicator ( within / outside province ) rather than using a continuous measure ( i . e . , distance in kilometers from the donor ﬁrm to the recip - ient ) . 3 . 1 . Data The data we use in this paper are similar to those that Pennings et al . ( 1998 ) analyzed in their study on the effect of organization - level changes in human and social capital on ﬁrm dissolution . Because our observation period ends in 1986 , our initial population is also smaller than that examined by Boone et al . ( 2000 ) , whose study extended until 1992 . We further eliminated single propri - etorships from our risk set , ending up with a population of 676 organizations . We collected information on the name , address , and status ( partner or associate ) of indi - vidual professional accountants , and also on the name and address of individual organizations from the mem - bership lists and directories of accountant associations , which were published at intervals varying from every year to every ﬁve years . More precisely , the frequency ( in percent ) of one - , two - , three - , four - , and ﬁve - year intervals are 24 % , 60 % , 6 % , 8 % , and 2 % , respectively . These larger gaps in data challenged our mapping of the effects of interﬁrm mobility on organizational dissolu - tion . However , as explained in § 4 , in our analyses we controlled for the variance in interval length by creating D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 697 a variable accounting for diverse time spans . We recon - structed the histories of individual organizations by ﬁrst aggregating individual - level data to the ﬁrm level . The data cover the entire population of Dutch accounting ﬁrms over the period 1880 – 1986 . Following Boone et al . ( 2000 ) and Phillips ( 2002 ) , we deﬁne dissolution as exit from the market , without distinguishing between bankruptcy and merger or acqui - sition ( M & A ) . Our choice is motivated by the fact that “failure , in the sense of bankruptcy , cannot be observed in the audit industry and , therefore , cannot be distin - guished from other types of exit” ( Boone et al . 2000 , p . 368 ) . Thus , organizational dissolution encompasses different types of exit , ranging from the case in which a ﬁrm disappears because its owners are no longer listed in the Certiﬁed Professional Accountant ( CPA ) directo - ries , to the case of dissolution by acquisition or merger . In all such cases , we coded our dichotomous dependent variable as one and removed the ﬁrm from the risk set . Because the industry became more concentrated in the late 1960s in the wake of intense M & A activity , we checked whether our results might be affected by our broad notion of dissolution . We conducted a sensitiv - ity analysis including only the data up to and includ - ing 1966 . The results obtained remain similar to those presented in the paper . Accounting ﬁrms are stratiﬁed , consisting of partners and associates . In the analysis , we investigated the inter - ﬁrm mobility events involving only partners because they usually possess superior replication potential ( if only because they have been around longer and have successfully completed the tournament to partnership ) . The competitive effects of higher - order routine repli - cation should therefore be higher when departure of organizational members involves partners rather than associates . Within accounting ﬁrms , partners serve as producer - managers by actively participating in the busi - ness as key production workers ( Maister 1993 ) . Unlike shareholders of large corporations , partners are also responsible for the overall management . Their decision - making power extends to the task of building or chang - ing routines , such as those dealing with hiring and ﬁring policies , procuring work and deploying junior profes - sionals , differentiation ( i . e . , to hedge against market shrinkage ) , investment , personal ﬁnancial planning , and liability insurance premium decisions . ( For more details , see Maister 1993 . ) Being owners , partners enjoy more latitude in the transfer of organizational routines . This latitude of freedom is much larger in newly founded ﬁrms because partnership agreements strictly deﬁne the criteria of succession ( e . g . , setting the voting rights of partners for the transition ) and the principles behind the successor’s management . 3 . 2 . Qualitative Evidence The present study draws from archival sources and subjects the data to an econometric analysis exposing relationships between variables that defy comprehensive efforts at triangulation with other data—most notably qualitative observations . The replication of routines , which is central in this study , remains an unobserved phenomenon . As we argued before , the migration of senior members to peer ﬁrms harms the donor ﬁrm par - ticularly because , under certain conditions , the senior members can successfully replicate higher - order rou - tines . To obtain a more intuitive understanding , three consultants were interviewed . One was a former part - ner in a Swedish accounting ﬁrm ( he retired in January 2006 ) , one is still afﬁliated with a Dutch accounting ﬁrm , and one is no longer active as a CPA but currently heads a major Dutch consulting company to account - ing ﬁrms . Although our study period ends in 1986 , only one of the interviewees began to work as a CPA prior to that year . Because they all are or were partners of large accounting ﬁrms , we had the opportunity to ask them speciﬁc questions regarding different classes of routines ( which in the paper we labeled as higher - order and operating routines ) , their stickiness to individuals , and their replication due to interﬁrm mobility . The inter - views were semistructured and lasted from one to three hours each . According to one senior CPA , it is important to dis - tinguish between what he calls “technically” and “com - mercially” proﬁcient CPAs because different types of routines are involved in the performance of their tasks . The technical routines that are usually relevant in activ - ities such as auditing and sampling are highly portable and therefore more easily separable from professionals . By contrast , on the commercial side routines can only be transferred when people move . The commercial routines play a critical role when it comes to recruiting , coaching , and retaining junior professionals to ensure their loyalty . Professionals can take with them these higher - order rou - tines as they leave to join or create another ﬁrm . Higher - order routines are partly attached to professionals and their career proﬁles . A second CPA hinted at the difference between out - bound movements toward a new versus an incumbent ﬁrm . He suggested that the management style of partners renders a ﬁrm consistent in its governance . For instance , he referred to changes in the rules of governance after the completion of a merger when the treatment of bill - able hours was revised and partners’ discretionary allo - cations were suddenly curtailed—and which made the smiles on their faces disappear just as suddenly . This scenario contrasted with a peer ﬁrm where changes in ﬁrm climate did not occur each time a new wind blew , but where they rather stuck to their way of doing things . In that ﬁrm , as our consultant noted , no tussensprints are observed ; tussensprint is Tour de France jargon for an intermittent and opportunistic acceleration . Both CPAs objected to the view that partner mobil - ity also produces mobility among clients . They point to D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 698 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS anticompete clauses as part of partnership agreements . Because clients , too , are legally expected to abide by such clauses , the transfer of a professional to a peer ﬁrm does not result in a concomitant transfer of clients . Reputational damage to the professional and ﬁrm would exacerbate the ill - advised appropriation of such clients . If anything gets transferred , it is governance practices that migrate with the partner to a peer ﬁrm . The com - petitive damage due to partner turnover , therefore , can be hardly attributed to a loss of clients . Finally , when probing individual versus collective departure , one CPA hinted at the major advantage of collective transfer to form a new ﬁrm : “When departing as a team , they can leverage their governance skills they are no longer distracted by ‘atmospheric frictions , ’ per - sonality clashes , or person - culture misﬁts ; in short they start with a clean slate and do not become distracted politically . ” Recruitment and retention of people work - ing well together far exceed any other success factor in the accountancy . The competitive advantage derives from getting professionals , much less so from getting clients . Although such observations are rather limited in vali - dating the econometric results to be reported , they nev - ertheless shed light on the meaning of higher - order routines in our setting and on their replication as a result of interﬁrm mobility . Moreover , the implicit triangula - tion resulting from combining archival data with inter - view data , in conjunction with key informants’ review of our study , helped us to overcome the limitations of each separate source and to reduce construct validity problems ( see Yin 1994 ) . 3 . 3 . Independent Variables We tested our hypotheses by distinguishing interﬁrm mobility according to the three dimensions suggested by our theory : ( 1 ) joint group experience , ( 2 ) type of destination : incumbent or a newly founded organiza - tion , and ( 3 ) location of destination : same province or different province . The conditions under which they pose a competitive threat to the donor ﬁrm , however , are likely to vary . Our theoretical reasoning suggests that interﬁrm mobility affects the source ﬁrm’s survival chances more strongly when partners leave collectively ( Hypothesis 1A ) . We thus created two dummy variables ﬂagging whether the event under study involved indi - vidual ( Individual - exit ) or collective ( Group - exit ) cases of interﬁrm mobility . 1 We deﬁned a group as consisting of two or more partners who leave their employer and wind up working together for another ﬁrm , whether an incumbent or a start - up . We carried out the test concerning the potential of the group to replicate existing routines by counting the average number of years that the departing mem - bers spent together before their exit . Our choice of this variable is rooted in existing research that shows how joint experience improves cohesion , trust , and efﬁcacy of communication among team members ( Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven 1990 , Zenger and Lawrence 1989 , Groysberg et al . 2006 ) . While in any given interval a ﬁrm might lose several partners who exit individually , we typically observe only one collective departure in any given year . For each ﬁrm , our data do not display two or more groups of defecting partners during the same year , but more than one partner may leave to start up a new venture or join a competitor . Because higher - order routines typically involve multiple actors linked by pat - terns of communication and interaction , the ability to preserve the routines’ integrity as well as replicate them in a different context is diminished when a partner leaves alone . Although the number of partners leaving individ - ually also represents a loss of valuable human and social capital for the focal ﬁrm ( and we control for this effect in the analysis ) , our theory suggests that the degree of competition faced by the donor is proportional to the stock of experience shared by the defecting members . Following this logic , we tested Hypothesis 1B by cre - ating a measure of the ( logged ) average joint experience of defecting members . We also ran the analysis using the minimum number of years that organizational members spent together before leaving as a group . The average might confound the case where just a few group mem - bers worked together for a long time , while the others only for a few years , with the case where , on the con - trary , all group members almost always worked together . Thus , even if the average joint experience could be the same in both cases , the situation would of course be signiﬁcantly different . In the latter case group members most likely contributed to the creation of ( and therefore would be sharing ) the same bundle of routines . Because , in our data , groups typically consist of partners who worked together most of the time before leaving , the results do not depend on whether we use the average or the minimum number of years . The average joint experience was then disaggregated in several ways to test the remaining hypotheses . To test Hypothesis 2 we distinguished between the average experience of departing members founding a new ven - ture ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - new - ﬁrm ) and the average experience of departing members join - ing an existing ﬁrm ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - incumbent ) . The sum of these two variables is Group - average - joint - experience - to - any . As before , because we presume that the effect of the joint experience of depart - ing members increases organizational dissolution at a decreasing rate , we log - transformed each member exit variable . To test Hypothesis 3 , we distinguished between the ( logged ) average joint experience of partners moving to a ﬁrm located within the same province as the source ﬁrm ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - local - ﬁrm ) and the experience of partners moving to a different one ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - nonlocal - ﬁrm ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 699 The ultimate question to be addressed , however , is how these three forces jointly shape organizational sur - vival . We predicted that the competitive effects of inter - ﬁrm mobility are stronger when collective rather than when individual departures lead to a new venture in a geographic area similar to that of the source ﬁrm . Accordingly , we sorted the average experience of depart - ing members along four different combinations to test Hypothesis 4 . In particular , we distinguished between ( 1 ) the ( logged ) average joint experience of organizational members leaving as a group to found a new venture located within the same ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - local - new - ﬁrm ) or a different ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - nonlocal - new - ﬁrm ) province , and ( 2 ) the ( logged ) average joint experience of organizational mem - bers leaving as a group to work for an incumbent ﬁrm located within the same ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - local - incumbent ) or a different ( Group - average - joint - experience - to - nonlocal - incumbent ) province . Because all the above variables can take on the value of zero , we log - transformed them after adding one to their base value . Finally , to reinforce our causal inferences , we lagged all the independent variables by one observation period . 3 . 4 . Control Variables In the ﬁnal model , we included several control vari - ables—at the organizational , historical , and provincial levels—to rule out a number of competing hypotheses . Organizational Controls . A crucial alternative hy - pothesis concerns internal disruption . Because internal disruption of routines should take place in the pres - ence of any type of turnover , we controlled for turnover events ( e . g . , death , retirement , or joining a nonaccount - ing ﬁrm such as a client organization ) that represent exit from the sector by creating the ( logged ) variable Other - than - interﬁrm - mobility . Our theory suggests that the replication of higher - order routines is a distinct phe - nomenon from the transfer of ( human and ) social capital as a result of interﬁrm mobility . Like previous research ( e . g . , Phillips 2002 , Rao and Drazin 2002 ) , we did not directly measure routines . However , unlike this research , we tried to tease apart the effect of routines’ replication from the potentially confounding consequences of los - ing social capital by creating the variable Social capital loss , which measures the change in the stock ( in years ) of province - speciﬁc experience due to interﬁrm mobility . While this variable may also account for human capital features , we rely on our robustness checks—see model section on the individual level analyses—to rule out the existence of selectivity on exiting partners’ human and social capital . We also ruled out the impact of any dias - pora effect by adding a control that adjusts for the per - centage of partners leaving in a speciﬁc year relative to the total number of partners at the company level the year before an interﬁrm mobility event ( Percentage - of - partners - exiting ) . Additionally , instead of measuring the ratio of partners to associates , we followed Phillips ( 2002 ) by taking the ( logged ) number of associates , while controlling for the ( logged ) number of partners . A dummy variable was coded as one to indicate a very Small ﬁrm —i . e . , size of two employees—as such more fragile and exposed to a higher risk of failure . We ﬁnally controlled for the number of years elapsed since the founding of an organization by creating the variable Age . Following Petersen ( 1991 ) , we coded the variable by taking the midpoint of each period . Historical Controls . The Dutch accounting industry has been marked by important historical events that might well account for organization dissolution in spe - ciﬁc years . Several controls were added . We created two dummies for the governmental regulations deal - ing with World War I conditions ( one if during 1914 – 1918 , zero otherwise ) and the occurrence of World War II ( one if during 1941 – 1946 , zero otherwise ) . Another institutional event was the emergence of a Single asso - ciation ( or NIvRA—Netherlands Institute for Certiﬁed Accountants ) , which represented the collective interests of all Dutch accounting organizations and was estab - lished in 1966 ( one if year > 1966 , zero otherwise ) . Besides establishing disciplinary rules , the organization granted the Registered Accountant ( RA ) license on con - dition that a prospective auditor acquired “knowledge of complicated audit techniques ( such as statistical sam - pling , risk analysis , and analytical review ) and exten - sive knowledge of ﬁnancial accounting ( measurement methods , regulations , and standards ) ” ( Maijoor and van Witteloostuijn 1996 , p . 555 ) . The effect of regulatory changes enforced in 1971 and 1984 that signiﬁcantly heightened the demand for audit services was captured by two dummy variables , Regulation of 1971 ( one if year > 1971 ) and Regulation of 1984 ( one if year > 1984 ) . We used the rate of unemployment ( Unemploy - ment ) , a time - varying variable measured at the national level , to control for some of the circumstances under which the migration of professional accountants is more ( less ) frequently observed . Provincial Controls . We tried to estimate the extent to which more general ecological phenomena affect the risk of organizational dissolution with the inclusion of the linear and quadratic effects of density measures at the provincial level : Province density and Province density 2 ( i . e . , density squared ) . To control for the impact that the number of organizations populating the industry has on organization dissolution we also included C 4 , a measure of the level of concentration of the industry given by the total market share of the top four ﬁrms . The risk of dissolution might also be inﬂuenced by how many ﬁrms were created or dissolved each year , which reﬂects not only the degree of muniﬁcence of the environment , but also the extent to which ecological conditions affect interorganizational mobility by creating or destroying D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 700 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS Table 1 Descriptive Statistics Variable N obs . Mean Std dev Min Max Age 5 , 404 14 (cid:1) 667 13 (cid:1) 626 0 (cid:1) 50 66 (cid:1) 00 World War I 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 028 0 (cid:1) 165 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 World War II 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 080 0 (cid:1) 272 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Single association 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 264 0 (cid:1) 441 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Regulation 1971 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 199 0 (cid:1) 399 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Regulation 1984 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 123 0 (cid:1) 329 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Province inhabitants 5 , 404 1 , 810 , 008 652 , 859 271 , 669 3 , 121 , 471 C4 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 239 0 (cid:1) 121 0 (cid:1) 11 1 (cid:1) 00 Birth province 5 , 404 14 (cid:1) 383 11 (cid:1) 967 0 (cid:1) 00 65 (cid:1) 00 Death province 5 , 404 14 (cid:1) 126 12 (cid:1) 928 0 (cid:1) 00 57 (cid:1) 00 Provincial density at founding 5 , 404 57 (cid:1) 356 37 (cid:1) 076 0 (cid:1) 00 126 (cid:1) 00 Provincial density 5 , 404 70 (cid:1) 496 37 (cid:1) 067 0 (cid:1) 00 126 (cid:1) 00 Provincial density squared 5 , 404 6 , 343 . 395 4 , 781 . 663 0 (cid:1) 00 15 , 876 . 00 Unemployment 5 , 404 7 (cid:1) 399 8 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 10 32 (cid:1) 70 Small ﬁrm 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 409 0 (cid:1) 492 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 No . of partners ( log ) 5 , 404 1 (cid:1) 098 0 (cid:1) 853 0 (cid:1) 00 5 (cid:1) 07 No . of associates ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 539 1 (cid:1) 706 0 (cid:1) 00 5 (cid:1) 34 Other - than - interﬁrm - exits ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 409 1 (cid:1) 717 0 (cid:1) 00 12 (cid:1) 06 Social capital loss 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 077 0 (cid:1) 438 0 (cid:1) 00 10 (cid:1) 00 Percentage - partners - leaving 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 047 0 (cid:1) 243 0 (cid:1) 00 9 (cid:1) 00 Group - exit dummy 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 079 0 (cid:1) 270 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Individual - exit dummy 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 157 0 (cid:1) 364 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 00 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - any ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 938 0 (cid:1) 357 0 (cid:1) 00 2 (cid:1) 80 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - new ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 971 0 (cid:1) 315 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 74 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - inc ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 929 0 (cid:1) 440 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 25 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - same - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 985 0 (cid:1) 910 0 (cid:1) 00 4 (cid:1) 67 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - diff - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 944 0 (cid:1) 402 0 (cid:1) 00 3 (cid:1) 74 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - inc - same - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 984 0 (cid:1) 179 0 (cid:1) 00 1 (cid:1) 79 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - new - same - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 987 0 (cid:1) 183 0 (cid:1) 00 2 (cid:1) 74 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - inc - diff - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 973 0 (cid:1) 222 0 (cid:1) 00 2 (cid:1) 43 Group - avg - joint - exp - to - new - diff - pr ( log ) 5 , 404 0 (cid:1) 993 0 (cid:1) 125 0 (cid:1) 00 2 (cid:1) 56 new job opportunities . Thus , we included two variables , Birth province and Death province , to control for the number of ﬁrms founded and dissolved during the previ - ous year within a given province . We also included the variable Province density at founding to account for any imprinting effect . Finally , to capture variations in car - rying capacity ( number of potential clients ) over time , we controlled for Provincial inhabitants , the number of inhabitants in each province for each year . Tables 1 and 2 report the descriptive statistics and the correlation values for the variables we used in the analysis . 4 . Model and Methods In creating the data set , we treated the year in which the organization appeared for the ﬁrst time on the Register of Accountants as the founding year and the last year of appearance as the year of dissolution . We divided the life of each organization in ﬁrm years ( Tuma and Hannan 1984 ) . After excluding single proprietorships , the ﬁnal data set includes the life of 676 ﬁrms divided into 5 , 404 year - segments , for a total of 518 exit events . For the analysis , we used event - history techniques . The coarse data points suggest the adoption of a discrete - time formulation . We model the rate at which failure events occur at a particular time t , conditional on the values of the observed covariates and on the event not having occurred prior to time t . This rate , r(cid:5)t (cid:1) X(cid:7)t(cid:8)(cid:9) , is generally known as the hazard rate . It is formally deﬁned as P it = Pr (cid:7)T i = t (cid:1) T i ≥ t(cid:13)X it (cid:8)(cid:13) where T is the discrete random variable measuring the uncensored date of survival and P it is the probability that ﬁrm i at time t will still be in existence , given that it did not fail in any previous time interval . A further compli - cation in using this procedure is due to the presence of crude observation points . The data structure challenges the use of a logit model . As Yamaguchi ( 1991 ) noted , logit model approaches can be interpreted as a ratio of two odd ; such a ratio approaches the ratio of two rates only if the interval between observations is sufﬁciently small . A valid alternative is a continuous - time data spec - iﬁcation that can be used to derive a model for data grouped into intervals ( Allison 1995 ) . A complementary log - log speciﬁcation accomplishes this goal . Under the assumption that events are generated by Cox’s propor - tional hazard rate model , we have log (cid:5) − log (cid:7) 1 − P it (cid:8)(cid:9) = (cid:14) t + (cid:1) (cid:6) x it (cid:13) D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 701 T a b l e 2 P a i r w i se C o rr e l a t i on s V a r i a b l e 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 . A g e 1 (cid:1) 00 2 . W o r l d W a r I − 0 (cid:1) 06 1 (cid:1) 00 3 . W o r l d W a r II 0 (cid:1) 20 − 0 (cid:1) 05 1 (cid:1) 00 4 . S i n g l e a ss oc i a t i on − 0 (cid:1) 28 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 18 1 (cid:1) 00 5 . R e g u l a t i on 1971 − 0 (cid:1) 24 − 0 (cid:1) 08 − 0 (cid:1) 15 0 (cid:1) 83 1 (cid:1) 00 6 . R e g u l a t i on 1984 − 0 (cid:1) 18 − 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 63 0 (cid:1) 75 1 (cid:1) 00 7 . P r o v i nce i nha b i t an t s − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 15 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 27 0 (cid:1) 23 0 (cid:1) 17 1 (cid:1) 00 8 . C 4 − 0 (cid:1) 26 − 0 (cid:1) 08 − 0 (cid:1) 19 0 (cid:1) 85 0 (cid:1) 85 0 (cid:1) 63 0 (cid:1) 22 1 (cid:1) 00 9 . B i r t h p r o v i nce 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 35 0 (cid:1) 08 1 (cid:1) 00 10 . D ea t h p r o v i nce 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 13 − 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 18 0 (cid:1) 19 0 (cid:1) 21 0 (cid:1) 48 0 (cid:1) 18 0 (cid:1) 45 1 (cid:1) 00 11 . P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y a t f oun d i n g − 0 (cid:1) 26 − 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 62 − 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 29 0 (cid:1) 41 1 (cid:1) 00 12 . P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y 0 (cid:1) 21 − 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 41 − 0 (cid:1) 38 − 0 (cid:1) 31 0 (cid:1) 50 − 0 (cid:1) 44 0 (cid:1) 20 0 (cid:1) 35 0 (cid:1) 69 1 (cid:1) 00 13 . P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y s q ua r e d 0 (cid:1) 23 − 0 (cid:1) 14 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 47 − 0 (cid:1) 42 − 0 (cid:1) 34 0 (cid:1) 40 − 0 (cid:1) 48 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 29 0 (cid:1) 64 0 (cid:1) 97 1 (cid:1) 00 14 . U ne m p l o y m en t 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 17 − 0 (cid:1) 14 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 17 − 0 (cid:1) 20 0 (cid:1) 15 0 (cid:1) 08 − 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 12 1 (cid:1) 00 15 . S m a ll ﬁ r m − 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 11 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 05 1 (cid:1) 00 16 . N o . o f p a r t ne r s ( l o g ) 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 16 0 (cid:1) 14 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 14 0 (cid:1) 14 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 56 17 . N o . o f a ss oc i a t e s ( l o g ) 0 (cid:1) 11 − 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 21 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 15 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 13 − 0 (cid:1) 47 18 . O t he r - t han - i n t e r ﬁ r m - e x i t s 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 19 19 . S oc i a l ca p i t a l l o ss 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 10 20 . P e r cen t a g e - p a r t ne r s - l ea v i n g 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 00 21 . G r ou p - e x i t d u mm y − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 15 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 14 − 0 (cid:1) 15 22 . I n d i v i d ua l - e x i t d u mm y 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 14 − 0 (cid:1) 12 − 0 (cid:1) 10 − 0 (cid:1) 11 − 0 (cid:1) 15 − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 03 23 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - an y 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 10 24 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 05 25 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 09 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 10 26 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - s a m e - p r − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 05 27 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - d i ff - p r 0 (cid:1) 05 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 09 28 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - s a m e - p r − 0 (cid:1) 04 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 12 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 05 29 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - s a m e - p r 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 04 30 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - d i ff - p r 0 (cid:1) 06 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 00 − 0 (cid:1) 07 − 0 (cid:1) 08 31 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - d i ff - p r − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 01 − 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 02 − 0 (cid:1) 04 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 702 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS T a b l e 2 ( c on t ’ d . ) V a r i a b l e 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 16 . N o . o f p a r t ne r s ( l o g ) 1 (cid:1) 00 17 . N o . o f a ss oc i a t e s ( l o g ) 0 (cid:1) 49 1 (cid:1) 00 18 . O t he r - t han - i n t e r ﬁ r m - e x i t s 0 (cid:1) 39 0 (cid:1) 21 1 (cid:1) 00 19 . S oc i a l ca p i t a l l o ss 0 (cid:1) 22 0 (cid:1) 18 0 (cid:1) 38 1 . 00 20 . P e r cen t a g e - p a r t ne r s - l ea v i n g − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 08 0 . 06 1 . 00 21 . G r ou p - e x i t d u mm y 0 (cid:1) 20 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 26 0 . 15 0 . 06 1 . 00 22 . I n d i v i d ua l - e x i t d u mm y 0 (cid:1) 08 − 0 (cid:1) 04 0 (cid:1) 52 0 . 25 0 . 09 0 . 06 1 . 00 23 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - an y 0 (cid:1) 17 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 20 0 . 25 0 . 05 0 . 32 0 . 07 1 . 00 24 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 17 0 . 24 0 . 04 0 . 14 0 . 07 0 . 61 1 (cid:1) 00 25 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc 0 (cid:1) 13 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 15 0 . 15 0 . 04 0 . 33 0 . 04 0 . 80 0 (cid:1) 04 1 . 00 26 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - s a m e - p r 0 (cid:1) 10 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 13 0 . 22 0 . 02 0 . 13 0 . 07 0 . 58 0 (cid:1) 80 0 . 12 1 . 00 27 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - d i ff - p r 0 (cid:1) 15 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 20 0 . 17 0 . 05 0 . 31 0 . 04 0 . 70 0 (cid:1) 32 0 . 70 0 . 02 1 . 00 28 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - s a m e - p r 0 (cid:1) 06 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 04 0 . 08 0 . 01 0 . 14 0 . 01 0 . 49 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 . 61 0 . 16 0 . 00 1 (cid:1) 00 29 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - s a m e - p r 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 08 0 (cid:1) 12 0 . 21 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 07 0 . 51 0 (cid:1) 80 0 . 01 0 . 98 0 . 02 − 0 (cid:1) 01 1 (cid:1) 00 30 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - d i ff - p r 0 (cid:1) 11 0 (cid:1) 07 0 (cid:1) 15 0 . 13 0 . 03 0 . 28 0 . 04 0 . 64 0 (cid:1) 05 0 . 78 0 . 02 0 . 88 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 02 1 (cid:1) 00 31 . G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - d i ff - p r 0 (cid:1) 09 0 (cid:1) 05 0 (cid:1) 12 0 . 13 0 . 04 0 . 09 0 . 02 0 . 35 0 (cid:1) 58 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 51 − 0 (cid:1) 01 0 (cid:1) 00 0 (cid:1) 07 1 . 00 D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 703 where (cid:14) t is an unspeciﬁed function of time , x it is the vector that includes all covariates and controls , and (cid:1) is the vector of coefﬁcients . The model resembles a piece - wise speciﬁcation with the difference that the hazard of failure is not forced to remain constant across intervals , but is allowed to ﬂuctuate in various ways so long as the assumption of proportionality within each of them is satisﬁed . Following Pennings et al . ( 1998 ) , we set those intervals equal to the time gaps in our data and con - trolled for ﬁrm age—i . e . , a curvilinear effect of duration . Further potential problems in our analysis concern the direction of causality and endogeneity . Interﬁrm mobility might be an effect rather than a cause of organizational dissolution ; individuals are more likely to quit when their ﬁrm is performing poorly and “death is sneaking around the corner” ( see Wagner 1999 ) . We addressed this concern in different ways . First , we lagged the vari - ables by one period . Because in our data a period ranges from a one - to a ﬁve - year interval , for 84 % of the ﬁrms in our database a one - period lag corresponds to one to two years , and for 16 % to three to ﬁve years . But endogeneity may be due to systematic differences across exiting individuals . High - proﬁle partners ( i . e . , with high - quality human capital ) , for instance , are more likely to leave the company to join an incumbent or to found their own venture . In a similar vein , the inclination to remain in the same area may also be higher for individuals with a high stock of human and social capital . This poten - tial scenario renders endogenous any donation to orga - nizations located in similar geographic areas , potentially biasing the values of the estimated coefﬁcients . We then double - checked the robustness of our ﬁndings in several ways . The spurious effect of poor performance on interﬁrm mobility might be ruled out by control - ling for a lagged accounting measure of performance . Because we could not obtain accounting data on ﬁrm performance ( e . g . , ﬁnancial data ) , we opted for a differ - ent solution : Size growth represents an often - used proxy for organizational success ( for example , see Sørensen 1999 ) ; therefore , the lagged rate of Size growth can be construed as lagged performance , under the assumption that ﬁrms expand their ranks when they perform well . Size is easily observed by the ﬁrm’s membership , and growth in membership suggests success and long - term viability . If performance is what motivates members to stay or quit , the harmful effects of turnover should be weaker in well - performing organizations . We examined this possibility by creating an interaction term between size growth and our most relevant measures of inter - ﬁrm mobility—i . e . , group average experience transferred to newly founded ﬁrms within the same province . The results of this robustness check are reported in the last column of Table 3 . Second , we checked the existence of any underly - ing correlation between the partners’ human or social capital and geographic destination by running a set of analyses at the individual level . More speciﬁcally , we reconstructed the history of all the accountants in our database and measured the probability of remain - ing within the same province against that of moving to a different province on the realization of an inter - ﬁrm mobility event . After excluding the single propri - etorships and all the nonmobility events ( i . e . , other than interﬁrm mobility cases such as death and retirement ) we ended up with a sample of 867 cases of partner mobil - ity ; 62 % involves movements within the same province and 38 % across provinces . We proxied the quality of the human capital involved in the transfer by measuring the relative time - to - promotion of each partner—i . e . , the number of years needed to move from associate to part - ner ; for a discussion of the relevance of this measure see Maister ( 1993 ) . The results ( obtained with a com - plementary log - log speciﬁcation , coding one the event of remaining within the same province , and zero all the movement across provinces ) reassured us that human capital randomly distributes across geographic space on an interﬁrm mobility event . The estimates of the coefﬁ - cients associated with human and social capital ( proxied by local experience ) were positive but far from being sta - tistically signiﬁcant . Again , the same coefﬁcients turned out to be statistically insigniﬁcant when we estimated the impact of social and human capital on the decision to found a new company ( 65 % of the cases ) versus joining an incumbent ( 35 % ) on exiting . We further checked the existence of any systematic difference across ﬁrms due to unobserved effects by run - ning a random effects complementary log - log model . 2 Because no evidence of any unobserved effect was found , we present the results adopting a more parsimo - nious speciﬁcation . The analyses presented below , how - ever , are controlling for ﬁxed effects at the province level ( not reported in Table 3 ) to account for unobserved systematic geographic differences across provinces . The statistically signiﬁcant improvement in the ﬁt of the model due to the addition of provincial ﬁxed effects points to the existence of different selection environ - ments . All the estimates were obtained using STATA 8 . 5 . Results Table 3 presents the estimates of the complementary log - log models for organizational dissolution . Model 1 includes all the control variables . In Model 2 , we tested Hypothesis 1A by adding our measures of individual and group - related mobility . In Model 3 , a measure of the ( logged ) average time spent together by the groups leav - ing is used to test Hypothesis 1B . In Model 4 , we juxta - posed the average joint experience of group migrations within and across provinces to test Hypothesis 2 . To test Hypothesis 3 , in Model 5 we looked at the effect of aver - age joint experience of groups moving to newly founded ﬁrms and incumbents ( located both inside and outside D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 704 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS T a b l e 3 C o m p l e m e n t a r y Log - Log M od e l s f o r t h e D i ss o l u t i on R a t e o f D u t c h A cc oun t i ng F i r m s , 1880 – 1986 V a r i a b l e M o d e l 1 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 2 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 3 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 4 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 5 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 6 S t d . e rr . M o d e l 7 S t d . e rr . T i m e g a p 2 y ea r s 1 (cid:1) 510 0 (cid:1) 095 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 275 0 (cid:1) 114 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 501 0 (cid:1) 095 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 503 0 (cid:1) 096 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 509 0 (cid:1) 095 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 502 0 (cid:1) 096 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 513 0 (cid:1) 096 ∗∗ T i m e g a p 3 y ea r s − 2 (cid:1) 134 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 952 1 (cid:1) 019 ∗ − 2 (cid:1) 125 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 123 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 128 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 126 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 121 1 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ T i m e g a p 4 y ea r s 3 (cid:1) 422 0 (cid:1) 182 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 210 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 382 0 (cid:1) 183 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 386 0 (cid:1) 182 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 406 0 (cid:1) 183 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 369 0 (cid:1) 184 ∗∗ 3 (cid:1) 386 0 (cid:1) 185 ∗∗ T i m e g a p 5 y ea r s 2 (cid:1) 652 0 (cid:1) 559 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 515 0 (cid:1) 535 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 604 0 (cid:1) 561 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 618 0 (cid:1) 560 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 641 0 (cid:1) 559 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 617 0 (cid:1) 560 ∗∗ 2 (cid:1) 634 0 (cid:1) 560 ∗∗ A g e − 0 (cid:1) 087 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 091 0 (cid:1) 013 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 088 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 088 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 088 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 089 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 089 0 (cid:1) 012 ∗∗ A g e 2 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 002 0 (cid:1) 0002 ∗∗ W o r l d W a r I − 0 (cid:1) 078 0 (cid:1) 607 0 (cid:1) 051 0 (cid:1) 618 − 0 (cid:1) 074 0 (cid:1) 608 − 0 (cid:1) 073 0 (cid:1) 608 − 0 (cid:1) 075 0 (cid:1) 608 − 0 (cid:1) 073 0 (cid:1) 608 − 0 (cid:1) 091 0 (cid:1) 608 W o r l d W a r II − 0 (cid:1) 536 0 (cid:1) 398 − 0 (cid:1) 362 0 (cid:1) 389 − 0 (cid:1) 498 0 (cid:1) 398 − 0 (cid:1) 500 0 (cid:1) 398 − 0 (cid:1) 517 0 (cid:1) 398 − 0 (cid:1) 492 0 (cid:1) 398 − 0 (cid:1) 517 0 (cid:1) 402 S i n g l e a ss oc i a t i on 1 (cid:1) 195 0 (cid:1) 280 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 174 0 (cid:1) 316 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 190 0 (cid:1) 278 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 185 0 (cid:1) 277 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 187 0 (cid:1) 279 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 179 0 (cid:1) 276 ∗∗ 1 (cid:1) 165 0 (cid:1) 277 ∗∗ R e g u l a t i on 1971 − 0 (cid:1) 016 0 (cid:1) 281 0 (cid:1) 118 0 (cid:1) 258 − 0 (cid:1) 009 0 (cid:1) 280 − 0 (cid:1) 001 0 (cid:1) 280 − 0 (cid:1) 001 0 (cid:1) 281 0 (cid:1) 008 0 (cid:1) 282 0 (cid:1) 045 0 (cid:1) 284 R e g u l a t i on 1984 − 1 (cid:1) 680 0 (cid:1) 222 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 450 0 (cid:1) 237 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 694 0 (cid:1) 222 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 690 0 (cid:1) 222 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 693 0 (cid:1) 222 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 705 0 (cid:1) 223 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 713 0 (cid:1) 223 ∗∗ P r o v i nce i nha b i t an t s ( i n m illi on s ) 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 0 (cid:1) 02 0 (cid:1) 03 C 4 1 (cid:1) 151 1 (cid:1) 141 0 (cid:1) 590 1 (cid:1) 124 1 (cid:1) 105 1 (cid:1) 131 1 (cid:1) 081 1 (cid:1) 135 1 (cid:1) 098 1 (cid:1) 140 1 (cid:1) 082 1 (cid:1) 136 0 (cid:1) 994 1 (cid:1) 141 B i r t h p r o v i nce − 0 (cid:1) 021 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 025 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 021 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 021 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 021 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 021 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 020 0 (cid:1) 007 ∗∗ D e a t h p r o v i nce 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 058 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 059 0 (cid:1) 006 ∗∗ P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y a t f oun d i n g 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 007 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 003 ∗∗ P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y − 0 (cid:1) 030 0 (cid:1) 014 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 024 0 (cid:1) 015 − 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 014 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 017 0 (cid:1) 014 − 0 (cid:1) 026 0 (cid:1) 014 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 014 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 026 0 (cid:1) 014 ∗ P r o v i nc i a l d en s i t y s q ua r e d 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 0002 0 (cid:1) 0001 ∗∗ U n e m p l o y m en t − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 039 0 (cid:1) 016 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 063 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ S m a ll ﬁ r m 0 (cid:1) 047 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 528 0 (cid:1) 128 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 057 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 054 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 045 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 060 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 109 0 (cid:1) 118 N o . o f p a r t ne r s ( l o g ) − 0 (cid:1) 007 0 (cid:1) 075 − 0 (cid:1) 335 0 (cid:1) 083 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 028 0 (cid:1) 076 − 0 (cid:1) 028 0 (cid:1) 076 − 0 (cid:1) 017 0 (cid:1) 077 − 0 (cid:1) 024 0 (cid:1) 075 0 (cid:1) 048 0 (cid:1) 080 N o . o f a ss oc i a t e s ( l o g ) − 0 (cid:1) 067 0 (cid:1) 034 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 070 0 (cid:1) 039 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 066 0 (cid:1) 034 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 067 0 (cid:1) 034 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 069 0 (cid:1) 034 ∗∗ − 0 (cid:1) 066 0 (cid:1) 034 ∗ − 0 (cid:1) 038 0 (cid:1) 035 ∗∗ O t he r - t han - i n t e r ﬁ r m - e x i t s 0 (cid:1) 011 0 (cid:1) 026 − 0 (cid:1) 094 0 (cid:1) 031 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 008 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 007 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 008 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 011 0 (cid:1) 027 0 (cid:1) 004 0 (cid:1) 028 S oc i a l ca p i t a l l o ss 0 (cid:1) 157 0 (cid:1) 065 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 116 0 (cid:1) 069 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 115 0 (cid:1) 063 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 112 0 (cid:1) 064 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 126 0 (cid:1) 062 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 117 0 (cid:1) 063 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 073 0 (cid:1) 077 P e r cen t a g e - p a r t ne r s - l ea v i n g 0 (cid:1) 252 0 (cid:1) 102 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 213 0 (cid:1) 128 ∗ 0 (cid:1) 256 0 (cid:1) 102 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 256 0 (cid:1) 102 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 254 0 (cid:1) 102 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 255 0 (cid:1) 102 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 287 0 (cid:1) 101 ∗∗ G r ou p - e x i t d u mm y ( H 1 ) 2 (cid:1) 628 0 (cid:1) 135 ∗∗ I n d i v i d ua l - e x i t d u mm y ( H 1 ) 0 (cid:1) 070 0 (cid:1) 145 G r o u p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - an y ( H 1 A ) 0 (cid:1) 215 0 (cid:1) 079 ∗∗ G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w ( H 2 ) 0 (cid:1) 167 0 (cid:1) 081 ∗∗ G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc ( H 2 ) 0 (cid:1) 107 0 (cid:1) 074 G r o u p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - s a m e - p r ( H 3 ) 0 (cid:1) 036 0 (cid:1) 017 ∗∗ G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - d i ff - p r ( H 3 ) 0 (cid:1) 019 0 (cid:1) 072 G r o u p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - s a m e - p r ( H 4 ) 0 (cid:1) 203 0 (cid:1) 165 0 (cid:1) 241 0 (cid:1) 164 G r o u p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - s a m e - p r ( H 4 ) 0 (cid:1) 455 0 (cid:1) 113 ∗∗ 0 (cid:1) 383 0 (cid:1) 115 ∗∗ G r ou p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - i nc - d i ff - p r ( H 4 ) 0 (cid:1) 032 0 (cid:1) 151 0 (cid:1) 026 0 (cid:1) 149 G r o u p - a v g - j o i n t - e x p - t o - ne w - d i ff - p r ( H 4 ) 0 (cid:1) 245 0 (cid:1) 153 0 (cid:1) 239 0 (cid:1) 152 S i z e g r o w t h − 0 (cid:1) 032 0 (cid:1) 013 ∗∗ S i z e g r o w t h ∗ G r ou p - a v g - e x p - t o - ne w - s a m e - p r 0 (cid:1) 006 0 (cid:1) 008 C on s t an t − 2 (cid:1) 535 0 (cid:1) 497 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 595 0 (cid:1) 510 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 288 0 (cid:1) 501 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 316 0 (cid:1) 683 ∗∗ − 2 (cid:1) 214 0 (cid:1) 584 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 583 0 (cid:1) 600 ∗∗ − 1 (cid:1) 592 0 (cid:1) 594 ∗∗ Lo g li k e li hoo d − 1 (cid:2) 257 (cid:1) 62 − 1 (cid:2) 254 (cid:1) 78 − 1 (cid:2) 254 (cid:1) 54 − 1 (cid:2) 254 (cid:1) 53 − 1 (cid:2) 255 (cid:1) 18 − 1 (cid:2) 251 (cid:1) 99 − 1 (cid:2) 247 (cid:1) 19 N o t e s . P r o v i nc i a l ﬁx e d e ff ec t s i nc l u d e d — 518 e v en t s ; ∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 10 ; ∗∗ p < 0 (cid:1) 05 . T w o - t a il e d t e s t s . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 705 the focal province ) . In Model 6 we tested Hypothe - sis 4 by considering the three dimensions simultane - ously . Model 7 reports the coefﬁcient estimates after we included the interaction term between the size growth variable and the measure of group exit , which is central to our theoretical reasoning . The baseline model ( Model 1 ) with all the control variables shows that the creation of the single association in 1966 ( NIvRA ) signiﬁcantly increased the risk of dis - solution . By contrast , the increase in demand for audit - ing services following the introduction of the 1971 regu - lation reduced the dissolution risk , especially after 1984 . The pattern of the Age variable suggests the existence of a curvilinear effect . The coefﬁcients measuring the impact of ecological dynamics on failure rates— Birth province , Death province , Provincial density at founding , Provincial density , and Provincial density 2 —are all in the expected direction and statistically signiﬁcant . These results conﬁrm that the survival chances of the focal ﬁrm are mainly dependent on the evolutionary dynamics of local populations . 3 Although the coefﬁcient estimating the effect of exits that do not involve interﬁrm mobil - ity is positive , it does not reach statistical signiﬁcance . On the contrary , the coefﬁcient estimate of the variable measuring the impact of losing social capital is positive and statistically signiﬁcant . Model 2 presents the estimates measuring the com - petitive effects of interﬁrm mobility after we distin - guished between individual and group movements . The risk of organizational dissolution is statistically signiﬁ - cant when interﬁrm mobility involves a group of partners rather than individuals . Model 3 reﬁnes this ﬁnding by replacing the group dummy with a measure of average joint experience of departing members . The positive and statistically signiﬁcant estimate of the variable Group - avg - joint - exp - to - any provides support to our Hypoth - esis 1B . We then disaggregated this measure accord - ing to the nature of the destination ﬁrm ( incumbent or newly founded ) and to its geographic location ( within the same province or a different one ) . Model 4 com - pares the ﬁndings depending on whether the recipient ﬁrm is an incumbent or an entrepreneurial ﬁrm . Only the coefﬁcient for newly founded organizations is statis - tically signiﬁcant , so conﬁrming Hypothesis 2 . Model 5 reports the estimates across geographic space . Similarly , the estimates seem to conﬁrm Hypothesis 3 : The coef - ﬁcient of the variable capturing movements within the same province is the only one statistically signiﬁcant . 4 In the previous models the three dimensions ( individ - ual versus group , incumbent versus start - up , same versus different geographic context ) were treated as indepen - dent . Thus , they do not inform us about how those dimensions jointly affect organizational survival . Model 6 is meant to aggregate these three dimensions . The coefﬁcient estimates reported in Model 6 suggest a few considerations . First , the effect of migration as a group is stronger than the effect of individual movement . Second , the strongest effects of interﬁrm mobility on dissolution are related to movements within the same geographic area . Third , for each case the risk of organizational dis - solution is much higher when partners leave the focal organization to found a new rival rather than to join an existing rival . In line with Hypothesis 4 , the hazard of dissolution is the highest when groups depart to found a new ﬁrm located in the same province as the source ﬁrm . Model 7 further corroborates these ﬁndings by com - bining Size growth ( lagged ) —a proxy for good per - formance—with the Group - avg - joint - exp - to - new - diff - pr variable presented in Model 6 . Because this interaction term turned out to be nonsigniﬁcant , we interpreted this result as an indication that the competitive impact of routines replication is independent of the donor’s ﬁrm health . 6 . Discussion and Conclusions The analysis of the effects of member exit on organi - zational survival has spun research on the antecedents and the consequences of this event ( for a comprehen - sive discussion see Pennings and Wezel 2006a ) . The present study pushes this inquiry by investigating the competitive consequences for the donor ﬁrm of interﬁrm mobility . We limited our theorizing to those exit cases in which a member departs to a peer ﬁrm , while con - trolling for other scenarios representing complete depar - ture from the sector . Being a study of partnerships , we focused on partners , i . e . , key members who participate in the governance of their ﬁrm . Their exit was framed in terms of higher - order routines replication . Since these routines govern processes of resource acquisition and allocation , it is critical to focus on the conditions facil - itating their replication to understand when interﬁrm mobility increases competitive interdependence among organizations . Recent research has begun to investigate how such mobility affects the performance of the source ﬁrm ( Sørensen 1999 ) , the destination ﬁrm ( Agarwal et al . 2004 , Rao and Drazin 2002 , Wezel and Saka 2006 ) , or both simultaneously ( Phillips 2002 ) , under the assump - tion that interﬁrm mobility entails the transfer of routines but without further qualifying the conditions facilitating their replication . We contribute to this body of research in three ways . First , special attention is drawn to the scenario where interﬁrm mobility translates into the transfer of higher - order routines across organizations , such that the different effect of individual versus collec - tive migrations is exposed . Second , this paper demon - strates how migrations to incumbents are less likely to affect the long - term performance of the donor than are migrations to newly founded ﬁrms . Third , this study D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 706 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS shows the relevance of the same historical , socioeco - nomic , and institutional environment in facilitating suc - cessful replication of existing routines ( see Stinchcombe 1965 , and for a comprehensive review of this article , Lounsbury and Ventresca 2002 ) and therefore increasing the competitive effects of interﬁrm mobility . Altogether , this paper builds on the insights of research on spin - offs’ behavior ( Agarwal et al . 2004 , Phillips 2002 , Ruef 2005 , Burton et al . 2002 , Klepper and Sleeper 2005 ) to uncover conditions under which the spillover of pro - prietary routines exposes the source ﬁrm to unfavorable survival prospects . The loss of proprietary organizational routines occurs most ominously when senior members depart collectively , and especially so when they have spent many years together before leaving . This paper is concerned with the competitive conse - quences occasioned by routine replication due to out - bound movements , while controlling for the loss of human and social capital . Unlike previous research that does not distinguish between resources and routines , we believe such a distinction to be both theoretically and empirically important . The thrust of the argument is that resources such as social capital are usually attached to individuals and therefore are more likely to be transferred when those individuals move from ﬁrm to ﬁrm . Moreover , as our qualitative evidence suggests , the presence of anticompete clauses signiﬁcantly con - strains the extent to which individuals’ social capital can be transferred , especially when it involves clients who should contractually abide by such clauses . The com - petitive damage due to partner turnover , thus , cannot be primarily attributed to a loss of clients . By contrast , routines are not bound to single individ - uals : Because they originate from repeated interaction among multiple actors inside or outside the ﬁrm , their successful replication is a more complex and uncertain phenomenon necessitating a much broader set of con - ditions to hold . Even though routines are unobserved and this paper—like the kindred papers of Phillips ( 2002 ) , Klepper and Sleeper ( 2005 ) , and Pennings and Wezel ( 2006b ) does not measure replication as such , we attempted to measure the impact thereof , net of the effect of losing human or social capital . Needless to say , fur - ther empirical research , using more ﬁne - grained data , is needed to validate our claims . Better measures should properly account for the spillover effects due to the loss of human and social capital . Our proxy captures such effects only indirectly . With respect to human capital , we found self - selection not to be at work even though our analysis remains silent on the speciﬁc characteris - tics ( e . g . , education , skills , or expertise ) of departing individuals . While the ﬁndings concerning social cap - ital are consistent with existing literature , the way we operationalize this construct only proxies for the effect of external ties ( e . g . , relations with clients ) , disregard - ing that of internal ties—i . e . , repeated interaction among partners that stimulate communications and cohesion . Our measure of average joint experience partly captures this effect because it accounts for defecting members’ dynamic patterns of interaction . Whether higher - order routines replication or the transfer of internal social capital between ﬁrms is responsible for the ﬁndings observed is a matter of debate . In our opinion , how - ever , it remains unclear why the transfer of internal social capital should harm the donor’s performance— especially when controlling for possible causes of inter - nal disruption . We interpret the ﬁndings as pointing to routines replication as the critical mechanism respon - sible for donor’s mortality . Regardless of the speciﬁc mechanism at work , a study on the conditions favoring the portability of skills , resources , and routines across organizations should move beyond the individual level of analysis to embrace group dynamics as well . Our focus on higher - order routine replication also sheds light on the reason why interﬁrm mobility can be viewed as a source of competitive interdependence . Unlike operating routines that usually attend to an orga - nization’s daily activities , higher - order routines govern the processes by which resources are allocated through - out the organization . The leakage of such higher order routines differs markedly from lower order or audit - ing and other professional routines . The spillover of such lower level routines might in fact be beneﬁ - cial rather than harmful , as Corredoira ( 2006 ) demon - strated , if and when outbound movement involves not managers , but professionals and other employees , i . e . , carriers of lower level routines whose mobility is con - ducive to the strengthening of communities of prac - tice that typically span multiple ﬁrms and enhance their professional standards . By contrast , while replication of higher order routines across ﬁrms fosters similarity between donor and recipient ﬁrms , such convergence drives them toward greater and more intense rivalry . It is their successful replication—not that of operating routines—that ultimately increases the degree of similar - ity between the donor and the recipient ﬁrms . Studying the conditions facilitating higher - order routine replica - tion , therefore , helps understand when interﬁrm mobility produces competitive consequences . In this respect , it should be noted that the replication of proprietary rou - tines under investigation in this paper is typically not premeditated , even though poaching is usually driven by competitive motives . Spin - offs are frequently due to turnover of employ - ees who seek an organizational setting outside the parent ﬁrm . The presumption is that voluntary ( as in the case of partners ) out - movement produces consequences quite different from those turnover events brought about by intended and intentional human resources strategies . For example , many ﬁrms maintain elaborate job - rotation sys - tems as one of the means of deliberate routine transfer . As for such transfers , consider that many ﬁrms—e . g . , D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 707 Home Depot , Kinko’s , Toyota , Carrefour—base their strategic intentions on routine replication that is usu - ally well - articulated and explicit ( see Winter and Szulan - ski 2001 ) . Intentional transfer also occurs between ﬁrms through strategic alliances , outsourcing , guest engineers , and so on . We believe that our study belabors theoret - ically how such nonpremeditated events involving key players reveal competitive externalities . In its present form , the study suffers from several limi - tations . Each limitation , however , can be associated with a speciﬁc direction for future research . The contextually dependent replication of routines involves knowledge - intensive ﬁrms . Similar mobility consequences can be observed in high - tech industries ( e . g . , software , biotech , semiconductors—see Klepper and Sleeper 2005 ) where spin - offs occasion spatial replication of routines . Fur - ther research should spell out the mobility implications for manufacturing versus service ﬁrms . Partnerships dif - fer from incorporated ﬁrms with various levels of lim - ited liability and family - owned or single proprietorships ( which we omitted from the present analysis ) —see Pen - nings and Wezel ( 2006a ) . How do such varying classes of organizations and their legal or institutional traditions affect the absorption of new higher - order routines ? Apart from variations among sectors , within - sector heterogene - ity among ﬁrms differently exposed to the routine repli - cation risk was observed as well . The present paper does not address this question and treats organizations in a dichotomous way : a newly founded ﬁrm or an incum - bent . This distinction is premised on the idea that incum - bents are already saddled with legacies of routines , i . e . , endowed with institutionalized patterns of interaction , chaﬁng against those having an extramural provenance . Accordingly , in the analysis we compared these two classes of ﬁrms as a dichotomy . However , existing ﬁrms differ along several dimensions that shape their suscep - tibility to absorption of extramural routines . Accounting for those dimensions amounts to an important reﬁne - ment and further elaborates on the conduciveness of rou - tine replication across ﬁrms . Consider dimensions such as ﬁrm size , aspects of organizational demography such as diversity in experience or skill sets , and ﬁrm per - formance prior to outbound movements . Such inquiries push the frontiers of knowledge regarding migration of ﬁrm proprietary routines and related spillovers to new levels , but are beyond the scope of this study . The ﬁnding that the effects of interﬁrm mobility are very much regional hints at geographic niches har - bouring organizational routines . The exit of profession - als often precipitates jolts , upheavals , and other forms of organizational change and discontinuity . We argued that the equivalence of geographic embeddedness for mobility - based replication is critical , and that one should spell out the nature of location equivalence . We have shown that the effects of mobility and routine replica - tion are most observable if they occur within the same environment—i . e . , when donor and destination ﬁrms are co - located . Historical , socioeconomic , and institutional differences in the location of the donor and the destina - tion ﬁrms matter more than geographic distance per se . Additional speciﬁcation of the nature of geographic units such as SMSAs and industrial districts should improve the explanatory power of geography and co - location . Finally , access to individual motivation and cogni - tion for interﬁrm mobility remain elusive . We have been agnostic about motives that induce individual or collec - tive career - related action . We exposed effects of individ - ual conduct shaping ﬁrm and sector - level externalities , even if we did not ﬁnd any evidence of selectivity among events involving individuals endowed with signiﬁcant human or social capital ( fast - trackers or partners ranking high in their level of industry experience ) . Additional multilevel information about this individual motivation might , however , contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the implications of interﬁrm mobility , routines replication , and organizational survival . Acknowledgments All authors contributed equally . Much of the original data were collected as part of a research project ( with ﬁnancial support from the Limpberg Institute ) conducted by Willem Bujink , Steven Maijoor , Arjen van Witteloostuijn , and Maurice Zinken , NIBOR , Department of Economics , Maastricht Uni - versity , the Netherlands . Rahul Patel , Drexel University , provided data management assistance . Sarah Friedberg’s thoughtful critique helped to polish the ﬁnal draft . The authors gratefully acknowledge suggestions from Paul Allison , Jos Becker , Christophe Van den Bulte , Anne Cummings , Mauro Guillen , Ben Hoetjes , Peter Kamper , Cornelis Lammers , Mark Lazerson , Jan de Pree , Joel Waldfogel , and participants of the Jones Center Seminar at Wharton , Handelshoegskolan , IAE Lille I , HKUST , Tilburg University Seminars in Organi - zation and Strategy , and the 10th Organization Science Win - ter Conference . The authors gratefully thank Associate Edi - tor Henrich Greve and three anonymous reviewers for their very constructive comments . All errors remain the authors’ responsibility . Endnotes 1 We opted for this measurement of the construct to keep the test as simple as possible and to show how the loss of a team of partners—rather than that associated to individual mobility— reduces the donor’s survival chances independently from its intensity and characteristics , which we further qualify by using other measures . The test carried out by using continuous mea - sures provides , however , comparable results . Because one pos - sible concern has to do with the underlying size distribution , we reran the analysis after controlling for the number of mem - bers involved in the event . Moreover , to reduce the impact of outliers , we did so only for those cases in which up to three members exited together ( accounting for 68 % of all the team events ) . These additional checks did not alter the ﬁndings reported here . 2 A more complex solution to this problem is to create instru - ments for all the variables of theoretical interest . This proce - dure entails the estimation of a survival model where the eight D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility 708 Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS interﬁrm variables are replaced with the estimated number of events obtained through eight count models—i . e . , instru - mented variables . As we found no evident sign of endogeneity while running our robustness checks ( see § 5 ) , we decided not to use this technical correction . 3 Analyses not reported here demonstrate that the local ecolog - ical effects dominate national effects . 4 Hypotheses 2 and 3 might be linked to arguments regarding age and structure based on the argument that if the donor and the recipient ﬁrms were age equivalent they would also be structurally equivalent and therefore routine transfer between them would be more likely . Such a coincidence was exam - ined by constructing a variable measuring the age difference between donor and recipient ﬁrms at the time of an inter - ﬁrm mobility event . The ﬁndings obtained point to an increas - ing and independent impact of age distance on mortality . In other words , the larger the donor - spin - off age divergence , the stronger the competitive effect of interﬁrm mobility . Adding this variable to the estimation did not affect the ﬁndings’ robustness . A peculiar complication involves the donor’s age when the recipient ﬁrm is a start - up , an issue that we resolved by adding a dummy variable ﬂagging those transfers involv - ing newly founded ﬁrms and interacting this variable with the age - difference measure . None of the coefﬁcients , how - ever , turned out to be statistically signiﬁcant . The same pro - cedure was repeated for the case of geographic destination— i . e . , by adding an interaction term between age difference and a dummy variable indicating whether the transfer took place within the same province or a different province . In this case , the dummy suggested the existence of a positive effect on mor - tality of transfers taking place between equally aged and proxi - mate pairs of ﬁrms . The robustness of these results was further tested by adding geographically - split measures . This addition canceled out the previous results , supporting a dichotomous rather than continuous difference between newly founded ﬁrms and incumbents in the presence of routines replication . The implication is that high - order routines become imprinted dur - ing the early stages of the organizational life cycle ( e . g . , Baron et al . 1996 ) rendering incumbents , whatever their age , less amenable to the injection of new ( high - order ) routines . References Agarwal , R . E . Echambadi , A . M . Franco , M . B . Sakar . 2004 . Knowl - edge transfer through inheritance : Spin - out generation , develop - ment and survival . Acad . Management J . 47 ( 4 ) 501 – 522 . Allison , P . D . 1995 . Survival Analysis Using the SAS System . SAS Institute , Cary , NC . Baldwin , C . Y . , K . Clark . 2000 . Design Rules , Vol . 1 . The Power of Modularity . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Baron , J . N . , M . D . Burton , M . T . Hannan . 1996 . The road taken : Origins and early evolution of employment systems in emerging companies . Indust . Corporate Change 5 ( 2 ) 239 – 275 . Bhide , A . V . 1994 . How entrepreneurs craft strategies that work . Harvard Bus . Rev . 72 ( 2 ) 150 – 161 . Bhide , A . V . 2000 . The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . Boeker , W . 1997 . Executive migration and strategic change : The effect of top manager movement on product market entry . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 213 – 236 . Boone , C . , V . Bröcheler , G . R . Carroll . 2000 . Custom service : Appli - cation and tests of resource - partitioning theory among Dutch auditing ﬁrms from 1896 to 1992 . Organ . Stud . 21 ( 2 ) 355 – 381 . Boone , C . , G . R . Carroll , A . van Witteloostuijn . 2002 . Environmen - tal resource distributions and market partitioning : Dutch daily newspaper organizations from 1968 to 1994 . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 67 408 – 431 . Boone , C . , F . C . Wezel , A . van Witteloostuijn . 2006 . Top management team composition and organizational ecology . J . A . C . Baum , S . Dobrev , A . van Witteloostuijn , eds . Ecology and Strategy : Advances in Strategic Management , Vol . 23 . JAI Press , Green - wich , CT , 103 – 135 . Braum , E . , S . MacDonald . 1978 . Revolution in Miniature . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Burton , M . D . , J . B . Sorensen , C . M . Beckman . 2002 . Coming from good stock : Career histories and new venture formation . M . Lounsbury , M . J . Ventresca , eds . Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . 19 . Elsevier Science , New York , 229 – 262 . Cattani , G . , J . M . Pennings , F . C . Wezel . 2003 . Spatial and temporal heterogeneity in founding patterns . Organ . Sci . 14 ( 6 ) 670 – 685 . Coff , R . 1997 . Human assets and management dilemmas : Coping with hazards on the road to resource - based theory . Acad . Manage - ment Rev . 22 ( 2 ) 374 – 402 . Cohen , M . , P . Bacdayan . 1994 . Organizational routines are stored as procedural memory . Organ . Sci . 5 554 – 568 . Corredoira , F . 2006 . Social capital accessibility and innovation : Mobility ties and reverse knowledge ﬂows in the semiconductor industry . SMS Conf . Vienna , Austria . Cyert , R . M . , J . G . March . 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Dosi , G . , R . R . Nelson , S . G . Winter . 2000 . The Nature and Dynam - ics of Organizational Capabilities . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . Edmondson , A . , R . Bohmer , G . Pisano . 2001 . Disrupted routines : Group learning and new technology implementation in hospitals . Admin . Sci . Quart . 46 685 – 716 . Eisenhardt , K . M . , C . B . Schoonhoven . 1990 . Organizational growth : Linking founding team , strategy , environment , and growth among U . S . semiconductor ventures , 1978 – 1988 . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 3 ) 504 – 529 . Felin , T . , N . J . Foss . 2005 . Organizational routines : A sceptical look . DRUID Working Paper 04 - 13 . Freeman , J . H . 1986 . Entrepreneurs as organizational products : Semi - conductor ﬁrms and venture capital ﬁrms . G . Libecap , ed . Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship , Innovation , and Eco - nomic Growth . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 33 – 58 . Grant , R . M . 1996 . Toward a knowledge - based theory of the ﬁrm . Strategic Management J . 17 109 – 122 . Groysberg , B . , A . N . McLean , N . Nohria . 2006 . Are leaders portable ? Harvard Bus . Rev . 84 92 – 101 . Hannan , M . T . , J . H . Freeman . 1977 . The population ecology of orga - nization . Amer . J . Sociol . 82 929 – 964 . Hannan , M . T . , J . H . Freeman . 1984 . Structural inertia and organiza - tional change . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 49 149 – 164 . Harris , D . , C . Helfat . 1997 . Speciﬁcity of CEO human capital and compensation . Strategic Management J . 18 895 – 920 . Henderson , R . , I . Cockburn . 1994 . Measuring competence : Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical research . Strategic Management J . 15 63 – 84 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . Wezel , Cattani , and Pennings : Competitive Implications of Interﬁrm Mobility Organization Science 17 ( 6 ) , pp . 691 – 709 , ©2006 INFORMS 709 Huckman , R . S . , G . P . Pisano . 2006 . The ﬁrm speciﬁcity of individual performance : Evidence from cardiac surgery . Management Sci . 52 473 – 488 . Klepper , S . 2001 . Employee startups in high - tech industries . Indust . Corporate Change 10 639 – 674 . Klepper , S . , S . Sleeper . 2005 . Entry by spin - offs . Management Sci . 51 ( 8 ) 1291 – 1306 . Knott , A . M . 2001 . The dynamic value of hierarchy . Management Sci . 47 ( 3 ) 430 – 448 . Kogut , B . , U . Zander . 1992 . Knowledge of the ﬁrm , combinative capabilities , and the replication of technology . Organ . Sci . 3 383 – 397 . Levitt , B . , J . G . March . 1988 . Organizational learning . Ann . Rev . Sociol . 14 319 – 340 . Linz , J . J . , A . de Miguel . 1966 . Within - nation differences and com - parisons : The eight Spains . R . L . Merritt , S . Rokkan , eds . Com - paring Nations : The Use of Quantitative Data in Cross - National Research . Yale University Press , New Haven , CT . Lounsbury , M . , M . J . Ventresca . 2002 . Social structure and organiza - tions revisited . M . Lounsbury , M . J . Ventresca , eds . Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . 19 . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 3 – 36 . Maijoor , S . , A . van Witteloostuijn . 1996 . An empirical test of the resource - based theory : Strategic regulation in the Dutch audit industry . Strategic Management J . 17 549 – 569 . Maister , D . H . 1993 . Managing the Professional Service Firm . Free Press , New York . McKelvey , B . 1982 . Organizational Systematics : Taxonomy , Evolution and Classiﬁcation . University of California Press , Berkeley , CA . Nelson , R . R . , S . G . Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Eco - nomic Change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Pennings , J . M . , K . Lee , A . van Witteloostuijn . 1998 . Human capital , social capital and ﬁrm dissolution . Acad . Management J . 41 ( 4 ) 425 – 440 . Pennings , J . , F . C . Wezel . 2006a . Micro - Behaviors and Organizational Evolution . Edward Elgar , Chaltenham , Pennings , J . , F . C . Wezel . 2006b . Demographic diversity , inter - ﬁrm mobility and competition . Working paper , Tilburg University , The Netherlands . Penrose , E . T . 1959 . The Theory of the Growth of the Firm . Blackwell , Oxford , UK . Pentland , B . T . , M . S . Feldman . 2005 . Organizational routines as a unit of analysis . Indust . Corporate Change 14 ( 5 ) 793 – 781 . Petersen , T . 1991 . Time aggregation bias in continuous - time hazard - rate models . P . Marsden , ed . Sociological Methods . Blackwell , Oxford , UK , 263 – 290 . Pfeffer , J . 1994 . Competitive Advantage Through People . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Phillips , J . D . 2002 . A genealogical approach to organizational life chances : The parent - progeny transfer and Silicon Valley law ﬁrms , 1946 – 1996 . Admin . Sci . Quart . 47 474 – 506 . Putnam , R . D . 1996 . The strange disappearance of civic America . Amer . Prospect 7 ( 24 ) 34 – 38 . Rao , H . , R . Drazin . 2002 . Overcoming resource constraints on product innovation by recruiting talent from rivals : A study of the mutual fund industry , 1986 – 1994 . Acad . Management J . 45 ( 3 ) 491 – 507 . Ruef , M . 2005 . Origins of organizations : The entrepreneurial process . L . Keister , ed . Research in the Sociology of Work . JAI Press , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . Ruef , M . , H . E . Aldrich , N . Carter . 2003 . The structure of organi - zational founding teams : Homophily , strong ties , and isolation among U . S . entrepreneurs . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 68 195 – 222 . Song , J . , P . Almeida , G . Wu . 2003 . Learning - by - hiring : When is mobility more likely to facilitate interﬁrm knowledge transfer ? Management Sci . 49 351 – 365 . Sørensen , J . B . 1999 . Executive migration and interorganizational competition . Soc . Sci . Res . 28 289 – 315 . Stinchcombe , A . 1965 . Social structure and organizations . J . G . March , ed . Handbook of Organizations . Rand McNally , Chicago , IL , 142 – 193 . Teece , D . J . , G . Pisano , A . Shuen . 1997 . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management J . 18 ( 7 ) 509 – 533 . Tuma , N . , M . T . Hannan . 1984 . Social Dynamics : Models and Meth - ods . Academic Press , Orlando , FL . Wagner , J . 1999 . The life history of exits from German manufacturing . Small Bus . Econom . 13 71 – 79 . Wezel , F . C . , A . Saka . 2006 . Antecedents and consequences of orga - nizational change : “Institutionalizing” the behavioral theory of the ﬁrm . Organ . Stud . 27 265 – 286 . Williams , K . Y . , C . O’Reilly III . 1998 . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . B . M . Staw , L . L . Cummings , eds . Research in Organizational Behavior . JAI Press , Greenwich , CT , 77 – 149 . Winter , S . G . 2000 . The satisﬁcing principle in capability learning . Strategic Management J . 21 ( Special issue ) 981 – 996 . Winter , S . G . , G . Szulanski . 2001 . Replication as strategy . Organ . Sci . 12 730 – 743 . Yamaguchi , Y . 1991 . Event History Analysis . Sage , Newbury Park , CA . Yin , R . 1994 . Case Study Research : Design and Methods , 2nd ed . Sage Publishing , Beverly Hills , CA . Zenger , T . R . , B . S . Lawrence . 1989 . Organizational demography : The differential effects of age and tenure distributions on technical communication . Acad . Management J . 32 353 – 376 . Zollo , M . , S . G . Winter . 2002 . Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities . Organ . Sci . 13 ( 3 ) 339 – 351 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 128 . 122 . 183 . 156 ] on 24 J un e 2016 , a t 15 : 21 . F o r p e r s o n a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .