Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa Roger Meintjes Department of Computer Science , University of Bremen , Germany s _ uwhnm5 @ uni - bremen . de Thembelani Makapela Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre , Graaff - Reinet , South Africa thembelanimakapela1 @ gmail . com Micyla Hobbs Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre , Graaff - Reinet , South Africa cylahobbs @ gmail . com Nandipha Jantjies Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre , Graaff - Reinet , South Africa nandiphateressa @ gmail . com ABSTRACT Museums play an increasingly important role in public health . In - house makerspaces , fab labs and other contexts fostering 21st cen - tury skills could expand children’s participation in these initiatives . This could open up new opportunities for children to learn through technology design and enable museums to enhance cultural rele - vance of health education materials for children . Here we report on a participatory action research study exploring child - to - child public health messaging through a portable craft tech interactive in a rural community museum . The interactive was a floor - based learning game using milk - carton foot switches connected to wire - less sensor network hardware programmed with Scratch . The study was run during the first year of the COVID - 19 pandemic , when non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPI ) such as face masks and physical distancing were the principal means for slowing the spread of the virus . Five primary school children worked in a multigenerational team to design an interactive reinforcing COVID - 19 NPI messaging . The interactive was presented in four primary schools and a day care centre , where it was used by 747 learners . A mixed methods approach was used to collect data on children’s participation in the design process and peer responses to the interactive in the pre - sentations . Results suggest that portable craft tech interactives are a promising new medium for engaging children in public health messaging for children . Designers can make significant contribu - tions to source , message and channel variables , which enhance the fit of education materials with target group culture and provide context and meaning for health messages . 92 , 9 % of the 707 users who completed a post - use survey indicated they would use an in - teractive again if they had the chance ; 88 , 8 % indicated they would like to design an interactive with friends ; and 59 , 4 % chose a craft tech interactive game to teach a friend about the coronavirus – over a school textbook , colourful poster , TV advertisement , and radio programme . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0131 - 3 / 23 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3585088 . 3589372 CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS Computational crafts , interactive exhibits , public health , children ACM Reference Format : RogerMeintjes , ThembelaniMakapela , MicylaHobbs , andNandiphaJantjies . 2023 . Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa . In Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’23 ) , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3585088 . 3589372 1 INTRODUCTION Museums are making important contributions to public health ( e . g . [ 1 – 4 , 17 , 26 – 28 , 32 , 37 – 39 , 64 , 100 ] ) . This work is leading to a strengthening of relationships in their communities [ 16 ] and their reappraisal as ’community public health assets’ ( [ 5 ] , p . 122 ) . In - house makerspaces , fab labs and other contexts promoting the development of 21st century skills through creative technology projects could expand children’s participation in these initiatives . This could open up new opportunities for children to learn through technology design projects and enable museums to enhance the cultural relevance of health education materials for children . In the following paper we report on a participatory action research ( PAR ) study exploring child - to - child public health messaging through a portable craft tech interactive in an underserved rural community in South Africa . The study was run by the Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre’s ( SM & LC ) Craft - Tech Club ( CTC ) . The SM & LC is a community - based museum situated in uMasizakhe , Graaff - Reinet , and the CTC is an in - house programme fostering 21st century skills through design projects . The study was run over a three month period during the first year of the COVID - 19 pandemic ( December 2020 – February 2021 ) , when nonpharmaceutical interventions ( NPI ) such as mask - wearing , hand - washing and physical distancing , and education campaigns promoting the adoption of these measures , were the principle means for slowing the spread of the virus [ 77 – 79 , 85 , 92 ] . The aim was to contribute to COVID - 19 NPI education campaigns in local schools and broaden understanding about roles children can play in pub - lic health mobilisation in museums [ 37 ] . A multigenerational de - sign team , comprising three local mentor - researchers , an external 210 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . researcher and five local primary school children , designed the interactive over the summer school holidays . A collection of 28 educational posters focusing on one or more NPI served as source material for the interactive . The interactive was designed for three users and cooperation was rewarded . Messages addressed com - pliance issues identified by children . Physical distancing and safe forms of touch were factored into interaction design . The interac - tive was presented in four local primary schools and a day care centre catering for learners with special needs , where it was used by a total of 747 children . Children’s participation in public health message design for other children has been shown to enhance the cultural relevance [ 71 ] of messages . For example , in the context of an HIV / AIDS counselling project for youth , real - life digital stories by Tanzanian secondary school students lent material credibility ; provided the target group with a sense of ownership ; and , when compared with imported tools for HIV / AIDS education , made it easier for children to identify the lessons to be learned [ 14 ] . Children also recognise and under - score the potential value of their contributions . For example , in the Eh ! woza project in South Africa [ 18 , 19 ] , a youth media initiative exploring the local HIV and TB co - epidemic , a participant empha - sised how the same message delivered by young people might be received differently : " ’Everywhere they talk about TB . . . TB every - where . . . in pamphlets , in the newspapers , on TV , but I think this might be different , because we’re young and maybe they’ll listen better to us . . . ’ " ( [ 15 ] , p . 3 ) . The practice of partitioning large heterogeneous populations into smaller more homogeneous subgroups , and developing tar - geted health communication and health promotion programmes addressing and building on cultural characteristics of the subgroups , is well - accepted best practice [ 66 , 69 , 88 ] . Source , message and chan - nel are key modifiable input variables influencing the effectiveness of communications and programmes [ 69 ] , and each can be tuned during the design stage to enhance cultural relevance for the target group [ 68 , 70 , 71 ] . Source relates to who is delivering the message . When the receiver perceives the source to be similar to themselves , they often rate them more favourably and trust them more [ 69 ] . Message relates to what is being communicated , the format and content . Messages which reflect the social and cultural worlds of the receiver are more likely to be viewed as familiar and increase receptivity and acceptance [ 69 ] . Channel relates to which medium is adopted . Each medium has its own unique attributes , and may be perceived as more or less relevant by the target group [ 69 ] . Museum initiatives fostering 21st century skills through creative technology projects offer a range of new ways to increase children’s control over each of these input variables and potentially step - up cultural relevance of health messages for peers . The PAR study focused on children’s manipulation of the three input variables during the design stage , and peer responses to the interactive in the presentations . Two research questions ( RQ ) were established to guide the investigation process : RQ1 – In which ways did children reshape source , message and channel during the interactive design process ? ; RQ2 – How did users respond to the interactive in the presentations ? Questions were investigated using a mixed methods approach , including photography , participatory visualisation methods ( e . g . flow diagrams , drawing , low - res pro - totypes , performance , design of a new technology ) [ 54 , 56 ] and a short post - use survey . 2 RELATED WORK Interactives are popular learning resources in museums and science centres [ 8 – 11 , 13 , 29 ] . Users are able to manipulate a system or ob - ject , with opportunities for exploration , collaboration , investigation and discussion [ 30 , 33 ] . Museum research suggests interactivity promotes engagement , understanding and recall of exhibits and their content [ 31 ] . Play is used as a tool to attract children [ 12 ] and to structure the learning process [ 7 ] . We now review the literature on interactive design with children . Museums regularly include children in user , tester and informant roles [ 94 ] , but it is less common to engage them as design partners [ 34 , 36 , 96 ] . Axelsen et al . [ 34 ] developed a participatory design framework for designing interactive exhibits with children . The framework was used in an interactive exhibition and community intervention promoting physical activity for families with children aged 6 - 12 years . Children from the target group were involved in the development of activities and concepts for the exhibition ( de - sign proposals ) following a ’design by doing’ approach . The authors highlight the importance of using artefacts and storytelling to get children started ; offering multiple ways to communicate ideas ; and working with creative materials already familiar to children . [ 36 ] describe a child - to - child ( C2C ) participatory design method for co - designing interactive exhibits for young children in a children’s museum . The C2C method involves a two - group organisation : older children ( 8 - 11 ) as design partners in an intergenerational design team , and younger children ( 3 - 5 years ) from the target group mostly in tester and user roles . Older children act as mediators and trans - lators for the younger children . In the study all children influenced design decisions . The authors argue that the two - group organisa - tion enables participation of less articulate groups , and is suitable for interactive design for young children . Digital Natives [ 95 ] , an interactive exhibition involving teenagers in design partner roles , in collaboration with designers , programmers , anthropologists and curators , explored possible futures in digital cultural heritage com - munication using " dialogic curation " ( [ 95 ] , p . 112 ) . The authors em - phasise the importance of a shared design language which enables children to contribute to the establishment of the design space , ongoing design work and project evaluation . Early work on a participatory prototyping workshop for a chil - dren’s museum is reported in [ 35 ] . The workshop was prominently positioned in the exhibition space . Benefits included exhibits and innovative ideas co - designed with children ; a richer overall visitor experience ; opportunities for children to learn through design ; and dynamic research data for the museum . Eisenberg and colleagues showed how craft tech [ 22 ] ( also computational crafts [ 6 ] ) – the creative blending of computation and craft materials in person - alised expressive objects [ 20 , 21 , 23 – 25 , 107 ] – is democratising interactive design and facilitating the spread of museum values into settings such as homes and classrooms [ 6 ] . They offered the idea of the homespun museum , a combined workshop and exhibition space situated outside of the museum [ 6 ] . [ 97 ] used craft tech approaches 211 Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA in an after - school centre to introduce tangible interactive learn - ing opportunities to a community with limited access to museums . Craft tech includes computationally - designed objects ( digital fabri - cation ) , computationally - enriched objects ( programmable crafts ) and projects integrating both lines of work [ 22 , 109 ] . We build upon these related works by using craft tech to explore participatory ap - proaches to the design of portable health - focused interactives in the context of a museum creative technology programme . 3 PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH Participatory action research ( PAR ) [ 42 , 46 , 86 ] – or participatory research ( PR ) [ 44 , 45 , 55 ] – is an approach to action research ( AR ) [ 49 ] which emphasises active participation by those affected by the issue being studied , and the shared goal of " advancing knowledge in search of greater justice " ( [ 42 ] , p . 152 ) . It combines research , ed - ucation and action [ 41 , 72 ] to drive collective empowerment and deepen social knowledge [ 45 , 93 ] . Local stakeholders are credited with a richness of experience and reflective possibilities developed through living in the complex situation [ 43 ] . External researchers take on catalyst and facilitator roles , and are actively engaged in collaborative problem solving – as opposed to being detached ob - servers [ 47 ] . Everyone is an equal partner , although there may be multiple forms of participation in a given project , and the nature of participation may change over time . Tensions between insider and outsider knowledge – asymmetry of skills and local knowledge – are the basis for a cogenerative learning process [ 43 ] . PAR initia - tives start with an existing problem in a community or organisation [ 41 ] , and aim to develop sustainable solutions which improve the lives and well - being of participants . The approach has been used in health [ 48 , 51 , 57 , 65 ] , education [ 58 – 61 , 67 , 73 ] , human - computer interaction ( HCI ) [ 62 , 63 ] , and museums [ 53 , 74 ] ( among others ) . Kurt Lewin originally described AR ( 1946 ) as a " spiral of steps each of which is composed of a circle of planning , action and fact - finding about the result of the action " ( [ 50 ] , p . 206 ) . Each circle in the systematic inquiry process is informed by a working hypothesis about what needs change in the situation to increase chances of success – a " change - experiment " [ 50 ] . The working hypothesis is tested against reality , followed by group reflection on actions taken . Learnings from one circle are fed back into the planning stage of the following circle . The AR spiral serves as both a medium for change in the community and a method for evaluating the effectiveness of the change [ 46 ] . It is also the process which drives the co - construction of new knowledge about the situation . Results are judged by their ’workability’ : how well the interpretation works when acted on in the local context , in other words , its value for local stakeholders [ 43 ] . PAR generally builds in an educational component to strengthen community participation [ 47 ] and establish foundations for a mu - tually understandable discourse [ 43 ] . A common approach is to embed the research project within the system the study is meant to benefit , to facilitate ongoing capacity building and empowerment [ 51 ] . The initial asymmetrical situation between outsiders and in - siders is progressively balanced through the transfer of knowledge and information in both directions . Communication arenas [ 43 ] , interfacing methods [ 46 ] , and rituals [ 52 ] which promote and fa - cilitate engagement of views , skill sets and forms of knowledge and experience , are key to leveraging the full creative potential of the group and promoting ongoing learning and development . For projects involving young people and children , it is important to identify different capacities and create opportunities for these diverse strengths to be developed and mobilised for the project [ 52 ] . The end goal is a community of researchers that share ownership of the research process [ 53 ] . Due to the heterogeneity of PAR situations , there is no fixed for - mula for designing and implementing PAR projects . A mix of quan - titative and qualitative methods is recommended [ 42 – 44 , 46 , 56 ] . The particular mix of methods should be contextually determined , and align with the democratic values of PAR [ 43 ] . Participatory visualisation methods , such as drawing , mapping , prototyping and various forms of performance , help focus and anchor discussions , strengthen participation , and promote collective ownership of data [ 54 , 56 ] . In HCI , AR often uses design and deployment of tech - nologies as " methods of knowing and of enacting change " ( [ 62 ] , p . 49 ) . Only knowledge generated and tested in practice is deemed credible [ 43 ] . It is highly contextualised , and cannot be generalised automatically to other contexts . Practitioners aim for transferability instead , highlighting and analysing salient aspects of the project in the write - up [ 44 ] to enable readers to identify findings which could be transferred to their contexts [ 65 ] . 4 PAR STUDY 4 . 1 Institutional Setting The study was run by the Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre’s ( SM & LC ) Craft - Tech Club ( CTC ) . The SM & LC is located in uMa - sizakhe , Graaff - Reinet , in the rural Karoo region of South Africa . uMasizakhe is a historic black township , with a rich history and strong sense of community , but like many other South African townships , it remains trapped in the extreme inequalities suffered under Apartheid [ 40 ] . The CTC is an in - house programme fostering 21st century skills through creative technology projects . Activities are structured as PAR studies to enable the club to learn from its practice . Each activity is designed and run with a view to opening up space for children to take on change - agent roles in their community . Each probes a particular problem or opportunity to understand how children may meaningfully engage and contribute , and develop new skills and understanding through the process . Each activity serves as both a medium for change in the community and as a method for evaluating the effectiveness of the change [ 46 ] . Lewin’s approach [ 50 ] is used and findings are fed back into the ongoing design of the club . The study reported here is an example of this approach . Local youth between the ages of 21 and 28 years ( authors 2 – 4 ) have been trained as mentor - researchers to run and develop the club . 4 . 2 Multigenerational Team The interactive was designed by a multigenerational team com - prising the three local mentor - researchers , an external researcher and five local primary school children . Children had just completed grade six ( 3 ) and grade seven ( 2 ) . Their baseline exposure to IT re - flected broader South African inequalities . There was no computer lab at their school and no computers in any of their homes . The 212 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . study was their first opportunity to build hardware and code . ( For details on children’s participation see section 8 . ) All team members were South African . Home languages were : isiXhosa ( 7 ) , Afrikaans ( 1 ) , and English ( 1 ) – also the three local languages . The team practiced translanguaging throughout the study , moving fluidly between the three languages to achieve communication goals and promote learning . Makalela states that in South African learning contexts " use of translanguaging approaches disorganizes ethno - linguistic divisions and separatist ideologies of the past and creates optimal opportunities for pedagogy of integration , which liber - ates historically excluded languages and affirms the fluid linguistic identities of multilingual speakers " ( [ 87 ] , p . 214 ) . Collaboration was grounded in cogenerative dialogue , emphasising respect and equity . Three health care professionals from the Department of Medicine at the University of Cape Town ( UCT ) [ 101 ] and Eh ! woza community health youth media project [ 18 ] offered scientific guidance through email and video conferencing . 4 . 3 Historical Context COVID - 19 is caused by SARS - CoV - 2 , a novel form of the human coronavirus . The first known case was identified in Wuhan , China , in December 2019 . On 11 March 2020 , the World Health Organ - isation ( WHO ) declared COVID - 19 a pandemic [ 75 ] . There were more than 118 000 cases in 114 countries , and 4 291 people had lost their lives . The WHO director - general called for a " whole - of - government , whole - of - society " response [ 75 ] . South Africa con - firmed its first case on 5 March 2020 . Measures implemented to curb transmission included a national lock - down , travel restric - tions , closure of schools , and a widespread health communication programme promoting NPI adoption [ 76 ] . COVID - 19 NPI are public health measures which aim to limit SARS - CoV - 2 transmission in the community [ 77 – 79 , 85 , 92 ] , including physical distancing , hand hygiene and cough etiquette , ventilation of indoor spaces , and the wearing of face masks . They require robust and sustained commu - nication to achieve public compliance [ 77 , 79 ] . Nan et al . [ 91 ] argue that messaging fatigue and desensitisation to pandemic information is part of pandemic fatigue . They suggest health communicators develop and deliver tailored messages with a variety of executions through different channels to reduce messaging fatigue . 4 . 4 Source Materials A collection of 28 COVID - 19 educational posters served as source material for the interactive . Posters were designed by South Africa’s National Department of Health ( NDoH ) [ 80 ] and National Institute for Communicable Diseases ( NICD ) [ 89 ] , the Western Cape Govern - ment ( WCG ) [ 106 ] with UCT’s Knowledge Translation Unit ( KTU ) [ 81 ] , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) [ 82 ] , and Jive Media Africa ( JMA ) in partnership with the United Nations in South Africa ( UN ) [ 83 ] . Posters were downloaded from organisational websites , grouped into the three main NPI categories ( individual , environmen - tal and community [ 79 ] ) , and inserted in a LibreOffice slideshow . In cases where a poster was available in isiXhosa and English , the two versions were positioned side by side on the same slide . All other posters were in English only . Poster content included information about the coronavirus ; signs and symptoms of COVID - 19 ; hand hygiene ; COVID - 19 prevention on public transport ; how to make a cloth mask ; how to wear a cloth mask safely ; cough and sneeze eti - quette ; physical distancing ; disinfecting frequently touched objects and surfaces ; avoiding crowds and confined spaces ; the dominant mode of transmission ; ventilation of indoor spaces ; and what to do when feeling sick . All posters used a combination of image and text . The poster slideshow served as a starting point for the design process and as a record of content development – as content was defined it was inserted into the document . The team consulted the document throughout the design process . The document was also sent to the scientific advisors for comment . 4 . 5 Prior Decisions Decisions bounding interactive design and use included the theme ( COVID - 19 NPI ) ; source materials ( COVID - 19 educational posters ) ; tools ( Scratch [ 102 ] , fundakit [ 84 ] , arts and crafts , basic electronics ) ; requirements ( portable non - competitive multi - user game ) ; target group ( primary school children ) ; and preferred presentation envi - ronment ( classroom ) . A 1l milk - carton foot switch was prototyped and tested before the study to reduce the risk of surface trans - mission through the interactive . At the time scientific evidence suggested contaminated surfaces and objects ( fomites ) could be a major route of SARS - CoV - 2 transmission ; through hand - object contacts followed by hand - face contacts ( eyes , nose , mouth ) [ 105 ] . The switch promoted foot - object rather than hand - object contacts to address this . The design was implemented in the final interactive . All prior decisions were taken by the external researcher and three local mentor - researchers . 4 . 6 Interactive Design The design process began with a presentation of existing CTC interactives . Children used the interactives as a group . Mentor - researchers then unpacked the designs . Explanations focused on craft tech combinations and the Scratch software running on the re - mote host computer . The main tools were then introduced through a series of short exercises . Children worked in small groups , each assuming responsibility for a fundakit node and coding scripts for it in a shared programme . Each child built a mini milk - carton foot switch out of half a carton , and connected it to their node for testing ( Figure 1 ) . Mentor - researchers modelled test code ideas on a pre - sentation screen , and children worked in their groups to implement their own solutions . They interacted with their switches to explore the simple circuits and test foot - based interaction . The interactive theme and design process were introduced next . For the theme , researchers presented the poster slideshow on the presentation screen . Children sat around the screen and took turns to read poster text to the group – their idea . New words were clar - ified . Mentor - researchers then led a review of NPI compliance in the community . One facilitated group discussion while the other wrote up points on a flip chart . Challenges to compliance were surfaced and discussed . For the introduction to the design pro - cess , the team designed a simple game about animals using the mini milk - carton switches . Children drew icons for their switches , and worked with mentor - researchers to author questions and code scripts . Mentor - researchers structured the process as a shared en - deavour , and created space for children to take on leadership roles . Museum staff were invited to use the completed game . 213 Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Figure 1 : Creating a foot switch with half a milk carton and aluminium tape during the preparatory exercises ( left ) ; reading English and isiXhosa versions of a South African poster explaining face masks ( right ) . Figure 2 : Playing through game rules and ideas with a low - res prototype ( top left ) , authoring a multiple - choice question and marking correct and incorrect answer options ( top right ) ; testing milk carton switches with purpose - built software scripts ( bottom left ) ; narrating and recording audio output ( bottom right ) . Ideation followed the introductions . Mentor - researchers built a low - res prototype for the interface with empty milk cartons grouped into groups of three , and demonstrated ideas for interac - tion . One mentor - researcher wrote the letters A , B , C on the three cartons in each group to illustrate an idea for a sensor module for an - swering multiple - choice questions . Members then drew rough ideas for the interface . Common themes included four wireless sensor modules positioned in a ring ( later reduced to three ) ; wireless sensor modules containing three switches for answering multiple - choice questions ( implemented ) ; and wireless sensor modules positioned around a start / questions button ( later rejected ) . Finished drawings were taped to the wall . The team gathered around the drawings and children generated ideas for the game . One child took charge of the process , facilitating discussion and writing up rules on the flip chart . Children built on each other’s ideas in a collaborative way . The team then assembled a revised low - res prototype based on the drawings and rules . Three children played an improvised version of the game with the prototype ( Figure 2 ) . The main rules and ideas were consolidated in a flow diagram . A child led the process , referring to a diagram for an earlier system taped to a nearby wall . Researchers pointed out problems and pro - vided support . The team worked through multiple versions , always increasing detail and clarity . The team then split into two smaller groups , both led by mentor - researchers . One group drew up detailed drawings of the sensor modules and icons for the three switches for responding to the planned multiple - choice questions ( A , B , C ) , 214 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . while the other worked on the questions . The questions group iden - tified appropriate starting points in the posters and collaboratively generated ideas around them . Final question and answer - options were written up on the flip chart . The drawing group researched objects for the icons ( soap , sanitiser , masks , etc . ) , as well as ways to represent physical distancing . Groups swapped roles halfway to en - sure everyone worked on both tasks . When the tasks were complete , mentor - researchers laid out the drawings on a large work surface . They led discussion , placing drawings between and on top of milk cartons to create impressions of possible solutions . Drawings were integrated into a revised low - res prototype representing decisions . The revised prototype was used in a final improvised version of the game . Three children stood in front of three sensor modules , while the other children and mentor - researchers stood behind the flip chart and read questions . The three users acted out interactions to start the game , listen to instructions , answer questions , and repeat questions . The reader group observed the user group’s interactions , and responded with appropriate content . Mentor - researchers and children discussed and resolved issues while playing together . After improvising a full version of the game , the team finalised decisions and proceeded to implementation . Implementation involved building and testing the three wireless sensor modules , each comprising three milk - carton foot switches connected to an embedded fundakit node . It also involved translat - ing , narrating and recording the content , and building the Scratch programme around it . The programme was developed collabora - tively on the presentation screen . Children assumed responsibility for tasks which fell within a zone of proximal development ( ZPD ) [ 103 ] – the ZPD is a " dynamic region of sensitivity to learning " ( [ 104 ] , p . 14 ) , defined as the " the distance between the actual devel - opment level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capa - ble peers " ( [ 103 ] , p . 86 ) . Mentor - researchers provided temporary scaffolding by asking questions , proposing ideas and modelling strategies . Programming tasks which fell outside of children’s ZPD were implemented by the researchers . Children tested the completed sensor modules and software , and then played the first full round of the game . Museum staff were invited to participate in the next round . Bugs and outstanding elements were identified and addressed over the following sessions . Children chose the title Coronavirus Update for the interactive . 4 . 7 Interactive Use The interactive was presented in four primary schools and a day care centre catering for youth with special needs . Decisions pertain - ing to the setting , grades , learner numbers and duration were taken by schools . Researchers proposed alternatives when problems were identified . In three of the learning institutions the environment was a classroom ( not always the same one ) , in the other two , a hall and a covered open - air space . In one classroom desks were fastened to the floor . In this setting the interactive was presented at the front of the class , between the front desks and the backboard . In all the other classrooms desks were rearranged into a circular formation with desks facing inwards . The interface , comprising a large draw - ing of the coronavirus , three physical distancing ’spacers’ , and the three wireless sensor modules , was set up in the centre of the desk formation on the floor ( Figure 3 ) . Children sat and stood in the desks , facing the interactive and each other . In the hall and open - air space , children either stood or sat on chairs in a similar circular formation . The host computer and audio system were set up on the teacher’s desk or table . In the schools , presentations were run for individual classes ( N = 28 ) , combined classes ( N = 2 ) , and a group of learners not attend - ing class on the day ( N = 1 ) . Individual class size ranged from 20 to 24 learners – half the real class size to comply with COVID - 19 protocols . The two combined class sizes were 44 and 45 learners . The size of the group of learners not attending class on the day was 21 . A single presentation was run in the day care centre . Class size there was 12 learners . A total of 747 children used the interac - tive . Presentations were run by the three mentor - researchers using translanguaging approaches [ 87 , 108 ] . They introduced the activity , ran a short demo , facilitated use and closed with a post - use dis - cussion . Teacher presence and participation varied across schools . Duration of presentations was 45 - 60 minutes . Each presentation included one or more collaborative use sessions . Children from the design team assisted on four of the presentation days . Children used the interactive in groups of three – the active users ( AU ) , with support from peers around the interactive – the passive users ( PU ) . Active use was rotated . The use environment was iterated for joint decision - making with a balanced exploration of differences of perspective in user groups . Learnings from one day of presentations were fed back into the planning stages of the following day’s presentations . 4 . 8 A Collaborative Use Session The 3 AUs coordinate efforts to press the three switches on the START module at the same time ( Figure 3 ) . This interaction starts the game and plays the first question . Each AU then takes up posi - tion behind a module . They listen to the question , discuss it among themselves and with PUs , reach consensus on the correct answer , and input the answer from their respective modules . The system only considers and answer correct if the correct answer is inputted from all three modules . If the group is correct they get three points and the system outputs the following question . If they are incorrect , the system offers a second chance . If they are still incorrect , the system outputs the correct answer and plays the following question . Groups can replay the current question by pressing the 3 switches on the REPLAY module at the same time . They can also listen to the instructions at any time by pressing the three switches on the INSTRUCTIONS module at the same time . There are sixteen ques - tions in total . Language ( isiXhosa , Afrikaans and English ) is rotated question by question . At the end of the game the system outputs the group’s score and the highest score for the day . 4 . 9 Data Collection and Analysis Various participatory visualisation methods [ 54 ] were integrated into the design process , including drawing , flow diagramming , pro - totyping , collaborative writing up of ’public’ rules and content , and the co - construction of a new technology – the craft tech interactive . The interactive comprised hardware and software containing con - tributions from children and adults ( 16 drawings , 86 audio files , 304 215 Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Figure 3 : Setting up the interactive in a classroom use environment ( top left ) ; user standing behind one of the three wireless sensor modules ( top right ) ; user group coordinating interactions to start the game ( bottom left ) ; user group coordinating interactions to answer a question ( bottom right ) . lines of code , and 7 craft tech constructions ) . A project - specific form of performance [ 44 ] – the playful enactment of evolving game rules with work - in - progress content and low - res prototypes – was used to complement and extend static visual representations . The pro - cesses and outcomes of visualisation methods were systematically documented with a hand - held digital camera ( 1135 photos ) . Particu - lar attention was paid to the collaborative development of ideas and artefacts , playful enactments , and children’s evolving participation . Material outcomes from visualisation methods were stored in the CTC , and available for later analysis . Documents related to the design process , such as the poster slideshow and narrative script , were also available . Mentor - researchers administered a short paper - and - pencil sur - vey after each presentation . The survey was designed to collect data on interest in further use of craft tech interactives ( yes / no ) , interest in designing a craft tech interactive with friends ( yes / no ) , and pre - ferred medium for teaching a friend about the coronavirus ( school textbook , colourful poster , craft tech interactive game , television advertisement , radio programme ) . Survey forms were distributed to children in the use environment . Questions were written in English . Mentor - researchers and teachers translated and clarified the three questions and explained how to answer them . The survey had an average completion time of less than 5 minutes . 707 of the 747 users completed the survey , yielding a completion rate of 94 , 6 % . We considered surveys complete if at least one question was answered . Children were asked to write their class ( e . g . 5B ) on the form . No other personal data was collected . Data analysis addressed the two research questions . For RQ1 , In which ways did children reshape source , message and channel during the interactive design process ? , we coded participatory visualisation data , process documents and photographic documentation , using codes for the three variables . Ideas and patterns were surfaced and traced out across multiple data sources for a given variable to map the complexities of child participation and elaborate overarching learning themes . This process also allowed us to triangulate data sources to strengthen validity . For RQ2 , How did users respond to the interactive in the presentations ? , we collated results from the post - use survey , organising by survey question , grade and response , and identified relevant results . 5 RESULTS Here we present the findings for the two research questions . 5 . 1 In which ways did children reshape source , message and channel during the interactive design process ? 5 . 1 . 1 Source Variable . Source relates to who is delivering the mes - sage . In the original posters , source was mainly communicated through organisational and departmental logos . Out of 28 posters in the collection , 27 displayed logos prominently . Children reshaped source as " in - group messengers " ( [ 91 ] , p . 11 ) through their collec - tive contributions to the interface and output ; what users saw and heard while using the interactive together . Both areas – drawing 216 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . and audio – projected a distinct child - like presence and authorship in the context of a museum outreach programme . Of the 16 interface icons and images , 15 ( 93 , 7 % ) were drawn by children in collaboration with the mentor - researchers . Tracing out source reshaping across multiple data sources – sketches , spec - ification diagrams , final drawings , interactive and photographic documentation – revealed that the group sketched up initial ideas , discussed results , identified directions to take , and generated speci - fications for final designs . Children then proceeded to implementa - tion . Specifications brought cohesive similarity but not uniformity . Each child added subtle personal touches to their drawings . They mostly drew without adult supervision and support . All five chil - dren were represented on the interface through their drawings . Twenty - five of the 96 audio segments ( 26 , 0 % ) used in the Scratch programme were narrated by children . Tracing the reshaping across multiple data sources – script , recording notes , audio files , pro - gramme and photographs – revealed children narrated the ques - tions , game levels , interaction feedback , and answer feedback , while mentor - researchers narrated the instructions , pop - up facts , module - specific functionality , correct answers and scores . If users chose not to listen to the instructions and answered all questions cor - rectly , 51 of the 62 segments ( 82 , 2 % ) outputted in the game were narrated by children . The number of segments narrated by the mentor - researchers increased by two for each wrong answer . Chil - dren narrated confidently and expressively in all three languages . One child chose not to participate in this task . They also opted out of reading poster text in the introductory sessions . Children’s previous drawing and reading experience appeared to enable rich participation in this variable and the strong " marking " of child presence and authorship . Ongoing dialogue with mentor - researchers through and around process artefacts facilitated bridg - ing into new design areas . It is important to note that not all children were comfortable contributing to both tasks . 5 . 1 . 2 Message Variable . Message relates to what is being com - municated , the content and structure . The original poster content focused on three main areas : i . ) self - efficacy – actions an individual can take to protect themselves and others from being exposed to the coronavirus ; ii . ) collective efficacy – social actions a community can take to reduce coronavirus transmission and protect vulnerable groups ; and iii . ) technical information – symptoms and modes of transmission of COVID - 19 [ 90 , 91 ] . All posters followed the same general approach for structure , a combination of text and image . A total of 144 people were represented in the images : 136 using realistic drawing styles , and 8 through signage - like depiction . The age breakdown for the realistic drawings was 75 adults , 56 youth and 5 children . Realistic drawings included in the South African posters reflected the social and cultural environment . Tracing out message reshaping across multiple sources – poster slideshow , flip chart notes ( community compliance review , ideas , rules , questions ) , script , interactive and photographic documenta - tion – revealed children and mentor - researchers first developed the structure ( the game rules and ideas ) , and then the content ( the game questions and pop - up facts ) . Children led with confidence and authority on the structure , taking over at the flip chart and building on the initial design decisions established by the researchers ( see section 4 . 5 ) . They developed devices to promote cooperation within groups and friendly competition across groups ; an approach for lan - guage ; supportive elements to promote learning ; and a game level system based on the three main categories of NPI [ 79 ] : individual , environmental and community . Final decisions were written up on the flip chart : Coronavirus Update ———————— A game for 3 players Stand in a circle and use touch sensor to answer ques - tions Agree on the same answer and answer together 3 points for a right answer 0 point for a wrong answer and 2 chances 3 levels level 1 = Ind level 2 = Env level 3 = Comm each level has 4 or more questions You can’t get knocked out of the game Players get their points at the end of the game Get the right answer after the two chances Players decide when to play the instruction If you did not hear the question press repeat Mix the three languages Isixhosa , English and Afrikaans A button to start the game and restart the game At the end of the game we tell the players their score and tell the highest score The game content was developed with the structure in mind . Content comprised 16 multiple - choice questions and 5 pop - up facts . Questions focused on self - efficacy topics , and pop - up facts con - centrated on collective efficacy and technical information . The questions were developed by the children with the support of the mentor - researchers . The pop - up facts were developed by the mentor - researchers only . Questions were made up of a stem ( the problem to be solved ) and three options : a key ( correct answer ) and two distractors ( incorrect answers ) . Children followed two broad approaches for their development . In the first , the stem and the three options were based on poster content they identified as rele - vant for their peers , drawing on their insider knowledge of child compliance in the community . The content was extracted from the posters and reorganised into the four constituent parts ( Figure 2 ) . An example of this approach was the use of mask - related messaging in two WHO posters illustrating the ’Do’s’ and ’Don’ts’ of wearing non - medical fabric masks : HOW TO WEAR YOUR MASK ? ( A ) Cover your mouth , nose and chin ( B ) Wear a dirty and wet mask ( C ) Wear it under your nose In the second approach , poster content was embedded in every - day situations in the community . An example of this approach was the reworking of illness - related messaging in WCG / KTU [ 81 , 106 ] and WHO [ 82 ] posters : 217 Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA WHAT SHOULD YOU DO WHEN YOU ARE FEELING SICK ? ( A ) Go to school , Play with friends ( B ) Tell no one , Go to the shops ( C ) Stay at home , Tell your parents Children’s shared interest in and knowledge of play appeared to facilitate their leadership on the message structure . Living in the community during the pandemic helped build detailed understand - ing of peer compliance and experiences , which was leveraged to shape more targeted and child - orientated message content . 5 . 1 . 3 Channel Variable . Channel relates to how the message is delivered , the medium and the setting . The original posters were all in digital format ( PNG , JPG , PDF ) , and available for download and DIY printing . Printed examples were displayed in workplaces , shop - ping malls , educational institutions , etc . Children and researchers reshaped channel through their work on the portable craft tech interactive and use environment . Tracing out channel reshaping across multiple data sources – introductory exercise results , sketches , prototypes , flow diagrams , drawings , flip chart notes , interactive and photographs – revealed a collaborative effort with mentor - researchers in control . They led on the interactive’s hardware and software , while children engaged in what Lave and Wenger call legitimate peripheral participation ( LPP ) – " engagement in social practice that entails learning as an in - tegral constituent " ( [ 110 ] , p . 35 ) . Children contributed to discussions and other ideation activities led by mentor - researchers ; worked on simple , low - risk tasks with the support of mentor - researchers ; and observed and assisted mentor - researchers with their tasks . Tasks were situated within a ZPD and clearly connected to the broader group effort . For the hardware , this included participating actively in the group’s user interface sketching exercises and interaction de - sign , making internal contacts for the milk carton switches , cutting and stripping electrical wire for circuits , insulating solder joints , and testing switch contacts and circuits with purpose - built software scripts . For the software , this included drawing up flow diagrams , coding parts of event handler scripts which responded to all three switches on a module being pressed at the same time , implementing scripts which assembled various audio output on the fly , and inte - grating other audio output into the programme . Tasks which fell outside children’s ZPD were implemented by researchers . Presen - tations were planned and organised by the researchers and school authorities . Children assisted on four of the presentation days , at two different schools . Children’s building of milk - carton switches and event handler scripts in the introductory exercises was characterised by greater child control over hardware and software ( Figure 1 ) . The process enabled them to build mental models of the test system , which fa - cilitated LPP in channel reshaping – e . g . knowing what to look for while testing switch contacts and circuits with purpose - built scripts ( Figure 2 ) – but results were not suitable for the planned school presentations . The switches required ongoing tinkering to keep them working and the scripts outputted a single audio file . Scaling up to the envisaged multi - user learning game required skills and understanding which lay beyond children’s ZPD . Working with more experienced members of their community , who did possess these skills and understanding , enabled them to make meaningful contributions . The combination of simple introductory exercises and LPP opportunities in a group design process – including new - comers and old - timers – appears to offer ways to support children’s reshaping of the channel . 5 . 2 How did users respond to the interactive in the presentations ? A total of 747 children from four primary schools and a day care centre catering for learners with special needs used the interactive in the presentations . Breakdown by grade and learning programme was : Grade 4 = 117 ; Grade 5 = 225 ; Grade 6 = 210 ; Grade 7 = 183 ; Special Needs = 12 . 707 of the users completed a short post - use survey containing three close - ended questions . The survey revealed a pronounced interest in craft tech interactive use : 92 , 9 % ( N = 657 ) of respondents indicated that they would play a craft tech interactive game again if they had the chance . There was slightly less interest in craft tech interactive design : 88 , 8 % ( N = 628 ) of respondents indi - cated that they would like to create their own craft tech interactive game with friends . Finally , craft tech interactives were the medium of choice for coronavirus educational messaging for peers : 59 , 4 % ( N = 420 ) of respondents indicated that they would choose a craft tech interactive game to teach a friend about the coronavirus ; 12 , 4 % ( N = 88 ) a school textbook ; 10 , 0 % ( N = 71 ) a poster with lots of bright colours ; 8 , 3 % ( N = 59 ) a television advertisement ; and 4 , 3 % ( N = 31 ) a radio programme . 5 , 3 % ( N = 38 ) of responses were unclear . 6 DISCUSSION Children’s contributions aligned with two commonly used strate - gies for making health promotion and disease prevention interven - tions more culturally appropriate for the target group . The colourful user interface drawings , scripted multiple - choice questions with references to practices , snacks , modes of transport , material objects and spaces from children’s lives , and audio output narrated in the three local languages , were examples of what Kreuter et al . [ 70 ] call peripheral strategies . These strategies aim to package health education materials in ways which are likely to appeal to the target group . This may include the use of colours , fonts , images , people , places , music , clothing , etc . which outwardly convey relevance to the group . When these elements reflect or express the social and cultural world of the audience , it makes materials appear familiar and comfortable [ 70 ] . This matching of materials to observable char - acteristics of the target group is thought to enhance receptivity to and acceptance of health messages [ 68 ] . We observed an example of this fit within the local culture in schools where presentations were run over a number of days . It was common for children who had already attended a presentation to playfully call out their favourite parts of output ( from memory ) when they saw us in the playground . Children’s other main contributions , to game rules and interac - tive hardware and software , reflected sociocultural strategies [ 70 ] . These approaches focus on the inner workings of a culture rather than its outward appearances . Health - related issues are discussed in the context of social and / or cultural characteristics of the target group . Interventions recognise and build on cultural values , beliefs and behaviour to provide context and meaning for health mes - sages [ 69 , 70 ] . Resnicow et al . call these characteristics the " deep 218 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . structure " of cultural sensitivity , which conveys salience to the tar - get group when integrated into health communication [ 68 ] . In the case of the interactive hardware , the team built on target group behaviour , namely children’s self - led making practice . During the study we observed examples of footballs made from condoms and bread packaging , kites made from plastic bags and sticks , swings made from packing strap and water bottles , discarded mattresses used as trampolines , and toy cars made from milk cartons and bottle tops . These self - made play resources , a creative response to need ; materials found in the environment ; and ideas passed from one gen - eration of children to the next ; were used by groups on the streets of the townships . In the interactive presentations , users recognised continuity with their making practice , drawing our attention to similarities between the interactive’s wireless sensor modules and the bokskarre ( cars made from milk cartons , wire and plastic tops ) they made and used . They also expressed interest in the ways peers had extended the practice into new technological areas . The inter - active’s rules implemented in the software , rewarding cooperation and coordination in user groups , emphasised local cultural val - ues of ubuntu – captured in the isiXhosa maxim : Umntu ngumntu ngabantu ( A person is a person through other people ) . Ubuntu articulates social interdependence [ 99 ] , which Rogoff describes as " responsive coordination with the group " ( [ 98 ] , p . 200 ) . Letseka argues that ubuntu " implies an interactive ethic in which our hu - manity is shaped by our interaction with others as co - dependent beings " ( [ 99 ] , p . 48 ) , potentially setting up rich opportunities for culturally - grounded learning through multi - user interactives . 7 CONCLUSION The aim of this PAR study was to contribute to COVID - 19 education in local schools and broaden understanding about roles children can play in public health mobilisation in museums . A total of 747 children used the interactive learning resource in the school and day care centre presentations . We found that craft tech tools and methods enabled children in the design team to actively reshape key input variables influencing the effectiveness of health communica - tion . Source ( who is delivering the message ) was reshaped through user interface design and audio output . Both areas conveyed a dis - tinct child - like presence and authorship . Message ( what is being communicated ) was reshaped through the interactive game rules and multiple - choice questions . The rules structured messaging as a playful group learning exercise . The questions addressed issues children identified as relevant for peers , and embedded content in everyday situations in the community . Channel ( which medium is adopted ) was reshaped through the hardware and software . These core elements connected to local making practice and supported cooperative interactions with , through and around the interactive . Contributions held relevance for peers in the presentations . Users expressed strong interest in designing their own interactives , using an interactive again in the future , and using an interactive to teach a friend about the coronavirus . We view portable craft tech interac - tives as promising vehicles for promoting children’s participation in culturally - relevant health promotion and disease prevention interventions for children . They can foreground designer voices , interests and experience , and engage user cultural values and be - haviour . This can enhance the fit of education materials with target group culture and provide context and meaning for health messages . Future research should examine children’s gains from design and use , as well as the ripple effects of the educational aspect within the community . 8 SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN Designers – all five children ( 4 boys and 1 girl ) participated in earlier face shield personalisation workshops introducing digital fabrication ( 26 boys and 32 girls ) . The workshops were planned and run with two local schools . At the end of each workshop , mentor - researchers informed participants about the upcoming activity and invited them to attend an introductory meeting . Attendance was voluntary and outside of school hours . At the meeting mentor - researchers explained : ( i ) participants would work with them over the summer school holidays to create a playful interactive for peers , ( ii ) the completed interactive would be presented in local schools at the start of the new academic year , and ( iii ) the process would help shape the eventual design of the club . Each child took home a parental / guardian consent form . The form stated that the activity would be documented for archival , media , exhibition and scientific purposes . Attendance was voluntary and contingent on the return of a signed form . Sessions were run from Monday to Friday , from mid - morning to early afternoon . Sandwiches and juice were offered at lunch breaks . No payment or other form of incentive was pro - vided . Children were told they could leave the activity if they no longer wished to participate . All five children who signed up for the activity had used CTC interactives in class previously . They expressed interest in designing their own and presenting to peers . Users – the heads of the four primary schools and day care centre were approached to explore ideas for the presentations . Three heads visited the CTC to discuss the presentations and use the interactive . Researchers met with the other two heads in their school offices . All heads received a summary document describing the design process , completed interactive and proposed presentation process . Four of the five heads agreed to presentations during school hours , class by class , as part of their COVID - 19 orientation programmes . The fifth head expressed concern about the pandemic’s impact on school attendance . They agreed to a single presentation for pupils not attending class on the day ( schools were rotating attendance to comply with COVID - 19 protocols ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank the five children who were part of the multigener - ational team , the staff and children at the four primary schools and day care centre , and our scientific advisors at the UCT Department of Medicine and Eh ! woza . The PAR study was supported by the National Lotteries Commission and the Eastern Cape Provincial Arts and Culture Council . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Paul Camic and Helen Chatterjee . 2013 . Museums and art galleries as partners for public health interventions . In Perspectives in Public Health , 133 ( 1 ) : 66 - 71 . [ 2 ] Julie Christensen , Julie Bønnelycke , Peter Bentsend , and Lærke Mygind . 2016 . Museums and science centres for health : from scientific literacy to health pro - motion . In Museum Management and Curatorship , 31 ( 1 ) : 17 - 47 . 219 Child - to - Child Public Health Messaging through a Portable Craft Tech Interactive in Rural South Africa IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA [ 3 ] Krisztina Lackoi , Maria Patsou , and Helen Chatterjee ( eds . ) . 2016 . Museums for Health and Wellbeing . A Preliminary Report , National Alliance for Museums , Health and Wellbeing . https : / / museumsandwellbeingalliance . wordpress . com [ 4 ] Judy Diamond , Bejamin Jee , Camillia Matuk , Julia McQuillan , Amy Spiegel , and David Uttal . 2015 . Museum Monsters and Victorious Viruses : Improving Public Understanding of Emerging Biomedical Research . In Curator , 58 ( 3 ) , 299 - 311 . [ 5 ] Helen Chatterjee . 2020 . Partnership for health : the role of cultural and natural assets in public health . In Mark O’Neill and Glenn Hooper ( eds . ) Connecting Museums . Routledge . [ 6 ] Mike Eisenberg , Nwanua Elumeze , Leah Buechley , Glenn Blauvelt , Sue Hendrix , and Ann Eisenberg . 2005 . The homespun museum : computers , fabrication , and the design of personalized exhibits . In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Creativity & cognition ( C & C ’05 ) . ACM . [ 7 ] Isabel Fróes and Kevin Walker . 2011 . The Art of Play : Exploring the Roles of Technology and Social Play in Museums . In Katy Beale ( ed . ) Museums At Play – Games , Interaction and Learning . MuseumsEtc . [ 8 ] K . C . Cole . 2009 . Something incredibly wonderful happens : Frank Oppenheimer and the world he made up . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishers . [ 9 ] Christian Heath and Dirk vom Lehn . 2010 . Interactivity and Collaboration : new forms of participation in museums , galleries and science centres . In Ross Parry ( Ed . ) Museums in a Digital Age . Routledge . [ 10 ] Graham Black . 2012 . Transforming Museums in the Twenty - First Century . Rout - ledge . [ 11 ] Rosana Alexandre . 2011 . Porto Through a Game . In Katy Beale ( Ed . ) Museums At Play – Games , Interaction and Learning . MuseumsEtc . [ 12 ] Lisa Ellsworth and Sara DeAngelis . 2011 . Leveraging Play , Unlocking Imagina - tions . In Katy Beale ( Ed . ) Museums At Play – Games , Interaction and Learning . MuseumsEtc . [ 13 ] Eva Davidsson and Anders Jakobsson . ( Eds . ) 2012 . Understanding Interactions at Science Centres and Museums : Approaching Sociocultural Perspectives . Sense Publishers . [ 14 ] Marcus Duveskog , Katie Kemppainen , Roman Bednarik and Erkki Sutinen . 2009 . Designing a story - based platform for HIV and AIDS counseling with Tanzanian children . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’09 ) . ACM . [ 15 ] Ed Young , Bianca Masuku , Barbara Torresi , Digby Warner , and Anastasia Koch . 2018 . Eh ! woza : intersection of art and science to engage youth on tuberculosis . In Global Health Innovation , 1 ( 1 ) . [ 16 ] American Alliance of Museums . 2013 . Museums On Call : How Museums Are Addressing Health Issues . Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . aam - us . org / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 01 / museums - on - call . pdf [ 17 ] Jocelyn Dodd and Ceri Jones . 2014 . Mind , body , spirit : How museums impact health and wellbeing . University of Leicester : Research Centre for Museums and Galleries . [ 18 ] Eh ! woza . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / ehwoza . com / [ 19 ] Bianca Masuku , Nolwazi Mkhwanazi , Ed Young , Anastasia Koch , and Digby Warner . 2018 . Beyond the lab : Eh ! woza and knowing tuberculosis . Medical Humanities , 44 ( 4 ) : 285 - 292 . [ 20 ] Hyunjoo Oh , Sherry Hsi , Michael Eisenberg , and Mark Gross . 2018 . Paper Mechatronics : Present and Future . In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM . [ 21 ] Mike Eisenberg and Ann Eisenberg . 1998 . Middle Tech : Blurring the Division between High and Low Tech in Education . In Allison Druin ( ed . ) The Design of Children’s Technology . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 22 ] Craft Tech Lab . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / cucraftlab . org / [ 23 ] Michael Eisenberg and Ann Eisenberg . 1999 . The Developing Scientist as Craftsperson . In Wallace Feurzeig and Nancy Roberts ( eds . ) , Modeling and Sim - ulation in Science and Mathematics Education . Springer - Verlag . [ 24 ] Michael Eisenberg , Ann Eisenberg , Sue Hendrix , Glenn Blauvelt , Diana Butter , Jeremy Garcia , Ryan Lewis , and Tyler Nielsen . 2003 . As we may print : new directionsinoutputdevicesandcomputationalcraftsforchildren . In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and children . ACM . [ 25 ] Leah Buechley , Michael Eisenberg , Jaime Catchen , and Ali Crockett . 2008 . The LilyPad Arduino : Using Computational Textiles to Investigate Engagement , Aesthetics , and Diversity in Computer Science Education . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ‘08 ) . ACM . [ 26 ] Mark O’Neill , Pete Seaman , and Duncan Dornan . 2020 . Thinking through health and museums in Glasgow . In Mark O’Neill and Glenn Hooper ( eds . ) , Connecting Museums . Routledge . [ 27 ] Esme Ward . 2020 . Transforming health , museums and the civic imagination . In Mark O’Neill and Glenn Hooper ( eds ) , Connecting Museums . Routledge . [ 28 ] Gevrey Trunnell . 2011 . Public Health Communication in the Museum Nonprofit : A Case Study Approach . Lambert Academic Publishing . [ 29 ] John Falk , Carol Scott , Lynn Dierking , Léonie Rennie , and Mika Jones . 2004 . Interactives and Visitor Learning . In Curator : The Museum Journal , 47 . [ 30 ] Sue Allen . 2004 . Designs for learning : Studying science museum exhibits that do more than entertain . In Science Education , Volume 88 , Issue S1 . Wiley . [ 31 ] Sue Allen and Joshua Gutwill . 2004 . Designing Science Museum Exhibits with Multiple Interactive Features : Five Common Pitfalls . In Curator : The Museum Journal , 47 ( 2 ) . [ 32 ] Helen Chatterjee and Guy Noble . 2016 . Museums , Health and Well - Being . Rout - ledge . [ 33 ] Eva Hornecker and Luigina Ciolfi . 2019 . Human - Computer Interactions in Muse - ums . Morgan and Claypool Publishers . [ 34 ] LykkeAxelsen , LærkeMygindandPeterBentsen . 2014 . DesigningwithChildren : A Participatory Design Framework for Developing Interactive Exhibitions . In The International Journal of the Inclusive Museum Vol . 7 : 1 . [ 35 ] Alma Culén . 2012 Transforming Children’s Museums by Designing Exhibits with Children . In Proceedings of The Transformative Museum . DREAM - Danish Research Center on Education and Advanced Media Materials , University of Southern Denmark . [ 36 ] Alma Culén , Tone Bratteteig , Sumit Pandey , and Swati Srivastava . 2013 . The Child - to - Child ( C2C ) Method : Participatory Design for , with and by Children in a Children’s Museum . In IADIS International Journal on WWW / Internet , Vol . 11 : 2 . [ 37 ] Lois Silverman . 2010 . The Social Work of Museums . Routledge . [ 38 ] Communities for Immunity : Museums and Libraries as Trusted Community Partners [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / community . astc . org / communitiesforimmunity / home [ 39 ] Peter Winch , Elli Leontsini , José Rigau - Pérez , Mervin Ruiz - Pérez , Gary Clark , and Duane Gubler . 2002 . Community - based dengue prevention programs in Puerto Rico : impact on knowledge , behavior , and residential mosquito infesta - tion . In American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene . 67 ( 4 ) . [ 40 ] Sobukwe Museum and Learning Centre . [ n . d . ] Sobukwe Heritage and Learning Museum , uMasizakhe , Graaff - Reinet , Eastern Cape . Business Implementation Plan : April 2010 to April 2012 . [ 41 ] Patricia Maguire . 1987 . Doing Participatory Research : A Feminist Approach . The Center for International Education , University of Massachusetts , Amherst . [ 42 ] Orlando Fals - Borda and Mohammad Rahman . 1991 . Action and Knowledge : Breaking the Monopoly with Participatory Action - Research . The Apex Press . [ 43 ] Davydd Greenwood and Morten Levin . 2007 . Introduction to Action Research : Social Research for Social Change . Sage . [ 44 ] Alice McIntyre . 2008 . Participatory Action Research . Sage . [ 45 ] Budd Hall . 1992 . From Margins to Center ? The Development and Purpose of Participatory Research . In The American Sociologist , 23 . [ 46 ] Jacques Chevalier and Daniel Buckles . 2019 . Participatory Action Research : The - ory and Methods for Engaged Inquiry . Routledge . [ 47 ] Marion Martin . 1996 . Issues of power in the participatory research process . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) Participatory Research in Health : Issues and Experiences . Zed Books and NPPHCN . [ 48 ] Gert Marincowitz . 2003 . How to use participatory action research in primary care . In Family Practice , Vol . 20 , No . 5 . Oxford University Press . [ 49 ] Ernest Stringer . 2014 . Action Research . Sage . [ 50 ] Kurt Lewin . 1948 . Action Research and Minority Problems . In Gertrud Weiss Lewin ( ed . ) Resolving Social Conflicts : Selected Papers on Group Dynamics / by Kurt Lewin . Harper & Brothers . [ 51 ] Margaret Cargo and Shawna Mercer . 2008 . The value and challenges of partici - patory research : strengthening its practice . In Annual Review of Public Health . 2008 ; 29 . [ 52 ] Caitlin Cahill . 2009 . Doing research with young people : Participatory research and the rituals of collective work . In Lorraine van Blerk and Mike Kesby ( eds . ) Doing Children’s Geographies : Methodological Issues in Research with Young People . Routledge . [ 53 ] Vasiliki Tzibazi . 2013 . Participatory Action Research with young people in museums . In Museum Management and Curatorship , 28 : 2 . Routledge . [ 54 ] Andrea Cornwall . 1996 . Towards participatory practice : participatory rural appraisal ( PRA ) and the participatory process . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) Participatory Research in Health : Issues and Experiences . Zed Books and NPPHCN . [ 55 ] Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin . 1996 . Participatory research in health : setting the context . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) Participatory Research in Health : Issues and Experiences . Zed Books and NPPHCN . [ 56 ] Elizabeth Tolley and Margaret Bentley . 1996 . Training issues for the use of participatory research methods in health . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) Participatory Research in Health : Issues and Experiences . Zed Books and NPPHCN . [ 57 ] Stanley Okurut , Amos Odong , James Imalingat , Anne Okurut , Lawrence Oloit , andFilderOloit . - PACODET . 1996 . Participatoryresearchprocessesandempow - erment : the PACODET community , Uganda . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) Participatory Research in Health : Issues and Experiences . Zed Books and NPPHCN . [ 58 ] Ronél Ferreira , Liesel Ebersöhn and Karien Botha . 2013 . Using participatory actionresearchtodevelopanHIVandAidsschoolplan . In SouthAfricanJournal of Education , 33 ( 4 ) . [ 59 ] IngoEilksandBerndRalle . 2002 . ParticipatoryActionResearchwithinChemical Education . In Bernd Ralle and Ingo Eilks ( eds . ) : Research in chemical education - 220 IDC ’23 , June 19 – 23 , 2023 , Chicago , IL , USA Roger Meintjes et al . What does this mean ? Shaker , Aachen . [ 60 ] Thenjiwe Meyiwa , Tebello Letsekha , and Lisa Wiebesiek . 2013 . Masihambisane , lessons learnt using participatory indigenous knowledge research approaches in a school - based collaborative project of the Eastern Cape . In South African Journal of Education , 33 ( 4 ) . [ 61 ] Steven Jacobs . 2016 . The Use of Participatory Action Research within Education : Benefits to Stakeholders . In World Journal of Education , Vol . 6 , No . 3 . Sciedu Press . [ 62 ] GillianHayes . 2011 . KnowingbyDoing : ActionResearchasanApproachtoHCI . In Judith Olson and Wendy Kellogg . ( eds . ) Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer . [ 63 ] Gillian Hayes . 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - Computer Interaction . In ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 18 , No . 3 . [ 64 ] Camylla de Oliveira and Maria Bonatto . 2017 . Vírus e modelagem para a edu - cação em saúde : uma investigação no Parque da Ciência / Museu da Vida / Fiocruz . In Proceedings XI Encontro Nacional de Pesquisa em Educação em Ciências – XI ENPEC . [ 65 ] Bob Mash . 2014 . African Primary Care Research : Participatory action research . In African Journal of Primary Health Care & Family Medicine ; 6 : 1 . [ 66 ] Michael Slater . 1996 . Theory and Method in Health Audience Segmentation . In Journal of Health Communication , 1 : 3 . [ 67 ] GladysAyaya , TsedisoMakoelle , andMartynvanderMerwe . 2020 . Participatory Action Research : A Tool for Enhancing Inclusive Teaching Practices Among Teachers in South African Full - Service Schools . In SAGE Open , 10 : 4 . [ 68 ] Ken Resnicow , Tom Baranowski , Jasjit Ahluwalia , and Ronald Braithwaite . 1999 . Cultural Sensitivity in Public Health : Defined and Demystified . In Ethnicity and Disease . 9 : 1 . [ 69 ] Matthew Kreuter and Stephanie McClure . 2004 . The Role of Culture in Health Communication . In Annual Review of Public Health ; 25 . [ 70 ] Matthew Kreuter , Susan Lukwago , Dawn Bucholtz , Eddie Clark , and Vetta Sanders - Thompson . 2003 . Achieving Cultural Appropriateness in Health Pro - motion Programs : Targeted and Tailored approaches . In Health Education and Behavior . Vol . 30 : 2 . [ 71 ] Matthew Kreuter and Ricardo Wray . 2003 . Tailored and targeted health commu - nication : strategies for enhancing information relevance . In American Journal of Health Behavior . 27 : 3 . [ 72 ] Patricia Maguire . 1996 . Proposing a more feminist participatory research : know - ing and being embraced openly . In Korrie de Koning and Marion Martin ( eds . ) ParticipatoryResearchinHealth : IssuesandExperiences . ZedBooksandNPPHCN . [ 73 ] Marcia Scherer and Barbara McKee . 1993 . Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) : What it Is , What it Isn’t , How it’s Done , What you Get . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Education Research Association . [ 74 ] Nathalie Lemelin . 2002 . Participatory Action Research in a Contemporary Art Museum : Findings from a Researcher / Practitioner Partnership . Paper for poster presentation at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association . [ 75 ] World Health Organization . 2020 . WHO Director - General’s open - ing remarks at the media briefing on COVID - 19 - 11 March 2020 . Geneva , Switzerland : WHO . Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . who . int / director - general / speeches / detail / who - director - general - s - opening - remarks - at - the - media - briefing - on - covid - 19 - - - 11 - march - 2020 [ 76 ] Jaydon Farao . 2020 . Digital health communication in South Africa during COVID - 19 . In Global Health Innovation . 3 ( 1 ) . [ 77 ] Olumuyiwa Odusanya , Babatunde Odugbemi , Tinuola Odugbemi , and Whenayon Ajisegiri . 2020 . COVID - 19 : A review of the effectiveness of non - pharmacological interventions . In Nigerian Postgraduate Medical Journal , 27 ( 4 ) . [ 78 ] Qing - Xia Ma , Hu Shan , Hong - Liang Zhang , Gui - Mei Li , Rui - Mei Yang , and Ji - Ming Chen . 2020 . Potential utilities of mask - wearing and instant hand hygiene for fighting SARS - CoV - 2 . In Journal of Medical Virology , 92 ( 9 ) . [ 79 ] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control . 2020 . Guidelines for the implementation of non - pharmaceutical interventions against COVID - 19 . 24 September 2020 . Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . ecdc . europa . eu / sites / default / files / documents / covid - 19 - guidelines - non - pharmaceutical - interventions - september - 2020 . pdf [ 80 ] South Africa’s National Department of Health - COVID - 19 Online Resource & News Portal . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / sacoronavirus . co . za / [ 81 ] Knowledge Translation Unit . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / knowledgetranslation . co . za [ 82 ] World Health Organization . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . who . int / [ 83 ] Jive Media . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / jivemedia . co . za / science - spaza / haykhona - corona - spreading - the - word - not - the - virus / [ 84 ] Fundakit . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from www . fundakit . org [ 85 ] Bella Kantor and Jonathan Kantor . 2020 . Non - pharmaceutical Interventions for Pandemic COVID - 19 : A Cross - Sectional Investigation of US General Public Beliefs , Attitudes , and Actions . In Frontiers in Medicine , vol . 7 ( 384 ) . [ 86 ] Joanne Rappaport . 2020 . Cowards Don’t Make History : Orlando Fals Borda and the Origins of Participatory Action Research . Duke University Press . [ 87 ] Leketi Makalela . 2015 . Moving out of linguistic boxes : the effects of translan - guaging strategies for multilingual classrooms . In Language and Education , 29 : 3 . Routledge . [ 88 ] Vicki Freimuth , Huan Linnan , and Polyxeni Potter . 2000 . Communicating the Threat of Emerging Infections to the Public . In Emerging Infectious Diseases . 6 ( 4 ) . [ 89 ] National Institute for Communicable Diseases . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . nicd . ac . za / [ 90 ] Jeannette Sutton , Scott Renshaw and Carter Butts . 2020 . COVID - 19 : Retrans - mission of official communications in an emerging pandemic . In PLoS ONE , 15 ( 9 ) . [ 91 ] Xiaoli Nan , Irina Iles , Bo Yang , and Zexin Ma . 2022 . Public Health Messaging during the COVID - 19 Pandemic and Beyond : Lessons from Communication Science . In Health Communication , Vol . 37 ( 1 ) . [ 92 ] Derek Chu , Elie Akl , Stephanie Duda , Karla Solo , Sally Yaacoub , Holger Schüne - mann , on behalf of the COVID - 19 Systematic Urgent Review Group Effort ( SURGE ) . 2020 . Physical distancing , face masks , and eye protection to prevent person - to - person transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and COVID - 19 : a systematic review and meta - analysis . In Lancet . 395 ( 10242 ) : 1973 - 1987 . [ 93 ] Fran Baum , Colin MacDougall , and Danielle Smith . 2006 . Participatory action research . In Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health . Oct ; 60 ( 10 ) . [ 94 ] Druin , A . 2002 . Theroleofchildreninthedesignofnewtechnology . In Behaviour and Information Technology , Vol . 21 ( 1 ) . [ 95 ] OleIversenandRachelSmith . 2012 . ScandinavianParticipatoryDesign : Dialogic Curation with Teenagers . In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Interaction Design and Children . [ 96 ] Maria Roussou , Elina Kavalieratou , and Michael Doulgeridis . 2007 . Children designers in the museum : applying participatory design for the development of an art education program . In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Interaction design and children . [ 97 ] Roger Meintjes and Heidi Schelhowe . 2016 . Inclusive Interactives : the Transfor - mative Potential of Making and Using Craft - Tech Social Objects Together in an After - School Centre . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . [ 98 ] Barbara Rogoff . 2003 . The Cultural Nature of Human Development . Oxford Uni - versity Press . [ 99 ] Moeketsi Letseka . 2012 . In Defence of Ubuntu . In Studies in Philosophy and Education , Vol . 31 , 47 - 60 . Springer . [ 100 ] ACM ( AssociationofChildren’sMuseums ) . 2010 . HealthyKids , HealthyMuseums . Arlington , VA : Association of Children’s Museums . [ 101 ] University of Cape Town , Department of Medicine . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / health . uct . ac . za / department - medicine [ 102 ] Scratch . [ n . d . ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / scratch . mit . edu / [ 103 ] Lev Vygotsky . 1978 . Mind in society : The development of higher psychological processes . Harvard University Press . [ 104 ] BarbaraRogoff . 1990 . ApprenticeshipinThinking : CognitiveDevelopmentinSocial Context . Oxford University Press . [ 105 ] CDC ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) . Updated April 5 , 2021 . Sci - ence Brief : SARS - CoV - 2 and Surface ( Fomite ) Transmission for Indoor Commu - nity Environments . https : / / www . cdc . gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / more / science - and - research / surface - transmission . html [ 106 ] Western Cape Government . [ n . d ] Retrieved December 14 , 2022 from https : / / www . westerncape . gov . za / [ 107 ] Jin Yu , Sherry Hsi , Seth Van Doren , and HyunJoo Oh . 2022 . My : Talkies : De - signing a Craft Kit to Support Learning about Communication Devices through Making . In Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’22 ) . ACM [ 108 ] Leketi Makalela . 2015 . Translanguaging as a vehicle for epistemic access : cases for reading comprehension and multilingual interactions . In Per Linguam 31 : 15 - 29 . [ 109 ] NathanHolbert , MatthewBerland , andYasminKafai . 2020 . ExaminingConstruc - tionist Bodies : Interview with Michael Eisenberg . In Nathan Holbert , Matthew Berland , and Yasmin Kafai ( eds . ) Designing Constructionist Futures : The Art , Theory , and Practice of Learning Designs . MIT Press . [ 110 ] Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger . 1991 . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge University Press . 221