Cognitive Development , 13 , 453 - 478 ( 1998 ) ©1998 Ablex Publishing ISSN 0885 - 2014 All rights of reproduction reserved . MORE EVIDENCE FOR A RELATIONAL SHIFT IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF ANALOGY : CHILDREN ' S PERFORMANCE ON A CAUSAL - MAPPING TASK Mary Jo Rattermann Swarthmore College Dedre Gentner Northwestern University Gentner ( 1988 ) has proposed a relational shift whereby children interpret analogy and metaphor first in terms of object similarity and then in terms of relational similarity . Goswami ( 1996 ) argues against the relational shift hypothesis , citing as evidence a study performed by Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) in which 3 - , 4 - , and 6 - year - old children were able to correctly com - plete pictorial A : B : : C : ? analogies based on familiar causal relations , and , contrary to the predictions of the relational shift hypothesis , made very few object - similarity errors despite the presence of an object - similarity choice . In the present experiment we obtained similarity ratings of Goswami and Brown ' s stimuli and found that the materials did not contain a true object sim - ilarity choice and therefore that study was not an adequate test of the rela - This research was supported by an award from the National Science Foundation ( SBR - 95 - 11757 ) to Gentner , a grant from the National Institute of Education under Contract 400 - 31 - 0031 to the Center for the Study of Reading at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign and by Training Grant HD 07205 from the National Institute of Mental Health to the Psychology Department of the University of Illinois . The studies were carried out at the Beckman Institute at the University of Illinois . Preparation of the manuscript was supported in part by a fellowship to Gentner from the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistic Research in Nijmegen , the Netherlands . We thank Usha Goswami and Ann Brown for helpful discussions of these issues and for generously allowing us access to the stimulus materials and the individual data for Experiment 2 of the Goswami & Brown ( 1989 ) paper . Special thanks to Rebecca Campbell for her valuable contributions to the design and implementation of these experiments . We also thank Graeme Halford and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments on this manuscript . Direct all correspondence to : Mary Jo Rattermann , Whitely Psychology Laboratories , Franklin & Marshall College , P . O . Box 3003 , Lancaster , PA 17604 - 3003 . Manuscript received August 2 , 1996 ; revision accepted December 29 , 1997 453 454 Rattermann and Gentner tional shift hypothesis . After appropriate modifications to their methodology , we found that 4 - and 5 - year - old children ' s performance was consistent with the relational shift hypothesis : First , object - similarity errors were highly fre - quent initially and decreased with age ; second , the rate of relational ( correct ) responding increased with age ; and third , performance on the analogues was ly related to children ' s knowledge about the participating causal rela - tions . We conclude by proposing an explanation for the relational shift based on an alignment view of similarity comparison and , further , suggest a new role for object similarity in children ' s analogical development . There is little doubt that children can , and do , reason by analogy . Countless exam - ples , from both empirical studies and anecdotal stories , demonstrate the ability of very young children to reason about the unfamiliar based on the familiar . The question addressed in this paper is not whether children can reason analogically , but how analogical reasoning develops . Different theoretical viewpoints have emphasized different aspects of this development , focusing , for example , on very young children ' s use of analogy as a primary tool for acquiring knowledge ( Brown , 1990 ; Goswami & Brown , 1989 ) ; the role of cognitive capacity in the use of relational similarity ( Halford , 1993 ) ; or the importance of knowledge accretion and representational change in analogical reasoning ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotovsky , 1995 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993ab ) . Studies using a variety of methods have shown that young children can respond to relational similarity ( e . g . , Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ; Gentner , 1977a , 1977b ; Holyoak , Junn , & Billman , 1984 ) , suggesting that analogical reasoning is a skill possessed at a very early age . For example , Gentner ( 1977a , 1977b ) has demonstrated that young children can perform a spatial analogy between a human body - which is a highly familiar domain , even for preschoolers - and pictured objects , such as trees and mountains . She showed children simple pictures , such as a picture of a tree , and asked , " If a tree had a knee , where would it be ? " Even 4 - year - olds ( as well as 6 - year - olds and 8 - year - olds ) were able to perform the map - ping of the human body to the tree . They were as accurate as adults , even when the orientation of the tree was changed or when confusing surface attributes were added to the pictures . Yet there is also evidence that young ren are limited in their analogical rea - soning abilities . For example , Sternberg and his colleagues presented grade - school children and adults with A : B : : C : D analogies ( Sternberg & Downing , 1982 ; Sternberg & Nigro , 1980 ) . They found that young children ( grades 3 and 6 ) responded based on thematic , rather than relational , similarity while ninth - grade and college students produced relational responses . A similar shift from thematic to relational was also found by Piaget , Montangero , and Billeter ( 1977 ) . Further evidence of limitations on children ' s abilities is presented by Winner , Rosenstiel , Relational Shift 455 and Gardner ( 1976 ) , who found that young children interpreted comparisons like " The prison guard ' s heart was hard as stone " to mean that the person was literally turned to stone . The relational interpretation - that like a stone the guard ' s heart was impossible to alter or break , etc . - was made only by much older children and adults . While few researchers would agree with Piaget ' s assessment that before the advent of formal operations ( at about 11 years ) children do not possess the basic cognitive competence required to perform a relational mapping ( Inhelder & Piaget , 1958 ; Piaget , Montangero , & Billeter , 1977 ) , there remains the challenge of finding a unified account of both children ' s abilities and their limitations . The Career of Similarity . Gentner ( 1988 ) proposed that the development of similarity and analogy shows a relational shift : a shift from early attention to com - mon object properties to later attention to common relational structure . Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) amplified this framework to encompass the career of sim - ilarity . They proposed that the development of similarity proceeds from overall similarity to object similarity - for example , a round , red ball and a round , red apple - to similarity based on common relations between objects - for example , " apple ON table " and " book ON bureau " - to similarity based on common higher - order relations ( relations between relations ) - for example , " sun MELTS snow CAUSES snow CHANGE TO puddle " and ` flame MELTS candle CAUSES candle CHANGE TO mound . " ' They further argued , based on a survey of devel - opmental literature , that the mechanism underlying this evolution is epistemolog - ical , not maturational . Thus , there is no absolute level of maturity or experience that will enable children to process relational similarity ; rather , the kind of simi - larity children can perceive is determined by the nature of their domain represen - tation , and , in particular , by the amount and kind of relational knowledge they possess in the domain ( Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotovsky , 1995 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Rattermann , Gentner , & DeLoache , 1989 ; Ratter - mann & Gentner , in preparation ) . The claim that changes in knowledge shape children ' s analogical development offers a potential resolution to the question of why analogical ability emerges at very different times in different domains ( Gen - tner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . There is considerable evidence for such a pattern of performance in children ' s use of similarity and analogy ( see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 , for a full discus - sion ) . Support for the relational shift portion of this hypothesis is provided by Gentner ( 1988 ) , who asked children and adults to interpret metaphors such as " A cloud is like a sponge . " The younger children ( 5 - to 7 - year - olds ) produced mere - appearance interpretations : interpretations based on shared object descriptions , ' The term ' higher - order relation ' has been used in two conflicting ways in the developmental liter - ature . For Piaget , higher - order relations referred to the relation of identity between two lower - order relations , such as that which applies in classic A : B : : C : D analogies . To avoid confusion , it is worth not - ing that our use of the term " higher - order relation ' encompasses not only this identity relation but also other relations between relations . 456 Rattermann and Gentner such as " Both are round and fluffy . " Older children and adults gave interpretations based on common relational structure : for example , " Both can hold water and then later give it back . " Chen and Daehler ( 1989 ) found that children easily became confused when given problem sets in which surface similarity did not match with structural similarity , suggesting that they relied on surface similarity in their mapping . Rattermann , Gentner , and DeLoache ( 1989 ; in preparation ) pre - sented 3 - and 4 - year - old children with an analogical mapping task in which the correct answer was based on relational similarity , but there was a competing ( incorrect ) object - similarity response . Both age groups , but particularly 3 - year - olds , had difficulty learning the relational mapping and made many object - based errors , particularly when the objects were perceptually rich ( so that object similar - ity was salient ) . These results bear out three predictions of the relational shift hypothesis , which proposes that when relational similarity competes with object similarity : ( 1 ) young children ( and adults ) will initially make many object - simi - larity responses ; and with age / experience , ( 2 ) object - similarity responding should decrease , and ( 3 ) relational responding should increase . A further prediction , because the relational shift is not age - determined but knowledge - related , is that it can occur at different ages in different domains , depending on domain knowledge ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . In her relational primacy view , Goswami ( 1992 , 1996 ) proposes an alternative to the relational shift hypothesis . In common with the view proposed by Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) , Goswami ( 1996 ) states that " analogical reasoning ( rela - tional or structural mapping ) can be used to solve problems and to acquire new knowledge as soon as the infant or young child has represented the relevant rela - tional knowledge " ( p . 98 ) . 2 A fundamental difference between the two positions , however , is in the proposed role of object similarity . According to the relational shift hypothesis , the use of object similarity is a crucial and necessary step in the progression from comparisons based on overall similarity to comparisons based on relational similarity . In contrast , the relational primacy view proposes no spe - cial role for object similarity in early comparison processing ; object similarity is merely one of several performance factors that can impede children ' s ability to perform relationally . Because the only role of object similarity is that of a " perfor - mance factor " no relational shift from object similarity to relational similarity is predicted . In fact , based on this proposal , Goswami has stated that the relational shift is " more apparent than real " ( Goswami , 1996 , p . 110 ) . In sum , while both the relational shift and the relational primacy views propose that the ability to make 2 Note that while both Gentner and Ratterman ( 1991 ) and Goswami ( 1996 ) consider analogical rea - soning to be the mapping of relational similarity , when discussing the analogical abilities of children Goswami often describes the " relation of similarity ; " that is , similarity of identicality between lower - order predicates , such as " same color , " " same shape , " or " identical clown . " We prefer to use the more specific term literal similarity when describing situations in which both objects and relations are iden - tical . Relational Shift 457 relational comparisons appears early and increases with the accretion of relational knowledge within a domain , they differ in the proposed role of object similarity . Thus , although both the relational primacy view and the relational shift hypoth - esis assert that knowledge of domain relations is a crucial determinant of analog - ical performance , the two views differ in the developmental course they predict . The relational shift hypothesis predicts a shift from interpretations based on object commonalities to interpretations based on relational commonalities as domain experience increases . The relational primacy view predicts that children should either process relational comparisons correctly from the beginning or , if errors are made before the child possesses adequate domain knowledge , there should be a variety of errors , with no one type predominating . Further , once chil - dren understand the relevant relations , no further object similarity matches should occur . Thus Goswami argues against the relational shift in analogical develop - ment . Object Similarity and Relational Primacy The evidence cited previously suggests a shift in children ' s analogical process - ing from object commonalities to relational commonalities ( for a complete review see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . To account for these findings , Gos - wami ( 1992 , 1996 ) proposes that object similarity is merely a " performance fac - tor " that impedes children ' s ability to perform a relational mapping . To support this view of object similarity , Goswami cites an experiment performed in collab - oration with Brown ( Goswami & Brown , 1989 ) . In this research , they tested the relational shift hypothesis against the relational primacy claim that from the beginning ( or at least as soon as any domain knowledge is present ) children can overlook object similarity and respond based on relational similarity . To do this they presented young children ( 2 - , 3 - , and 4 - year - olds ) with 4 - term ( A : B : : C : ? ? ) causal analogies in which relational similarity and object similarity were in con - flict . The relations that formed the basis for the analogies were familiar causal relations , such as burning and melting . For example , an analogy based on the cut relation was loaf of bread : single slice of bread : : lemon : ? ? ( slice of lemon ) The child was to select the correct completion ( slice of lemon ) from a set of five alternatives : • - correct ( the correct object with the correct causal transformation ) • - the wrong object with the correct transformation F - the correct object with the wrong transformation • - a high - similar object match to the C term ( " mere - appearance " ) • - an identity match to the C term 458 Rattermann and Gentner Goswami and Brown included the wrong object - correct transformation and correct object - wrong transformation response alternatives in order to test whether children had partial knowledge of the analogical rule . Finally , to test the relational shift hypothesis , the " mere - appearance " choice was included . If , as this hypothe - sis predicts , children rely on object similarity before they understand the rela - tional structure , then the high - similarity object match to C ( a " mere - appearance match " in the terms used by Gentner ( 1983 , 1988 ) ) ( a ) should be a frequent error among young children , and ( b ) should decrease with age and experience as the rate of correct relational responses increases . In contrast , if the relational primacy view is correct , then even very young children will overlook salient object simi - larity choices and respond relationally to causal analogies . When young children do make errors , they should be evenly distributed among the error types ; there should be no special tendency for young children to make object - similarity errors . In addition to the analogy task , Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) conducted a causal reasoning control task to test children ' s understanding of the domain relations . For instance , for the " cut " relation the children were shown a lemon and a knife cutting the lemon , and were asked to select from among several alternatives the final picture to complete this sequence : specifically , a slice of lemon . Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) performed two experiments using this basic para - digm , and the results of these experiments supported their major prediction : both age groups performed significantly above chance in both the analogy and causal reasoning tasks . Thus Goswami and Brown ' s first conclusion from this research was that children as young as 3 years old were able to resist the tempting object similarity and respond based on a common causal relation . Of course , this conclu - sion is not problematic for the relational shift hypothesis , which makes no predic - tions regarding the age of relational responding in any given domain ; rather , its predictions concern the developmental sequence of similarity types . Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) second conclusion , however , is more trouble - some . Based on results from their Experiment 2 , they noted that there was no spe - cial tendency to make mere - appearance errors in either age group ( mere - appearance matches accounted for only 10 % of the 3 - year - olds ' responses and 2 % of the 4 - year - olds ' ) and further that the 3 - year - olds made several types of errors . From this they concluded that " when the 3 - year - olds cannot solve the analogies they select randomly between the different answer options . " This pattern of results produced what appeared to be a clear disconfirmation of the relational shift hypothesis ; when young children did make errors they were distributed across a variety of alternatives , with no special tendency to make object similarity errors . The conclusion that young children did not show a tendency to make object similarity errors does bear directly on the relational shift hypothesis , which pre - dicts that object errors should be predominant . Note , however , that Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) base their conclusion on the relatively low number of responses to the mere - appearance choice ; a choice that they assumed provided a tempting object match to the C term . Only if this assumption holds true does the failure of Relational Shift 459 young children to choose the mere - appearance alternative count against the rela - tional shift hypothesis . An examination of the stimuli used in their second exper - iment ( which is the focus of this work ) suggests that this was not the case . ' The mere - appearance matches did not seem particularly similar to the C - term and , fur - ther , in some cases other alternatives appeared more similar to the C - term than the mere - appearance matches . If this were true , the presence of these competing high - similarity alternatives would of course diminish the rate of responding to the des - ignated " mere - appearance " matches . Consequently , the rate of mere - appearance responding would not be a fair assessment of children ' s tendency to make object similarity responses . To settle this matter , we took two further steps . In Experiment la we obtained similarity ratings for the stimuli used by Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) to determine whether the alternatives presented to the children contained other high similarity matches to the C term - matches that could present viable alternatives to the mere - appearance choice . We then compared the results of this rating task to the performance of the children in Goswami and Brown ' s Experiment 2 . In Experi - ment lb we repeated Goswami and Brown ' s study , altering the stimuli to better achieve the desired tension between relational and object similarity . EXPERIMENT 1A In order to verify whether the similarity structure in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) study truly tested the relational shift hypothesis , we presented adults with the stimuli from Goswami and Brown ' s second experiment and asked them to judge the similarity between the C term and each of the possible choices . 4 We then rean - alyzed the data from Goswami and Brown ' s Experiment 2 to determine whether the children ' s responses varied based on object similarity . METHOD Participants . The participants were 30 undergraduates from the University of Illinois who were paid for their participation . Materials . The materials were the pictures used in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 . Procedure . Participants were shown the C term of the analogy and asked to rate its similarity to each of our response alternatives : correct , wrong object - cor - 3We are very grateful to Usha Goswami for making the stimuli and the individual data from Exper - iment 2 available to us . 4We attempted to obtain similarity ratings from young children , however , we found that it was dif - ficult for them to make explicit judgments of similarity ; they were either nonresponsive or highly vari - able in their responses . Consequently , we used adult ratings for this experiment . 460 Rattermann and Gentner rect transformation ( WO - CT ) , correct object - wrong transformation ( CO - WT ) , and mere - appearance ( MA ) . ( The fifth response alternative , an identity match to the C picture , was assumed to be of maximum similarity and was not rated . ) Par - ticipants were told to " rate the similarity of the picture on a scale of 1 ( least simi - lar ) to 5 ( most similar ) . You should rate them according to how much they look alike - that is , how similar they are . " Results The participant ratings confirmed that the materials used by Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) did not achieve the necessary stimulus structure . ( See Appendix for item - by - item ratings of these stimuli . ) The MA match should have been signifi - cantly more similar to the C term than the correct choice . Instead , the mean rating for the MA match ( M = 3 . 00 , SD = . 36 ) ) was not significantly higher than that of the correct choice ( M = 2 . 56 , SD = . 73 ) , t ( 10 ) = 1 . 29 , NS . The possibility of a dilu - tion effect was also confirmed . The CO - WT item ( M = 3 . 85 . SD = . 88 ) had high similarity to the C term ( significantly more so than the MA item , t ( 10 ) = 2 . 20 , p < . 05 ) , as did the identity match ( which was not rated but is assumed to have a sim - ilarity to the C term of 5 . 0 ) . Thus , object similarity responses could be distributed across the mere - appearance , CO - WT , and the identity match ( as well as the cor - rect choice ) . In fact , the high - similarity CO - WT alternative was the dominant error for both 3 - and 4 - year - olds . 5 Goswami and Brown interpreted children ' s propensity to choose the CO - WT match as evidence that they understood the basic notion of a causal transformation but had failed to maintain the proper trans - formation . However , given its strong similarity to the C alternative , it is clear that object similarity could also have accounted for its dominance . Based on the previous analysis , it is clear that the children ' s tendency to make object similarity responses cannot be judged by the frequency of the mere - appear - ance choice ; rather , we need to examine their performance in light of the actual similarity structure of the alternative choices as revealed by the similarity ratings . Using these ratings , we can compare the frequency of a particular alternative choice and its rated similarity to determine whether the children ' s choices were affected by the presence of object similarity . Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) would predict no specific pattern of responses based on object similarity , while the rela - tional shift hypothesis would predict a pattern of responses in which the object similarity of an alternative affects the likelihood of it being chosen . We found that , consistent with the relational shift hypothesis , these similarity ratings were highly predictive of children ' s responses . A Pearson - product moment correlation between the mean similarity rating of each alternative and the mean number of 5 For 3 - year - olds , but not for 4 - year - olds , the identity choice was also a frequent error . Though not rated , this is of course the alternative most similar to the C term . Given feedback on each trial , 4 - year - olds were evidently able to learn not to choose this highly distinctive match . Relational Shift 461 responses ( regardless of correctness ) for that alternative was significant for both 3 - year - olds , r ( 24 ) = . 52 , and 4 - year - olds , r ( 24 ) = . 53 . Discussion These analyses confirmed the hypothesized difficulties with Goswami and Brown ' s study . The similarity ratings obtained demonstrate that similarity was not properly controlled . At least two factors mitigated against obtaining an object similarity effect : ( 1 ) The relatively low similarity of the mere - appearance choice and the relatively high similarity of the correct choice to the C term ( consequently the desired contrast between object similarity and relational similarity did not obtain ) ; and ( 2 ) the presence of other incorrect alternatives - the CO - WT choice and the identity choice - that were much higher in object similarity than the MA match , produced a dilution effect . These factors suggest that the children ' s rate of selecting MA matches substantially underestimated their propensity to choose on the basis of object similarity . Thus , the conclusion that young children were resistant to object similarity matches is not supported by the data . The children ' s low level of mere - appearance responding can be accounted for by the low similarity of the intended object sim - ilarity choice and by the dilution effect of other competing object matches . More - bead Correct Wrong ob / ccr - Comect transformation CorrectWrong formation Mer - aappearance ( GO . i & Brown ) Mere - appearance ( Rattermann & G - - ) slim of bread lice of ] - - slice of cake 1 - e4 I , K nee = ed lemons yellow ball . - yell . Nert football Figure 1 . Sample stimuli from Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 , together with the amended MA choice used in our experiment . ( The stimulus sets were other - wise identical . ) 462 Rattermann and Gentner over , when ratings of the stimuli ' s actual similarity structure were used to test the predictions of the relational shift hypothesis we found evidence suggesting that children ' s responses were predominantly similarity based . This evidence , however , is based on post - hoc analyses of Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) data . In order to properly test the predictions of the relational shift hypothesis we used Goswami and Brown ' s paradigm with modifications aimed at creating the necessary similarity structure . Specifically , we presented children with a true mere - appearance choice , one that , relative to the correct answer , was highly similar to the C choice . We also reduced the number of alternative object similarity choices , thus mitigating the dilution effect . The analogies were adapted from those used by Goswami and Brown , with the change that the mere - appear - ance choices were altered to be highly similar to the " C " terms . For example , the mere - appearance match for a lemon was changed to a yellow , lemon - shaped , Nerf football , and the mere - appearance match for an orange box of soap powder was changed to a red box of mashed potatoes . Figure 1 shows a sample stimulus set from Goswami and Brown ' s second experiment as well as our altered version of the set . ( See Appendix for the complete set of stimuli . ) Similarity ratings for the new MA alternatives were obtained from a new group of 15 paid adult participants using the procedure described previously . We found that our alterations of the MA stimuli had the desired effect ; the average rating of the MA matches was 3 . 88 ( SD = . 39 ) ( compared to 3 . 0 ( SD = . 36 ) for the MA match and 2 . 56 ( SD = . 73 ) for the correct alternative used by Goswami and Brown , 1989 ) . An additional change was that we eliminated the identity match to the C term , reducing the number of possible response alternatives from five to four choices : correct , wrong object - correct transformation , correct object - wrong transforma - tion , and mere - appearance . This was done chiefly to reduce the number of highly similar alternatives , thus reducing the dilution effect referred to earlier , wherein children ' s high - similarity responses are spread over several alternatives . In addi - tion , four alternatives seemed an easier array for preschoolers to manage than five . Causal Reasoning Control Task For the causal reasoning control ( CRC ) task we tested the children ' s knowledge of the causal relations by constructing a causal sequence based upon the first two terms of each analogy . In this way we ensured that the correct answer in the CRC trial was not the correct answer in the corresponding analogy trial . For example , in the analogy for the relation " cut " bread ( A ) : slice of bread ( B ) : : lemon ( C ) : ? ? our causal reasoning control was bread : knife cutting the bread : ? ? Relational Shift 463 with the correct answer being " a slice of bread . " We also created for the CRC trials a new wrong object - correct transformation ( slice of pie ) , correct object - wrong transformation ( bread wrapped in plastic package ) , and semantically - related end - state ( garlic toast ) 6 to fit with the new causal event . Had we constructed the CRC task using the last two terms of the analogy ( e . g . , lemon : slice of lemon ) , the answer to the causal task would have also been the answer in the corresponding analogy trial . Note that in their experiment Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) did use the last two terms of the analogy in the CRC , leaving open the possibility of a fairly sizable cross - task effect on the children ' s perfor - mance in the analogy task , an issue we will discuss more fully below . Although the general procedure was based closely on that used in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 , the practice task was slightly different , as described in the Method section . Finally , instead of using 3 - , 4 - and 6 - year - olds , as in Goswami and Brown ' s study , we used 4 - and 5 - year - olds . We had originally intended to use 3 - year - olds as well , but pilot studies proved discouraging ; we had a high rate of nonperformance . ( Our participants in general performed at a slightly lower rate of correct responding than Goswami and Brown ' s , an issue we will return to later ) . As in Goswami and Brown ' s Experiment 2 the children received feedback after every trial . When they made a mistake , the experimenter showed them the correct choice and stated the causal chain underlying the analogy . To review , the relational shift hypothesis predicts that the younger children should show higher rates of object - similarity errors and lower rates of relational responding than the older children . Thus , mere - appearance responses in particu - lar , and high - similarity errors in general , should diminish and correct relational responding increase as the children gain in age and experience . A second related prediction is that to the extent that children fail to select the correct relational response , high object - similarity responses should constitute a significant portion of their errors . The relational primacy view predicts no special propensity to make object - similarity errors , even in the youngest group , and no overall shift from object - based to relational responding . Rather , children should give a high level of relational responses throughout and their errors should be distributed nonsystem - atically across error types . Both views predict that children ' s performance on the analogy items should increase with knowledge of domain relations , as assessed by their performance on the causal - control task . 6 The new stimuli were tested on five 3 - year - olds and five 4 - year - olds to be sure that these pictures were readily identifiable . All the children could readily identify all the objects pictured . 464 Rattermann and Gentner EXPERIMENT 1B Method Participants . The participants were twelve 4 - year - olds ( mean age 4 years , 6 months ) and twelve 5 - year - olds ( mean age 5 years , 5 months ) from middle - class families in the Champaign - Urbana area . Materials . We used the six analogies and the six corresponding causal - rea - soning items that were used in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) Experiment 2 , with the modifications described above . For the analogy task , the four response alter - natives were ( D ) correct , ( E ) wrong object - correct transformation ( WO - CT ) , ( F ) correct object - wrong transformation ( CO - WT ) , and ( G ) mere - appearance ( MA ) . For example , for the relation " cut , " the children were shown : bread : slice of bread : : lemon : ? ? with the response alternatives of D : slice of lemon ( Correct ) E : slice of yellow cake ( WO - CT ) F : squeezed lemons ( CO - WT ) G : yellow Nerf football ( MA ) . For the CRC task , the four alternatives were ( C ) correct , ( D ) wrong object - correct transformation ( WO - CT ) , ( E ) correct object - wrong transformation ( CO - WT ) , and ( F ) semantically - related end - state ( SEM ) . For example , for the relation " cut , " the children were shown : bread : knife cutting the bread : ? ? with the response alternatives of : C : slice of bread ( Correct ) D : slice of cherry pie ( WO - CT ) E : bread in a white bag ( CO - WT ) F : garlic bread ( SEM ) . As in the Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) studies , the stimuli were color pictures 10 . 16 cm by 15 . 2 cm in size , mounted on cardboard and covered with plastic lam - inate . The complete set of materials is given in the Appendix . Design . The design was a 2 x 2 between - participants design : Age ( 4 - and 5 - years ) x Order ( Analogy to CRC and CRC to Analogy ) . Thus , half the children Relational Shift 465 received the analogy trials first and half received the CRC trials first . There were six analogy trials and six CRC trials . Procedure Practice Task . The practice task consisted of a verbally presented causal chain . The children were told that they would play a game about choosing pictures and were asked questions like " If I show you a picture of a watermelon and a pic - ture of someone throwing the watermelon off of a building , what would the next picture look like ? " After responding correctly , they were then shown the first trial of either the analogy task or the causal reasoning task , depending upon condition . ( In contrast , in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) practice task , children were shown pictures of a sample analogy and asked to complete the series . ) Analogy Trials . The children were shown the pictures of the first three terms , placed in a straight line , and were asked " to choose the card that finishes the pat - tern . See if you can work out how the pattern goes . " The experimenter then laid out the response alternatives in a random order . When children picked an incorrect alternative , they were shown the correct response and the causal chain of the anal - ogy was explained : for example " The bread is cut to make a slice of bread and the lemon is cut to make a slice of lemon . " Causal Reasoning Control Trials . In the CRC trials participants were shown the first two terms of the causal sequence placed in a straight line and again asked to " finish the pattern . " The experimenter then presented the four possible responses . As in the analogy task , children received corrective explanatory feed - back on their responses . Results Testing the Relational Shift . As predicted by the relational shift hypothesis , the proportion of relational ( correct ) responses increased with age ( from . 35 for Table 1 . Mean Similarity Ratings for Stimuli Used in Experiment lb , Together With the Children ' s Choice Proportions Notes . The scale was I ( least similar ) to 5 ( most similar ) . The identity choice was not rated . Standard deviations appear in parentheses . Similarity Ratings Choice Proportion 4 - yr - olds 5 - yr - olds Correct 2 . 56 ( . 73 ) . 35 . 67 Correct object - Wrong transformation 3 . 85 ( . 88 ) . 35 . 28 Mere Appearance 3 . 88 ( . 39 ) . 22 . 03 Wrong object - Correct transformation 1 . 13 ( . 23 ) . 07 . 03 466 Rattermann and Gentner the 4 - year - olds to . 67 for the 5 - year - olds , t ( 22 ) = 3 . 37 , p < . 01 ) and the number of mere - appearance choices decreased with age ( from . 22 for the 4 - year - olds to . 03 for the 5 - year - olds , t ( 22 ) = 3 . 76 , p < . 01 ) . Only the 5 - year - olds scored signifi - cantly above chance on the analogy trials ( t ( 11 ) = 7 . 369 , p < . 0001 ) . The perfor - mance of the 4 - year - olds was not significantly above chance ( t ( 11 ) = . 968 , p > . 18 ) . ( Chance here is . 25 . ) Table 1 shows the children ' s choice proportions along with the mean similarity ratings ; item - by - item ratings are given in the Appendix . A 2 ( age ) x 2 ( order ) mixed - measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) on the number of correct responses on the analogy trials across participants revealed a significant main effect of age ( F ( 1 , 20 ) = 9 . 48 , p < . 01 , MSE = 2 . 33 ) . There were no significant effects or interactions with order ; performance on the analogies task was the same whether it preceded ( . 53 proportion correct ) or followed ( . 49 pro - portion correct ) the causal knowledge task . Because we had retained as much of Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) design as possible , our choice sets included other high - similarity alternatives besides the MA match . To assess the effects of object similarity , we separated the alternatives into three similarity categories based on the adult similarity ratings : correct , high - similarity errors ( errors with a mean similarity - to - C rating of 3 . 5 or higher ) , and low - similarity errors ( those rated 2 . 0 or lower ) . ( Note that several alternatives fell between these two categories and were not included in the similarity analyses . ) As shown in Table 2 , the proportion of high - similarity errors was quite substantial for the youngest group and decreased with age , from . 39 for 4 - year - olds to . 22 for 5 - year - olds ( t ( 22 ) = 2 . 37 , p < . 01 ) . 7 Thus , the results show a strong influence of object similarity on the performance on the younger group , as predicted by the relational shift hypothesis . Effects of Causal Knowledge To test whether the degree of causal knowledge predicted performance on the analogies task , we computed the correlations between performance on the CRC task and performance in the analogy task . These were not significant for the sep - arate age groups , but reached significance when we combined both age groups , ( r ( 24 ) = . 60 ) . As a further check on the effects of causal knowledge , we divided the items into two halves based on the children ' s ability to correctly complete the causal sequence in the CRC task . We then submitted the two groups of items to a 2 x 2 mixed - measures ANOVA ( Age x Familiarity ) on the number of correct responses . This revealed a significant main effect for age , ( F ( 1 , 20 ) = 9 . 83 , p < . 005 , MSE = 2 . 05 ) , and a marginal main effect for familiarity , ( F ( 1 , 20 ) = 3 . 98 p < . 06 , MSE = 2 . 05 ) . Although the difference between the familiar ( M = 3 . 58 , SD = . 82 ) and the 7 Chance levels for the three categories were as follows : correct , . 25 ; high - similarity errors , . 30 ; low - similarity errors , . 20 . Because medium - similarity errors were omitted from the analysis the levels do not add up to 1 . 0 . Relational Shift 467 Table 2 . Response Types in Experiment lb Categorized by Similarity to the " C " Choice Note . * = above chance , unfamiliar ( M = 2 . 42 , SD = . 96 ) causal relations was only marginally significant , the direction is consistent with the claim that children did better on analogies when they understood the causal relation . Exactly What Can a Young Child Do ? In the previous experiment we found that the 4 - year - olds we tested were unable to perform the relational mapping at an above chance level ( . 35 correct relational responses , where chance was . 25 ) , in contrast to the 3 - year - olds tested by Gos - wami and Brown ( 1989 ; . 36 correct relational responses , where chance was . 20 ) . This leaves us with a puzzle ; given the high level of consistency between our experiment and Goswami and Brown ' s , why is there such a large discrepancy between the performance of the two groups of children ? While our manipulation of the object similarity choice can account for a portion of this difference , there is still a considerable amount of variation in the performance of the two populations that is left unexplained . It is important to know at what age and experience level children can carry out a causal analogy , for the precise age at which children acquire this ability has ramifications for many theories of children ' s intellectual development . The reason for the large gap between the performance of the children in our experiment and those tested by Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) appears to be a cross - task effect from the CRC task to the analogy task . As we briefly noted in our description of the causal reasoning task we designed , within each set of stimuli used by Goswami and Brown the correct choice in the analogy task was also the correct choice in the CRC task . For example , the causal reasoning control for the analogy concerning cutting was : lemon : knife cutting the lemon : ? ? The correct answer , the alternative " slice of lemon , was also the correct answer to the corresponding analogy : bread ( A ) : slice of bread ( B ) : : lemon ( C ) : ? ? Because the same picture was correct for both tasks , and because children were always shown the correct response on the CRC trials , children ' s greatly superior performance when the CRC task preceded the analogy task could have resulted Correct High Sim Errors Low Sim Errors 4 - year - olds . 35 . 39 . 07 5 - year - olds . 67 * . 22 . 02 * 468 Rattermann and Gentner from a tendency to select the prior correct answer from the CRC task . Because the CRC task preceded the analogy task on two - thirds of the trials , such cross - task effects would have had a large influence on the overall results . Given these con - cerns about the stimulus structure and about the possible cross - task effects , Gos - wami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) conclusions must be reexamined . Examination of Order Effects . In their research , Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) reported a main effect of task order , but noted that in the overall Age x Order x Condition analysis there were no significant interactions between order and the other factors , and so did not pursue the order effect further . Our further analysis of the data , however , revealed that the children ' s proportion correct for analogy trials that followed CRC trials was about twice as high as for analogy tri - als that preceded CRC trials ( . 91 vs . . 48 for the 4 - year - olds and . 54 vs . . 19 for the 3 - year - olds ) . Specifically , in Experiment 2 , Goswalni and Brown ( 1989 ) used a within - participants design that included appearance - same ( AS ) analogies and appearance - differs ( AD ) analogies in addition to the causal - reasoning control task . The appearance - same analogies ( which were used in both Experiments 1 and 2 ) were modified to form the appearance - differs analogies ( which were the focus of our experiment ) . T - tests performed on the data from the analogy task confirmed the superiority of performance when the causal control preceded the analogy task ( CRC - AD - AS versus AD - AS - CRC : t ( 12 ) = 2 . 00 , p < . 05 for the 3 - year - olds , t ( 11 ) = 3 . 07 , p < . 01 for the 4 - year - olds ; and AS - CRC - AD versus AD - AS - CRC : t ( l 2 ) _ 2 . 33 , p < . 05 for the 3 - year - olds and t ( 12 ) = 3 . 23 , p < . 01 for the 4 - year - olds ) . This striking change in performance suggests that carryover from the CRC task inflated the results of the AD task . Re - Analysis ofPerformance . To accurately evaluate the effect of object sim - ilarity on children ' s performance in Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) experiment , we examined the one - third of the AD trials that were clearly free of cross - task effects : namely , those on which the AD task preceded the CRC task . To assess the effects of object similarity , we again separated the alternatives into three similarity cate - gories based on the adult similarity ratings . The proportion of responses for each response choice revealed a marked effect of object similarity on the children ' s AD performance when AD preceded CRC ( i . e . , when no cross - task effects were pos - sible ) . For 3 - year - olds , the dominant response ( . 47 ) was high - similarity errors , as compared to . 19 correct responses and . 14 low - similarity errors . Indeed , the high - similarity category significantly above the chance level of . 33 . - year - olds performed better ( . 48 correct , significantly above chance ) , but still produced . 31 high - similarity errors , as compared with . 09 low - similarity errors . Thus , both age groups showed an effect of object similarity . Fur - t Chance levels for the three categories were as follows : correct , . 20 ; high - similarity errors , 33 ; low - similarity errors , . 20 . Because medium - similarity errors were omitted from the analysis , the levels do not add up to 1 . 0 . Relational Shift 469 ther , consistent with the predictions of the relational shift hypothesis , the object - similarity effect was strongest for 3 - year - olds . Also as predicted , there was a shift with age and experience from predominantly object - based responding among the younger children to predominantly relational responding among the older chil - dren . In summary , we first note that the cross - task effects in Goswami and Brown ' s Experiment 2 apparently led to an inflation in the correct response rate and an underestimation of the rate of similarity - based responding , and second that both age groups showed an effect of object similarity . Thus the findings do not consti - tute evidence against the relational shift hypothesis . In fact the results of this re - analysis bear out the relational shift hypothesis . GENERAL DISCUSSION The goal of these experiments was to test the relational shift hypothesis and , spe - cifically , to respond to Goswami and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) empirical studies that seemed to falsify the hypothesis . In Experiment I a we demonstrated the effects of object similarity on children ' s analogical reasoning through a re - analysis of Gos - warni and Brown ' s own data . In Experiment l b we partially replicated and extended their work in order to provide a true test of the relational shift hypothe - sis . The results of both experiments support the existence of a relational shift in children ' s analogical reasoning . The relational shift hypothesis predicts ( 1 ) an initially high level of object - sim - ilarity responses , dropping with age ; ( 2 ) an increase in relational responding with age . In Experiment lb we found that , when the response alternatives from Gos - warni and Brown ' s ( 1989 ) experiment were grouped according to their rated sim - ilarity to the C term and the analysis is restricted to data that are free from possible cross - task effects , the results fit the relational shift hypothesis . Object - similarity responses are the dominant response category ( 47 % among 3 - year - olds , diminish - ing to 31 % among 4 - year - olds ) . Relational responding shows the predicted increase , from 19 % among 3 - year - olds to 48 % ( the dominant category ) for 4 - year - olds . Also in Experiment lb , we altered Goswami and Brown ' s method to create a stimulus structure more in accord with the logic of the hypothesis . The results again supported the relational shift : relational responding rose from 35 % for the 4 - year - olds to 67 % for the 5 - year - olds and object - similarity responses declined from 39 % for the 4 - year - olds to 22 % for the 5 - year - olds . Thus , contrary to Goswarni and Brown ' s conclusion , there was both a drop in object - similarity responding and a rise in relational responding across the age range studied . These results are consistent with our career of similarity account ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) in which we propose that there is a systematic evolution in the kinds of relational comparisons that can be made as knowledge within a domain deepens ; from overall similarity to object similarity , to relational similarity , and finally , to higher - order relational comparisons . This evolution of similarity com - 470 Rattermann and Gentner parisons is a reflection of a multipurpose similarity mechanism , present at birth , that aims for all common matches . This mechanism is dependent upon domain knowledge ; children must possess the appropriate relational knowledge in order to make a relational comparison . On Goswami ' s ( 1992 , 1996 ) account , children are from the beginning actively seeking relational interpretations of analogies . There is no change in the kind of comparisons that can be made , only an increase in the domains in which relational comparisons can be performed . This account suggests that humans possess a mechanism dedicated to forming relational com - parisons , and that object similarity merely hinders this mechanism ' s performance . What is not clear from Goswami ' s relational primacy account is how ordinary mundane similarity is computed . What do we do when matching based on com - mon object properties as well as common relational similarity is appropriate ? It would seem that separate mechanisms for analogy and for other more mundane similarity types , such as literal similarity or object - based matches , would be required . While such a situation is logically possible , it is counterintuitive in that ordinary similarity and analogy lie along a continuum of similarity types - thus one multipurpose similarity mechanism could compute both . Goswami ' s ( 1992 , 1996 ) relational primacy view agrees in some respects with our career of similarity account ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . Both theories are knowledge - driven rather than stage - based and , in contrast to more purely stage - based views of analogy , both propose that the chief limit on children ' s ability to arrive at relational interpretations is their early lack of knowledge . The fundamen - tal difference between the two views lies in our differing accounts of the develop - mental course of similarity . On our account , objects and relations both participate in the mapping throughout . This follows from structure - mapping theory , in which carrying out a comparison process involves matching both the objects and the rep - resentational structure within which they are embedded ( e . g . , Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ; Gentner , 1989 ) . This view is supported by empirical evidence and computational simulations showing that objects and relations both participate integrally in the process of structural alignment ( Gentner & Markman , 1993 ; Goldstone , 1994 ; Goldstone , Medin , & Gentner , 1991 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993ab , 1996 ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ; See also Halford , 1993 ; Hal - ford , Wilson , Guo , Gayler , Wiles , & Stewart , 1994 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 , 1995 ; Keane , 1988 ; Spellman & Holyoak , 1992 , 1993 ) . On this view , a compari - son becomes more similar if either object commonalities or relational commonal - ities are added to the shared system . How can we decide between our account of the development of similarity in which object similarity and relational similarity work together to promote a match , and Goswami ' s ( 1992 , 1996 ) account in which relations are integral and objects are not ? Zelazo and his colleagues ( Zelazo , Carter , Reznick , & Frye , 1997 ) have suggested that to untangle factors relevant to a process it is necessary to compare the operations of these factors in oppositional and in facilitating roles . For instance , the sentences below place object similarity and relational similarity Relational Shift in both an oppositional ( cross - mapped ) relation and a facilitating ( literal similar - ity ) relation . On the structure - mapping theory , children and adults will both find a literal similarity match , such as that between sentences 1 and 2 , more similar than a purely relational match , such as that between sentences 1 and 4 , and further , will have difficulty ignoring extraneous similarity , such as that in the cross - mapped sentences 1 and 3 . ( 1 ) The squirrel helped the robin escape from the evil trout . ( 2 ) The chipmunk helped the bluebird escape from the malevolent salmon . ( 3 ) The trout helped the squirrel escape from the evil robin . ( 4 ) The secretary rescued her boss from the taxman . Goswami ' s relational pri o adults ) actively seek and focus on relational commonalities regardless of the match or mismatch among the objects . Object commonalities can affect the match process , but only as a performance variable - as a task feature that can either help or hinder the ability to perform a relational mapping - - or as a " fallback " strategy to be used when relational knowledge fails , and not as an integral part of the pro - cess . Thus sentence ( 1 ) should match equally well with sentences ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) , and ( 4 ) , because the relational match is the same for all these pairs ( and are familiar to nor - mal adult participants ) . Adults might take longer to comprehend the pairs with inconsistent object matches , but the end result should be equivalent . However , there is evidence from adults that suggests that object matches are integral to the computation and evaluation of comparisons ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993ab ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . Processing a comparison appears to involve interactive levels of matching , with object matches generally computed before relational matches ( Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Ratcliff & McKoon , 1989 ) . Further evidence indicates that object similarity is crucial in similarity - based access from memory ( Gentner , Ratter - mann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Keane , 1985 ; Novick , 1988 ; Ross , 1989 ) , as well as transferring a prior solution ( Gentner & Schumacher , 1986 ; Reed , 1987 ; Ross , 1989 ) . Conceivably , some of these results could be construed as reflective of mere performance factors . However , what is especially trouble - some for the view that object commonalities are merely a performance factor is the pattern provided by adults ' judgments of similarity . In accord with the intu - that relational matches are privileged , Gentner , Rattermann and Forbus ( 1993 ) found that , in general , adults considered analogies ( pure relational matches ) to be more similar than purely object - level matches . However , these same adults rated overall literal similarity ( both objects and relations in common ) as still more similar than analogies . It is not clear how this pattern of performance could result from a mechanism dedicated to relational similarity ; rather , this sug - gests a general similarity mechanism that considers both object and relational similarity . 471 472 Rattermann and Gentner Other developmental findings support our view that object similarity and rela - tional similarity work together in the mapping process . We have performed exper - iments that manipulate whether object similarity and relational similarity play a facilitating or oppositional role ( cf . , Zelazo et al . , 1997 ) . For example , Gentner and Toupin ( 1986 ) asked children to act out a simple story with a set of toy char - acters and then to re - enact the same plot using a new set of toys . When given lit - eral similarity matches 6 - year - old children could accurately retell the story ( approximately 90 % correct ) , however , their accuracy dropped ( approximately 60 % correct ) when given no supporting object similarity . The worst performance ( approximately 50 % correct ) occurred when object similarity was cross - mapped ( i . e . , in opposition to the relational match ) between the sets . Although the 9 - year - olds generally performed better , they showed the same pattern ; better perfor - mance when a facilitory relation held ( approximately 90 % ) , and poorer perfor - mance when an oppositional relation held ( approximately 60 % ) between object similarity and relational similarity . Rattermann , Gentner , and DeLoache ( 1991 , in preparation ) also found that when given a simple mapping task between ordered sets of objects , 4 - year - old children were most accurate in a literal similarity con - dition in which object and relational similarity were in harmony and least accurate when object similarity and relational similarity were in opposition . These results run counter to predictions of Goswami ' s relational primacy view ; if objects are extraneous to the comparison of relational similarity there should be no facilitory effect of object similarity in a relational similarity task . The assumption that children focus solely on relational commonalities seems implausible on two counts . First , the evidence just discussed demonstrates that adults use both object commonalities and relational commonalities in processing comparisons . It seems unlikely that children would forego the use of object com - monalities and adopt a more abstract relational form of processing than adults . On the contrary , empirically children appear to be more influenced by object - level matches than are adults . The second difficulty is that it is not clear how ordinary mundane similarity , such as that in sentences ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) above , is processed on the relational primacy account , whether by separate mechanisms or by the rela - tional primacy mechanism with object similarity added . The relational primacy account would seem to lead to the prediction that children disregard object simi - larities when processing overall similarity comparisons . It seems more intuitive to assert that because there is no way for a child ( or an adult ) to know in advance whether a comparison will be an analogy or a literal similarity statement , the ini - tial processes must be uncommitted to a particular type of similarity . Our results are relevant to another important theory of analogical development . Halford ( 1989 , 1992 ) has proposed a sequence of development that also includes a relational shift ; children shift from being able to process unary relations ( which correspond to object attributes ) to binary relations ( relations between two ele - ments ) , to ternary relations ( relations between three elements ) and finally to qua - ternary relations ( relations between four elements ) . In Halford ' s account an Relational Shift 473 important driver of the relational shift is changes in cognitive capacity ; in order to carry out similarity matches children must have the capacity to represent and map the number of arguments necessary for a match . Children show a developmental increase in cognitive capacity that permits them to make more complex matches . However , Halford also postulates that changes in domain knowledge are impor - tant in the development of analogical skill . Our data agree with Halford ' s pre - dicted pattern of performance in that object - based responding preceded relationally based responding . While the current experiment does not allow us address the issue of changes in cognitive capacity , the fact that increases in causal knowledge contribute to relational responding is consistent with the claim made by both theories that knowledge plays an integral role in children ' s ability to com - plete causal analogies . Knowledge and the Relational Shift To recapitulate , the relational shift refers to a change from early attention to common object properties to later attention to common relational structure ( Gen - tner , 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . This shift is assumed to follow an ear - lier focus on overall similarity , and is assumed to be based on changes in knowledge representation rather than on changes in cognitive competence . It is assumed that children in the initial stages of learning have better representations of objects than of the relations between them . This assumption stems from the more general novice - expert shift assumption that knowledge of objects tends to be acquired earlier than knowledge of the relational structure for both child and adult learners ( e . g . , Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ) . How these changes in knowledge representation come about is beyond the scope of this paper . In our prior work , we have suggested two mechanisms that may promote the learning of relational struc - ture : ( a ) the acquisition of relational language , and ( b ) progressive abstraction brought about by structural alignment ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotovsky , 1995 ; Rattermann , Gentner , & DeLoache , in preparation ) . The Role of Causal Knowledge Despite our disagreement with the role assigned to object similarity in the rela - tional primacy view , there are some points of fundamental agreement between our position and that of Goswami . Because we believe that the relational shift results primarily from knowledge accretion , rather than from maturation ( Gentner & Rat - termann , 1991 ) , we agree with Goswami ( 1992 , 1996 ) and with Goswami and Brown ( 1989 ) in predicting that children ' s performance on the analogy items should improve with their level of knowledge of the causal relations . Consistent with this prediction , we found that children ' s performance on the analogy task was correlated with their performance on the causal - knowledge assessment task , supporting the hypothesis that children ' s ability to process causal analogies depends l on knowledge of the underlying causal mechanisms . This result 474 Rattermann and Gentner accords with other research on the role of domain knowledge in analogical devel - opment ( Brown , 1989 , 1990 ; Brown & Campione , 1984 ; Gentner , 1977a , 1977b ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotovsky , 1995 ; Goswami , 1991 , 1992 ; Vosniadou , 1987 ) . Reconsidering the Role of Similarity Similarity is often cast as a kind of malign force in cognitive development : a misleading factor that interferes with children ' s ability to perceive deeper rela - tionships . This feeling is engendered partly by the many experiments in which children ' s ability to make an insightful response is pitted against their attraction to incorrect object - similarity lures . Of course , this is a useful tension to exploit , and we have done our share of such experiments . But we should not lose sight of the fact that similarity , including object similarity , is far more often benevolent than malevolent . Perceptual similarity is often correlated with conceptual similarity ( Medin & Ortony , 1989 ) , and object similarity with relational similarity ( Gentner , 1989 ; Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ) , thus attention to concrete similarity often results in deeper insights ( Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . We close with an observation that illustrates this point : A two - year - old boy is walking through the zoo with his mother and grandmother when he sees the tigers . His grandmother says , " See , the tiger has a big tongue . He ' s licking his paws . " The child sticks his tongue out , points to it and asks his grandmother to stick hers out too . As the child continues to look at the tiger his mother says , " See , the tiger has a big tail that he ' s wav - ing " The child watches for a moment as the tiger ' s tail waves back and forth . Then he glances over his shoulder to where his own tail would be if he had one . ( Marilyn Shatz , personal com - munication , April , 1989 ) . The child ' s noticing of the object similarity between his tongue and the tiger ' s led him to compare and align the tiger ' s body with his own and to attempt a further inference from the tiger to himself . By testing and disconfirming that possible inference he learned something about the morphology of the human body relative to that of other mammals . Far from being harmful , similarity can lead children to consider new hypotheses that refine and enrich their knowledge . REFERENCES Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 369 - 412 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Brown , A . L . ( 1990 ) . Domain - specific principles affect learning and transfer in children . Cognitive Science , 14 , 107 - 133 . Brown , A . L . , & Campione , J . C . ( 1984 ) . Three faces of transfer : Implications for early competence , individual differences , and instruction . In M . E . Lamb , A . L . Brown , & B . Rogoff ( Eds . ) , Advances in developmental psychology ( Vol . 3 , pp . 143 - 192 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Relational Shift 475 Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children ' s mental models deter - mine analogical transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , 1 , 103 - 121 . Chen , Z . , & Daehler , M . W . ( 1989 ) . Positive and negative transfer in analogical problem solving by 6 - year - old children . Cognitive Development , 4 , 327 - 344 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 144 - 206 . Gentner , D . ( 1977a ) . Children ' s performance on a spatial analogies task . Child Develop - ment , 48 , 1034 - 1039 . Gentner , D . ( 1977b ) . If a tree had a knee , where would it be ? Children ' s performance on simple spatial metaphors . Papers and Reports on Child Language Development , 13 , 157 - 164 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure mapping : The relational shift . Child Develop - ment , 59 , 47 - 59 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 - 241 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 - 297 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1993 ) . Analogy - Watershed or Waterloo ? Structural align - ment and the development of connectionist models of cognition . In S . J . Hanson , J . D . Cowan , & C . L . Giles ( Eds . ) , Advances in neural information processing systems 5 ( pp . 855 - 862 ) . San Mateo , CA : Kauffman . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & . J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrela - tions in development ( pp . 225 - 277 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability and inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 - 575 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , Markman , A . B . , Kotovsky , L . ( 1995 ) . Two forces in the development of relational similarity . In T . Simon and G . Halford ( Eds . ) , Developing cognitive competence : New approaches to process modeling ( pp . 263 - 313 ) . Hills - dale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Schumacher , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Use of structure mapping theory for complex systems . Proceedings of the 1986 IEEE International Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics ( pp . 252 - 258 ) . Atlanta , GA . New York : IEEE . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 - 300 . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Similarity , interactive activation , and mapping . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 20 , 3 - 28 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1994 ) . Time course of comparison . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 20 , 29 - 50 . 476 Rattermann and Gentner Goldstone , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational similarity and the non - independence of features in similarity judgments . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 - 264 . Goswami , U . ( 1991 ) . Analogical reasoning : What develops ? A review of research and the - ory . Child Development , 62 , 1 - 22 . Goswami , U . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning in children . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Goswami , U . ( 1996 ) . Analogical reasoning and cognitive development . In H . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( pp . 92 - 135 ) . San Diego , CA : Aca - demic Press . Goswami , U . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Melting chocolate and melting snowmen : Analogi - cal reasoning and causal relations . Cognition , 35 , 69 - 95 . Halford , G . S . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping approach to cognitive development . Interna - tional Journal of Psychology , 22 , 609 - 642 . Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive devel - opment . Human Development , 35 , 193 - 218 . Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) . Children ' s understanding : The development of mental models . Hills - dale , NJ : Erlbaum . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , Guo , J . , Gayler , R . W . , Wiles , J . , & Stewart , J . E . M . ( 1995 ) . Connectionist implications for processing capacity limitations in analogies . In K . J . Holyoak & . J . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory , Vol . 2 : Analogical connections ( pp . 363 - 415 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Holyoak . K . J . , Junn , E . N . , & Billman , D . O . ( 1984 ) . Development of analogical problem - solving skill . Child Development , 55 , 2042 - 2055 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332 - 340 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . R . ( 1989 ) . A computational model of analogical problem solving . In S . Vosniadou & . A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 242 - 266 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . R . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . MIT Press ; Cambridge , MA . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . ( 1958 ) . The growth of logical thinking from childhood to adoles - cence . New York : Basic Books . Keane , M . ( 1985 ) . On drawing analogies when solving problems : A theory and test of solu - tion generation in an analogical problem - solving task . British Journal of Psychol - ogy , 76 , 449 - 458 . Keane , M . T . ( 1988 ) . Analogical problem solving . New York : Wiley . Kotovsky , L , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 - 2822 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993a ) . Splitting the differences : A structural alignment view of similarity . Journal of Memory and Language , 32 , 517 - 535 . Markman . A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993b ) . Structural alignment during similarity compari - sons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 - 467 . Markman . A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Commonalities and differences in structural com - parisons . Memory and Cognition , 24 , 235 - 249 . Medin , D . . Goldstone , R . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 - 278 . Relational Shift 477 Medin , D . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Psychological essentialism . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 179 - 195 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 510 - 520 . Piaget , J . , Montangero , J . , & Billeter , J . ( 1977 ) . La formation des correlats . In J . Piaget ( Ed . ) , L ' Abstraction reflechissante ( pp . 115 - 129 ) . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Ratcliff , R . , & McKoon , G . ( 1989 ) . Similarity information versus relational information : Differences in the time course of retrieval . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 139 - 155 . Rattermann , M . J . , Gentner , D . , & DeLoache , J . ( 1989 , April ) . Effects of competing surface similarity on children ' s performance in an analogical task . Poster presented at the biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Kansas City , MO . Rattermann . M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( in preparation ) . The effect of relational language on children ' s performance in an analogical mapping task . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . , & DeLoache , J . ( in preparation ) . Effects of object and relational similarity on children ' s performance in a spatial analogies task . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Journal of Experimen - tal Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 124 - 139 . Ross , B . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of surface similarity : Different effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Mem - ory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 - 468 . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1992 ) . If Saddam is Hitler then who is George Bush ? Analogical mappings between systems of social roles . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 913 - 933 . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1993 ) . An inhibitory mechanism for goal - directed ana - logical mapping . In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Cogni - tive Science Society ( pp . 947 - 952 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Lawrence Erlbaum . Sternberg , R . J . , & Downing , C . J . ( 1982 ) . The development of higher - order reasoning in adolescence . Child Development , 53 , 209 - 221 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Nigro , G . ( 1980 ) . Developmental patterns in the solution of verbal anal - ogies . Child Development , 51 , 27 - 38 . Vosniadou , S . ( 1987 ) . Children and metaphors . Child Development , 58 , 870 - 885 . Winner , E . , Rosenstiel , A . , & Gardner , H . ( 1976 ) . The development of metaphoric under - standing . Developmental Psychology , 12 , 289 - 297 . Zelazo , P . D . , Carter , A . S . , Reznick , J . S . , & Frye , D . ( 1997 ) . Early development of exec - utive function : A problem solving approach . Review of General Psychology , 1 , 198 - 226 . 478 Rattermann and Gentner APPENDIX Mean rated similarity to the C term for Goswami and Brown ' s appearance - differs alternatives and for the altered mere - appearance alternatives used in our Experi - ment lb . CUT : A ( bread ) : B ( cut bread ) : : C ( whole lemon ) COR slice of lemon 3 . 8 WO - CT slice of cake 1 . 0 CO - WT squeezed lemons 2 . 7 MA ( GB ) yellow balloon 3 . 4 MA ( RG ) yellow Nerf football 4 . 1 BREAK : A ( gray vase ) : B ( broken gray vase ) : : C ( gray egg ) : ? COR broken gray egg 2 . 4 WO - CT broken blue plate 1 . 1 CO - WT multi - colored egg 4 . 1 MA ( GB ) yellow lemon 2 . 8 MA ( RG ) tan potato 4 . 1 WET : A ( coffee crystals ) : B ( mug of coffee ) : : C ( orange box of Tide ) : ? COR soapy water 1 . 6 WO - CT glass of Koolaid 1 . 1 CO - WT spilled Tide 4 . 7 MA ( GB ) blue box of cat chow 3 . 0 MA ( RG ) red box of mashed potatoes 4 . 1 BURN : A ( tree ) : B ( burnt tree stump ) : : C ( pile of leaves ) : ? COR smoking pile of leaves 2 . 9 WO - CT burnt paper 1 . 0 CO - WT swirling leaves 2 . 8 MA ( GB ) pile of sticks 2 . 4 MA ( RG ) pile of brown socks 3 . 9 OPEN : A ( tub of ice cream ) : B ( ice cream cone ) : : C ( yellow box of Cheerios ) : ? COR blue bowl of Cheerios 2 . 4 WO - CT blue bowl of Chex 1 . 6 CO - WT torn Cheerios box 4 . 3 MA ( GB ) red and blue box of crackers 3 . 3 MA ( RG ) yellow Sunlight detergent 4 . 1 MELT : A ( frozen river ) : B ( rushing river ) : : C ( snowman ) : ? Note . The scale was I ( least similar ) to 5 ( most similar ) . COR melted snowman 2 . 3 WO - CT melted chocolate 1 . 0 CO - WT dirty snowman 4 . 5 MA ( GB ) scarecrow 3 . 1 MA ( RG ) marshmallow man 3 . 1 MEAN COR 2 . 56 WO - CT 1 . 13 CO - WT 3 . 85 MA ( GB ) 3 . 00 MA ( RG ) 3 . 88