MarkupLens : An AI - Powered Tool to Support Designers in Video - Based Analysis at Scale TIANHAO HE , Delft University of Technology , The Netherlands YING ZHANG , Zhejiang University , China EVANGELOS NIFORATOS , Delft University of Technology , Netherlands GERD KORTUEM , Delft University of Technology , The Netherlands ( a ) A designer annotation using MarkupLens with embedded CV support ( b ) The study environment setting Fig . 1 . MarkupLens is an AI - powered platform that utilizes Computer Vision ( CV ) to track and automatically label relevant video in video - based design research . We evaluated MarkupLens with 36 designers in a user study and in three CV modes : ( 1 ) none , ( 2 ) partial , and ( 3 ) full support . Video - BasedDesign ( VBD ) isadesignmethodologythatutilizesvideoasaprimarytoolforunderstandinguserinteractions , prototyping , and conducting research to enhance the design process . Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) can be instrumental in video - based design by analyzing and interpreting visual data from videos to enhance user interaction , automate design processes , and improve product functionality . In this study , we explore how AI can enhance professional video - based design with a State - of - the - Art ( SOTA ) deep learning model . We developed a prototype annotation platform ( MarkupLens ) and conducted a between - subjects eye - tracking study with 36 designers , annotating videos with three levels of AI assistance . Our findings indicate that MarkupLens improved design annotation quality and productivity . Additionally , it reduced the cognitive load that designers exhibited and enhanced their User Experience ( UX ) . We believe that designer - AI collaboration can greatly enhance the process of eliciting insights in video - based design . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; • Computing methodologies → Computer vision tasks . Additional Key Words and Phrases : computer vision , video - based design , video annotations , video analysis , eye - tracking , designer - AI collaboration 1 INTRODUCTION Video as a multi - sensory medium , typically carries rich information . Video can be employed to foster an enriched learning experience , engaging learners through a blend of visual , auditory , kinesthetic , and emotional components . In design , the adoption of video as a primary tool for knowledge generation , idea collation , and problem identification 1 a r X i v : 2403 . 05201v1 [ c s . H C ] 8 M a r 2024 He , et al . is known as Video - Based Design ( VBD ) [ 22 , 47 , 51 , 54 , 55 ] . VBD offers immersive learning experiences , enabling designers to gain a deeper understanding and acquire knowledge . For example , Mackay et al . integrated videos of user interactions into the re - design process of a graphical editing prototype [ 37 ] . They revisited these videos in details and brainstormed their ideas derived from the footage on a whiteboard to share with their colleagues . Traditional practices of note - taking for videos , such as transcribing observations and ideas onto whiteboards separate from the video medium , have been a go - to approach for many designers [ 54 ] . However , the process of dissecting videos can be inefficient and may occasionally overlook nuances . This problem becomes prominent when designers need to make precise notes on zoomed - in scenes and synchronize them with specific frames of interest . Video annotation , defined as the process of adding labels and tags to video footage primarily for training AI models , presents a promising alternative to bridge this gap . Video annotation involves marking frames of interest with text , bounding boxes , or other forms of tags to identify and categorize objects , features , or other data points within the frames of video . It is also commonly performed at scale through crowdsourcing , which makes the video analysis process more accessible and easier to distribute for first - time users [ 8 ] . These advantages from video annotation offer designers the opportunity to achieve precise markings with synchronization in video - based design projects . Emerging from crowd - sourced annotations , AI - enhanced annotations , such as object detections and semantic segmentation , have notably enhanced the efficiency and productivity for video annotation . These AI algorithms are capable of identifying relevant objects that human practitioners seek , thereby providing proposals and reducing the effort of information retrieval . This lead us to consider whether such AI - supported techniques could also be beneficial in VBD . However , considering the different nature of design and video crowdsourcing , the use of excessive automation in video analysis carries risks of over - control . Such an approach could potentially interfere with the natural process of video analysis conducted by human designers . The CSCW community has also expressed concerns about the over - reliance on AI , noting that excessive use of AI might jeopardize the intuition of human decision - makers . Chen et al . advocated for improvements aimed at increasing the resilience of human decision - makers by enabling them to override AI predictions when necessary [ 13 ] . Similarly , Buçinca et al . sought solutions aimed at reducing over - reliance on AI by adopting cognitive forcing interventions [ 10 ] . Thus , it is crucial to determine the extent to which AI assistance can be beneficial in facilitating design video analysis , without compromising the innate capabilities of design practitioners . In this paper , we introduce and evaluate a design - oriented annotation platform with three distinct levels of AI support , with the aim to bolster video - based design . Our work makes the following contributions : • We introduce a novel AI - powered tool featuring three tiers of annotation assistance in video - based design . • We investigate the impact of varying levels of CV support on the resulting designer annotations , cognitive workload , and user experience . • We scale up the video - based design method through effective designer - AI collaboration . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Video - Based Design VBD is a methodology in design and research that heavily relies on video as a tool for capturing , analyzing , and communicating information . This approach is particularly prevalent in fields like user experience ( UX ) design , interaction design , and ethnographic research [ 55 ] . In video - based design , videos are used to record and study user interactions with products or environments , offering a dynamic and context - rich source of data . Designers and researchers analyze 2 MarkupLens these videos to gain insights into user behaviors , needs , and pain points , which informs the design process [ 54 , 55 ] . Additionally , video prototypes can be created to demonstrate and test design concepts , allowing for a more interactive and engaging way to present and evaluate ideas . This method enables a deeper understanding of real - world user interactions and experiences , leading to more effective and user - centered design solutions . Tracing back to 1989 , designers from Apple Computer Inc . ( now Apple Inc . ) leveraged videos to conceptualize their new user interface ( UI ) of upcoming computers [ 51 ] . Capitalizing on the temporal representations offered by videos , they created animated objects using computer programs within video productions . This approach enabled them to simulate new user interfaces , facilitating the internal dissemination and evaluation of their novel UI designs . In the same year , Tatar from Xerox PARC ( now PARC ) initiated an exploration into learning from repeated observations and documentation of user behavior through stationary camera recordings [ 47 ] . This approach was aimed at reducing erroneous assumptions in the development of new software . Tatar also emphasized the necessity for more advanced video editing tools for software designers , acknowledging that video - based interaction analysis is a complex and multifaceted task [ 47 ] . Later , Ylirisku and Buur stated that VBD is useful for design practitioners to learn from users’ daily experiences and acquire " thick descriptions " of an artifact . They are instrumental in capturing users’ movements , interactions , and emotional transitions , thus constructing design narratives and encapsulating individual thoughts for further examination by designers [ 54 ] . The VBD approach aids in comprehensively understanding which aspects should and should not be improved in design prototyping over time [ 55 ] . Similarly , the concept of learning from videos , known as Video - Based Learning ( VBL ) , has been adopted to enhance understanding for knowledge workers in various domains including primary care and education [ 1 , 4 ] . 2 . 2 Video Annotation Techniques and Tools Video annotation is a process of adding text labels , bounding boxes , polygons , and other forms of tags to video frames to categorize objects , events , or features , which is critical for training AI systems . This task is commonly undertaken by crowd - sourced workers and requires labeling objects in videos frame by frame with high accuracy in location and categories . Manual video annotation is also employed by designers in VBD to elicit insights from videos . To improve efficiency and accuracy , tools combining AI assistance with human annotators have become prevalent in recent years for labeling objects in video footage [ 23 ] . Bianco et al . developed an interactive video annotation tool offering manual , semi - automatic , and fully automatic modalities for human annotators [ 6 ] . They demonstrated that cases utilizing semi - automatic and fully automatic AI support reduces human effort while maintaining the quality of the annotations . Similarly , Kavasidis et al . proposed a collaborative web - based video annotation tool which aimed to collect video ground truth annotation at scale with efficiency and quality in mind [ 32 ] . Another case in point is Mu , who introduced an annotation software specifically designed to combine video analysis with textual descriptions within an interactive learning framework . The author provided a comprehensive demonstration of how users can effectively leverage their system to meticulously document text descriptions , supplemented by time anchors , within the log history [ 39 ] . Commercial software platforms such as Transana TM 1 and Diver TM 2 offer integrated workspaces for video annotations , combining additional elements like audio transcriptions and the capability to capture zoomed - in regions . In more specialized design scenarios , video annotation techniques is employed to aid designers in contextualizing problems . Fruchard et al . introduced a situated video annotation tool aimed to design proper climbing gestures to assist 1 https : / / www . transana . com / ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 2 https : / / diver . stanford . edu / what . html ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 3 He , et al . climbers . They employed an embedded video annotation feature to visualize time - sensitive records and design solutions for improving climbing gestures [ 21 ] . The adoption of annotation on videos also exists in educational research . Picci et al . investigated a new protocol of using teaching videos in classrooms , paired with an existing annotation tool and time - referenced text descriptions , to create reflections and enhance teachers’ pedagogical skills [ 40 ] . 2 . 3 Computer Vision in Video Annotation Computer Vision ( CV ) is a subset of AI that enables computer programs to extract features and derive meaningful information from visual content . Its objective is to mimic the visual perception capabilities of humans , enabling it to make recommendations based on visual cues . Supported by Deep Learning ( DL ) algorithms , CV has experienced exponential growth in recent years . It now finds application in video annotation in a wide array of areas , tackling tasks such as classification , detection , and segmentation across diverse visual contexts , including static images , moving videos , and zoomed - in scenes [ 52 ] . As AI rapidly advances , professional video annotation tools employing CV have also experienced a transformative evolution . CV is now enhancing the very tools that initially contributed to its own improvement . Annotation tools have also evolved beyond mere integration of CV techniques , extending their utility to assist researchers across various domains in addressing complex , domain - specific annotation challenges . In the field of agriculture , Rasmussen et al . presented a specialized Faster Region - Based Convolutional Neural Network ( Faster R - CNN ) integrated with a semi - automatic annotation platform , empowering researchers to identify and label corn fragments [ 41 ] . Furthermore , the MarkIt annotation platform , as proposed by Witowski et al . , simplifies the annotation process for radiologists when interpreting and analyzing x - ray images . They employed supervised learning to categorize symptoms by classes and integrated them into the annotation tool , minimizing the effort expended in medical annotation processes [ 53 ] . This large range of potential applications intrigues our interest in exploring whether CV can augment video annotation analysis for VBD too . Building on recent advancements in CV and video annotation , a strategic opportunity emerges to revolutionize video - based design at scale . We introduce an AI - augmented video annotation prototype ( MarkupLens ) to enhance VBD . We investigate the impact of MarkupLens on participants’ performance and mental workload in a scenario - based video design case across three distinct levels of AI assistance : ( 1 ) none , ( 2 ) partial , and ( 3 ) full support . 3 THE MARKUPLENS PROTOTYPE The MarkupLens comprises two interconnected web UIs : a control panel ( Fig . 2a ) and an annotation page ( Fig . 2b ) . Starting with the control panel , we integrated 7 variations of foundation models from YOLOv8 3 , a state - of - the - art ( SOTA ) model frequently utilized for object detection and instance tracking . Users can upload their videos ( 2a - a ) , choose an object detection model with varying levels of AI support ( 2a - b ) , and customize the range and type of visualizations ( 2a - c to 2a - g ) . Specifically , region 2a - c in Fig . 2a prompts users to select a frame containing the instances they wish to analyze in VBD . The chosen frame is displayed in region 2a - d , where users can preview the current selections and click on the object ( s ) of interest , such as a biker as exampled in Fig . 2a . If multiple objects overlap at the click point ( s ) , the interface generates a list in region 2a - e for user confirmation . Users can then check boxes in the " confirm to include " to select and track one or multiple instances depending the need from VBD . Following this , in region 2a - f , users define the radius of the detection range ( referred to as " lens " in Fig . 2a ) , centering on the self - defined tracking object ( s ) and 3 https : / / ultralytics . com / yolov8 ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 4 MarkupLens ( a ) A screenshot of Control Panel : Region 2a - a enables video uploads ; Region 2a - b provides options for selecting video processing models , setting object detection confidence , and adjusting AI support levels ; Region 2a - c offers a frame selection for video preview ; Region 2a - d displays the preview frame , allowing users to choose instance ( s ) for tracking within the ’lens’ as a focus ( foci ) ; Region 2a - e contains a confirmation list to review selected instances for the ’lens’ in case multiple instances are selected ; Region 2a - f facilitates setting the radius and color of the ’lens’ , where selected objects from Region 2a - g are displayed in the ’lens’ area with specified colors and a visualization method . ( b ) A screenshot of Annotation Page : Region 2b - a contains a sidebar with tools for creating annotations ; Region 2b - b shows as the video viewing window ; Region 2b - c contains video player controls , enabling users to play , pause , and navigate video progress ; Region 2b - d is the note window , where users can view and edit existing annotations . Fig . 2 . The MarkupLens Prototype : Control Panel and Annotation Page 5 He , et al . Fig . 3 . A system workflow for designing AI interactions with MarkupLens choosing a detection background color . Subsequently , in region 2a - g , a list of detected instances appears , allowing users to select their objects of interest from a dropdown list in preferred colors . Users also have visualization options for AI - supported annotations , such as boxed object detections , image recognition , instance segmentation , and semantic segmentation ( see Fig . 8 in appendix for examples ) , with or without object names ( as exemplified in Fig . 2a , using object detection with names included ) . When users accept the pre - determined AI settings , the control panel processes the raw video accordingly and transfers it to the annotation page . Fig . 3 illustrates the workflow of using the control panel to set AI - supported annotations . In addition , the annotation page ( Fig . 2b ) is an integration of an existing crowdsourcing tool ( CVAT 4 ) , enhanced with a refined protocol , providing a graphical user interface ( GUI ) for inserting text into frames of interest . In the side toolbar ( 2b - a ) , we retained the original layout of the annotation tool but simplified the protocol to use only rectangle bounding boxes , which is the easiest method for tagging zoom - in scenes . Users can create a bounding box by clicking twice on the frame . The video player bar , located at the top in region 2b - c , allows users to pause , play , reverse , accelerate , or jump to a specific frame in the video . The central region 2b - b displays the video with AI annotations . All notes , synchronized with frames and locations , are stored and visualized on the right in region 2b - d . Users can view these notes frame by frame or use hotkeys ( left and right arrows ) on the keyboard to navigate back and forth between them . 4 STUDY We assess the effectiveness of MarkupLens and the impact of CV assistance on practitioners’ design work by investigating three levels of CV assistance ( none , partial and full ) in a design case scenario . We seek to answer the following Research Questions ( RQs ) : RQ1 . How do different levels of CV assistance impact the productivity of annotations in VBD ? Earlier studies have illustrated the myriad advantages that CV , especially instance detection , confer upon professional cognitive tasks across a spectrum of industries [ 41 , 53 ] . However , other studies have raised concerns about the over - reliance on AI , pointing out that human collaborators often depend excessively on AI decisions or accept inaccurate AI suggestions , which lead to poorer decision - making outcomes [ 9 , 19 , 30 ] . To address these concerns , we implemented three levels of AI support in this study . Our hypothesis is that higher levels of CV 4 https : / / github . com / opencv / cvat ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 6 MarkupLens support will result in an increased number of annotations , a greater number of instances being included by designers , and a higher number of characters counts in annotation within the VBD process . In turn , these will yield a wealth of new insights , thus scaling up the VBD process . RQ2 . How do different levels of CV assistance influence the cognitive load that designers exhibit in VBD ? The cognitive load is the load placed on an individual’s working memory by a particular task [ 2 , 3 ] . As indicated by prior research , a negative correlation is found between cognitive load and decision - making performance [ 18 , 28 ] . We hypothesize that by incorporating a higher level of CV assistance , we can reduce the cognitive load on design practitioners , which in turn could enhance their decision - making capabilities . Utilizing a combination of subjective methods , such as self - reporting questionnaires ( NASA - TLX [ 29 ] ) , and objective measures , such as eye - tracking , we seek to facilitate a nuanced assessment of cognitive load across three conditions . RQ3 . How do varying CV levels affect designers’ user experience ( UX ) and technology acceptance in VBD ? Evaluating UX is crucial as it provides valuable insights into designers’ views on a system . This evaluation is fundamental in the assessment of our prototype . We anticipate that the integration of CV will ease the video analysis process in design tasks through CV - assisted annotation suggestions , generated based on video content . To glean deeper insights into how designers perceive the prototype , we employ a User Experience Questionnaire ( UEQ ) [ 44 , 45 ] and a Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) ( see section 4 . 3 ) . We hypothesize that higher levels of CV support will enhance UX and that our prototype will be positively perceived in terms of technology acceptance , eventually being perceived as beneficial in VBD . 4 . 1 Participants We recruited 36 design graduates ( 19 female and 17 male ) from Design Faculty of our University , following approval from the ethics board and ensuring none had cognitive disorders . Our participants are university students ( BSc & MSc ) and PhD candidates with an average age of 26 . 75 years ( SD = 5 . 06 ) and average design experience of 2 . 86 years ( SD = 1 . 13 ) . Table 1 shows the participants’ current educational level , their self - rated experience with design - oriented video annotation tools , and proficiency in using AI - powered tools ( e . g . , Midjourney 5 ) . Participants with a visual acuity below 20 / 20 were instructed to wear contact lenses prior to attendance . All participants were informed about and agreed to the consent form before the experiment commenced . 4 . 2 Apparatus In our experiment , we assessed our system in a typical office environment . The system was configured to run as localhost on a desktop machine in the lab . Figure 1b shows the lab setup where participants interacted with the system . In addition to standard office tools like a keyboard , mouse , and speaker , participants were instructed to wear eye - tracking glasses ( NEON by Pupil Labs 6 with a sampling rate of 200 Hz ) , which were linked to a companion Android phone via a USB type - c cable for recording eye - movement data . The collected eye - movement data includes eye gaze trajectories , gaze fixation positions , and blink patterns . We positioned the monitor 55 centimeters away from the user - facing edge of the table . The 22 - inch monitor was tilted and its height adjusted to be approximately 15 degrees below the participants’ horizon line . This arrangement ensured a comfortable visual zone for the participants , spanning from - 15 degrees to 5 https : / / www . midjourney . com / home ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 6 https : / / pupil - labs . com / products / neon / ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 7 He , et al . Table 1 . Participants’ design - related demographic details Variable f % Current design educational level Bachelor 11 30 . 56 % Master 22 61 . 11 % PhD ( ongoing ) 3 8 . 33 % Design - oriented video annotation experience Definitely not 2 5 . 56 % Probably not 6 16 . 67 % Might or might not 3 8 . 33 % Probably yes 17 47 . 22 % Definitely yes 8 22 . 22 % Proficiency in using AI - powered tools Never used before 5 13 . 89 % Beginner 20 55 . 56 % Intermediate 11 30 . 56 % Expert 0 0 % 15 degrees [ 25 ] . Additionally , we affixed four AprilTags 7 to each corner of the screen ( see Figure 1b ) to enable the eye - tracking glasses to identify the screen’s surface . 4 . 3 Measures 4 . 3 . 1 Objective Measures . • Number of Graphic Annotations : the number of annotations made with bounding boxes on the video during the VBD task . • Number of Texted Annotations : the number of annotations made with text descriptions on frames of the video during the VBD task . • Average Character Counts : the averaged number of text characters per text description . • Completion Times : task completion time for the VBD task in seconds . • Eye - Gaze Fixation Rate and Duration : the rate and duration during which the eyes stay still in one position . Saccade Rate and Duration : the rate and duration of rapid , conjugate movements of the eyes from one fixation point to another . Blink Rate and Duration : the rate the duration of rapid closing and opening of the eyelids . 4 . 3 . 2 Subjective Measures . • NASA Task Load Index : a questionnaire , commonly used in Human - Computer Interaction , evaluates cognitive load with a self - rated 21 - point Likert scale across six attributes : mental , physical , temporal demands , performance , effort , and frustration [ 2 , 3 , 18 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 36 ] . This tool also includes Comparison Cards for weighted scoring , providing a comprehensive assessment of cognitive load [ 29 ] . 7 https : / / april . eecs . umich . edu / software / apriltag ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 8 MarkupLens • User Experience Questionnaire 8 : an questionnaire used for measuring User Experience ( UX ) in interactive products . It has a benchmark method that categorizes raw UEQ scores into dimensions like efficiency , perspicuity , dependability , originality , and stimulation , allowing for a detailed UX analysis [ 44 , 45 ] . • Technology Acceptance Model : a leading model for understanding user acceptance of new technological products and prototypes [ 15 , 16 , 50 ] . Our modified TAM ( see Table 3 in the appendix ) uses a 7 - point Likert scale , from ’extremely likely’ to ’extremely unlikely’ , including intermediary options like ’quite’ , ’slightly’ , and ’neither’ , to assess user responses . 4 . 4 Procedure 4 . 4 . 1 Preparation . For proper experimental control , we opted for a foundational model as the primary predictor . Participants were given a scenario - design task based on an edited video spanning 5 , 400 frames , showcasing a biker’s commute on bustling city streets 9 . The completion of this task required approximately 10 minutes . Our aim was to provide a standardized case for practitioners to design a safer biking commuting policy based on the video content . We configured the system to assign a fixed color for each traffic entity , such as bikes , cars , and pedestrians , as detected by the model . Additionally , we ensured the biker in the video remains at the center of the ’lens’ , which we set to a predetermined size and colored light grey . The visualization technique was chosen as instance segmentation , maintaining a consistent alpha of 0 . 8 for color saturation . Using de - identified IDs , participants were uniquely assigned into three distinct groups , adhering to a between - subjects design , with each group consisting of 12 participants for the video - design task : ( 1 ) The first group received full CV annotation and visualized all detected instances , ( 2 ) the second experienced partial CV annotation , displaying 50 % of randomly selected detected instances for each category , and ( 3 ) the third group operated with no CV support , analyzing the video on their own . Task assignments were outlined in a list using randomized IDs . Participants were individually invited to the lab based on their scheduled times . Upon arrival , they were briefed about the purpose of the experiment . Participants then took their designated spots in front of the monitor ( see Figure 1b ) . With assistance , they adjusted the monitor’s height and tilt angle , based on their measured height and sitting position , ensuring their visual angle was within the comfortable range ( - 15 to + 15 degrees ) [ 25 ] . Subsequently , they provided their consent by completing the form and filling out a brief demographics questionnaire . Participants were subsequently informed and checked to ensure they had the appropriate visual acuity to wear the eye - tracking glasses . 4 . 4 . 2 Training and Main Session . After undergoing the preparation procedures , participants were shown a 3 - minute video demonstrating how to use the prototype . The training video instructed participants on utilizing the playback features of the integrated video player and on annotation techniques , including adding textual descriptions and drawing boxes on video frames . Subsequently , they were given sufficient time in a hands - on practice task to ensure they understood how to operate the system interface . In the study , the training procedure took about 15 minutes . Next , participants were guided to wear eye - tracking glasses described in Section 4 . 2 and instructed to start the main task . Timestamps were recorded at both the start and end of the tasks . Within the annotation page , the video window ( region 2b - b in Fig . 2b ) was designated as the Area of Interest ( AOI ) for eye movement detection . We then introduced our participants to our predefined design case , which involved creating safer commuting guidelines for bikers . They were instructed to view and annotate a cycling video on MarkupLens as designers for traffic safety . 8 https : / / www . ueq - online . org / ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 9 https : / / youtu . be / yWHdkK5j4yk ? si = fuvizCEJoBeA3B3B ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 9 He , et al . Table 2 . Annotation measurements across three designer groups with different CV supports . The values are presented as means ( M ) , followed by the Standard Deviations ( SD ) in parentheses . Values with significant differences are marked with asterisks ( ∗ ) . Measures No CV Partial CV Full CV Number of Graphic Annotations ( N ) 12 . 667 ( 2 . 708 ) 20 . 583 ( 3 . 343 ) ∗ 26 . 917 ( 3 . 502 ) ∗ Number of Texted Annotations ( N ) 8 . 333 ( 3 . 447 ) 18 . 583 ( 3 . 397 ) ∗ 25 . 417 ( 4 . 441 ) ∗ Average Character Count ( N ) 16 . 667 ( 8 . 489 ) 30 . 833 ( 14 . 390 ) ∗ 37 . 333 ( 12 . 929 ) ∗ Time Spent ( seconds ) 623 . 078 ( 509 . 126 ) 732 . 055 ( 446 . 121 ) 583 . 726 ( 360 . 889 ) Their task was to generate annotations and text descriptions on objects , events , interactions , or scenes within the video that they deemed helpful for future design purposes using MarkupLens functionalities . Participants were advised to perform as naturally as they would in their regular design tasks and were given the flexibility to take as much time as needed for the task . After completing the main task , participants were prompted to assess their workload using the NASA - TLX and provided feedback on their overall experience by completing both the TAM and UEQ surveys . 4 . 4 . 3 Post - Session . After completing all tasks , we inquired about their overall experience , as well as any other concerns or questions they might have had about the study . We then appreciated the contribution made by our participants and provided each of them with a 10 - credits gift card . 5 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 5 . 1 Measurement of Annotations ( RQ1 ) We conducted a measurement of annotation in the study across three groups ( none , partial , and full CV support ) as shown in Table 2 . We observed a significant main effect between the levels of CV support on the average number of graphic annotations produced by designers ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 59 . 633 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 783 ) . Designers with partial CV support displayed a significantly higher average graphic annotation count ( see Table 2 ) compared to no CV support group ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Full CV support resulted in significantly higher average annotation counts ( see Table 2 ) in comparison to participants with partial and no CV support ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Moreover , we noted a significant effect in the average number of texted annotation ( see in Table 2 ) across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 61 . 702 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 789 ) . Designers with partial and full CV support produced on average significantly more text descriptions ( see Table 2 ) compared to those with no CV support ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . In relation to the average character count per annotation , a Kruskal - Wallis H test indicated a statistically significant effect across the three designer groups ( 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 15 . 536 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) with mean rank scores of 9 . 29 , 20 . 25 , and 25 . 96 for “no , ” “partial , ” and “full CV” support group , respectively . Follow - up Mann - Whitney U tests revealed that designers in groups with partial ( 𝑈 = 23 . 500 , 𝑝 = . 004 ) and full CV support ( 𝑈 = 10 . 00 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) produced significantly longer text descriptions on average compared to those in the no CV support group . Additionally , no significant effect was identified in the time spent on tasks across the three designer groups ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 1 . 207 , 𝑝 = . 547 ) . 5 . 2 Cognitive Load ( RQ2 ) 5 . 2 . 1 NASA - TLX Questionnaires . Prior literature indicates a negative correlation between cognitive workload and users’ decision - making capabilities , making it crucial to quantify cognitive load during design tasks [ 18 , 28 ] . Accordingly , we 10 MarkupLens assessed the cognitive load of the three designer groups ( none , partial , and full CV support ) , with Figure 4 displaying TLX raw and weighted overall scores across six attributes . Based on the ranking scores derived from the Sources - of - Workload Comparison cards , we noted a significant main effect in the overall TLX scores among the three groups ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 20 . 293 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) . The mean rank scores were 29 . 46 for the ’no CV support’ group , 14 . 96 for the ’partial CV support’ group , and 11 . 08 for the ’full CV support’ group . The follow - up pairwise Mann - Whitney tests revealed that designers in both the ’partial CV support’ group and ’full CV support’ group recorded significantly lower overall TLX scores compared to those in the ’no CV support’ group ( 𝑈 = 7 . 500 , 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑈 = 5 . 000 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) . No significant differences were observed in the overall NASA - TLX scores between the ’partial CV support’ group and the ’full CV support’ group ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 50 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 219 ) . In raw TLX scores , we observed a significant effect from mental demand across the three designer groups with mean ranks scores of 26 . 08 for ’no CV support’ group , 17 . 42 for ’partial CV support’ group , and 12 . 00 for ’full CV support’ group ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 10 . 999 , 𝑝 = . 004 ) . Groups with no CV support reported higher mental demand scores compared to group with partial and full CV support ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 37 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 045 & 𝑈 = 16 . 000 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) . For physical demand , we also observed a significant main effect in self - reported scores across the three designer groups , with mean ranks scores of 27 . 92 for ’no CV support’ group , 17 . 21 for ’partial CV support’ group , and 10 . 38 for ’full CV support’ group ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 17 . 073 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Interestingly , despite producing more annotations , subsequent pairwise tests revealed that designers in both the partial and full CV support groups reported experiencing less physical demand compared to their counterparts in the no CV support group ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 21 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 002 & 𝑈 = 10 . 000 , 𝑝 < . 001 ) . The ’full CV support’ group also reported significantly lower physical demand scores compared to the ’partial CV support’ group ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 36 . 500 , 𝑝 = . 039 ) . Furthermore , the raw scores of self - reported performance manifested a significant effect across the three groups under scrutiny ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 8 . 042 , 𝑝 = . 018 ) . The mean rank score were 14 . 38 for ’no CV support’ group , 15 . 67 for ’partial CV support’ group , and 25 . 46 for ’full CV support’ group . We conducted post hoc tests and observed that the self - reported performance level was greater in partial and full CV support groups compared to the group without CV support ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 33 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 024 & 𝑈 = 27 . 500 , 𝑝 = . 008 ) . Moreover , we found the self - reported frustration scores had a significant effect among the groups ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 11 . 984 , 𝑝 = . 002 ) . The groups with no , partial , and full CV support exhibited mean rank scores of 24 . 17 , 21 . 21 , and 10 . 13 , respectively . The follow - up tests indicated that designers reported significantly lower frustration levels between the ‘no’ and ‘full CV support’ groups ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 21 . 500 , 𝑝 = . 002 ) , as well as between the ’full’ and ’partial CV support’ groups ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 22 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 003 ) . There were no significant effects in the reported raw temporal demand and effort input across the three designer groups ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 1 . 514 , 𝑝 = . 469 & 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = . 710 , 𝑝 = . 701 ) with mean ranks scores of 26 . 08 for ’no CV support’ group , for ’partial CV support’ group , and for ’full CV support’ group . Overall , these results indicate that designers who used the full and partial CV support reported lower TLX scores , indicating a reduced cognitive load . 5 . 2 . 2 Eye gaze . Fig . 5 presents the saccade movements , fixation activities , and blink patterns of participants within the AOI across the three groups during the task . We observed significant differences in both the average duration and rate of saccades during tasks across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 4 . 070 , 𝑝 = . 026 , 𝜂 2 = . 198 & 𝐹 2 , 33 = 218 . 279 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 930 ) . On average , designers in the full CV support group exhibited significantly longer saccade duration compared to those without CV support ( Bonferroni 𝑝 = . 037 ) . While there was no significant difference in saccade duration between the no and partial CV support groups ( Bonferroni 𝑝 = . 095 ) , and between the partially and full CV support groups ( Bonferroni 𝑝 = 1 . 000 ) , we observed significantly lower average saccade rate in both the full and 11 He , et al . Mental Demand Physical Demand Temporal Demand Performance Effort Frustration Overall TLX Score Attribute 0 20 40 60 80 S c a l e d S c o r e * * * * * * * * * * * No CV Support Group Partial CV Support Group Full CV Support Group Fig . 4 . Mean values of six NASA - TLX raw and scaled overall scores for three groups with different levels of CV support . We observed main effects on the overall NASA - TLX score , as well as on the raw scores for mental and physical demand , performance , and frustration . Pairs with significant differences are marked with asterisks ( ∗ ) . partial CV support groups compared to no CV support group ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Furthermore , we noted a significant variation in average fixation duration and rate across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 9 . 154 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 357 & 𝐹 2 , 33 = 1259 . 362 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 987 ) . Subsequent pairwise tests revealed that , compared to the no CV group , designers in the partial and full CV support groups had significantly shorter average fixation duration ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 01 & 𝑝 < . 01 ) . Additionally , the average fixation rates were significantly higher between the no and partial , partial and full , as well as between the no and full CV support groups ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . In addition to fixation movements , we also found a significant difference in the average blink rates across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 4811 . 710 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 997 ) , even though average blink duration remained relatively stable ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = . 171 , 𝑝 = . 844 , 𝜂 2 = . 010 ) . Pairwise analysis revealed that designers in the partial and full CV support groups blinked , on average , less frequently during the task , compared to those in the no CV support group ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Overall , these results indicate that designers who experienced full and partial CV support exhibited low cognitive load reflected by attributes such as saccades , fixations , and blinks using eye tracking . 5 . 3 Technology Acceptance and UX Analysis ( RQ3 ) 5 . 3 . 1 TAM . We next assessed the technology acceptance level of designers using our prototype , given its importance in indicating how users’ needs are met during the task . In Fig . 6 , we gathered data on twelve attributes ( see details in Table 3 ) and averaged the values into two categories : Perceived Usefulness ( PU ) and Perceived Ease - of - Use ( PEU ) . From the PU perspective , we found a notable effect among the three groups with mean rank scores of 12 . 88 for ’no CV support’ 12 MarkupLens No CV Support Partial CV Support Full CV Support Group Name 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 A v e r a g e D u r a t i o n ( m s ) * * * Saccade Duration Saccade Rate No CV Support Partial CV Support Full CV Support Group Name 0 200 400 600 800 1000 A v e r a g e D u r a t i o n ( m s ) * * * * * Fixation Duration Fixation Rate No CV Support Partial CV Support Full CV Support Group Name 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 A v e r a g e D u r a t i o n ( m s ) * * Blink Duration Blink Rate 545 550 555 560 565 570 575 F r e q u e n c y ( e v e n t / m i n ) 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 F r e q u e n c y ( e v e n t / m i n ) 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 F r e q u e n c y ( e v e n t / m i n ) Fig . 5 . Mean values of eye - tracking metrics within the AOI , including fixations , saccadic movements , and blinks , accompanied by SDs presented in error bars . The three left y - axes denote scales for the average duration of events , while the right y - axes demote the event frequencies . We observed significant main effects in several metrics across the three groups : saccade duration , saccade rate , fixation duration , fixation rate , and blink rate . Pairs that demonstrated significant differences in duration are marked with solid lines with asterisks ( ∗ ) , while pairs with significant differences in rate are indicated by dashed lines with asterisks . group , 18 . 79 for ’partial CV support’ group and 23 . 83 for ’full CV support’ group ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 6 . 703 , 𝑝 = . 035 ) . Specifically , the ’full CV support’ group showed a higher PU than the ’no CV support’ group ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 30 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 014 ) . Additionally , we observed a main effect from the overall PEU scores of the three groups , with mean rank sores of 12 . 33 for ’no CV support’ group , 20 . 71 for ’partial CV support’ group and 22 . 46 for ’full CV support’ group ( Kruskal - Wallis 𝑥 2 ( 2 ) = 6 . 636 , 𝑝 = . 036 ) . In pairwise evaluations , the PUE scores of ’partial CV support’ group was significantly higher than the ’no CV support’ group ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 33 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 024 ) . The ’full CV support’ group also surpassed the PEU score of the ’no CV support’ groups ( Mann - Whitney 𝑈 = 37 . 000 , 𝑝 = . 045 ) . These results indicate that designers who used the full CV support reported a higher level of perceived usefulness and ease - of - use compared to the designers with no CV support given . Participants also reported a higher perceived ease - of - use when they received partial CV support compared to receiving no CV support . 5 . 3 . 2 UEQ . We utilized the benchmark calculation proposed by Hinderks et al . to transform the twenty - six attributes collected from UEQ into six UX categories : Attractiveness , Perspicuity , Efficiency , Dependability , Stimulation , and Novelty [ 44 , 45 ] . Fig . 7 presents the results . We observed a significant effect across the three design groups ( none , partial , and full CV support ) upon analyzing the average attractiveness scores ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 18 . 740 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 532 ) . Notably , the partial CV support group exhibited a significantly higher average score of attractiveness ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 17 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 396 ) compared to the no CV support group ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 49 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 649 ; Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 01 ) . The full CV support group showed higher attractiveness average scores ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 72 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 398 ) when compared to both the no CV and partial CV support groups ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 = . 029 ) . While no significant main effect was detected in the average scores of perspicuity ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 2 . 247 , 𝑝 = . 122 , 𝜂 2 = . 303 ) , further analysis revealed a notable disparity in the average efficiency scores among the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 9 . 820 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 373 ) . In pairwise tests , the groups with full ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 71 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 317 ) and partial CV support ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 38 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 598 ) outperformed the no CV support group ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 85 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 470 ) in terms of average efficiency scores ( Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 = . 034 ) . For the dependability scores , a significant variance was observed among the average scores of the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 24 . 476 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 597 ) . Specifically , the average dependability scores for both the partial ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 25 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 612 ) and full CV ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 58 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 526 ) groups were significantly higher than those of the group without CV support ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 04 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 562 Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 001 ) . Furthermore , a significant main effect was observed 13 He , et al . P U 1 P U 2 P U 3 P U 4 P U 5 P U 6 P E U 1 P E U 2 P E U 3 P E U 4 P E U 5 P E U 6 O v e r a ll P U S c o r e O v e r a ll P E U S c o r e Attribute 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 S c a l e d S c o r e * * * No CV Support Group Partial CV Support Group Full CV Support Group Fig . 6 . Medians of TAM scores in three groups with SDs indicated by error bars . Refer to Table 3 for the complete list of TAM statements matched with their corresponding attribute codes . We found main effects in both overall Perceived Usefulness ( PU ) and Perceived Ease of Use ( PUE ) scores , calculated by averaging the scores from the twelve attributes . Pairs with significant differences are marked with asterisks ( ∗ ) . in the average scores of stimulation across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 13 . 910 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 457 ) . Both the full ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 88 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 471 ) and partial CV support ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 40 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 458 ) groups registered notably higher average stimulation scores compared to no CV support group ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 65 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 750 ; Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 01 ) . Lastly , our analysis revealed a significant main effect in the average novelty scores across the three groups ( ANOVA 𝐹 2 , 33 = 19 . 425 , 𝑝 < . 001 , 𝜂 2 = . 541 ) . Similarly , both the full ( 𝑀𝑛 = 1 . 50 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 544 ) and partial CV support ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 96 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 396 ) groups exhibited significantly elevated average novelty scores when compared to the group without CV support ( 𝑀𝑛 = . 06 , 𝑆𝐷 = . 724 ; Bonferroni 𝑝 < . 001 & 𝑝 < . 01 ) . However , no discernible difference was found between the full and partial CV support groups in terms of average novelty scores ( Bonferroni 𝑝 = . 079 ) . These results indicate that designers who received the full and partial CV support experienced substantially higher UX in terms of attractiveness , efficiency , dependability , stimulation and novelty than those with no CV support . 6 DISCUSSION Our results suggest that full CV support promotes annotation frequency , reduces cognitive workload , and enhances multiple aspects of UX in VBD . These findings encourage fellow researchers to explore the potential of integrating CV to elevate professional VBD analysis at scale . 6 . 1 Higher CV support facilitates video annotation and can promote VBD at scale Plenty of prior studies corroborated the use of CV in bolstering efficiency and decision - making across a range of disciplines [ 41 , 53 ] . In light of this , we are curious to explore whether the incorporation of CV support can elevate the productivity of annotations in VBD ( RQ1 ) . Our findings suggest that when provided with augmented CV support , designers tended to produce a higher volume of annotations . These annotations were characterized by more graphical bounding boxes , as well as longer and more text descriptions within the video . Additionally , the incorporation of CV 14 MarkupLens Attractiveness Perspicuity Efficiency Dependability Stimulation Novelty Attribute - 1 . 00 - 0 . 50 0 . 00 0 . 50 1 . 00 1 . 50 2 . 00 2 . 50 S c a l e d S c o r e * * * * * * * * * * * ExcellentGoodAbove Average Below Average BadNo CV Support Group Partial CV Support Group Full CV Support Group Fig . 7 . The scaled mean values for the six UEQ attributes are presented : Attractiveness , Perspicuity , Efficiency , Dependability , Stimulation , and Novelty . The segments are color - coded to represent performance benchmark values : less than 25 % ( bad ) , 25 – 50 % ( below average ) , 50 – 75 % ( above average ) , 75 – 90 % ( good ) , and greater than 90 % ( excellent ) [ 44 , 45 ] . We noted significant main effects in attributes including Attractiveness , Efficiency , Dependability , Stimulation , and Novelty . Pairs with significant differences are marked with asterisks ( ∗ ) . did not seem to significantly impact the time invested in analyzing the video . Based on these results , we believe that the integration of higher CV support in VBD annotation such as MarkupLens has the potential to increase annotation productivity in professional design annotation for VBD . 6 . 2 Higher CV support reduces cognitive load According to the NASA - TLX results , participants in the groups with CV support ( both partial and full ) reported lower overall TLX scores . Specifically , compared to the group with no CV support , those with partial and full CV support reported lower scores in mental and physical demand , as well as frustration . Concurrently , these participants also indicated higher self - reported performance metrics . This indicates a lower cognitive load as a result of being provided with higher levels of CV support [ 27 ] . That said , we still wanted to investigate the eye - movement activity that our participants exhibited as a window to our participants’ thinking processes [ 43 ] . In conditions with a high level of CV assistance , designers experienced longer yet less frequent saccadic movements , which collectively suggest a reduction in cognitive load [ 5 , 24 ] . In examining the fixations , our analysis revealed that designers with more CV support exhibited shorter fixation duration when engaging with design videos than other conditions . This shortened length of fixations is also correlated with a decreased cognitive load , as it suggests that designers were able to process the visual information more efficiently [ 14 , 42 ] . This efficiency could be attributed to the enhanced guidance provided by increased CV support , which potentially clarified the visual content and streamlined the information processing pathway . Additionally , we observed a higher frequency of fixations with higher CV support conditions , which is also commonly associated with reduced cognitive load [ 12 , 17 ] . This increased frequency may indicate that designers were actively searching the visual field and rapidly assimilating information from different parts of the video . In the groups with higher CV support , we noticed a significantly lower rate of blinking , which is indicative of reduced cognitive load [ 7 , 20 , 38 ] . This phenomenon often aligns with the tendency for blink frequency to decrease in conditions of mental fatigue , attention lapses , and stress [ 11 , 49 ] . Therefore , the 15 He , et al . observed prominence in blink rate may suggest that participants were in a more relaxed mental state , experiencing less stress and fatigue , which contributed to a reduction in cognitive load . The observations from eye movements indicate that designers in conditions with higher CV support experienced reduced cognitive loads while working on professional design annotations ( RQ2 ) . 6 . 3 Higher CV support enhances UX TAM scores offered insights into participants’ acceptance and perceived ease of use regarding the CV support in their design tasks [ 15 ] . Concurrently , UEQ allowed us to evaluate interactions with our prototype from six attributes [ 44 , 45 ] . We observed that designers tended to report higher scores for both PU and PUE in groups with higher CV support ( TAM ) . The instance segmentation in CV assistance masked consistent colors to instances belonging to the same categories in the video . This color - coding strategy likely brings coherence to the visual field , which may result in an improved user experience . Furthermore , we observed prominence in attributes of attractiveness , efficiency , dependability , stimulation , and novelty in higher CV support conditions ( UEQ ) . Participants were likely to consider CV support in the task as a dependable resource for analyzing the case ( dependability ) , which might facilitate the process and lead them to generate more design insights ( efficiency and stimulation ) . Additionally , participants may have found that CV support added interest to the design annotation process ( novelty ) . Therefore , the results from both TAM and UEQ suggest that designers experienced a better UX in conditions with more CV support ( RQ3 ) . 6 . 4 Limitations In this study , we employed a scenario - based design case focused on traffic policy design as a task to assess the performance of our MarkupLens prototype in VBD . Our methodology involved a controlled user study , implementing a between - subject design with three CV support conditions , all conducted in a laboratory setting using a local computer . However , several limitations must be acknowledged . The design scenarios using videos can vary greatly , with differences ranging from angles to content including interview videos , outdoor operations , and indoor activities [ 55 ] . This diversity can lead to variations in quantifying the annotation process . In our study , we evaluated MarkupLens with one scenario : analyze a video of a cyclist biking through traffic to design a safer biking commuting policy . This limitation could introduce biases by not considering other design cases . That said , the selected task represents a realistic case of VBD in urban planning and traffic engineering [ 34 , 46 ] . Additionally , the nature of design tasks involving video is inherently varied in professional practice . Designers in real - world settings may pursue a range of objectives when engaging with design videos : from understanding the design intent , to identifying challenges , to seeking solutions [ 54 ] . Each of these objectives introduces further complexity to the study . However , we created a workflow and provided many options for customizing the CV support in the control panel of our prototype as illustrated in Fig . 2a . This provides future users with the flexibility to select and filter instances based on their specific design tasks . In addition , to control the variables in our study while balancing computational resources , we limited our testing to one model ( YOLOv8 ) and used instance segmentation for visualization . Nevertheless , during the time of writing this paper , the Ultralytics YOLOv8 10 represents a compilation of SOTA deep learning algorithms in CV . As more advanced models are expected to emerge in the near future , these advancements will likely contribute to enhanced Designer - AI collaboration , further empowering designers and practitioners in VBD . Our methodology demonstrated that this specific combination of a pre - trained 10 https : / / ultralytics . com / yolov8 ( last accessed : March 7 , 2024 ) . 16 MarkupLens model and visualization enhances VBD ( i . e . , annotation productivity , cognitive load , technology acceptance , and UX ) in a scenario - based design case . 6 . 5 Future Work In our next step , we aim to collect a broader range of design cases , complete with accompanying videos from various domains . We will then test these cases with our prototype to evaluate its effectiveness in enhancing professional design annotation , as demonstrated in this study . Additionally , we aim to integrate more advanced CV models and explore other visualization methods to validate our findings and enhance the prototype . Moving forward , we aim to integrate few - shot learning and fine - tuning strategies into our pipeline . This will enable our models to rapidly adapt to designers’ intentions , highlighting the crucial elements while filtering out the irrelevant ones [ 33 , 35 ] . 7 CONCLUSION The swift progress of CV and AI bears the potential to enhance and scale up the video - based design ( VBD ) method . Earlier studies have ventured into applying CV for more professional annotation tasks , covering niche domains such as agriculture and medical imaging . In this paper , we explored the utilization of CV to aid professional designers in video analysis practices . We developed an AI - powered prototype that delivers CV assistance to designers in a laboratory setting , and used a scenario - based video case to validate it . We evaluated the design task performance across three conditions with varied CV assistance levels employing eye - tracking and self - reported measures . By examining objective and subjective data , our results showed that the embedded CV assistance not only improves annotation productivity in VBD , but also reduces practitioners’ cognitive load and improves UX . Ultimately , we assert that refined CV techniques hold significant potential in augmenting video analysis in VBD . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Onur Asan and Enid Montague . 2014 . Using video - based observation research methods in primary care health encounters to evaluate complex interactions . 21 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 161 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / jhi . v21i4 . 72 [ 2 ] Hasan Ayaz , Patricia A . Shewokis , Scott Bunce , Kurtulus Izzetoglu , Ben Willems , and Banu Onaral . 2012 . Optical brain monitoring for operator training and mental workload assessment . 59 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 36 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2011 . 06 . 023 [ 3 ] Fabio Babiloni . 2019 . Mental Workload Monitoring : New Perspectives from Neuroscience . In Human Mental Workload : Models and Applications ( Cham ) ( Communications in Computer and Information Science ) , Luca Longo and Maria Chiara Leva ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , 3 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 32423 - 0 _ 1 [ 4 ] Laura Baecher and Bede McCormack . 2015 . The impact of video review on supervisory conferencing . 29 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 153 – 173 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500782 . 2014 . 992905 [ 5 ] Mahnaz Behroozi , Alison Lui , Ian Moore , Denae Ford , and Chris Parnin . 2018 . Dazed : measuring the cognitive load of solving technical interview problems at the whiteboard . In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering : New Ideas and Emerging Results ( Gothenburg Sweden ) . ACM , 93 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3183399 . 3183415 [ 6 ] Simone Bianco , Gianluigi Ciocca , Paolo Napoletano , and Raimondo Schettini . 2015 . An interactive tool for manual , semi - automatic and automatic video annotation . 131 ( 2015 ) , 88 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cviu . 2014 . 06 . 015 [ 7 ] Francesco N . Biondi , Babak Saberi , Frida Graf , Joel Cort , Prarthana Pillai , and Balakumar Balasingam . 2023 . Distracted worker : Using pupil size and blink rate to detect cognitive load during manufacturing tasks . 106 ( 2023 ) , 103867 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2022 . 103867 [ 8 ] Abhigna B . s . , Nitasha Soni , and Shilpa Dixit . 2018 . Crowdsourcing – A Step Towards Advanced Machine Learning . 132 ( 2018 ) , 632 – 642 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . procs . 2018 . 05 . 062 [ 9 ] Adrian Bussone , Simone Stumpf , and Dympna O’Sullivan . 2024 . The Role of Explanations on Trust and Reliance in Clinical Decision Support Systems . In 2015 International Conference on Healthcare Informatics ( 2015 - 10 ) . 160 – 169 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICHI . 2015 . 26 [ 10 ] Zana Buçinca , Maja Barbara Malaya , and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2021 . To Trust or to Think : Cognitive Forcing Functions Can Reduce Overreliance on AI in AI - assisted Decision - making . 5 ( 2021 ) , 188 : 1 – 188 : 21 . Issue CSCW1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449287 [ 11 ] Philipp P . Caffier , Udo Erdmann , and Peter Ullsperger . 2003 . Experimental evaluation of eye - blink parameters as a drowsiness measure . 89 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 319 – 325 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00421 - 003 - 0807 - 5 17 He , et al . [ 12 ] Siyuan Chen , Julien Epps , Natalie Ruiz , and Fang Chen . 2011 . Eye activity as a measure of human mental effort in HCI . In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces ( New York , NY , USA ) ( IUI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 315 – 318 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1943403 . 1943454 [ 13 ] Valerie Chen , Q . Vera Liao , Jennifer Wortman Vaughan , and Gagan Bansal . 2023 . Understanding the Role of Human Intuition on Reliance in Human - AI Decision - Making with Explanations . 7 ( 2023 ) , 370 : 1 – 370 : 32 . Issue CSCW2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3610219 [ 14 ] Charles Clifton , Fernanda Ferreira , John M . Henderson , Albrecht W . Inhoff , Simon P . Liversedge , Erik D . Reichle , and Elizabeth R . Schotter . 2016 . Eye movements in reading and information processing : Keith Rayner’s 40year legacy . 86 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2015 . 07 . 004 [ 15 ] Fred D . Davis . 1989 . Perceived Usefulness , Perceived Ease of Use , and User Acceptance of Information Technology . 13 , 3 ( 1989 ) , 319 – 340 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 249008 Publisher : Management Information Systems Research Center , University of Minnesota . [ 16 ] Fred D . Davis , Richard P . Bagozzi , and Paul R . Warshaw . 1989 . User Acceptance of Computer Technology : A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models . 35 , 8 ( 1989 ) , 982 – 1003 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 35 . 8 . 982 Publisher : INFORMS . [ 17 ] M . De Rivecourt , M . N . Kuperus , W . J . Post , and L . J . M . Mulder . 2008 . Cardiovascular and eye activity measures as indices for momentary changes in mental effort during simulated flight . 51 , 9 ( 2008 ) , 1295 – 1319 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00140130802120267 [ 18 ] Daniel E . Ehrmann , Sara N . Gallant , Sujay Nagaraj , Sebastian D . Goodfellow , Danny Eytan , Anna Goldenberg , and Mjaye L . Mazwi . 2022 . Evaluating and reducing cognitive load should be a priority for machine learning in healthcare . 28 , 7 ( 2022 ) , 1331 – 1333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 022 - 01833 - z Number : 7 Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . [ 19 ] Upol Ehsan , Samir Passi , Q . Vera Liao , Larry Chan , I . - Hsiang Lee , Michael Muller , and Mark O . Riedl . 2021 . The Who in Explainable AI : How AI Background Shapes Perceptions of AI Explanations . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2107 . 13509 arXiv : 2107 . 13509 [ cs ] [ 20 ] Vérane Faure , Régis Lobjois , and Nicolas Benguigui . 2016 . The effects of driving environment complexity and dual tasking on drivers’ mental workload and eye blink behavior . 40 ( 2016 ) , 78 – 90 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trf . 2016 . 04 . 007 [ 21 ] Bruno Fruchard , Cécile Avezou , Sylvain Malacria , Géry Casiez , and Stéphane Huot . 2023 . A Case Study on the Design and Use of an Annotation and Analytical Tool Tailored To Lead Climbing . In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA ) ( CHI EA ’23 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544549 . 3573876 [ 22 ] Ana Fucs , Juliana Jansen Ferreira , Vinícius C . V . B . Segura , Beatriz de Paulo , Rogerio Abreu De Paula , and Renato Cerqueira . 2020 . Sketch - based Video A Storytelling for UX Validation in AI Design for Applied Research . CHI Extended Abstracts ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375221 [ 23 ] Eshan Gaur , Vikas Saxena , and Sandeep K Singh . 2018 . Video annotation tools : A Review . In 2018 International Conference on Advances in Computing , Communication Control and Networking ( ICACCCN ) . 911 – 914 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICACCCN . 2018 . 8748669 [ 24 ] Joseph H Goldberg and Xerxes P Kotval . 1999 . Computer interface evaluation using eye movements : methods and constructs . 24 , 6 ( 1999 ) , 631 – 645 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0169 - 8141 ( 98 ) 00068 - 7 [ 25 ] Canadian Centre for Occupational Health Government of Canada and Safety . 2023 . CCOHS : Office Ergonomics - Positioning the Monitor . https : / / www . ccohs . ca / oshanswers / ergonomics / office / monitor _ positioning . html Last Modified : 2023 - 06 - 13 . [ 26 ] CarlGutwin , ScottBateman , GauravArora , andAshleyCoveney . 2017 . LookingAwayandCatchingUp : DealingwithBriefAttentionalDisconnection in Synchronous Groupware . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Portland Oregon USA ) . ACM , 2221 – 2235 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998226 [ 27 ] Sandra G . Hart and Lowell E . Staveland . 1988 . Development of NASA - TLX ( Task Load Index ) : Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research . In Advances in Psychology . Vol . 52 . Elsevier , 139 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0166 - 4115 ( 08 ) 62386 - 9 [ 28 ] John M . Hinson , Tina L . Jameson , and Paul Whitney . 2003 . Impulsive decision making and working memory . 29 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 298 – 306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 29 . 2 . 298 [ 29 ] HumanPerformanceResearchGroupatNASA’sAmesResearchCenter . 2022 . NASATaskLoadIndex ( NASA - TLX ) PaperandPencilVersionInstruction Manual . NASA , Moffett Field , CA . Available at : https : / / humansystems . arc . nasa . gov / groups / tlx / tlxpaperpencil . php . [ 30 ] Maia Jacobs , Melanie F . Pradier , Thomas H . McCoy , Roy H . Perlis , Finale Doshi - Velez , and Krzysztof Z . Gajos . 2021 . How machine - learning recommendations influence clinician treatment selections : the example of antidepressant selection . 11 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41398 - 021 - 01224 - x Number : 1 Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . [ 31 ] Vaiva Kalnikait˙e , Patrick Ehlen , and Steve Whittaker . 2012 . Markup as you talk : establishing effective memory cues while still contributing to a meeting . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( Seattle Washington USA ) . ACM , 349 – 358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145260 [ 32 ] Isaak Kavasidis , Simone Palazzo , Roberto Di Salvo , Daniela Giordano , and Concetto Spampinato . 2014 . An innovative web - based collaborative platform for video annotation . 70 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 413 – 432 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11042 - 013 - 1419 - 7 [ 33 ] Yujin Kim , Jaehoon Oh , Sungnyun Kim , and Se - Young Yun . 2022 . How to Fine - tune Models with Few Samples : Update , Data Augmentation , and Test - time Augmentation . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2205 . 07874 arXiv : 2205 . 07874 [ cs ] [ 34 ] Alan Latham and Peter R H Wood . 2015 . Inhabiting Infrastructure : Exploring the Interactional Spaces of Urban Cycling . 47 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 300 – 319 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1068 / a140049p [ 35 ] Haokun Liu , Derek Tam , Mohammed Muqeeth , Jay Mohta , Tenghao Huang , Mohit Bansal , and Colin A Raffel . 2022 . Few - Shot Parameter - Efficient Fine - Tuning is Better and Cheaper than In - Context Learning . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , S . Koyejo , S . Mohamed , A . Agarwal , D . Belgrave , K . Cho , and A . Oh ( Eds . ) , Vol . 35 . Curran Associates , Inc . , 1950 – 1965 . https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2022 / file / 0cde695b83bd186c1fd456302888454c - Paper - Conference . pdf 18 MarkupLens [ 36 ] Yikun Liu , Yuan Jia , Wei Pan , and Mark S . Pfaff . 2014 . Supporting task resumption using visual feedback . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing ( Baltimore Maryland USA ) . ACM , 767 – 777 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531710 [ 37 ] Wendy E . Mackay , Anne V . Ratzer , and Paul Janecek . 2000 . Video artifacts for design : bridging the Gap between abstraction and detail . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques ( New York City New York USA ) . ACM , 72 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 347642 . 347666 [ 38 ] Alfonso Magliacano , Salvatore Fiorenza , Anna Estraneo , and Luigi Trojano . 2020 - 09 - 25 . Eye blink rate increases as a function of cognitive load during an auditory oddball paradigm . 736 ( 2020 - 09 - 25 ) , 135293 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neulet . 2020 . 135293 [ 39 ] Xiangming Mu . 2010 . Towards effective video annotation : An approach to automatically link notes with video content . 55 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1752 – 1763 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2010 . 07 . 021 [ 40 ] Patrizia Picci , Antonio Calvani , and Giovanni Bonaiuti . 2012 . The Use of Digital Video Annotation in Teacher Training : The Teachers’ Perspectives . 69 ( 2012 ) , 600 – 613 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sbspro . 2012 . 11 . 452 [ 41 ] Christoffer Bøgelund Rasmussen , Kristian Kirk , and Thomas B . Moeslund . 2022 . The Challenge of Data Annotation in Deep Learning—A Case Study on Whole Plant Corn Silage . 22 , 4 ( 2022 ) , 1596 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / s22041596 [ 42 ] KeithRayner . 1998 . Eyemovementsinreadingandinformationprocessing : 20yearsofresearch . 124 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 372 – 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 124 . 3 . 372 Place : US Publisher : American Psychological Association . [ 43 ] Dario D Salvucci . 1999 . Inferring intent in eye - based interfaces : tracing eye movements with process models . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 254 – 261 . [ 44 ] Martin Schrepp , Andreas Hinderks , and Jörg Thomaschewski . 2014 . Applying the User Experience Questionnaire ( UEQ ) in Different Evaluation Scenarios . 383 – 392 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 07668 - 3 _ 37 [ 45 ] Martin Schrepp , Andreas Hinderks , and Jörg Thomaschewski . 2017 . Construction of a Benchmark for the User Experience Questionnaire ( UEQ ) . 4 ( 2017 ) , 40 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9781 / ijimai . 2017 . 445 [ 46 ] Justin Spinney . 2011 . A Chance to Catch a Breath : Using Mobile Video Ethnography in Cycling Research . 6 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 161 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17450101 . 2011 . 552771 [ 47 ] Deborah Tatar . 1989 . Using video - based observation to shape the design of a new technology . ACM SIGCHI Bulletin 21 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 108 – 111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 70609 . 70628 [ 48 ] Russ Tedrake . 2023 . CH . 9 - Object Detection and Segmentation , Robotic Manipulation . http : / / manipulation . mit . edu [ 49 ] J . A . Veltman and A . W . K . Gaillard . 1998 . Physiological workload reactions to increasing levels of task difficulty . 41 , 5 ( 1998 ) , 656 – 669 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 001401398186829 Publisher : Taylor & Francis eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 001401398186829 . [ 50 ] Viswanath Venkatesh . 2000 . Determinants of Perceived Ease of Use : Integrating Control , Intrinsic Motivation , and Emotion into the Technology Acceptance Model . 11 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 342 – 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / isre . 11 . 4 . 342 . 11872 Publisher : INFORMS . [ 51 ] Laurie Vertelney . 1989 . Using video to prototype user interfaces . ACM SIGCHI Bulletin 21 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 57 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 70609 . 70615 [ 52 ] Athanasios Voulodimos , Nikolaos Doulamis , Anastasios Doulamis , and Eftychios Protopapadakis . 2018 . Deep Learning for Computer Vision : A Brief Review . 2018 ( 2018 ) , e7068349 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 7068349 [ 53 ] Jan Witowski , Jongmun Choi , Soomin Jeon , Doyun Kim , Joowon Chung , John Conklin , Maria Gabriela Figueiro Longo , Marc D . Succi , and Synho Do . 2021 . MarkIt : A Collaborative Artificial Intelligence Annotation Platform Leveraging Blockchain For Medical Imaging Research . 4 ( 2021 ) , 10 . 30953 / bhty . v4 . 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 30953 / bhty . v4 . 176 [ 54 ] Salu Ylirisku and Jacob Buur . 2007 . Making sense and editing videos . In Designing with video : Focusing the user - centred design process . Springer London , 86— - 135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 84628 - 961 - 3 _ 2 [ 55 ] Salu Ylirisku and Jacob Buur . 2007 . Studying what people do . In Designing with video : Focusing the user - centred design process . Springer London , 36 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 84628 - 961 - 3 _ 2 19 He , et al . Table 3 . Statements of TAM with their corresponding attribute codes . Perspective Attribute Code Perceived Usefulness ( PU ) Using the prototype helps me to accomplish the task more quickly . PU1 Using the prototype improves my work performance . PU2 Using the prototype improves my work productivity . PU3 Using the prototype enhances my effectiveness at work . PU4 Using the prototype makes it easier to do my work . PU5 I find the prototype useful in my work . PU6 Perceived Ease - of - Use ( PEU ) Learning to operate the annotation system has been easy for me . PEU1 I find it easy to get the prototype to do what I want to do . PEU2 My interaction with the prototype is clear and understandable . PEU3 I find the prototype is flexible to interact with . PEU4 It is easy for me to become skillful at using the prototype . PEU5 I find the prototype easy to use . PEU6 Fig . 8 . An example from COCO Dataset demonstrating 4 commonly used annotation types [ 48 ] 20