T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y © The Rockefeller University Press $ 8 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 172 , No . 1 , January 2 , 2006 91 – 102 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200508044 JCB : ARTICLE JCB 91 Pax3 and Pax7 have distinct and overlapping functions in adult muscle progenitor cells Frédéric Relaix , 1 Didier Montarras , 1 Stéphane Zaffran , 1 Barbara Gayraud - Morel , 2 Didier Rocancourt , 1 Shahragim Tajbakhsh , 2 Ahmed Mansouri , 4 Ana Cumano , 3 and Margaret Buckingham 1 1 Unité de Génétique Moléculaire du Développement , 2 Groupe de Cellules Souches et Développement , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA 2578 , Département de Biologie du Développement , 3 Unite de Biologie Moleculaire du Gene , Département d’Immunologie , Institut National de la Sant é et de la Recherche Medicale U277 , Institut Pasteur , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France 4 Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Max - Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , D - 37077 Gottingen , Germany he growth and repair of skeletal muscle after birth depends on satellite cells that are characterized by the expression of Pax7 . We show that Pax3 , the paralogue of Pax7 , is also present in both quiescent and activated satellite cells in many skeletal muscles . Dominant - negative forms of both Pax3 and - 7 repress MyoD , but do not interfere with the expression of the other myogenic determination factor , Myf5 , which , together with Pax3 / 7 , regulates the myogenic differentiation of these cells . In Pax7 mutants , satellite cells are progressively lost in both T Pax3 - expressing and - nonexpressing muscles . We show that this is caused by satellite cell death , with effects on the cell cycle . Manipulation of the dominant - negative forms of these factors in satellite cell cultures demon - strates that Pax3 cannot replace the antiapoptotic function of Pax7 . These ﬁndings underline the importance of cell survival in controlling the stem cell populations of adult tissues and demonstrate a role for upstream factors in this context . Introduction Pax genes play key roles during development . Members of this family of paired box / homeodomain transcription factors regu - late the contribution of progenitor cells to different tissue types ( Tremblay and Gruss , 1994 ) . Pax3 and its paralogue Pax7 have been implicated in the specification of cells that will enter the myogenic program . In the absence of both Pax3 and - 7 , there is a major deficit in skeletal muscle , with arrest of myogenesis occurring during later embryonic and fetal development ( Relaix et al . , 2005 ) . Cells in which the genes are activated become incorporated into other tissues or die in the double mutants . Normally , Pax3 / 7 - positive skeletal muscle progenitor cells , which are derived from the central dermomyotome region of the somites ( Ben - Yair and Kalcheim , 2005 ; Gros et al . , 2005 ) , activate the myogenic regulatory genes and differentiate into skeletal muscle fibers or remain as a proliferating reserve cell population within the muscle mass ( Gros et al . , 2005 ; Kassar - Duchossoy et al . , 2005 ; Relaix et al . , 2005 ) . In late - stage fetal muscle , these cells begin to adopt a satellite cell position ( Kassar - Duchossoy et al . , 2005 ; Relaix et al . , 2005 ) , suggesting that this somite - derived population also provides the progenitor cells of postnatal skeletal muscle ( Gros et al . , 2005 ) . In these cells , the expression of Myf5 and MyoD results in muscle cell determination . During the formation of early embryonic skele - tal muscle in the somite , Myf5 and Mrf4 play a critical role in myogenic progenitors , which at this stage are derived from the edges of the dermomyotome ( Braun et al . , 1992 ; Tajbakhsh et al . , 1996 ; Kassar - Duchossoy et al . , 2004 ) . Pax7 is not ex - pressed in these cells in the mouse , where Pax3 is present . Early myogenesis occurs in the Pax3 mutant ; however , in a triple Pax3 / Myf5 ( Mrf4 ) mutant no skeletal muscle forms and MyoD , which is required for skeletal muscle determination in the absence of Myf5 and Mrf4 , is not expressed ( Tajbakhsh et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , Pax3 , together with Myf5 / Mrf4 , regu - lates the activation of MyoD . Consistent with this conclusion , MyoD is up - regulated in embryos in which PAX3 - FKHR , which acts as a strong transcriptional activator , has been tar - geted to an allele of Pax3 ( Relaix et al . , 2003 ) . Pax3 is essential for the survival of cells at the edges of the dermomyotome , par - ticularly to those located hypaxially , where it is also required for the delamination and migration of muscle progenitor cells to other sites where skeletal muscle will form , such as the limbs ( Franz et al . , 1993 ; Bober et al . , 1994 ; Goulding et al . , 1994 ) . When the coding sequence is targeted to the Pax3 gene , Pax7 can substitute for Pax3 function in the trunk , but not in the F . Relaix and D . Montarras contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Margaret Buckingham : margab @ pasteur . fr Abbreviations used in this paper : (cid:1) - galactosidase , (cid:1) - gal ; PI , propidium iodide . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 92 limbs , suggesting that after the duplication of a common Pax3 / 7 gene , which is present before vertebrate radiation , the functions of Pax3 and - 7 diverge in response to the requirements of appendicular muscle formation ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) . Satellite cells , the myogenic progenitor cells of postnatal muscle , lie under the basal lamina of muscle fibers in a quies - cent state until they become activated , proliferate , and form new skeletal muscle , which occurs during postnatal growth and in response to damage ( Bischoff and Heintz , 1994 ) . Myogenic regulatory genes are expressed during this process ; Myf5 is al - ready expressed in quiescent satellite cells ( Beauchamp et al . , 2000 ) , and MyoD is expressed as the cells become activated and subsequently differentiate with the expression of myogenin ( Yablonka - Reuveni and Rivera , 1994 ) . Myf5 : MyoD double mutants have not yet been examined in this adult context be - cause of the perinatal lethality of the original Myf5 mutant . However , in the absence of MyoD , muscle regeneration is less efficient and the balance between proliferation and differentia - tion of myosatellite cells appears to be affected ( Megeney et al . , 1996 ) . The most striking result , however , came from the examination of Pax7 mutant mice ( Seale et al . , 2000 ) . Pax7 is present in satellite cells , and in its absence muscle regeneration is severely affected . Satellite cells were not observed in the mu - tant , leading to the proposal that Pax7 is essential for the speci - fication of adult muscle progenitor cells ( Seale et al . , 2000 ) . However , it has recently been shown that satellite cells are present in the Pax7 mutant , although in decreasing numbers as the mice mature , and it has been suggested that their prolifera - tion is compromised in the absence of Pax7 ( Oustanina et al . , 2004 ) . Pax7 is present in quiescent satellite cells and during their activation , but is down - regulated when they differentiate . A proportion of activated satellite cells remain undifferentiated , retain Pax7 expression , and are thought to reconstitute the sat - ellite cell pool ( Olguin and Olwin , 2004 ; Zammit et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , Pax7 appears to play a predominant role in adult muscle progenitor cells . The presence of Pax3 , however , has been noted after satellite cell activation , leading to the pro - posal that it is implicated in their proliferation ( Conboy and Rando , 2002 ) . It was also noted that the expression of a Pax3 nLacZ allele can be detected in quiescent satellite cells ( Buckingham et al . , 2003 ) . We now investigate the role of Pax7 in relation to Pax3 , which we show is expressed in the quiescent satellite cells of a major subset of skeletal muscles . We show that both Pax3 and - 7 control MyoD activation , and therefore regulate myogenesis in the adult . However , we demonstrate that in the absence of Pax7 satellite cells are progressively lost postnatally because of apoptosis accompanied by cell cycle defects . Pax7 has a critical antiapoptotic function in activated satellite cells for which Pax3 does not compensate . These results underline the critical role of upstream regulators of tissue formation and regenera - tion in assuring progenitor cell survival . Results Pax3 expression in the satellite cells of adult skeletal muscle Because Pax3 plays a key role during the onset of skeletal myogenesis in the embryo , we investigated its status in adult muscle in relation to Pax7 . Analysis of adult mice in which the Pax3 gene is targeted with nLacZ reporters ( Relaix et al . , 2003 ) revealed the presence of (cid:1) - galactosidase ( (cid:1) - gal ) – positive cells in adult skeletal muscle . The number of such cells varies between muscles . They are particularly abundant in the diaphragm Figure 1 . Pax3 expression in muscle satellite cells . ( A – C ) Expression of Pax3 in different muscles from 3 - wk - old Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) mice , revealed by X - Gal staining . ( A ) Dia - phragm muscle ; ( B ) hindlimb muscles , ( g ) gracilis muscle ; ( C ) trunk muscles , ( sdc ) serratus dorsalis caudalis . ( D ) Semiquantitative RT - PCR of Pax3 and - 7 transcripts in adult tibialis anterior ( TA ) and diaphragm muscle . The number of cycles is indicated on the top of each lane . M , molecular weight markers ( see Materials and methods ) . ( D’ ) Pax3 protein is detected by Western blot in protein extracts from different muscles ( D , diaphragm ; L , hind - limb ; T , ventral trunk muscles ) in 3 - wk - old mice . Tubulin ( Tub ) expression is shown as a loading control . ( E and F ) Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) is expressed in a subset of diaphragm muscle nuclei ( arrows ) from 3 - wk - old mice , as revealed by X - Gal and DAPI staining of a transverse section ( E ) or isolated fiber ( F ) . ( G and G’ ) Detection of Pax3 / 7 - depen - dent (cid:1) - gal expression in transverse sections of adult dia - phragm muscle from the transgenic line P34 , which re - ports Pax3 / 7 transcriptional activity . ( G ) Immunodetection of laminin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) staining . ( G’ ) Coimmuno - detection of laminin ( red ) and (cid:1) - gal ( green ) . ( H – J’ ) Coimmunodetection of (cid:1) - gal – positive cells in the dia - phragm muscle of 3 - wk - old Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) mice with laminin ( H’ , green ) , CD34 ( I’ , red ) , or M - cadherin ( J’ , red ) . As indicated in the figure , (cid:1) - gal is shown in red in H’ and in green in I’ and J’ . Corresponding DAPI staining is shown ( H , I , and J ) for each panel . Arrows indicate the labeled satellite cell nuclei . ( K ) Coimmunodetection of Pax3 ( red ) and laminin ( green , K’ ) . Corresponding DAPI staining is shown , with the labeled nucleus indicated by an arrow ( K ) . ( L – N’ ) Coimmunohistochemistry on diaphragm muscle from 3 - wk - old Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) mice for Pax7 ( red ) or (cid:1) - gal ( green ) . ( L – N ) Corresponding DAPI staining is presented with labeled nuclei indicated by arrows for each panel . PAX7 IS ESSENTIAL FOR MUSCLE SATELLITE CELL SURVIVAL • RELAIX ET AL . 93 ( Fig . 1 A ) , but are much less frequent in hindlimb muscles , with the exception of the gracilis muscle ( Fig . 1 B ) . In contrast , (cid:1) 50 % of forelimb muscles express Pax3 . As in the embryo ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) , expression of Pax3 is not detectable in head muscles . Most ventral trunk muscles are positive , with a striking juxtaposition in the rib area , where intercostal muscles are mainly negative , whereas body wall muscles such as the serratus caudalis dorsalis are positive ( Fig . 1 C ) . This differ - ence is confirmed by semiquantitative RT - PCR analysis of Pax3 versus - 7 transcripts in the tibialis anterior hindlimb mus - cle compared with the diaphragm ( Fig . 1 D ) . The Pax3 protein is also present , as shown by Western blot analysis of different muscles ( Fig . 1 D’ ) . The Pax3 nlacZ / (cid:2) - expressing cells are found to be associated with muscle fibers ( Fig . 1 , E and F ) . The Pax3 / 7 protein is transcriptionally active in adult muscle , as indicated by activation of the P34 reporter transgene in which Pax3 / 7 binding sites regulate nLacZ expression ( Fig . 1 , G and G’ ; Relaix et al . , 2004 ) . These Pax3 - expressing nuclei are present in satel - lite cells , as shown by coimmunolocalization of (cid:1) - gal with the satellite cell markers CD34 and M - cadherin and by the inclu - sion of (cid:1) - gal – positive cells within the basal lamina of the muscle fiber ( Fig . 1 , H – K’ ) . Because Pax7 is present in satellite cells ( Seale et al . , 2000 ) , the question of Pax3 expression in relation to Pax7 was addressed . In the diaphragm , the majority of Pax7 - positive satellite cells also coexpress Pax3 . About 15 % of the cells only label with Pax7 , and , occasionally , cells that express only Pax3 are also detected ( (cid:3) 3 % ; Fig . 1 , L – N’ ) . We therefore conclude that Pax3 , like Pax7 , is expressed in quiescent satel - lite cells and that the frequency of this event varies between muscles . There is no direct relation to fiber type ( Kelly and Figure 2 . Pax3 and - 7 expression in activated satellite cells . ( A – F ) Coimmunocytochemistry on primary cultures derived from the trunk muscles of 3 - wk - old Pax3 nLacZ / (cid:2) mice after 4 d in culture , using DAPI staining ( A and D ) , or an antibody recognizing (cid:1) - gal ( Pax3 ; B and E , red ) , MyoD ( C , green ) or Pax7 ( F , green ) . Whereas (cid:1) - gal ( Pax3 ) and MyoD are coexpressed in proliferating myoblasts , upon terminal differentiation Pax3 ( (cid:1) - gal ) is down - regulated ( A – C , arrow - heads ) , and is already lower in some mononucleated MyoD - positive cells ( A – C , arrow ) . ( E and F ) Most colonies coexpress (cid:1) - gal ( Pax3 ) and Pax7 . ( G – L ) Detection of GFP and myogenin in primary cultures of satellite cells from the diaphragm of 3 - wk - old Pax3 GFP / (cid:2) mice after 5 d in culture ; ( G and J ) DAPI staining ; ( H and K ) direct detection of GFP ( Pax3 ) fluorescence ( green ) ; and ( I and L ) immunodetection of myogenin ( red ) . ( M – R ) Coimmunocytochemistry on primary cultures derived from the hindlimb muscles of 3 - wk - old Pax3 nLacZ / (cid:2) mice after 4 d in culture , showing DAPI staining ( M and P ) or reaction with an antibody recognizing (cid:1) - gal ( N and Q , red ) or Pax7 ( O and R , green ) . Colonies expressing either Pax7 alone ( N and O ) or Pax3 and - 7 ( Q and R ; (cid:4) 20 % , see S ) were identified . ( S ) Histograms showing the percentage ( % ) of (cid:1) - gal ( Pax3 ) – positive colonies of myogenic cells obtained from the dia - phragm ( Diaph . ) , ventral trunk ( Trunk ) , and hindlimb ( Limb ) muscles of 3 - wk - old Pax3 nLacZ / (cid:2) mice . Cells were plated at low density to permit the formation of colonies and stained with X - Gal 3 – 4 d after plating . The results are from three independent experiments after counting (cid:5) 100 colonies from triplicate cul - ture plates . ( T and U ) Muscle satellite cells were isolated by flow cytometry from the lower hindlimb muscles and from the diaphragm of Pax3 GFP / (cid:2) adult mice as ( Pax3 ) GFP - negative and ( Pax3 ) - positive cells and maintained in culture as proliferating cells for 6 d before analysis of GFP expression by flow cytometry . Direct detection of GFP was performed on living cells under an inverted fluorescence microscope ( T and U , top left ) with corresponding phase - contrast detection of the cells ( T and U , bottom left ) and flow cytometry detection of GFP - positive cells ( T and U , right , boxed R2 region ) . JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 94 Rubenstein , 1994 ) because the diaphragm muscle ( type IIX , IIA , and I fibers ) is positive , whereas in the hindlimb the soleus ( type I and IIA ) is negative . Similarly , in the hindlimb the gas - trocnemius ( mostly type IIB ) is negative , whereas other fast muscles ( type IIA and IIB ) in the trunk and forelimb have Pax3 - expressing satellite cells . We next examined the expression of Pax3 and - 7 in pri - mary cultures of satellite cells prepared from different muscles ( Fig . 2 ) . Activated satellite cells , from the trunk muscle of Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) mice , which are Pax3 ( (cid:1) - gal ) - positive , also ex - press MyoD and down - regulate Pax3 ( (cid:1) - gal ) in differentiated muscle fibers ( Fig . 2 , A – C ) . This is also seen in cultures from Pax3 GFP / (cid:2) mice ( Relaix et al . , 2005 ) , where expression of myo - genin , which marks the onset of differentiation , is associated with rapid reduction in Pax3 ( GFP ) expression ( Fig . 2 , G – L ) . MyoD - positive cells in which Pax3 ( (cid:1) - gal ) is low ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) have probably activated myogenin . MyoD ( Fig . 2 C ) , or later myogenin ( Fig . 2 , I and L ) , is expressed in most cells marked by DAPI staining . In cultures from trunk ( Fig . 2 , D – F ) and diaphragm muscle ( not depicted ) , most nondifferentiating satellite cells coexpress Pax3 ( (cid:1) - gal ) and - 7 . However , in cul - tures from the hindlimb of Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) mice this is not the case and many colonies only express Pax7 ( Fig . 2 , N and O ) . Some colonies ( (cid:4) 20 % ) express both Pax genes ( Fig . 2 , P – R ) . The distribution of these two types of colonies from different muscle sources is quantified in Fig . 2 S . To confirm that Pax3 is not activated in satellite cells that only express Pax7 , we iso - lated these cells using flow cytometry . Based on the isolation of GFP - positive satellite cells from the diaphragm muscle , we had previously established the gating window that contains these cells ( Montarras et al . , 2005 ) , which is shown as a boxed area ( R2 ) in Fig . 2 ( T and U ) . When satellite cells isolated on this basis from the diaphragm muscle are cultured and reana - lyzed by flow cytometry , they remain Pax3 ( GFP ) - positive ( Fig . 2 T ) . However , when Pax3 - negative satellite cells are sorted from the muscle of the lower hindlimb and cultured , no GFP - positive cells were found in the R2 window after re - sorting by flow cytometry ( Fig . 2 U ) . These results demonstrate that activated satellite cells from Pax3 - negative muscles , do not activate this Pax gene in cell culture . The myogenic function of Pax3 and - 7 in satellite cells In the genetic hierarchy that regulates the onset of myogene - sis in the embryo , Pax3 activates MyoD ( Tajbakhsh et al . , 1997 ; Relaix et al . , 2003 ) , and Pax7 can replace Pax3 in this function ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , we investigated the myogenic activity of the two Pax proteins in adult muscle by infecting cultured satellite cells with adenoviral vectors ex - pressing wild - type or dominant - negative forms of Pax3 and - 7 , together with a GFP reporter . The dominant - negative proteins contain the repression domain of the Drosophila melano - gaster engrailed transcription factor ( Han and Manley , 1993 ) fused to the NH 2 - terminal region of the Pax sequence , which retains its DNA - binding domain . An initial series of experi - ments was performed with satellite cells isolated from a Pax reporter line , P34 , in which the transgenic mice express (cid:1) - gal Figure 3 . The effect of dominant - negative forms of Pax3 and - 7 on MyoD and Myf5 expression in satellite cells . ( A ) Primary cultures prepared from adult diaphragm muscle from the Pax3 / 7 transcriptional reporter line , P34 , were infected with adenoviruses encoding either GFP alone ( Adeno - GFP ) , GFP and Pax3 , GFP and Pax7 , or GFP with dominant - negative versions of either Pax3 ( Pax3DN ) or Pax7 ( Pax7DN ) . ( top ) Infected cells are identified as GFP positive . ( bottom ) The capacity of Pax3DN or - 7DN to abrogate Pax3 / 7 transcriptional activity is revealed by weaker ( arrows ) or undetect - able X - Gal staining seen in (cid:5) 80 % of GFP - positive cells with both dominant - negative constructs . ( B and C ) Coimmunohistochemistry on primary cultures from hindlimb or diaphragm muscles of 3 - wk - old wild - type mice infected with adenoviral vectors as in A . DAPI staining and antibodies recognizing either Myf5 ( B ) or MyoD ( C ) were used , whereas GFP fluorescence was de - tected directly . Cells expressing lower levels of PaxDN are indicated with an arrowhead . ( D ) Quantitation of results for satellite cell cultures infected with an adenovirus - expressing GFP and Pax3DN or GFP and Pax7DN , pre - sented in B and C . Results presented as histograms of the percentage ( % ) of GFP - positive cells expressing Myf5 or MyoD are taken from two to five inde - pendent experiments . ( E ) Primary cultures of satellite cells isolated from the diaphragm muscle of adult wild - type mice were infected with adenoviruses expressing GFP and Pax3 or - 7 . Infected cells were identified by direct detection of GFP fluorescence , and MyoD expression was followed by immunodetection . ( F ) Primary cultures of muscle satellite cells from hindlimb muscles of 3 - wk - old Myf5 GFP / (cid:2) and Myf5 GFP / GFP mice were infected with adenoviral vectors encoding either GFP alone or GFP and Pax3DN or - 7DN . Infected cells are identified by GFP fluorescence , and myogenesis is moni - tored by immunodetection of myogenin . The threshold of fluorescent GFP detection was set to capture only the strong adenovirus GFP reporter , excluding the weaker expression from the Myf5 GFP allele . PAX7 IS ESSENTIAL FOR MUSCLE SATELLITE CELL SURVIVAL • RELAIX ET AL . 95 from an nLacZ reporter that is regulated by multimerized Pax3 / 7 binding sites ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) . Overexpression of Pax3 or - 7 resulted in no obvious increase in reporter activity , which was already expressed at a high level in the Pax3 / 7 - positive satellite cells . However , the dominant - negative ver - sions of both of these factors ( Pax3DN and - 7DN ) resulted in down - regulation of the reporter ( Fig . 3 A ) . With decreasing levels of Pax3DN or - 7DN , no significant difference in the re - pression exerted by either dominant - negative Pax was detect - able ( not depicted ) . We conclude that Pax3 and - 7 bind to the consensus site with similar affinities and that their dominant - negative forms compete effectively with both endogenous proteins , which normally function as transcriptional activa - tors in these adult muscle cells , as in the embryo ( Relaix et al . , 2003 ) . When dominant - negative forms of Pax3 or - 7 were expressed in satellite cell cultures , the level of the myogenic factor Myf5 was not markedly affected ( Fig . 3 B ) , whereas MyoD was down - regulated in infected cells ( Fig . 3 C ) . As for the Pax3 / 7 reporter transgene , similar dosage effects were seen for both Pax3DN and - 7DN , with reduction , but not elimination , of MyoD in cells in which the adenoviral expres - sion vector was expressed at a lower level ( Fig . 3 C , arrow - heads ) . These results are quantified in Fig . 3 D . In contrast to the striking down - regulation of MyoD seen with the dominant - negative constructs , overexpression of wild - type Pax3 or - 7 is compatible with MyoD expression ( Fig . 3 E ) . Because myo - genesis still occurs in the absence of MyoD ( Fig . 3 F and not depicted ) , we investigated whether this is regulated by Myf5 , which is expressed independently of Pax3 or - 7 in the satellite cell cultures . These cells were prepared from hindlimb muscles of Myf5 GFP / (cid:2) and Myf5 GFP / GFP mice and infected with Pax3DN and - 7DN adenoviral vectors ( Fig . 3 F ) . Unlike infected cells from het - erozygous mice , Myf5 mutant cells do not express myogenin or differentiate in the presence of the dominant - negative Pax vectors . This demonstrates that either Pax3 / 7 , acting via MyoD , or Myf5 are required for the myogenic differentiation of adult satellite cells . The presence of satellite cells and muscle differentiation in Pax3 - expressing muscles of Pax7 mutant mice Because Pax3 - expressing satellite cells are found in adult mus - cles , their potential contribution to muscle growth and regener - ation was investigated in the Pax7 mutant mouse . We first evaluated whether Pax3 continues to be expressed in dia - phragm and trunk muscles . This is the case as shown in Fig . 4 at postnatal day 3 ( P3 ) . Western blots show that Pax3 is present , although at a reduced level ( Fig . 4 A ) , and immunohis - tochemistry confirms that Pax3 is expressed in satellite cells ( Fig . 4 B ) . Satellite cells are also revealed by (cid:1) - gal labeling of Pax7 LacZ / LacZ muscle at P2 ( Fig . 4 C ) and , indeed , even at P10 cultures from the diaphragm contain MyoD - positive cells that differentiate into myofibers expressing troponin T ( Fig . 4 D ) , although such cells are much rarer ( (cid:4) 15 % of wild type ) . Simi - larly , single fiber experiments with the extensor digitorum lon - gus hindlimb muscle ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200508044 / DC1 ) show that satellite cells are still present in the mutant , but that their number is reduced to (cid:1) 10 % of normal levels at P10 . The number of myonuclei is also reduced by (cid:1) 50 % at this stage ( Fig . S1 F ) and muscle fi - bers are smaller ( not depicted ) , consistent with the reduced size of mutant mice ( Mansouri et al . , 1996 ; Seale et al . , 2000 ) . The number of (cid:1) - gal – positive satellite cells were counted on sec - tions of Pax7 LacZ / LacZ muscles and compared with heterozygotes at P2 and P11 ( Fig . 4 E ) . At P2 there is only a small reduction Figure 4 . Pax3 expression is maintained in Pax7 - deficient satellite cells . ( A ) Western blot analysis of Pax3 expression in the diaphragm of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) ( (cid:2) / (cid:6) ) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ ( (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) mice at P3 . Tubulin ( Tub ) expres - sion is shown as a loading control . ( B ) Coimmunohistochemistry on trans - verse sections of ventral trunk muscle of Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mice at P2 using DAPI staining and an antibody that recognizes Pax3 . Laminin staining shows a Pax3 - positive cell ( red ) present in a satellite cell position . ( C ) Immunohis - tochemistry on transverse sections of ventral trunk muscle from Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mice at P2 using antibodies recognizing (cid:1) - gal ( green ) and laminin ( red ) . Corresponding DAPI staining is indicated . Arrowheads indi - cate Pax7 ( (cid:1) - gal ) – expressing cells , located under the basal lamina . ( D ) Coimmunocytochemistry on 7 - d primary cultures derived from the dia - phragm of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mice at P10 using antibodies recog - nizing MyoD and troponin T . ( E ) Quantification of the number of (cid:1) - gal – positive satellite cells in trunk , diaphragm ( dia ) , and hindlimb ( limb ) muscles of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) ( (cid:2) / (cid:6) ) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ ( (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) mice , detected per fi - ber on 10 - (cid:7) m sections from ventral trunk muscle at P2 or P11 . ( F ) Infection of primary cultures from Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mutant mice ( Pax7 (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) at P4 with an adenovirus expressing a dominant - negative form of Pax3 ( Adeno GFP (cid:2) Pax3DN ) shows elimination of MyoD expression in infected cells ( right arrowhead , infected cell ; left arrowhead , noninfected cell ) , whereas virus expressing GFP alone had no effect . Quantification is shown in G . No MyoD - positive myogenic cells are present after Pax3DN infection . JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 96 ( (cid:1) 18 % ) in the numbers of satellite cells in trunk , diaphragm , or hindlimb muscles . By P11 , this reduction is striking ( (cid:1) 83 % ) and is similar for all three muscle sources , whether Pax3 is ex - pressed in most satellite cells ( e . g . , diaphragm ) or not ( hind - limb ) . This demonstrates that Pax3 cannot compensate for Pax7 function during the postnatal development of skeletal muscle . This is not because of a failure in myogenesis in the mutant satellite cells . MyoD is still expressed and , as in wild - type cultures ( Fig . 3 ) , its expression is inhibited by a dominant - negative form of Pax3 ( Fig . 4 , F and G ) . Satellite cell proliferation in the Pax7 mutant Because the numbers of satellite cells fall during postnatal devel - opment in Pax7 mutant mice , and muscle fiber size is reduced , it is possible that activated satellite cells , which contribute to muscle growth , do not proliferate normally . This was examined in primary cultures from the diaphragm and hindlimb muscles of Pax7 LacZ / LacZ and Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) mice , plated at low density so that the number of cells per colony could be monitored . A re - duction of 25 – 30 % in the number of cells per myogenic colony was observed ( Fig . 5 A ) , indicating that , in the absence of Pax7 , proliferation is affected and that this is also the case for colonies from a muscle , such as the diaphragm , which ex - presses Pax3 . To determine whether some cells have with - drawn from the cell cycle , a Ki67 antibody was used , which marks proliferating cells in all phases of the cell cycle ( Schol - zen and Gerdes , 2000 ) . There was no difference between colonies from mutant or heterozygous mice , where the pro - portion of proliferating cells is concerned ( Fig . 5 B ) . We next examined progression of cells through the cell cycle , using a cyclin A antibody that marks cells in the S and G 2 phases ( Girard et al . , 1991 ) . There were 33 % more cyclin A – positive cells in the mutant myogenic colonies ( Fig . 5 C ) . One possible explanation for the increase in the propor - tion of proliferating cells in the S and G 2 phases of the cycle in the Pax7 mutant is that some cells exit the cycle during G1 and immediately undergo apoptosis , resulting in a reduction in the number of cells per colony observed in the absence of Pax7 ( Fig . 5 A ) . In the colony assay , we did not detect a significant difference in the numbers of dying cells using standard markers of apoptosis ( not depicted ) . This may be because such cells detach immediately . Alternatively , there may be a cell cycle defect independent of apoptosis , such as a cell cycle arrest in G 2 , resulting in a slower progression through the cell cycle . Apoptosis of satellite cells in the absence of Pax7 To investigate the survival of satellite cells in postnatal muscle in vivo , in the absence of Pax7 , we used an antibody to the acti - vated form of caspase - 3 to label cells undergoing apoptosis ( Patel et al . , 1996 ) . Coimmunohistochemistry was performed with an antibody to desmin , which marks activated satellite cells as they assume a myoblast phenotype ( Creuzet et al . , 1998 ) , as well as muscle fibers . In the postnatal trunk muscle of Pax7 mutant mice , activated caspase - 3 – labeled cells are ob - served , whereas in control mice labeled cells are not detected ( Fig . 6 , A – D ) . These results are quantitated in Fig . 6 E . The de - crease observed from P0 to P6 reflects the decreasing numbers of satellite cells in the mutant . These cells also express desmin , suggesting that they correspond to activated satellite cells , probably contributing to the postnatal growth of muscle ( Fig . 6 , A and B , arrowheads ) . The identification of these cells was confirmed by labeling with a laminin ( Fig . 6 C ) or (cid:1) - gal anti - Figure 5 . Satellite cell proliferation in the Pax7 mutant . ( A ) Satellite cells from the diaphragm ( dia ) or hindlimb muscles ( limb ) of Pax7 lacz / (cid:2) ( (cid:2) / (cid:6) ) and Pax7 lacz / lacz ( (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) mice at P4 were plated at low density . After 3 d , when colonies had formed , cells were processed for immunocytochemistry using a MyoD antibody . The number of cells per myogenic colony was determined in three independent experiments for each type of muscle and after counting at least 10 colonies per experiment . Results are expressed as the percentage of cells per myogenic colony from the Pax7 mutant ( (cid:6) / (cid:6) ) with respect to Pax7 heterozygotes ( (cid:2) / (cid:6) ) , taken as 100 % . ( B ) Determination of the percentage of cycling cells in normal and mutant myogenic colonies cultured as in A . Cells were costained with antibodies against MyoD and Ki67 , which marks all phases of the cell cycle . Examples shown are for myogenic colonies from hindlimb muscles . Quan - titation is from two independent experiments for each type of muscle . Results expressed as percentage of Ki67 - positive cells per myogenic colony indicate that both mutant and wild type cells proliferate equally well . ( C ) Determination of the percentage of cyclin A – positive cells per myogenic colony cultured as in A . Cells were costained with antibodies against MyoD and cyclin A , which marks the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle . Examples shown are from hindlimb muscles treated for immunocytochemistry as in B . Results are expressed as percentage of cyclin A – positive cells per myogenic colony . PAX7 IS ESSENTIAL FOR MUSCLE SATELLITE CELL SURVIVAL • RELAIX ET AL . 97 body ( Fig . 6 D ) . The latter detects Pax7 transcription , which marks satellite cells . During postnatal development , apoptotic cells were detected in all trunk and limb muscles examined in the Pax7 mutant , whereas they were very rare in the muscles of normal mice ( Fig . 6 E ) . Therefore , we conclude that Pax7 has an antiapoptotic function and that in its absence satellite cells die , despite the presence of Pax3 . To compare the roles of Pax3 and - 7 in protecting against apoptosis , wild - type satellite cells were transfected with GFP - marked adenoviral vectors coexpressing a dominant - negative form of Pax3 or - 7 . These cells were analyzed by flow cytometry on the basis of GFP expression , and their viability was mea - sured by propidium iodide ( PI ) staining , which detects dying cells ( Matteucci et al . , 1999 ) . Such an experiment is shown in Fig . 7 A for cells from hindlimb muscle infected with a domi - nant - negative form of Pax3 or - 7 , which led to 71 % of dying cells in the GFP - positive population when Pax7DN was ex - pressed . The results of these experiments are summarized in Fig . 7 B . Whereas Pax7DN led to substantial cell death , the Pax3DN - expressing virus at similar or sixfold higher multiplic - ities of infection did not show any effect on these cells , relative to control values . Similar results were seen in primary cultures from young mice ( P7 ; not depicted ) to those shown here for 3 – 4 - wk - old animals ( Fig . 7 ) . No such apoptotic effect was ob - served when muscle cultures were infected with adenoviral vectors expressing Pax7 . The induction of apoptosis is not related to the presence of MyoD ( Peschiaroli et al . , 2002 ) be - cause in satellite cell cultures from MyoD (cid:6) / (cid:6) mice infected by Figure 6 . Satellite cell survival in Pax7 mutant mice . ( A ) Coimmunohistochemistry on trans - verse sections of ventral trunk muscle of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ newborn mice at P0 or P3 using DAPI staining or antibodies recog - nizing desmin ( red ) or the activated form of caspase - 3 ( green ) . Apoptotic cells that are desmin positive are present in muscles from Pax7 mutant mice ( arrowheads ) . ( B ) Coimmuno - histochemistry on transverse sections of ven - tral trunk muscle of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) mice at P2 us - ing DAPI staining or antibodies recognizing desmin ( red ) or (cid:1) - gal ( green ) . Pax7 ( (cid:1) - gal ) - expressing satellite cells are either desmin positive ( arrows ) , which marks activated satel - lite cells , or desmin negative ( arrowheads ) , in - dicating quiescent satellite cells . ( C and D ) Coimmunohistochemistry on transverse sec - tions of ventral trunk muscle of Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mice at P2 ( C ) or P6 ( D ) using DAPI staining or antibodies recognizing the activated form of caspase - 3 ( green ) , laminin ( C , red ) , or (cid:1) - gal ( D , red ) shows that the Pax7 mutant cells located in a satellite cell position are subject to apoptosis . ( E ) Quantification of apoptotic cells at P0 , P2 , and P6 , based on analysis of sections after coimmuno - histochemistry with an antibody to activated caspase - 3 , and to desmin as a marker of muscle cells . Cells labeled with both antibodies were scored per standard transverse section of trunk and forelimb muscle . Figure 7 . The role of Pax7 and - 3 in the survival of satellite cells . ( A ) An example of the data obtained by flow cytometry after infection of cells cultured from hind - limb muscles with a GFP - labeled adenovirus expressing GFP alone or with a dominant - negative form of Pax3 ( Pax3DN ) or Pax7 ( Pax7DN ) . The percentages indicate the number of GFP - positive cells that are undergoing cell death on the basis of PI uptake ( R4 ) compared with those that survive ( R3 ) . ( B ) A summary of results obtained from the hindlimb on infection with both Pax7DN and Pax3DN , based on four independent experiments with triplicate cultures in each experiment . The numbers shown in the histograms are the percentage of dying cells ( R4 ) . Control experiments were performed with adenoviruses expressing only GFP . Numbers in brackets indicate the multiplicity of infection . ( C ) A summary of results obtained for cells isolated from the diaphragm . The histograms correspond to five independent experiments for the control ( 5 – 30 ) and Pax3DN ( 5 – 10 ) , two for Pax3DN ( 30 ) , and three for Pax7DN ( 5 ) . Numbers in brackets indicate the multiplicity of infection . ( D ) The number of MyoD - positive colonies per culture dish obtained after plating the same number of cells from hindlimb or diaphragm muscle of Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) or Pax7 LacZ / LacZ mice at P4 . JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 98 Pax7DN a similar extent of cell death was observed ( not de - picted ) . Furthermore , Pax7DN ( or Pax3DN ) did not provoke cell death in nonmyogenic cells , such as the OP9 bone mar - row stromal cell line ( not depicted ) . When cells isolated from the diaphragm ( Fig . 7 C ) were similarly infected , cell death caused by Pax7DN was about half of that witnessed in cells from hindlimb muscle . Equivalent levels of Pax3DN showed no effect , but in contrast with the observations on the hind - limb ( Fig . 7 B ) , when the concentration of Pax3DN was in - creased , some cell death was observed . These results suggest that Pax3 can have a limited antiapoptotic effect in the muscles in which it is expressed . In keeping with this conclusion , more myogenic colonies are present in cells isolated from the dia - phragm of Pax7 mutant mice at P4 , although in both diaphragm and hindlimb preparations , this number was strikingly lower than with the wild type ( Fig . 7 D ) . At later stages no differ - ence was detectable . Discussion Pax7 is a satellite cell marker ; however , we now show that its paralogue , Pax3 , is coexpressed in these cells in many skeletal muscles . This raises the question of their respective roles and whether Pax3 can compensate for the Pax7 mutant phenotype . Both function similarly in regulating MyoD during the onset of myogenesis in satellite cell cultures , and our analysis of Myf5 mutant cells demonstrates that Myf5 and Pax3 or Pax7 control the entry of these adult muscle progenitor cells into the myo - genic program . The progressive postnatal loss of satellite cells that we document for Pax7 mutant mice is seen in the presence of Pax3 , and it is caused by a requirement for Pax7 in muscle satellite cell survival and cell cycle progression for which Pax3 cannot compensate . Muscle progenitor cell specification and Pax3 expression in a subset of skeletal muscles At birth the great majority of satellite cells are still present in the trunk and limb muscles of Pax7 mutant mice ( Oustanina et al . , 2004 ) , showing that Pax7 is not required for satellite cell specification as previously suggested ( Seale et al . , 2000 ) . During prenatal development , a Pax3 / 7 population of myo - genic progenitor cells is present and these somite - derived cells take up a satellite cell position in late fetal muscle ( Gros et al . , 2005 ) . It is only when both Pax3 and - 7 are absent that these cells die or fail to enter the myogenic program , with a major deficit in skeletal muscle in the double mutant ( Relaix et al . , 2005 ) . We would therefore propose that satellite cell progenitors are specified prenatally by the action of Pax3 in the Pax7 mutant . It is not clear why Pax3 should be present in the quies - cent , as well as in the activated satellite cells of some muscles and not others . Most hindlimb muscles , usually used as a source of satellite cells ( Seale et al . , 2000 ; Conboy and Rando , 2002 ) , and some forelimb and trunk muscles are negative for Pax3 . Even within a muscle that is positive , like the diaphragm , some satellite cells express only Pax7 . These differences do not correlate with fiber type and , thus , they do not correlate with the type of innervation . A correlation with the embryological origin of the muscle is also not evident ( Tajbakhsh and Buck - ingham , 2000 ) . Heterogeneity between muscles is a well known feature of myopathies in which the mutation of a gene expressed in all muscles may have a pathological effect on particular muscle groups ( Hadchouel et al . , 2003 ) . It is also evident from the study of regulatory genes in the embryo that different sites of myogenesis are coordinated by different regulatory strategies . This is illustrated by the number of distinct sequences that con - trol the spatiotemporal activation of the Myf5 gene ( Buch - berger et al . , 2003 ; Hadchouel et al . , 2003 ) or by the effects of mutations in genes encoding homeobox proteins , such as Lbx1 ( Schafer and Braun , 1999 ; Brohmann et al . , 2000 ; Gross et al . , 2000 ) or Meox2 ( Mankoo et al . , 1999 ) , which lead to the loss of certain limb muscles and not others . Understanding the basis of such myogenic heterogeneity represents a challenge for the muscle field , which has tended not to think in these terms be - cause of the apparently generalized effects of the MyoD family of myogenic regulatory factors in the embryo . The role of Pax3 and - 7 in myogenesis Myogenesis in the embryo is initially orchestrated by the myo - genic regulatory factors Myf5 and Mrf4 that , together with Pax3 , lead to the subsequent activation of MyoD . Mrf4 is not detectable in adult satellite cells ( unpublished data ) , although it is expressed when they differentiate ( Cooper et al . , 1999 ) , and this gene does not play a role as a determination factor during late embryonic and fetal development ( Kassar - Duchossoy et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . However , we show that the genetic hierarchy that controls the onset of myogenesis in the embryo is con - served in the adult and that Pax3 / 7 and Myf5 control the entry of cells into the myogenic program , acting in parallel genetic pathways . In the absence of all three factors , skeletal muscle differentiation does not occur , whereas in satellite cells from the Myf5 mutant or from Pax3 - negative hindlimb muscles of the Pax7 mutant , myogenin is activated and the cells differenti - ate . In keeping with previous observations on MyoD mutant embryos ( Rudnicki et al . , 1992 ) , Myf5 can activate myogenin directly , whereas activation of myogenesis by Pax3 / 7 depends on MyoD , as shown in the experiments reported here ( Taj - bakhsh et al . , 1997 ) . Expression of Myf5 in satellite cells , which we show is not affected by dominant - negative forms of Pax3 or - 7 , suggests that these cells have progressed beyond the progenitor cell state , characterized by the presence of Pax3 / 7 and the ab - sence of any myogenic regulatory factor ( Gros et al . , 2005 ; Kassar - Duchossoy et al . , 2005 ; Relaix et al . , 2005 ) . In prenatal progenitor cells , expression of both Myf5 and MyoD depends on the presence of Pax3 / 7 factors ( Relaix et al . , 2005 ) . Dominant - negative forms of Pax3 or - 7 down - regulate MyoD expression in the presence of Myf5 . Presumably , the en - grailed repression domain present in these constructs overrides transcriptional activation by Myf5 . The direct repression ex - erted by these constructs was demonstrated by their effect on the P34 reporter transgene , which is dependent on Pax3 / 7 binding sites . In these experiments , and in situations where PAX7 IS ESSENTIAL FOR MUSCLE SATELLITE CELL SURVIVAL • RELAIX ET AL . 99 Pax3DN or - 7DN are expressed at a lower level , as indicated by the GFP reporter , with only partial repression of MyoD , we have never detected any difference between the two Pax domi - nant - negative forms . Furthermore , satellite cells isolated from hindlimb muscles expressing only Pax7 down - regulate MyoD in the presence of Pax3DN . We therefore conclude that Pax3 and - 7 play a similar role in the activation of MyoD and subse - quent skeletal muscle differentiation . In experiments with ade - noviral vectors in which Pax3 or - 7 were overexpressed in sat - ellite cells , we saw no down - regulation of MyoD . This is in contrast to the results of the study conducted by Olguin and Olwin ( 2004 ) , although in the C 2 myogenic cell line , we did see some effect on MyoD ( unpublished data ) . This may be a question of the cell system and the extent of overexpression , but we conclude that Pax3 and - 7 normally act as activators of the myogenic program . The overexpression of MyoD that we observe in embryos that express the constitutively active PAX3 - FKHR protein is consistent with this role . We show that Pax3 , like Pax7 ( Olguin and Olwin , 2004 ; Zammit et al . , 2004 ) , is rapidly down - regulated as satellite cells begin to differentiate . We observed the presence of Pax3 / 7 - positive , MyoD - negative cells in older cultures in which differentiated myotubes were present . These cells probably correspond to reserve cells that will reconstitute the satellite cell pool , taking up a satellite cell position on newly formed fibers ( Zammit et al . , 2004 ) . Satellite cell proliferation In satellite cultures from hindlimb muscles , we frequently saw colonies that expressed only Pax7 , with no detectable expres - sion of the Pax3 reporter . In contrast , Pax7 - positive satellite cells from the tibialis anterior muscle , also used in our experi - ments , have been reported to systematically activate Pax3 in culture and it has been proposed that Pax3 is necessary for their proliferation ( Conboy and Rando , 2002 ) . This discrepancy may reflect problems with the Pax3 antibody used , which , in our experience , works poorly on cultured cells and may show cross - reactivity with Pax7 . This is why we rely on different Pax3 reporter lines , which consistently give reproducible results ( Relaix et al . , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 ) . When we isolate satellite cells from Pax3 GFP / (cid:2) mice by flow cytometry after injury of the tibialis anterior , these cells remain Pax3 ( GFP ) - negative ( Montarras et al . , 2005 ) , consistent with our ex vivo observations . Grafting experiments ( Montarras et al . , 2005 ) , in addition to cell culture observations , show that satellite cells retain their Pax3 - positive or - negative status independent of their environment . In the Pax7 mutant , satellite cells are present and can dif - ferentiate into skeletal muscle ( Oustanina et al . , 2004 ) , but , as we show , there is a progressive loss of these cells during post - natal development . Their loss is equally evident in muscles where Pax3 is also expressed in satellite cells . This indicates that there must be a function of Pax7 for which Pax3 cannot compensate . It had been suggested that there may be a prolifer - ative defect in satellite cells in the absence of Pax7 ( Oustanina et al . , 2004 ) . We examined the proliferation of satellite cell cul - tures from Pax7 mutant mice and observed a 25 – 30 % reduction compared with wild type . This was seen with Pax3 - positive myogenic colonies from the diaphragm , as well as from Pax3 - negative hindlimb muscles . All of the cells were still cycling , but the cell cycle was perturbed , with relatively more cells in S and G2 phases . We suggest that this effect may be attributable to the loss of cells in G1 caused by apoptosis ( Abrams and White , 2004 ) . Pax7 and satellite cell survival We show that apoptosis , marked by activated caspase - 3 , occurs in the skeletal muscle of the Pax7 mutant . This is detectable immediately after birth and appears to occur in activated satel - lite cells , marked by desmin expression that would normally contribute to muscle growth . This suggests that self - renewal of satellite cells takes place via an activated cell state , as previ - ously proposed ( Zammit et al . , 2004 ) . We do not detect cell death in cultured satellite cells from Pax7 mutant mice . This may be because the presence of serum in the medium provides some protection or because dying cells detach rapidly preclud - ing detection with markers of apoptosis . Muscles , such as the diaphragm , in which Pax3 is expressed , have more satellite cells , giving rise to myogenic colonies when satellite cell loss in vivo is still relatively minor ( 15 – 20 % ) . However , by 15 d after birth only 5 % of satellite cells remain in Pax3 - expressing as well as Pax3 - negative muscles . The difference between Pax3 and - 7 is demonstrated by the flow cytometry experi - ments on satellite cells expressing dominant - negative con - structs . Pax3DN at high levels does have some effect on the viability of the satellite cells in which it is expressed , but Pax7DN is much more potent , suggesting that the antiapoptotic targets of these two Pax factors are different in postnatal muscle . In the embryo , muscle progenitor cells in the somite are lost in the absence of Pax3 , which is necessary for the survival of the hypaxial dermomyotome . Pax7 is not normally expressed in these cells , but can rescue this function ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) . The expression of a single Pax3 / 7 gene in the muscle progenitor cells present in the somites of the cephalochordate Amphioxus ( Holland et al . , 1999 ) also suggests that Pax3 and - 7 have similar functions in this embryonic context and that the dis - tinct antiapoptotic activity of Pax7 evolved during vertebrate radiation , perhaps in response to the requirements of postnatal muscle growth and regeneration . Members of the Pax gene family , which play key roles in the formation of other tissues ( Tremblay and Gruss , 1994 ; Chi and Epstein , 2002 ) , have been implicated in several functions discussed here for Pax3 and - 7 in the skeletal muscle context . In addition to affecting cell fate choices , roles in proliferation and cell survival have been described . Notably , in the latter context , cells that do not express Pax2 in the developing inner ear undergo apoptosis ( Li et al . , 2004 ) and apoptosis is seen in mesodermal cells , which would normally form the pronephros during kidney development , in the absence of Pax2 and - 8 , which are required for the emergence of the nephric cell lin - eage ( Bouchard et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , Pax2 has been shown to prevent apoptosis in renal cell cultures ( Torban et al . , 2000 ; Cai et al . , 2005 ) related to its function during later neph - rogenesis ( Porteous et al . , 2000 ) . In a screen of human cancer cell lines from a range of tissues , PAX gene expression was frequently observed , and repression of its expression led to ap - JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 100 optosis ( Muratovska et al . , 2003 ) . The antiapoptotic function of Pax7 , which we describe here in postnatal skeletal muscle , is therefore not unique to this Pax subgroup . A role for Pax pro - teins in assuring the survival of the progenitor cells in which they regulate cell fate determinants may be widespread . The fine - tuning of such an antiapoptotic function in progenitor cells in the adult may also be critical in regulating the maintenance of stem cell populations during tissue growth and regeneration . Materials and methods Mice Pax3 nLacZ / (cid:2) ( Relaix et al . , 2004 ) and Pax3 IRESnLacZ / (cid:2) ( Relaix et al . , 2003 ) mice were genotyped on the basis of the “ s plotch” phenotype ( Auerbach , 1954 ) . Pax7 LacZ / (cid:2) mice ( Mansouri et al . , 1996 ) were genotyped by PCR , using the following primers : DPax7Ex2A : CTTggCCAAggCCgggTCAAT - CAgCTTggTggg ; RLacZ3 : AAATTCAgACggCAAACgACTgTCCTggCC ; and RPax7Ex3C : gATggACCCAgTCTCCTgATATCggCACAg . The wild - type band was amplified using DPax7Ex2A / RPax7Ex3C ( 800 bp ) , whereas the mutated allele was amplified using DPax7Ex2A / RLacZ3 ( 500 bp ) . Cell culture Cells were prepared from muscle tissue of mice at different time points af - ter birth by enzymatic dissociation , as previously described ( Pinset and Montarras , 1998 ; Montarras et al . , 2000 ) . Cells were plated on gelatin - coated dishes in a 1 : 1 mixture ( vol / vol ) of Ham’s F12 and DME ( GIBCO BRL ) containing 20 % ( vol / vol ) fetal calf serum ( AbCys ) and 2 % ( vol / vol ) ultroser ( Biosepra ) . This medium , which supports both the proliferation and differentiation of muscle cells ( Montarras et al . , 2000 ) , was used in all ex - periments . To allow the formation of colonies of muscle cells , primary cul - tures were plated at a density of 100 and 200 cells / cm (cid:6) 2 . When plated under these conditions cultures were highly enriched in myogenic colo - nies . The number of mononucleated cells to be plated was determined by counting after labeling an aliquot with 5 (cid:7) g / ml of the DNA dye bis - benz - imide ( Hoeschst ) . Single fiber preparation and culture were performed according to Beauchamp et al . ( 2000 ) . Immunocytochemical analysis Cells were treated as previously described ( Montarras et al . , 2000 ) . In brief , after fixation with 4 % ( wt / vol ) paraformaldehyde and permeabilization with 0 . 2 % ( wt / vol ) Triton X - 100 , cells were incubated with antibodies diluted in PBS containing 0 . 2 % ( wt / vol ) gelatin . All incubations were at room temperature . For immunofluorescence , cells were mounted in mowiol ( Calbiochem ) after the staining of DNA with 5 (cid:7) g / ml bis - benzimide in the penultimate PBS wash . Antibodies used were as follows : Myf5 , rabbit polyclonal ( Lindon et al . , 2000 ) , at a 1 : 1 , 000 dilution ; MyoD , either a rabbit polyclonal ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution , or a mouse monoclonal ( clone 5 . 8A ; DAKO ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; troponin T , mouse monoclonal ( clone JLT12 , Sigma - Aldrich ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; desmin , mouse mono - clonal ( clone D33 ; DakoCytomation ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; laminin , rabbit polyclonal ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; M - cadherin , mouse mono - clonal ( clone 12G4 ; Nanotools GmBh ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; antiactive caspase - 3 , rabbit polyclonal ( BD Biosciences ) , at a 1 : 250 dilution ; cyclin A , a rabbit polyclonal ( gift from A . Fernandez and N . Lamb , Institut de Génétique Humaine , Montpellier , France ) , at a 1 : 200 dilution ; Ki67 , a mouse monoclonal ( BD Biosciences ) , at a 1 : 100 dilution ; Pax7 , mouse monoclonal ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) , at a 1 : 100 dilu - tion ; Pax3 , mouse monoclonal ( provided by M . Bronner - Fraser , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA ) , at a 1 : 100 dilution ; (cid:1) - gal , either rabbit polyclonal ( Invitrogen ) , at a 1 : 4 , 000 dilution in cell culture experi - ments , or another rabbit polyclonal used on sections ( provided by J . - F . Nicolas , Institut Pasteur , Paris , France ) , at a 1 : 500 dilution , or mouse mon - oclonal ( clone Gal13 ; DakoCytomation ) , at a 1 : 100 dilution . Secondary antibodies were coupled to a fluorochrome , either Alexa 488 or 594 ( In - vitrogen ) , at a 1 : 250 dilution . For X - Gal ( Roche ) staining , single fibers were fixed for 30 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , on ice . Fibers were rinsed twice with PBS , and then stained with X - Gal , using 0 . 4 mg / ml X - Gal in 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 02 % NP - 40 , 0 . 1 M PBS , pH 7 . 5 , 20 mM K 4 Fe ( CN ) 6 , and 20 mM K 3 Fe ( CN ) 6 for 4 – 16 h at 37 (cid:8) C , with shaking . Fibers were rinsed in PBS , postfixed overnight in 4 % paraformaldehyde , and mounted after washing in PBS - buffered mowiol with DAPI . Similar conditions were used for X - Gal staining of sections . X - Gal staining of cells was performed after a 5 - min fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde in the same solution used for fibers , but without NP - 40 . Images of cultured cells and sections were acquired using an Axio - phot or an Apotome equipped with an Axiocam camera and Axiovision software ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . ) . Neofluar lenses , 40 (cid:9) , NA 0 . 75 , and 20 (cid:9) , NA 0 . 50 , were used . Images were optimized globally for contrast and brightness and assembled using Photoshop CS software ( Adobe ) . Analysis of extracts by semiquantitative RT - PCR RNA extracts were prepared from tibialis anterior and diaphragm muscles of 8 - wk - old mice , using TRIzol ( Invitrogen ) . Reverse transcripts were gener - ated using Power Script reverse transcriptase ( BD Biosciences ) . The prim - ers for Pax3 were DPax3 - 740 ( TGCCCTCAGTGAGTTCTATCAGC ) and RPax3 - 1100 ( GCTAAACCAGACCTGCACTCGGGC ) , which generate a 360 - bp PCR fragment . The primers for Pax7 were Dpax7 - 140 ( TGG - AAGTGTCCACCCCTCTTGGC ) and RPax7 - 650 ( ATCCAGACGGTTC - CCTTTGTCGCC ) , which generate a 510 - bp PCR fragment . Three other primer pairs were used and gave similar results . PCR products were sepa - rated on 1 . 5 % agarose gels , using standard techniques , and revealed by UV light ( Image Master CVS ; GE Healthcare ) . Analysis of extracts by Western blotting Protein extracts were prepared and analyzed by Western blotting , as pre - viously described ( Lindon et al . , 2000 ) . The antitubulin antibody ( clone 5HI ; BD Biosciences ) was used at a 1 : 2 , 000 dilution and the Pax3 anti - body at a 1 : 400 dilution . Preparation of adenoviral vectors and cell infection Adenoviral vectors were generated using standard molecular biology techniques . In brief , dominant - negative Pax3 and - 7 constructs were made by fusing in - frame sequences encoding the D . melanogaster engrailed re - pression domain ( 298 amino acids ; Han and Manley , 1993 ) to the first 340 amino acids of murine Pax7 ( to generate the Pax7DN construct ) or the first 374 amino acids of Pax3 ( to generate the Pax3DN construct ) . Dominant - negative activity of Pax7DN and - 3DN was verified by cotrans - fection in 293 cells with a plasmid containing polymerized Pax3 / 7 bind - ing sites ( Epstein et al . , 1996 ) in front of a thymidine kinase ( Herpes virus ) minimal promoter followed by a LacZ reporter gene . Before their introduc - tion into the adenovector , Pax7DN and - 3DN were cloned into the Adtrack - CMV shuttle vector and recombinant adenoviruses with a GFP re - porter sequence were generated as described previously ( He et al . , 1996 ) . High - titer viral stocks were prepared by repeated infection into the packaging cell line 293T . Viruses were purified by CsCl banding followed by passage through a 2 . 5 - ml Sephadex G25 column ( GE Healthcare ) for desalting and stored in aliquots at (cid:6) 80 (cid:8) C . The titer of each preparation was determined after infection of 293 cells by limiting dilution of virus and detection of GFP expression . Primary cultures of muscle cells were infected 3 d after plating on 35 - mm dishes . The medium was removed , but a film of medium ( 0 . 3 ml ) was left to prevent drying and virus was added to each dish for 30 min at 37 (cid:8) C at a multiplicity of infection of 5 – 30 ( Results ) . 1 . 5 ml of medium was added to the cells that were analyzed 3 d later by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry . Flow cytometry Flow cytometric analysis and characterization of ( Pax3 ) GFP - positive cells present in skeletal muscles of adult Pax3 GFP / (cid:2) mice have permitted us to define parameters for isolating adult muscle progenitor cells both from Pax3 - expressing muscles ( e . g . , diaphragm ) and non - Pax3 – expressing muscles ( e . g . , lower hindlimb muscles ; Montarras et al . , 2005 ) . In the case of the latter , this was on the basis of the size and granularity of CD34 (cid:2) cells . GFP - positive muscle progenitor cells from diaphragm muscle and GFP - negative muscle progenitor cells from lower hindlimb muscles , isolated by flow cytometry , were maintained in culture for 6 d as prolifer - ating cells before a second flow cytometric analysis for detecting the pres - ence of GFP - positive cells . Flow cytometry analysis was performed with an LSR analyzer ( Becton Dickinson ) and cell sorting was performed with a Moflo ( Cytoma - tion , Inc . ) . Antibody against CD34 was a mouse monoclonal clone ( clone Ram [ 34 ] ; Becton Dickinson ) , coupled to biotin , and detected with strepta - vidin coupled to phycoerythrin . Cell death was measured by PI staining of PAX7 IS ESSENTIAL FOR MUSCLE SATELLITE CELL SURVIVAL • RELAIX ET AL . 101 adenovirus - infected cells , which were identified by GFP fluorescence . Cells were trypsinized and pooled with the culture supernatants before addition of 1 (cid:7) g / ml PI and flow cytometry . Each determination was from triplicate plates . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 presents an analysis of satellite cells present on single fibers iso - lated from the extensor digitorum longus hindlimb muscle of Pax7 (cid:2) / (cid:6) and Pax7 (cid:6) / (cid:6) mice at P10 . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200508044 / DC1 . We thank Catherine Bodin for excellent histology , M . Garcia for advice on fi - ber types , and M . Rudnicki for discussion . This work was supported by the Pasteur Institute , the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ( M . Buckingham and S . Tajbakhsh ) , and the Insti - tut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale ( INSERM ; A . Cumano ) , with additional grants from the Association Française contre les Myopathies ( M . Buckingham and D . Montarras ) , the “Cellules Souches” Grand Programme Horizontal of the Pasteur Institute ( M . Buckingham , A . Cumano , and S . Tajbakhsh ) , the “EuroStemCell” Integrated Project ( M . Buckingham , A . Cumano , and S . Tajbakhsh ) , and the Myogenic Research Network of Excellence ( M . Buckingham and S . Tajbakhsh ) of the European Union Sixth Framework Pro - gramme . F . Relaix is an INSERM fellow . B . Gayraud - Morel is supported by a fellowship from the Agency for Cancer Research . Submitted : 4 August 2005 Accepted : 23 November 2005 References Abrams , J . M . , and M . A . White . 2004 . Coordination of cell death and the cell cycle : linking proliferation to death through private and communal couplers . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 : 634 – 638 . Auerbach , R . 1954 . Analysis of the developmental effects of a lethal mutation in the house mouse . J . Exp . Zool . 127 : 305 – 329 . Beauchamp , J . R . , L . Heslop , D . S . Yu , S . Tajbakhsh , R . G . Kelly , A . Wernig , M . E . Buckingham , T . A . Partridge , and P . S . Zammit . 2000 . Expression of CD34 and Myf5 defines the majority of quiescent adult skeletal muscle satellite cells . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 1221 – 1234 . Ben - Yair , R . , and C . Kalcheim . 2005 . Lineage analysis of the avian dermomyo - tome sheet reveals the existence of single cells with both dermal and muscle progenitor fates . Development . 132 : 689 – 701 . Bischoff , R . , and C . Heintz . 1994 . Enhancement of skeletal muscle regeneration . Dev . Dyn . 201 : 41 – 54 . Bober , E . , T . Franz , H . H . Arnold , P . Gruss , and P . Tremblay . 1994 . Pax - 3 is required for the development of limb muscles : a possible role for the migration of dermomyotomal muscle progenitor cells . Development . 120 : 603 – 612 . Bouchard , M . , A . Souabni , M . Mandler , A . Neubuser , and M . Busslinger . 2002 . Nephric lineage specification by Pax2 and Pax8 . Genes Dev . 16 : 2958 – 2970 . Braun , T . , M . A . Rudnicki , H . H . Arnold , and R . Jaenisch . 1992 . Targeted inacti - vation of the muscle regulatory gene Myf - 5 results in abnormal rib de - velopment and perinatal death . Cell . 71 : 369 – 382 . Brohmann , H . , K . Jagla , and C . Birchmeier . 2000 . The role of Lbx1 in migration of muscle precursor cells . Development . 127 : 437 – 445 . Buchberger , A . , N . Nomokonova , and H . H . Arnold . 2003 . Myf5 expression in somites and limb buds of mouse embryos is controlled by two distinct distal enhancer activities . Development . 130 : 3297 – 3307 . Buckingham , M . , L . Bajard , T . Chang , P . Daubas , J . Hadchouel , S . Meilhac , D . Montarras , D . Rocancourt , and F . Relaix . 2003 . The formation of skele - tal muscle : from somite to limb . J . Anat . 202 : 59 – 68 . Cai , Q . , N . I . Dmitrieva , J . D . Ferraris , H . L . Brooks , B . W . van Balkom , and M . Burg . 2005 . Pax2 expression occurs in renal medullary epithelial cells in vivo and in cell culture , is osmoregulated , and promotes osmotic tolerance . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 503 – 508 . Chi , N . , and J . A . Epstein . 2002 . Getting your Pax straight : Pax proteins in de - velopment and disease . Trends Genet . 18 : 41 – 47 . Conboy , I . M . , and T . A . Rando . 2002 . The regulation of notch signaling controls satellite cell activation and cell fate determination in postnatal myogenesis . Dev . Cell . 3 : 397 – 409 . Cooper , R . N . , S . Tajbakhsh , V . Mouly , G . Cossu , M . Buckingham , and G . S . But - ler - Browne . 1999 . In vivo satellite cell activation via Myf5 and MyoD in regenerating mouse skeletal muscle . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 2895 – 2901 . Creuzet , S . , L . Lescaudron , Z . Li , and J . Fontaine - Perus . 1998 . MyoD , myogenin , and desmin - nls - lacZ transgene emphasize the distinct patterns of satellite cell activation in growth and regeneration . Exp . Cell Res . 243 : 241 – 253 . Epstein , J . A . , D . N . Shapiro , J . Cheng , P . Y . Lam , and R . L . Maas . 1996 . Pax3 mod - ulates expression of the c - Met receptor during limb muscle development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 93 : 4213 – 4218 . Franz , T . , R . Kothary , M . A . Surani , Z . Halata , and M . Grim . 1993 . The Splotch mutation interferes with muscle development in the limbs . Anat . Embryol . ( Berl . ) . 187 : 153 – 160 . Girard , F . , U . Strausfeld , A . Fernandez , and N . J . Lamb . 1991 . Cyclin A is re - quired for the onset of DNA replication in mammalian fibroblasts . Cell . 67 : 1169 – 1179 . Goulding , M . , A . Lumsden , and A . J . Paquette . 1994 . Regulation of Pax - 3 ex - pression in the dermomyotome and its role in muscle development . Development . 120 : 957 – 971 . Gros , J . , M . Manceau , V . Thome , and C . Marcelle . 2005 . A common somitic origin for embryonic muscle progenitors and satellite cells . Nature . 435 : 954 – 958 . Gross , M . K . , L . Moran - Rivard , T . Velasquez , M . N . Nakatsu , K . Jagla , and M . Goulding . 2000 . Lbx1 is required for muscle precursor migration along a lateral pathway into the limb . Development . 127 : 413 – 424 . Hadchouel , J . , J . J . Carvajal , P . Daubas , L . Bajard , T . Chang , D . Rocancourt , D . Cox , D . Summerbell , S . Tajbakhsh , P . W . Rigby , and M . Buckingham . 2003 . Analysis of a key regulatory region upstream of the Myf5 gene reveals multiple phases of myogenesis , orchestrated at each site by a combination of elements dispersed throughout the locus . Development . 130 : 3415 – 3426 . Han , K . , and J . L . Manley . 1993 . Functional domains of the Drosophila En - grailed protein . EMBO J . 12 : 2723 – 2733 . He , X . S . , M . Rivkina , and W . S . Robinson . 1996 . Construction of adenoviral and retroviral vectors coexpressing the genes encoding the hepatitis B sur - face antigen and B7 - 1 protein . Gene . 175 : 121 – 125 . Holland , L . Z . , M . Schubert , Z . Kozmik , and N . D . Holland . 1999 . AmphiPax3 / 7 , an amphioxus paired box gene : insights into chordate myogenesis , neu - rogenesis , and the possible evolutionary precursor of definitive verte - brate neural crest . Evol . Dev . 1 : 153 – 165 . Kassar - Duchossoy , L . , B . Gayraud - Morel , D . Gomes , D . Rocancourt , M . Buck - ingham , V . Shinin , and S . Tajbakhsh . 2004 . Mrf4 determines skeletal mus - cle identity in Myf5 : Myod double - mutant mice . Nature . 431 : 466 – 471 . Kassar - Duchossoy , L . , E . Giacone , B . Gayraud - Morel , A . Jory , D . Gomes , and S . Tajbakhsh . 2005 . Pax3 / Pax7 mark a novel population of primitive myogenic cells during development . Genes Dev . 19 : 1426 – 1431 . Kelly , A . M . , and N . A . Rubenstein . 1994 . The diversity of muscle fiber types and its origin during development . In Myology . Vol . I . 2nd edition . A . G . Engel and C . Franzini - Armstrong , editors . McGraw - Hill Inc . , New York . 119 – 133 . Li , H . , H . Liu , C . E . Corrales , H . Mutai , and S . Heller . 2004 . Correlation of Pax - 2 expression with cell proliferation in the developing chicken inner ear . J . Neurobiol . 60 : 61 – 70 . Lindon , C . , O . Albagli , P . Domeyne , D . Montarras , and C . Pinset . 2000 . Consti - tutive instability of muscle regulatory factor Myf5 is distinct from its mi - tosis - specific disappearance , which requires a D - box - like motif overlap - ping the basic domain . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 8923 – 8932 . Mankoo , B . S . , N . S . Collins , P . Ashby , E . Grigorieva , L . H . Pevny , A . Candia , C . V . Wright , P . W . Rigby , and V . Pachnis . 1999 . Mox2 is a component of the genetic hierarchy controlling limb muscle development . Nature . 400 : 69 – 73 . Mansouri , A . , A . Stoykova , M . Torres , and P . Gruss . 1996 . Dysgenesis of ceph - alic neural crest derivatives in Pax7 (cid:6) / (cid:6) mutant mice . Development . 122 : 831 – 838 . Matteucci , C . , S . Grelli , E . De Smaele , C . Fontana , and A . Mastino . 1999 . Iden - tification of nuclei from apoptotic , necrotic , and viable lymphoid cells by using multiparameter flow cytometry . Cytometry . 35 : 145 – 153 . Megeney , L . A . , B . Kablar , K . Garrett , J . E . Anderson , and M . A . Rudnicki . 1996 . MyoD is required for myogenic stem cell function in adult skeletal mus - cle . Genes Dev . 10 : 1173 – 1183 . Montarras , D . , C . Lindon , C . Pinset , and P . Domeyne . 2000 . Cultured myf5 null and myoD null muscle precursor cells display distinct growth defects . Biol . Cell . 92 : 565 – 572 . Montarras , D . , J . Morgan , C . Collins , F . Relaix , S . Zaffran , A . Cumano , T . Par - tridge , and M . Buckingham . 2005 . Direct isolation of satellite cells for skeletal muscle regeneration . Science . 309 : 2064 – 2067 . Muratovska , A . , C . Zhou , S . He , P . Goodyer , and M . R . Eccles . 2003 . Paired - Box genes are frequently expressed in cancer and often required for can - cer cell survival . Oncogene . 22 : 7989 – 7997 . Olguin , H . C . , and B . B . Olwin . 2004 . Pax - 7 up - regulation inhibits myogenesis and cell cycle progression in satellite cells : a potential mechanism for self - renewal . Dev . Biol . 275 : 375 – 388 . JCB • VOLUME 172 • NUMBER 1 • 2006 102 Oustanina , S . , G . Hause , and T . Braun . 2004 . Pax7 directs postnatal renewal and propagation of myogenic satellite cells but not their specification . EMBO J . 23 : 3430 – 3439 . Patel , T . , G . J . Gores , and S . H . Kaufmann . 1996 . The role of proteases during apoptosis . FASEB J . 10 : 587 – 597 . Peschiaroli , A . , R . Figliola , L . Coltella , A . Strom , A . Valentini , I . D’Agnano , and R . Maione . 2002 . MyoD induces apoptosis in the absence of RB function through a p21 ( WAF1 ) - dependent re - localization of cyclin / cdk complexes to the nucleus . Oncogene . 21 : 8114 – 8127 . Pinset , C . , and D . Montarras . 1998 . Cell systems for ex vivo studies of myogen - esis : A protocol for the isolation of stable muscle cell populations from newborn to adult mice . In Cell Biology : A Laboratory Handbook . Vol . 1 . J . E . Celis , editor . Academic Press , Inc . , Orlando , FL . 226 – 232 . Porteous , S . , E . Torban , N . P . Cho , H . Cunliffe , L . Chua , L . McNoe , T . Ward , C . Souza , P . Gus , R . Giugliani , et al . 2000 . Primary renal hypoplasia in hu - mans and mice with PAX2 mutations : evidence of increased apoptosis in fetal kidneys of Pax2 ( 1Neu ) (cid:2) / (cid:6) mutant mice . Hum . Mol . Genet . 9 : 1 – 11 . Relaix , F . , M . Polimeni , D . Rocancourt , C . Ponzetto , B . W . Schafer , and M . Buckingham . 2003 . The transcriptional activator PAX3 - FKHR rescues the defects of Pax3 mutant mice but induces a myogenic gain - of - func - tion phenotype with ligand - independent activation of Met signaling in vivo . Genes Dev . 17 : 2950 – 2965 . Relaix , F . , D . Rocancourt , A . Mansouri , and M . Buckingham . 2004 . Divergent functions of murine Pax3 and Pax7 in limb muscle development . Genes Dev . 18 : 1088 – 1105 . Relaix , F . , D . Rocancourt , A . Mansouri , and M . Buckingham . 2005 . A Pax3 / Pax7 - dependent population of skeletal muscle progenitor cells . Nature . 435 : 948 – 953 . Rudnicki , M . A . , T . Braun , S . Hinuma , and R . Jaenisch . 1992 . Inactivation of MyoD in mice leads to up - regulation of the myogenic HLH gene Myf - 5 and results in apparently normal muscle development . Cell . 71 : 383 – 390 . Schafer , K . , and T . Braun . 1999 . Early specification of limb muscle precursor cells by the homeobox gene Lbx1h . Nat . Genet . 23 : 213 – 216 . Scholzen , T . , and J . Gerdes . 2000 . The Ki - 67 protein : from the known and the unknown . J . Cell . Physiol . 182 : 311 – 322 . Seale , P . , L . A . Sabourin , A . Girgis - Gabardo , A . Mansouri , P . Gruss , and M . A . Rudnicki . 2000 . Pax7 is required for the specification of myogenic satel - lite cells . Cell . 102 : 777 – 786 . Tajbakhsh , S . , and M . Buckingham . 2000 . The birth of muscle progenitor cells in the mouse : spatiotemporal considerations . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 48 : 225 – 268 . Tajbakhsh , S . , D . Rocancourt , and M . Buckingham . 1996 . Muscle progenitor cells failing to respond to positional cues adopt non - myogenic fates in myf - 5 null mice . Nature . 384 : 266 – 270 . Tajbakhsh , S . , D . Rocancourt , G . Cossu , and M . Buckingham . 1997 . Redefining the genetic hierarchies controlling skeletal myogenesis : Pax - 3 and Myf - 5 act upstream of MyoD . Cell . 89 : 127 – 138 . Torban , E . , M . R . Eccles , J . Favor , and P . R . Goodyer . 2000 . PAX2 suppresses apoptosis in renal collecting duct cells . Am . J . Pathol . 157 : 833 – 842 . Tremblay , P . , and P . Gruss . 1994 . Pax : genes for mice and men . Pharmacol . Ther . 61 : 205 – 226 . Yablonka - Reuveni , Z . , and A . J . Rivera . 1994 . Temporal expression of regula - tory and structural muscle proteins during myogenesis of satellite cells on isolated adult rat fibers . Dev . Biol . 164 : 588 – 603 . Zammit , P . S . , J . P . Golding , Y . Nagata , V . Hudon , T . A . Partridge , and J . R . Beauchamp . 2004 . Muscle satellite cells adopt divergent fates : a mecha - nism for self - renewal ? J . Cell Biol . 166 : 347 – 357 .