Cellular Dimensions Affecting the Nucleocytoplasmic Volume Ratio Joel A . Swanson , Melinda Lee , and Philip E . Knapp Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 Abstract . Although it has long been appreciated that larger eukaryotic cells have larger nuclei , little is known about how this size relationship is maintained . Here we describe a method for measuring the aqueous vol - ume ratio of nucleus to cytoplasm , two compartments which are interconnected via the pores in the nuclear envelope . We then use that method to identify propor - tional cellular dimensions in variously treated cells and in different cell types . Cells were scrape loaded with a mixture of fluorescent dextrans : Texas red dextran , av - erage mol wt = 10 , 000 ( TRDx10 ) , and fluorescein isothiocyanate dextran , average mol wt = 70 , 000 ( FDx70 ) . After introduction into the cytoplasmic space , the TRDx10 distributed into both the nucleus and cytoplasm , whereas the FDx70 was restricted to cytoplasm , due to size exclusion by the nuclear pores . The aqueous nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio ( RN / c ) was determined by measuring , from fluores - cence images of spread cells , total cellular fluo - rescence of each of the two probes and the fluores - cence ratio of those probes in the cytoplasm . RN / c was long - appreciated but unexplained observation , is that nuclear size increases with cell size . Early ' cytolo - gists named this relationship the (cid:9) oPlasmic ratio ~ y or nucleocytoplasmic ratio ( 1 , 18 ) . For growing cells and some differentiated cells , there is evidence that cell volume is proportional to the amount of DNA in the nucleus ( 3 , 5 ) . Diploid cells are twice the size ofhaploid cells ( 18 ) , and spe - cies of amphibians with different C - values ( half the quantity of DNA in the haploid cell ) contain proportionally large or small erythrocytes ( 5 ) . However , because an individual or - ganism contains cells of many sizes , but contains for the most part no more than a fourfold variation of cellular DNA content , there should be other factors affecting the nucleo - cytoplasmic ratio besides the amount of DNA in the nucleus . An experiment by Prescott ( 12 ) indicated that nuclear size is subject to cellular regulation . By surgically removing a portion of cytoplasm from a giant ameba , thereby reducing cell size , he prevented cell division . Daily surgical opera - tions prevented cell division in one individual for 20 d , de - spite continued and measurable cell growth . When the sur - gery schedule was terminated , the ameba divided , indicating that when allowed to grow larger than a minimum size , the © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 91 / 11 / 941 / 8 $ 2 . 00 The Journal ofCell Biology , Volume 115 , Number4 , November 1991941 - 948 unaffected by the measurement procedure or by vary - ing temperatures between 23° and 37°C . Loading ex - cess unlabeled dextrans had little effect on RN / c , with the single exception that high concentrations of large dextrans could lower RN / c in endothelial cells . Expand ing intracellular membranous compartments of macro - phages by phagocytosis of latex beads decreased RN / c . Expanding the same compartment by pinocytosis of sucrose , which nearly doubled total cell volume , had little effect on RN / c , indicating that nuclear volume was more closely linked to the cytoplasmic volume , exclu - sive of vesicular organelles , than to total cell volume . RN / c was the same in mononucleate and binucleate en - dothelial cells . Finally , measurements of RN / c in mu - rine bone marrow - derived macrophages , bovine aortic endothelial cells , Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts , PtK2 cells , and CV - 1 cells revealed that nuclear volume scaled al - lometrically with cell volume . The allometric relation - ship indicated that cell volume was proportional to nu - clear surface area . cell could divide . Interestingly , Prescott observed that after each surgical reduction of cell size , there was an accompany - ing decrease in the volume ofthe nucleus . This indicates that the size of the nucleus can adjust to the size of the cell , and that the regulation ofthe nucleocytoplasmic ratio may be re - lated to a size - dependent regulation of cell division . The present work is an effort to identify the cellular dimen - sions critical to maintenance of the nucleocytoplasmic ratio . We first describe a method for measuring the aqueous nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio , which we define as the ratio of free water distribution between the nucleus and its contig - uous cytoplasmic space . The nuclear compartment is sepa - rated from the cytoplasm by the nuclear envelope , and that envelope helps to maintain the distinct identities ofthe com - partments . Pores in the envelope are large enough to allow free exchange of water , ions , and macromolecules of di - ameters < 45A ( 10 , 11 ) , and they are small enough to prohibit exchange of many larger macromolecules . Our method ex - ploits the size selectivity ofthe nuclear pores ; large , fluores - cein - labeled dextran molecules are loaded into the cytoplas - mic space and are excluded from the nucleus by the nuclear pores , whereas smaller , Texas red - labeled dextrans loaded 941 into the cytoplasm distribute into both nucleus and cyto - plasm . Analysis of fluorescence images from cells loaded with both probes yields the volume ratio of the two compart - ments . We report that the size of the nucleus is more closely related to cytoplasmic volume , exclusive of vesicular or - ganelles , than to total cell volume . Moreover , we identify a proportionality between cytoplasmic volume and the surface area of the nucleus . Materials and Methods Cells Bone marrow - derived macrophages were obtained from femurs ofC3H . He or ICR mice ( Trudeau Institute , Saranac Lake , NY ) , as described previ - ously ( 16 ) . Bone marrow exudate was cultured for 5 d in bone marrow growth medium ( BMM : DME plus 30 % L cell - conditioned medium plus 20 % heat - inactivated FBS ; 16 ) . For the study of actively growing macro - phages , day 5 cultures were resuspended from their culture dishes and replated onto 35 - mm Lab - tek culture dishes ( Nunc , Roskilde , Denmark ) at 106 cells per dish . They were then left in BMM overnight before analysis . Bovine aortic endothelial cells ( BAEC , provided by Dr . Paul McNeil , Harvard Medical School ; BAED , provided by Dr . Patricia DAmore , Har - vard Medical School ) , Swiss 3173 fibroblasts , CV - 1 cells ( obtained from Dr . David Knipe , Harvard Medical School ) , and PtK2 cells ( obtained from Dr . Paul McNeil ) were cultured in DME plus 10 % heat - inactivated FCS ( DM10F ) . Fluorescent Labeling Procedures Fluorescent dextrans were introduced into the cytoplasm of fibroblasts by scrapeloading ( 9 ) or bead loading ( 8 ) . Amixture of3 . 5 mg / ml Texas red - la - beled dextran , average mol wt = 10 , 000 ( TRDx10 ; Molecular Probes Inc . , Junction City , OR ) ' plus 3 . 5 mg / ml FITC - labeled dextran , average mol wt = 70 , 000 ( FDr70 ; Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was prepared in PBS ( 137 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCI , 7 mM phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 ) . Macro - phages in culture dishes were rinsed twice with PBS at 37°C , and then PBS was removed and 50 - 6014 of dextran solution was added to the dish . Cells were scraped offthe dish with a rubber policeman , and then warm medium was added to the dish . These scrape - loaded cells were plated into wells of culture dishes containing No . 1 coverslips ( 12 - mm diameter ) . After 10 min at 37°C , medium was changed , thereby lowering the extracellular dextran concentration , and cultures were leftfor another 1 - 3 h in fresh medium ( 5 % C02 , 37°C ) . Endothelial cells , fibroblasts , PtK2 cells , and CV - 1 cells on coverslips were loaded with dextrans by bead loading ( 8 ) , in which 150 - 200 - / Am - di - ameterglass beads are dropped onto cells on coverslips , thereby loading ex - tracellular macromolecules ( dextrans ) into continually attached cells . After bead loading , coverslips were rinsed in warm PBS to remove the glass beads , and then they were placed into culture medium for 1 - 2 h before mi - croscopic analysis . For microscopic analysis , coverslips were rinsed in PBS with added diva - lent cations ( 137 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCI , 0 . 5 MM M9C12 , 1 mM CaC12 , 7 mM phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 4 ) ; then they were mounted on glass slides to form chambers of PBS sealed with valap , as described previously ( 15 ) . The loading methods produced very little labeling of intracellular vesicles , ei - ther by endocytosis or sequestration of fluorescent dextrans ( data not shown ) . Occasional preparations which displayed punctate intracellular fluorescence were rejected . Cell Volume Alteration andMeasurement Macrophage size was increased either by phagocytosis oflatex beads or by vacuolation . Macrophages were scrape loaded with fluorescent dextrans and plated onto coverslips . During the next 2 h , several coverslip cultures were incubated in 0 . 5 ml of medium containing 7 - pm - diameter latex beads ( Duke ScientificCorp . , Palo Alto , CA ) at 8 x 10 , beads / ml . Macrophages with varying numbers ofphagocytosed beads were then identified in an in - verted microscope . Images were collected only from cells in which all phagocytosed beads were in one plane of focus . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : FDx70 , fluorescein isothiocyanate dex - tran , avg . mol wt = 70 , 000 ; RN / c , aqueous nucleocytoplasmic volume ra - tio ; TRDx10 , Texas red dextran , avg . mol wt = 10 , 000 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 115 , 1991 To vacuolate cells , macrophage cultures were incubated overnight in medium containing 20 mg / ml sucrose . After vacuolation by pinocytosis of sucrose , macrophages were scrape loaded with fluorescent dextrans , plated ontocoverslips , and incubated another 2 h in medium with sucrose . Control populations were treated over the same period with medium lacking beads or sucrose . Cell volumes weremeasured in living , resuspended cells using an ocular micrometer on the light microscope . Cells were resuspended from culture dishes either by chilling them in cold PBS ( macrophages ) or by trypsiniza - tion . Diameters of 81 spherical cells were measured , and the total volume of each cell was calculated ( VT = 4arl / 3 ) before determining the mean volume , SD , and SEM . Image Collection andAnalysis Determination ofthe nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio first required that we obtain two digitized video images from each scrape - loaded cell . Cells on coverslips were observed using an inverted microscope ( model IM - 35 , Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thomwood , NY ) equipped for epillumination of fluorescent specimens . Light from a tungsten lamp passed through either a fluorescein or a rhodamine filter set and a 40 x water - immersion objective lens ( NA 0 . 75 ) . Fluorescence images were collected using a multichannel plate in - tensifier coupled to a nuvicon video camera ( Video Scope International , Ltd . , Washington , DC . ) . Video signals were collected and processed using a Tracor Northern TN 8500 image analysis system ( Noran Instruments Inc . , Middleton , WI ) . Each video image was stored in digitized form as the Kalman average of 50 video frames . Labeled , well - spread cells were identified using the fluorescein filter set . The cell was then viewed through the video monitor using the rhodamine filter setto adjust illumination intensity and cell posi - tion on the screen . For each cell , four images were collected : ( a ) after ad - justing the Texas red fluorescence image , the stage was adjusted to a nearby cell - free region of coverslip to collect a background image ( BACKTR ) ; ( b ) the cell was again positioned in the center of the screen and the image of the cellular Texas red fluorescence was collected ( CELLTR ) ; ( c ) without moving the stage , the filters were changed , the intensifier gain was adjusted , and then the cellular fluorescein image was collected ( CELLF ) ; and ( d ) the stage was again moved to a cell - free region to collect a background image for the fluorescein filter set ( BACKF ) . Background - subtracted images were then created by digital image processing : the Texas red background - sub - tracted image ( SUBTTR ) = CELLTR - BACKTR and the fluorescein back - ground - subtracted image ( SUBTF ) = CELLF - BACKF . The background - subtracted images were stored for subsequent analysis . Measurement ofthe nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio requiredthat weob - tain four values from the background - subtracted images ofeach cell . These were the total Texas red fluorescence in the cell ( TRT ) , the total fluores - cein fluorescence ( FT ) , the Texas red fluorescence from a region of cyto - plasm not overlying the nucleus ( TRci ) , and the fluorescein fluorescence from that same region of cytoplasm ( Fc , ) . As shown in Fig . 1 , the method for obtaining these values was to prepare two binary images ( BI and B3 ) which could be applied to the grey images SUBTTR ( 11 ) and SUBTF ( 12 ) for selective quantitation of the cellular fluorescence . ( step 1 ) To create a binary mask for measuring total fluorescence ( TRT and FT ) , SUBTTR ( II ) was used to generate a binary image ofthe cell ( stored in BI ) by including all regions of Il with grey value greater than 10 ( scale , 0 - 255 ) . This binary image was then edited such that the portion ofthe binary overlying the cell was the only positive area of the binary ( i . e . , the fluorescence of other cells on the screen was masked out ) . Next , we created the binary image used to measure cytoplasmic fluores - cence ( TRci and Fci ) ( Fig . 1 , steps 2 - 5 ) . ( step 2 ) The two background - subtracted images SUBTTR ( II ) and SUBTF ( 12 ) were used to generate , pixel by pixel , a third image ( 13 ) , which represented the fluorescence ratio TR / F ( 13 = WI2 ) . ( step 3 ) The binary generated in step one , Bl , was ap - plied as a mask to theratio image ( 13 ) to create a second edited ratio image ( 14 ) in which the cell defined by the binary was the only grey area on the screen ; all other regions of the screen were assigned a grey value of zero . ( step 4 ) The second ratio image ( 14 ) displayed the cytoplasm as a uniform grey , and the region over the nucleus as brightergrey , indicating the higher TR / F values in that region . This difference in brightness was used to gener - ate abinary , B2 , which identified the nucleus . ( step 5 ) Thebinary generated by the cell fluorescence ( BI ) was combined with the binary defining the nu - clear region ( B2 ) to form a third binary image ( B3 ) , which marked regions of the cell which were exclusively cytoplasmic . ( step 6 ) The background - subtracted images Il and 12 were analyzed using the binaries Bl and B3 to obtain the fluorescence intensities TRT , FT , TRH , , and Fcr , shown diagra - matically in Fig . 2 . For example , TRT was obtained by determining the av - 942 Figure 1 . The method for obtaining nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio data . The boxes show digitized video images ( 11 - 14 ) or binary images ( BI - B3 ) of asingle macrophage scrape loaded with TRDx10 ( II ) and FDx70 ( 12 ) . The steps summarized here are described in more detail in Methods . ( a ) Generate binary image ( BI ) from background - subtracted TRDx10 image ( fl ) . ( b ) Generate ratio image ( 13 ) by dividing the TRDx10 image ( 11 ) by the FDx70 image ( 12 ) . ( c ) Apply the binary BI as amask to the ratio image73 to obtain a second ratio image ( I4 ) without background noise . ( d ) Generate binary of the nucleus ( B2 ) using the ratio image I4 . ( e ) Generate abinary of the cytoplasm ( B3 ) by subtracting the nuclear binary ( 82 ) from the total binary ( BI ) . ( f ) Integrate fluorescence ofII and12 using the binaries B1 and B3 as masks . eragepixel value for all pixels in 11 underlying the cell mask in BI , and then multiplying this average by the total number of pixels in that binary mask . Applying the binary B3 to that same image yielded TRcl , the Texas red fluorescence for that selected region of cytoplasm . Confocal Microscopy Macrophages were scrape loaded with TRDx10 and FDx70 , each at 10 mg / ml . Cells were observed and photographed using a laser scanning con - focal system ( MRC 500 , Bio - Rad Laboratories , Richmond , CA ) , attached toan Axiophotmicroscope ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) . The objective lens was a63x Plan Apo ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) . Confocal images were collected both as stan - dard X - Y images and as X - Z images , which essentially provided side - view sections of the loaded cells . Measurement ofCellular DNA Content Cellular DNA was quantified using a fluorescence assay ( 6 ) . Growing cul - tures of cells were suspended by trypsinization and counted using a hemocytometer . Known numbers ofcells were lysed by freezing and thaw - ing , and the DNA content of the lysates was determined by measuring the DNA - dependent increase in fluorescence of 100 ng / ml 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole in solutions containing 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Fluorescence was measured using a spectrofluorometer ( Aminco 500c , SLM Instruments , Inc . , Urbana , IL ) set at excitation 360 run , emission 450andband width of5 run . Calf thymus DNA was used to generate a DNA standard curve . Swanson et al . The Nucleocytoplasmic Volume Ratio Results Rationalefor the Method ofMeasurement Fig . 2 shows the TRDx10 and FDx70 distribution inside a macrophage after scrape loading , displayed as an X - Z series ( side views ) from a laser scanning confocal microscope . TRDx10 occupies both nucleus and cytoplasm , and FDx70 is excluded from the nucleus . These images are presented again in Fig . 2 , C - F to diagram the fluorescence data ob - tained by image processing . RN / c was obtained from the Texas red and fluorescein im - ages by measuring total cellular fluorescence for each probe and the concentration ratio ofthose probes in the cytoplasm . To explain the concept , we first consider a cell with no nu - cleus which is labeled with TRDx10 and FDx70 . The two probes would have identical distribution throughout the cell . The ratio of total cellular Texas red fluorescence to total fluorescein fluorescence would be identical to the ratio of Texas red to fluorescein fluorescence measured in any sub - section of the cell . Any size sampling area , from one pixel up to the whole cytoplasm , would report the same fluores - cence ratio . However , the presence of a nucleus restricts 943 FDx70 to cytoplasm because of its selective permeability to the dextrans . Consequently , the ratio of total cellular TRDx10 to FDx70 fluorescence will be higher than the ratio obtained in cytoplasmic regions . These ratios can be used to calculate Rc , the ratio of the cytoplasmic volume ( Vc ) to the nuclear - plus - cytoplasmic volume ( V ( N + c ) ) , and from this ratio one can obtain the aqueous volume ratio of nucleus to cytoplasm , VN / VC or RN / C . It should be emphasized that al - A 300 100 aoo . 200 Q 10 o Figure 3 . Theeffectsofrepeated measurements or of tempera - 5 o (cid:9) lure on R N , c in macrophages . TIME ( min . ) (cid:9) ( A ) Background - subtracted im - ages from each of six cells were collected at 5 - min inter - vals ; R N , C was calculatedlater . No trends in R N , c are evident . ( B ) R N , c was measured incells held 15 - 30 min at each tem - perature shown . Data are the 2 , 3 (cid:9) io (cid:9) (cid:9) mean and SEM ; n = 18 ( 23° ) , TEMPERATUREM ) (cid:9) 19 ( 30° ) , and 27 ( 37°C ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 115 , 1991 though our methods measured the fluorescence from as much of the cytoplasm as possible , it was not necessary to do this . It was only necessary to measure some portion of the cytoplasm that does not overlie the nucleus . The total cell fluorescence intensities of Texas Red and of 944 LOADED INTO CELLS Figure 2 . X - Z images ofamac - rophage scrape loaded with FDrt10 and TRDx10 ( 10 mg / ml each ) . ( A ) TRDx10 labels both the cytoplasmic and the nuclear compartments , where - as FDx70 ( B ) is restricted to the cytoplasm . ( C - F ) The same images redrawn to dem - onstrate the regions of the cell sampled by image analysis , displayed as a side view ofthe cell for illustration . TRT ( C ) and FT ( D ) are total Texas red and fluorescein fluores - cence , respectively . TRc , ( E ) and Fc , ( F ) are the integrated fluorescence from a region of the image that is exclusively cytoplasmic . CONCENTRATION OF UNLABELED DEXTRAN Figure 4 . RN , c in macrophages ( M ) and endothelial cells ( E ) loaded with excess unlabeled dextrans . All cells were loaded with 3 . 5 mg / ml FDx70 and 3 . 5 mg / ml TRDxl0 . In addition , loading so - lutions contained 0 , 25 , 50 or 75 mg / ml Dx10 or D : 70 . Final intra - cellular dextran concentrations are not known . fluorescein , respectively , were obtained from the back - ground - subtracted images SUBTTR and SUBTF as described in Materials and Methods ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . These values are described by the following equations : TRT = kTR ' [ TRDx10 ] ' VIN + c > and (cid:9) ( 1 ) FT = kF [ FDx70 ] - Vc , (cid:9) ( 2 ) where kTR and kF are constants describing the fluorescence yield of the fluorophores and the various amplification parameters of the electronics , and where [ TRDx10 ] and [ FDx70 ] are the intracellular concentrations ofTRDx10 and FDx70 , respectively . Similar equations can be written to de - scribe TRc , and Fc , , which represent the Texas red and fluorescein fluorescence from a selected volume of cyto - plasm , Vc , : Substituting into Eqs . 1 and 2 the expressions for kTR Reliability of the Measured Values Swanson et al . The Nucleocytoplasmic Volume Ratio Therefore , by obtaining the measured values TRT , FT , TRc , , and Fc , one can calculate the volume ratio VN / Vc , or RN , c . Once the method was devised , it was necessary to examine both the natural and the experimental variation . In one ex - perimental scheme , RN , c was measured in the same cell three times , once every 5 min . Fig . 3 A shows the measured values for each of six macrophages , with connecting lines showing the related points . These measurements showed no trend , upward or downward , in the RN , c values , indicating that the method ofcollecting data did not appear to alter the measured ratios . In a larger sample ofmacrophages in which each cell was measured once , the mean R , , , c was 0 . 179 , with a standard deviation of0 . 034 ( n = 22 , _ SEM = 0 . 007 ) . As shown below , these values were different from those mea - sured for other cell types . The observation that the volume ratio remained constant throughout successive measurements indicated that fluores - cence photobleaching , a process that affects fluorescein dex - tran more than it does Texas red dextran , was not altering the measured ratios . Since the method is ratiometic , it corrects for differences in the absolute fluorescence intensities of the two fluorophores . Moreover , the ratiometric images indi - cated that the ratio TR / F was nearly uniform throughout cy - toplasmic regions . A small increase in the ratio was detect - able at the edges of the thinnest margins of well - spread cells ( Fig . 1 I4 ) . We presume that this was due to fluorescein pho - tobleaching and slower diffusion of FDx70 , since this always appeared as an increase in the fluorescence ratio regardless of the concentration ratio of fluorophores loaded into cells ( data not shown ) . This potential artifact was corrected by the method of integrating the fluorescence from as much of the cytoplasm as possible ( Fig . 1 B3 ) . Macrophages were measured at different temperatures by mounting coverslips with scrape - loaded cells into Sykes - Moore chambers , putting these chambers into a tempera - ture - controlled stage , and collecting ratio images . Incuba - tion of cells at 23° , 30° , or 37°C for 15 - 30 min had no measurable effect on Rwc ( Fig . 3 B ) . All subsequent mea - surements were made at room temperature ( 23°C ) . It was possible that the fluorescent dextrans , loaded into the cells at 3 . 5 mg / ml each , were themselves altering the true nucleocytoplasmic volume ratio . To examine this possibility we loaded cells with TRDx10 and FDx70 , each at 3 . 5 mg / ml , plus an excess ofunlabeled dextran . Fig . 4 shows that in mac - rophages , scrape loading an excess dextran ofup to 75 mg / ml had little if any effect on RNic . In endothelial cells , which exhibit higher RN , c values , unlabeled DxIO had little effect on RN / C , but high concentrations of unlabeled WO lowered the measured ratios significantly . The mechanism of this effect is not clear , although the observation might be ex - plained by osmotic effects of the larger dextran in the cyto - plasm essentially drawing water from the nucleus into the cytoplasm . Nonetheless , the effect of WO is slight enough that one would not expect the true ratio to be altered by the 3 . 5 mg / ml FDx70 used to make the measurements . The Relationship ofRN , c to Other Cellular Dimensions There is no reason to think that ifcells regulate the nucleocy - toplasmic ratio they do so by measuring a volume ratio . They could regulate ratios other than nuclear to cytoplasmic vol - ume , such as nuclear volume to total cell volume , or nuclear surface area to total cell surface area . We therefore per - formed experiments to determine which dimensions cells hold most directly proportional , i . e . , which dimensions are isometric . The space labeled by fluorescent dextran does not include thevolumeoccupied by membranous organelles . In mostcir - cumstances membranous organelles are collapsed and oc - cupy a small percentage of the total cell volume ( 14 ) , but they can be enlarged via endocytosis to increase total cell volume . We measured R , , / , in macrophages whose volume had been increased either through phagocytosis or pinocyto - sis . Macrophages were scrape loaded with fluorescent dex - trans and allowed to phagocytose 7 - 4m - diameter latex beads before measurement of RN / C . The accumulated data from three sets of experiments ( Fig . 5 ) indicated that as the endo - cytic compartment was expanded with increasing numbers of beads per cell , RNic decreased . Linear regression of the data indicated a weak relationship between RN , c and the number of beads per cell ( slope = - 0 . 0062 ; b = 0 . 180 ; Rz 945 [ TRDx10 ] ( Eq . 5 ) and kF [ FDx70 ] ( Eq . 6 ) obtains TRT TRc , TRT - Vc ~ = or = V ( N + c ) and ( 7 ) Vc ' V ( N + c T & FT Fc , FT ' Vci T = or = V ( 8 ) Vc ' Vc Fc Then combining Eqs . 7 and 8 yields Rc VC FT - TRc - _ - _ . ( 9 ) V ( N + c > Fc , * TRT RN + c is obtained by - - RNic 1 Rc TRTFc , TRc , - FT = ( 10 ) Rc TRc , - FT TRc , = kTR - [ TRDx10 ] - Vc , and ( 3 ) Fc , = kF [ FDx70 ] - Vc , . ( 4 ) Rearranging Eqs . 3 and 4 yields TRc , = k TR [ TRDxl0 ] and ( 5 ) Vc Fc , = kF [ FDx70 ] . ( 6 ) Vc Figure S . The effect of phagocytosis on RNIc in macrophages . Scrape loaded cells were allowed to phagocytose 7 - , m diameter la - tex beads before measurement of RN , c . All data points from three sets ofexperiments are shown ( n = 87 ) . The dashed line represents the linear regression of the data . In addition , R NIc values are shown for clusters at 0 , 1 - 3 , 4 - 5 , and 6 - 8 beads per cell . The cellu - lar condition is shown in the drawings , with stippled regions indi - cating the distribution of FDx70 . = 0 . 39 ; n = 87 ) , but comparison of the unfed cells with those containing six to eight beads showed a significant difference ( P < 0 . 001 ) in RN / C . This indicated that expand - ing the vacuolar compartment , which probably increased to - tal cell volume , actually decreased the volume ratio of nu - cleus to cytoplasmic space . Another way to enlarge the endocytic vacuolar compart - ment of macrophages is to allow extensive pinocytosis of su - crose . Sucrose accumulates undegraded in macrophage lyso - somes , eventually expanding that compartment into many phase - bright vacuoles ( 4 , 17 ) . We compared RN , C in normal and sucrose - vacuolated macrophages . Macrophages accu - mulated abundant sucrose vacuoles , yet they exhibited no significant difference in R wc ( P > 0 . 25 ) . We measured the total cell volume in populations of sucrose - vacuolated mac - Figure 6 . Macrophages vacu - olated by pinocytosis of suc - rose increase their total vol - ume nearly twofold , with only a slight decrease in RN / c . To determine RN , C , cells were in - cubated overnight in medium containing 20 mg / ml sucrose and then were scrape loaded and measured ; measurements were taken for control cells n = 22 and forvacuolated cells n = 28 . To determine cell volumes , control ( * ) or sucrose - vacuolated ( o ) macrophages were resuspended from their dishes by chilling , then the diameters of these rounded cells were measured using an ocular micrometer . Total cell volume was calculated for each cell before determining mean and SEM ; forboth sets ofmeasurements n = 83 . The drawings of cells indicate the condition of the nearby points ; stippling indicates the distribution of FDx70 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 115 , 1991 Table L Rrv c in Mononucleate and Binucleate Endothelial Cells rophages and untreated controls and found that vacuolation nearly doubled cell volume ( Fig . 6 ) . This , together with the measured RN , C values after phagocytosis ( Fig . 5 ) , indicated that the volume of the nucleus was not held proportional to total cell volume ( cytoplasmic volume plus included or - ganelles ) , but rather was more closely linked to cytoplasmic volume ( V c ) or to nuclear - plus - cytoplasmic volume ( V ( N + C ) ) . Cultures of bovine aortic endothelial cells often contain binucleate cells , the frequency of which we found could be increased by brief incubation of cultures ( - 30 min ) at room temperature . This cooling was done at various times before bead loading . We measured mononucleate and binucleate endothelial cells and found an insignificant difference in RNIC ( Table I ; P > 0 . 30 ) . This comparison supports many previous observations which indicate that cytoplasmic vol - ume is proportional to the total size of the nuclear compart - ment ( 3 , 13 ) . It is also consistent with the proportionality we ~ 2 . 200 946 400 - . 300 - . 100 - 0 CELL VOLUME ( NO ) T 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 Figure 7 . R NI c is higher in larger cells . RN , c was measured in well - spread macrophages ( * ; n = 22 ; same data as in Fig . 6 ) , endo - thelial cells , BAEC ( r n = 74 ) , or BAED ( o ; n = 81 ) ; CV - 1 cells ( 0 ) ; n = 49 ) ; PtK Z cells ( o ; n = 25 ) , and fibroblasts ( A ; n = 30 ) . The left - hand edge ofthe plot shows the mean and SEM . Volumes were measured as in Fig . 6 . Data are the mean and SEM , where n = 83 ( macrophages ) or 81 ( all other cell types ) . The solid line indicates the regression analysis of the data ( VN + Q = 44 . 2 VN65 ) . The dashed lines indicate the curves which would be obtained if ( a ) cell volume were proportional to nuclear diameter ( VN + c > « VN ' 13 ) , ( b ) cell volume were proportional to nuclear surface area W ( N + Q °C VN2 ' 3 ) or ( c ) cell volume were proportional to nuclear volume ( V ( N + c ) oc VN ) . Curves a - c all originate from the point de - termined for macrophages . RNrc Mononucleate Binucleate x 0 . 194 0 . 179 SD 0 . 055 0 . 045 SEM 0 . 013 0 . 010 n 18 20 Table II . DNA Content of Cultured Cells Discussion Swanson et al . The Nucleocytoplasmic Volume Ratio observed between cytoplasmic volume and nuclear surface area ( see below ) . The aqueous RN , C was different in different cell types ; in general RN , C was greater in larger cells . Fig . 7 shows the calculated cell volumes ( t SEM ) for macrophages , PtK 2 cells , CV - 1 cells , 3T3 fibroblasts , and two isolates ofbovine aortic endothelial cells , obtained by measuring diameters of spherical cells following resuspension . The six cell types comprise distinct groupings of total cell volume . RN / C in these cells , obtained in separate experiments , are shown as well . The plot RNic vs . cell volume ( Fig . 7 ) shows that larger cells have disproportionately larger nuclei . That is , the relationship between nuclear volume and total volume is allometric . Further analysis of these data revealed more about the al - lometric relation . Using R & and the measured cell volume for each cell type , and assuming that the measured cell vol - ume in these nonvacuolated cells was not significantly greater than the nuclear - plus - cytoplasmic volume ( i . e . , V T V ( N + C ) , we calculated the mean nuclear volumes ( V N = V ( N + C ) [ 1 - Rj ) . We then applied the data to the equation V ( N + c ) = aVN° , (cid:9) ( 11 ) and determined that a = 44 . 2 and b = 0 . 653 ( R2 = 0 . 99 ) . The dashed lines in Fig . 7 show the plots that would be ob - tained if cell volume were proportional to nuclear diameter ( line a ) , nuclear surface area ( line b ) or nuclear volume ( line c ) , originating from the point determined for macrophages . The solid line shows the curve determined by the linear regression analysis ( V ( N + C ) = 44 . 2 VN61 ) . The similarity of this curve to line b indicates that cytoplasmic - plus - nuclear volume scales isometrically with nuclear surface area . We measured cellular DNA for five ofthese cell types and found that , in general , cell types with higher RN , c contained more DNA per cell ( Table II ) . The higher values of DNA per cell obtained in CV1 , PtK 2 and Swiss 3T3 cells is most likely due to aneuploidy occurring after prolonged culture . The low correlation coefficient between Rwc and DNA per cell ( R2 = 0 . 80 ) did not warrant further analysis . This method for measuring the RN / c should be applicable to a variety of cultured cells . It measures RN , c best in cells which are readily loaded with fluorescent dextrans and which spread well , or remain spread after loading . The method requires that one fluorophore has access to both nu - cleus and cytoplasm , and that the other is restricted to cytoplasm . The probes must also be freely diffusible in cytoplasm , with no binding to cytoplasmic or nuclear com - ponents . Fluorescent dextrans satisfy these criteria ( 7 , 10 , 11 ) . It remains possible , however , that there are weak inter - actions betweendextrans and cytoplasmic or nuclear compo - nents , and these could introduce some bias into the measure - ments . Having characterized the method of measuring RN , c we can ask experimentally how this ratio is regulated . A first step , taken here , is to ask how the dimensions of different compartments scale with one another . Two compartments can be said to scale isometrically if , over a range of sizes , the dimensions of one are directly proportional to the other . To put this another way , if one dimension is y and the other is x , their relationship can be expressed as y = axb . If x and y scale isometrically , then b = 1 . Ifx and y vary dispropor - tionately , b may be some number other than one , and the relationship is called allometric . Ifvariation ofx has no effect on y , then b = 0 and y = a , a constant value unrelated to x . If nuclear volume scaled isometrically with total cell vol - ume ( i . e . , nucleus plus cytoplasm plus included organelles ) , then enlargement oftotal cell volume , either through phago - cytosis ofbeads or vacuolation with sucrose , should have in - creased nuclear volume , and R N / c , substantially . The mea - sured total cell volume of the macrophages , 1493 jtm3 , is equivalent to that of 8 - 9 7 - ym diameter latex beads . There - fore , phagocytosis ofeight beads should have nearly doubled cell volume , and , if nuclear volume scales isometrically with total cell volume , should have increased RN / C - Similarly , vacuolation with sucrose , which increased cell volume nearly twofold , should also have increased RN / C - Since R N + c decreased after phagocytosis and changed very little in vacuolated cells , we conclude that nuclear volume is not iso - metric with total cell volume . Because we do not know if or how much nuclear - plus - cytoplasmic volume changes after vacuolar expansion , ei - ther with sucrose or latex beads , we cannot refine this con - clusion . We can say that nuclear volume does not scale with total cell volume , and that the more likely relationship is be - tween nuclear and cytoplasmic volume or between nuclear volume and nuclear - plus - cytoplasmic volume . However , we cannot yet determine that it is one of these two alternatives . In visualizing mechanisms for monitoring cell dimensions , it is easier to imagine ones that monitor the sizes of the nu - clear and cytoplasmic spaces , as these represent contiguous and communicating compartments . The decrease in RN , c af - ter phagocytosis of beads indicates that something else is in - volved , perhaps a relationship between RN , c and cell shape . The plot of RN / C vs . cell volume in six cell types ( Fig . 7 ) indicated an allometric relationship between cell size and nu - clear size . The fact that RN , c increased with increasing cell volume suggested that some lower order dimension ofthe nu - cleus , e . g . , diameter or surface area , scales isometrically with cell volume . Certainly nuclear volume and total volume are not isometric . When we calculated nuclear volume from our data and examined its relationship to total cell volume , the correlation between nuclear surface area and total cell volume appeared . Our essential conclusions are demonstrated by Figs . 6 and 7 . If cell volume is increased by expanding the vacuolar com - partment ( Fig . 6 ) , then RN , c - the volume ratio of nucleus to cytoplasm - does not change . In contrast , if cell volume is increased by increasing the cytoplasmic volume , which could be done by comparing different kinds ofcells ( Fig . 7 ) , then RN , c increases allometrically and indicates a propor - 947 Cell type RN / C DNA per cell P8 Macrophage 0 . 179 f 0 . 007 8 . 6 t 0 . 6 BAED 0 . 209 t 0 . 006 4 . 9 f 0 . 9 PtK2 0 . 272 t 0 . 010 15 . 4 f 1 . 2 Fibroblasts 0 . 306 f 0 . 011 13 . 8 t 0 . 6 CV - 1 0 . 318 t 0 . 011 13 . 7 f 0 . 5 tionality between nuclear surface area and cytoplasmic vol - ume or total cell volume . Doubling the number of nuclei per cell did not alter RN , c significantly ( Table I ) . This result appears inconsistent with the hypothesis that cell volume scales isometrically with nu - clear surface area : the larger binucleate cells should have higher RN , C values . The discrepancy may be explained by the way that the nuclear compartment has been enlarged . If the total nuclear surface area is increased by enlarging a sin - gle , spherical nucleus , then nuclear volume will increase as the 3 / 2 power of the surface area . However , if the total nu - clear surface area is increased by doubling nuclear number , then nuclear volume will simply double as well . Therefore , regardless ofwhich nuclear dimension is isometric with cell volume , increasing nuclear number should not change RN , C - Nonetheless , the constancy of RN , c in mononucleate and binucleate cells lends weight to the proposal that the nucleocytoplasmic ratio is a regulated proportionality . We have observed in preliminary experiments that RN , c decreases when cells differentiate and stop dividing , which suggests that the relationships we have observed pertain mostly to growing and dividing cells . A mechanism that maintains in growing cells an isometric relationship between nuclear surface area and cell volume would limit the possible range of cell sizes . Over a wide range of sizes , eukaryotic cell size scales isometrically with the amount of DNA in the cell ( 2 , 3 , 5 ) . Diploid cells are twice the size of haploid cells , and mul - tinucleate cells have proportionally large cell volumes . We measured the quantity of DNA in the various cell types and found that the larger cells , with their higher RN , C values , contained more DNA per cell . It is possible that nuclear sur - face area is related to cellular DNA content . However , it may also be that cell type - specific condensation of chromatin against the nuclear lamina affects nuclear surface area and RN / C - We are currently examining these possibilities . The importance of the karyoplasmic ratio was raised by Wilson ( 18 ) , and his consideration of the subject provides significant precedent to our findings . First , he cites Boveri ( page 730 ) , whose " extensive measurements led him to the unexpected result that in the sea urchin , with increasing chromosome - number the nuclear volume increases more rapidly than the cytoplasmic , in such a manner that it is the surface of the nucleus and not its volume that is directly proportional to the number ofchromosomes . " This is consis - tent with our finding that the cell types with higher average DNA per cell have higher RN , C values . Second , Wilson credits Conklin ( page 731 ) , who showed " that nuclear vol - ume varies not with the total volume of the cytosome but only with thatofits active protoplasm . This is proved by eggs centrifuged during cleavage , in which a sharp separation The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 115 , 1991 takes place between the heavier yolk and the lighter pro - toplasm , so that their volumes may readily be determined . In such eggs , during cleavage , it may readily be seen that the largest nuclei appear in blastomeres that contain the largest amount ofactive protoplasm , irrespective of their total size . " This , too , is compatible with our conclusions . This paper is dedicated to Professor John T . Bonner on the occasion ofhis retirement . We thank Drs . Peter Hollenbeck and Paul McNeil for helpful sugges - tions and Dr . Karl Matlin for assistance with the confocal microscopy . This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( CA - 44328 ) . Received for publication 28January 1991 and in revised form29July 1991 . References 1 . Adolph , E . F . 1931 . The Regulation of Size as Illustrated in Unicellular Organisms . Charles Thomas & Co . , Baltimore , MD . 236 pp . 2 . Bennett , M . D . 1972 . Nuclear DNA content and the minimum generation time in herbaceous plants . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B . 181 : 109 - 135 . 3 . Cavalier - Smith , T . 1985 . Cell volume and the evolution ofeukaryotic ge - nome size . In The Evolution ofGenome Size . T . Cavalier - Smith , editor . John Wiley & Sons Inc . New York . 105 - 184 . 4 . Cohn , Z . A . , and B . A . Ehretueich . 1969 . Theuptake , storageand intracel - lular hydrolysis of carbohydrates by macrophages . J . EXP . Med . 129 : 201 - 225 . 5 . Homer , H . A . , andH . C . MacGregor . 1983 . C Valueandcell volume : their significance in the evolution and development ofamphibians . J . CellSci . 63 : 135 - 146 . 6 . Lee , A . M . , J . T . Thomthwaite , and E . M . Rasch . 1984 . Picogram percell determinationofDNA by flow cytometry . Anal . Biochem . 137 : 221 - 226 . 7 . Luby - Phelps , K . , D . L . Taylor , and F . Lanni . 1986 . Probing the structure of cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 2015 - 2022 . 8 . McNeil , P . L . , and E . Warder . 1987 . Glassbeadsload molecules into living cells . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 669 - 678 . 9 . McNeil , P . L . , R . F . Murphy , F . Lanni , and D . L . Taylor . 1984 . A method for incorporating macromolecules into adherent cells . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1556 - 1564 . 10 . Paine , P . L . , L . C . Moore , and S . B . Horowitz . 1975 . Nuclear envelope permeability . Nature ( Lond . ) . 254 : 109 - 114 . 11 . Peters , R . 1983 . Nuclear envelope permeability measured by fluorescence microphotolysis of single liver cell nuclei . J . Biol . Chem . 258 : 11427 - 11429 . 12 . Prescott , D . M . 1956 . Relation between cell growth and cell division . u . The effect ofcell size on cell growth rate and generation time inAmoeba proteus . In . Changes in nuclear volume and growth rate and prevention of cell division in Amoeba proteus resulting from cytoplasmic amputa - tions . Exp . Cell Res . 11 : 86 - 98 . 13 . Smith , G . 1903 . ActinosphaeriumEichorni . A biometrical study in themass relations of nucleus and cytoplasm . Biometrika 2 : 241 - 254 . 14 . Steinman , R . M . , S . E . Brodie , and Z . A . Cohn . 1976 . Membrane flow during pinocytosis . A stereological analysis . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 665 - 687 . 15 . Swanson , J . A . 1989 . Fluorescent labeling of endocytic compartments . In Fluorescence Microscopy ofLiving Cells in Culture . Methods in Cell Bi - ology . Vol . 29 . Y . - L . Wang and D . L . Taylor , editors . Academic Press Inc . New York . 137 - 151 . 16 . Swanson , J . A . 1989 . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute flow through macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 94 : 135 - 142 . 17 . Swanson , J . A . , B . Yirinec , E . Burke , A . Bushnell , and S . C . Silverstein . 1986 . Effect of alterations in the size of the vacuolar compartment on pinocytosis in J774 . 2 macrophages . J . Cell Physiol . 128 : 185 - 201 . 18 . Wilson , E . B . 1928 . The Cell in Development and Heredity . MacMillan Co . , New York . 1232 pp . 948