fl . ia , ft & il - . r I r ' l $ f ' l Understanding Word and Sentence G . B . Simpson ( Editor ) @ Elsevier Scicnce Publishers B . V ' ( Nort - h - Holland ) , l99l Chapter 10 On the Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs : Minor and Major Adjustments to Meaning Edward J . Wisniewski University of Michigan Ann Arbor , Michigan U . S . A . Dedre Gentner University of Illinois Champaign , Illinois U . S . A . The process of conceptual combination involves accessing two or more concepts and , determining how they fit dogether to form a new concept . In a sense , conceptual combination is very broad in scope , involved in many situ - ations in natural language understanding . For example , understanding a story probably includes the combining of concepts of the individual sentences . Un - derstanding a sentence , in turn , probably ilicludes combining the meanings of - noun , verb , and prepositional phrases . To understand a noun ; verb , or preposi - tional phrase , we combine the meanings of individual words . In this chapter , we 1 , will focus on how people combine concepts when they attemft to understand complex noun phrases ( i . e . , noun phrases other than those consisting of a noun or a determiner and a houn ) . For example , tb understand a phrase like " elephant tie , " one might combine the concepts elephant and tie in such a way to mean , " a tie worn by circus elephants " or " a tie with a picture of an elephant on it . " r These are possible interpretations of the phrase " elephant tie . " Recently , there has been a fair amount of psychological research on this kind of conceptual ' combination ( e . g . , OsherSon & Smith , 1982 ; Smith & Osherson , 1984 ; Medin & - ' Siroben , 1988 ; Murphy , 1990 ) . Several models have been proposed to account for this process ( Hampton , 1987 ; Smith , Osherson , Rips , & Keane , 1988 ; Co - hen & Murphy , , 1984 ; Murphy , 1988 ) . Besides models of understanding com - plex noun phrases , there has also been research on how people combine the mebnings of nouns and verbs in understanding sentences ( Gentner & Franc - e , 1988 ) . This chapter is organized into three parts . In the first part , we introduce u2 the process of cohceptual EJ . Wisniewski and D . Gentner and discuss its importance as a topic of investigation . we will outline some e ' mpirical results of studies on conceptual combination and general challenges tiat any theory of conceptual combination , must address . In the second part , wg present three psychological models of , i . conceptual combination and evaluate ihem in terms of the specific psychologi - " - - . , - cal findings and theigeneral challengers outlined in the first part of thi chapier . ' ti " ) ' . The models are the attribute inheritan " ce model ( Hampton , 1987 ) , the selective modification model ( Smith et al . , 1988 ) and the concept specialization model ( Cohen & Murphy , l9 & 4 ; Murphy , 1988 ) . In the third part of the chapter , lie examiie one of the major assumptions of two of the conceptual combination ' models . Both the - selective modification and concept specialization models prdpose a type of slot filling as the primary mechanism for combining concepts . ( A process called elaboration is also very important in the concept specializatioh model . ) In these models , concepts are composed of slots and fillers ( as in frdmes and schemata ) . One combines a pair of concepts by filling a slot in one ccincept ( which we will call the head con - cept ) with that of the other concept ( w . hich we will call the predicate concept ) . 2 A slot in the head concept is restrictid to having the predicate concept as its filler or value . For eiample , to interpr6t a combinationlifr . le red box , one finds a slot in box ( i . e . , rhe color slot ) thatlcan be filled by the concept red . The concept red box is thereby restricted tri having red as the filler of its color slot . In this section , we will suggest that slot filling may be a common default strategy for combining concepts . To a ' ddress this hypothesis , we discuss some results from a preliminary study thatfexamines the kinds of descriptions that people give for noun - noun concepts . Ih this study , people defined novel combi - nations of count and mass nouns thdt were either artifacts or natural kinds . While we found evidence for slot fillifi ' g , a number of examples from this study - appear to be exceptions to the slot - filiing view of conceptual combiriation . In * ' order to account for the full range bf results , we will propose some other mechanisms that may be involved in tonceiltual combination . In addition , * e " will argue that these mechanisms operdte on much richer conceptual representa - tions than those typically emphasized { in the literature on coneeptual combina - tion . In particular , the relational structdre in concepts plays an important role in how they are combined I I Tnn CoxcnpruAl CoilrsrxltloN PRoBLEM I Studying how people combine cbnceps is important for several reasons . First , the use of noiel complex nounlphrases is a very common , nahlral , and , croativo way to fill i vocabulary gap . , People often introduce new terms into a language by combining existing wordi rather than inventing , new wdrds . For w # example , to denote st particular kind ofitable that supports computers , one might introduc . e lhe phrase ' " computer table , ' iinstead of inventing a new word . Novel l , I II 1 r . , b L - t . * i r - - ! - Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs complex noun phrases are common in newspaper headlines , where they , : , concisety convey important information ( e . g . , " Record Pentagon Procurement ' : i Overcharges Cited , " which appeared in the Washington Post on New Year ' s t ' day , 1989 ) . The coining of novel noun phrases is evident in children at an early 6 \ , ; age ( E . Clark , Gelman , & Lane , 1985 ) . Indeed , many researchers have specu - r ' ' lated that conceptual combination ' provides a route to language change and growth ( Downing , 1977 : H . Clark , 1983 ; Gentner & France , 1988 ) . Downing ( 1977 , page 823 ) suggests that the creation of novel concept combinations , " serves as the back door into the lexicon . " Second , any general - purpose natural language processing system will have to interpret complex noun phrases . Building systems that can understand such combinations is very difficult ( e . 9 . , Brachman , 1978 ; Cottrell , 1988 ; Finin , 1980 ; Hirst , 1983 ) . Knowledge of how people combine concepts might assist in the development of such systems . Third , studying how concepts combine can provide a way to constrain theories about how concepts are represented . In fact , work by Edward Smith and Daniel Osherson on conceptual combination presented a serious challenge to theories of concepts that were derived from research on single concepts ( Osherson & Smith , 1981 , 1982 ; Smith & Osherson , 1984 ) . In parricular , rhey demonstrated that prototype theories augmented with fuzzy set theory accounts of conceptual combination could not predict a number of findings on how people combine concepts . This research provided clues to conceptual structure that one may not have been able to discover by just studying single concepts . Based on oru own studies of how concepts combine , we will alSo suggest how concepts should be structured . For these reasons and otlers , there has been increasing interest in concep - . , tual combination . Below , we describe some recent studies , as well as a number " of general characteristics of conceptual combination that make it a challenging , problem . Representational Assumptions Crucial to any discussion of how concepts are combined is some notion of , how they are represented . Researchers in the field have used different represen - . i tations for concepts as well as different terminology for the same representa - - . tion . To keep our discussion of representational issues explicit and clear , we + " will briefly define some terms . The term " attribute " or " feature " will refer to " any property of an object that is represented in tho concept of that object . So , for example , " has a pair of wings , " " is colored red , " and " flies " might be attributes or features that are represented in the concept of robin . In describing his model , Hampton ( 1987 ) uses attribute in this manner . Many researchers , however , distinguish between slots and fillers whbn discussing properties of objects that are represented in concepts . In slot and filler notation , the attributes 243 244 E . J . Wisniewski and D . Gentner the slot . one can view slots and their fillers as dimension - value pairs of a concept . Researchers often discuss slois and fillers in the context of frames . A - ; f ; frame is a knowledge structure that refresents one ' s concept of a stereotypical : ' \ situation or object ( Minsky , 1975 ) . Ir i , onsists of a list of tuples that are gener - ally true of the stereotypical situation oi object . ( Aframc instance would repre - sent a specific example of that situaticin or event - - + . g . , a specific robin . ) 3 So , the frame for robin would include thd tuples above ( as well as others ) . With some slight modifications ( discussed lhter ) , Smith et al . ( 1988 ) use frames to represent concepts in their model . Onepan view a concept as being more than a list of slots and fillers , however . A strictured frame consists of a structured list of slots and fillers . The list is structuied in the sense that it captures various relationships between a slot and is fiilAr and between different slots and fillers . For example , in tle concept pie , the siot made - of might indicate that its filler must , be something edible , capturing thti fact that pies are made of edible things . As a seconil ' example , in the concept rebtangle , the slot area might indicate that its filler is the product of two ottrer fillbrs ( namely , the fillers of the height and , widrlr slots ) . With some slight modifiiations , Murphy ( 1983 ) uses structured frames to . represent concepts in his model . l Ambiguity I Combining concepts involves tnlee HnOs of ambiguity - syntactic , lexi - cal , and relational ambiguity . ln syntdcfic ambiguity , the concept that a con - stituent modifies is ambigous . When the number of constituents is more than two , there is the " who modifies wtronif ' problem of combining concepts . In a concept pair in English , the first conippt almost always modifies the second . . concept . However , when there are moie than two concepts , determining who modifies whom is not straightforwardi The combination is syntactically am - biguous . Often , combinations are nested within other combinations . So , in solid state RCA color television , a systenl or person must recognize that solid modifibs state and that this combination modifies television . In water meter f cover adjustment screw , water modifrics meter and the combination modifies i cover , which in turn forms a new comdinaton water meter cover that modifies , the final conc6pt . These examples alSo suggest that a model of conceptual combination must have a mechanism { for the recirsive processing of nested combinations . I In lexical ambiguity , one or m < ire of the meanings of the constituen [ words of the combination is ambiguous ! Many words of English have more than one meaning and many common wordi have a very large number of meanings ( Hirst , 1983 ) . As an example of a phrase that ' has ambiguous constituents , red ) , ( robin locomotion flies ) . The first term in each tuple is thi concept nime , the second term is a slot of the concept ' , and the third teim is a filler or value of I I t ' | r " t fi Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 2 , 45 consider " ball bat . " The word " ball " could mean ( among other things ) any of the balls used in playing sports or it could mean the kind ofball that one dances at . The constituent " bat " could refer to a type of animal or sports equipment . ln relational ambiguity , the relation between the constituents is ambigu - ous . In this case , it is neither the individual constituents nor their syntactic relationship that is ambiguous but rather , how they fit together - their concep - tual relationship . Consider the example of elephant tie above . Assume that the meanings of the constituents are unambiguous ( e . 9 . , that elephan means a type of airimal and that tie means a type of clothing ) . Given an appropriate context , elephant and tie could be related to each other in many possible ways , as in , " a tie worn by circus elephants , " " a tie that is large like an elephant , " " a lie that has pictures of elephants on it , " and so on . In fact , constituents can be related ! o each other in an arbirary number of ways that can be very plausible , given the appropriate context ( Kay & Zimmer , 1976 ; H . Clark , 1983 ) . Concept - dependent Combination Processes How a particular predicate concept is combined with the head concept often depends on the head concept . To see why , consider a simple , straightfor - ward system in which concepts are combined in a way that is independent of the head concept . A particular predicate concept would be combined with any head concept in the same way . For example , the concept red might be combined with any head concept X , to mean " an X that has the color red . " Therefore , for each concept , a straightforward rule would describe how the concept combines with all others when it functions as the predicate . However , there is increasing evidence tlat , in human language , predicate concepts do not combine with all concepts in the same way ( e . g . , Halff , Ortony , & R . C . Anderson , 1976 ; Rips & Turnbull , 1980 ; Murphy , 1988 ; Medin & Shoben , 1988 ) . As an example , a flower man is a man who sells flowers , a flower garden is a garden that contains flowers , aflower painting is a painting that depicts a flower , aflo ' wer necklace is a necklace made out of flowers , and so on . In these cases , how the predicate conceptf ' lower combines with the head concept varies as the head concept varies . Medin and Shoben ( 1988 ) provide evidence from typicality ratings for this claim . Results of their second experi - ment suggest that , for example , gold is combined with coin to mean " a coin made out of gold " but that it is combined with railing to mean " a railing with the color of gold . " Murphy ( 1988 ) also showed that the meaning subjecs gave for a simple adjective varied with the noun that it was combined with . These findings suggest that specifying the combinatorial rules of conceptual combina - tion will not be straightforward . Typicality effects ' l Smith and Osherson ( 1984 ) describe several findings involving the typi - needs to specify what it is about the Sructure of adjective - noun concepts that accofnts for these effects . The first finhing , called thi conjunction ' effect , i . tttat the tfpicality of an instance to zrn adjhtive - noun concept ( i . e . , a conjunction ) eiceeds its typicality to the noun coricept . So , a particular red apple is more typical of the concept red apple thanlit is of apple . The second finding is the compatible - incompatible conjunction bffect - that is , the conjunction effect is greater for incompatible than compatitle conjunctions . Here , an incompatible conjunction is one in which the adjecti , ve denotes an unlikely filler for a slot of a noun ( e . 9 . , as in bluc apple ) and a iompatible conjunction is one where the adjective denotes a likely filler for a dlot of a noun ( e . g . , as in red apple ) . So , the extent to which a blue apple is jfdg ' ed more typical of blrc apple than apple is greater than the extent to which a ied apple is judged more typical of red apple than apple . The third finding , called the reverse conjunction effect , is that the typicality of a noninstance o anladjective - noun concept is less than its typicality to the noun concept . So a blire apple is less typical of red apple than 246 | E . I . Wisniewski and D . Gentner cality of adjective - noun concepts . A c < implete theory of conceptual combination it is of apple . Relative Ease of Combining Conceptb t l t . t I Some concepts are easier a " o { Uin " than others . Reaction time studies suggest that several factors affect hovi easy it is ! o understand complex noun phrases . One factor is the form classfof the predicate concept - in particular , whether the predicate is an adjective 6r noun . Murphy ( 1990 ) found that sub - jects understood adjective - noun pairs fAster than noun - noun pairs . For example , people undentood " pleasant punishmerit " more quickly than " bear punishment . " It is unlikely that this result could be elplained by differences in the familiarity of the objects named by the phrases ror in word frequency . Noun - noun pairs were used that had been previously jidged as interpretable . Furthermore , the predicate nouns actually had higher wbrd frequencies than the aiijectives . One possible reason for the difference is lrelated to ttre different roles that form classes play in language . In general , adjectives function as opeiators whose role in language is to pick out a particular 3lot of a noun to fill . Oftdn , an adjective picks out the same slot of many differeht nouns . For example , " green " picks out the color slot of the nouns in green apple , green table , green grass , and so on . In contrast , a noun primarily serves to esihblish reference to individual objects or categories ( Gentner & France , 1988 ) . Using a noun as an operator violates its preferred use as a referent . An adjectivi - noun phrase might be easier to under - stand than a nciun - noun phrase becausetboth of its constituents are playing their primary roles whereas in a noun - noun * phrase , the predicate noun is playing a role that violates its preferred role . I A second factor that may affect & se of understanding is conceptual com - plexity . Murphy ( 1990 ) prefers this eiplanation for why noun - noun pairs are Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 2 / 17 more difficult to understand than adjective - noun pairs . Nouns ire more concep - tually iomplex than adjectives . In general , compared o adjectives , there is more knowled $ e represented in nouns . To understand a noun - noun phrase , people must combine two relatively complex represen0ations whereas ! o under - stand an adjective - noun phrase , they must combine one simple and one com - plex repiesentation . Therefore , combining d pair of nouns shorild involve more computation . Within the class of adjective - noun coniepts , Murphy ( 1990 ) has identified three factors that afrect comprehension : typicality , relevance , and predication . People more quickly understand a combination con0aining an adjective that is typical of the noun than one containing an adjective that is atypical ( e . g . , " rcd applg " is easier ! o understand than " blue apple " ) . ( Familiarity of adjectives was controlled for by having each adjective serve both as a typical dnd atypical adjec tive , ' when paired with different nouns . ) A combination containing an adjectivc that - is relevant o the noun , is easier to understand than one containidg an adj€rtive that is irrelevant . Accord - in $ to Murphy , an adjective is , relevant if it picks out a slot that is present in the notn ( i . e . , is part of the representation of th6 noun ) . So , the adjective " cold " is relevent to beer because it picks ovt temperature - a slot thai is part of the concept of beer . In contrast , " cold " is irrelevant to gdrbage because tempera - ture is not part of the concept of garbage . One must infer the fact that garbage has a temperature , presumably by inheritance from its superordinate . , Therefore , the phrase " cold beer " is easier to understand than " cold garbage . l ' Relevance is independent of typicality . In this experiment , typicality was measured by the proportion of objects in a noun category that had the adjective property . In the example abovO , Murphy found that the proportion of , objects in the category beer that had the attribute cold was judged to be about the same as the propor - tion in the category garbage that had ihis attribute Finally , people more quickly understand combinations containing an ad - jective that has a ' predicating relationship to a noun than one having anonpredi - cating relationship . An adjective is predicative if the combination can be mapped ontro a sentence of the form n6un be adjective that makes sense and reflects the meaning of the combination ( e . g . , Levi , 1978 ) . So , " ugly " is a predicating adjective in " ugly paintin ! " . because the phrase can be mapped onto " The painting is ugly " - a sen [ ence that makes sense and reflects the meaning of " ugly painting . " In contrast , " rural " is a nonpredicating adjective in the phrase " rural policeman . " The sentence " The policeman is rural " does not make sense . Within the class of noun - noun compounds , . several studies have investi - gated differences in ease of understanding . Murphy ( 1990 ) fouird that context can speed the interpretation of noun : noun phrases . In one study , novel noun - noun phrases were preceded by either helpful or neutral contexts . A helpful context was one that plausibly indicated how the - predicate noun was related 0o 2A8 the head noun . The neutral . context EJ . , Wisniewski and D . Gentner the predicate noun - and the head noun but , did not indicdte a plausiblb relation . when $ ubjects actually read stituents , thus increasin g com prehensio ' rr ti me . I - sentences . containing the noun ' noun plrases , they underslood those embedded in the helpful cont , exts , more quickly firan . those embedded in the neutral con - leits . This finding suggested that whbn rhe conrext specified the relation be - tweenlthe predicate noun and . thb hdad ' noun , the corilbination processr . was faster . f i Wisniewski ( 199b ) identified an8rne , factor that predicts how ehsy it will be o combing concrete , artifact nouhs - namely , the functional scope of the object named Uf ttre head noun . The finctional siope of an artifact refers to the range of " objects that can enier inrc the artifact ' s function . The , range can ' be relatively unconstrained such that mafiy objects can participate in the object ' s . furction . For example , the functionallscope of soap is unconstrdined . because many objects can enter into its functiori . ( i . e . , , many objects can be bleaned ) . The range can also be relatively consffaineil such that few objects caniparticipate in the function . Foi example , the functiofid scope of comb is constrained because fewbbjects can ente . r into its functionl ( i . e . , few objects can be straightened or stiled with a comb ) . Tlpically , funcdbns whose scopes are uncdnsrained are ttrose for which achieving the functiofi depends on a nearly universally - appli - cable . characteristic of objecs , i . i . , ti characteristic that almost all concrete objects can possess . For examilte , the ' . functionAl scope of a bo * is relaiively ' unconstrained ( i . e . , a box can be usediio contain many things ) . This is because the function of ' box depends for its acirievement on a nbarly ' universally appli - cable characteristic - i . e . , the characteiistic of occupying finite volume so that being contained is possible . I ' Wisniewski found that people [ more quickly understood ' noun : houn phrases involv - ing " head nouns with uriconstrained scopes ( e . g . , jlacket box " ) than those involving head nouns withlconstrained scopes : ( e . g - . , ' Jicket fork ' ) . The re ' sults suggested that for artifact if0uns , people often interpret compounds by trying to reiite the predicate noun t5 the function of the object namedby the head noun . In tle case of a : head noin with unconstrained functional scope , people cah easily relate the predicate rfoun to the head noun ' s function and thus interpret the . noun - noun pair . But , in . the case of ' a head noun with constrained functional scope ; people must - seek otlier ways to meaningfully relate the con - Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs binations that were either semantically . natural or semantically strained . An example of a combination that is semantically . natural is " The lizard limped . ' : The combination meets the requirement that an animale object ( i . e . , lizard ) be the agent of the verb ( i . e . , limped ) . In contrast , . " The lantern limped " is semanti - cally strained - the agent of " limped " is not animate . Gentner and France found that when a combination was semantically strained , people paraphrased the combination by altering the meaning of the verb more than the noun . So , people might paraphrase " The lantern limped " as " The . lighting ilevice gave off a ' flickering li $ ht " ( which alters the rneaning of " limped " and preserves the mean - ing of " lantern " ) . They seldom paraphrased such combinations ' by altering the meaning of the noun and preserving the meaning of the verb ( e . 9 . , as in " The bright person walked lamely " ) . Gentner and France ( 1988 ) suggested that the nouns in a noun is a noun sentence show a similar pattern of differential mirtability ( though less extreme ) . In these sentences , the predicate noun . ( which functions as operator ) typically adapts its meaning to the subject noun ( which functions to establish object reference ) . Thus , " The acrobht is a hippopotamus " conveys a clumsy airobat , whereas " The hippopatomus is an acrobat " conveys an agile hippopotamus . The interprerition of noun - noun concepts should . parallel this finding . That is , the first noun should function as an operator whereas the second noun should func - tion to establish object reference ( we will discuss some exceptions to this rule later ) . Ernergent and fnteracting Feature Features often emerge in coiicept combinations that are not present ( or at least not salient ) in the . constituents of those combinations . , Murphy ( 1988 ) found that subjects judged certain features to be typical of adjective - noun concepts but atypical of the noun or adjective concept alone . " For example , people believe " lose money " is a typical feature of empry store bul an atypical feature of store or empty . Murphy ( 1988 ) argued that such a feature was riot a conceptual part of either the constituent empry or store but rather emerged , through an interaction of the constituents and people ' s general world knowl - edge . Gentner and France ( 1988 ) also suggested that features emerge in concept combinations that are not present in the constituents . They found that when a noun - verb combination was semantically strained , people often altered the verb ' s meaning by invoking a novel meaning of the verb . For example , in one case , the sentence " The lizard worshipped , " was - paraphrased as " The small gray reptile lay on a hot rock and snred unblinklingly at " the sun . " In this example , the feature " stared unblinkingly at the sun " is not highly typicat of ' either concept . Gentner and France ( 19 . 88 ) argued ' that , when paraphrasing the meaning , of verb in such combinations , people often go beyond simply seldcting . from a range of prestored aspects of verb meanings . Instead , they adapted the u : 9 Features in a concept combinaddn also interact . For example , people ber lieve that wooden , spoons are large ipoons whereas metal spoons are sinall ' 3poons ( Medin & Shoben , 1988 ) . In ihis example , the made o / dimension of spoon interacts with the size dimension . one interpretation of this finding is tliat a combination iriherits correlation & s contained in itre treaO concept tlat are made relevant by the predicate conce { t . So , the representation of spoonmight contain information about the correlaiion " spoons that are made of wood are also large . i ' This correlation ' would influence the interpretation of wooden spooh . a The impli - c - ation of this findin ! is that concepts cannot be represented simply as lists of features , as implied by many past theories ( e . g . , Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ; Smith , Shoben , & RipS ' ; 1974 ) . Instead , concepts also capture dependencies and relations betweeri features . For example , features ' may be . statisd ; ally correlated ( as iir the spodn example above ) , causally connected , ( e . g . , ' has wing ' s and flies in the concepibdrdl , functionally related ( e . g . , the legs of a table typically support its top ) , mdtheinatically related ( e . g . , the volume of a cube is the product of its height , wibth , and length ) , and so ' on . A model of conceptual combination must take intohccount ' such dependencies . * Coricept . Combinations . as a Heteroge { neous Class - t , We began this chapter ' by suggesiing that conceptual combihation is very broad in ' scope . ' Restricting conceptuallbombination only to noun - noun and ad - jective - noun pairs , there are still a number of psychologically important dimen - ' iions along which such combinations cLn n " ry . First , as previously noted , there can be form class . differences - the piedicate term of a combination can be either a noun or ah adjective . In additioh , an adjective can hdve a predicating or nonpredicdting relationship to the headlnoun ( as described above ) . . , Combinations 6an be conjunctivi . or nonconjunctive . A conjunctive con - cept designates a category whose menibers belong to both constituent catego - ries ( Hampton , 1987 ) . For exhmple , th ' e members of pet iguana arb both pets and ' iguanas . ' The members of red iltck are both red things and , trucks . . In Contrast , the members of a nonconjunCtive cdtegory ar " * " * b " rt of . only one constitdent . categbry ( that named Uy ltre head ndun ) ; So , apartment dogs are dogs but not apartments . t i ' Combinations alsb vary in their d - egree of familiarity - from well - known , lexicalized terms ( e . g . , " apple pie " ) totnovel plirases ' coined by eccentric writ - ers . ( For eiample , the counterculture arithor Richard Brautigan , 1967 , titled the last chaptei , of Trort Fiihing in ' Ameritia , " The Mayonnaisb Chapter , " a refer - ence to . the . fact - thar ihe chapder end6d with the word " mayoniaise . " ) It is , assumed that novel terms are interprejed by combining the rheanings of the t ! ' l t l . 1 . . + I _ * r f I t 4 r i g ' I { b ! . . i h - i y 1 - * , . " , , , , , , ri ti I I Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs individual constituents to form ' " a new meaning ( Murphy , 1988 ) . A lexicalized oerm , on the otler hand , is assumed to be inteqireted by directly accessin $ is meaning , rather than by deriving it from , the meanings of its constituents . As support for this claim , Lees ( 1968 ) suggested that as a combinatioh is fre - quently used in a language , it may lose components of its initial meaning or gain aspects of meaning that are not derivable from its constituents . For ex - ample , the lexicalized term " marshmallow " originally named a t ; r4ie of plant that lived in marshes , then came to mean a confection made from the root of this plant and today means a soft , spongy confe ' ction made of sugar and corn symp , roasted over camp fires . Here , tle term marshmallow has lost its initial meaning ( based on the constituents " marsh " and " mallow " ) and gained a mean - ing that is not even derivable from its constituents . Summary . ) Taken together , these phenomena suggest that an ' adequate theory of con - ceptual combination will be rather complex . In noun - noun pairs , the predicate noun can be related to the head noun in arbitrary ways . Therefore , it does not look promising that a theory can be constructed out of a set of . rules that maps constituents onto a small set of relations between them . The theory must also poitulate some way of choosing the appropriate meanirigs of constituents ( i . e . , fesolving lexical ambiguity ) as well as the appropriate relations between . them ( resolving relational ambiguity ) . For combinations that contain more than two constituents , the theory must have a mechanism , for selecting " which constitu = ents to combine ( i . e . , resolving syntactic ambiguity ) . Importantly , these mecha - nisms will have ! o interact with thb context surroufrd . ing a concept combination . Finally , such a theory must also be able to represent not only the rich , internal structure , of concepts but the general , world kriowledge that lies outside those concepts , since this knowledge is often used to combine those concepts . tvt " oDnr , s oF Coxcnpruar , CoMBTNATToN In this section , we describe tle representationar and processing ' assumpj tions of three models of bonceptual combination . All of these models are ' intensional : A combination Xr is formed by using representations of X and y . These theories can be contrasted with extensional theories of conceptual combi - nAtion ( e . g . , osherson & smirh , l98l ; zadeh . 1965 ) in which a conibination xr is formed by intersecting the sets of the members corresponding to x and y . Strong evidence suggests that the psychological " validity of extensional theories is untenable ( e . g . , Osherson & Smith , 1982 ; Murphy , l9g9 ) . These intensional models have , focused chiefly on the interpretation of adjective - noun compounds and / or noun - noun compounds ( dthbugh Smith et al . have eitended ' their model to account for adverb adjective - noun compounds 25r I f t 252 l . , t . Wisniewski aid D . Gentner f like " very ' red apple " ) . We will restriit our evaluation of these moddls ' to hbw well how they account for the rangelof psychologicai findings on adjective - noun and noun - noun combinations thit were reviewed ' in the first section . To des ' cribe each model , we first ' note 6 " 1 * op " of combination phenomena that it has . explicitly addressed , then discuss : the model ' s representation of concepts and the combinatcjrial processes that it postulates . Finally , we summarize evi - dence ' for and against tle model . $ The Attribute Inheritance Model $ t Hampton ( 1987 ) pioposed a mo6el for how , people interpret novel con - junctive concepts , such as machine veliicle , lool weapon , . and sport gamc . These concepts are a subset of noun - noun ccimbinations . As mentioned ; the members of ' a Conjfnctive category are membeuis of both constituent cbtegories . So , a member of the category pet shark i3 boft a pet and a shark . Specificalln Hampton ' s model has been applied to bonjunctive concepts of the form " X that is a Y " ( i . e . , " pet that is a shark " ) rath ' er than conjunctive noun - noun concepts . ( It is not clear whether this syntactic difference would significantly affect how people process the two types of conjun ' ctions . ) . In Hampion ' s model , concepts : ' are represented as lists of independent attributes , weighted by importance . As a default , a coirjurictive concept is formed by taking the union of the attiibutes belonging to its cotistituents , and reweighting them in the resulting cofijunctive concept , The weighted impor - tance of an attribute for the bonjunctit ' e concept is a rising monotonic function of the attribute ' s importance weights Ssociated with its constituents . There are several casei in which an attribute 6f a constituent concept will fail to be inherited by the conjunctive concept . first , attributes that ' are true of one con - stituent but impoSsible or highly impla ' lsible for the other will not b6 included . For example , the attributs " is warm anh cuddly " which is generally true of pets is a highly implausible attribute for sniarks . Therefore , thJconjuncti " e concept pet shark would not contain this attiibtte . Second , if ttre average importance of an attribute for " the constituent concepls is low then it may be correspondingly low for the conjunctive concept ana fiit to be inherited . ' Thfud , attributes from each cdnstituent may be incompatible { or confliit with each other such that the , conjunitive concept may contain onetbut not both . So , " lives in a domestic environment " ( for the constituenr iet ) and " lives in ' the ocean " ( for . the constitbent slurk ) are incompatible and dnly one of them would be contained in pet shark , Hampton argues that ttre attribute that is cho3en is the one that is most compatible with the other ? ttribudes of the conjunctive concepl - In addition ! o these attribute inh8iitance failures , there are also situations : i " ' l | ' I - I I fi I , T : L . , | I 1 r " l rt t ' l , I t : l , l . t I { ) that strongly predict that a attribute will be . inherited . Specifically , an attfibute that is necessary br highl | probable ' fdi either constituent will also be included Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 253 sftarft since it is a necessary or hithly probable attribute of shdrks . Hanipton also hypothesized that a constituent of a conjunctive concept would often dominate the other constituent in the sense that it would have more salient and important featuresi As a consequence , combining the constituents would result in a conjunctive concept that included more important attributes of the dominant concept . This hypothesis was based on ' previous studies in which Hampton ( 1988 ) not€d that constituent concepts often contributed unequally lo the determination of the typicality of items in their conjunctive concept . That is , for some pairs of constituents , X and Y , Hampton ( 1988 ) found that the typical - ity of items ! o the constituent X carried more weight in predicting the typicality of those items to X tlat is a I than the typicality of those items to Y did . On this basis , Hampton categorized a number of concepts as dominant . Evidence for the Model Hampton obtained evidence supporting his model from subjects ' listings of attributes and ratings of their importance In general , attributes that belonged to ( i . e . , were rat€d as impd - itant for ) either or both constituents were inherited by the conjunctive concept , supporting tle model ' s assrlmption that a conjunc - tive concept includes the important atEibutes of its constituents . Not all attrib - utes belonging to the constituents were inherited by the conjunctive concept , however . But , in mord than half of these inheritance failures , the atribute had a low average importance rating for the constituent concepts . Therefore , as pre - dicted by the model , these atfibutes should not be inherited . Hampton ' also showed that attributes that were necessary for defining a constituent were inherited by the conjunctive concept whereas those that were impossible for a constituent were not inherited . To show this , Hampton classi - fied an attribute as necessary for a constituent if subjects had rated it as " ileces - sarily true of all possible examples ' of the constituent " and impossible for a constituent if subjects had rated it as " necessarily false of all possible examples of the constitueqt . " In virtually all cases , necessary attributes for one or both of the constituents were also necessary attribules for the conjunctive concept . Im - possible attributes ' " for bne or both of the constituents were also impossible attribules for the conjunctive concept . To investigate whether the importance of an attribute . in the conjunctive concept was a rising function of its importance in each constituent , Ilampt6n performed regression analyses . . In general , a weighted average of the constitu - ent scores best predicted the importance of an attribute in the conjunct . Finally , ^ Hampton showed that dominant concepts ' did in fact have more attributes that were important than nondominant concepts . Furthermore , in re - gression analyses , the importance of an attribute for the dominant concept car - ried more weight in predicting ' the importance of that , attribute in the conjunc - tive concept 254 I EJ . Wisniewski and ' D . Gentner Evaluation of thi Modil I , Hampton ' s * o . t t * shown oat Lttriuutel o " nn , n , a conjuncrive concepr are , tro a large extent , reasonably predidted by : i model that specifies the inheri - tance of attributes from the individualfconstitubnts of the conjunctive concepr . Hampton has identified a number ' ofipossible factors ( incorporated into the model ) that determine which attributes ' , are inherired andrwhat , their importance will : be in the . conjunctive concept , as tvell as rJtriltr attribuies * ill be excluded in the cdnjun ' itive concept . - These faciors inchlde the necessity , impossibility , and importance - of ' the features in thb conCtiiuents and the , dominance of a conCept ; Given the predictive soccess , bf the mlodel , future * ork mighrexplic - itly specify the processes that underly ihese factois . Currently , such factors , are . primarily determined by subjective ritings . One example of an unspecified prccess in the model ' concerns inheritance failures of impossible attributes . Given an important attribute for one tonstituent , exactly what process deler - mines , that the attribute is impossible , ifor the bttrer conitituent , and thereforb impossible for - the conjunctive concept ? As another eiample , subjective ratings deterrhine dominance of one concept with respect to another concept . What are the underlying reasons . for why a concdpt domiiates over another ? The most important limitation of ihe attribute inheiitance model is its lack of generality . Currently , it only Applieslto a verj small set of conceptual combi - nation phenomena of the form , " X thit is alsci a Y , " where " X " and " Y " aie nouns . Many - perhaps . most - nourf : noun , cbmbinations are not conjunctive ( Murphy , 1988 ) . For example , dog sle { s are sleds but they are not ilogs , apart - ment dogs are dogs but not apartmenti , and so on . As formulated , Hampton ' s inheritance rules will not correctly apply ' to these nounjnoun concepts . FOr example , in the case of dog . sled , inhdritance ' of necessary attributes predicts - that ! ' breathes " should bO an attribute $ aog sled ( because dogs must breath " e ) whereas noninheritance of impossible * attribute ' s predicts that it should noi be ( because ' sleds cannot breathe ) . Inherirdnce of riecessary attributes predics that " has walls " should be an attributs of tpartment dog whereas noninheritance bf impossible attributes predicts that it shiould , notrbe , and so on ; ' In general , non - conjunctive combinations are characteriz ' ed tiy attribute " inleritaf , cb asymmetry between the predicati noun and head iloun . Almost all of the attributes of the combination comi from the head noufi : For eiample ; the attributes of apart - ment dog arb almost all taken from d / g ' just as the attributes from ^ dogbpart - " ment are almosl all taken from apafiment . Therefore , feature necessity and impossibility depends primarily on thehead noun . rrrrl , vJJrurult uwPvrruD Pr urr4 uJ vrr urv rrwg rlvurr . , J , : " : , Other research suggests ' that the focus of combininf nonconjunctive con - I cepts . id ori ddtermining a plausible rilation detneen the constitrrcnts , rather I than rin selecting attributes from thefcdnsdtuents . For , example , slot filling I models ( see next section ) would predii ' i thai a pldusible meaning of apartment I dog is " a dog that lives in apartmentsi fnis mehning captures a relation be - | : " t | . t " ' ! * l tl . l 4 ' , I ' t . ' l lr { { l ' ! t . lr - t Combinatorial Senantics of Noun Pairs 255 tween the constituents , rather than an attribule that is inherited from one or the other constituent . It does not appear possible ! o extend the attribute inheritance approach to nonconjunctive combinations without considerable alteration . It is also unclear whether the model could be extended to encompass adjective - noun concepts . One could ' view many adjective - noun concepts ( e . g . , blrc apple ) as conjunctive concepts of the form " X that is a Y " ( e . g . , " apple that is blue colored " ) . However , at least in some cases , it appears that Hampton ' s model incorrectly predicts that the conjunct will fail to inherit important attribu0es . In the blue apple example , it seems obvious that the attrib - ute " has the color blue " should be a salient feature ' of blrc apple . However , this attribute will be unimportant in the apple constituent ( since almost all apples are red , yellow , and green ) and important in the concept blue . lf apple is viewed as the dominant constituent , then a weighted average of the importance of this feature for the two constituents ( giving more emphasis to the importance of the attribute for apple \ would predict that " has a blue color " will not be inherited by bluc apple . Also , certain adjective - noun concepts are not conjunctive . As with noun - noun combinations that are not conjunctive , the focus of conceptual combina - tion is not on selecting which features from the constituents become inherited . Consider the combination square bicycle . One might interpret this combination as a conjunction of the form " bicycle that is also square shape . d . " However , our intut " ion suggests that this interpretation does not make sense ( one could not ride a bicycle that was literally square - shaped ) . In contrast , compare this com - bination to square Dax which probably does make sense when interpreted as box that is also square shaped . A more plausible interpretation of square bicycle is " bicycle with a square frame . " In this case , the adjective applies to part of the , object named by the head concept . The feature has a square frame appea $ to be an emergent rather than inherited property of square bicycle ( see discus - sion in last section ) . Selective Modification Model Smith , Osherson , Rips and Keane ( 1988 ) proposed a model for construct - ing adjective - noun concepts from individual adjective and noun concepts . More specifically , it was developed to accounr for typicality judgments involving adjective - noun concepts . The model has also been applied ! o adverb adjective - noun concepts ( e : g . , very red apple ) . In general , the model postulates that the adjective directs the formation of the adjective - noun concept by restricting the filler ofa noun slot to the adjective concept and by increasing the diagnosticity of this slot . To take a simple example , the adjective " green " would direct the formation of the concept green apple by restricting the color slot of green apple to the filler green md by increasing the diagnosticity of the calor slot . 5 The model has three major characteristics . First , nouns and adjectives are 256 E . L Wisniewski and D . Gentner viewed as simple ftames which consisf ' of the typical properties associated with Erovr A91b . Slot FIllGr 8sllcrcc Cobr : tEd O ' grt ? [ \ 0 brcvn 30 Shap ? : Iound 15 sgull ! : ctilndrbd 5 Texturu : sDo | } 5 Fugh s bumDy 0 their instances . For example , a frame fbr apple would contain typical properties such as " has a round shape , " " has a sinooth t€xture , ' and " has the color red . " More specifically , the frame consists of a list of slots and a set of fillers associ - ated with each slot . Each slot . has a diagnosticity value and each filler of the slot has a salience score . The diagnosticity of a slot meariures how useful the slot is in discriminating examples of ithe category from examples of contrast categories . The ' salience score of a filler of a slot reflects its subjective fre - quency among examples of the categorli as well as its perceptibility . For ease of explaining the model , the salience scorb is viewed as the " number of votes " for a particular slot filler . Figure I ( adapied from Smith et al . , 1988 ) shows ex - amples of the apple , brown , and broih apple frames . Second , the model pro - poses a mechanism for operating on ab ; ective and noun frames to produce an adjective - noun frame . The mechanisni operates as follows . The slots of the adjective frame select the correspondihg slots of the noun frame . For each of these slots in the noun frame , there isian increase in the salience of the filler indicated by the adjective and a decrdase in the salience of other fillers ( i . e . , votes get shifted to the filler from thi other fillers ) . In addition , there is an increase in the diagnosticity of the slod Figwe 1 . Using slot selection ( or slot filling ) orcombine brown and apple to form brown apple , in the selective modification model . I I , I I , r f ADDL Dirg . SfDt FiIcr SdirDrc 1 . 0 , . ) Color : rsd 5 ShaDi : rounll 15 sqrru ! 9 cYBdrical 5 5 Tcxtlu ? : ttnoolh mw ! bunDy ' Bmv [ Dht . Sfot Flllrr Sitrcrcc Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs Figure I also illustrates the operation of this , mechanism for the frames brown and apple . Here , the brown frame contains a single slot ( calor ) and it selects that slot in the apple frame , increasing the salience of the filler brown and the diagnosticity of the slot color , in brown apple , The votes for the other fillers of color are shifted to the filler brown . Although the model is not stated in these terms , one can view selection as slot filling . By selecting a slot in the noun frame , the adjective frame essentially resricts or limis the slot 0o having the adjective concept as its filler . The third characteristic of the model is a process for computing the typi - cality ( or similarity ) of an instance with respect 0o its frame , using a slightly modified version of Tversky ' s ( 1977 ) contrast rule . According to this rule , typicality is an increasing function of the votes for an slot filler that are com - mon tro the instance and frame and a decreasing function of the votes for a slot filler that are distinct to the frame and distinct to the instance : Typicality ( I , D = E , taf , ( I + F ) - bq G - D - cf , ( I - D where / is the instance , F is the frame , i indexes the slots , / + F is the set of votes of the slot fillers of slot i that overlap in the instance and frame , F - / designates the set of voles of the fillers of slot i that are distinct ! o the frame , and / - F designates the set of votes of the fillers of slot i that are distinct to the instance . The parameters a , b , c determine the relative contributions of these sets . Figure 2 shows an example of how the typicality of an apple instance to the apple frame has been computed ( a , b , and c all have the value l ) . In this example , for the slot color , the instance and frame have 25 overlapping votes for the filler red . The frame , in turn , has 5 votes for the filler green that are distinct , and the instance has 5 votes of the filler redthat are distinct . These sets are then multiplied by the diagnosticity value of the color slot . The equation is applied to the other slots in a similar manner . AIrIrls Ilstalce Slot filIer SalicDE ? Color : nil 30 gnen 0 brorrn 0 SlaDc : rounil ZO 9qu6 $ 0 sltliiltrhil 0 Tenur : smoo | h 30 rDWh 0 burnDy 0 AlDla Frau Dilg . Slot filllr SrlbDE ? 1 . 0 Color : nil 25 gl ? en 5 trolra 0 O . 5O ShaPa : rourul l5 tquur 0 cYUnnncat 5 0 . 25 Te : tun : ! nm0r rDWhbumDy z5 E 0 T ) ipicarity ( ADDlerAlnhp ) = 1 * ( 25 - 5 - S ) + O . 5gt ( 15 - 5 - 5 ) + 0 . 25 * ( 25 - 5 - 5 ) = 21 . 15 Figure 2 . Computing the typicality of instance of apple to applc in the selective modification model . 257 258 E . I . Wisniewski and D . Gentner The selective modification modei was developed primarily to account for tipicality findings involving adjectivelnoun conceps . As discuised in the first section of this . tr " pt " r , rh ; ; " ; ; ; rhl ; - ila1or finoings . The first finding was the conjunction effect . In some cases , ihe typicality of an instance to an adjec . tive - noun cbncept exceeds its typicality to the noirri concept ( e . g . , a brown apple is more typical of brown apple than of applel . The second finding is the compatible - incompatible conjunction inect . That is , tlre conjunction effect is greater for incompatible than compatitile conjunctions . So , the extent to which a blue apple is judged more typical of ' bltu apple than apple is greater than the extent ! o which a red apple is judged niore typical of red apple than apple . The third finding was the reverse conjunctidn effect . In some cases , the typicality of a noninstance to an adjective - noun conbept is less than is typicality to the noun concept . So , a blue apple is less typicaFof red apple than it is typical of apple . The model accounts for these firidings in a sraightfor * atd * ay . For ex - ample , ! o account for the conjunctioli effect , consider the appte and brown apple franes ( shown in Figure l ) . Notice that both frames are identical except for the color slot . This slot has been niodified in brown apple ( dwing concep - tual combination ) such that the numbdr of vores for the filler browi ( i . e . , its salience ) and the diagnosticity of the slot color aregreater in brown apple than in apple . Also , the votes for the other i - olor fillers are less in brown apple than in apple . Note that more votes of the i . olor fillers for a particular brown apple will match those of brown apple than atpple , and the color slot will have greater diagnosticity in ' ' brown apple than in : bpple . Furthermore , more votes of the color slot for the particular brown apfle will mismatch those of apple than brown apple . Therefore , using the equation above , a particular brown apple will be more typical of brown apple than ap ' ple , As a ' second example , to account for the reverse conjunction effect , note thaf a particular brown apple will mismatch a highly salient filler ( i . e . , red ) | n red apple and that this mismatch will oe ' increased ( relative to apple ) by the iicreased diagnosticity of color for red apple . Therefore , the particular brownlapple will be less typical of red apple than it will be of apple . I The selective modification moddl has also proposed a mechanism for combining adverbs with adjectives an ] O nouns . In particular , the model has examined adverbs that intensify or diminish aspects of concepts . For example , an adverb like " very " appea $ to increade the filler of a slot . In " very red fruit , " " very " increases the redness of red fiuit . Other adverbs like " slightly " and " non " at ' pear to decrease a slot ' s fiildr . In " slightly red fruit " and " non red fruit , " the adverbs decrease the rednesslin redfriit . In the model , these adverbs function as scalars that multiply the saiience scores of slot fillers . The adverb " very " is a scalar greater than l , " slightly " is a scalar between 0 and l , and " non ' . ' is a scalar less than or equal to ' O . For example , " very " would multiply the votes for red in rbd apple by som0 scalar greater than 1 . Thus , very red apple would have more votes on redthin red apple would . I I f r I Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs Evidence for the Model Smith et al . empirically tested their model by collecting data that allowed them to derive the frames of various concepts and o predict typicality ratings of instances tio those ftames . They then compared the predicted typicality rat - ings of the model with actual typicality ratings of subjects . Specifically , Smith et al . had subjects list slot and filler pairs ( e . g . , colar - red ) for various examples of vegetables and fruiS ( e . g . , onion , carrot , peach , apple ) . Using these data , they constructed frames for vegetable and / rrit . The nuinber of subjects who listed a particular slot - filler pair was taken as the salience or number of voles for that slot - filler pair in the concept . Diagnosticity values for each slot were estimated by measudng the extent to which the fillers of that attribute were associated with vegetable but not fruit ( or vice versa ) . Smith et al . then calculated the typicality of the examples to fruit , vegetable and to the dight adjective - noun combinations of the four adjectives " red , " " white , " " round , " and " long " with " fruit " and " vegetable . " Next , they compared these typicality ratings predicted by the model with ttrose given by another gioup of subjects . The predicted values were highly correlated with the subject ratings for most of the adjective - noun concepts that were tested . Smith et al . also calculated the model ' s typicality ratings of examples to adverb adjective - noun concepts that paired the adverbs , " very , " " slightly , " and " non " with the adjective - noun concepts above , and compared them to subjects ' ratings . They generally found reasonable correlations between obtained typical - ity ratings and ratings predicted by the model . Evaluation of the - M odel The selective modification model has a number of suengths . First , it pos - tulates a clear , well - specified combinatorial mechanism . Second , Smith and his colleagues have carefully tested the model ' s predictions by comparing them to psychological studies of how adjectives and nouns are combined , as well as how some adverbs , adjectives , and nouns are combined . One limitation of the current model is that in general , it cannot be applied to noun - noun concepts . To understand why the model would have difficulty with constructing a noun - noun frame from two noun frames , consider one of the major processes in thb model : the slots of the adjective select the corre - sponding slots of the noun and modify them in the combination . To use one of Smith et al . ' s examples , in forming the combination shriieled apple , the slots of the adjective shriveled ( texture and shape ) , would select the corresponding texture and shape slos in the noun apple . T \ ese slots would ( and probably should ) be modified in the sftriveled apple frame . If we apply an analogous process for combining two noun frames , the slots of the predicate noun should select the corresponding slots of the head noun and modify them in the combi - 259 zffi E . J . Wisniewski and D . Gentner nation . Clearly , however , many of thefslots of the head noun frame that corre - spond to those in the predicate noun Should not be modified . For example , in dog house , likely corresponding slots rhight be texture , shape , and size ( to name a few ) . We would not want the doglhouse frame ! o contain dog ' s fillers for texture , slape , and size . Dog houses ' are not furry and shaped like dogs , and they are certainly larger than dogs . Ttius , it does not appear possible to extend the selective modification model to nonun - noun combinations without consider - able alteration . I This limitation may not be not olverly imporrant in evaluating the ' model , however . One might argue that there is form - class specificity in how concepts are combined and that the selective niodification model addresses how adjec - tive - noun concepts are formed . Other p ? ocesses are involved in noun - noun com - binations . This view is reasonable , giyen that the primary roles of adjectives and nouns are different . Adjectives inherently are predicate terms whereas nouns primarily are used as object refdens and only secondarily used as predi - cate terms . I More seriously , the generality of tne model ' s assumptions about adjec - tive - noun combination has been called into question . First , the model assumes that adjectives and nouns are combin & using a closed operation - an adjective modifies slots within the noun or adds slots to the noun that are within the adjective . Such an assumption is contrbdicted by Murphy ' s ( l9SS ) finding that subjects judged certain attributes rc bd considerably more typical of adjective - noun concepts than of either the nounJor adjective concept alone . These results imply that such attributes may not be fresent in either the adjective or tle noun concept but rather emerge through afi interaction of the noun and adjective concepts and general , world knowledge . ( Gentner and France ( 1988 ) found similar results with noun - verb combindtions . ) Second , the selective modificatioh model treats the attributes of a concept as independent . Hence , it predicts thft modifying one attribute of a concept should not affect other attributes . Ho # ever , recall Medin and Shoben ' s finding that attributes in concept combinationi can be conelated ( e . g . , wooden spoons tend to be large whereas metal spoonsftend to be small ) . This finding suggests that an adjective may affect more than bne slot in a noun . For example , in large spoon , " large " not only determines ft6 fitter of the size slot of spoon but also determines the filler of is made - of slot . ( Some of the Medin and Shoben results are open to an alternative interpretatioh , provided by Smith and Gray ( 1990F see footnote 3 ) . Besides this specific finding , there is substantial evidence that relations between attributes are very i ' iriportant and that in general , many con - cepts are best represented as havingfcomplex , relational structure ( Genrneq 1975 , 1981 , 1983 , 1989 ; Gentner & Clement , 1988 ; Gentner & France , 1988 ; Goldslone , Gentner , & Medin , t989 ; Malt & Smith , 1984 ; Medin , Altom , Edel - son , & Freko , 1982 ; Medin & Shobdn , 1988 ; Medin & Wattenmaker , 1987 ; Murphy & Medin , 1985 ; Murphy & disniewski , l989ai 1989b ; Palmer , 1978 ; I t l _ , _ l _ . _ . ' : Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 26r Norman & Rumelhart , 197 5 \ . Smith et al . also note that the model does not apply to several kinds of adjective - noun concepts . First , in some combinations , the adjective indicates a slot that is normally not a slot of the noun . For example , " upside - down " cues the slot orientation which would not normally be associated with / rzit . Thus , upside - downlrmr could not be formed by selecting the appropriate slot in fruit . Presumably , some additional mechanism would add the slot to the noun ( along with its diagnosticity , values , and the valuesl saliences ) . Second , they note that some adjectives can have complex effects on the nouns that they combine with . For example , " fake ' in " fake apple " leaves some slots of apple intact ( e . g . , slwpe , color ) bat negates others ( e . g . , taste , edibleness ) . In the next section , we will make a related claim that mass nouns ( e . g . , glass , chocolate ) have complex effects on their head nouns when they play the role of the predicate term in a combination . For all its admirable explicitness , tle selective modification model does not present a complete picture of adjective - noun combination . It may be more accurate to say that Smith and his colleagues have identified one important process that operates whgn adjectives and nouns combine . Namely , when an adjective combines with a noun , it may select one or more slots of the noun , changing their diagnosticity and the saliences of their possible fillen . It appears that other mechanisms or representational assumptions are needed to specify how general knowledge affects the combination process and how filling a slot affects other slots in the concept . There is some suggestive evidence that selec - tive modification may be a first stage in adjective and noun combination , with other processes operating later ( Smith & Gray , 1990 ) . Concept Specialization Model The concept specialization model was explicitly formulated 0o account for both the interpre [ ation of adjective - noun and noun - noun concepts . As with the selective modification model , slot filling is an important mechanism in the concept specialization model ( Cohen & Murphn 1984 ; Murphy , 1988 ) . Impor - tantly however , the model hypothesizes a second process that operates in con - ceptual combination . This process , called elaboration , is driven by people ' s general background knowledge that lies outside the concepb being combined . The model hypothesizes a richer representation for concepts than the first two models . The formulation of the concept specialization model was influenced by an AI model called KL - ONE ( Brachman , 1977 : 1978 ; 1979 ) . This model repre - sented concepts as structured sets of slots and fillers and it proposed slot filling as one of the primary mechanisms for combining concepts . ( Brachman called the mechanism slot restriction rather than slot filling . ) The concept specializa - tion model also incorporates these characteristics but differs in that it is being t ; t : il 262 | nl . Wisniewski and D . Gentner t I proposed as a psychological model of tonceptual combination . Therefore , some characteristics of the model reflect Rirdings in the psychological literature on concepts . I In this model , a concept is a structured set of slots . A slot specifies a default filler and a list of other possilile fillers that may fill the slot , weighted by typicality . The slots are structured rin the sense that relations between slots and between slots and their possible dillers are also represented . Although this aspect is not spelled out in detail , fillbrs of different slots may be statistically correlated , and may have causal , numdrical , functional , or logical dependencies between them . Concepts arc organizdd into hierarchies and can inherit slots from conceps higher in the hierarchy . l Several of the representational ainects of the model are designed to cap - ture concept typicality . In particular , the possible fillers of a slot and the sub - concepts of a concept are ordered by fypicality . The typicality of a subconcept to is p - arent concept ( e . gl , the typicaliiy of robin to bird ) is measured by com - puting the degree of family resembladce , after Rosch and Mervis ( 1975 ) . Ac - cording to Cohen and Murphy , family iesemblance is calculated by counting the number of slots and slot fillers that a dubconcept shares with the other subcon - cepts of the parent and subtracting thd number it shares with non - subconcepts of the parent . Thus , subconcepts thatlhave many slots and fillers in coinmon with each other and few in common with non - subconcepts will be more typical of the parent concept . { Concepts are combined using altwo - stage process . The first procdss is similar to that outlined in the selectivb modification model . Here , a combina - tion is created by filling one of the slots of the head concept with the predicate concept . For example , ! o interpret ele ' phant box , one would fill a slot in box ( e . 9 . , a slot like contains ' ; . with the predicate concept elephant . So , elephant box might be interpreted as " a box that coitains elephants . " Figure 3 illustrates the slot filling process for elephant bor . iThere are several ways of determining which slot to fill . First , a predicate teim may be listed in the head concept as one of the possible fillers for a slot . If , the predicate term is a possible filler of more than one slot , then presumably thre slot of which it would be more typical is selected . Second , context ( e . 8 . , a dilbourse setting ) can drive the slot - selec - tion process , by activating a slot in theihead concept . So , during a discussion of washing and the mention of a phrase like " fingei cup , " a slot will be activated that reflects a " cup used for washing fingers " interpretation of finger cup . Third , one may use general knowledge ' lo determine ttre best slot . Especially for novel combinations , the predicate termlmay not be listed as a possible filler for a slot and discourse may be insufficient for selecting an appropriate slot . The second process is called elafioration and it involves refining and aug - menting the combination , irsing world knowledge ( Murphy , 1988 ) . This knowl - edge is used to infer other likely charaiteristics of the combination . To continue the example aboVe , one might reasodably conclude that an elephant box is I llI t , I Combinatoriat Semantics of Noun Pairs 263 ldrger than the usual box and augment the combination wittr this fact ( probabiy by filling the size slot of elephant box with . large ) . One also might conclude that an elephant box , is sturdier . than the usual box and " therefore is made of wood rather than cardboard . In Figure 3 ; elephant bor has been elaborated to reflect these conclusions . Elaboration may be based on some type of plausible reason - ing process ( Collins , 1978 ; Collins & Michdlski , 1989 ) . It may also involve re - calling examples of the head concept . So , one might recall examples of boxes that contained elephants and use , them to refine and augmeirt the meaning of elephant box . Hampton ( 1985 ) calls this process extensional feedback ( see also Cohen & Murphy , 1984 ) . It involves accessing knowledge of actiral objecs in the world . ' Bor . Slot : Filler ( s ) : Color : bnovn Shape : cube - like Contairs : Made - of : cardboard Size : rnsdium Figure 3 . Usin ! slot filling and elaboration io combine cleplunt and box ro form cleplnnt box , in the ' concept specialization model . Besides the processing assumptions of slot filling and elaboration , the model also assumes that conceptual combination is typically asymmetrical : a combination of the form Xr is not at all the same as one of the form Ifr . so , for example , an apartrnentdog is not the same as a dog apartment . " This assumption has been emphasized in order to contrast the model with exteniional models of conceptual combination , in which an XY combination would be formed by intersecting the sets corresponding to x and Y . By corirmutativity of set , inter - section , this view wouldipredict that an aparffnent dog is the same as a dog apartment . The asymnietry of conceptual combination may be due 0o the differ - ent roles that the predicate and head nouns play ( Gentner & France , 1988 ) . In an xY combination , the meaning of X is more mutable ( becausf X functions as an operator ) and the meaning of Y is more " " btable ( since it serves to designate the referent of an object ) . The reverse is true , for a YX combinatioh . Therefore , the meaning of XI ' will be different from IX Evidence for the Model Murphy ( 1988 , 1990 ) details several studies that provide support for " the general assumptions of the model . one line of support for the use of , general l l " ' j - , ] Elephant Slot : ' Filler ( s ) : Color : Sray Shape : elePhant - like Size : lar8B Parts : tusks , bwrk . . . Habital zoo , savarurah Elephut , Bor Slot : * Filler ( s ) : Color : brovn Shpe : cube . lite contaiDs . - , ; Size : large Made - ot yood 2 & E . J . Wisniewski and D . Gentner knowledge comes from a previoirsly study suggesting that features appear ih a " combination which are ntt present ' in eithef the adj & tive or noun concepts brit which emerge through ah interaction of these concepts , mediated by general knowledge . In addition , Murphy ' s finding that irrelevant - adjective noun concepts were more difficult tolundbfstand than relevant - adjective noun concepts suggests that one needs to - aicess concepts outside of the constituents ( specif , ically , superordina0e concepts ) io unilerstand the former . So , in trying to understAnd cold garbage one will not ' . find an appropriate slot ih garbage , that cold can fill ( because a slot like temberature is not relevanl to garbage ) . In - stead , one must - determine an appropriate slot via inheritance from one of the superconcept s of garbage . In contrast , Iunderstanding cold beer should be easier because such a slot is represented in tlie concept Deer . Murphy ' s ( 1938 ) finding that a irelpful context speeds up the interpreta - tion of noun - noun concepts suggests ' that cohtext may aclivate slots in a con - cept , thiis speeding the combination frocess . Context may suggest a plausible slof for the predicate term , making thelcombination - process easier . Evaluarion of rhe Model { ' I " t , The concbpt specialization model provides a rinifying account of how adjectiv6 - noun and noun - noun concefits are interpreteit . In this respect , it is more general than the selective modification model ( which applies only to adjective - noun concepts ) and - the attrjbute inheritance model ( which applies only to the small subset of noun - nouhlconcepts that are conjunctive ) . It is also the only model that has attempted to iccount for the important role . of context in conceptual " combination . f On the dther hand , while the moilel ' s notion of world knowledge ( used in the elaboration proieiss ) seems neces $ ury a capture ' emeigent feaiures and ' to determine which slos tb fill , it is a v { ' ! ue principle . Murphy ( 1988 ) has noted ' that the ' model refers to " people ' s kno & ledge in a ratheriunconstrained manner and that its use of knowledge is not Spelled out to any degree . Moreover , the model has not been empirically evahiated as carefully ' as either the attribute inheritance model cir the selective modification model . Further development of the model will need to take these issuds into account . Nevertheless , the concept speci ? tization model is extremely plausible , " inOeeO , we " suspect that it is the defaujt model for combining nouns . ' However , in the next section , we will argue thnat in some cases , it is necessary to go beyond the model ' s processing and refresentational assumptions . I { particular , - dtrite tne model assumes structured representations for nouns , the impcirtance of such structure for combining concdpts has not , been demonstratdd ; We will suggest that in a number of ' no - un - nouh combinations this structut " ll * ni . n in - cludes relations between slots ) plays i u " ty important rble in the cbmbination proces ' s . geliOes an emphasis on sru6tured representations , we wiil also sug - TI { ' l J I I * l , Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 265 gest that a complete model of noun - noun combination must employ other proc - esses besides slot filling . Summary We have described a number of models of conceptual combination . . It is clear that no model is complete . There are two mAjor reasons why this is the case . First , psychological research on conceptual combination is relatively re - cent compared to work in other areas ( memory retrieval , attention , structure and processing of single concepts , erc ) . There is not yet a large base of empirical studies on how people combine concepts . We need to learn more about this cognitive process that people do naturally ' and easily . Second , as argued in the last section , any . complete model of conceptual combination . will have to be comfilicated and extensive . The approach taken in all of these models " is to carve out a piece of the problem and first attempt to understand that well . ' In doing so , these models have made a number of implicit , simplifying assumptions which make th ' em incomplete at this point in . their development . They avoid the probleni of . " who modifies whom " by assuming that combinations are composed of only two constituents . The models also implicitly assume that it is clear which meanings of the constituents are being combined ( thus avoiding the problem of lexical ambiguity ) . The models also limit the types of combinations that they address . Smith et al . ' s selective modi - fication model has been applied to a subset of adjective - noun concepts . Hampton ' s attribute inheritance model has been applied to the subset of noun - noun concepts that are conjunctive . Murphy ' s concept specialization model is the most general model - specifying how people interpret both noun - noun anil adjective - noun concepts . However , the model has not explicitly addressed the important role of conceptual structure ( e . g . , relations between slots ) in combin - ing nouns . In the next section , we will ' . suggest that this structure sometimes is involved in combining noun meanings . We will also describe other processes besides slot filling thaf operate noun - noun combinations . How oo Pnoplr Dnrrne Novrl CounrNlrroxs - Wsar rs l Powy Cnlln ? * In this section , we address the generality of slot fiiting in conceptual combination . Our goal is to examine people ' s descriptions of novel combina - tions to see how well they fit this view . We are - especially interested in deter - mining other strategies that people use to combine concepts as well as the kinds of noun representations thdt would be needed to accommodate these strategies . As mentioned , slot ' filling is a ' major component of both the selective modifica - tion model and the concept specialization model . The a ' uthors of these models imply that slot filling typically occurs when people combine concepts . The , ' 26 concept specialization model also E . J ! Wisniewski and D . Gentner a second process ( elaboratioh ) that follows slot filling . we will focus h { re bn noun - noun coricepts and will ilot . examine the geneiality of the processlfor adjeciive - nouh " on " ipt . In rerms of evahiating the two models , our data ai . . e more directly applicable to the concept specialization model ( since it explicitly addresses how noun - noun concepts are combined ) . y Assumptions add Phusibility or tnellot Fiiling process t " There are three underlying assudrptions involted in slot filling . . First , the process is applied to the head ' concdpt dnd to a slot , that the head concept con0ains or can inherit from its supbiordinate concepts . Second , the resulting combination Xf is basically aY with air additional restiiction on one of its slots . Third , the process involves restrictin ! . the filler of the slot 0o the ' predicate concept ( ahd not other concepts ) . So , iwhen forming a combination XY , people restrict ' the filler of a slot in the head ccincept Y to the predicate concept X . For example , consider a very plausible m & niirg of book box : " box that contains or holds books . " Assume that the concefi box has a number of slots that ' can be filled by other concepts . When people ' . interpret a phrase like " book box " they search ' for a slot in ' the head conceptl ' boi that can be filled by the predicate concept book . ln this case , people intbrpret . book box by filling a slot of bo : ( that con - esponds to " contains " or " ' holds " ) with book . This slot is restricted to having b6ok as is filler . A book box i3 a box except that it contains books and not otherthings . ( Of course , such a rdires6iation does . not rule out the possi - bility that a book box could contain ' iother things . " We will ' ignore this subtle distinction , ) * Intditively , it seems that slot filling is a very natural strategy for combin - ing concepts . There may be several iedbons for why people prefer this srategy . First , it allows one to use the predicat { houn as a predicate while prese ' rving the integrity or cohesiveness of is meaning , as well as the meaning of ' the head noun . That is , slot filling may involvb mirtor adjustments to noun meanings . Gentner ( 1981 , 1982 ) has suggested thht concrete nouns , relative to other parts of speech , have highly coherent , int0rnally constrained meanings and that people prefer 0o preserve those mean ' ings whenever they cah . Simple nouns typically fefer to objects in the world ' , and their meanings incorporate a large amount of perceptLal information tra - i is determiired Ui ' ttrose oUjects . Other paits of speech , est ' ecially verbs , are lLss tightly constrained by the perceptual world . As previously noted , verbs are fiore likely to change their me - anings than nouns ( Gentner & France , 1988 ) . Al5o , compared to nouns , languages vary more in terms of which meaning compbnents ' they conflate into verbs ( Gentner , l98i ; 1982 ; cf . Talmy , 1978 ) . f . . Slot filling amounts to asserting d relation between the head noun and the predicate noun ( erg . , " box that containrs books " ) and does not disrupt the basic [ . . rf t , i , . , Cornbinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 267 meanings of the nouns . Of course , slot filling may aller the meaning of either noun to some extent . For example , assume that " pear pie " means " a pie made - of pears " and that pear fills the nade - of slot ofpie . In this case , the predicate noun " pedi " probably refers to sliced and pe€led pears rather than the typical pear . As another example , the head concept soap in tank soap is probably different than the typical soap ( e . g . , more abrasive , more concentraled ) . It is likely that the meanings of these nouns have been altered . Howeve4 they proba - bly retain enough of their original meanings so that people would aglee that they still refer to pears and soap . Later , we will present examples suggesting that this is not always the case . Second , in terms of computation , slol filling may be an easier strategy than others . In general , one only has to check the meaning of the predicate noun rather than io , alter its structure . Specifically , slot filling may require that one check whether the predicate noun fis certain constraints on the slot . In the example of pear pde , filling the nade - of , slot of pie with pear might involve checking whether pear ftts a constraint ' bn the made - ol slot such as being ed - ible . In contrast , we will suggest that other strategies require one to dismantle and significantly alter the meaning of one or both nouns . That is , some strate - gies involve najor adjustments to noun meanings . Presumably , these adjust - ments are more computationally complex than those involved in slot filling . Ax ExpnnrMENT The study that we will ilescribe was largely exploratory in nature . We were interested in assessing the generality of slot filling as well as discovering other combinatorial strategies and the corresponding representations that they operate upon . One way to examine such strategies is to collect a large number of descriptions of many novel combinations . The obvious problem with this approach is that one needs a way to meaningfully sample from the huge number of possible noun combinations . To introduce . some constraints , we varied nouns along three conceptually important dimensions : predicate versus head noun po - sition , artifact versus natural kind , and count noun versus mass noun . Intuitively , we also believed that nouns varying along these dimensions niight interact in interesting ways when they were combined . These interactions might result iri situations where slot filling * as more or less preferred as a combinatorial strategy . For example , intuitively , the " predicate versus head noun position " probably cues whether a noun is an operator or a referent . gn the other hand , count nouns and mass nciuns " may differ in terms of how natural it is to use tlem as referents and operators . Objecs ( particularly artifacts ) are often composed of mass quantities ( e . g . , windows made of glass , vases made of clay , etc ) . One uses count nouns to refer to such objects rathe ; than the mass terms of which they are composed of . Therefore , in a novel combination , one might prefer ' to use a codnt noun as an object referent and a mass noun as an 268 E . J . Wisniewski and D . Gentner noun : noun phrases . Each of 20 subjecfs defined 20 of these noun - noun phrases . operator . A massArtifact - count combination preserves the preferred roles of the constituents whereas an artifact - counVmass combination violales those roles . As a result , it might be more , straightiorward to interpret a mass / artifact - count combination by slot fitUng rhan an dtiifact - counVmass combinarion . In fact , in the predicate position , massnouns miy functiori like adjectives , picking out , a particular slot ( i . e . , composition ) to f { 1 . On the other hand , subjects migtrt uSe some other strategy ! o interpret countlmass terms ( e . g . , use the predicate noun as the referent and the head noun as an operator ) . We used three groups of nounl ! o crea0e the noun - noun phrases . One group consisted of 10 count nouns afid a second . grouf consisted of . l0 mass noqqs . A third group of nouns consistdd of l0 count nouns , as in the first group . Half of the nouns in each group were * artifaqts and half were natural kinds . The three groups of nouns are shown in f ; igure 4 . To ' form noun phrases , we first paired each noun ' from group . l with 6ach . noun from group 3 and paired each noun from group 2 . with each noun from ' group 3 . This procedure resulted in 200 pairings . It also resulted in a hibrarchy , of combination types , shown in Figure S . ' For each " pairing , we thenfformed the two ' noun - noun phrases that were possiblg ( e . g . , for the pairing df " robin " and " clock , " the two . phrdses " robin clock " and " clock robin " werelpossible ) . This procedure resulted in 400 frog box chY ' moosc chair coDper tobln Dan ' soJtd t skuik ralr sbn6 tger vhrc augar candychocohEglasJ DaPer Dlastic bookcar . clrick , ladiler peruil 1 . : cleDt $ nt ttrhDony fislrc squinel descriptions of their most likely meanings . They . were told to pretend that they r , ' . L i , ' l ' ' t . 1 " " , . f I i " - . t Figure 4 . The three groups of nouns used in the , ' experiment . t ! - , " " 1 4 . l . Subjects rdad the novelhoun - noin phrases and were asked to write down snalc - candy fbhsbm car Combinatorial Sernantics of Noun Pairs pan squurel 269 , der ' box Figure 5 . A hierarchy of combination types ( with examples of each type ) used in rhe experiment . had just heard a phrase during a conversation and that they should think of a meaning that seemed most natural to them . Subjecs were instructed to try to arrive at meanings that were specific and clear and to define every phrase . i Generality bf Slot fitling . , To look at the generality of slot filting , wd asked two quesiions about a description that would provide evidence for rhd slot filling view . Thii first ques - tion was what is the referent of a subjecs ' description : Slot filling predicts that the referent will be a tyile of rhe head . concept . For example , . if a subjecr described book box as above , " a box that cohtains or tlblds book , " then tlie referent would clearly , be a type of box . ln most of - the subjects ' descriptions , th ' e referent could be determined syn ' uctically . Typilitly , as in this example , it f - \ r , 1 , " t 270 t ' E . l . Wisniewski and D . Gentner I is the first noun that is mentioned in tlre subject ' s description . However , this is not always tle case . For example , cofisider the description for chocolate pony , " a pony made of chocolate . " Syntactic ' atty , a pony is being described . However , conceptually , the referent is not reallyla pony , but rather chocolate in the slnpe of a pony ( according to our intuitions ) l fhg second queStion is whether ilt or part of a description can be charac - terized as Y slot - relation " X , _ where Yiis the head concept , X is the predicate concept , and - sloi - relation is some relation being asserted between I and X that corresponds to a slot contained in thq ; head concept . The description of book box cin be characterized as a ' Y sloVrelation X ( " box concains books " ) . In contrdst , a description such as " squirrbl with a black sripe down is back " for squinel skunk , cannot be characteriz€d in this manner , as no relation is being asserted between skunk and squirrel . Rather , it appears that a property of squir - rel is being asserted of skur * . " $ To address the first question ( i . d . , to determine the referents of the sub - jects ' descriptions ) , we gave the deScriptions to a group of . undergraduate . judges . Each of 20 judges read half ( 100 ) of the definitions . For each descrip - tion , they determined whether the refeient was a type of the predicate concept , a type of the head concept , both , or Some other object . Specifically , subjects were asked to answer the following eupstion about each description : What is the object that is being dlscribed ? That is , what would be the best name for the object that - worild let someone know what it really is . For a given description , this procedurre resulted in l0 judgements about the identity of the referents . [ , The referent of a description whs determined by the consensus of the judges . In general , the head noun was [ the referent , as predicted by slot fillingl The judges believed that a majority ofithe descriptions described types or kinds of the head concept . Interestingly , hoviever , for 151 , ( 39Eo ) of the 400 descrip - tions , the head concept was not the referent . Two exdmples of this violation were chair ladder , which was de - scribep as " a chair that for necessity is used as a ladder , " and paper eleplwnt , which d , qs described as . " paper in the shape of an elephant . - " ( Notice that in the both ca ' i6s , the predicate noun functions as the referent and head noun as the operator ) Two examples of descriptions in which the head concept was judged as the referent werb " a tiger that preys on horseV ponies , etc " for pony tiger , and " glass - for holding fencils " for pencil glass . To addies3 the ' second question ( i . e . , to determine whether a description could be characterized as a Y slot - reldtion X ; , two graduate studelnts from the , University of Michigan rbad each defihition anO Oecided which of two catego - . ries it belonged to . If a description iniluded a relation bet * een the two gbj " " tt napeg in the phrase ; it was placed . iii the relation category . Otherwise , the _ de ' scription was _ categorized ' as . other . lWc gave th . e ratep , several dxam " ples of ; l j t I i I the relation dnd other categories ; usihg descripiions that were not from the Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs experiment . For example , they were told that " a factory that is smelly and p ( rcesses fish " belonged to the relation category , as it asserts a " processes " relation between / actory andfish . As another example , they were told that " a dangerous man " belongs to the other category ( no relation is being asserted between a pair of nouns ) . Also , some descriptions specified a relation between the head and predicate noun even though one of the nouns was not explicitly mentioned . An example of such a description was " a tiger that likes to read a lot " for the phrase book tiger . In this description , a relation between book and tiger is srongly implied even though book has been omitted from the descrip - tion . Judges were instructed to place these descriptions in the relation category . Note that this procedure provides a liberal test of the generality of slot filling . The ralers only determined that a relation was being asserted between the head concept and predicate concept . They did not have to judge which relations . corresponded to slos contained in the head noun . This leads to a generous count , for it includes relations that may not be part of the head noun ' s frame . For example , one might argue that in the description for ladder skuftk , " a skunk . , that climbs ladders , " the slot being filled in skunk ( i . e . , climb ) oigi - nates in ladder . ( Certainly , climbing is much more typical of ladders than of skunks . ) The procedure also does not distinguish those descriptions based solely on slot filling from those that included other strategies in addition to slot filling . The two raters initially agreed on 879o of their judgments about the de - scriptions . Differences in scoring were discussed and resolved . The raters judged only 407o of the descriptions as stating a relation . Ttvo examples of descriptions that were categorizel as relation were " a pan for frying fish " for ft . sh pan , and " car made out of copper " for copper car . Two examples of de - scriptions that were judged as other were " a square box " for box clock and " a ladder whose rungs are far apart " for frog ladder . The resuls of these analyses suggest that nouns are not always combined by slot filling . Indeed , the majority of the descriptions in our corpus were not classified as Y slot - relation X . An examination of those descriptions that did not conform to slot filling suggests two general conclusions . First , there are other important processes besides slot filling that are used to combine nouns . Some of these processes involve major adjustments to meaning ( relative to slot fill - ing ) . Second , some of these processes operate on noun representations that are more complex than those currently proposed in the literature . We will argue that noun representations must include more than slots and fillers . Importantly , they must include relations between slots within a noun ( i . e . , internal relations ) as well as relations between slots of different nouns ( i . e . , external relations ) . In addition , fillers of slots can themselves be complex structures ( i . e . , nested struc - tures ) . Below , we describe some of these conjectured processes and the repre - sentations that they operate upon . At this point , we will make no claim about thet generality , except to say that the noun - noun descriptions that suggest these processes were not rare occurrences in our data . 271 I x 272 t t Orrun Srnlrpcrns ron Go E . J . Wisniewski and D . Gentner MBINTNG Nouu Mnlxrncs I As , we have suggested , slot filltg is an example of a process that pre - serves the basic meanings of the pred ' icate and head nouns . The combination that results from slot filling is a typg of the head noun witl some relation ( designated by the slot ) to the predicaG noun . In general , this process does not significantly alter the meaning of eithdr noun . We will now suggest that ' many of the descriptions that do not conforni ' to slot filling reflect processes in which only part a / the meaning of the predicate noun is involved in the resulting combination . We will also suggest thlt under some conditions ( for example , often when mass and count nouns co ' inUinel only part of the meaning of the head noun is involved in the resulting iombination . A large number of the subjects ' ddscriptions ( approximately 3OEo ' ) had the form property Y or Y with propeity , where I is the head concept ( e . g . , " a large frog " , was the definirion for elephant fyog ) . In these descriptions , a property is being asserted of the head concept , rather than a relation between . the predicate concept and the head concept ( as in slbt filling ) . That is , the predicate noun is not participating as a whole in the resnulting combination . It is not playing the role of a slot filler . What role then iloes it play in such combinations ? We suggest that the predicate noun plays ? at least two other roles besides being a slot filler . First , in a process called property nwpping , theftller of a slot in the predicate concept is used as a filler irijthe conesponding slot of head concept . Second , in a process called , structurelmapping , 6 the complex structure of the predicate noun guides the creation of . Xnew structure or the transformation of existing structure in the head noun . We illustrate these processes using some e " amples taken from our data . Besiddp property mapping and structure map - ping , we will also discuss complex effects that occur when mass nouns in the predicate position combine with counthouns in the head noun position . ' t Property Mapping t t ' To illusrrate this process , considei the description , " a red snake , " t } tat was given by a subject for robin snate . Thib description does not fit the slot filling view since a slot in snake is not beindfilled with the predicate conceptrobin . ( A description for robin snake that would involve slot filling is " snake that eats robins " ) . Instead , it appears ttrat the filier red of the slot color in robin & comes the filler for the color slotin snake , as illustrated in Figure 6 . ( In this figure and those that follow , we have added un ' specified connections between slots to emphasize the importance of relations . ) Here , the color slot of robin is ' aligned ( or put into correspondence ) with thel ' color slot of snake . The filler of color ( red ) is then mapped across and becombs the filler of the color slot in snake . As in the standara niern of slot filling , a slbt in the head concept is affected and the I I I f . , fi Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 273 resulting combination XY is basically a Y , with an additional restriction on the slot . However , property mapping restricts the slot to the ftller of a slot in the predicate concept rather than the predicate concept . Notice that this process leaves the meaning of the head noun basically intact . However , the prddicate concept , contributes only a small part of its meaning to the combination . As described , one could incorporale property mapping ino the concept specialization model without altering the the model ' s basic assumptions . The slot filling mechanism would consider both slot fillers in the predicate concept and the predicate concept iself as potential fillers for head noun slots . More - over , the mechanism could still operate successfully on a list of sloS and fillers Srale Slot : Filler ( r ) : dau : lq $ exture : : rodenlssrrooth Figurc 6 . Using property mapping to combine robin end snakz to form robin snakc . ( the representation for nouns that is emphasized in the model ) as long as an alignment of slots could be made to guide the property mapping . However , the next process that we consider is quite different from this augmenLed view of slot filling and requires more complex representations . Structure Mapping We will illusnate this process using three examples taken from our data . The first example is pony chair , which was defined as " a small chair . " This description does not fit the slot filling view since a slot in chair is not being filled with the predicate concept pony . One might be tempted to classify this description as an an example of property mapping . Here , the filler smcll of the slot size in pony fills the size slot in chair , yielding the interpretation of pony chair as a small - sized chair . However , note that the typical pony is actually larger than the typical chair . If one literally interpres pony chair as a chair similar in size to a pony , then paradoxically , a pony chair will be larger than most chairs ! The resolution rests on noting that " small " is a relative adjective and that ponies are small relative to other horses . We suggest that pony chair literally means a chair that is small relative to other chairs . How then were pony and chair combined to yield this meaning ? To ifiterpret pony chair in this manner , we suggest that the representations of ponytand chair must be more complex Robin $ ot : Filler ( r ) : f - { ats : vorms ( 6r9ru lfoud : cbirps l ! = Parls : beat , fmttrers . . a \ a a aa Robil Saale Slot Filler ( r ) : Color : red I + at6 : rodents lpTexhre : smooth l . ! + a $ s : fangr , scala . . 274 E . I . Wisniewski and D . Gentner relation ( i . e . , less - than ) between its stlze slot and the size slot of horse which represents the fact that ponies are snlall relative to other horses . To combine pony and chair , a similar relation is cieated between the size slot of pony chair and the size slot of chair . The relatioh represents the fact that pony chairs are Figwc 7 . Using structure mapping ro combine jony and clrair to fomt pony chair . small relative to other chairs . This dxample illustrates a structure mapping ifto conespondence ) rhe size slot of pony which involves aligning ( or putting into correspondence ) the size slot of pony with the size slot of pony chair and tlie size slot of horse with the size slot of chair ( see Figure 7 ) . Then , a less - thaft relation is mapped across between the size slots of pony clnir and chair , leading to the notion of a small chair . ? There are several important diffd " rences between this process and those of property mapping and slot filling . Firsi , neither the predicate concept or a filler of one of its slots functions as a slot filler . Rather , a structural relation between one of its slots and the slot of anothbr ( closely associated ) item guides the creation of a new , similar structural r6lation in the head concept . Second , the process operat€s on and creates repreientations that are more complex than a list of slos and fillers . In this examfle , the representations include relations between slots of different concepts ( i . e ' , , external relations ) . A second example is snake g / als , which was described as a " tali , very with the size slot of pony chair and I l Il I t , thin drinking glass . " Once again , thisr de ' scription does not fit the slot filling view , How then were snake and g / css tombined ? First , note that a snake glass resembles the shape of a snake in soriie way . We suggest that in general , the Slot Filler ( r ) : Cobr : bron , tzhib , TdtE ! : firrt Fnd : Drght Pony Chrir Slot Filler ( r ) : cobr : bIDwIr , bbk , Un . . . Tertur : - . * * ' T ? : ( t [ E : : : l - rmmth ! l . ilc - od : J I vood , nrGl , plarrfo . . IrcaIDn : I livlrg rEm . kibhrn i ' zc : - 2 Cheir Slot : Filler ( r ) : $ lor : brovrr , bbk , 6n . . . Tertrt : = - trlooth raxnuE : = h trlooo Md . { f : J I vmd , rlrbl , Dlrrr $ . . Lmton : I [ l , ' lng rDom , llthon Sipc : - J 3 Habilat : - 1 farm , rrmlt . S : c . - l 6 < l - Horre Slot : Fitler ( r ) Color : trctra , T ' ItoI ! : fury Sourd : n Cht Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs shape slot specifies a complex structure that relates various aspects of shape to each other ( cf . Palmer , 1975 ; Marr & Nishihara , 1978 ; Biederman , 1985 ) . In the concept snake , this structure might ( among other things ) indicate that the typi - cal snake is much longer than it is wider . In the concept glcss , this structure might ( among other things ) indicate that ttre typical glass is somewhat taller than it is wider . In this example , we believe that the shape of glass is modified in a way thatis analogous ta the shape of snake . Just as a snake is much longer than it is wider , a snake glass is much taller ttran it is wider . Figure 8 outlines how structure mappiirg might operate to produce snak glass . Notice the vari - ous parts of structure that have been aligned ( e . g . the length slot of snake has been aligned with the height slot of glcss . ) The process results in the height of snake glass being increased relative to its width . Unlike the example of pony chair , existrng structure in g / ass is being transformed to create snake glass Figurc 8 . Using structure mapping to combine sna b md glass to fotm snakt glass , rather than new structure being added . on the other hand , interpreting snate glcss in the manner described might result in the new knowledge that snake glasses are longer than typical glasses . Therefore , one would need ! o augment snake glass with a longer - than relation between the tength slot of snake glass and the length slot of glass . ( i . e . , an exlernal relation ) . A final example is ladder rake which was defined as " utensil which is elongated so as to use 0o reach high places . " As in the examples before , this de - scription is not a case of slot filling . we present one possible interpretation of how ladder and rake are combined . First , assume that the function of ' Iadder rake actvally shares aspects of both the function of ladder and of rake . Like ladders , ladder rakes are used to reach high places . Although not specified , one might als6 surmise that they are used to collect or gather things from high ' places , thus preserving aspects of the function of rakes . Figure 9 sketches how Iqdder and rake might be combined . Notice that the fillers of the function slots point to complex structures which we have represented using notions derived from case grammar . To combine ladder and rake , the function of ladder is 275 Shape : length y - q widrh z - lJ Shape : length y - 2 height x - l tlwidth z - Z l - heightx - 2 the function of rake . Specifically , ttreiilers of the source and destinatlon slots of thefunction of ladder are mapped abross and become the fillers of the source and destination slots of the function oi rake ( see Figure 9 ) . As h result , a ladder rake has a function that is similar to th ' at of a rake except that one uses a ladder rake o rake in a vertical direction rath6r than a horizontal direction . Notice also 276 aligned with that of rake . T \ e EJ . Wisniewski and D . Gentner of ladder rakc is created by modifying Rafing , Slot : Filler ( rl : 0tcnt sourc : I tbrrbr 9kt ( wn , ilalt I cle phr4v ! n . ) iltrl llfCuntc ( str rrl ura transforrmtlon ) Climbing Slot : Filler ( s ) : R , Slot : . t { r [ l : I ' souIcc : . ilrrt . inrtc | * " " t I Filler ( r ) : I I | crn toulpt : daJt : lnE cb $ Dbo ( rtr ( F torlbr Dlac ? ( * rt ) hldcr - cle place ( horlr . ) ttt ( I Figvc 9 . Using structure mipping to cqnbine liiler and rakc to form lailer rakz . Y that the filler of the slnpe slot of Uf , au rake isdifferent from that of rake ( ladder rakes are longer than rakes bec ' ause they are used to reach high places ) . The change in the slwpe slot is an eiample of interacting properties ( srie the first section ) . In particular , the funcddn ud slwpe slots must include relations between them that capture these interactions . A variation on the structue - madping process is that a slot that is filled may actually be one that is inherited , by the head concept from the predicate concept . Two examples are clock rlgei which was defined as " a tiger that can tell time " and ponylrog which was d ' bfined as " a frog that is trained to ride ponies . " In both of these ( somewhat s ' trange ) examples , ttre relation being as - serted is strongly associated with thelnredicate concept rather than the head concept . These examples illustrate strircture creation as a novel slot is being added to the head concept . ItI I I I Slot ShD . : - l Cobr : I Mdlof : . : tl FuErb [ L _ l : Filler ( r ) : IfitgtHft . . t @ r : r nEd , lrtl Laddcr Rrtc $ ot Fillor ( c ) : shF : - l L . oSlDFt6fi . Cobe I tmrr ! Dtdr - o ( : - tl rrooil , rrttl FuElbs : lJ oF $ Z Combirwtorial Semanrtcs of Noun Pairs Complex Effects of Mass Tbrms Mass , terms oflen refer to substances that things are made of . For ex - ample , the mass noun " glass " refers ! o a substance that many objects are made of - windows , vases , bottles , plates , and so on . Therefore , people may be biased to interpret a combination of the form mass term - count term as naming an object that is made of the mass term . In fact , according to our judgment , 59 % ( 59 out of 100 ) of the descriptions of mass - count terms described an object that was made of that mass term . Some of these descriptions explicitly stated this relation , as in " a clock made out of coppe . r " for , copper clock . Otbet descrip - tions were less explicit , as in " s0atuen for stone snakz . However , it also appears that interpreting a combination in this manner has important effects beyond just indicating the composition of an object . These effects are related ! o semandc differences in the head nouns that we used in this study . Recall that a head noun was either an artifact or an animal natural kind ( see Figure 5 ) . In general , an artifact can be made of a variety of substances ( often named by mass nouns ) whereas a given animal is generally believed to be composed of one kind of substance . One can often assert that an artifact is made of a variety of different substances and still preserve the identity of the artifact - what appears important though is that the function of the artifact be preserved ( Gelman , 1988 ; Keil , 1986 ; 1987 ) . A plate for example , can be made of wood , metal , plastic , glass , and so on , and still be a plate ( being made of such substances does not affect its function ) . On the other hand , a dog can ' t be made of wood or plastic and still be a real dog . This difference between artifacts and animals suggest diffrJrent conditions under which head nouns will lose their referential priveleges . When a mass - animal term describes an object made of the mass term , the referent will be some object other than the animal . For example , the description of chocolate snake ( ' chocolate in the shape of a snake " ) names an object that is made of the mass term . , The referent is also the mass 0erm ( " chocolate " ) rather ' than the animal ( " squirrel " ) . In this example , the head noun has given up its referential priveleges to the predicate noun . Of course , squirrel still confers ils shape on the referent . ( In fact , in many contexts , slape may be an important property for determining reference . Even though the head noun loses its refefential privel - eges , it may in a sense , " effect a compromise , " by contributing an important property for determining reference . ) In contrast , one can usually intepret a mass - artifact term as an " artifact made of mass ! erm " if doing so would preserve the artifact ' s function . In these cases , the artifact retains its referential privileges as the head noun . However , if such a description would fail to preserve the artifact ' s function , then the refer - ent will be some object other than the artifact . Two examples from our data illustrate these different cases . The referent of clay ladder ( ' a ladder made of clay " ) was judged to be ladder . this description also appears ! o preserve the n7 2t8 E . I . Wisniewski and D . Gentner function of ladder - i . e . , one could usi a clay ladder for climbing . on the other hand , the referent of candy ladder ( " d long strip of candy " ) was judged to be candy . It appears that function of ladder would not have been preserved if the term was literally interpreled as " a hdder made of candy . , , As evidence for these hypothesesr , recall that there were 59 descriptions of mass - count terms that referred to objec ] s made of those mass terms : 27 of these descriptions involved mass - animal ter ' ms and 32 descriptions involved mass - artifact lerms . A group of undergraduab luages had determined the referents of these descriptions . In 96 % ( 26 of 2l ) cit the mass - animal terms , the animal term failed to retain irs referenrial privilegel rn 66 % ( 21 of 32 ) of rhe mass - arrifact terms , the artifact retained its referentilal privilege . For the rirass - artifact terms , we have not systematically evaluated Shether retaining versus giving up refer - ential privilege corresponds to preserving versus violating an ob . lect ' s function . However , in those combinations in which the artifact tcrm gave up its referen - tial privilege , it did appear that inter $ reting them as " arrifact made of mass term " would have violAted their functicins . tl Suu ' rvranv I These preliminary results rugg " rt that there may be a variety of mecha - nisms that operate in conceptual comtiination . Although we did find evidence for slot filling , it was by no means tlie only strategy that people used . Most notably , another very common st ategf was aligning the structures of the two nouns and mapping part of the predicdte noun ' s structure oirto the structure in ' the head noun . Either a filler from the lredicate noun was mapped to fill a slot in ' the head noun ( property mapping ) or , a relation between slos in the predicate noun ( or between a predicate slot and a [ slot in a related concept ) was mapped to the head noun ( structure mapping ) . In [ either case , the predicate noun is ( in a sense ) dismantled : instead of filling a Slot in the head noun it yields part of its meaning in forming a combination . Fihally , we also shciwed that people com - bine mass and count terms in complex ' ways . They often inlerpret a mass - count phrase as naming an object whose corhposition is indicated by the mass term but whose referent is not always a typelof the head concept . In particular , if the head noun names a natural kind , it will lose is referential priveleges although it may contribute an important referentialfproperty ( i . e . , its shape ) to the combina - tion . If the head noun names an artifact , it generally retains its referential priveleges unless the composition of the combination violates the function of the artifact . I One possible objection to the present study is that we collected just a single definition for each combination hnd that our results reflect idiosyncratic responding in our subjects . For examplL , if we asked a large number of people what a pony robin was , would the majority hctually respond " a robin with a tail : ' ( as the subject in our experimentl " did ) ? Probably not . Ilowever , while a t I I ! I I Combiratorial Semantics of Noun Pairs 279 . description for a given combination might be idiosyncratic , the different strate - gies disc - ussed ab < ive were not rare occuirences . For example , property mapping and structure mapping werc common strategies across ' subjects . - " A second possible objection is that our results are based on unusual or even bizarre noun - noun compounds that one rar6ly ' enlbunters in typical natural langnage contexts . For example , how oflen does one encounter , a phrase like " chair potry , " consisting of a natural kind and an artifact ? We have two answers to this objection . First , individtul constituenis of the compounds are not ' un : usual . Therefore ; studying how meanings of common words interact ( even if their occurring in the same cont€xt is unlikely ) could shed light on the nature of the meanings themselves . We believe that conceptual combination , like analogy and metaphor , forces words to reveal aspects of their meanings that may not become apparent in more usual contexts ; In fact , ' the interactions between word " meanings that we found suggest that the representations of individual constitu - ents need to be structured and complex . Second , a number of the combination types that we used in this experiment ( see Figure 5 ) do appear in our language , , as indicated by lexicalized entries in the dictionary . Some examples of natural - kind pairs include : tiger salamander , sparrow hawk , moose bird , dog salriron , and gopher snake . Natural - kind artifact pairs include : whale boat , monkey jacket , book scorpion , carpet beetle , ' and olster rake . Artifact natural - kind pairs includb : trumpet flower , guitar fish , chimney swallow , rizor clam , and pill bgS . Mass - count lerms inchide : paper knife , clay pigeon , slone fln coal fish , and plastic bomb . The findings raise a number of interesting issues . For e : iample , we have suggeSted that slot filling is the default strategy for combining noun meaninis . An obvious question is when do people . adopt other strategies like property mapping and structure mapping ? At this point , we can only speculate on the answer " to this qdestion . We can think of at I ' east two conditions which might promote the use of property mapping and structure mapping . First , the more similar two objects are , the easier it should be to map properties or structures . from one object ! o tlre other . In this context , similarity specifies the degree to which one frame can be aligned with another . In a combinaiion such as zebra horse , high similarity may bias people to map properties fr6m zebra ta horse . Informally , when asked to describe a zebra horse , penple typically respohded , ' " a horse with stripes " ( which is an example of property mapping ) . Although high similarity may facilitate the mapping of properties and structure , people may still interpret some combinations by slot filling . For example , two vbry plausible descriptions of dolphin shark arc " shark with a dolphin - like nose " , ' ( property mapping ) and " shark that eats dolphins " ( slot filling ) . It may Ueitrat a highly salient , plausible relation between two objects can override mapping processes . . . A second condition which might encourage mapping processes is the dif - ficulty of finding a plausible relation between objects . ' As a result , people are 280 E . J . Wisniewski and ' D . Gentner not able to meaningfully combine nci [ ns Uy " slot filling ( their default strategy ) and must consider other strategiesr For various reasons , a plausible relation between two objects may not exist . Factors like high dissimilarity of two ob - jects and their low co - occurrence in the environment may rule out such ' a rela - - tion . This condition may apply - to r9 + " of our examples of strucrure mapping , ( such as snake glass and pony chair ) . \ . There are many other interestihg questions that futue research might address : For example , at some level , dan we reiiably predict the meanings that subjects will construct for , novel comtrinations ? Can we reliably predict which combinations are moie difficult to unherstahd than others ? Are some meaniirgs , of novel combinations " better than ot } r ' brs ' ! ( as judged by subjects ) and why ? At this time ; we have little to say about theserissues . ' The major goal of the current work has been . to determine the stratejies thai people use and tle nature of noun ' j ' representations required for tlose stratbgies . Once we have a better appreciation of thesC issuOs , we can ' begin to addre $ s the more difficult questions . : t ' ' ' - , Acknowledgments * + . " k t , This research was supported " inTpart " by the Natiolnal Institute of Child Health anil Human Development undpr Fellowship Award I F32 ' HD07279 - 01 to theTirst author . It was also suppofted ' by thd National . Science Foundation undei Grant BNS 87 - 20301 ' and by lthe Office of ' Educational " Researchl . and Improvement under Cooperative Ag ? eement No . G0087 - Cl00l - 90 with the 4eaaing and Education Center . We irave bcnefited from discirssions of this wort wittr Arthur Markman , Dougli ' S Medin , Gregory Vurphy and Edward Smith . i : r : i . ! Noies : , f t I We use italics to indicate coiicepts br parts of coricepts , and reserve quotes for the words that ddnote thosdconcepts . ' 2 We use the terms " head concblt " ' and * predicate " concept to capture an irhfortant foint : First , is disiusse ' d tielow , a nbun - nouri cohbination of the form ' Xy typicaliy ' refers . n aY andhot an X - e . g . , a dog apartinent is an apartmbnt dnd i , ot a dog . Therefoib ; i cetermines more oi the meaning ' of XI . In this sense , I is the head or main $ 1cept . In fact , one can view conceptual . ! combination as an ati , stiact function X ( Y ) in which X acts as an ' operator on Y . [ n this sense , it i5 a predicate . t " t 3 There are h number . of i ; ubtldti . es about frames and frame instances that i we ' will ignore in thii paper . For exaniple , the semantics of fillers are different in frame ! and - frame initances . In a frdme instance ; a slot and its fillef specify a iact that is actually true of a partic ' ular , object . So , ( robin ' I7 color red - 13 ) roughly ineans that the color of a pditibular robin is a particular ' red . ( Here , numberi are alipended to robin and reb to distinguish them : from other instances . , f i , r " * ' i , - , S , ' l l lt C ombinatorial Semantic s ' of N oun P airs of robins and their instances of color . ) In contrast - a slot and filler of a frame specify a default fact about an object . So , . ( robin color red ) roughly means that the color of robins is typically red a Smith and Gray ( 1990 ) provide an alternatirie interpretation for some of these feature interactions . Specifically , they suggest that people alreaily may be familiar with sorile combinations and that feature interactions do not resrilt from a combination process but rather from experience ' with examples of the familiar combination . So , people may already be familiar with the combination woodcn spoon , and may haie acquired their belief that ' wooden , spoons are large from experience with . examples of wooden spoons . In this view , knowledge that wooden spoons are large is not derived from combiningwoodcn and spoon but ratler from examining examples of wooden spoons after the combination proc - ess . * 5 While acknowledging that their ' representations are much like . frames , Smith et al . actually use the terms attribute and value for slot and filler and the tenn prototype for ftame . 6 Structure mapping is the mapping of relational structure from the predi - cate noun ' s meaning to the head noun ' s meaning ( as in Gentner ' s ( 1983 , 1989 ) discussion of analogy ) 7 We have assumed that the meaning of pony . was accessed . in order ! o interpret pony chair as a small chair . It is plausible that one may have accessed the meaning of pony & eg instead . Nevertheless ; we would claim that similar processing and representational assumptions would still hold . The basic differ - ence would be that structure mapping would operate on a relation between slots of pony keg and teg instead of between slots of pany . and horse . References Biederman , I . ( 1985 ) . Human image unders0anding : Recent , " r " ar . h and a ' theory . Computer Vision , Graphics , and Image P . rocessing , 32 , 29 - 73 . Brachman , R . J . ( 1977 ) . What ' s iri a concept ? Structural foundations for seman - tic networks . I nt e r natio n al J o ur nal , of M an - M a c hine S tudie s , 9 , L27 - 152 . Brachman , R . J . ( 1978 ) . A structural paradigm for representing knowledge . BBN Report No . 3605 , Cambridge , . MA , . ' Brachman , R . J . ( 1979 ) . On the epistemological slatus of semintic networks . [ n N . V Findler @ d . ) , Associative networks : . Representation and use of knowledge by computers . " New York : Academic Press . ' Brautigan ; R . . ( 1967 ) . Trout fishing in America . New York : Dell Publisher ' s . Clark , E . V . , Gelman , S . A . , & Lane , N . ' M . ( 1985 ) . Compound no - uhs and category structure in young children . Child Development , 56 , 89 - 94 . Clark , H . . H . ( 1983 ) . . Making sense of nonce sense . In G . B . Flores d ' Arcais & R . Jarvella ( Eds . ) , Tle process of understanding language . New York : Wiley . 28r a : . s 282 EJ . Wisniewski and D . Gentner Collins , A : ( 1978 ) . H " tunai ilausible . BBN Report # 3810 , Cambr - ' , theory Cognitivi Scienc , i , l3 , 1i50 . ) ohen , B . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . M , odels of ccincepts . Cognitive Science ; 8 , Cohen , B . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . 27 - 58 . { - Cottrell ; 6 . W . ( 198S ) r A model ' of lexlical ' access of ambiguou . * orOr . In ' S . , L . chology , in press . , Halff , , Hr M . , Ortony , A . , & Anderson , [ R . C . ( 1975 ) . A context - sensitive rcpre - T - . 1 ! Small , G . W . Cottrell , & M . F Tanenhaus ( Eds . ) , I * ical antbiguity re so lutio n : P er s p e c t iv e s fro m p sy c hol i n g uis ti c s , ne nro ' p sy c hb t o gy & arti - ' licial intelligence . San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann Publisheis . Dowriing , P . ( 1977 ) , orr the creationland ' use of English compound nouirs . . , Languafe , s3 , 810 - 842 . I ) Finin , T . ( 1980 ) . The semantic interpr6tation of , nominal compounds . Proceed - ings of the First Annual Natioial Conference on Artiftcial Intelligence , c " * " : 3 . t " i $ rti ' * " " too * ent oi , $ uu . uon within narural tind ; ; , , ; " ; i cat _ egories . C o gni tive P sy c lnlo gi , 2 0 , 65 - 9 5 . Gentner , D . ( 1975 ) . Evidehce for the { sychological reality of components : The . verbs of possession : In D ; A . an4 D . E . Rumelhart ( Eds . ) , E4ilorations ' in . . cognition . San Francisco : Freem ' an . Gentner , . D . ( 1981 ) . Some interesting ' . : 616 " t " rites between ' verbs . and nouns . ' - Cognition and Brain Thicory 4 , 16l - 178 : Gentner , D . ( 1982 ) . Why nouns are lehrned before verbs : Linguistic relativity . versus natural partitioning . In Si Kuczaj @ d . ) , Language development : Language , cognition , and cultfure . Cambridge : Cambtidge University Press . t Gentier , D ; ( 1983 ) . Structure - mappin [ : A tlieoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , T , 155 - 170 . I Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms iof analogical leaming . In S . Vosniadou and A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , SimitariS and analogical reasoning . New York : Cambridge University Press . * Gentner , D . ; & France , I . . M . ( 1988 ) . The verb mutability effecc - Studies of the ' , combinatorial semantics of no $ ns and verbs . In . S . L . Small , G . W . Cottrell , & M . K . Tanenhaus ( E ' ds . ) , Lexical ambiguity resolution : Per - spectives from psyclnlinguistici , neuropsychotogy & arrificial intelli - gence . Sani ' Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . Gentner , D . , & Clement , C . ' A . ( 1988 ) . Evidence for relational selectivity in the ' interpretation of analogy and m6taphor . In G . H . Bciwer @ d . ) , Tle psy - chology of learning and nntivaion . New York : Academic Press . Goldstoife , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Genfner , D . ( 1990 ) . ' Relations , attribules , and Combinatorial Semantics of Noun Pairs sen0ation of word meanings . Mennry & Cognition , 4 , 378 - 383 . - Hampton , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions . ? Menory & Cognition , IS , 5S - 7L . " Hampon , J . A . ( 1988 ) . Overextension of conjunctive concepts : Evidence for a * 1 unitary model of concept typicality and class inclusion . Journal of Ex - ' perimental Psychology : Learning , Menory , and Cognition , 14 , 12 . 32 . Hirst , G . ( 1983 ) . Semantic interpretation against ambiguity . Technical Report . CS - 83 - 25 , Computer Science Department , Brown . University . Kay , P . , & Zimmer , K . ( 1976 ) . on the semantics of compounds and genitives in English . Sixth Califurnia Linguistics Association Proceedings . San Di - ego : Campile Press . Keil , F . ( 1986 ) . The acquition of natural kind and artifact terms . In w . De - mopoulos & A . Marras ( Eds . ) , Language learning and concept acquisi - lion . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . ' Keil F . ( 1987 ) . Conceptual development and category structure . In U . Neisser @ d . ' 1 , Concepts and conceptwl development : Ecological and intellectual factors in categorization . Carnbidge : Cambridge University hess . Lees , R . B . ( 1960 ) . Tlrc grammar of English nominalizatio , ns . Bloomington , IN : Indiana University . Levi , J . N . ( 1978 ) . Tlv syntax und senantics of complex nominars . New york : Academic Press . Malt , B . c . , & smith , E . E . ( 1984 ) . correlated properties in natural categories . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal B e havior , 2 J , 250 - 269 . Marcus , M . P . ( 1980 ) . A theory of syntactic recognitionfor naturar ranguage . Cambridge , MA : MIT press . Marr , D , & Nishihara , H . K . ( 1978 ) . Representdtion and recognition of the spatial organization of three - dimensional shapes . proceedings of the Royal Society of London , B 200 , 269 - 294 . Medin , D . L . , Altom , M . W . , Edelson , S . M . , & Freko , D . ( 19g2 ) . Correlated symptoms and simulated medical classification . fournal of Experimental P sy c ho lo gy : Le arni ng , M emary , and C o gnition , 8 , 37 - 50 . Medin , D . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1988 ) . conrexr and srructure in conceptual combinarion . C o g ni tive p syc lw lo gy , 20 , l5B - lg0 . Medin , D . L . , & wattenmaker , w . D . ( 19s2 ) . category cohesiveness , theories , ! j and cognitive archeology . In u . Neisser ( Ed . ) , concepts and conceptual 1 developnunt : The ecological and intellectual factors in categorizition . Cambridge : Cambridge University press . d Minsky , M . ( 1975 ) . A framework for represenring knowledge . In p . H . winston , \ F 4 ; - ( Ed . ) , The psyclnlogy of computer vision . New york : McGraw - Hill . Murphy , G . L . ( 1988 ) . comprehending complex concepts . cognitive science , 12 , 529 - 562 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1990 ) . Noun phrase interpre0ation and conceptuat combination , Journal of Memory and Language , in press . 2U EJ . Wisniewski and D . Gentner Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( The role of theories in concept ' ual E . i - YE - . - t coherence : P sy c lw lo gic at R ev ie \ v , 92 , 289 - 31 6 . Murphy , G . L . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1989a ) . Categorizing objects in isolation and in scenes : What a superordinate is good for . Journdl of Experimental , Psychology : Learning , tutennryl and Cognition , 15 , 572 - 586 . Murphy , G . L . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1989b ) . Feature correlations in conceptual representations . In G . Tiberghibn ( Ed . ) , Advances in cognitive science : Theory and applicatiarci ( Vol . 2 ) , 23 - 45 , Chichester : Ellis Horwood . Normdn , D . A . , & Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1975 ) . Memory and knowledge . In D . A . Norman and D . E . Rumdlhartl ( Eds . ) , Explorations in cognition . San , , Francisco : Freeman . I I Oshdrson , D . N . , & Smith , ' E . E . ( 1981 ) . On the adequacy of prototype theory as ' , a thdory of conceps . Cognitioi ; 9 , 35 - 38 . Osherson , D . N . , & Smith , E . E ' . ( 1982 ) . Gradedness and conceptual combination . Cognition , I 2 , 299 - 318 . ? almer , S . E . ( 1975 ) . Visual percepdofi and world knowledge : Noies on a model of sensory - cognitive interactioli . In D . A . Normdn and D . E . Rumelhart , ( Eds . ) , Explorations in c : ognitio ' n . San Francisco : Freeman . Palmer , S . E . ( 1978 ) . Fundamental a ] spects of cognitive representation . In E . Ro ' sch & B . B . Lloyd , @ ds . ) , fCognition and categorization . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc . { " Rips , L . J . , & Turnbull , W . ( 1980 ) . [ How big is big ? Relative and absolute pro ' pgrties in memory , Cognitioh , S , 145 ' 174 . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . G . ( 1975 ) . Fa ? nily resemblancesl Studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitiie Psychology ' 7 , 573 - ffi5 . Smith , E . E . , & Gray , K . C . ( 199 $ . lMechanisms of conceptual combinatidn , t Unpublished manuscript . I Smith , E . E . & Osherson , D . N . ( 1984 ) . Conceptual combination with prototype concepts . Cognitive Science , S , ; 337 - 361 . t Smith , " E . E . , Osherson , D . N . , RipslL . J . , & Keane ' ; " M . ( 1988 ) . Combining prototypes : A modificaiion model . Cognitive Science , 12 , 485 - 528 . t - l ; , Smith , E . E . ; Shoben , E . J . & nipsl L . I . ( 1974 ) . Structure and piocess in semantic memorv : A featural riodel for semantic decisions . Psychologi ' semantic memory : A featural for semantic decisions . P sycholo gi ' , cal Review , Al , itq - z + t . . { Talmy , L . ( 1976 ) . Semantic casativeljypes . In M . Shibatani @ d " ) , ' Syntax and , i - sennntics , ( Vol . 6 ) . New York : hcademic Press . { Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of simildiity . Psychalogical Review , 84 , 327 - 352 . Tversky , B . , & Hemenway , K . ( 19S4 ) lobjects , pars , and categories . Journal of E xperime ntal , P sy c hol o gy : G e nb ral , I I 3 , 169 - 193 . wisniewski , E : J . ( 1990 ) . Functiondl biases in understanding complex noun phr ase s , Unpublished manuscriPt . Zadeh , L . A . ( 1965 ) . Fuzzy sets . Iitfofuation Conrol , 8 , 338 - 353 . ll = = ; ; - r ' + lr ft [ t1 tlt , | II