Downregulation of Lnc - Spry1 mediates TGF - β - induced epithelial – mesenchymal transition by transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms Cristina Rodríguez - Mateo 1 , Belén Torres 1 , Gabriel Gutiérrez 2 and José A Pintor - Toro * , 1 Long non - coding RNAs ( lncRNAs ) are a class of regulatory genes that participate in a wide range of biological processes , including proliferation , differentiation and development , as well as in a broad spectrum of diseases . Although the role of lncRNAs in TGF - β - induced epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) has been well established , little is known about the role of lncRNAs as immediate - early regulators of EMT . Here lnc - Spry1 is identified as an immediate - early regulator of EMT that is downregulated by TGF - β . It is also found that knockdown of lnc - Spry1 promotes a mesenchymal - like phenotype and results in increased cell migration and invasion . In addition , it is shown that lnc - Spry1 depletion preferentially affects the expression of TGF - β - regulated gene targets . Moreover , lnc - Spry1 associates with U2AF65 splicing factor , suggesting a role in alternative splicing . Depletion of lnc - Spry1 induces , as TGF - β , isoform switching of fibroblast growth factor receptors , resulting in FGF - 2 - sensitive cells . Taken together , these results show that lnc - Spry1 could act as an early mediator of TGF - β signaling and reveal different roles for a lncRNA in modulating transcriptional and posttranscriptional gene expression . Cell Death and Differentiation ( 2017 ) 24 , 785 – 797 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2017 . 9 ; published online 10 February 2017 EMT is a basic cellular process in which epithelial cells lose their epithelial characteristics and take on properties of mesenchymal cells . During EMT , epithelial cells lose their cell – cell junctions and the epithelial apical – basal polarity . The actin cytoskeleton is reorganized and cells acquire migratory and invasive properties . 1 – 3 This process is essential in the generation of tissues and organs during embryogenesis , during wound healing and is associated with pathologies , such as fibrosis and cancer . In carcinomas , cancer cells can undergo EMT to escape the primary tumor , invade surround - ing tissues and colonize remote sites via blood or lymphatic routes generating metastases . 4 – 6 The EMT program can be activated efficiently and rapidly in epithelial cells in response to soluble factors or cytokines , including epidermal growth factor , fibroblast growth factors ( FGFs ) and transforming growth factors ( TGF - β s ) . TGF - β may induce EMT through distinct signaling mechanisms causing substantial changes in gene expression . These changes involve three families of transcription factors : the zinc finger Snail , Zeb , and basic helix – loop – helix families . 7 Beyond the well - established transcriptional reprogramming during EMT , posttranscriptional mechanisms , such as regula - tion by alternative pre - mRNA splicing and regulation by non - coding RNA , have an important role and provide an additional layer of complexity on the gene regulation during EMT . 8 – 12 The mammalian genome encodes many thousands of lncRNAs , a class of transcripts 4 200 nucleotides with limited protein - coding potential . 13 They can act as molecular signals , tethers , decoys , guides or scaffolds at every level of gene regulation in a wide range of biological processes . 14 – 16 Although transcription factors , microRNAs and signaling pathways that control EMT have been studied intensively , lncRNAs that may regulate this process in an immediate - early phase have not been identified . Several lncRNAs have been reported to be involved in EMT ; 17 – 21 however , these lncRNAs have been identified in cells treated with TGF - β for days or in cells stably expressing an EMT - inducer transcription factor . Here we profiled immediate - early changes of lncRNAs in NMuMG cells following TGF - β treatment . This study reports the identification of a lncRNA located adjacent to the mouse Spry1 gene , which was named lnc - Spry1 , early downregu - lated by TGF - β . Decreased lnc - Spry1 levels induce a mesenchymal - like phenotype leading to increased cell migra - tion and invasion . Lnc - Spry1 was found to interact with U2AF65 RNA splicing regulator , suggesting a posttranscrip - tional regulation of EMT - associated genes . Taken together , our findings indicate that lnc - Spry1 modulates early transcrip - tional expression and alternative splicing ( AS ) of genes involved in the EMT process . Results TGF - β - mediated EMT regulates the expression of lncRNAs . Transcription factors regulating EMT are induced early . We hypothesized that lncRNAs with a differential expression during early EMT could represent putative EMT regulators . To identify such lncRNAs , transcriptional profiling was performed in untreated NMuMG mammary epithelial 1 Department of Cell Signaling , Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa ( CABIMER - CSIC ) , Avda Américo Vespucio s / n , Seville 41092 , Spain and 2 Department of Genetics , Seville University , Seville 41080 , Spain * Corresponding author : JA Pintor - Toro , Department of Cell Signaling Centro Andaluz de BiologÃa Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa ( CABIMER - CSIC ) , Avda Americo Vespucio s / n Isla de la Cartuja , Sevilla 41092 , Spain . Tel : + 34 954 467 995 ; Fax : + 34 954 46 16 64 ; E - mail : jose . pintor @ cabimer . es Received 16 . 6 . 16 ; revised 16 . 12 . 16 ; accepted 11 . 1 . 17 ; Edited by X Lu ; published online 10 . 2 . 2017 Cell Death and Differentiation ( 2017 ) 24 , 785 – 797 & 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved 1350 - 9047 / 17 www . nature . com / cdd cells , a widely employed model to study TGF - β - induced EMT , and NMuMG cells treated with TGF - β for 2 h using chips that cover 31 423 annotated lncRNAs and also 25 376 protein - coding transcripts . Fold change values 4 2 and P - values o 0 . 05 were set as the filtering criteria to analyze differentially expressed RNAs ( Supplementary Figure S1 ) . At this time , microarray results indicated that TGF - β treatment for 2 h led to EMT gene expression signature 22 ( Supplementary Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 786 Cell Death and Differentiation Figure S1e ) . Six hundred genes were found to be upregu - lated and 490 downregulated in treated cells compared with untreated cells , including 215 downregulated and 220 upregulated lncRNAs ( Supplementary Table S1 ) . Expression of several candidates was confirmed by real - time PCR . Among them , we focused on AK040898 located on mouse chromosome 3 , because of its consistent early downregula - tion ( Figure 1a ) . We termed this candidate lnc - Spry1 based on the name of the neighboring gene . Given the proximity of lnc - Spry1 to the Spry1 gene ( Figure 1b ) , and the fact that both are transcribed in the same orientation , we sought to ensure that the lnc - Spry1 transcript was distinct from that of the Spry1 gene . We determined by 5 ′ and 3 ′ rapid amplification of cDNA ends ( RACE ) that lnc - Spry1 is a 2851 nucleotides transcript without introns , 472 nucleotides shorter at the 5 ′ end than the ENCODE AK040898 transcript annotation ( Figure 1c and Supplementary Figure S1 ) . We next sought to detect trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 ( H3K4me3 ) enrichment at the 5 ′ regulatory region of lnc - Spry1 . Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed a remarkable H3K4me3 - enriched region within 800 bp of the lnc - Spry1 transcription start site , enrichment not detected in TGF - β - treated cells ( Figure 1d ) . These data indicate that Spry1 mRNA and lnc - Spry1 RNA are transcribed from independent promoters . Sequence analysis using ORF Finder ( NCBI ) predicted open reading frames o 70 amino acidswithout a valid Kozak sequence . In addition , a low coding potential score ( − 0 . 924 ) and a low coding probability ( 0 . 032 ) returned by the Coding Potential Calculator software 23 and Coding - Potential Assessment Tool , 24 respectively , confirmed a negligible protein - coding potential for lnc - Spry1 . Sequence homology searches and 5 ′ RACE analysis revealed no clear orthologous lnc - Spry1 sequence or transcripts in syntenic regions of the human genome , suggesting that lnc - Spry1 is a mouse - specific lncRNA . Smad4 is a central mediator of TGF - β intracellular signaling . 25 We investigated the requirement of Smad4 in lnc - Spry1 downregulation by TGF - β . Two different commercial Dicer - substrate short interfering RNAs were used for silencing Smad4 and the knockdown efficiencies were tested by western blotting . Lnc - Spry1 downregulation by TGF - β treatment was notably affected in Smad4 - suppressed cells , indicating TGF - β - Smad signaling dependency of this TGF - β response ( Figure 1f ) . Smad - mediated signaling path - way , extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERKs ) and p38 kinases are activated very rapidly in TGF - β - treated NMuMG cells . 26 However , lnc - Spry1 downregulation appeared to uniquely rely on the Smad - mediated pathway , as preincuba - tion of NMuMG cells with the MEK inhibitor U0126 and the p38 inhibitor SB203580 had no effect on TGF - β - downregulated lnc - Spry1 ( Figures 1e and g ) . Lnc - Spry1 downregulation detected within 15 min of TGF - β treatment ( Figure 4b ) suggested an active role in the start of EMT program . To determine whether lnc - Spry1 was a direct target of TGF - β - Smad pathway , we analyzed the levels of lnc - Spry1 in cells treated with TGF - β in the presence or absence of cyclohex - imide , an inhibitor of protein synthesis . Cycloheximide treat - ment did not inhibit downregulation of lnc - Spry1 , whereas upregulation of SIP1 , an indirect target control of the TGF - β - Smad pathway , 27 was blocked ( Figure 1h ) . Together , these findings strongly suggest that lnc - Spry1 is downregulated by TGF - β - Smad signaling and it is a direct target of this pathway . Lnc - Spry1 downregulation promotes a mesenchymal - like phenotype . To investigate whether the reduced expression of lnc - Spry1 could promote the process of EMT , we generated short hairpin RNAs ( shRNA ) - mediated knockdown stable clones using three lnc - Spry1 - targeting shRNA expression constructs . Expression of lnc - Spry1 was reduced from 60 to 70 % using these different shRNAs ( Figure 2a ) . A consistent epithelial - to - mesenchymal - like phenotype was observed for all three shRNAs used ( Figure 2b ) , indicating that this change was specific and was not likely due to off - targeting . Further - more , immunofluorescence analysis revealed a decrease in the epithelial marker E - cadherin expression and the remaining protein was dislocated from the membrane to the cytoplasm . In the absence of TGF - β , phalloidin - labeled F - actin was pre - dominantly organized in thin cortical bundles tightly associated with cell – cell adhesions . 28 In contrast , after 48 h of treatment with TGF - β , F - actin was assembled into thick parallel bundles , or actin stress fibers , traversing the ventral cell surface . We also observed a notable remodelling of the cytoskeleton from cortical actin to stress fibers in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells Figure 1 Lnc - Spry1 expression in TGF - β - treated NMuMG cells . ( a ) Expression of lnc - Spry1 measured by quantitative reverse transcriptase - PCR ( RT - qPCR ) at representative time points shows decreased levels in TGF - β - treated cells . Experiments were performed in triplicate , and error bars represent S . D . * * P o 0 . 01 by two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . ( b ) Schematic illustration of the mouse lnc - Spry1 gene locus chromosomal location . Arrowheads indicate the transcription orientation . ( c ) Top , a representative image of PCR products from the 5 ′ - RACE and 3 ′ - RACE procedure . Bottom , sequencing of PCR products revealed the boundary between the adaptor primers and lnc - Spry1 sequences . ( d ) Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis were performed to study H3K4me3 enrichment at the lnc - Spry1 5 ′ regulatory region of NMuMG control cells and NMuMG stimulated with TGF - β for 2 h . Transcription star site ( TSS ) and the enrichment regions analyzed are indicated in the figure . Enrichment values are represented as the percentage of recovered input . Control cell data are the mean of at least n = 9 qPCR reactions from three independent experiments . Background enrichment with normal rabbit IgG was o 0 . 05 % of the total input chromatin . TGF - β - treated cell data are the mean of n = 6 qPCR reactions from two independent experiments . Background enrichment with normal rabbit IgG was o 0 . 015 % of the total input chromatin . ( e ) Effect of MAP kinase inhibitor , U0126 , on lnc - Spry1 downregulation . NMuMG cells were pretreated with 10 μ M inhibitor for 1 h prior to addition of TGF - β for 2 h where indicated . Lnc - Spry1 levels were measured by RT - qPCR ( top ) ; p - ERK1 / 2 were assessed by western blotting and total ERK1 / 2 were used as protein loading control ( bottom ) . ( f ) NMuMG cellswere transfected with DsiRNAs against Smad4 ( DsiSmad4 ) or scramble DsiRNA ( SRC ) and treated with TGF - β for 2h . Levels of lnc - Spry1 weremeasuredbyRT - qPCRanalysis ( top ) . Smad4was assessedbywesternblotting ( bottom ) ; β - actin was usedas proteinloading control . ( g ) Effect of p38 kinase inhibitor , SB203580 , on lnc - Spry1 downregulation . Cellswere pretreated with 10 μ M inhibitor for 1 h prior to addition of TGF - β for 2 h where indicated . Levels of lnc - Spry1 were measured by RT - qPCR analysis ( top ) . Activation of p38 kinase was detected via phosphorylated p85 ribosomal kinase ( p85 ) . A representative immunoblot analysis for p85 is shown ( bottom ) ; β - actin was used as a protein loading control . ( h ) Requirement of de novo protein synthesis for lnc - Spry1 downregulation by TGF - β . NMuMG cells pretreated with 5 μ M of cycloheximide ( CHX ) for 1 h were stimulated with TGF - β for 2 h ( top ) or 24 h ( bottom ) . Expression levels of lnc - Spry1 ( top ) and SIP1 ( bottom ) were measured by RT - qPCR analysis Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 787 Cell Death and Differentiation ( Figure 2c ) . Immunoblotting analysis revealed a remarkable increase in the expression of mesenchymal markers , such as vimentin and Snail1 , and a decrease in the expression of the epithelial marker E - cadherin in lnc - Spry1 - depleted clones compared with control clones ( Figure 2d ) . Also RT - qPCR analysis showed that mesenchymal marker SIP1 was slightly increased in lnc - Spry1 - depleted clones ( Figure 2e ) . As lnc - Spry downregulation mimics TGF - β signaling in terms of EMT induction , we wondered whether lnc - Spry1 down - regulation induced TGF - β expression and this could cause an autocrine TGF - β signaling . Quantification of TGF - β mRNA levels in lnc - Spry1 - depleted shRNA1 and shRNA2 clonal cell lines showed that these clones contained TGF - β mRNA levels 1 . 4 and 2 . 2 times higher , respectively , than control cells . To test a possible role of autocrine TGF - β signaling in lnc - Spry1 - depleted clones , we treated them with TGF - β type I receptor Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 788 Cell Death and Differentiation ( ALK5 ) kinase inhibitor SB431542 . 29 Clones were minimally affected by treatment with the inhibitor and showed mesenchymal - like phenotype ( Supplementary Figure S2a ) , and EMT - related molecules analyzed were not significantly affected ( Supplementary Figures S2b – e ) . These results indicate that downregulation of lnc - Spry1 promotes per se a mesenchymal - like phenotype . As cell migration and invasion are altered in EMT , we assessed the migratory capacity and invasiveness of lnc - Spry1 - silenced cells . Wound - healing assays revealed that shlnc - Spry1 NMuMG cells migrated much faster than control cells ( Figures 3a – c and Supplementary Movie S1 ) . Furthermore , the effect of lnc - Spry1 downregulation on cell invasion was determined in invasion assays in matrigel - coated transwell chambers . Lnc - Spry1 silencing resulted in a highly significant increase in the invasive potential of NMuMG cells ( Figures 3d and e ) . However , monitoring of NMuMG real - time cell proliferation showed no differences between control and lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells ( Figure 3f ) . These results demonstrate a role of lnc - Spry1 in remodeling the cell cytoskeleton and the effect of its depletion on cell migration and invasion . Lnc - Spry1 depletion alters gene expression . LncRNAs have been shown to regulate the expression of neighboring genes in cis or in trans by diverse mechanisms . 30 The Spry1 gene is located 480 bp upstream from lnc - Spry1 and , therefore , could be a candidate to be regulated in cis . In fact , lnc - Spry1 - depleted clones markedly reduced the Spry1 mRNA levels ( Figure 4a ) . This effect was specific for Spry1 gene , as changes were not detected in other protein - coding genes surrounding lnc - Spry1 ( Supplementary Figure S3 ) . A detailed time course of lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 mRNA expres - sion after TGF - β treatment for short periods of time showed a strong correlation between downregulation of both genes ( Figure 4b ) . Similar to the effect of cycloheximide on lnc - Spry downregulation in TGF - β - treated cells , downregulation of Spry1 mRNA levels was not affected by cycloheximide , indicating that Spry1 is a direct target ( Figure 4c ) . Moreover , forced expression of lnc - Spry1 in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells did not rescue the expression of Spry1 gene ( Figures 4d and e ) , as would be expected from a lncRNA whose primary function was exerted locally . 31 Also , overexpression of Spry1 did not lead to any noticeable morphological change in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells ( Supplementary Figure S4 ) . To determine whether the expression of lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 genes were linked , we examined their relative expression across the same panel of different mouse tissues ( Figure 4f ) . Spry1 mRNA was found to be much more highly expressed than lnc - Spry1 in all the tissues analyzed . Both RNAs were more abundant in the heart , lung and muscle . Despite the variation in the expression levels of both transcripts and the different expression in the tissues analyzed , the expression profiles of Spry1 and lnc - Spry1 genes were closely correlated ( Pearson correlation coefficient R = 0 . 98 ) . Altogether , we might suggest that lnc - Spry1 could act locally to regulate the Spry1 expression and that they both could regulate similar biological processes . Overexpression of lnc - Spry1 did not seem to perturb normal EMT by TGF - β . Immnunofluor - escence analysis of TGF - β - treated control cells and TGF - β - treated lnc - Spry1 - overexpressing cells did not reveal appar - ent morphological changes . Also , immunoblot analysis of E - cadherin , vimentin , Snail1 and Spry1 proteins did not show any significant change in the expression levels of these proteins ( Supplementary Figure S5 ) . This result would be consistent with the fact that EMT relies on a complex signaling network that involves multiple transcription factors and signaling proteins , in some instances , with redundant functions . As Snail1 transcription factor is a major regulator of EMT and it is a primary responder to TGF - β treatment , 32 , 33 we tested whether ectopic expression of Snail1 affected the levels of lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 mRNA . Expression of both genes was unaffected by overexpression of Snail1 , indicating that Snail1 is not required for lnc - Spry1 inhibition upon TGF - β treatment ( Supplementary Figure S6 ) . We next reasoned that analysis of global gene expression pattern in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells could reveal further clues toward elucidating its function . Changes in RNA levels were analyzed by DNA microarray analysis both in stable lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells and control cells . We found 181 misregulated genes in the lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells ( lineal change 4 2 - fold and P - value o 0 . 05 ) among which 110 were downregulated and 71 were upregulated ( Figure 4g and Supplementary Table S2 ) . RT - qPCR analysis confirmed microarray results for 10 of the 12 selected genes ( 83 % ) , including down - regulation of Id2 , Sim2 , Atoh8 , Cxcl5 , Ccl20 and upregulation of Sox9 ( Supplementary Figure S7 ) . Gene ontology analysis of misregulated genes in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells showed a notable enrichment in those genes involved in chemokine and cytokine activity ( Ccl2 , Ccl20 , Ccl7 , Cxcl1 , Cxcl16 , Bmp2 , Grem1 ) ( Figure 4h ) . Strikingly , 30 and 28 % of downregulated and upregulated genes , respectively , were also downregulated and upregulated in TGF - β treated Figure 2 Downregulation of lnc - Spry1 promotes a mesenchymal - like phenotype . ( a ) Lnc - Spry1 - downregulated cell lines were generated by transduction of shRNA expression lentivirus againsteither lnc - Spry1or anon - targeting control . Lnc - Spry1 RNAlevelsweredeterminedbyquantitativereversetranscriptase - PCR ( RT - qPCR ) inNMuMG cells treated with TGF - β for 48 h , in a clonal cell line transduced by empty lentivirus ( pLKO ) , three clonal cell lines expressing reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 and a control cell line . Experimentswereperformed intriplicate , and errorbarsrepresent S . D . within one representativeexperiment . Resultswereanalyzedbyone - way analysisof variance , followed by Bonferroniposttest . * * * P o 0 . 001 , NS , not significant . ( b ) Downregulationof lnc - Spry1inducesmorphologicalchangesinNMuMGcells . Phase - contrastimagesillustrate thatcells depleted of lnc - Spry1 undergo EMT - like changes in morphology , including a reduction in cell – cell contacts and cobblestone appearance . ( c ) Immunofluorescence microscopic analysis of changes in location and the expression of marker proteins . Cells were stained with antibodies against the epithelial marker E - cadherin and with tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate ( TRITC ) - conjugated phalloidin and 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole to visualize the actin cytoskeleton and nuclei , respectively . Scale bar , 25 μ m . ( d ) Immunoblotting of Snail1 , E - cadherin and vimentin in NMuMG cells , NMuMG treated with TGF - β for 48 h and lnc - Spry1 - downregulated NMuMG clones generated by transduction of shRNAs expression lentivirus against lnc - Spry1 . β - Actin was used as a loading control . ( e ) Expression levels of SIP1 mRNA were detrmined by RT - qPCR in NMuMG control cells , treated with TGF - β for 48 h and three clonal cell lines expressing reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 . Error bars represent S . D . * * * P o 0 . 001 , * * P o 0 . 01 , * P o 0 . 05 by two - tailed Student ’ s t - test Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 789 Cell Death and Differentiation cells ( Figure 4i and Supplementary Table S3 ) ( P - value = 4 . 7 × 10 − 48 and P - value = 6 . 9 × 10 − 20 , hypergeometric distribu - tion ) , strongly suggesting that lnc - Spry1 could participate directly and indirectly in TGF - β - dependent transcriptional response . Lnc - Spry1 interacts with the U2AF65 spliceosome component . To investigate the mechanism by which lnc - Spry1 mediates gene regulation , we searched for proteins that were associated with lnc - Spry1 using in vitro biotin - RNA pull - down . In vitro - transcribed biotinylated lnc - Spry1 and a non - relevant RNA as a negative control were incubated with total cellular extracts and coprecipitated proteins were isolated using streptavidin - coated beads . RNA - associated proteins were resolved on a SDS - PAGE gel , and specific bands to the lnc - Spy1 probe were visualized using SYPRO Ruby staining and cut out for analysis by mass spectrometry ( Figure 5a ) , identifying U2AF65 as a protein specifically associated with lnc - Spry1 ( Supplementary Figure S8 ) . These interactions were confirmed by western blotting analysis Figure 3 Lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells acquire migratory and invasive properties . ( a ) The migratory capacity of lnc - Spry1 - downregulated NMuMG cells were tested in wound - healing assays . Cells were imaged at 20 min intervals for 23 h . The frames of the movie at 9 , 12 and 23 h are shown . ( b ) The frames at 9 and 12 h are used to estimate the percentage of surface covered by the cells . Values represent the average ( % ) of wound closure ± S . E . * * * P o 0 . 001 by two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . ( c ) Wound density quantitation ofthetime - lapsevideoframesfromcontrolandtwolnc - Spry1 - depletedclonalcelllines . ( d ) Representativeimagesofinvasioninaclonalcelllineexpressingreducedlevelsoflnc - Spry1 and in a control cell line analyzed in a transwell invasion assay . After 24 h , cellswere fixed and stained with crystal violet . ( e ) Histograms represent the mean ± S . D . of the numberofcellsperfieldcountedinthreedifferentinserts . * * P o 0 . 01bytwo - tailedStudent ’ s t - test . ( f ) Real - timemonitoringof invitro proliferationoftwoclonalcelllinesexpressing reduced levelsof lnc - Spry1 and a control cell line using the eCELLigencesystem . The systemmeasureselectricalimpedance acrossinterdigitated microelectrodes integrated on the bottom of tissue culture plates Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 790 Cell Death and Differentiation ( Figure 5b ) and RNA immunoprecipitation ( RIP ) . Enrichment of lnc - Spry1 RNA was observed using specific U2AF65 antibody compared with non - specific IgG antibody ( Figure 5c ) . Additionally , deletion - mapping experiments combined with western blotting analysis showed that the different truncated Figure4 Geneexpressionisaffectedinlnc - Spry1 - depletedcells . ( a ) RelativeSpry1mRNAlevelsdeterminedbyquantitativereversetranscriptase - PCR ( RT - qPCR ) incontrol cells , clonal cell line transduced by empty lentivirus ( pLKO ) , cells treated with TGF - β for 48 h and three independent shRNA - mediated knockdown of lnc - Spry1 stable clones . Resultswere analyzed by one - way analysis of variance , followed by Bonferroni posttest . * * * P o 0 . 001 . ( b ) Relative lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 mRNA levels determined by RT - qPCR in NMuMG control cells treated with TGF - β for 15 , 30 , 60 and 120 min . Error bars represent S . D . ( c ) Expression levels of Spry1 mRNA in NMMG cells pretreated with 5 μ M cycloheximide ( CHX ) for 1 h and stimulated with TGF - β for 2 h . ( d ) Real - time PCR analysis of lnc - Spry1 levels in cells infected at MOI 2 with pHRSIN - DUAL lentivirus control ( pSD ) or lentivirus carrying full - length lnc - Spry1 cDNA . Error bars represent S . D . within one representative experiment . ( e ) Relative levels of Spry1 mRNA in cells overexpressing lnc - Spry1 . ( f ) Relative lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 mRNA levels determined by RT - qPCR in a broad range ofadult mouse tissues . Results are presented relative to the averagevalue of HPRT reference gene and a fixed reference sample ( bone marrow ) . ( g ) Heat map showing statistically significant changes of 181 genes in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells . Color intensitiesareshownonalog2scale . ( h ) SignificantGeneOntologyannotationenrichmentsof lnc - Spry1 - regulatedgenes ( 5 % FDR ) . ( i ) Venndiagramshowingthe intersectionof genes affected in TGF - β - treated or lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells . All misregulated genes in the upper panel . Lower left and right panels : upregulated and downregulated genes , respectively . Probability of overlapping based on hypergeometric distribution is provided Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 791 Cell Death and Differentiation versions of lnc - Spry1 associated with U2AF65 . Lnc - Spry1 sequence contained several disseminated U2AF65 - binding sites ( Figure 5d ) and association between U2AF65 and lnc - Spry1 decreased drastically after mutagenesis of some of these binding sites ( Figure 5e ) . Next , lnc - Spry1 expression was measured in nuclear and cytosolic fractions from NMuMG cells by RT - qPCR . The differential enrichments of HPRT , Xist and U3 RNAs were used as fractionation indicators . A considerable increase in lnc - Spry1 level was observed in the nucleus of NMuMG cells ( Figure 5f ) , indicating that lnc - Spry1 may have a major regulatory function . Lnc - Spry1 modulates EMT - associated AS . A strong link between EMT and AS has been demonstrated in the case of FGF receptors ( FGFRs ) . A functional FGFR consists of three extracellular immunoglobulin domains ( Ig - I , Ig - II and IgIII ) , a single - transmembrane domain , and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain . AS in the second half of the third extracellular immunoglobulin - like domain is encoded by one of the two mutually exclusive alternative exons : IIIb or IIIc . The expres - sion of either isoform is highly cell - type specific , with FGFR2IIIb expression predominantly expressed in epithelial cells and FGFR1IIIc and FGFR2IIIc mainly expressed in mesenchymal cells . Given the interaction between U2AF65 and lnc - Spry1 and the documented role of U2AF65 in splicing regulation , we hypothesized that lnc - Spry1 could have a trans - mediated effect in AS by leading or fitting the pool of U2AF65 . Analysis by RT - qPCR of FGFR1 and FGFR2 mRNA levels showed that FGFR1 mRNA levels increased 60 - fold in Figure 5 Lnc - Spry1 interactswith U2AF65 splicing factor . ( a ) A representative Sypro ruby - stained gel picture showing the proteins bound to lnc - Spry1 ( left lane ) or unrelated RNA ( right lane ) . The highlighted region was analyzed by mass spectrometry . U2AF65 was identified as lnc - Spry1 - binding partner . ( b ) Western blotting analysis of the specific interaction between U2AF65 and lnc - Spry1 . Protein loading normalization was performed by measuring total protein directly on the membrane using the criterion stain - free gel imaging system . ( c ) Physical association of lnc - Spry1 and U2AF65 determined by RNA immunoprecipitation ( RIP ) . ( Bottom ) Representative western blotting of U2AF in the corresponding samples . Results are the median of three technical replicates ; bars represent S . D . ( d ) Deletion analysis of lnc - Spry1 transcript . Motifs for U2AF65 binding in lnc - Spry1 are shown . Associated U2AF65 with different RNA fragments was detected by western blotting . ( e ) Associated U2AF65 with the 1580 nt lnc - Spry1 fragment after mutagenesis of U2AF65 - binding sites . ( f ) Lnc - Spry1 subcellular localization . Expression of lnc - Spry1 , U3 , Xist and Hprt in nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of NMuMG cells . Error bars represent S . D . Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 792 Cell Death and Differentiation cells stimulated with TGF - β for 48 h and from 11 - to 20 - fold in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells , whereas FGFR2 mRNA levels decreased in both conditions ( Figures 6a and b ) . Using isoform - specific primers , we determined that the FGFR1 isoform upregulated by TGF - β or by lnc - Spry1 depletion was the mesenchymal isoform FGFR1IIIc ( Figure 6c ) , whereas Figure 6 Isoformswitchingof FGFRsinTGF - β - treatedcellsandlnc - Spry1 - depletedcells . ( a and b ) ExpressionlevelsofFGFR1and FGFR2inNMuMGcontrolcells , treated with TGF - β for 48 h , a clonal cell line transduced by empty lentivirus ( pLKO ) and three clonal cell lines expressing reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 . Error bars represent S . D . * * * P o 0 . 001 by two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . ( c – e ) Expression of the alternatively spliced forms of FGFR1 and FGFR2 in NMuMG control cells , treated with TGF - β for 48 h , in a clonal cell line transduced by empty lentivirus ( pLKO ) and in three clonal cell lines expressing reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 . Error bars represent S . D . * * * P o 0 . 001 by two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . ( f and g ) Representative western blotting results for ERK1 / 2 and p - ERK1 / 2 protein expression from NMuMG control cells , a clonal cell line transduced by empty lentivirus ( pLKO ) and a clonal cell line expressing reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 ( Clone shRNA1 ) . NMuMG cellswere preincubated with ( f ) or without ( g ) TGF - β for 2 days and then stimulatedwith30 ng / mlFGF - 2for15 min . AclonalcelllineexpressingreducedlevelsofSpry1mRNA ( CloneshSpry1 ) isincludedinpanel ( g ) . ( h ) Immunofluorescenceanalysis of actin cytoskeleton reorganization in NMuMG control and lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells cultured in the presence of 30 ng / ml FGF - 2 for 48 h . Scale bar , 25 μ m Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 793 Cell Death and Differentiation both FGFR2IIIc and FGFR2IIIb isoforms were downregulated ( Figures 6d and e ) . The different isoforms generated by this splicing event show distinct FGF - binding specificities . During TGF - β - mediated EMT , TGF - β induces isoform switching of FGFRs , sensitizing cells to FGF - 2 , which binds preferentially to IIIc isoforms , whereas FGF - 7 and FGF - 10 bind exclusively to IIIb isoforms . 34 As shown in Figure 6f , addition of FGF - 2 to TGF - β - treated cells induced ERK signaling pathway , reveal - ing isoform switching by TGF - β treatment . Interestingly , addition of FGF - 2 activated ERK signaling pathway in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells without previous TGF - β treatment ( Figure 6g ) . ERK phosphorylation was not observed in Spry1 - depleted cells , which showed reduced levels of FGFR1IIIc , FGFR2IIIb and FGFR2IIIc ( Figure 6g and Supplementary Figures S10b – d ) . Likewise , morphology of Spry1 - depleted cells was not affected after FGF - 2 addition ( Supplementary Figure S10e ) , whereas lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells showed a dramatic accumulation of the actin cytoske - leton into large clamps ( Figure 6h ) , supporting a role for lnc - Spry1 in modulating the stability of actin cytoskeletal structures . Epithelial Splicing Regulatory Proteins 1 and 2 ( ESRP1 and ESRP2 ) are key epithelial - specific RNA - binding proteins that promote splicing of the epithelial variant of the FGFR transcripts . In NMuMG cells , induction of EMT by TGF - β is accompanied by nearly complete abrogation of ESRP2 expression ( ESRP1 is not expressed in NMuMG cells ) and consequent isoform switching of FGFRs . 12 , 35 Strikingly , depletion of lnc - Spry1 mimics the effects of TGF - β on FGFRs splicing ; however , ESRP2 protein levels are not affected in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells ( Supplementary Figure S9 ) . This fact together with the clear evidence of interaction between lnc - Spry1 and U2AF65 may suggest a redundant mechanism for FGFR isoform switching . Discussion The precise regulation of gene expression patterns is paramount in the transdifferentiation of epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells . 36 , 37 LncRNAs have emerged as key regulatory components in different processes . 14 , 16 , 38 , 39 Sev - eral lncRNAs have been analyzed and associated with EMT in cells upon TGF - β treatment for one or several days . 21 , 40 , 41 We hypothesized that lncRNAs could have an essential role as early master regulators during EMT . Here lnc - Spry1 is identified as an immediate - early gene downregulated by TGF - β with potential implications in EMT . According to ENCODE genomic annotations , 5 ′ end of lnc - Spry1 is 10 nucleotides away from 3 ′ end of Spry1 gene and both genes are located in the same DNA strand and show the same orientation , supporting the hypothesis that lnc - Spry1 could be an extension of the protein - coding Spry1 transcript . However , experiments of RACE and TGF - β - dependent enrichment of active promoter tags around the transcription start site rule out the presence of a long Spry1 isoform containing lnc - Spry1 as an extended 3 ′ UTR and support that Spry1 and lnc - Spry1 exist as two independent RNAs . Signaling through TGF - β receptor complexes involves SMAD - dependent and SMAD - independent pathways . 42 In NMuMG cells stimulated with TGF - β , we found activation at short time of both ERK and p38 kinases ; however , the presence of specific inhibitors of MEK and p38 MAPK kinases did not affect lnc - Spry1 downregulation . In contrast , it was notably affected in SMAD4 - depleted cells . Downregulation of lnc - Spry1 was detected as early as 15 min poststimulation with TGF - β , and it was also observed in cells pretreated with cycloheximide demonstrating that it did not require de novo protein synthesis and could be categorized as an immediate - early response gene and a direct target of TGF - β - Smad pathways in NMuMG cells . Knockdown and ectopic expression of multiple lncRNAs reveal their influence on the transcription of their neighboring protein - coding genes . 43 , 44 In line with these observations , some findings suggest a local regulation of Spry1 gene by lnc - Spry1 , such as closevicinity of Spry1 to lnc - Spry1 , concurrent , rapid and de novo protein synthesis - independent down - regulation of both genes in TGF - β - treated cells , downregula - tion of Spry1 in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells , close correlation between lnc - Spry1 and Spry1 expression in different organs and tissues and failure to rescue Spry1 expression in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells after forced expression of lnc - Spry1 . Spry proteins are feedback regulators of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) that restrain RTK - mediated ERK signaling , and therefore they have critical roles in the regulation of cell proliferation , differentiation and survival , 45 , 46 and its down - regulation could contribute to mesenchymal - like phenotype . 47 Analysis of the protein - coding genes in the 500 kb window surrounding the lnc - Spry1 did not reveal any transcriptional effect in the neighboring genes , except for Spry1 mRNA ; interestingly , forced expression of Spry1 gene did not rescue the epithelial phenotype in lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells . These observations indicated that mesenchymal - like phenotype of lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells seems not to be related only to the action of lnc - Spry1 on local environment but also it could be a result of trans - mediated effects of the lnc - Spry1 transcript . In association with specific chromatin - modifying complexes , lnc - Spry1 could regulate in trans distantly located genes . In fact , lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells showed expression changes in 181 genes , among which 30 and 28 % were enriched for down - regulated and upregulated genes , respectively , by TGF - β treatment . Some of them , including downregulated Id2 , Sim2 , Maf2 and Atoh8 or upregulated Sox9 transcription factors , could be involved in regulating specific sets of EMT - associated genes . 48 , 49 Our data show that the expression of Snail1 , as well as E - cadherin and vimentin markers , change significantly upon depletion of lnc - Spy1 . Ectopic expression of the transcriptional repressor Snail1 50 did not affect the expression level of lnc - Spry1 , indicating that lnc - Spry1 could function upstream or independently of the Snail1 signaling pathway . Interaction between lnc - Spry1 and the U2AF65 spliceosome component together with the enrichment of nuclear fraction in lnc - Spry1 suggested an active role in AS for lnc - Spry1 . Recently , lncRNAs have been shown to affect AS by different mechanisms , which provides cells with an additional level of complexity to the regulation of gene expression . 38 , 51 , 52 Extensive changes in AS of many mRNAs have been reported in EMT . 8 , 12 In the well - characterized family of FGFRs , it has been reported that FGFR1IIIc and FGFR2IIIb , respective isoforms of FGFR1 and FGFR2 , are upregulated and down - regulated , respectively , by TGF - β , producing NMuMG cells to be sensitive to FGF - 2 . 34 Lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells showed Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 794 Cell Death and Differentiation upregulated FGFR1IIIc isoform and downregulated both FGFR2IIIb and FGFR2IIIc isoforms . Consistent with these changes in mRNA expression profiles of FGFR isoforms , lnc - Spry1 - depleted cells showed actin accumulation in large clamps and ERK phosphorylation in response to FGF - 2 , whereas control cells treated with FGF - 2 did not exhibit neither morphological changes nor ERK phosphorylation . Among the splicing factors associated with EMT , downregulation of epithelial splicing regulatory proteins ( ESRPs ) has been reported to promote a cell - type - specific splicing program that results in isoform switching of FGFRs . 53 Here lnc - Spry1 is shown to physically associate with the splicing factor U2AF65 , and importantly , its depletion , without altering ESRP protein levels , affects isoform switching of FGFR1 and FGFR2 , a similar response to that observed in TGF - β - treated cells . 8 , 34 , 35 Taken together , these observations support the proposal that lnc - Spry1 binding to U2AF65 may modulate its function mimicking endogenous transcripts to hijack or redistribute U2AF65 deflecting it from their primary targets . Reduced levels of lnc - Spry1 upon TGF - β treatment might reroute or alter the binding specificity of U2AF65 protein to influence its proper localization . In summary , our data reveal that lnc - Spry1 is an early TGF - β - downregulated lncRNA that acts as a key multifunctional regulator of TGF - β signaling pathways . The immediate - early downregulation of lnc - Spry1 alters the transriptional and posttranscriptional gene regulation of the epithelial cells promoting a mesechymal - like phenotype . Exploring early TGF - β - regulated lncRNAs and elucidating the function may point to new mechanisms and components of the EMT pathways as well as potential therapeutic interven - tions targeting EMT . Materials and Methods Cell culture and reagents . NMuMG cells were grown in Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum , 2 mM L - glutamine , 50 U / ml penicillin , 50 lg / ml streptomycin and 10 μ g / ml insulin at 37 °C in a 5 % CO 2 - humidified , 95 % air incubator . TGF - β was purchased from PeproTech ( London , UK ) . SB - 431542 , U0126 and SB - 203580 were purchased from Selleck Chemicals ( Houston , TX , USA ) . lncRNA microarray analysis . Total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) , in accordance with the manufacturer ’ s protocol , and purified by the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen , Hilden , Germany ) . Total RNA from each sample was quantified and quality assured by NanoDrop ND - 1000 ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA , USA ) . RNA integrity was assessed by standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis . Samples preparation and microarray hybridization were performed based on the manufacturer ’ s standard protocols with minor modifications . Briefly , mRNA was purified from total RNA after removal of rRNA ( mRNA - ONLY Eukaryotic mRNA Isolation Kit , Epicentre , Madison , WI , USA ) . Then each sample was amplified and transcribed into fluorescent cRNA along the entire length of the transcripts without 3 ′ bias using a random priming method ( Arraystar Flash RNA Labeling Kit , Arraystar , Rockville , MD , USA ) . The labeled cRNAs were hybridized onto the Mouse LncRNA Array v2 . 0 ( 8×60 K , Arraystar ) . After having washed the slides , the arrays were scanned by the Agilent Scanner G2505C . Agilent Feature Extraction software ( version 11 . 0 . 1 . 1 ) was used to analyze the acquired array images . Quantile normalization and subsequent data processing were performed using the GeneSpring GX v11 . 5 . 1 software package ( Agilent Technologies , Santa Clara , CA , USA ) . After quantile normalization of the raw data , lncRNAs and mRNAs that at least one out of the six samples have flags in Present or Marginal ( ‘ All Targets Value ’ ) were chosen for further data analysis . The microarray contained probes for 31 423 lncRNAs that were designed by Arraystar based on the most authoritative databases ( RefSeq , UCSC Known genes , Ensembl and related literature ) and 25 376 coding transcripts . Each transcript is represented by a specific exon or splice junction probe , which can identify individual transcript accurately . Differentially expressed lncRNAs and mRNAs with statistical significance ( ( fold change ) ≥ 2 . 0 , P - value ⩽ 0 . 05 ) were identified by comparing the normalized expression levels in TGF - β - treated and untreated samples with a paired t - test . Transfections , lentivirus production and infection assays . Trans - fection of NMuMG cells was performed using Viromer reagent from Lipocalyx , ( Halle , Germany ) following the protocol recommended by the manufacturer . Percentage of transfected cells was 4 90 % and it was quantified by co - expression of the GFP reporter gene . Mouse Spry1 expression vector , pCMV - Sport6 . 1 - Spry1 , was obtained from the I . M . A . G . E . Consortium ( Nottingham , UK ) ( accession number BC053428 ) . For lentiviral production , 2 . 8×10 6 HEK293T cells were seeded onto a 10 - cm Petri dish and transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) using 15 μ g of the transfer vectors pHRSIN - DUAL or pLKO together with 10 and 5 μ g of the HIV packaging plasmids pCMVDR8 . 91 and pVSVG , respectively . Lentiviruses were harvested 48 h posttransfection , passed through a 0 . 45 - μ m filter and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 100 000× g for 90 min . Virus particles were resuspended in serum - free DMEM , snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C . Titers of pHRSIN - DUAL lentiviral particles were determined by flow cytometry of NMuMG - infected cells , and titers of pLKO . 1 lentiviral particles were determined by transduction of NMuMG cells and subsequent evaluation of the number of colony - forming units following puromycin selection . For generation of lnc - Spry1 - downregulated cell lines ( shRNAs clones ) , NMuMG cells were infected with pLKO - shRNA lentiviral supernatant containing 4 μ g / ml polybrene and independent clones were isolated by selection in the presence of puromycin ( 1 μ g / ml ) for 2 weeks . Three independent shlnc - Spry1 sequences ( shRNA1 , shRNA2 , shRNA3 ) were cloned into pLKO . 1 vector and tested . Clones expressing shRNA1 gave the most effective lnc - Spry1 silencing ( 60 % reduction of lncRNA - Spry1 ) and were used in most of the experiments . For ectopic expression of lnc - Spry1 or Snail1 full - length cDNAs , NMuMG cells were infected with pHRSIN - DUAL - lnc - Spry1 or pHRSIN - DUAL - Snail1 lentivirus ( MOI = 2 ) , respectively . Mouse lnc - Spry1 gene was cloned by PCR using genomic DNA of NMuMG cells . The purified amplified fragment was cloned into pHRSIN - DUAL lentivector . Primers were designed according to RACE results . Mouse Snail1 expression vector was generated from IMAGE clone 5121591 by subcloning into the same lentivector . The dual - promoter lentivector pHRSIN - DUAL ( also known as pHRSIN - CSGWdINotI _ pUb _ Em ) was kindly provided by Mary K Collins ( Windeyer Institute , London , UK ) . Oligonucleotide sequences used for cloning are shown in Supplementary Table S4 . RNA interference . RNA duplexes against Smad4 were prepared by IDT ( Leuven , Belgium ) . DsiRNA sequences are shown in Supplementary Table S4 . Cells were transfected with RNA duplexes using Viromer reagent from Lipocalyx following the manufacturer ’ s protocol . Proliferation , migration and invasion assays . For growth curves , cells were harvested and transferred into 16 - well E - plates , which contain electrodes integrated into the bottom surfaces of each well to measure cell index based on impedance using the xCELLigence System ( Roche , Indianapolis , IN , USA ) . In all , 100 μ l of cell culture media were first added to each well at 37 °C for 30 min to equilibrate the conductors to the media . Then , 8 , 4 , 2 and 1 K cells were added per well , and the program was set to make readings every 30 min for 95 h . Cell migration was measured by using Culture - Inserts ( IBIDI , Martinsried , Germany ) . The Culture - Inserts were transferred to six - well plates , and cells were seeded at a density of 7×10 4 / ml in each well of Culture - Inserts and cultured in phenol red - free complete medium . After 24 h of incubation , the Culture - Inserts were removed , and a 400 - μ m cell - free gap was created . Cell migration was observed with a Leica DMI6000 inverted microscope ( Leica Microsystems , Wetzlar , Germany ) equipped with a Hamamatsu ORCA - ER camera ( Hamamatsu , Japan ) using LEICA N PLAN 10× , / 20× / 0 . 25 objectives and recorded every 20 min for 23 h . Image processing was carried out using the Leica ( LAS ) and Adobe Photoshop ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA , USA ) softwares . Quantification of cell surface was performed using the multiwave length cell - scoring module of the Metamorph Offline software , Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA , USA and the WimScratch Wound Healing Module ( WIMASIS , Munich , Germany ) program . Transwell invasion assays were performed using Transwell chambers ( 24 well , 8 μ M pore size ; Cell Biolabs , San Diego , CA , USA ) coated with basement membrane . Cells were allowed to grow to subconfluency and were serum - starved for 24 h . After detachment with trypsin , cells were washed with PBS , resuspended in serum - free medium and 5×10 4 cells were added to the upper chamber . Complete medium was added to the bottom well of the Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 795 Cell Death and Differentiation chamber . The cells that had not migrated were removed from the upper face of the filters using cotton swabs , and the cells that had migrated to the lower face of the filters were fixed with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde , permeabilized with 100 % methanol and stained with 0 . 05 % crystal violet . Images of random fields were captured from each membrane and the number of invasive cells was counted . The mean of triplicate assays was used for each experimental condition . Immunofluorescence microscopy . Cells grown on coverslips were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde / phosphate - buffered saline at room temperature for 15 min and then permeabilized by incubation in 0 . 01 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . After fixation , the coverslips were blocked with 3 % BSA in PBS for 45 min and incubated with primary antibody against E - cadherin ( 6010181 , Transduction Laboratories , San José , CA , USA ) for 1 h and then incubated with fluorochrome - labeled secondary antibody or phalloidin ( R415 , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR , USA ) for 1 h at room temperature . The coverslips were counterstained with DAPI and wide - field fluorescence imaging was performed using a Leica DM6000B microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . Data were processed with Adobe Photoshop CS4 ( Adobe Systems ) . Western blotting analysis . Protein expression was determined by immunoblotting using the following specific antibodies : polyclonal rabbit antibody against U2AF65 was purchased from Abcam ( Cambridge , UK ) ( ab37530 ) , monoclonal rabbit antibody against Snail1 was obtained from Cell Signaling ( Danvers , MA , USA ) ( C15D3 ) , monoclonal antibody against vimentin and monoclonal antibody against smad4 were acquired from Santa Cruz ( Dallas , TX , USA ) ( sc - 32322 and sc - 7966 ) , polyclonal rabbit antibody against ERK1 / 2 was purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific ( Waltham , MA , USA ) ( 61 – 7400 ) and polyclonal rabbit antibody against phospho - ERK1 / 2 and monoclonal antibody against phospho - p70 S6 kinase were purchased from Cell Signaling ( # 9101 and # 9206 ) . Proteins levels were normalized to β - actin ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , USA , A1978 ) . Results were visualized and quantified using ChemiDoc MP Imaging system ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA , USA ) . Western blotting analysis of the specific association between lnc - Spry1 and U2AF65 was normalized by measuring total protein directly on the membrane using the criterion stain - free gel imaging system ( Bio - Rad ) . RNA isolation , RT - qPCR and RACE . Total RNA was isolated using the TRIzol reagent according to the manufacturer ’ s instruction ( Invitrogen ) and was then reverse transcribed using a mix of oligo ( dT ) 20 and random hexamers and SuperScript III reverse transcriptase . Reverse transcription was followed by SYBR Green quantitative PCR using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix ( Bio - Rad ) . RACE was performed using the FirstChoice RLM - RACE Kit ( Ambion , Foster City , CA , USA ) following the manufacturer ’ s protocol . RT - PCR primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table S4 . RNA isolation from mouse tissues . Organs from normal C57BL / 6 mice were dissected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C . To isolate RNA , 40 – 60 mg of frozen tissue specimens were cut in small pieces and transferred to a tube containing 1 ml of TRIzol Reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Next , they were mechanically homogenized using a Pro250 homogenizer ( PROScientific , Oxford , CT , USA ) and total RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer ’ s instruction . RNA pull - down of proteins associated with lnc - Spry1 RNA and site - directed mutagenesis . pCR2 . 1 - Topo plasmid ( Invitrogen ) containing full - length and truncated lnc - Spry1 cDNAs was linearized with restriction enzyme BamH1 and purified using the DNA Clean and Concentrator - 5 Kit ( Zymo Research , Irvine , CA , USA ) . A 20 - μ l reaction contained 1 . 5 μ g linearized plasmid DNA , Biotin RNA labeling mix ( Roche ) and 40U T7 RNA polymerase ( ThermoFisher Scientifc ) was incubated at 37 °C for 3 h followed by RNAse - free DNAse I treatment at 37 °C for 30 min . Labeled RNAs were purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen ) , checked on agarose gel and quantified . Cellular extracts were prepared resuspending 5×10 7 NMuMG cells in 4 ml RIP buffer ( 25 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM KCl , 0 . 5 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 0 . 5 % NP40 , 1 mM PMSF , protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) and 20 U / ml Rnasin ribonuclease inhibitor ( Promega , Madison , WI , USA ) and incubated 30 min at 4 °C . Extracts were homogeneized by sonication ( Diagenode ’ s Bioruptor , Diagenode , Liege , Belgium , 10 min , high power setting , 15 s on / 30 s off ) , follwed by centrifuging for 20 min at 13 000 r . p . m . The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and precleared by applying 40 μ l of equilibrated Streptavidin - coupled Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) for 20 min at 4 °C . In order to block binding to unspecific RNA - binding proteins , 20 μ g / ml yeast RNA was added and incubated for 20 min at 4 °C . Biotinylated RNA ( 10 pmol ) was heated for 5 min at 65 °C , cooled down to room temperature and next incubated with 400 μ g of precleared cellular extracts and 25 μ l of equilibrated streptavidin - coupled Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) for 2 h at 4 °C . After washing four times for 5 min with RIP buffer , proteins were denatured in SDS buffer at 95 °C for 5 min and subjected to SDS - PAGE gels . Proteins were visualized by immunoblotting or by staining with SYPRO Ruby . Candidate protein bands were carefully cut out and sent out for mass spectrometric analysis . Specific mutations were produced using the QuikChange Multi Site - Directed Mutagenesis Kit ( Agilent Technologies ) as recommended by the manufacturer . ChIP assays . ChIP assays were performed using anti - H3K4me3 ( ab8580 ) from Abcam . Chromatin was sonicated to an average fragment size of 400 – 500 bp using the Diagenode Bioruptor . Rabbit IgG ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO , USA ) was used as a control for non - specific interactions . Input was prepared with 10 % of the chromatin material used for immunoprecipation . Input material was diluted 1 : 10 before PCR amplification . Quantification of immunoprecipitated DNA was performed by real - time PCR with the Applied Biosystems 7500 real - time PCR system ( Applied Biosystems , Foster City , CA ) , using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix ( Bio - Rad ) . Sample quantifications by qPCR were performed in triplicate . Sequences of all oligonucleotides are provided in Supplementary Table S4 . RNA immunoprecipitation . Cellular extracts were prepared from NMuMG cells crosslinked with 1 % formaldehyde . Cells were resuspended in RIP buffer and incubated 30 min at 4 °C and next were homogeneized by sonication ( Diagenode ’ s Bioruptor , 10 min , high power setting , 15 s on / 30 s off ) , and centrifuged for 20 min at 13 000 r . p . m . The supernatant was preclared by applying equilibrated protein A Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) and non - specific competitor tRNA . Finally , 400 μ g of extracts were incubated with 4 μ g of antibody against U2AF65 ( Abcam ) and 100 μ l of protein A Dynabeads for 3 h at 4 °C . Beads were washed four times for 5 min at 4 °C with RIP buffer and resuspended in 100 μ l of 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 0 , 5 mM EDTA , 10 mM DTT and 1 % SDS and next were incubated at 70 °C for 45 min to reverse the crosslinks . RNA was extracted using TRIzol according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol and was reversed transcribed and subjected to PCR analysis . Cell fractionation . The separation of nuclear and cytosolic fractions was carried out using the PARIS Kit ( Life Technologies ) according to the manufaturer ’ s instructions . RNA was extracted from each fraction using TRIzol reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Statistical analysis . Data were analyzed by one - way ANOVA and Student ’ s t - test comparison , using GraphPad Prism 5 ( Graphpad Software , La Jolla , CA , USA ) . Statistical significance was reached at P o 0 . 05 . Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest . Acknowledgements . We thank Sharon von Weelden for technical help and Dr . AGarcíade Herreros , Dr . A López - Rivas and Dr . M Encinasfor providing valuable reagents . We are grateful to Dr . MA Moreno - Mateos , Dr . C Méndez - Vidal and Dr . JC Reyes for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by grants from Ministerio de Economíay Competitividad ( SAF2014 - 57632 - P to JAP - T ) . CR - M was a recipient of a predoctoral fellowship from Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad . 1 . Kalluri R , Weinberg RA . The basicsof epithelial - mesenchymal transition . JClin Invest 2009 ; 119 : 1420 – 1428 . 2 . Scheel C , Weinberg RA . Phenotypic plasticity and epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in cancer and normal stem cells ? Int J Cancer 2011 ; 129 : 2310 – 2314 . 3 . Xu J , Lamouille S , Derynck R . TGF - beta - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition . Cell Res 2009 ; 19 : 156 – 172 . 4 . NietoMA . Theinsandoutsoftheepithelialtomesenchymaltransitioninhealthanddisease . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2011 ; 27 : 347 – 376 . 5 . Thiery JP , Acloque H , Huang RY , Nieto MA . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell 2009 ; 139 : 871 – 890 . 6 . Tam WL , Weinberg RA . The epigenetics of epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity in cancer . Nat Med 2013 ; 19 : 1438 – 1449 . Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 796 Cell Death and Differentiation 7 . Zheng H , Kang Y . Multilayer control of the EMT master regulators . Oncogene 2014 ; 33 : 1755 – 1763 . 8 . Shapiro IM , Cheng AW , Flytzanis NC , Balsamo M , Condeelis JS , Oktay MH et al . An EMT - driven alternative splicing program occurs in human breast cancer and modulates cellular phenotype . PLoS Genet 2011 ; 7 : e1002218 . 9 . Biamonti G , Bonomi S , Gallo S , Ghigna C . Making alternative splicing decisions during epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Cell Mol Life Sci 2012 ; 69 : 2515 – 2526 . 10 . Braeutigam C , Rago L , Rolke A , Waldmeier L , Christofori G , Winter J . The RNA - binding protein Rbfox2 : an essential regulator of EMT - driven alternative splicing and a mediator of cellular invasion . Oncogene 2014 ; 33 : 1082 – 1092 . 11 . Warzecha CC , Jiang P , Amirikian K , Dittmar KA , Lu H , Shen S et al . An ESRP - regulated splicing programme is abrogated during the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . EMBO J 2010 ; 29 : 3286 – 3300 . 12 . Warzecha CC , Carstens RP . Complex changes in alternative pre - mRNA splicing play a central role in the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Semin Cancer Biol 2012 ; 22 : 417 – 427 . 13 . Morris KV , Mattick JS . The rise of regulatory RNA . Nat Rev Genet 2014 ; 15 : 423 – 437 . 14 . Batista PJ , Chang HY . Long noncoding RNAs : cellular address codes in development and disease . Cell 2013 ; 152 : 1298 – 1307 . 15 . Mercer TR , Dinger ME , Mattick JS . Long non - coding RNAs : insights into functions . Nat Rev Genet 2009 ; 10 : 155 – 159 . 16 . Rinn JL , ChangHY . Genomeregulation bylongnoncoding RNAs . Annu RevBiochem 2012 ; 81 : 145 – 166 . 17 . HuP , YangJ , HouY , ZhangH , ZengZ , ZhaoL etal . LncRNAexpressionsignaturesoftwist - induced epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in MCF10A cells . Cell Signal 2014 ; 26 : 83 – 93 . 18 . Ying L , Chen Q , Wang Y , Zhou Z , Huang Y , Qiu F . Upregulated MALAT - 1 contributes to bladder cancer cell migration by inducing epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Mol Biosyst 2012 ; 8 : 2289 – 2294 . 19 . Luo M , Li Z , Wang W , Zeng Y , Liu Z , Qiu J . Long non - coding RNA H19 increases bladder cancer metastasis by associating with EZH2 and inhibiting E - cadherin expression . Cancer Lett 2013 ; 333 : 213 – 221 . 20 . Guo F , Parker Kerrigan BC , Yang D , Hu L , Shmulevich I , Sood AK et al . Post - transcriptional regulatory network of epithelial - to - mesenchymal and mesenchymal - to - epithelial transitions . J . Hematol Oncol 2014 ; 7 : 19 . 21 . YuanJH , YangF , WangF , MaJZ , GuoYJ , TaoQF etal . ALongnoncodingRNAactivatedby TGF - beta promotes the invasion - metastasis cascade in hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer Cell 2014 ; 25 : 666 – 681 . 22 . Huang S , Holzel M , Knijnenburg T , Schlicker A , Roepman P , McDermott U et al . MED12 controls the response to multiple cancer drugs through regulation of TGF - beta receptor signaling . Cell 2012 ; 151 : 937 – 950 . 23 . Kong L , Zhang Y , Ye ZQ , Liu XQ , Zhao SQ , Wei L et al . CPC : assess the protein - coding potential of transcripts using sequence features and support vector machine . Nucleic Acids Res 2007 ; 35 : W345 – W349 . 24 . Wang L , Park HJ , Dasari S , Wang S , Kocher JP , Li W . , CPAT . Coding - Potential Assessment Tool using an alignment - free logistic regression model . Nucleic Acids Res 2013 ; 41 : e74 . 25 . Deckers M , van Dinther M , Buijs J , Que I , Lowik C , van der Pluijm G et al . The tumor suppressor Smad4 is required for transforming growth factor beta - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition and bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 2202 – 2209 . 26 . Yu L , Hebert MC , Zhang YE . TGF - b receptor - activated p38 MAP kinase mediates Smad - independent TGF - beta responses . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 3749 – 3759 . 27 . Shirakihara T , Saitoh M , Miyazono K . Differential regulation of epithelial and mesenchymal markers by deltaEF1 proteins in epithelial mesenchymal transition induced by TGF - b . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 3533 – 3544 . 28 . HaynesJ , SrivastavaJ , MadsonN , WittmannT , BarberDL . Dynamicactinremodelingduring epithelial - mesenchymal transition depends on increased moesin expression . Mol Biol Cell 2011 ; 22 : 4750 – 4764 . 29 . Inman GJ , Nicolas FJ , Callahan JF , Harling JD , Gaster LM , Reith AD et al . SB - 431542 is a potent and specific inhibitor of transforming growth factor - beta superfamily type I activin receptor - likekinase ( ALK ) receptorsALK4 , ALK5 , andALK7 . MolPharmacol 2002 ; 62 : 65 – 74 . 30 . Orom UA , Shiekhattar R . Long non - coding RNAs and enhancers . Curr Opin Genet Dev 2011 ; 21 : 194 – 198 . 31 . Goff LA , Rinn JL . Linking RNA biology to lncRNAs . Genome Res 2015 ; 25 : 1456 – 1465 . 32 . Thuault S , Tan EJ , Peinado H , Cano A , Heldin CH , Moustakas A . HMGA2 and Smads co - regulate SNAIL1 expression during induction of epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 33437 – 33446 . 33 . Thuault S , Valcourt U , Petersen M , Manfioletti G , Heldin CH , Moustakas A . Transforming growth factor - beta employs HMGA2 to elicit epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 174 : 175 – 183 . 34 . Shirakihara T , Horiguchi K , Miyazawa K , EhataS , Shibata T , Morita I et al . TGF - b regulates isoform switching of FGF receptors and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . EMBO J 2011 ; 30 : 783 – 795 . 35 . Horiguchi K , Sakamoto K , Koinuma D , Semba K , Inoue A , Inoue S et al . TGF - b drives epithelial - mesenchymal transition through deltaEF1 - mediated downregulation of ESRP . Oncogene 2012 ; 31 : 3190 – 3201 . 36 . Lamouille S , Xu J , Derynck R . Molecular mechanisms of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Nat Rev 2014 ; 15 : 178 – 196 . 37 . GonzalezDM , MediciD . Signalingmechanismsoftheepithelial - mesenchymaltransition . Sci Signal 2014 ; 7 : re8 . 38 . Ramos AD , Andersen RE , Liu SJ , Nowakowski TJ , Hong SJ , Gertz CC et al . The long noncoding RNA Pnky regulates neuronal differentiation of embryonic and postnatal neural stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 2015 ; 16 : 439 – 447 . 39 . Guttman M , DonagheyJ , CareyBW , Garber M , Grenier JK , MunsonG etal . lincRNAs actin the circuitry controlling pluripotency and differentiation . Nature 2011 ; 477 : 295 – 300 . 40 . LiangWC , FuWM , WongCW , WangY , WangWM , HuGX etal . TheLncRNAH19promotes epithelial to mesenchymal transition by functioning as MiRNA sponges in colorectal cancer . Oncotarget 2015 ; 6 : 22513 – 22525 . 41 . Richards EJ , Zhang G , Li ZP , Permuth - Wey J , Challa S , Li Y et al . Long non - coding RNAs ( LncRNA ) regulated by transforming growth factor ( TGF ) beta : lncRNA - hit - mediated TGFbeta - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in mammary epithelia . J Biol Chem 2015 ; 290 : 6857 – 6867 . 42 . Derynck R , Smad - dependent Zhang YE . and Smad - independent pathways in TGF - b family signalling . Nature 2003 ; 425 : 577 – 584 . 43 . Orom UA , Derrien T , Beringer M , Gumireddy K , Gardini A , Bussotti G et al . Long noncoding RNAs with enhancer - like function in human cells . Cell 2010 ; 143 : 46 – 58 . 44 . Engreitz JM , Haines JE , Perez EM , Munson G , Chen J , Kane M et al . Local regulation of gene expression by lncRNA promoters , transcription and splicing . Nature 2016 ; 539 : 452 – 455 . 45 . Mazzon M , Jones M , Davidson A , Chain B , Jacobs M . Denguevirus NS5 inhibits interferon - alpha signaling by blocking signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 phosphoryla - tion . J Infect Dis 2009 ; 200 : 1261 – 1270 . 46 . Impagnatiello MA , Weitzer S , Gannon G , Compagni A , Cotten M , Christofori G . Mammalian sprouty - 1 and - 2 are membrane - anchored phosphoprotein inhibitors of growth factor signaling in endothelial cells . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 152 : 1087 – 1098 . 47 . Bronnum H , Andersen DC , Schneider M , Sandberg MB , Eskildsen T , Nielsen SB et al . miR - 21 promotes fibrogenic epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition of epicardial mesothelial cells involving Programmed Cell Death 4 and Sprouty - 1 . PLoS ONE 2013 ; 8 : e56280 . 48 . Capaccione KM , Hong X , Morgan KM , Liu W , Bishop JM , Liu L et al . Sox9 mediates Notch1 - induced mesenchymal features in lung adenocarcinoma . Oncotarget 2014 ; 5 : 3636 – 3650 . 49 . Kondo M , Cubillo E , Tobiume K , Shirakihara T , Fukuda N , Suzuki H et al . A role for Id in the regulation of TGF - beta - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transdifferentiation . Cell Death Differ 2004 ; 11 : 1092 – 1101 . 50 . Batlle E , Sancho E , Franci C , Dominguez D , Monfar M , Baulida J et al . The transcription factor snail is a repressor of E - cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumour cells . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 84 – 89 . 51 . Tripathi V , Ellis JD , Shen Z , Song DY , Pan Q , Watt AT et al . The nuclear - retained non - coding RNA MALAT1 regulates alternative splicing by modulating SR splicing factor phosphorylation . Mol Cell 2010 ; 39 : 925 – 938 . 52 . Gonzalez I , Munita R , Agirre E , Dittmer TA , Gysling K , Misteli T et al . A lncRNA regulates alternative splicing via establishment of a splicing - specific chromatin signature . Nat Struct Mol Biol 2015 ; 22 : 370 – 376 . 53 . BebeeTW , ParkJW , SheridanKI , WarzechaCC , CieplyBW , RohacekAM etal . Thesplicing regulators Esrp1 and Esrp2 direct an epithelial splicing program essential for mammalian development . Elife 2015 ; 4 : e088954 . Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on Cell Death and Differentiation website ( http : / / www . nature . com / cdd ) Lnc - Spry1 mediates EMT C Rodríguez - Mateo et al 797 Cell Death and Differentiation