- 1 - FACIT PD : A Framework for Analysis and Creation of Intergenerational Techniques for Participatory Design Greg Walsh 1 , Elizabeth Foss 2 , Jason Yip 2 , and Allison Druin 2 1 University of Baltimore 1420 N Charles St , AC 200H , Baltimore , MD 21201 gwalsh @ ubalt . edu 2 Human - Computer Interaction Lab 2117 Hornbake South Wing , Univ . of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 { efoss , jasonyip , allisond } @ umd . edu ABSTRACT In this paper , we present a framework that describes commonly used design techniques for Participatory Design with children . Although there are many currently used techniques for designing with children , researchers working in differing contexts and in a changing technological landscape find themselves facing difficult design situations . The FACIT PD framework presented in this paper can aid in choosing existing design techniques or in developing new techniques regardless of the stage in the design cycle , the technology being developed , or philosophical approach to design method . The framework consists of eight dimensions , concerning the design partners , the design goal , and the design technique . The partner dimensions are partner experience and need for accommodation . The design goal dimensions are design space and maturity of design . The technique dimensions include : cost , portability , technology and physical interaction . Three cases will be presented which describe new techniques developed using the framework and two cases will describe existing techniques . Author Keywords Children ; design ; design techniques ; design methods ACM Classification Keywords D2 . 2 . Design Tools and Techniques : Evolutionary prototyping General Terms Design . INTRODUCTION While many existing techniques are available for design researchers working with children , technology continuously evolves . New techniques need to be developed quickly in order to adapt to changing technologies and design spaces . For example , video games were screen - based and controlled with a joystick or keyboard a generation ago , but today , video games are available on phones where the input is unlike a joystick or a keyboard . Similarly , home video game systems are now able to sense players’ movements and require no touch interaction . As children’s technologies shift , the techniques used to work with children must keep up with this evolution . In our research , we have utilized Participatory Design ( PD ) as the means to design technology for and with children . At its core , PD is an overarching methodology that involves end - users in the technology design process . In the mid - 1970’s , computer - based technologies were introduced into the workplace in Europe , and workers began to feel that they were losing control of their work environment . In Germany and the Scandinavian countries , this feeling of loss was an important theme concerning democracy in the workplace [ 12 ] and led to the seminal work of the UTOPIA project [ 4 ] . The UTOPIA project sought to give a voice to newspaper workers in Sweden in the design of new computer - based tools for their work in the early 1980’s . This project continued in the spirit of other democratizing projects in 1970s Scandinavia where researchers observed and helped trade unions influence the technologies used in the work place [ 4 ] . It was not until the late 1990s that PD was adapted and more widely used with children [ 1 , 7 ] . Collaborative Design , or co - design , is the subset of PD in which expert designers work with the target audience to solve a problem . PD is often used to include any activity with an end - user ; however , co - design implies that the end - user is part of the design process . This subtle distinction is necessary because we use the term co - design to imply that the user becomes involved in the design process instead of merely testing a system or providing feedback at the end of the design process . The framework presented below is centered on co - design activities with children as the end - user group . Design researchers work with techniques to “enable children and adults to work together to create innovative technology for children” [ 9 ] . We define a technique as a creative endeavor that is meant to communicate design ideas and system requirements to a larger group . Researchers have also developed different methods for working with children in the design of new technologies . We define a method as a collection of techniques used in conjunction with a larger design Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2013 , April 27 – May 2 , 2013 , Paris , France . Copyright © 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1899 - 0 / 13 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2893 - 2 - philosophy . Cooperative Inquiry , Bonded Design , and Informant Design [ 6 , 13 , 22 ] are examples of popular methods used in the intergenerational co - design process . Previously , researchers have categorized PD methods and techniques in various ways . Muller and Kuhn [ 16 ] described methods and techniques through the level of involvement with end - users , the time in the design process , where the technique or method was used ( Scandinavian countries or not ) , if the technique or method was being used for commercial purposes , and group size . Sanders and colleagues [ 20 ] describe PD tools and techniques through the dimensions of form , purpose ( i . e . , probing , priming , understanding , and generating ) , and context ( i . e . , group size , face - to - face vs . online , venue , and stakeholder relationship ) . This previous work is extremely important , however , these classifications systems were either designed for adult - centered PD , or as a checklist that evaluates what a technique can output and where it can be used . Working with children requires a different lens to examine the properties of techniques and a framework for intergenerational design needs to consider these properties to design new techniques . The goal of this paper is to provide a framework for describing existing design techniques , and for use when creating effective new design techniques for working with children in the design process . It attempts to be agnostic to the design method employed by researchers . Instead , we focus on the practical use of the framework to understand existing techniques and to support design researchers when new or modified techniques are needed . The paper begins by reviewing examples of existing methods and techniques , then goes on to identify a multidimensional framework developed from evaluating existing techniques . In the concluding section , the use of this framework is described in the review of two existing techniques and in the development of three new techniques by the authors for conducting design work with children . PREVIOUS WORK Methods and techniques exist independently , and many techniques are not exclusively used in one specific method . For this review , we chose to examine the methods and techniques from the most cited papers in the ACM Digital Library based on the keywords of “children” , and “Participatory Design . We also drew from other sources , for example the journal Library and Information Science , because of the similarities or differences to highlighted methods . Our goal is to present examples that provide an overview of design philosophies differing along a spectrum of when and how children are involved in the design process . Below we describe four methods made up of multiple techniques . Druin [ 6 ] outlined the roles that children can play in the PD of technology from a spectrum of minimally involved to full partner : user , tester , informant , and design partner . The most involved method of bringing children into the design of technology is design partnering , where children are integral parts of creating a technology . This philosophy is called Cooperative Inquiry . Cooperative Inquiry has been used in the design of children ' s technologies for over a decade . This method prescribes that adults and children work together as design partners , using idea elaboration to create low - tech prototypes [ 6 ] . The prototypes are redesigned iteratively and usually increase in technological sophistication or focus at each iteration . Prototypes then receive feedback from the design team and the iterative cycle continues . In this method , the intergenerational design team participates in the design of the technology throughout its life cycle . Another role researchers ask children to be is informants . In this role , children offer input and feedback at different stages of the design process , but not continuously to guide the design process [ 21 ] . Informant design utilizes both hi - tech and low - tech prototyping techniques depending on the design problem and results desired . Philosophically , this method differs from Cooperative Inquiry in that researchers can choose the best stages of the design process for the involvement of children and only seek input during those critical stages . Informant design is intended to be a compromise between working with children as full partners , such as in Cooperative Inquiry , and adults designing technology with children in mind . Bonded Design [ 13 ] is similar to Cooperative Inquiry , except that design partners work with researchers for shorter periods of time and the design projects are done in schools instead of a lab environment . This is done because the amount of time and resources required for a full - year of design partnering are often outside the means of design researchers . One philosophical difference of Bonded Design from Cooperative Inquiry is that all participants are also thought of as learners in addition to being designers . The Mad Evaluation Session with Schoolchildren ( MESS ) day method used by the Child Computer Interaction ( ChiCI ) group is a mix of several techniques unified by the goal “to help children have technologies that are worthy of them ; that support playfulness , that are fun to use , and are engaging and exciting” [ 19 ] . This example fits the definition of method because of the unification of multiple techniques with a larger design philosophy . This method relies heavily on evaluation and low - tech prototyping during MESS days . In this method , the research team works with a group of children to evaluate new technologies , participate in design sessions , and take part in research experiments [ 18 ] . This method is similar to Bonded Design , but has more of an emphasis on evaluation and fun . The MESS days method is closely related to an older method called Bluebells [ 11 ] that was developed by the same group . In Bluebells , adults plan activities to focus on requirements , children play several games that create outputs for designers , and then adults incorporate ideas into the design requirements . The game techniques used during Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2894 - 3 - the play sessions generate new ideas and output for the adult designers to use in future designs . Techniques Human - Computer Interaction researchers have used a number of techniques to work with end - users . In order to create a framework for developing new techniques to support intergenerational PD , we examined the literature for prior techniques that design researchers have used in working with children and adults . In this section , we discuss techniques identified in the Human - Computer Interaction literature as having been used in PD with children , ordered by publication date ( earliest to latest ) . Bags of Stuff is a low - tech prototyping technique [ 6 ] considered to be one of the earliest and most common intergenerational PD prototyping techniques for the creation of low - fidelity prototypes . Large plastic bags are filled with arts and craft supplies such as yarn , glue , paper , markers , and scissors . Design teams comprised of two to four children and one to three adults are each given a bag to use in the development of a low - fidelity prototype . Ideally , each team develops one prototype , although depending on the ideas generated , a team may have more than one prototype . At the end of the design session , each team takes turns standing in front of the larger group and describing their ideas . Another commonly used technique is Storyboarding [ 25 ] . In storyboarding , the story of a system design is drawn onto large sheets of paper to establish a timeline as well as the aesthetics of the system . This technique is generally used later in the design process , as most of the design parameters should be established so the design team can provide feedback . Another example of common materials used in a design technique is often referred to as Stickies [ 6 ] . Stickies , or sticky notes , are small pieces of paper with a mild adhesive that stick to surfaces . The Stickies technique is especially useful towards the end of the design process as a way to identify likes , dislikes , and design ideas around a nearly complete prototype . In this technique , the larger group is split up into smaller teams made up of one or two children and at least one adult . The teams evaluate the technology by writing one like , dislike , or design idea on each sticky . The stickies go onto a whiteboard where an adult design partner organizes them into groupings of similar themes . This technique involves more than simple evaluation , as the likes , dislikes , and design ideas are used to inform the design requirements in the following iteration . In designing with children , there are several traditional uses of Paper Prototyping [ 23 ] . Letter or A4 sized paper is used to sketch designs [ 11 ] . In this way , designers are able to express their ideas in a way that seems intuitive for both children and adults . Big Paper [ 9 ] uses large pieces of paper , like those found on easel pads , as the medium for design . These large pieces of paper offer an unconstrained view of the design problem , as there is room for every design partner to draw their own ideas . In this way , Big Paper can generate a wide array of design ideas and approaches for design problems that are loosely defined or need an influx of ideas . KidReporter is a technique where the child designers can be responsible for the documentation of a design session [ 1 ] . Adult researchers give children video cameras and notepads , which children can use to take photo and video during the evaluation of a system . This technique is useful for children who may have difficulty writing or reading , and allows for a high level of interaction with the system under examination , as well as results in a large amount of different types of data . Mixing Ideas [ 9 ] is a technique originally created as the result of working with children aged 5 and 6 as design partners . Younger children often have a harder time working as partners in the design process and instead want to work individually in the creation of their designs rather than collaboratively with others . In this technique , design partners create their own individual designs and talk about them with the large group . At a later point in time , an adult member of the team cuts up or disassembles the designs so the group can utilize the existing parts in one new design . Comicboarding [ 15 ] is a newer technique that helps children who may be hesitant about designing to communicate their ideas to researchers . In Comicboarding , researchers ask children to come up with a story about a technology they are designing . An artist is directly on hand to draw the story as the children describe the technology . The Mission from Mars technique [ 5 ] provides a way for children to express their ideas on everyday life by communicating to a “Martian” ( an adult researcher in another room ) who represents someone that does not understand life on Earth . Adult participants present the narrative , setup the children into groups for the Martian broadcast , and help the children communicate to the Martian . Layered Elaboration [ 26 ] is a more recent paper - based prototyping technique in which designers add layers of transparent material to enable iterative design without destroying the original idea . In this technique , the larger group is split into several smaller teams that each create a design to address the stated problem . At the end of a specified amount of time , the teams meet to describe their designs to the larger group . When all of the teams have presented , a transparent sheet is added on the drawing paper and the design is exchanged with another team . The next team adds to the design by drawing on the transparency . This process is repeated as needed and elaborations are stacked on top of each other to enable understanding of the whole design . Obstructed Theater is one of the newer design techniques used by the Usability of Music for Social Inclusion of Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2895 - 4 - Children project [ 17 ] . In this technique , design researchers filmed a video of two children performing a sketch in which they describe a mobile device while never showing the device on screen . The video is shown to the design group at the beginning of the session . Because the described device is never shown , Obstructed Theater [ 17 ] allows children to be prompted at the beginning of a design session without influencing their designs . Modifying existing techniques Existing techniques can be modified depending on the design problem or context of the research . Design researchers only need to change the materials or approach to match the kinds of problems they are trying to solve . For example , the authors have modified Bags of Stuff to be more suited to a specific environment . Mobile Bags of Stuff is a technique in which Bags of Stuff are used , but the design partners must get up and move to another location , such as a stairwell or outdoors , to build their prototypes so the materials used are fewer and portable . Idea Synthesis The output of any technique should be a list of ideas , themes , or requirements that can be used in the next iteration of the design or to improve the technology . The idea synthesis , through which information is extracted from the design session , may look very different depending on the method used . For example , in Cooperative Inquiry , there is a group discussion involving the child design partners as well as adults as the ideas from small teams are written on a whiteboard . The authors refer to this as Big Ideas . Big Ideas is not a technique , per se , but it is an important part of the co - design process . Other methods may exclude the children from the idea synthesis altogether [ 13 , 19 ] . MULTIDIMENSIONAL TECHNIQUES FRAMEWORK From our review of the literature , we find that common dimensions exist between different techniques . To develop our framework , we employed a constant comparative analysis [ 14 ] , similar to approaches used in Grounded Theory [ 24 ] , to identify emergent patterns in the techniques . To do this , we reviewed the techniques to answer two questions : 1 ) how are the techniques similar and different with respect to the implementation of the technique and 2 ) how are the techniques similar and different with respect to the design team ( i . e . , children , researchers ) ? During the first round of review , we annotated noticeable similarities and differences between the techniques . We observed differences in materials used , interaction in the design space , what technologies were being designed , how the design partners would interact in the techniques , etc . From this process , we collapsed our observations into eight codes that were present in all the techniques via group discussions and comparisons of different aspects of techniques . To validate the framework we conducted code checks with two external researchers who were familiar with co - design techniques with children . The external researchers reviewed the coding scheme throughout the analysis . Using these codes , we went back and re - analyzed the techniques to determine if the codes were able to capture the most salient aspects of the techniques . No codes were added during the reanalysis . Eight dimensions resulted from this analysis that should be considered when choosing or creating techniques to achieve design goals with adults and children . These motivators led us to call this the F ramework for A nalysis and C reation of I ntergenerational T echniques for P articipatory D esign ( FACIT PD ) . In this framework , two of the dimensions concern the intergenerational participants , two of the dimensions concern the problem space being addressed , and four of the dimensions concern the technique itself . There is no particular order to the presentation of the dimensions because the needs of the researcher determine the priority of the dimensions . The two dimensions of the intergenerational participants are : 1 . Partner experience 2 . Need for accommodation The two dimensions of the design goal are : 3 . Design space 4 . Maturity of the design The four dimensions of the technique are : 5 . Cost 6 . Portability 7 . Technology level 8 . Physical interaction In the sections that follow each of these dimensions will be further defined and described . We also explain the role and importance of context in these dimensions . Dimensions of the Child Participants 1 . The partner experience dimension ( Figure 1 ) examines how much design experience is necessary to participate in the design sessions . Figure 1 . The spectrum of the partner experience dimension . The dimension goes from no expertise , allowing a child or adult who has never been a design partner to participate in design sessions , to high expertise , where design teams need to possess more expertise to successfully work on a design task . Most of the time , design techniques with children should be easy , natural , and accessible . A technique requiring no experience might be Comicboarding , as most participants can express ideas to another for illustration . An example of a technique requiring higher experience is Bags of Stuff , which is difficult for some partners due to the need to produce a collaborative , single design artifact arising from idea elaboration . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2896 - 5 - 2 . The need for accommodation dimension ( Figure 2 ) refers to the age and cognitive ability of the design partners involved . This dimension ranges from no accommodations to accommodations needed . Younger and older design partners occasionally need techniques that are modified [ 8 , 9 ] . Partners with special needs may need additional supports as well , such as ensuring that there is a complete supportive team in place around the child design partner prior to engaging any techniques [ 10 ] or providing visual schedules to aid children on the autistic spectrum with progressing through the technique activity [ 2 ] . If a design partner is of differing or cognitive age , accommodations can be included in the existing techniques . For example , Storyboarding requires design partners to draw out the scenarios of a system on large pieces of paper . Some partners may need to dictate their drawings to a proxy artist , and this would be considered a low accommodation , as any other member of the design team could act as the proxy . Mixing Ideas requires collaboration between design partners . In the case of partners with social issues , working in a group might not be ideal , and pairing with an adult might work better . This would be considered moderate accommodation , as there could be a limited number of adults present . Due to the wide variety of differences in accommodations needed , we tentatively place these two techniques on the dimension ( Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 . The spectrum of the need for accommodation dimension . Dimensions of the Design Goal 3 . The design space dimension ( Figure 3 ) looks at how specifically the design problem is defined . The dimension runs from non - specific to highly specified . If a problem is non - specific , the technique may need to be generalizable to a wide range of design spaces , such as computer - based , application design , or tangible technology . Researchers might use Bags of Stuff to have children build low - fidelity prototypes and collaborate together on an unspecific problem . If the problem is highly specific , the technique will need to accommodate that particular design space . For example , if researchers and designers have a specific user interface they would want children to critique , using Stickies can help child partners quickly give feedback . Figure 3 . The spectrum of the design space dimension . 4 . The maturity of design dimension ( Figure 4 ) examines how far along the current design is in the overall design process . The dimension ranges from early in the design process to late . If the design session occurs early in the process , then the main goal of the technique is to foster generation of design idea and directions . For example , Bags of Stuff allows children to design low - fidelity prototypes early in the process to generate design themes . If the technique is employed in the middle of the design process , it may be utilized for the elaboration and iteration of the existing design . For instance , Stickies could be used to evaluate an already existing prototype . If the technique is to be used at the end of the design process , it will need to facilitate evaluation of the existing design . Figure 4 . The spectrum of the maturity of design dimension . Dimensions of the Technique 5 . Cost ( Figure 5 ) refers to the financial price of materials required for the technique . This dimension ranges from no - cost materials to high - cost materials . An example of a no - cost technique would be theatrical plays in which designers explain new technologies through acting . An example of a low - cost technique , such as Stickies and Paper Prototyping , would be drawing ideas on paper with pencil , as paper and pencils are not expensive materials . A high - cost technique may include specialized equipment like video camera recorders , such as KidReporter . Figure 5 . The spectrum of the cost dimension . 6 . The portability ( Figure 6 ) of the technique describes the physical mobility of the technique or of the mobility of the artifacts generated by the technique . This dimension ranges from non - portable to highly portable . A non - portable technique would need to be in one location . For example , a group may be tethered by the need to use a computer lab or design in a particular space that has a specific recording setup . Figure 6 . The spectrum of the portability dimension . If designers need to consider working with children outside of a controlled lab setting , we recommend they consider whether or not the technique can be implemented in different environments . For instance , the artifacts generated by the Bags of Stuff technique can be difficult to move from one location to another because of the number of small pieces . We classify Bags of Stuff as lower in portability than Stickies , which can be done in most rooms Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2897 - 6 - with walls that allow the posting the notes up for group discussion . 7 . The technology dimension ( Figure 7 ) looks at the sophistication level of the technology utilized in the technique . The dimension ranges between low - tech usage and high - tech usage . An example of a low - tech technique is the utilization of paper as a medium to express ideas , while a high - tech technique may use tablet computers on which designers can express their ideas . Mission from Mars ( MfM ) [ 5 ] requires the use of cameras , televisions , microphones , and other video equipment . There is a positive correlation between cost and technology level ; more high - tech techniques tend to be more expensive . However , high cost does not necessarily mean high technology usage . Figure 7 . The spectrum of the technology dimension . 8 . The physical interaction dimension ( Figure 8 ) examines the degree to which designers will physically move around during the design process because of the technique . Figure 8 . The spectrum of the physical interaction dimension . The dimension goes from low movement to high movement . Some techniques may require the designers to sit in place in order to complete their designs and these techniques would be low physical interaction . For instance , Layered Elaboration tends to only need children to sit and draw on design iterations . Techniques that require participants to move around would be considered high physical interaction . This differs from the portability dimension as physicality refers to the bodily movement required for the technique , and the portability dimension refers to the mobility of the technique itself . For instance , in MfM , children move between different rooms for the technique , but the actual technique is not easily moved . Utility 1 : A framework for analyzing techniques In this section , we briefly describe the design challenges of two techniques ( Comicboarding [ 15 ] and Mission from Mars [ 5 ] ) and we breakdown the techniques through the lens of the above framework . In this section and others , we will refer specifically to the eight dimensions by numbers ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ) . Figure 9 shows the two techniques as analyzed from the framework . Existing Technique # 1 : Comicboarding It is occasionally difficult for child designers to express their ideas via drawing , as they may be accustomed to rote learning practices where brainstorming is not encouraged [ 15 ] . In such cases , it is possible to bring in an outside artist who can aid child designers in ordering and expressing their ideas by communicating ideas verbally with the child via storytelling and then drawing the ideas while the child designer offers input . Figure 9 . Using the eight dimension of the framework to classify two prior techniques in co - design with children . The partner experience ( 1 ) dimension for Comicboarding is low for child designers as we believe children are proficient at explaining idea via storytelling . Comicboarding is designed to allow children of any background to participate in design activities , but a more experienced artist would be needed to be able to accurately represent and contribute ideas to the design problem . Since children need to only narrate a story to an artist , little accommodation is needed on that dimension ( 2 ) . However , determination of the need for accommodation spectrum also depends on the context of a research project . In Comicboarding , it is established that the child designer will design either within a partially completed comic , somewhat grounding the design space ( 3 ) to a more specific area , or within a free - form comic , which is a more unconstrained design space [ 15 ] . The maturity of design ( 4 ) dimension is generally early stage , as the ideas are being generated on the spot by the designers As Comicboarding requires hiring an artist , the cost ( 5 ) of the technique is moderate . However , as the output of the technique is drawings on paper , the technique is highly portable ( 6 ) . As for the technology dimension ( 7 ) , nothing more than paper and drawing supplies are needed in Comicboarding . For the user dimensions , physical interaction ( 8 ) is low as the technique calls for designers and an artist to sit and work together . Existing Technique # 2 : Mission from Mars ( MfM ) One of the principles of Contextual Design [ 3 ] states that people are experts at what they do , but have a difficult time articulating their own practice to designers . This same principle applies with children . As mentioned , the MfM technique [ 5 ] provides a way for children to express their ideas on everyday life by communicating to a “Martian” ( an Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2898 - 7 - adult researcher in another room ) who represents someone that does not understand life on Earth . MfM requires numerous pieces of electronic equipment . The children are brought into a broadcast room in which they speak to the Martian though a video feed that includes monitor , video camera , speakers , and the equipment that locally connects the devices . The cost ( 5 ) is high and the technology dimension ( 7 ) requires high usage . MfM was implemented in a school between two classrooms . The portability ( 6 ) dimension is mid - level . As long as two rooms are present and have enough electrical outlets and space between for the devices to connect , MfM can be implemented . For the design space ( 3 ) dimension , MfM is highly specific . The researchers were directly focused on how to improve upon eBag , a digital repository in which children can store photos , documents , and other electronic artifacts . The maturity of design ( 4 ) is mid - level ; the researchers were still in the process of developing eBag and making iterative changes . In considering the user dimensions , the partner experience ( 1 ) is low ; children were only recruited for this one session and did not need prior design experience . In considering the need for accommodation ( 2 ) dimension , high accommodation may need to be present due to the numerous tasks . Children were presented with the narrative and had to decode alien symbols . They also had to work in groups , develop a presentation for the alien broadcast , and had come back for discussion . This constant switching between different tasks and rooms also meant that the physical interaction ( 8 ) of the children is mid - level . Utility 2 : A framework for creating new techniques In this section , we outline three techniques we have developed with the FACIT PD framework and its eight dimensions . We describe the design challenge that prompted the creation of a new technique , explain how we came up with the technique , and explain the details of the technique . We implemented and designed the three new techniques for use with an intergenerational design team Kidsteam . Kidsteam is composed of adult researchers and children aged 7 – 11 that meets twice a week during the school year to co - design new technologies . Although these techniques were used as a part the Cooperative Inquiry method , we believe the techniques can be used with different design methods . New Technique # 1 – Big Props Kinect™ is a motion sensor controller that detects physical player movement for the Xbox™ video game system . We wanted to see what ideas the design team would come up with for the technology . However , none of the prior techniques used during Kidsteam design sessions would capture the dynamic nature of the technology . Typically , we utilize the Bags of Stuff technique to develop low - fidelity prototypes early in the design process , but the Bags of Stuff prototypes were too stiff and motionless for thinking about motion sensing controllers . We needed a technique that allowed for the same non - specific design space as Bags of Stuff , but could show us gestures and dynamic motions of children by enabling more physicality . Figure 10 . Big Props is a technique in which design partners use props to act out gestures and motions for technology that requires such interactions . In our consideration of the design challenge of motion and gestures , the physical interaction ( 8 ) dimension needed to be a high priority . The children needed to demonstrate gestures and that interaction would be very high . Since the Kinect™ design session focused on an unspecific design space ( 3 ) and early maturity of design ( 4 ) , we also wanted the same low cost ( 5 ) , low tech ( 7 ) , and low partner experience ( 1 ) dimensions as Bags of Stuff [ 6 ] . As we considered the issues of high physical activity with the low - fidelity prototyping properties of Bags of Stuff , our research group examined other prior techniques , but could not find one suitable for the design challenge . We decided to develop a new technique based on high physical interaction needs combined with the development of low - fidelity prototypes . We developed Big Props as a technique to design children’s technologies that depended on motions , gestures , and dynamic movement ( Figure 10 ) . In Big Props , children are divided into groups with the adults and given a random assortment of large stage props ( e . g . , balls , umbrellas , blankets ) . Using the props , each small group comes up with a scenario for the motion - based technology and shares the gestures and interactions with the larger design team . After each group presents their idea , the props are rotated around and the teams come up with another new idea . When we first implemented Big Props , the other dimensions started to become clearer . After implementation , we observed that children’s high physical motions meant that portability ( 6 ) of Big Props would be limited to large rooms that could accommodate a lot of activity . Based on our child - participants , Big Props did not require any need for accommodations ( 2 ) beyond adults constantly monitoring and supervising for safety issues . New Technique # 2 – Line Judging Researchers in our lab asked Kidsteam for opinions on a series of technologies that could help children learn foreign languages . The researchers came to Kidsteam with ideas Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2899 - 8 - about several different technologies that needed to be evaluated by participants . We knew from past experiences that simple voting is difficult for engagement . Voting can mean that children have to sit for a long time and raise their hand up for either a “yes” , “no” , or “neutral” answer . We wanted the children to vote on a spectrum ( highly negative to highly positive ) and we wanted them to quickly see their opinions in a spatial manner . Since we wanted the children to vote quickly on the new ideas , we knew that the cost ( 5 ) and technology ( 7 ) dimensions for our new technique should be extremely low . Voting also needed to be a technique that is highly portable ( 6 ) . The design space ( 3 ) needed to be highly specific to foreign language technologies and the maturity of design ( 4 ) could range from early to mid - level designs . Since voting had to be simple , our child partners needed a technique that had low design experience ( 1 ) and low need for accommodations ( 2 ) As we examined prior techniques , we found that none of them were sufficient for this design task due to the need for rapid evaluation of design ideas . Our typical technique for this type of design problem is Stickies , in which the design team evaluates a late - stage prototype in depth . Because of the numerous early - stage ideas the researchers had , we needed the Kidsteam to both quickly vote on the ideas they liked as well as express their thoughts on expanding or modifying a numerous and diverse amount of ideas . Based on the priorities identified , we developed Line Judging as a technique that is similar to Stickies in that it allows the design team to indicate likes or dislikes of ideas ( Figure 11 ) . We drew a 3 - meter line on the lab floor in masking tape . The design team began by standing together at the middle of the line . One of the researchers briefly described each technology idea . Once the participants heard the idea , they moved themselves in one direction for positive feelings , in the opposite direction for negative feelings , or remained in the middle for neither like or dislike . Then they shared their opinions about the idea . Participants had the option of standing anywhere on the line to state their opinion and if their opinions changed , they could change their position on the line . This process repeated with each new idea . Based on the initial implementation of Line Judging , we found that physical interaction ( 8 ) was on the mid - range because children were constantly moving along the line . New Technique # 3 – Team Construction The National Parks Service ( NPS ) partnered with Kidsteam to design a new browser - based game that would help children vicariously explore and learn about shipwrecks in the ocean . Because of the detailed nature of a shipwreck , we were interested in generating ideas for a complete environment , rather than for disparate topics . In our evaluation of the design challenge , we considered that cost ( 5 ) for this technique needed to be low . We would only use materials and art supplies found in the lab ( with exception to digital cameras for recording ) . This made the technology dimension ( 7 ) low . The partner experience ( 1 ) dimension was low . We expected our team to be natural at building using larger household items and art supplies . The portability ( 6 ) of the technique would be low , as we wanted a large model representing a shipwreck that could be annotated and physically explored by the Kidsteam . The design space ( 3 ) of the new technique was mid - range , as we knew the intention was to develop an educational game for the computer . The maturity of design ( 4 ) was at the very early , unspecified stage . Figure 11 . In Line Judging , children and adults initially stand in the middle of the line and move as a way to express their opinions . Using aspects of our framework , we developed Team Construction as a technique similar to Bags of Stuff and Mixing Ideas . Instead of developing several smaller low - fidelity prototypes in different teams , Team Construction enables the entire design team to work together to build a single large model . In the case of the NPS shipwreck , we asked Kidsteam to build a large model shipwreck in the middle of our lab and then annotate it with large sticky notes . Children and adults used cardboard boxes , tape , art supplies , and toys to build the model . The advantage of Team Construction was that children could integrate different ideas about the shipwreck and build different sections , as well as realize their entire design in physical form . However , as we implemented Team Construction , we realized the need for accommodation ( 2 ) was moderate to high . The adults had to make sure that the children are able to build the project with ease , such as reaching up to higher points of the design . The technique also proved to have high physical interaction ( 8 ) . Children were constantly crawling around the shipwreck model to build the finer details . DISCUSSION The FACIT PD framework provides a means to describe existing techniques and to differentiate techniques and methods . The ability to describe design techniques in existence using the eight dimensions can aid in providing new directions for design and for the creation of new techniques . Techniques should be fun , be interactive , be applicable to a wide audience , and provide an alternative way for children to communicate . Techniques should also Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2900 - 9 - enable adults the opportunity to listen and learn from children . While we do not advocate eliminating older and proven techniques , we suggest that developers and researchers need to consider a framework for future development and modifications of design techniques for children . This framework provides scaffolding for researchers and design teams that want to work with intergenerational groups . It does this by identifying the properties of techniques and providing a range of values to be considered for intergenerational co - design . Each of the three new techniques presented in this paper show instances of the need to develop new techniques based on new situations and were created with the framework in mind . The same process used in this paper can be replicated in many situations , resulting in a multitude of new techniques , suited to specific contexts or to wider use . Beginning with a design challenge , or goal , for an end - user design session , researchers and developers can then proceed to develop a new technique by considering how each dimension should be altered to best suit their particular context . Figure 12 . Team Construction enables children and adults to collaborate together to build a single large model prototype . However , in each technique , changes to dimensions need to be thought of as trade - offs . For example , in Big Props , the use of high physical interaction ( 8 ) with large items meant trading - off portability ( 6 ) by making it low . Also , we reduced the level of co - design at which some adults would normally participate . Another example of trade - offs was when we chose to use a low - tech ( 7 ) , highly physical ( 8 ) approach in Line Judging . We did this to provide an environment to foster a rich discussion with participants . It would have been possible to replicate this same exercise on the computer , but that would have required higher technology ( 7 ) and , more than likely , a higher cost ( 5 ) and may have led to less discussion . However , by using higher technology , the speed of analysis of the evaluations might have been faster . This framework is not designed to replace other PD frameworks or to be mutually exclusive to those that seek to describe PD techniques and methods . The FACIT PD framework is different than the other classification methods because it more explicitly addresses the needs of those researchers and practitioners that would like to work with children in intergenerational PD . For example , the FACIT PD framework compliments Sanders et al . ’s [ 18 ] framework for classifying PD tools and techniques’ Purpose dimension . Specifically , the framework can complement the generating ideas sub - dimension by providing tools to teams that may need assistance in creating or choosing PD techniques for intergenerational groups based on the participants and environment . Use of the framework can also provide a common ground around which researchers in differing fields and from many methodological philosophies can communicate their ideas . As researchers expand end - user design work into multiple fields , and technology continues to change with time , the ability of design techniques to keep pace as well as span disciplines will become crucial . LIMITATIONS We acknowledge that some techniques may differ from other techniques on only one or two dimensions . However , we do not define what constitutes a new technique versus a modified technique based on dimensional differences , as we believe that the context of the design problem is of greater importance than dimensional differences . We acknowledge that users of this framework will likely find that it is necessary to alter techniques to fit their design needs . Additionally , we understand that some may find that this framework needs slight modification to align with the parameters of differing design methods . Researchers from varying philosophies working with children are encouraged to use the eight dimensions as a guide when considering how to approach their design problems . We advocate for the inclusion of the participants ' culture as one of the elements considered by design researchers as they employ this framework . FUTURE WORK We believe future work lies in developing techniques for underserved populations of children . Researchers and designers should consider how to develop techniques that are adaptable for children with developmental , cognitive , physical , or emotional impairments . For instance , the Bags of Stuff technique presumes that children can grasp , hold , and manipulate objects with dexterity and precision . Consideration as to how techniques can be altered to enable participation for all end - users is important , especially given the potential for technology to provide assistance to underserved populations . Additionally , this paper has considered design techniques from the perspective of children as users . It is of future interest to compare a similar taxonomy of techniques used with adults , and to examine via the same coding method whether the eight dimensions of this work hold true for work with adults . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2901 - 10 - ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The researchers would like to thank : Panagis Papadatos , Tansy Peplau , the adults and children of the Kidsteam research group , and the National Parks Service , Nick . com , and Google , Inc . for funding for this work . REFERENCES 1 . Bekker , M . , Beusmans , J . , Keyson , D . , and Lloyd , P . KidReporter : a user requirements gathering technique for designing with children . Interacting with computers 15 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 187 – 202 . 2 . Benton , L . , Johnson , H . , Brosnan , M . , Ashwin , E . , and Grawemeyer , B . IDEAS : an interface design experience for the autistic spectrum . Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ( 2011 ) , 1759 – 1764 . 3 . Beyer , H . and Holtzblatt , K . Contextual design : defining customer - centered systems . Morgan Kaufmann , 1997 . 4 . Bodker , S . , Ehn , P . , Sjögren , D . , and Sundblad , Y . Co - operative Design—perspectives on 20 years with ` the Scandinavian IT Design Model’ . Proceedings of NordiCHI , ( 2000 ) , 22 – 24 . 5 . Dindler , C . , Eriksson , E . , Iversen , O . S . , Lykke - Olesen , A . , and Ludvigsen , M . Mission from Mars : a method for exploring user requirements for children in a narrative space . Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design and children , ( 2005 ) , 40 – 47 . 6 . Druin , A . Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for children with children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : the CHI is the limit , ACM ( 1999 ) , 592 – 599 . 7 . Druin , A . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . 8 . Farber , A . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , Julian , D . , and Somashekhar , S . How Young Can Our Design Partners Be ? Proceedings of the Seventh Participatory Design Conference , ( 2002 ) . 9 . Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , Fails , J . A . , Simms , S . , and Farber , A . Mixing ideas : a new technique for working with young children as design partners . Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction design and children : building a community , ( 2004 ) , 35 – 42 . 10 . Hornof , A . J . Designing with children with severe motor impairments . Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2009 ) , 2177 – 2180 . 11 . Kelly , S . R . , Mazzone , E . , Horton , M . , and Read , J . C . Bluebells : a design method for child - centred product development . Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction : changing roles , ( 2006 ) , 361 – 368 . 12 . Kensing , F . and Blomberg , J . Participatory design : Issues and concerns . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 7 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 167 – 185 . 13 . Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , and Bowler , L . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library and Information Science Research 28 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 64 – 82 . 14 . Lewis - Beck , M . , Bryman , A . E . , and Liao , T . F . The SAGE Encyclopedia of Social Science Research Methods . SAGE , 2003 . 15 . Moraveji , N . , Li , J . , Ding , J . , O’Kelley , P . , and Woolf , S . Comicboarding : using comics as proxies for participatory design with children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2007 ) , 1371 – 1374 . 16 . Muller , M . J . and Kuhn , S . Participatory design . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 ( 1993 ) , 24 – 28 . 17 . Read , J . C . , Fitton , D . , and Mazzone , E . Using obstructed theatre with child designers to convey requirements . Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’10 , ( 2010 ) , 4063 . 18 . Read , J . C . , MacFarlane , S . , Kelly , S . R . , Mazzone , E . , and Horton , M . The ChiCI group . CHI ’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’06 , ( 2006 ) , 295 . 19 . Read , J . C . MESS Days : Working with Children to Design and Deliver Worthwhile Mobile Experiences . UPA User Experience Magazine 9 , 2010 . http : / / www . upassoc . org / upa _ publications / user _ experien ce / past _ issues / 2011 - 1 . html # walsh . 20 . Sanders , E . B . - N . , Brandt , E . , and Binder , T . A framework for organizing the tools and techniques of participatory design . Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM ( 2010 ) , 195 – 198 . 21 . Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , and Davies , M . Designing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning environments . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ( 1997 ) , 343 – 350 . 22 . Scaife , M . and Rogers , Y . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn’t know or confirming what we knew already . The design of children’s technology , ( 1999 ) , 27 – 50 . 23 . Snyder , C . Paper prototyping . Morgan Kaufmann , Burlington , Massachusetts , 2003 . 24 . Strauss , A . and Corbin , J . M . Basics of qualitative research : Grounded theory procedures and techniques . Sage Publications , Inc , 1990 . 25 . Truong , K . N . , Hayes , G . R . , and Abowd , G . D . Storyboarding : an empirical determination of best practices and effective guidelines . Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems , ( 2006 ) , 12 – 21 . 26 . Walsh , G . , Druin , A . , Guha , M . L . , et al . Layered elaboration : a new technique for co - design with children . Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1237 – 1240 . Session : Design for Children CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 2902