Actin is one of the most abundant and highly conserved proteins in eukaryotic cells and is structurally related to prokaryotic actin - like proteins , hinting at its ancient evolutionary origins ( Box 1 ) . A 42 kDa monomeric ATP - binding protein , globular actin ( G - actin ) , can undergo cycles of self - assembly into filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , ATP hydrolysis and depolymerization . Actin filaments contain dynamic barbed ends and less active pointed ends that are differentiated by their structural and biochemical characteristics . Filament turnover is controlled by many actin - binding proteins , including some that function in monomer sequestration or delivery and others that prom - ote filament nucleation , elongation , capping , severing or depolymerization . The ability of this versatile cytoskel - etal system to generate force , create structural scaffolds and act as tracks for motor proteins makes it a crucial participant in numerous cellular functions , including morphogenesis , migration , cytokinesis and membrane transport ( FIG . 1 ) . To initiate actin assembly during such processes , cells generate free barbed ends that act as templates for poly - merization by uncapping or severing existing filaments or by nucleating from monomers de novo . Spontaneous actin assembly is inefficient , however , as the forma - tion of actin dimers and trimeric ‘nuclei’ is kinetically un favourable . To overcome this obstacle , cells use factors that directly nucleate actin . For many years , only the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , a few of its activators , and formin proteins were known to directly participate in nucleation 1 – 3 . However , recent discoveries have revealed new factors with roles in nucleation . In this Review , we discuss the latest advances in our understanding of the cellular regulation and function of ARP2 / 3 and formins , and examine how the character - ization of new nucleation factors has provided fresh perspectives on actin dynamics in mammalian cells . ARP2 / 3 : a Y‑branching nucleator The first major actin nucleator to be identified was ARP2 / 3 , a 220 kDa complex comprising seven stably associated polypeptides that are highly conserved in vir - tually all eukaryotic organisms ( for an in - depth review on ARP2 / 3 , see ReF . 1 ) . These polypeptides include ARP2 and ARP3 plus five additional subunits , ARPC1 – ARPC5 ( FIG . 2a ) . Among the known nucleators , the ARP2 / 3 com - plex is unique in its ability to both nucleate filaments and organize them into branched networks . Biochemical properties , structure and activation . In its purified form , the ARP2 / 3 complex binds to the side of an existing actin filament and initiates the assembly of a new filament , joining the two at an ~ 70° Y - branch angle 1 . The nascent filament is capped by ARP2 / 3 at its pointed end , but is free to elongate at its barbed end . Like actin , ARP2 and ARP3 bind ATP , and the confor - mation of the ARP2 / 3 complex differs with and without nucleotides 4 , 5 . Importantly , ATP - binding is crucial for nucleation in vitro 4 , 6 , 7 . ARP2 has been shown to hydrolyse ATP and , although hydrolysis was initially implicated in either nucleation 8 or debranching 9 , recent work suggests it primarily accelerates debranching and recycling of the complex 10 . * Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , California , 94720 USA . e‑mails : campellone @ berkeley . edu ; welch @ berkeley . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2867 Published online 18 March 2010 A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly Kenneth G . Campellone * and Matthew D . Welch * Abstract | For over a decade , the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , a handful of nucleation - promoting factors and formins were the only molecules known to directly nucleate actin filament formation de novo . However , the past several years have seen a surge in the discovery of mammalian proteins with roles in actin nucleation and dynamics . Newly recognized nucleation - promoting factors , such as WASP and SCAR homologue ( WASH ) , WASP homologue associated with actin , membranes and microtubules ( WHAMM ) , and junction - mediating regulatory protein ( JMY ) , stimulate ARP2 / 3 activity at distinct cellular locations . Formin nucleators with additional biochemical and cellular activities have also been uncovered . Finally , the Spire , cordon - bleu and leiomodin nucleators have revealed new ways of overcoming the kinetic barriers to actin polymerization . REVIEWS nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 237 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 ATP – actin ATP – MreB ATP – ParM ADP – ParM ADP – actin ADP – MreB ATP – ParM ADP – ParM MreB ParM Bacterial shape Plasmid segregation Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ADP ADP ADP ADP ATP ATP ATP ATP ATP ATP ATP ATP ADP ADP ADP ADP ADP ADP ADP WCA domain The minimal sequence element required for potent activation of ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation and the formation of dendritic networks . The crystal structure of the bovine ARP2 / 3 complex has been solved in various nucleotide - bound condi - tions 6 , 11 , but none of these represent the active version because ARP2 and ARP3 are spaced too far apart to mimic a short - pitch actin dimer — the most likely con - figuration for promoting actin nucleation . Although structures of the active complex have yet to be solved , a combination of homology modelling and electron tomography has helped reveal its conformation at Y - branches ( FIG . 2a ) . These studies suggest that ARPC2 and ARPC4 form important contacts with the parental filament , whereas the barbed ends of ARP2 and ARP3 associate with the pointed end of the nascent filament 12 , 13 . moreover , interactions between the entire complex and the existing filament involve conformational changes by both structures that might increase branch - point stability 13 . Thus , on binding to an existing filament , ARP2 and ARP3 probably reorient into a dimer that acts as the first two subunits of the new filament . By itself , the ARP2 / 3 complex is an inefficient nucleator , but filament binding increases its activity and is coupled with nucleation and branching . Potent nucleation also requires phosphorylation of Thr and Tyr residues in ARP2 ( ReF . 14 ) . A third contributor to ARP2 / 3 activation , and the best characterized , involves engagement of the complex by nucleation - promoting factors ( nPFs ) . most mammalian nPFs activate ARP2 / 3 using a WCA domain , which is comprised of one or more wASP homology 2 ( wH2 ) domains that bind actin monomers , plus an amphipathic connector region and an acidic peptide that collectively bind ARP2 / 3 ( FIG . 2b ) . To nucleate actin , the connector and acidic portion of the wCA domain contacts multiple subunits of the ARP2 / 3 complex and causes a substantial conforma - tional change that primes it for nucleation 4 , 5 , 15 , 16 . The connector can interact with both ARP2 / 3 and actin 17 . Structural studies suggest that this region binds to ARP2 ( ReF . 18 ) while the wH2 domains , by virtue of their ability to bind G - actin 19 , 20 , deliver monomers to the barbed ends of ARP2 and / or ARP3 in the primed complex . Following ARP2 / 3 activation , the wCA domain is thought to disso ciate , enabling it to promote additional rounds of nucleation . Further biochemical and structural studies are needed to precisely define how wCA domains alter ARP2 / 3 conformation and promote activation during nucleation and branching . In cells , ARP2 / 3 is important for nucleating and organizing branched filament networks in lamellipodia and other structures ( FIG . 1 ) , based on many localization and functional inhibition studies 1 . However , much of what we have subsequently learned about cellular ARP2 / 3 functions has come indirectly , by studying its activators . These include wCA domain - containing proteins encoded by microbial pathogens , and mammalian nPFs that comprise the wASP superfamily ( FIG . 3a ) , originally named after the wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . NPFs : crucial ARP2 / 3 collaborators The largest group of mammalian nPFs ( class I ) stimulate ARP2 / 3 - mediated nucleation using carboxy - terminal wCA domains , but contain diverse amino - terminal sequences that enable different modes of regulation and functions in cells 3 ( FIG . 3a , b ) . As a consequence , these nPFs are subcategorized into five groups : wASP and neural wASP ( n - wASP ) ; three wASP - family verprolin homologue ( wAve ; also known as SCAR ) isoforms ; and the recently identified factors wASP and SCAR homologue ( wASH ) , wASP homologue associated with actin , membranes and microtubules ( wHAmm ) and Box 1 | The actin cytoskeleton : ancient evolutionary origins and functions Several prokaryotic proteins have structural similarities to eukaryotic actin and assemble into filaments , suggesting that they represent an ancestral actin cytoskeleton . These bacterial factors include murein formation cluster E B ( MreB ) and partitioning M ( ParM ) ( reviewed in ReF . 159 ; see the figure ) . MreB is expressed primarily in rod - shaped bacteria and is an ATPase , similar to eukaryotic actin . Also like actin , MreB subunits are preferentially incorporated into filaments in their ATP - bound form and depolymerize mainly in their ADP - bound form . However , unlike filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , MreB subunits generally have a non - helical structure and form short coils , spirals and ribbons . These filaments help determine bacterial shape by forming a scaffold beneath the inner plasma membrane and positioning the enzymes involved in cell wall biosynthesis . Another actin - like bacterial protein , ParM , is encoded on the Escherichia coli R1 plasmid . ParM polymerizes in an ATP - dependent manner to form helical filaments that are like F - actin but with the opposite handedness . Moreover , ParM assembly kinetics are very different from those of eukaryotic actin . ParM spontaneously nucleates more efficiently than actin and might not need nucleation factors . ParM filaments continuously cycle between phases of elongation and rapid catastrophic disassembly , a behaviour that was first described for microtubules and is termed dynamic instability . Finally , ParM filaments are not polar and can elongate from both ends . This has important functional consequences because during bacterial division , bidirectionally elongating ParM filaments drive the physical partitioning of R1 plasmids into the two daughter cells . Although a generic role for actin - like cytoskeletons in determining cell shape seems to be conserved from bacterial to mammalian cells , a function for the actin - based movement of nucleic acids has so far only been well - characterized in prokaryotes . R E V I E W S 238 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Stress fibres mDIA1 , mDIA2 and mDIA3 DAAM1 and DAAM2 FHOD1 INF1 Nucleus Filopodia and cell spikes N - WASP – ARP2 / 3 ? mDIA1 and mDIA2 SPIRE1 ? N - WASP – ARP2 / 3 JMY – ARP2 / 3 WAVE2 – ARP2 / 3 WAVE1 – ARP2 / 3 mDIA1 and mDIA2 FMN1 COBL ? Membrane ruffles and lamellipodia N - WASP – ARP2 / 3 WAVE2 – ARP2 / 3 mDIA1FRL1 Phagocytic structures WAVE2 – ARP2 / 3 mDIA1 and mDIA2 FMN1 Cell junctions WASH – ARP2 / 3 N - WASP – ARP2 / 3 mDIA1 and mDIA2 Endocytic structures SPIRE1 ? F - actin Golgi actin and / or membrane tubules WHAMM – ARP2 / 3 N - WASP – ARP2 / 3 ? SPIRE1 ? INF2 ? Lamellipodium A sheet - like cellular protrusion that contains a dynamic Y - branched and cross - linked F - actin meshwork , which elongates to drive membrane protrusion . WASP homology 1 ( WH1 ) domain A regulatory domain found in WASP - like NPFs that binds Pro - rich actin - binding proteins such as WIP . GTPase - binding domain A crucial regulatory element found in some ARP2 / 3 activators and formin nucleators that promotes autoinhibitory interactions under resting conditions , but can bind to small GTPases such as Cdc42 , Rac or Rho to relieve autoinhibition . junction - mediating regulatory protein ( JmY ) . moreover , cortactin , a distinct type of nPF ( class II ) , binds to actin filaments and influences the stability of F - actin branch points in conjunction with proteins from the coronin family of ARP2 / 3 inhibitors . WASP and N‑WASP . wASP and / or n - wASP , the best - characterized nPFs , are found in animals , fungi and protists . mammalian wASP is expressed specifically in haematopoietic cells and its mutation results in defec - tive cell migration , phagocytosis and T - cell signalling , leading to immunodeficiencies in mice and wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome in humans 21 . By contrast , n - wASP is expressed in most cell types and its deletion results in neurological and cardiac abnormalities and embryonic lethality in mice 22 , 23 . our discussion will focus on this more ubiquitous nPF . n - wASP has a modular domain organization con - sisting of an n - terminal WASP homology 1 ( WH1 ) domain , plus basic , Cdc42 and Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) , and autoinhibitory motifs that are collectively called the GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) , and a Pro - rich domain ( PRD ) adjacent to its wCA domain ( FIG . 3a ) . By itself , n - wASP has little nPF activity because its connector and acidic region is inhibited by intramolecular inter actions with the autoinhibitory portion of the GBD ( FIG . 3b ) . This inactive conformation is stabilized by wH1 - interacting proteins such as wASP - interacting protein ( wIP ) , a G - actin and F - actin - binding molecule that forms a complex with n - wASP 24 . wIP can inhibit n - wASP activity in vitro , but stimulates actin assembly in cells . Thus , it is unclear if wIP acts exclusively as an n - wASP inhibitor or if it can also enhance n - wASP activity . notably , most studies of n - wASP have relied on deriva - tives purified in the absence of wIP . However , recent work has begun to explore the biochemical features of n - wASP – wIP 25 – 27 , and continued analyses should reveal how wIP influences n - wASP activity in this complex . To stimulate n - wASP , signal transduction pathways initiated at the plasma membrane often converge on cell - ular factors that interact with the GBD or the PRD . For example , binding of the small GTPase Cdc42 changes the conformation of the GBD to free the wCA domain , an allosteric activation mechanism that is enhanced by phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) binding to the basic region ( FIG . 3b ) . In addition , diverse PRD - binding proteins with Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domains activate n - wASP . These include the adaptor proteins non - catalytic kinase 1 ( nCK1 ) and nCK2 ( ReF . 28 ) , membrane - deforming factors such as trans - ducer of Cdc42 - dependent actin assembly 1 ( ToCA1 ; also known as FnBP1L ) 25 , 27 , and the kinase - interacting protein ABL interactor 1 ( ABI1 ) 29 ( FIG . 3b ) . Tyr kinases also phosphorylate the GBD to stabilize active n - wASP and enable further stimulation by SH2 domains 30 . Although each of these factors individually activate n ‑ wASP in vitro , multiple inputs can be integrated to promote higher activity . moreover , multimerization of n - wASP by proteins that oligomerize or contain multivalent n - wASP - binding sites also increases n - wASP activity and its affinity for ARP2 / 3 ( ReFS 26 , 31 , 32 ) . ultimately , in response to these diverse signalling molecules , n - wASP directs ARP2 / 3 to polymerize actin during a multitude of cellular functions ( FIG . 1 ) . In the absence of proper n - wASP function , cells have multi - ple deficiencies in processes requiring actin dynam - ics at the plasma membrane . These include impaired filopodia formation 22 , 33 , dorsal membrane ruffling 34 and membrane invagination 35 . n - wASP also contributes to endocytosis 29 , 33 , 35 , 36 , a process in which F - actin facilitates membrane fission and drives endosome movement . It seems likely that the essential function of n - wASP in mammals is linked to the abundance of actin - associated processes that it affects in cells . WAVE1 , WAVE2 and WAVE3 . Like the wASPs , the wAve - family nPFs are conserved in many animals and protists , but they are also found in plants . The three mammalian isoforms are expressed in numerous cell types , with wAve1 and wAve2 distributed most broadly , although all are enriched in brain tissue . As a probable consequence of this , wAve1 - knockout mice have sensorimotor defects , behavioural abnormalities and reduced viability 37 , 38 , whereas wAve2 ablation is lethal , and knockout embryos exhibit impaired angio - genesis , underdeveloped hearts , haemorrhaging and brain malformation 39 , 40 . Figure 1 | localization and function of actin nucleation factors in mammalian cells . Filamentous actin ( F - actin ; red ) is nucleated and organized into branched networks by the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex and its nucleation - promoting factors , or is generated in unbranched forms by formins and tandem WASP homology 2 ( WH2 ) domain - containing nucleators . Functional roles for different nucleation factors in a generic mammalian cell are depicted during phagocytosis , cell junction assembly , endocytosis , membrane ruffling and lamellipodia dynamics , filopodia formation , Golgi and tubulovesicular membrane dynamics , and stress fibre formation . Question marks indicate that the precise role for the nucleation factor is unclear . COBL , cordon - bleu ; DAAM , Dishevelled - associated activator of morphogenesis ; FHOD , formin homology domain ; FMN , formin ; FRL , formin - related in leukocytes ; INF , inverted formin ; JMY , junction - mediating regulatory protein ; mDIA , murine Diaphanous ; N - WASP , neuronal - WASP ; WASP , Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ; WASH , WASP and SCAR homologue ; WAVE , WASP - family verprolin homologue ; WHAMM , WASP homologue associated with actin , membranes and microtubules . R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 239 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC2 ARP3 ARPC3 ARP2 ARPC4 ARPC5 ARPC1 G - actin ARP2 / 3 complex F - actin Class I NPF W C A W C A A R R R R R R Class II NPF β - P CC β - P C C β - P CC ATP ADP P h o s p h a t e r e l e a s e a n d f i l a m e n t a g e i n g 1 NPF - mediated ARP2 / 3 recruitment 2 Actin nucleation and branching 3 Branch stabilization and membrane protrusion 4 Coronin – cofilin interactions , debranching and disassembly 90° a b 20 nm A Coronin Cofilin Pro - rich domain A domain commonly found in ARP2 / 3 activators that contains binding sites for SH3 domains and the actin monomer - associated protein profilin . Filopodium A finger - like cellular extension composed of unbranched actin filaments that elongate to drive membrane protrusion . Membrane ruffle A dynamic cell surface protrusion containing a network of newly assembled actin filaments . It can appear as a dorsal circular wave or in peripheral cellular extensions . SCAR homology domain A regulatory element found in WAVe NPFs that bind multiple components of the WAVe complex . In contrast to wASPs , wAves are fully active and not autoinhibited when purified as recombinant pro - teins . They lack a GBD , and their n - terminal SCAR homology domains ( SHDs ) and PRDs are distinct from the regulatory portions of n - wASP ( FIG . 3a ) . The SHD associates with a complex consisting of BRICK1 ( also known as HSPC300 ) , ABI1 , nCK - associated protein 1 ( nAP1 ) and specifically Rac - associated 1 ( SRA1 ; also known as CYFIP1 ) 41 – 44 . In the ubiquitous wAve com - plex , BRICK1 and ABI1 bind to wAve2 , and nAP1 interacts with ABI1 and SRA1 ( ReF . 42 ) ( FIG . 3b ) . unlike wAve1 or wAve2 by themselves , the activities of the reconstituted complexes are suppressed 43 , 44 . Removal of an individual subunit disrupts the stability and / or localization of the others , highlighting the fact that the complex behaves as a unit 45 , 46 . Similar to n - wASP , the wAve2 PRD can bind to SH3 domain - containing proteins , such as insulin receptor substrate protein of 53 kDa ( IRSp53 ; also known as BAIAP2 ) 47 . wAve2 also contains a basic peptide that binds the phospholipid PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( ReFS 47 , 48 ) and is Tyr phosphorylated to modulate its activity 49 . However , in contrast to n - wASP , most signalling to wAve2 occurs through interactions with the com - plex , rather than direct binding to wAve2 . RAC1 , the best characterized wAve activator , binds to SRA1 ( ReFS 43 , 45 ) , although it might also act through IRSp53 ( ReFS 47 , 50 ) . moreover , nCK adaptor proteins can activate the wAve complex , probably by inter acting with nAP1 ( ReF . 41 ) . Importantly , the cellular source of the wAve complex and the manner in which it is puri - fied can greatly influence its response to stimuli 51 . RAC1 and nCK proteins were initially shown to dissociate the complex 41 , but more recent reports indicate that it remains intact after activation 45 , 46 . In addition , physio - logical stimulation of the wAve complex probably requires cooperativity among RAC1 , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and protein kinases 51 . A better understanding of how Figure 2 | The structure of arP2 / 3 in y‑branches and a model for nucleation and branching . a | The morphology of a Y - branched actin filament and the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex is shown in an electron micrograph and in structural models based on electron tomography . The ARP2 / 3 complex consists of ARP2 and ARP3 plus the additional subunits ARPC1 – ARPC5 . In this model , all seven subunits participate in binding to the existing filament and ARP2 and ARP3 act as the first two subunits of the nascent filament . b | ARP2 / 3 is recruited by the WCA domains of class I nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) in proximity to cellular membranes ( 1 ) . The collective activities of WASP homology 2 ( WH2 ; W ) , connector ( C ) and acidic ( A ) segments serve the basic purpose of bringing ARP2 / 3 together with the first actin subunit in the new filament to generate a branch ( 2 ) . ARP2 / 3 branch points can be stabilized by filamentous actin ( F - actin ) - binding class II NPFs , such as cortactin ( 3 ) . Coronin family proteins interact with ARP2 / 3 and F - actin to prevent cofilin - mediated disassembly of newly formed filaments ( 4 , top ) . Coronin can also replace ARP2 / 3 and synergize with cofilin to trigger debranching and disassembly of older ADP – actin filaments ( 4 , middle ) . Disassembly of older branches can also occur spontaneously , following phosphate release from ARP2 and actin ( 4 , bottom ) . β - P , β - propellor ; CC , coiled coil ; G - actin , globular actin ; R , repeat . Structural models in part a modified , with permission , from ReF . 13 © ( 2008 ) Rockefeller University Press . R E V I E W S 240 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 WH1 A C W W P A C W A C PRD W Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology WH1 CRIB BAI A WAHD1 CRIB B B AI PRD W W C A PRD W C A WH1 CRIB B AI PRD W W A WMD SHD PRD B W C A SHD PRD B TBR P W C A CC P W W C A N CC P W W L WASP N - WASP N - WASP ( Autoinhibited ) WAVE2 ( tran s - inhibited ) Cortactin HS1 WAVE1 – WAVE3 WASH WAHD1 TBR P WASH ( ? ) WHAMM WMD CC WHAMM ( ? ) JMY ActA RickA p78 / 83 W C PRD PRD W C A PRD W C A R R R R R R R PRD SH3 A R R R R PRD SH3 a Class I NPFs b Microbial NPFs Class II NPFs WIP BRICK1 BRICK1 ? ? ? ? CP CP FAM21 FAM21 CPCP ABI1 NAP1 WIP WH1 CRIB B AI PRD W W C A Active ? B PRD W C A Active Active Active Cdc42RAC1 IRSp53 ( SH3 ) PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 RhoA ? SFK ( SH2 ) NCK1 and NCK2 TOCA1ABI1 ( SH3 ) A C W SRA1 ABI1 NAP1SRA1 NCK1 and NCK2 RAC1 WAHD1 TBR P W C A ? ? ? PIPs ? WMD CC P W W C A W C A SHD the wAve complex subunits interact with one another and with the wAve isoforms themselves is necessary to clarify how the complex is regulated and reorganized in response to upstream signalling . In contrast to the functional versatility of n - wASP , the main function of wAve nPFs is to activate ARP2 / 3 dur - ing plasma membrane protrusion and cell motility ( FIG . 1 ) . In these processes , wAve1 and wAve2 have partially Figure 3 | Different groups of NPFs possess distinct modes of regulation . a | Mammalian class I nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) contain carboxy - terminal WCA domains that bind globular actin ( G - actin ) and the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , plus diverse amino - terminal regulatory regions . Microbial pathogens also express class I NPFs . These include ActA from Listeria Spp . , RickA from Rickettsia Spp . , and p78 / 83 from baculoviruses . Class II NPFs contain N - terminal acidic domains that bind ARP2 / 3 , central filamentous actin ( F - actin ) - binding repeats and regulatory C - terminal domains . b | Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ; also known as WASL ) NPF activity is regulated through an autoinhibitory domain ( AI ) and interactions with proteins from the WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) family . It can be stimulated by direct binding of phosphoinositides , small GTPases , Tyr phosphorylation and Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) or SH3 domains . WASP - family verprolin homologue 2 ( WAVE2 ; also known as WASF2 ) activity is controlled by a protein complex comprising BRICK1 ( also known as HSPC300 ) , ABL interactor 1 ( ABI1 ) , NCK - associated protein 1 ( NAP1 ) and specifically Rac - associated 1 ( SRA1 ) . It is stimulated by non - catalytic kinase ( NCK ) – NAP1 and Rac – SRA1 interactions , or by binding of phosphoinositides or SH3 domains to WAVE2 itself . WASP and SCAR homologue ( WASH ) activity is probably controlled by a multisubunit complex that contains capping protein ( CP ) and FAM21 . The NPF activity of WASP homologue associated with actin , membranes and microtubules ( WHAMM ) does not seem to be autoinhibited and is probably controlled by factors that interact with its WHAMM membrane interaction domain ( WMD ) and / or coiled - coil ( CC ) regions . Question marks indicate that the mechanism of activation is speculative . CRIB , Cdc42 – Rac interactive binding ; IRSp53 , insulin receptor substrate protein of 53 kDa ; JMY , junction - mediating regulatory protein ; L , linker ; P , polyproline ; PIP , phosphorylated phosphoinositides ; PRD , Pro - rich domain ; PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , PtdIns - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; SFK , Src family kinase ; SHD , SCAR homology domain ; TBR , tubulin - binding region ; TOCA1 , transducer of Cdc42 - dependent actin assembly 1 ; W , WASP homology 2 domain ; WH1 , WASP homology 1 domain ; WAHD1 , WASH homology domain 1 . R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 241 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 WASH homology domain 1 one of two subdomains — WAHD1 and WAHD2 ( also known as TBR ) — that comprise a putative regulatory element found in WASH NPFs . Retromer A protein complex that is important for recycling transmembrane receptors from endosomes to the trans - Golgi . Coiled coil A structural motif in proteins that consists of two or more helices that twist around each other to form a stable , rod - like structure . Cadherin A calcium - dependent adhesion transmembrane protein that has important roles in cell – cell contacts . overlapping functions , as wAve2 - deficient cells exhibit severe defects in peripheral membrane ruffling , lamelli - podia formation and cell motility 29 , 39 , 40 , 50 , 52 , and dorsal ruffling and migration through the extracellular matrix is impaired in the absence of wAve1 ( ReF . 50 ) . wAve2 might also help to organize and maintain cell – cell contacts 53 . It is interesting that there is not enough redundancy among the three wAves to prevent the main abnormalities that occur in mice lacking wAve1 or wAve2 . Clearly , impor - tant differences in the regulation and function of the different wAve isoforms remain to be uncovered . WASH . For nearly a decade , wASPs and wAves were the only known mammalian class I nPFs . However , several new nPFs have gained recognition in recent years ( FIG . 3a ) . one such factor is wASH , a wCA domain - containing protein found in animals and protists that was first identi - fied as the product of a subtelomeric gene that had under - gone extensive duplication in primates 54 . In Drosophila melanogaster , the single Wash gene is essential 54 , sug - gesting that it has a role in early development and is not functionally redundant with wASP or wAve . In addition to its wCA domain , wASH possesses an adjacent polyproline region and distinct n - terminal sequence elements , termed the WASH homology domain 1 ( wAHD1 ) and tubulin - binding region ( TBR ; also known as wAHD2 ) ( FIG . 3a ) . As with the other nPFs , these puta - tive regulatory domains probably mediate the formation of a multiprotein complex ( FIG . 3b ) . Indeed , wASH inter - acts with multiple proteins , including capping protein 55 , which caps filament barbed ends , and FAm21 , a protein that links wASH to endosomes 56 . However , the mech - anism by which the constituents of the native wASH complex control the activity and function of wASH are not well understood . mammalian wASH localizes to early and recycling endosomes 55 – 57 , where wASH - mediated ARP2 / 3 activity controls the shape of these membranes and influences retromer - dependent trafficking to the trans - Golgi net - work , recycling to the plasma membrane and trafficking to late endosomes . These functions might also be affected by interactions between wASH and tubulin subunits 56 . Interestingly , evidence from D . melanogaster suggests that wASH can bundle both F - actin and microtubules in a Rho GTPase - regulated manner 58 . moreover , these studies suggest that wASH might act in concert with two other types of actin nucleators : formins and Spire ( see below ) . understanding how regulation by GTPases , bundling of actin and microtubules , and interactions with other nucleators contribute to wASH function in mammalian cells requires further investigation . WHAMM and JMY . unlike the wASP , wAve , and wASH nPFs , two other recently identified ARP2 / 3 activators , wHAmm and JmY , seem to be confined to verte brates 59 , 60 . In mammals they are expressed in various tissues and cell types . wHAmm was identified based on its wCA sequence , whereas JmY was discovered as a factor that interacts with the transcriptional regulators p300 and p53 before the effects of its wCA domain on actin polymerization were realized . wHAmm and JmY are nearly 35 % identical , but can still be differentiated from one another and from other nPFs by their n - terminal sequences . In addition to their wCA domains and adjacent poly - proline motifs , wHAmm and JmY have central regions that are predicted to form coiled coils , and distinct n ter - mini that are only 25 % identical to one another ( FIG . 3a ) . Like n - wASP , the wHAmm wCA segment includes two wH2 domains , although wHAmm is a less potent nPF than n - wASP 59 . notably , the JmY wCA segment con - tains three wH2 domains . This third wH2 domain and an additional actin monomer - binding linker allow the JmY wCA domain to nucleate actin even in the absence of ARP2 / 3 ( ReF . 60 ) . The filaments produced by the JmY wCA domain without ARP2 / 3 are unbranched , unlike the networks that are generated in its presence . Future work will address whether the nucleating and nPF activities of JmY are coordinated , or whether one activity predominates in cells . whereas the nPF activity of full - length JmY has not been determined , full - length wHAmm is active in vitro , indicating that , like wAve2 , it is not autoinhibited 59 . wHAmm might therefore be part of a multiprotein complex that modulates its nPF activity under native conditions , although the components of such a complex have not been identified ( FIG . 3b ) . Despite the relatedness of their domain organization , wHAmm and JmY prob - ably interact with distinct cellular factors , as evidenced from differences in their localization and function . unlike other nPFs , wHAmm localizes to the cis - Golgi and to tubulovesicular membranes that move in an actin - and microtubule - dependent manner 59 . These patterns are derived from the combined activities of the wHAmm membrane - interaction domain ( wmD ) that mediates Golgi localization , and the coiled - coil region that directly binds microtubules ( FIG . 3a ) . Increasing or decreasing wHAmm protein levels perturbs Golgi structure and slows endoplasmic reticulum ( eR ) – Golgi transport , indicating that wHAmm influences Golgi morphology and anterograde trafficking . The ability of wHAmm to negotiate crosstalk between the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons seems central to its role in influencing membrane dynamics . A further characterization of how wHAmm activities are affected by its binding partners should yield additional clues about how actin and micro - tubules cooperate during membrane transport in cells and during development . In contrast to wHAmm , and in keeping with a role in transcriptional regulation , JmY is enriched in the nucleus of many cells 60 , and it seems to be recruited there in response to DnA damage 61 . In migrating cells , JmY reloc - ates to lamellipodia , where its overexpression enhances motility and its depletion slows it 60 . The role of JmY in cell motility might involve its actin nucleating activity in conjunction with an ability to regulate the expression of cadherins 61 . However , the precise mechanisms controlling the localization and activity of JmY are unknown . It also remains to be determined whether JmY and wHAmm share functional redundancy . Given its role in nuclear processes , advances in our understanding of JmY function might shed light on the role of actin in the nucleus . R E V I E W S 242 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Barbed end Pointed end NLasso FH2 core Lasso FH2 core C C N a Dimeric FH2 domain Actin Actin b FH2 – actin complex FH1 FH2 F - actin Profilin G - actin c Formin - mediated actin polymerization 1 2 3 4 Closed conformation Open conformation Open conformation Closed conformation Formin homology ( FH ) domain A domain found in formin proteins . examples include the conserved dimeric FH2 domain that nucleates actin and the Pro - rich FH1 domain that associates with the actin - binding protein profilin and SH3 and WW domains . Cortactin and coronin . In addition to wCA domain - containing nPFs , many animals possess a second type of ARP2 / 3 activator , termed class II activators 62 . In mam - mals , this category includes cortactin and its haemato - poetic relative haematopoetic - specific protein 1 ( HS1 ) ( FIG . 3a ) . These proteins have ARP2 / 3 - binding acidic peptides at their n termini , but lack wH2 domains for binding G - actin . Instead , they harbour repeti - tive sequences that interact with F - actin . They also contain PRDs with regulatory phosphorylation sites , and C - terminal SH3 domains that interact with many proteins including n - wASP and wIP . Compared to class I nPFs , class II nPFs are considered to be weak ARP2 / 3 activators . nevertheless , cortactin can enhance n - wASP - mediated activation of ARP2 / 3 ( ReFS 63 – 65 ) . Cortactin also inhibits spontaneous dissociation of ARP2 / 3 - bound filament branch junctions in vitro , thereby stabilizing Y - branches 62 ( FIG . 2b ) . The ability of cortactin to act as an nPF , cooperate with n - wASP and stabilize ARP2 / 3 - bound branches makes it an important participant in many cellular processes . Dominant - negative and RnA interference studies have revealed a role for cortactin in membrane fission during endocytosis and trans - Golgi export 66 – 68 , and in supporting cadherin adhesive zone formation and cell – cell contacts 69 . Similar manipulations of cortactin function also alter membrane dynamics and affect lamelli podial protrusion or persistence , resulting in impaired cell migration 64 , 70 – 72 . Deficiencies in membrane ruffling and motility have been recapitulated recently in cortactin - knockout cells 73 , confirming that cortactin is a major regulator of cortical F - actin architecture . our understanding of how cells control the organization and turnover of lamellipodial actin networks has grown recently with the characterization of human coronin 1B . This protein is a member of the ubiquitous coronin family and is the only known direct inhibitor of ARP2 / 3 in vitro 74 , 75 . Coronin also binds F - actin and protects newly formed ATP – actin filaments from the severing protein cofilin , but can synergize with cofilin and actin - interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ; also known as wDR1 ) to promote severing or catastrophic bursts of disassembly of older ADP – actin filaments in vitro 76 – 78 ( FIG . 2b ) . These dis - assembly processes may be coordinated with the ability of cofilin to dissociate ARP2 / 3 Y - branches 79 . In cells , the ability of coronin to inhibit ARP2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation , directly displace ARP2 / 3 from Y - branches just behind the leading edge and interact with phos - phatases that activate cofilin promotes the recycling of actin and ARP2 / 3 to allow efficient lamellipodial protru - sion 75 , 80 . This is one example of the highly orchestrated balance of nucleation , branching and turnover that leads to the formation of dendritic actin networks following ARP2 / 3 activation . Formins : nucleation and elongation unlike ARP2 / 3 , all other known actin nucleators produce unbranched filaments . The best - characterized of these are the formins , which are present in virtually all eukary - otes ( for an in - depth review of formins , see ReF . 2 ) . Their defining feature is the presence of the conserved formin homology ( FH ) domains , FH1 and FH2 ( FIG . 4a – c ) . much of what we know about formin structure and biochemical activity originated from studies of the yeast formins , however , nucleation activity has since been observed for many of the ~ 15 mammalian formins . These proteins fall into seven different subclasses based on FH2 sequence divergence : Diaphanous ( DIA ) , formin - related proteins in leukocytes ( FRLs ) , Dishevelled - associated activa - tors of morphogenesis ( DAAms ) , formin homology domain proteins ( FHoDs ) , formins ( Fmns ) , delphilin and inverted formins ( InFs ) 81 . Biochemical properties , structure and activation . FH2 domains are sufficient to trigger nucleation of puri - fied actin 2 . In contrast to ARP2 / 3 , which caps pointed ends , FH2 domains bind to barbed ends and act as proces - sive caps on elongating filaments ( FIG . 4c ) . As a result , they prevent other capping proteins from terminating elongation 82 – 84 and compete with displacement factors at the barbed end to determine filament length 85 . FH2 domains are active as homodimers 82 , 83 , 86 , 87 , and mutations that disrupt dimerization abolish actin polymerization activity 83 , 88 , 89 . Crystal structures of the yeast Bni1 FH2 domain 89 and the mammalian formin FH2 domains 90 , 91 Figure 4 | FH2 domain structure and an elongation model of formin‑mediated actin polymerization . a | A ribbon diagram of the dimeric formin homology 2 ( FH2 ) domain from Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bni1 . A ‘lasso’ extends from the knob of one monomer and wraps around the ‘post’ of the other monomer to stabilize this dimeric configuration . b | The Bni1 FH2 domain wrapped around a space - filling model of an actin dimer . c | A model of formin - mediated actin polymerization . An FH2 dimer associates with the barbed end of an actin filament , while the FH1 domains recruit profilin – actin ( 1 ) . The FH1 domain delivers profilin – actin to the barbed end , and this is either preceded by 92 or follows 93 the FH2 domain stepping towards the barbed end ( 2 ) . The second FH2 repeats this process ( 3 ) . The formin closed conformation prevents capping by other factors ( 4 ) . F - actin , filamentous actin ; G - actin , globular actin . Image in part a is modified , with permission , from ReF . 89 © ( 2004 ) Elsevier . Image in part b is modified , with permission , from Nature ReF . 92 © ( 2005 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 243 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 G B D D I D G B D D I D DD DD CC CC FH1 FH1 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology mDIA1 – mDIA3 FRL1 and FRL2 DAAM1 and DAAM2 FHOD1 and FHOD3 FMN1 and FMN2 Delphilin INF1 INF2 RhoA , RhoB and RhoC Cdc42 RhoA , RhoB and RhoC Cdc42 Active mDIA2 b Autoinhibited mDIA2 F H 2 F H 2 GBD DID GBD DID DD CC DD CC PDZ a Mammalian formins W GBD DID GBD GBD DID DID DD CC CC CC FH1 FH1 FH1 FH2 FH2 FH2 GBD DID DID FH1 FH1 FH2 FH2 FH1 FH2 FH1 FH2 FH1 FH2 DAD DAD DAD DAD FSI FH1 FH1 F H 2 F H 2 DAD DAD D A D D A D indicate that the two monomers are connected by flex - ible tethers to form a ring ( FIG . 4a ) . moreover , a co - crystal structure of Bni1 with tetramethylrhodamine – actin revealed that each FH2 bridges two actin subunits in a configuration resembling the short - pitch actin dimer of a filament 92 ( FIG . 4b ) , implying that FH2 - mediated nucleation involves actin dimer stabilization . The FH2 – actin structure , together with the behav - iour of heterodimeric FH2 mutants , suggests a model in which the FH2 dimer exists in alternating morphologies at the barbed end ( FIG . 4c ) . In a closed conformation , both FH2 monomers bind the two terminal actin subunits , blocking further actin incorporation . In an open con - formation , actin incorporation is enabled . Two potential open states have been proposed , one in which the FH2 steps towards the barbed end to allow addition of a new actin subunit 92 , and another in which actin addi - tion occurs before FH2 stepping 93 . Further work will be needed to resolve how monomer addition and step - ping are coordinated . notably , an adjacent Pro - rich FH1 domain binds the actin monomer - delivery protein profilin . FH1 – profilin interactions accelerate filament elongation 84 , 93 , 94 , most likely because binding of profilin – actin complexes to the FH1 domain increases the local concentration of G - actin that can be delivered directly to the barbed end 95 ( FIG . 4c ) . A more refined view of formin - mediated nucleation , processive capping and monomer addition will require solving the structures of active FH1 and FH2 domains in different conformations on an actual filament barbed end . Importantly , the abilities of individual formins to nucleate actin , associate with barbed ends and cooperate with profilin can vary by orders of magnitude . Sequence divergence in the FH1 – FH2 module is probably a main contributor to these differences in vitro , although the molecular bases for such variation , and any resulting cellu - lar consequences , are not well defined . Interestingly , apart from the FH1 – FH2 module , mammalian formin domains are quite diverse ( FIG . 5a ) , and recent characterizations of these nucleators have expanded our understanding of their biochemical and cellular activities . Diaphanous‑related formins mDIA1 – mDIA3 . The best - characterized mammalian formins are called the Diaphanous - related formins ( DRFs ) based on their simi - larity to D . melanogaster Diaphanous . In mice and other mammals , the DRFs are commonly named mDIA1 ( also known as DIAPH1 ) , mDIA2 ( also known as DIAPH3 ) Figure 5 | Different formins have distinct domain organizations . a | Mammalian formins share a conserved formin homology 1 ( FH1 ) – FH2 actin polymerizing module along with diverse regulatory motifs . The GTPase - binding domain ( GBD ) - Diaphanous inhibitory domain ( DID ) region of FH1 and FH2 domain - containing protein 1 ( FHOD1 ) is structurally distinct from the analogous portions of other formins . b | Diaphanous - related formins such as mDIA2 ( also known as DIAPH3 ) are dimeric and regulated by autoinhibition . Their actin nucleation functions are stimulated by binding to Rho family GTPases , such as RhoA , RhoB and RhoC and Cdc42 . CC , coiled coil ; DAAM , Dishevelled - associated activator of morphogenesis ; DAD , diaphanous - autoinhibitory - domain ; DD , dimerization domain ; FMN , formin ; FRL , formin - related in leukocytes ; FSI , formin – Spire interaction domain ; INF , inverted formin ; PDZ , Postsynaptic density protein , Discs large , Zona occludens 1 domain ; W , WASP homology 2 domain . R E V I E W S 244 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Diaphanous inhibitory domain A regulatory region near the N terminus of many formins that partially overlaps with a GBD and is involved in inhibiting actin nucleation activity by binding to a C - terminal DAD . Diaphanous autoregulatory domain A short ( ~ 20 residue ) peptide located near the C terminus of many formins that can bind to an N - terminal DID to inhibit actin nucleation activity . Focal adhesion A large transmembrane structure consisting of a cluster of integrins and associated proteins that binds to extracellular matrix molecules and intracellular actin stress fibres . Wnt signalling ( Wingless and Int signalling ) . A complex network of proteins with important roles in embryogenesis and signal transduction cascades involving intracellular responses to extracellular cues . and mDIA3 ( also known as DIAPH2 ) and are thought to be widely expressed . The gene encoding mDIA1 has been knocked out , and T cells and neutrophils from these mice exhibit impaired polarization , chemotaxis and trafficking to secondary lymphoid organs 96 – 98 . The mice also develop age - dependent myeloproliferative defects 99 . Roles for other DRFs in organism development and disease have not yet been elucidated . The DRFs have a modular domain organization that can be divided into three functional regions ( FIG . 5a ) . Their n termini contain regulatory sequences , including a GBD and a partially overlapping Diaphanous inhibitory domain ( DID ) that participates in autoinhibition 87 , 100 . These motifs are followed by central coiled - coil and dimerization domains that influence autoregulation . Lastly , their C termini encompass the FH1 – FH2 module and the Diaphanous autoregulatory domain ( DAD ) that binds the GBD – DID to inhibit the actin polymerizing activity of the FH2 domain 101 ( FIG . 5b ) . This inhibitory interaction is disrupted by the binding of RhoA to the GBD – DID 102 and results in FH2 activation in vitro 87 , 100 . Structural comparisons of the GBD – DID bound to either a DAD 87 , 102 , 103 or to Rho GTPases 104 , 105 indicate that binding of Rho and DAD is mutually exclusive , and their binding sites in the GBD – DID partially overlap . Importantly , DRF activation on GTPase binding in vitro is incomplete , raising the possibility that additional cell - ular factors are required for full activation 87 , 100 , 106 . The characterization of such binding partners will be crucial for fully understanding DRF regulation . Although the aforementioned model suggests a simple linear DRF activation pathway , cellular signal transduc - tion cascades are more complex . For example , differ - ent GTPases , including RhoA , RhoB , RhoC and RhoD , Cdc42 , RAC1 , and Rho in filopodia ( RIF ; also known as RhoF ) , signal to multiple DRFs 102 , 107 – 109 . moreover , aside from being a Rho effector , mDIA1 has been proposed to act upstream of Rho , suggesting that positive feedback might control DRF and Rho activities 110 . Lastly , SH3 domain - containing proteins such as Src family kinases interact with DRFs , suggesting a connection with Tyr kinase signalling , although how DRFs are integrated into these signalling pathways remains unresolved 111 . Despite the fact that few of these signalling pathways have been completely defined in vitro , the ultimate result of the dia - logue between GTPases , kinases and mDIA1 , mDIA2 and mDIA3 in cells is actin polymerization . DRF - mediated actin assembly participates in the for - mation of a remarkable variety of cellular structures ( FIG . 1 ) . Key examples include stress fibres , dorsal filaments that emerge from focal adhesions at the leading edge of migrating cells and the contractile ring that forms during cytokinesis 112 , 113 . DRFs also localize to filopodia , most prominently on co - expression of full - length proteins with RIF or of truncated proteins missing the GBD , and their ability to nucleate actin correlates positively with the frequency of filopodia formation 107 , 108 , 114 , 115 . multiple DRFs are also found in lamellipodia where they con - tribute to cell motility 114 – 117 and in phagocytic cups where they participate in phagocytosis 116 , 118 . The DRFs additionally help organize cell adhesion junctions 119 , 120 and coordinate actin assembly with endosome dynam - ics 121 . Lastly , actin polymerization triggered by DRF FH2 domains results in activation of serum response factor ( SRF ) - mediated transcription , an expression pro - gramme that controls developmental processes that rely on cell migration , contractility or morphogenesis 111 . FH2 domains from most formins share the ability to trigger the SRF response , suggesting that depletion of cytosolic G - actin is important for this process . In addition to their role in actin assembly , mDIA1 , mDIA2 and mDIA3 also have the intriguing ability to bind to microtubules 122 and to proteins that interact with microtubule plus ends 123 , 124 to promote microtubule sta - bility . These results suggest that DRF - mediated crosstalk between the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons can influence cell polarity and directional migration . much like the study of wHAmm and wASH at the interface of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons , future DRF characterizations will undoubtedly reveal more informa - tion about communication between these two cytoskeletal systems during membrane dynamics . FRL and DAAM proteins . Several formins are structur - ally related to the DRFs and are regulated in a similar manner . These include FRL1 , FRL2 and FRL3 ( also known as FmnL1 , FmnL2 and FmnL3 , respectively ) , and Dishevelled - associated activator of morphogenesis 1 ( DAAm1 ) and DAAm2 ( ReF . 81 ) , which contain GBD – DIDs , coiled - coil and dimerization domains , and FH1 – FH2 and DAD elements 106 , 125 ( FIG . 5a ) . In addition to polymer - izing actin , the FH2 domains of FRL1 , FRL2 and FRL3 bundle F - actin , an activity they share with mDIA2 ( ReFS 86 , 126 , 127 ) . The FH1 – FH2 and DAD region of FRL1 also severs filaments 82 . The cellular regulation and func - tion of these activities await determination . As with the DRFs , FRL1 can assume an autoinhibited conformation mediated by DID – DAD interactions . Its actin polymerization activity can be stimulated by Cdc42 in vitro , but only at high Cdc42 concentrations 106 , imply - ing that activation in cells requires additional regulatory inputs . FmnL2 is also autoinhibited , but FmnL3 seems to be constitutively active in cells even though its DID and DAD bind one another in vitro 127 . This suggests that DID – DAD interactions are not uniformly inhibitory and that other layers of autoregulation exist . In support of this possibility , the DAAm1 FH2 domain crystallizes in a closed conformation that occludes its actin - binding surfaces 90 . DAAm1 is also regulated by a DID – DAD interaction , and its inhibited state can be relieved by RhoA , RhoB or RhoC binding to the GBD 128 and by the phosphoprotein Dishevelled binding to the DAD 125 , 129 , implying that multiple signalling inputs are integrated to promote DAAm1 activation . The FRL and DAAm formins , in comparison to the DRFs , have not been extensively characterized in cells . nevertheless , FRL1 has been implicated in Fc receptor - mediated phagocytosis 106 . By contrast , DAAm1 is crucial for non - canonical Wnt signalling and RhoA acti - vation during cell polarization and for gastrulation in frog embryos 129 . In cells , DAAm1 translocates to stress fibres in response to wnt signalling 130 and affects cell R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 245 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Adherens junction A specialized intercellular junction of the plasma membrane , in which cadherin molecules of adjacent cells interact with each other extracellularly in a calcium - dependent manner , and associate with actin filaments inside cells . PDZ domain ( Postsynaptic density protein , Discs large and Zona occludens 1 domain ) . A domain present in many scaffolding proteins that binds to specific short amino - acid sequences . FYVE domain ( Fab1 , YoTB , Vac1 and eeA1 domain ) . A type of zinc - finger domain that binds PtdIns3P and is found in many proteins involved in membrane trafficking . shape 125 , 130 . Further investigation into the location and regulation of FRL - and DAAm - mediated actin nuclea - tion should paint a more complete picture of the cellular and organismal functions of these formins . FMN and FHOD proteins . The founding mammalian formins , Fmn1 and Fmn2 , along with FH1 and FH2 domain - containing protein 1 ( FHoD1 ) and FHoD3 ( also known as FHoS2 ) , share some characteristics with the DIA , FRL and DAAm proteins , but do not have pri - mary sequence similarity in their n termini 81 ( FIG . 5a ) . The regulation of Fmn1 and Fmn2 has not been exten - sively characterized , but FHoD1 has been shown to be autoinhibited by interactions between its C - terminal DAD and divergent n terminus 131 , 132 and associates with RAC1 through a GBD 132 . Interestingly , the FHoD1 GBD has a different fold than other formin GBDs , although the remainder of its n terminus resembles a DID 133 . Apparently , the modular organization of formins allows the incorporation of variable structural elements . In cells , an activated FHoD1 truncation lacking its DAD promotes stress fibre formation and elongated cell morphologies 131 , 132 . The effects of FHoD1 depend on the activities of RhoA , the Rho - kinase RoCK1 and possibly RAC1 ( ReFS 131 , 134 ) . Interestingly , FHoD1 physically interacts with RoCK1 and is also a RoCK1 substrate 134 , 135 . RoCK1 phosphorylates the DAD , which relieves autoinhibition in vitro and promotes FHoD1 - mediated stress fibre assembly in cells 135 . It remains to be seen whether RoCK1 phosphorylation directly regulates other formins . In contrast to FHoD1 , Fmn1 has been reported to localize to adherens junctions , and expression of trunca - tions disrupts junction formation 136 . However , analysis of cells from mice expressing green fluorescent protein – Fmn1 isoform Iv ( Fmn1 Iv ) suggests that this formin is cytoplasmic 137 . A Fmn1 Iv knockout also failed to reveal junction abnormalities , but uncovered defects in focal adhesion formation , lamellipodial dynamics and migration 137 . Thus , the role of Fmn1 requires clarifi - cation . Interestingly , Fmn2 might function distinctly from Fmn1 . Female mice lacking Fmn2 have poor fertility as a result of the inability of Fmn2 - deficient oocytes to position the metaphase spindle at the cell cortex during meiosis and undergo cytokinesis to form a polar body 138 , 139 . moreover , live imaging has revealed that Fmn2 organizes an actin network connected to the oocyte cortex and that actin assembly is crucial for spindle and chromosome movement to subcortical regions 140 , 141 . whether actin polymerization itself or myosin II motor activity drives chromosome move - ment is debatable . These exciting results hold promise for elucidating the roles of the actin cytoskeleton during meiosis and mitosis . Delphilin , INF1 and INF2 . The delphilin , InF1 ( also known as FHDC1 ) and InF2 proteins do not contain significant sequence similarity with other formins out - side of their FH1 – FH2 module and are the most unique formins ( FIG . 5a ) . Delphilin , which is highly expressed in mammalian brain tissue , lacks apparent GBD , DID or DAD regulatory regions 81 , and its actin polymerization activity has not been investigated . Different delphilin splice variants contain a palmitoylation site and PDZ domains , sequences that probably influence their ability to associate with cellular membranes 142 , 143 . Consistent with a role in neuronal function , mice lacking delphilin have altered synaptic plasticity 144 . The InFs are present in animals and differ from one another in their domain composition . InF1 lacks GBD – DID and DAD motifs , and its actin assembly activity has not been determined . when expressed in cells , InF1 induces stress fibre formation , but the protein localizes to microtubules 145 . InF2 , however , both nucleates actin and causes actin severing and disassembly 146 . Actin severing and disassembly require a DAD - like peptide that also acts as a wH2 domain ( FIG . 5a ) . Interestingly , DID – wH2 interactions inhibit the depolymerizing but not the nucleating activity of InF2 ( ReF . 147 ) . unlike other formins , InF2 localizes to the eR in some cell lines , and expression of wH2 mutants causes the eR to collapse around the nucleus 147 , suggesting that InF2 influences membrane organization . overall , despite many recent advances , current characterizations have probably just scratched the surface of the numerous functions that the formins perform in mammalian cells . WH2 domain‑containing nucleators Recently , new classes of nucleating proteins have been identified that contain a tandem cluster of three or more G - actin - binding motifs , including wH2 domains , as their signature . Such factors include the mammalian Spire , cordon - bleu ( CoBL ) , and leiomodin families , as well as several bacterial nucleators ( FIG . 6a ) . The wH2 ele - ment is shared with nPFs , which may be evolutionar - ily related 148 , but the tandem wH2 domain - containing nucleators do not seem to bind ARP2 / 3 and their wH2 domains are proposed to cause nucleation by tether - ing three or more actin monomers in either a single - stranded long - pitch multimer ( FIG . 6b ) or a short - pitch trimer . However , without high - resolution structures of native wH2 – actin complexes , precisely how the wH2 domains promote intersubunit contacts to form an actin nucleus remains unclear . Spire : a versatile regulator of actin dynamics . Spire was identified in D . melanogaster as a factor required for egg and embryo development and was subsequently shown to nucleate actin 149 . Although much of what is known about Spire - mediated actin dynamics comes from characterizations of the fly protein , orthologues have been identified in metazoans , including SPIRe1 and SPIRe2 in mammals . The Spire domain organi - zation includes an n - terminal kinase non - catalytic C - lobe domain ( KInD ) , a central region with four wH2 domains and a C - terminal FYVe domain ( FIG . 6a ) . The Spire sequence that polymerizes actin consists of tandem wH2 domains together with an additional actin monomer - binding linker 149 ( FIG . 6a ) . This region binds cooperatively to four G - actin molecules , and in an actin assembly assay it nucleates actin at low Spire / actin ratios and sequesters actin at high Spire / actin ratios 149 , 150 . R E V I E W S 246 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 W W Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Barbed end Pointed end Actin Actin Actin WH2 b Tandem WH2 – actin complex a WH2 domain - containing mammalian actin nucleators c Spire d Leiomodin Cordon - bleu Bacterial actin nucleators SPIRE1 and SPIRE2 COBL LMOD1 – LMOD3 Tarp VopF and VopL P P W W P W LRR P h b h W Y Y Y Y Y Y P W Sec P W W P W FH1 FH2 FMN2 - mediated elongation ? F - actin severing or barbed end capping Monomer sequestration F - actin Profilin G - actin W WWW Nucleation ? W W W W W W W WH2 WH2 L WW Nucleation W T NucleationLRR h b h KIND W W W W FYVE T Its nucleation activity is similar to that of the FH1 – FH2 module of the fly formin Cappuccino and less than that of activated ARP2 / 3 ( ReF . 149 ) , but the activity of the full - length protein has not been defined . maximal nucleation requires all four wH2 domains , although the third and fourth are most important . The monomer - binding linker is also crucial for actin assembly and this sequence can convert n - wASP into an ARP2 / 3 - independent nuclea - tor when it is introduced between the two n - wASP wH2 domins 60 . Although Spire triggers actin polymerization , its mechanism of nucleation is a matter of debate . electron micrographs suggest that D . melanogaster Spire assembles an actin nucleus consisting of a long - pitch tetramer 149 , which is consistent with an X - ray light scattering study 151 , but kinetic analyses suggest that this might not be the case 150 . moreover , initial work suggested that Spire caps pointed ends to inhibit disassembly 149 . However , a subse - quent report indicates that human SPIRe1 interacts with barbed ends , inhibits profilin – actin assembly at these ends and enhances pointed end disassembly by severing filaments 150 . Further structural and biochemical studies are needed to precisely define the configuration of the actin nucleus , the location of Spire on the filament and which biochemical activity dominates under physio logical conditions . Importantly , Spire seems to cooperate with formins in actin assembly , as suggested by the initial observa - tion that fly Spire and Cappuccino physically interact 152 . mammalian SPIRe1 and SPIRe2 also bind to Fmn1 Figure 6 | WH2 domain‑containing actin nucleators and models for polymerization . a | Members of the Spire , cordon - bleu ( COBL ) , and leiomodin families use WASP homology 2 ( WH2 ; W ) domains and additional actin monomer - binding sequences to nucleate and assemble unbranched actin filaments . They also contain other domains that probably regulate their nucleation activities . Bacterial pathogens also express WH2 domain - containing nucleators to induce plasma membrane remodelling . These include translocated actin - recruiting phosphoprotein ( Tarp ) from Chlamydia Spp . and VopF and VopL from Vibrio Spp . . b | A ribbon diagram of three tandem WH2 domains bound to actin monomers . How bound actin monomers are reorganized into a conformation that favours polymerization is not yet known . c | Spire is a versatile regulator of actin dynamics that can nucleate actin filaments ( which might be further elongated by formins , cap and sever existing filaments , and sequester monomers . d | COBL and leiomodin nucleators use multiple monomer - binding sequences to assemble trimeric actin nuclei and might remain associated with their pointed ends . F - actin , filamentous actin ; FMN2 , formin 2 ; G - actin , globular actin ; h - b - h , helix - basic - helix ; KIND , kinase non - catalytic domain ; L , linker ; LRR , Leu - rich repeats ; P , polyproline ; Sec , secretion signal ; T , tropomyosin - and actin - binding helices ; Y , Tyr - rich motif . Image in part b is modified , with permission , from ReF . 151 © ( 2008 ) National Academy of Sciences . R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 247 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Neurite A projection ( for example , an axon or dendrite ) from the cell body of a neuron . Leu - rich repeat A structural motif that participates in protein – protein interactions and is comprised of repeating 20 – 30 residue peptides that are rich in Leu residues . Sarcomere A specialized structure in striated muscle composed of actin , myosin and other proteins that serves as the smallest unit that generates contractile force . and Fmn2 , and the interaction is mediated by the Spire KInD 153 and a formin – Spire interaction sequence near the C terminus of Fmn1 or Fmn2 ( ReF . 154 ) . KInD binding to Fmn2 or Cappuccino inhibits formin - mediated actin nucleation while enhancing nucleation by the Spire wH2 domain cluster 153 . Spire also enhances actin - based motility of beads coated with the mDIA1 FH1 – FH2 module ( ReF . 150 ) . It remains to be deter - mined whether SPIRe1 and SPIRe2 and Fmn1 and Fmn2 function sequentially , such that Spire initiates nucleation and formins engage the barbed end to enable processive elongation using profilin – actin subunits 153 ( FIG . 6c ) , or whether Spire - mediated inhibition of profilin – actin assembly indirectly funnels actin to enhance formin - mediated elongation 150 . Spire and Fmn2 are also likely to function together in vivo . In the fly oocyte , Spire and Cappuccino localize to the cortex 152 , 153 , whereas in mammalian cells , tagged Spire variants colocalize with recycling endosome markers 155 and Spire expression leads to recruitment of Fmn2 ( ReF . 153 ) . Spire might have a role in Golgi to plasma membrane transport because this process can be inhibited by a C - terminal fragment of Spire lack - ing its wH2 sequences 155 . Lastly , Spire associates with and bundles microtubules , implying that it mediates actin – micro tubule interactions 152 , 153 . Collectively , these results suggest that Spire has important roles in mem - brane transport and cytoskeletal interactions , although the upstream signalling pathways that regulate these functions have yet to be fully explored . Cordon‑bleu : growing actin from trimeric seeds . CoBL was identified in yeast two - hybrid screens for factors that interact with actin - binding protein 1 ( ABP1 ) and syndapin , proteins that promote actin polymerization in brain extracts 156 . CoBL seems to be a vertebrate - specific protein , and the human version does not have recogniz - able domains apart from three wH2 domains near its C terminus and multiple polyproline peptides that might bind profilin ( FIG . 6a ) . As with Spire , the individual CoBL wH2 domains bind G - actin in vitro . moreover , a wH2 - encompassing fragment co - immunoprecipitates with actin after expres - sion in mammalian cells 156 . This CoBL variant promotes the nucleation of unbranched filaments at low CoBL / actin ratios , but sequesters actin at high CoBL / actin ratios . CoBL also binds to F - actin and partially protects barbed ends from disassembly . unlike Spire , all of the CoBL wH2 domains seem to be required for polymer - ization activity , even though the affinity of the third wH2 domain for actin is tenfold lower than the first two . Interestingly , the length , but not the sequence , of the linker between the last two wH2 domains is crucial for actin assembly . This suggests that the closely spaced wH2 domains create a long - pitch actin dimer , whereas the more distantly linked wH2 promotes lateral inter - actions with a third subunit , forming a trimeric configu - ration that favours polymerization ( FIG . 6d ) . However , it is not known how CoBL activity is modulated by other domains in the full - length protein , or if CoBL interacts with other nucleators . The cellular functions of CoBL are just beginning to be explored . CoBL localizes throughout hippocampal neurons , where decreasing its expression suppresses neurite branching and overexpression increases the number of axonal branch points and the arborization of dendrites in an actin polymerization - dependent man - ner 156 . It will be interesting to determine whether CoBL has functions in other cell types and whether its activities are influenced by ABP1 and syndapin , or by other signalling molecules . Leiomodins : muscle‑specific F‑actin makers . Leiomodin 2 ( LmoD2 ) , the latest actin nucleator to be character - ized 157 , is expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle and has homologues ( LmoD1 and LmoD3 ) in smooth muscle and perhaps other tissues 158 . The domain organization of leiomodins is related to tropomodulins ( Tmods ) , proteins that cap pointed ends . Similar to Tmods , the leiomodin n - termini contain tropomyosin - and actin - binding helices followed by a central Leu - rich repeat ( LRR ) region that also binds actin ( FIG . 6a ) . unlike Tmods , LmoD2 contains an extended C terminus with a polyproline peptide , two predicted helices and a wH2 domain . LmoD2 potently nucleates actin filaments in vitro without affecting elongation rates at either end 157 . Although full nucleation activity requires elements in its n terminus , LRR and C - terminal extension , the com - bination of the LRR and C terminus retains high activity . Interestingly , the F - actin - binding protein tropomyosin enhances nucleation by full - length LmoD2 , but not an LmoD2 truncation lacking its n terminus , implying that this portion of leiomodins modulates nucleation efficiency . In the current model for leiomodin - mediated nucleation , its three actin - binding motifs stabilize an actin trimer , in which the wH2 domain and C - terminal helices position the third monomer in a configuration that allows elongation from the barbed end ( FIG . 6d ) . In cardiomyocytes , LmoD2 localizes with tropo - myosin in sarcomeres , in which F - actin pointed ends are positioned 157 . Depletion of LmoD2 compromises sarco - mere assembly and reduces cell adherence , indicating that LmoD2 is important for sarcomere organization and cell morphology . Consistent with its nucleating abil - ity , overexpression of LmoD2 generates aberrant F - actin structures and disrupts sarcomere assembly . These inter - esting results provide a foundation for understanding the coordination of leiomodin and tropomyosin activity during sarcomere assembly in skeletal muscle , and the function of leiomodin in other cell types . Concluding remarks The recent resurgence in discoveries related to actin nucleation has expanded and deepened our views on how the actin cytoskeleton influences cellular functions . we discuss the roles of nucleation factors in several genetic disorders and in different aspects of mamma - lian development , but these proteins also influence numerous other pathogenic processes , including the invasiveness of cancer cells and the adhesion , invasion and spread of microbes . Clearly , many crucial questions R E V I E W S 248 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 regarding the structure and function of nucleation fac - tors and their potential roles in disease have yet to be answered . For example , what do the structures of the active ARP2 / 3 complex , formins and wH2 domain - containing nucleators look like ? How are the functions of the newly identified proteins controlled by upstream regulators ? How are actin - and microtubule - binding activities and the functions of the different nucleator classes orchestrated ? It seems inevitable that continued investigations will reveal more nucleation factors and additional examples of cooperation and antagonism among the different classes of nucleators and cytoskeletal systems . This progress will yield a more comprehensive understanding of how the actin cytoskeleton operates in cells , how it contributes to human health and how it is altered during disease . 1 . Goley , E . D . & Welch , M . D . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 ( 2006 ) . 2 . Chesarone , M . A . , DuPage , A . G . & Goode , B . L . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 62 – 74 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Stradal , T . E . & Scita , G . Protein complexes regulating Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 4 – 10 ( 2006 ) . 4 . Goley , E . D . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Martin , A . C . & Welch , M . D . Critical conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex are induced by nucleotide and nucleation promoting factor . Mol . Cell 16 , 269 – 279 ( 2004 ) . 5 . Zencheck , W . D . et al . Nucleotide - and activator - dependent structural and dynamic changes of Arp2 / 3 complex monitored by hydrogen / deuterium exchange and mass spectrometry . J . Mol . Biol . 390 , 414 – 427 ( 2009 ) . 6 . Nolen , B . J . , Littlefield , R . S . & Pollard , T . D . Crystal structures of actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex with bound ATP or ADP . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15627 – 15632 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Martin , A . C . et al . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 315 – 328 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Dayel , M . J . & Mullins , R . D . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex : addition of the first subunit of the new filament by a WASP protein triggers rapid ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 . PLoS Biol . 2 , E91 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Le Clainche , C . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6337 – 6342 ( 2003 ) . 10 . Martin , A . C . , Welch , M . D . & Drubin , D . G . Arp2 / 3 ATP hydrolysis - catalysed branch dissociation is critical for endocytic force generation . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 826 – 833 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Nolen , B . J . & Pollard , T . D . Insights into the influence of nucleotides on actin family proteins from seven structures of Arp2 / 3 complex . Mol . Cell 26 , 449 – 457 ( 2007 ) . 12 . Beltzner , C . C . & Pollard , T . D . Identification of functionally important residues of Arp2 / 3 complex by analysis of homology models from diverse species . J . Mol . Biol . 336 , 551 – 565 ( 2004 ) . 13 . Rouiller , I . et al . The structural basis of actin filament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 ( 2008 ) . This paper provides the highest resolution model of ARP2 / 3 in filament branches . 14 . LeClaire , L . L . , 3rd , Baumgartner , M . , Iwasa , J . H . , Mullins , R . D . & Barber , D . L . Phosphorylation of the Arp2 / 3 complex is necessary to nucleate actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 647 – 654 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Rodal , A . A . et al . Conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex leading to actin nucleation . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 , 26 – 31 ( 2005 ) . 16 . Kreishman - Deitrick , M . et al . NMR analyses of the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Biochemistry 44 , 15247 – 15256 ( 2005 ) . 17 . Kelly , A . E . , Kranitz , H . , Dotsch , V . & Mullins , R . D . Actin binding to the central domain of WASP / Scar proteins plays a critical role in the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10589 – 10597 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Boczkowska , M . et al . X - Ray scattering study of activated Arp2 / 3 complex with bound actin - WCA . Structure 16 , 695 – 704 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Hertzog , M . et al . The β - thymosin / WH2 domain ; structural basis for the switch from inhibition to promotion of actin assembly . Cell 117 , 611 – 623 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Chereau , D . et al . Actin - bound structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for filament assembly . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16644 – 16649 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Bosticardo , M . , Marangoni , F . , Aiuti , A . , Villa , A . & Grazia Roncarolo , M . Recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Blood 113 , 6288 – 6295 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Snapper , S . B . et al . N . - WASP deficiency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 897 – 904 ( 2001 ) . 23 . Lommel , S . et al . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 – 857 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Anton , I . M . , Jones , G . E . , Wandosell , F . , Geha , R . & Ramesh , N . WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) : working in polymerisation and much more . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 555 – 562 ( 2007 ) . 25 . Ho , H . Y . et al . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP – WIP complex . Cell 118 , 203 – 216 ( 2004 ) . 26 . Campellone , K . G . et al . Repetitive N - WASP - binding elements of the enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli effector EspF ( U ) synergistically activate actin assembly . PLoS Pathog . 4 , e1000191 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Takano , K . , Toyooka , K . & Suetsugu , S . EFC / F - BAR proteins and the N - WASP – WIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO J . 27 , 2817 – 2828 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Tomasevic , N . et al . Differential regulation of WASP and N - WASP by Cdc42 , Rac1 , Nck , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Biochemistry 46 , 3494 – 3502 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Innocenti , M . et al . ABI1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 969 – 976 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Torres , E . & Rosen , M . K . Protein - tyrosine kinase and GTPase signals cooperate to phosphorylate and activate Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) / neuronal WASP . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 3513 – 3520 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Padrick , S . B . et al . Hierarchical regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins . Mol . Cell 32 , 426 – 438 ( 2008 ) . This paper describes allosteric - and new multi merization - based mechanisms for activating NPFs . 32 . Sallee , N . A . et al . The pathogen protein EspF ( U ) hijacks actin polymerization using mimicry and multivalency . Nature 454 , 1005 – 1008 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Bu , W . , Chou , A . M . , Lim , K . B . , Sudhaharan , T . & Ahmed , S . The Toca - 1 - N - WASP complex links filopodial formation to endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 11622 – 11636 ( 2009 ) . 34 . Legg , J . A . et al . N . - WASP involvement in dorsal ruffle formation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 678 – 687 ( 2007 ) . 35 . Tsujita , K . et al . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 269 – 279 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Benesch , S . et al . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Dahl , J . P . et al . Characterization of the WAVE1 knock - out mouse : implications for CNS development . J . Neurosci . 23 , 3343 – 3352 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Soderling , S . H . et al . Loss of WAVE - 1 causes sensorimotor retardation and reduced learning and memory in mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1723 – 1728 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Yamazaki , D . et al . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 , 452 – 456 ( 2003 ) . 40 . Yan , C . et al . WAVE2 deficiency reveals distinct roles in embryogenesis and Rac - mediated actin - based motility . EMBO J . 22 , 3602 – 3612 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . & Kirschner , M . W . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nucleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 ( 2002 ) . 42 . Gautreau , A . et al . Purification and architecture of the ubiquitous WAVE complex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 4379 – 4383 ( 2004 ) . 43 . Ismail , A . M . , Padrick , S . B . , Chen , B . , Umetani , J . & Rosen , M . K . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 561 – 563 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Derivery , E . , Lombard , B . , Loew , D . & Gautreau , A . The WAVE complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 777 – 790 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Innocenti , M . et al . ABI1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 319 – 327 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Steffen , A . et al . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J . 23 , 749 – 759 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Suetsugu , S . et al . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP 3 , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 571 – 585 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Oikawa , T . et al . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 420 – 426 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Leng , Y . et al . Abelson - interactor - 1 promotes WAVE2 membrane translocation and Abelson - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation required for WAVE2 activation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1098 – 1103 ( 2005 ) . 50 . Suetsugu , S . , Yamazaki , D . , Kurisu , S . & Takenawa , T . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibroblast cell migration . Dev . Cell 5 , 595 – 609 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Lebensohn , A . M . & Kirschner , M . W . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol . Cell 36 , 512 – 524 ( 2009 ) . This paper shows that Rac , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and phosphorylation cooperate during activation of the WAVE complex . 52 . Steffen , A . et al . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Yamazaki , D . , Oikawa , T . & Takenawa , T . Rac - WAVE - mediated actin reorganization is required for organization and maintenance of cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 86 – 100 ( 2007 ) . 54 . Linardopoulou , E . V . et al . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet . 3 , e237 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Derivery , E . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell 17 , 712 – 723 ( 2009 ) . This paper shows that WASH has a role in the recycling of endosomes to the plasma membrane . 56 . Gomez , T . S . & Billadeau , D . D . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regulates retromer - dependent sorting . Dev . Cell 17 , 699 – 711 ( 2009 ) . This paper indicates that WASH functions in the trafficking of endosomes to the trans - Golgi network . 57 . Duleh , S . N . & Welch , M . D . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and trafficking . Cytoskeleton . 67 , 193 – 206 ( 2010 ) . 58 . Liu , R . et al . Wash functions downstream of Rho and links linear and branched actin nucleation factors . Development 136 , 2849 – 2860 ( 2009 ) . R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 249 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 This paper begins to characterize the biochemical activities and cellular roles of Drosophila WASH . 59 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . & Welch , M . D . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 ( 2008 ) . This paper identifies WHAMM as an NPF that interacts with actin and microtubules to modulate membrane dynamics and transport . 60 . Zuchero , J . B . , Coutts , A . S . , Quinlan , M . E . , Thangue , N . B . & Mullins , R . D . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nature Cell Biol . 11 , 451 – 459 ( 2009 ) . This paper identifies JMY as both an NPF and an actin nucleator that shuttles between the nucleus and plasma membrane . 61 . Coutts , A . S . , Weston , L . & La Thangue , N . B . A transcription co - factor integrates cell adhesion and motility with the p53 response . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 19872 – 19877 ( 2009 ) . 62 . Ammer , A . G . & Weed , S . A . Cortactin branches out : roles in regulating protrusive actin dynamics . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 687 – 707 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . & Geha , R . S . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 ( 2004 ) . 64 . Kowalski , J . R . et al . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 79 – 87 ( 2005 ) . 65 . Tehrani , S . , Tomasevic , N . , Weed , S . , Sakowicz , R . & Cooper , J . A . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 11933 – 11938 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Cao , H . et al . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 483 – 492 ( 2005 ) . 67 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . & Zenisek , D . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 ( 2005 ) . 68 . Zhu , J . et al . Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the fission of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 807 – 817 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Helwani , F . M . et al . Cortactin is necessary for E - cadherin - mediated contact formation and actin reorganization . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 899 – 910 ( 2004 ) . 70 . Boguslavsky , S . et al . p120 catenin regulates lamellipodial dynamics and cell adhesion in cooperation with cortactin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 10882 – 10887 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Bryce , N . S . et al . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 – 1285 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Kempiak , S . J . et al . A neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein - mediated pathway for localized activation of actin polymerization that is regulated by cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5836 – 5842 ( 2005 ) . 73 . Lai , F . P . et al . Cortactin promotes migration and platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization by signaling to Rho - GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3209 – 3223 ( 2009 ) . 74 . Humphries , C . L . et al . Direct regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex activity and function by the actin binding protein coronin . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 993 – 1004 ( 2002 ) . 75 . Cai , L . , Marshall , T . W . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Schafer , D . A . & Bear , J . E . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 , 915 – 929 ( 2007 ) . 76 . Brieher , W . M . , Kueh , H . Y . , Ballif , B . A . & Mitchison , T . J . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 315 – 324 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Kueh , H . Y . , Charras , G . T . , Mitchison , T . J . & Brieher , W . M . Actin disassembly by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 341 – 353 ( 2008 ) . 78 . Gandhi , M . , Achard , V . , Blanchoin , L . & Goode , B . L . Coronin switches roles in actin disassembly depending on the nucleotide state of actin . Mol . Cell 34 , 364 – 374 ( 2009 ) . This paper explains the paradoxical ability of coronin to both antagonize and synergize with cofilin . 79 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . & Pollard , T . D . Cofilin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin filaments . Curr . Biol . 19 , 537 – 545 ( 2009 ) . 80 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . & Bear , J . E . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 ( 2008 ) . This paper describes the competing activities of cortactin and coronin during the dynamics of ARP2 / 3 - containing F - actin branches . 81 . Higgs , H . N . & Peterson , K . J . Phylogenetic analysis of the formin homology 2 domain . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 1 – 13 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Harris , E . S . , Li , F . & Higgs , H . N . The mouse formin , FRL α , slows actin filament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and severs filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20076 – 20087 ( 2004 ) . 83 . Moseley , J . B . et al . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and mDia1 - induced actin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 896 – 907 ( 2004 ) . 84 . Romero , S . et al . Formin is a processive motor that requires profilin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Chesarone , M . , Gould , C . J . , Moseley , J . B . & Goode , B . L . Displacement of formins from growing barbed ends by Bud14 is critical for actin cable architecture and function . Dev . Cell 16 , 292 – 302 ( 2009 ) . 86 . Harris , E . S . , Rouiller , I . , Hanein , D . & Higgs , H . N . Mechanistic differences in actin bundling activity of two mammalian formins , FRL1 and mDia2 . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 14383 – 14392 ( 2006 ) . 87 . Li , F . & Higgs , H . N . Dissecting requirements for auto - inhibition of actin nucleation by the formin , mDia1 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 6986 – 6992 ( 2005 ) . 88 . Copeland , J . W . , Copeland , S . J . & Treisman , R . Homo - oligomerization is essential for F - actin assembly by the formin family FH2 domain . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 50250 – 50256 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Xu , Y . et al . Crystal structures of a formin homology - 2 domain reveal a tethered dimer architecture . Cell 116 , 711 – 723 ( 2004 ) . 90 . Lu , J . et al . Structure of the FH2 domain of Daam1 : implications for formin regulation of actin assembly . J . Mol . Biol . 369 , 1258 – 1269 ( 2007 ) . 91 . Shimada , A . et al . The core FH2 domain of diaphanous - related formins is an elongated actin binding protein that inhibits polymerization . Mol . Cell 13 , 511 – 522 ( 2004 ) . 92 . Otomo , T . et al . Structural basis of actin filament nucleation and processive capping by a formin homology 2 domain . Nature 433 , 488 – 494 ( 2005 ) . 93 . Paul , A . S . & Pollard , T . D . The role of the FH1 domain and profilin in formin - mediated actin - filament elongation and nucleation . Curr . Biol . 18 , 9 – 19 ( 2008 ) . 94 . Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaffy , R . , Higgs , H . N . & Pollard , T . D . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and profilin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 ( 2006 ) . 95 . Vavylonis , D . , Kovar , D . R . , O’Shaughnessy , B . & Pollard , T . D . Model of formin - associated actin filament elongation . Mol . Cell 21 , 455 – 466 ( 2006 ) . 96 . Eisenmann , K . M . et al . T cell responses in mammalian diaphanous - related formin mDia1 knock - out mice . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 25152 – 25158 ( 2007 ) . 97 . Sakata , D . et al . Impaired T lymphocyte trafficking in mice deficient in an actin - nucleating protein , mDia1 . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 2031 – 2038 ( 2007 ) . 98 . Shi , Y . et al . The mDial formin is required for neutrophil polarization , migration , and activation of the LARG / RhoA / ROCK signaling axis during chemotaxis . J . Immunol . 182 , 3837 – 3845 ( 2009 ) . 99 . Peng , J . et al . Myeloproliferative defects following targeting of the Drf1 gene encoding the mammalian diaphanous related formin mDia1 . Cancer Res . 67 , 7565 – 7571 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Li , F . & Higgs , H . N . The mouse formin mDia1 is a potent actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1335 – 1340 ( 2003 ) . 101 . Wallar , B . J . et al . The basic region of the diaphanous - autoregulatory domain ( DAD ) is required for autoregulatory interactions with the diaphanous - related formin inhibitory domain . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 4300 – 4307 ( 2006 ) . 102 . Lammers , M . , Rose , R . , Scrima , A . & Wittinghofer , A . The regulation of mDia1 by autoinhibition and its release by Rho•GTP . EMBO J . 24 , 4176 – 4187 ( 2005 ) . 103 . Nezami , A . G . , Poy , F . & Eck , M . J . Structure of the autoinhibitory switch in formin mDia1 . Structure 14 , 257 – 263 ( 2006 ) . 104 . Otomo , T . , Otomo , C . , Tomchick , D . R . , Machius , M . & Rosen , M . K . Structural basis of Rho GTPase - mediated activation of the formin mDia1 . Mol . Cell 18 , 273 – 281 ( 2005 ) . 105 . Rose , R . et al . Structural and mechanistic insights into the interaction between Rho and mammalian Dia . Nature 435 , 513 – 518 ( 2005 ) . 106 . Seth , A . , Otomo , C . & Rosen , M . K . Autoinhibition regulates cellular localization and actin assembly activity of the diaphanous - related formins FRL α and mDia1 . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 701 – 713 ( 2006 ) . 107 . Peng , J . , Wallar , B . J . , Flanders , A . , Swiatek , P . J . & Alberts , A . S . Disruption of the Diaphanous - related formin Drf1 gene encoding mDia1 reveals a role for Drf3 as an effector for Cdc42 . Curr . Biol . 13 , 534 – 545 ( 2003 ) . 108 . Pellegrin , S . & Mellor , H . The Rho family GTPase Rif induces filopodia through mDia2 . Curr . Biol . 15 , 129 – 133 ( 2005 ) . 109 . Lammers , M . , Meyer , S . , Kuhlmann , D . & Wittinghofer , A . Specificity of interactions between mDia isoforms and Rho proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 35236 – 35246 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Kitzing , T . M . et al . Positive feedback between Dia1 , LARG , and RhoA regulates cell morphology and invasion . Genes Dev . 21 , 1478 – 1483 ( 2007 ) . 111 . Young , K . G . & Copeland , J . W . Formins in cell signaling . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 14 Oct 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2008 . 09 . 017 ) . 112 . Hotulainen , P . & Lappalainen , P . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 383 – 394 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Watanabe , S . et al . mDia2 induces the actin scaffold for the contractile ring and stabilizes its position during cytokinesis in NIH 3T3 cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2328 – 2338 ( 2008 ) . 114 . Sarmiento , C . et al . WASP family members and formin proteins coordinate regulation of cell protrusions in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 1245 – 1260 ( 2008 ) . 115 . Yang , C . et al . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e317 ( 2007 ) . 116 . Brandt , D . T . et al . Dia1 and IQGAP1 interact in cell migration and phagocytic cup formation . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 193 – 200 ( 2007 ) . 117 . Gupton , S . L . , Eisenmann , K . , Alberts , A . S . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . mDia2 regulates actin and focal adhesion dynamics and organization in the lamella for efficient epithelial cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3475 – 3487 ( 2007 ) . 118 . Colucci - Guyon , E . et al . A role for mammalian diaphanous - related formins in complement receptor ( CR3 ) - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Curr . Biol . 15 , 2007 – 2012 ( 2005 ) . 119 . Carramusa , L . , Ballestrem , C . , Zilberman , Y . & Bershadsky , A . D . Mammalian diaphanous - related formin Dia1 controls the organization of E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell junctions . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3870 – 3882 ( 2007 ) . 120 . Ryu , J . R . , Echarri , A . , Li , R . & Pendergast , A . M . Regulation of cell - cell adhesion by Abi / Diaphanous complexes . Mol . Cell Biol . 29 , 1735 – 1748 ( 2009 ) . 121 . Gasman , S . , Kalaidzidis , Y . & Zerial , M . RhoD regulates endosome dynamics through Diaphanous - related formin and Src tyrosine kinase . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 195 – 204 ( 2003 ) . 122 . Bartolini , F . et al . The formin mDia2 stabilizes microtubules independently of its actin nucleation activity . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 523 – 536 ( 2008 ) . This paper shows that the formin mDia2 can directly stabilize microtubules . 123 . Wen , Y . et al . EB1 and APC bind to mDia to stabilize microtubules downstream of Rho and promote cell migration . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 820 – 830 ( 2004 ) . 124 . Lewkowicz , E . et al . The microtubule - binding protein CLIP - 170 coordinates mDia1 and actin reorganization during CR3 - mediated phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 1287 – 1298 ( 2008 ) . 125 . Liu , W . et al . Mechanism of activation of the Formin protein Daam1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 210 – 215 ( 2008 ) . This paper describes the importance of Dishevelled in regulating DAAM1 activity . 126 . Esue , O . , Harris , E . S . , Higgs , H . N . & Wirtz , D . The filamentous actin cross - linking / bundling activity of mammalian formins . J . Mol . Biol . 384 , 324 – 334 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S 250 | APRIL 2010 | voLume 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 127 . Vaillant , D . C . et al . Interaction of the N - and C - terminal autoregulatory domains of FRL2 does not inhibit FRL2 activity . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 33750 – 33762 ( 2008 ) . 128 . Higashi , T . et al . Biochemical characterization of the Rho GTPase - regulated actin assembly by diaphanous - related formins , mDia1 and Daam1 , in platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 8746 – 8755 ( 2008 ) . 129 . Habas , R . , Kato , Y . & He , X . Wnt / Frizzled activation of Rho regulates vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel formin homology protein Daam1 . Cell 107 , 843 – 854 ( 2001 ) . 130 . Sato , A . et al . Profilin is an effector for Daam1 in non - canonical Wnt signaling and is required for vertebrate gastrulation . Development 133 , 4219 – 4231 ( 2006 ) . 131 . Koka , S . et al . The formin - homology - domain - containing protein FHOD1 enhances cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1745 – 1755 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Schonichen , A . et al . Biochemical characterization of the diaphanous autoregulatory interaction in the formin homology protein FHOD1 . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 5084 – 5093 ( 2006 ) . 133 . Schulte , A . et al . The human formin FHOD1 contains a bipartite structure of FH3 and GTPase - binding domains required for activation . Structure 16 , 1313 – 1323 ( 2008 ) . 134 . Hannemann , S . et al . The Diaphanous - related Formin FHOD1 associates with ROCK1 and promotes Src - dependent plasma membrane blebbing . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 27891 – 27903 ( 2008 ) . 135 . Takeya , R . , Taniguchi , K . , Narumiya , S . & Sumimoto , H . The mammalian formin FHOD1 is activated through phosphorylation by ROCK and mediates thrombin - induced stress fibre formation in endothelial cells . EMBO J . 27 , 618 – 628 ( 2008 ) . This paper defines a ROCK - mediated mechanism of FHOD1 regulation . 136 . Kobielak , A . , Pasolli , H . A . & Fuchs , E . Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 21 – 30 ( 2004 ) . 137 . Dettenhofer , M . , Zhou , F . & Leder , P . Formin 1 - isoform IV deficient cells exhibit defects in cell spreading and focal adhesion formation . PLoS One 3 , e2497 ( 2008 ) . 138 . Leader , B . et al . Formin - 2 , polyploidy , hypofertility and positioning of the meiotic spindle in mouse oocytes . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 921 – 928 ( 2002 ) . 139 . Dumont , J . et al . Formin - 2 is required for spindle migration and for the late steps of cytokinesis in mouse oocytes . Dev . Biol . 301 , 254 – 265 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Li , H . , Guo , F . , Rubinstein , B . & Li , R . Actin - driven chromosomal motility leads to symmetry breaking in mammalian meiotic oocytes . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 1301 – 1308 ( 2008 ) . 141 . Schuh , M . & Ellenberg , J . A new model for asymmetric spindle positioning in mouse oocytes . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1986 – 1992 ( 2008 ) . References 140 and 141 implicate FMN2 in the control of spindle movements in mammalian oocytes . 142 . Miyagi , Y . et al . Delphilin : a novel PDZ and formin homology domain - containing protein that synaptically colocalizes and interacts with glutamate receptor δ 2 subunit . J . Neurosci . 22 , 803 – 814 ( 2002 ) . 143 . Matsuda , K . , Matsuda , S . , Gladding , C . M . & Yuzaki , M . Characterization of the δ 2 glutamate receptor - binding protein delphilin : Splicing variants with differential palmitoylation and an additional PDZ domain . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 25577 – 25587 ( 2006 ) . 144 . Takeuchi , T . et al . Enhancement of both long - term depression induction and optokinetic response adaptation in mice lacking delphilin . PLoS One 3 , e2297 ( 2008 ) . 145 . Young , K . G . , Thurston , S . F . , Copeland , S . , Smallwood , C . & Copeland , J . W . INF1 is a novel microtubule - associated formin . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 5168 – 5180 ( 2008 ) . 146 . Chhabra , E . S . & Higgs , H . N . INF2 Is a WASP homology 2 motif - containing formin that severs actin filaments and accelerates both polymerization and depolymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 26754 – 26767 ( 2006 ) . 147 . Chhabra , E . S . , Ramabhadran , V . , Gerber , S . A . & Higgs , H . N . INF2 is an endoplasmic reticulum - associated formin protein . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1430 – 1440 ( 2009 ) . This paper suggests that the formin INF2 can associate with the ER and influence its morphology . 148 . Dominguez , R . Actin filament nucleation and elongation factors — structure - function relationships . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 44 , 351 – 366 ( 2009 ) . 149 . Quinlan , M . E . , Heuser , J . E . , Kerkhoff , E . & Mullins , R . D . Drosophila Spire is an actin nucleation factor . Nature 433 , 382 – 388 ( 2005 ) . 150 . Bosch , M . et al . Analysis of the function of Spire in actin assembly and its synergy with formin and profilin . Mol . Cell 28 , 555 – 568 ( 2007 ) . This paper provides a detailed biochemical analysis of the numerous effects of Spire on actin dynamics . 151 . Rebowski , G . et al . X - ray scattering study of actin polymerization nuclei assembled by tandem W domains . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10785 – 10790 ( 2008 ) . 152 . Rosales - Nieves , A . E . et al . Coordination of microtubule and microfilament dynamics by Drosophila Rho1 , Spire and Cappuccino . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 367 – 376 ( 2006 ) . 153 . Quinlan , M . E . , Hilgert , S . , Bedrossian , A . , Mullins , R . D . & Kerkhoff , E . Regulatory interactions between two actin nucleators , Spire and Cappuccino . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 117 – 128 ( 2007 ) . This paper demonstrates that Spire binds directly to and influences the actin nucleating activity of the formin Cappuccino . 154 . Pechlivanis , M . , Samol , A . & Kerkhoff , E . Identification of a short Spir interaction sequence at the C - terminal end of formin subgroup proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 25324 – 25333 ( 2009 ) . 155 . Kerkhoff , E . et al . The Spir actin organizers are involved in vesicle transport processes . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1963 – 1968 ( 2001 ) . 156 . Ahuja , R . et al . Cordon - bleu is an actin nucleation factor and controls neuronal morphology . Cell 131 , 337 – 350 ( 2007 ) . This paper identifies COBL as a nucleator that regulates actin dynamics and dendrite branching in neurons . 157 . Chereau , D . et al . Leiomodin is an actin filament nucleator in muscle cells . Science 320 , 239 – 243 ( 2008 ) . This paper identifies LMOD2 as a potent actin nucleator that influences sarcomere assembly in muscle cells . 158 . Conley , C . A . , Fritz - Six , K . L . , Almenar - Queralt , A . & Fowler , V . M . Leiomodins : larger members of the tropomodulin ( Tmod ) gene family . Genomics 73 , 127 – 139 ( 2001 ) . 159 . Thanbichler , M . & Shapiro , L . Getting organized — how bacterial cells move proteins and DNA . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 6 , 28 – 40 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgements We thank R . Dominguez , D . Hanein , M . Rosen and N . Volkmann for providing structural images , and members of the Welch laboratory for comments on this manuscript . We also thank investigators whose earlier work laid the founda - tion for the studies noted in this Review but who could not be cited owing to space restrictions . K . G . C is supported by a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society special fellowship . M . D . W is supported by grants NIH / NIGMS RO1 - GM059609 and NIH / NIAID RO1 - AI074760 . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ABI1 | AIP1 | ARP2 | ARP3 | ARPC2 | ARPC4 | BRICK1 | COBL | DAAM1 | DAAM2 | delphilin | FHOD1 | FHOD3 | FMN1 | FMN2 | INF2 | IRSp53 | JMY | LMOD2 | mDIA1 | mDIA2 | mDIA3 | NAP1 | N - WASP | SRA1 | TOCA1 | WAVE1 | WAVE2 | WHAMM | WIP FURTHER INFORMATION Matthew D . Welch’s homepage : http : / / mcb . berkeley . edu / labs / welch / all liNks are acTive iN THe oNliNe PDF R E V I E W S nATuRe RevIewS | Molecular cell Biology voLume 11 | APRIL 2010 | 251 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10