Teaching Mathematics by Comparison : Analog Visibility as a Double - Edged Sword Kreshnik Nasi Begolli University of California , Irvine Lindsey Engle Richland University of Chicago Comparing multiple solutions to a single problem is an important mode for developing flexible mathematical thinking , yet instructionally leading this activity is challenging ( Stein , Engle , Smith , & Hughes , 2008 ) . We test 1 decision teachers must make after having students solve a problem : whether to only verbally discuss students’ solutions or make them visible to others . Fifth grade students were presented with a videotaped mathematics lesson on ratio in which students described a misconception and 2 correct strategies . The original lesson was manipulated via video editing to create 3 versions with constant audio but in which the compared solutions were a ) presented only orally , b ) visible sequentially in the order they were described , or 3 ) all solutions were visible after being described throughout the discussion . Posttest and delayed posttest measures revealed the greatest gains when all solutions were visible throughout the discussion , particularly better than only oral presentation for conceptual knowl - edge . Sequentially showing students visual representations of solutions led to the lowest gains overall , and the highest rates of misconceptions . These results suggest that visual representations of analogs can support learning and schema formation , but they can also be hurtful—in our case if presented as visible in sequence . Keywords : analogy , working memory , misconceptions , teaching strategies , video - lesson Comparing different student solutions to a single instructional problem is a key recommended pedagogical tool in mathematics , leading to deep , generalizable learning ( see Kilpatrick , Swafford , & Findell , 2001 ; National Mathematics Panel , 2008 ; Common Core Curriculum , 2013 ) ; however , the cognitive underpinnings of successfully completing this task are complex . In order to under - stand that 2 (cid:2) 2 (cid:2) 2 conveys the same relationships as 2 (cid:3) 3 , for example , students must perform what has been theoretically de - scribed as structure - mapping : represent the multiple solutions as systems of mathematical relationships , align and map these sys - tems to each other , and draw inferences based on the alignments ( and misalignments ) for successful schema formation ( see Gent - ner , 1983 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Structure - mapping is posited to underlie the processes of analogical reasoning where one source representation ( e . g . , 3 – 1 (cid:4) 2 ) , is mapped to a target representa - tion ( e . g . , x – 1 (cid:4) 2 ) , ( Gentner , 1983 ) . Orchestrating classroom lessons in which learners successfully accomplish such structure mapping is not straightforward for many reasons . First , classroom discussions often involve comparisons between a misconception and a valid solution strategy , which may be particularly effortful in regards to structure mapping and schema formation , because misconceptions often derive from deeply or long - held beliefs that may be difficult to overcome ( Vosniadou , 2013 ; Chi , 2013 ; Chinn & Brewer , 1993 ) . Second , reasoners often fail to notice the relevance or importance of doing structure mapping unless given very clear and explicit support cues to do so ( see Alfieri , Nokes - Malach , & Schunn , 2013 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Ross , 1989 ; Schwartz & Bransford , 1998 ) , Third , reasoners may intend to perform structure mapping but the process breaks down because their working memory or cognitive control processing resources are overwhelmed : ( Cho , Holyoak , & Cannon , 2007 ; English & Halford , 1995 ; Morrison , Holyoak , & Troung , 2001 ; Richland , Morrison , & Holyoak , 2006 ; Waltz , Lau , Grewal , & Holyoak , 2000 ; Paas , Renkl , & Sweller , 2003 ) . Working memory is required to represent the relationships operating within systems of objects as well as the higher order relationships between a familiar representation ( source analog ) and less familiar represen - tation ( target analog ) . In this case , to mentally consider the rela - tionships between two solution strategies , one must hold in mind the steps to each solution strategy being compared , must reorga - nize and rerepresent these systems of relations so that their struc - tures can align and map together , identify meaningful similarities and differences , and derive conceptual / schematic inferences from this structure - mapping exercise to better inform future problem solving ( see Morrison et al . , 2004 ; Morrison , Doumas , & Richland , 2011 ) . Lastly , reasoners’ prior knowledge plays an additional role This article was published Online First July 20 , 2015 . Kreshnik Nasi Begolli , School of Education , University of California , Irvine ; Lindsey Engle Richland , Department of Comparative Human De - velopment , University of Chicago . This work would not have been possible without the support of the National Science Foundation CAREER grant NSF # 0954222 . We thank the participating schools , principals , teachers , and students . We also thank our lab manager Carey DeMichellis ; research assistants Carmen Chan and James Gamboa ; Alison O’Daniel for her help with Final Cut Pro ; and Raminder Goraya for his programming efforts under high pressure . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kreshnik Nasi Begolli , University of California , Irvine , School of Education , 3200 Education , Irvine , CA 92697 - 5500 . E - mail : kbegolli @ uci . edu T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Journal of Educational Psychology © 2015 American Psychological Association 2016 , Vol . 108 , No . 2 , 194 – 213 0022 - 0663 / 16 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / edu0000056 194 ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 ; Holyoak , 2012 ) . Those without ade - quate knowledge of the key relationships within the source and target representations are either unlikely to be able to notice structure mapping ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Goswami , 2001 ; Fyfe , Rittle - Johnson , & DeCaro , 2012 ) , or this process will impose higher processing load than it would for those with more domain expertise ( Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ) . These challenges mean that the instructional supports are very likely essential to whether students notice and successfully execute structure mapping between multiple solution strategies . The cur - rent study tests a classroom - relevant mode for providing such support—providing visual representations of the source and target analogs . The study manipulation assesses whether a ) making source and target analogs visual ( vs . oral ) increases the likelihood that participants will notice and successfully benefit from structure mapping opportunities , and b ) whether learning is enhanced if the visual representations of all compared solutions are visible simul - taneously during structure mapping . The former should increase the salience of the relational structure of each representation , while the latter should reduce the working memory load and cognitive control resources necessary for participants to engage in structure mapping and inference processes . Understanding the relationships between visual representations and learners’ structure mapping provides insights into both a key pedagogical practice and improving theory on structure mapping and analogy more broadly . Teachers tend to find it difficult to lead students into making connections between problem solutions , and one productive way to support them is to provide guidelines for such discussions ( e . g . , see Stein , Engle , Smith , & Hughes , 2008 ) . Our study methodology is designed to lead to generalizable guidelines for the use of visual representations during classroom discussions comparing multiple solutions to a single problem . Observational data suggest that U . S . teachers do not regularly provide visual representations to support multiple compared solu - tion strategies , and when they do , they are less likely than teachers in higher achieving countries to leave the multiple representations visible simultaneously ( Richland , Zur , & Holyoak , 2007 ) . The literature on the role of making representations visible suggests that presenting source and target analogs simultaneously versus sequentially leads to better learning ( Gentner et al . , 2003 ; Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2009 ; Richland & McDonough , 2010 ; Star & Rittle - Johnson , 2009 ) , but these studies did not examine compar - isons between an incorrect and a correct strategy . On the other hand , learning from incorrect and correct strategies was better than learning from correct strategies only ( Durkin & Rittle - Johnson , 2012 ; Booth et al . , 2013 ) , but these studies have not investigated the role of visual supports . Thus this study may provide first evidence toward a guideline for teaching instructional comparisons with visual representations , particularly in the context of compar - ing a misconception and a correct student solution . To maximize the relevance of our findings for teaching prac - tices , we test alternative uses of visual representations within a mathematics lesson on proportional reasoning—a topic central to curriculum standards . Stimuli and data collection are conducted in everyday classrooms . The proportional reasoning lesson is situated in the context of a problem—asking students to find the best free - throw shooter in a basketball game . In this lesson , students are guided to perform structure mapping between three commonly used solution strategies : a ) subtract between two units ( e . g . , sub - tract shots made from shots tried , which is incorrect and a common misconception ) , b ) find the least common multiple between two ratios ( e . g . , proportionally equalize shots made to compare the shots tried ) , and c ) divide two units to find a success rate ( e . g . , divide shots made by shots tried ) . In addition , the work provides insights into theory on structure mapping and analogy . We examine a specific case of schema formation from structure mapping : identifying misalignments be - tween two representations , in our case “subtraction” ( a common misconception ) and “proportions” ( e . g . , rate or ratio ) . To benefit from this structure - mapping exercise , students have to identify elements that are not aligned between the two relational structures . Namely , the difference between comparing a single unit ( e . g . , shots missed ) and a relationship between two units ( e . g . , shots made and shots tried ) . Schema formation about proportional rea - soning would derive from understanding the higher order differ - ences between these two ways of attempting to solve the propor - tion problem . In contrast , structure - mapping failures may lead to the adoption of an inappropriate source ( single unit comparison ) , or at best the target ( relational comparison ) , but neither of which would be schema formation . In fact , either of these could hinder structure mapping , lead to misconceptions , and / or reduce transfer when solving later problems . We expect our findings to provide a more nuanced view on the possible implications of visual repre - sentations in terms of supporting or straining working memory resources necessary for successful structure mapping and its influ - ence on students’ mathematical knowledge . We examine these research questions using an experiment that employs methods and measurements designed with the aim to optimize both ecological validity and experimental rigor . We utilize stimuli that approximate a true classroom experience—a single mathematics video - lesson recorded in a real classroom— then randomly assign students within each classroom to watch one of three versions of the lesson ( see Figure 1 ) . The recording is video - edited to support or strain working memory resources through variations in the visibility of representations . We use four carefully designed pre - post and delayed posttest measures to assess the impact of these manipulations on : 1 ) procedural understanding—students’ ability to reproduce taught proce - dures ; 2 ) procedural flexibility—participants’ ability to under - stand multiple solutions and to deploy the optimal strategy ; 3 ) conceptual understanding—understanding the concepts under - pinning rate and ratio ; and 4 ) use of misconceptions . These measures enable us to not only assess which use of visual representations is most effective for promoting learning , but they also let us better understand the processes by which children have been learning in each of the three conditions . Memory and retention of the instruction would be reflected in procedural understanding measures , while schema formation would be better reflected in the procedural flexibility and con - ceptual understanding measures . We theorize that working memory is the mechanism underpinning differences between these conditions on learning , since more working memory is required to hold visual representations in mind when reasoning about information that is not currently visible . Thus , findings from this experiment will yield both theoretical insight into the role of visual representations for complex structure mapping , retention , and schema formation , and provides practice relevant implications for everyday mathematics teachers . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 195 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON Method Participants Eighty - eight participants were drawn from a suburban public school with a diverse population . Data from students who missed the intervention were omitted since their scores were not affected by our manipulation . Students who missed the pretest were also excluded from the analyses . They were excluded rather than hav - ing their data imputed ( Peugh & Enders , 2004 ) due to concerns that solving pretest problems may have changed the learning context for those who took it due to a testing effect ( Richland , Kornell , & Kao , 2009 ; Bjork , 1988 ; Carrier & Pashler , 1992 ; McDaniel , Roediger , & McDermott , 2007 ; Roediger & Karpicke , 2006a , 2006b ; for a review see Richland , Bjork , Linn , 2007 ) . The final analyses included 76 students ( 32 girls ) who completed all three tests ( pretest , immediate posttest , and retention test ) with ages ranging between 11 and 12 years old . Materials Materials for the intervention consisted of a worksheet , a net - book , and a prerecorded video lesson embedded in an interactive computer program . Figure 2 provides a visual of the process for developing the lesson and administering it as stimulus to students in different schools . Interactive Instructional Lesson Proportional Reasoning . There is a large literature research - ing student thinking about ratio that has contributed to evidence that can predict students responses to proportion problems . ( e . g . , Figure 1 . Still images illustrating the experimental conditions created through video editing . From left to right , the first picture shows only the teacher while obstructing the writing on the whiteboard ( Not Visible condition ) , the middle picture shows only the most recent problem solution ( Sequentially Visible condition ) , and the third picture shows the whole board ( All Visible condition ) . See the online article for the color version of this figure . Figure 2 . A process overview of using video to create experimental manipulations . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 196 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND Hart , 1984 ; Hunting , 1983 ; Karplus , Pulos , & Stage , 1983 ; Kaput & West , 1994 ; Lamon , 1993a , 1993b ; Lo & Watanabe , 1997 ; Shimizu , 2003 ) . Kilpatrick et al . ( 2001 ) identified proportional reasoning as requiring refined knowledge of mathematics and as the pinnacle of elementary arithmetic critical for algebraic and more sophisticated mathematics . Ratio was chosen for this study for two reasons : ( a ) it is part of the common core standards for sixth grade because it is essential for subsequent learning of algebra and ( b ) previous research has shown that ratio problems are cognitively taxing , leading to more diverse systematic student responses , useful for understanding mathematical thinking . Lesson content and teacher collaboration . An approxi - mately 40 - min lesson was developed by the authors in collabora - tion with a nationally board certified public school teacher ( see Appendix A for a sample of the transcript from the lesson ) . First , a lesson script was written based on a previously published lesson model ( Shimizu , 2003 ) on which the teacher and the authors performed practice trials without students . During practice , the transcript was modified to feel more natural within the teacher’s instructional style . The script provided specific details on how to present the main instructional problem ; identify key student re - sponses , present them on the board in a predetermined sequence , organize student responses on the board ; the type of gestures to use , and so on . The teacher then taught the scripted lesson to her students in her regular classroom . Students were not given instruc - tions and were expected to act spontaneously as they normally would during class hour . This teacher and students were not participants in our study . They only partook during the recording of the lesson which was used as stimulus for other students . The lessons began with the teacher asking her students to solve the problem below . Ken and Yoko were shooting free - throws in a basketball game . The results of their shooting are shown in the table below ( Table 1 ) . Who is the better free - throw shooter ? This was a novel problem and students were not given hints or instruction on how to solve it . The teacher’s only instruction was to “solve any way you know how , ” and that “the class can learn from all the answers . ” If students objected because they did not know how to solve this , the teacher encouraged them to use any strategy they liked . During the time when the students solved the problem , the teacher circled the room to identifying three students that used the three strategies listed in Table 2 . After a 5 - min period , those three students were called to the board to share their solutions with the class . The sequence of strategies was presented based on this published lesson model ( Shimizu , 2003 ) . First , the incorrect solution C was verbalized by a student while the teacher wrote it on the board . Next , solutions B and then A were presented in the same manner with different students describing their strategies , followed by a short discussion on what the student was thinking when using the strategy . After all solutions were presented the teacher orchestrated a discussion comparing the different solution methods to achieve specific goals . The teacher’s goals were : ( a ) to challenge students’ common misconception ( strategy C—subtraction ) by asking students whether strategy C is reasonable if the numbers changed ( Ken makes 0 out of 4 free throws and Yoko makes 5 out of 10 ) , ( b ) introduce the concept of proportional reasoning ( strategy B ) by leading students to notice that proportions can be compared by making one number ( i . e . , the denominator ) constant in each ratio and then comparing the other number ( i . e . , the numerator ) to determine which ratio is larger , ( c ) to challenge students to notice that the least common multiple strategy can become more difficult for larger and prime numbers , ( d ) to notice that using division ( solution A ) is the most efficient strategy , since it does not change much in difficulty , regardless if the numbers increase . These points were orchestrated by the teacher through predesigned comparisons that led her to introduce the concept of ratio , while the class responded spontaneously to her prompts . The crux of our manipulation came from applying video - editing techniques to the recording to create three different versions of the same lesson . FINAL CUT PRO’s ( FCP ) 7 . 0 . 3 academic version’s various editing features were used such as zooming , cropping , or different camera perspectives of the screen canvas to either : ( a ) hide the board to create a version of the lesson for the Not Visible condition ; ( b ) show only the section of the board most recently discussed , but hide other areas of the board to create a version of the lesson for the Sequentially Visible condition ; or ( c ) show the whole board throughout the version of the lesson in the All Visible condition . Thus , the same content was verbalized in all three lesson versions , but with systematic differences in visual cues . Each version of the lesson was strategically divided into nine clips with an approximate range from 1 min to 8 min . The endpoints of each clip were chosen based on when the teacher asked questions to the class . Each version of the video - lesson was made interactive by embedding clips of the video in a computer program written specifically for this study . At the end of each clip , the program prompted students with questions that were asked by the teacher in the videotaped classroom . Students in all conditions either wrote their answers on a packet provided by the experiment - ers , or selected multiple choice questions that the computer pro - gram collected as assessment data . This methodological approach of stimuli creation , provided a rigorous level of experimental control of a highly dynamic context—an everyday classroom . Further , it allowed for randomization within each classroom . Assessment The assessment was designed to assess schema formation and generalization . Mathematically , the assessment included three con - structs , procedural knowledge , procedural flexibility , and concep - tual knowledge ( Rittle - Johnson & Schneider , in press ) . These constructs were conceptually derived from Rittle - Johnson and Star ( 2007 , 2009 ) , and adapted to the core concepts and procedures underlying ratio problems . Items used for assessing each knowl - edge type are included in Appendix B . The items on the pretest and posttests were identical , but the pretest contained five additional procedural knowledge problems used to assess students’ prerequi - site knowledge of basic procedures ( e . g . , division by decimals , finding the least common denominator ) . Detailed scoring on all of Table 1 Problem Solved and Discussed During Videotaped Lesson Shots made Shots tried Ken 12 20 Yoko 16 25 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 197 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON the items can be found in Appendix B . Scores for each construct were averaged to yield an overall mean for that particular con - struct . Student produced strategies were coded for use of : ( a ) division , ( b ) least common multiple , ( c ) subtraction , ( d ) ratio , ( e ) other valid strategy ( e . g . , cross multiplication ) , ( f ) other invalid strategy ( e . g . , addition ) . For the analyses , these codes were col - lapsed for each problem into correct or incorrect . Open - ended questions ( e . g . , what is the definition of ratio ? ) were given a binary score of either correct or incorrect . Interrater agreement for three raters was calculated on 20 % of each test phase on whether the strategy was correct or incorrect ranging from 95 – 99 % ( 0 . 88 – 0 . 97 Kappa ) . Strategy specific coding was less reliable ranging from 86 % – 92 % ( 0 . 79 – 0 . 85 Kappa ) . Procedural Knowledge . Seven problems measured baseline ability and growth in procedural understanding . The procedural knowledge construct was designed to test : ( a ) students’ knowledge for producing and evaluating solutions of : familiar problems ( i . e . , similar in appearance to the problem used in the video lesson ; n (cid:4) 2 produce ; n (cid:4) 3 recognition ) , ( b ) transfer problems ( i . e . , students’ competence to extend these solution strategies to problems with novel appearance , but similar context ; n (cid:4) 2 ) . Students received one point if they produced the correct solution method and another point if they produced a correct solution method and made an inference to reach a correct answer . Students received one point if they recognized the correct strategy on multiple - choice questions . One procedural transfer problem showed no sensitivity to the intervention , so it was dropped from the analyses ( average change of 5 % from pretest to posttest ; see Problem 4 in Appendix B for details ) . Cronbach’s alpha on the remaining items was . 88 at posttest , . 91 at delayed posttest , and . 86 at pretest , which are above the suggested values of . 5 or . 6 ( Nunnally , 1967 ) . Procedural flexibility . The procedural flexibility construct measured : ( a ) students’ adaptive production of solution methods ( n (cid:4) 3 ) , ( b ) their ability to identify the most efficient strategy ( n (cid:4) 1 ) , and ( c ) students’ ability to identify a novel solution method which was related to a taught strategy ( n (cid:4) 1 ) . For ( a ) students were presented with one problem containing three items . The first item asked students to produce two strategies ( and correct an - swers ) for the same problem . The second item asked students to evaluate which of the two strategies was most effective . The third item asked students to select one out of four reasons for their choice on Item 2 . Students could receive two points for the first item and one point on the last two items . For ( b ) students were presented a multiple - choice problem that required them to identify the optimal strategy from two valid and two invalid strategies . For ( c ) students were presented with a multiple choice problem that probed students’ competence to identify the correctness of a re - lated but novel method of solving a problem ( i . e . , finding the lowest common multiple for the numerator instead of the denom - inator ) . Both ( b ) and ( c ) were scored for accuracy . Cronbach’s alpha on the flexibility construct was . 68 at posttest , . 67 at delayed posttest , and . 57 at pretest . Conceptual knowledge . The conceptual knowledge construct consisted of seven items that were designed to probe students’ explicit and implicit knowledge of ratio . Students’ explicit knowl - edge was measured by asking them to write a definition for ratio , which was scored for accuracy . The other six items measured students’ implicit understanding and transfer to new contexts . One problem probed whether students could conceptually examine two sets of non - numerical quantities ( i . e . , pictures of lemon juice and water ) , adapt their just learned solution methods to this novel context , and compare the sets to decide which ratio was greater ( i . e . , which lemonade was more lemony ? ) . On this problem , stu - dents were scored on whether they could produce the correct setup given objective quantities and choose the correct set ( when using the correct setup ) . The remaining problems were scored for accu - racy . One multiple - choice item that was part of a procedural knowledge problem probed whether students could conceptually evaluate the multiplicative properties of a solution procedure they had produced ( see Problem 1 in Appendix B under the Procedural and Conceptual Knowledge sections ) . Three conceptual questions , two fill - in - the - blank , and one multiple choice , probed students’ understanding of units in correspondence to ratio and rate numer - ical quantities . One of these unit questions was dropped due to floor effects ( only 6 out of 97 students responded correctly ; see Problem 5 , Part 3 in Appendix B for details ) . Lastly , one problem asked students to recognize the correct solution and setup for a novel problem type and context . However , this problem suffered from ceiling effects and was not sensitive to intervention ( averages ranged between 81 % – 89 % ; average change (cid:5) 3 % from pretest to posttest ; see Problem 8 in Appendix B for details ) . Thus , it was omitted from the analyses . Cronbach’s alpha on the remaining items was . 66 at posttest , . 64 at delayed posttest , and . 42 on pretest . Reliability at pretest was lower due to floor effects . Common misconception . Misconceptions are mistakes that students make based on inferences from prior knowledge , which obstruct learning ( Smith , diSessa , Roschelle , 1993 ) . Based on a published lesson ( Shimizu , 2003 ) , pilot data , and pretest data , a Table 2 Three Student Solutions Compared During the Videotaped Instructional Analogy Lesson A Student finds the number of goals made if each player shoots only 1 free throw . Ken : 12 goals (cid:6) 20 shots (cid:4) . 6 , and Yoko : 16 goals (cid:6) 25 shots (cid:4) . 64 . Answer : Yoko , because she gets more goals for the same number of free throws ( . 64 (cid:7) . 60 ) . Most efficient generalizable strategy B Student compares the number of goals if each player shoots the same number of free throws . Using 100 as the last common multiple , we get Ken : 60 / 100 and Yoko : 64 / 100 . Answer : Yoko , because she would get more goals if they each shot 100 times ( 64 / 100 (cid:7) 60 / 100 ) . Finding least common multiple : Drawback , difficult when larger numbers C Student compares the players by finding the difference between the number of free throw shots and the number of goals . Ken : 20 shots (cid:5) 12 goals (cid:4) 8 misses , and Yoko : 25 shots (cid:5) 16 goals (cid:4) 9 misses . Answer : Ken , because he missed fewer times than Yoko ( 8 (cid:8) 9 ) . Misconception ( incorrect ) : subtract values and compare differences without considering the ratio . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 198 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND solution involving subtraction was expected to be the most com - mon misconception participants would bring to the study . A sub - coding assessed how frequently students used the subtraction method . The common misconception measure examined students’ use of subtraction on near transfer procedural problems that looked like the instructed problem in the video lesson . Design and Procedure Students within four classrooms , not in the videotaped class - room , were randomly assigned to three experimental conditions : Not Visible ( n (cid:4) 26 ) , Sequentially Visible ( n (cid:4) 26 ) , or All Visible ( n (cid:4) 24 ) . All students were administered a pretest , 1 week later completed the video - lesson intervention and an immediate post - test , and o1 week later completed a delayed posttest . Students underwent the intervention before being introduced to rate and ratio in their regular curriculum . Results Baseline Data One - way ANOVAs were conducted first to establish that the randomization was successful and there were no differences be - tween conditions on each of the above described constructs . At pretest , there were no differences between conditions on any of the outcome constructs : procedural , procedural flexibility , conceptual knowledge , and common misconception with all p values above . 05 , Fs ( 2 , 80 ) (cid:4) 0 . 69 , 0 . 53 , 0 . 71 , and 0 . 29 , respectively . At pretest , students used mostly invalid strategies when solving ratio problems , and left a significant proportion of the problems blank ( see Table 3 ) . The average scores at each test point by condition are summarized in Table 4 . Condition Effects Analysis plan overview . We next sought to examine the effects of condition on each of the dependent variable constructs measured . There were three primary constructs : procedural knowl - edge , procedural flexibility , and conceptual understanding , and one additional measure to gather deeper information on the impact of the manipulations on inappropriate retention—use of the mis - conception . We conducted separate ANCOVAs for each outcome measure with both posttests as a within - subjects factor ( immediate test and delayed test ) and condition as a between - subjects factor . Students’ pretest accuracy and their classroom ( i . e . , teacher ) were included as covariates . In the model , the pretest measure matched the posttest measure , such that procedural knowledge pretest served as a covariate for the procedural knowledge posttests , and so on . Levene’s test of variance homogeneity was used to ensure that all measures were appropriate for use of the ANCOVA statistic . These analyses yielded no significant differences in variance be - tween groups on all measures ( F values range . 078 (cid:8) F (cid:8) 1 . 764 and p value range . 173 (cid:8) p (cid:8) . 925 ) , apart from the score for how often students used the misconception . The measure of miscon - ception use was therefore analyzed using Mann – Whitney U com - parisons of pretest to posttest gain scores across conditions , with a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons . When a main effect of condition was present on an ANCOVA analysis , least significant difference tests were used to determine whether there were differential effects of condition on posttest performance . Student performance was not expected to change between posttests because students continued to learn about ratio - related concepts after the intervention and our within - subject test for time confirmed this prediction . Main effects of condition . The results of each ANCOVA are summarized in Table 5 . For each outcome there was a main effect of condition with moderate to high effect sizes ( . 11 (cid:8) (cid:9) 2 (cid:8) . 15 ) and sufficient power ( . 77 (cid:8) ( 1 (cid:5)(cid:10) ) (cid:8) . 90 ) . Pretest was a signifi - cant predictor for each construct , though misconception use was not independently predictive . There were no expectations that time of test or classroom teacher would interact with condition and our tests support this . Pairwise comparisons between conditions on each construct are reported below ( see Table 6 and Figure 3 ) . Procedural knowledge . Students in the All Visible condition outperformed students in the Sequentially Visible condition in procedural knowledge . An unexpected finding was that students in the Not Visible condition also outperformed students in Sequen - tially Visible condition ( see Table 6 ) . Not seeing the board did not affect students’ procedural knowledge compared to students who saw all solutions on the board simultaneously . Table 3 Solution Strategies Produced for Ratio Problems by Condition Blank Division Least common multiple Ratio setup Subtraction Other valid Other invalid PretestAllvisible 25 % 4 % 18 % 9 % 20 % 7 % 18 % Seq . visible 24 % 8 % 7 % 4 % 21 % 4 % 30 % Not visible 17 % 10 % 10 % 8 % 22 % 2 % 30 % Posttest All visible 14 % 48 % 22 % 1 % 13 % 3 % 4 % Seq . visible 12 % 19 % 15 % 1 % 29 % 1 % 17 % Not visible 5 % 39 % 21 % 1 % 21 % 1 % 14 % DelayedAllvisible 16 % 39 % 22 % 1 % 10 % 3 % 6 % Seq . visible 15 % 25 % 12 % 0 % 32 % 5 % 11 % Not visible 12 % 30 % 19 % 4 % 19 % 4 % 12 % T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 199 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON Procedural flexibility . Students in the All Visible condition outperformed students in the Sequentially Visible condition , but there were no differences between any other groups ( see Table 6 ) . Conceptual knowledge . Pairwise comparisons reveal that students in the All Visible condition scored significantly higher than students in the Not Visible condition and students in the Sequentially Visible condition ( see Table 6 ) . There were no dif - ferences between students in the Sequentially Visible and Not Visible condition on conceptual knowledge ( see Table 6 ) . These results could have been driven by the types of solution strategies that students used ( Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2007 , 2009 ) , particularly subtraction ( a common misconception ) . Common misconception . The general pattern for students’ use of the common misconception displays a reverse pattern com - pared to the procedural knowledge performance , providing insight into why the Sequentially Visible condition led to low accuracy rates . Mann – Whitney U pairwise comparisons with a Bonferroni adjusted alpha level of p (cid:4) . 0167 per test ( . 05 / 3 ) show that students in the Sequentially Visible condition used the common misconception significantly more from pretest to delayed test compared to students in the All Visible condition , but no other comparisons were significant ( see Table 7 ) . Discussion Overall , this study supported our hypothesis that the presence of visual representations during a discussion comparing multiple so - lutions to a problem can serve as a double - edged sword . The presence and timing of visual representations impacted children’s learning from a mathematical classroom lesson on ratio when comparing a misconception to two correct strategies in both pos - itive and negative ways . Having all visual representations available simultaneously led to the highest rates of learning , while having them presented sequentially led to the highest rates of misconcep - tions . Specifically , the ability to see all compared representations simultaneously throughout the discussion increased the likelihood of schema formation and optimized learning when compared with seeing compared representations only sequentially . This was evi - denced by greater ability to : a ) use taught procedures , b ) under - stand multiple accurate solution strategies and select the most efficient strategy , c ) explain and use the concepts underlying taught mathematics , and d ) minimize use of a misconception . Strikingly , presenting mathematical solutions sequentially led to the lowest performance on these positive measures of learning , and the highest rates of misconceptions at posttests . This condition led to even lower learning rates overall than having no visual repre - sentations present during any of the comparison episodes , though these differences were not present on all measures . The details of how these conditions differed are informative to building theory regarding the role of visual representations in comparisons and schema formation . Having the solution strategies presented only verbally ( Not Visible condition ) led to performance rates that fell in between the two visual representation conditions . Not Visible presentation did lead to some retention of taught procedures and some schema formation , but not as universally as in the All Visible condition . At the same time , these participants ( Not Visible condition ) were less likely than in the Sequential condition to produce the misconcep - tion , suggesting that they did not retain the instructed representa - tions as well or uncritically as in that condition . It may be that the Not Visible condition was most effortful for students and thus some students were less successful than in the All Visible condi - tion , but for those students who were able to perform that effort , their learning was strong . Drawing on theory on the cognitive underpinnings of structure mapping , we interpret the differences between these conditions based on their likely load on students’ executive function re - sources . Structure mapping is well established to require both the ability to hold representations in mind and manipulate the rela - tionships to identify and map structural alignments or misalign - ments ( e . g . , Waltz et al . , 2000 ; Morrison et al . , 2004 ) , as well as to effortfully inhibit attention to invalid relationships ( e . g . , Cho et al . , 2007 ; Richland & Burchinal , 2013 ) . We suggest that having all Table 4 Student Scores , by Condition Pretest Posttest Delayed Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD ProceduralAllvisible 33 % 0 . 29 59 % 0 . 37 67 % 0 . 35 Sequentially visible 25 % 0 . 28 38 % 0 . 35 38 % 0 . 35 Not visible 27 % 0 . 32 52 % 0 . 34 56 % 0 . 35 FlexibilityAllvisible 11 % 0 . 14 37 % 0 . 29 42 % 0 . 26 Sequentially visible 14 % 0 . 22 17 % 0 . 24 22 % 0 . 29 Not visible 10 % 0 . 14 23 % 0 . 25 30 % 0 . 31 ConceptualAllvisible 19 % 0 . 19 44 % 0 . 29 47 % 0 . 26 Sequentially visible 13 % 0 . 17 30 % 0 . 30 27 % 0 . 28 Not visible 17 % 0 . 22 31 % 0 . 25 35 % 0 . 23 Common misconception All visible 20 % 0 . 21 13 % 0 . 20 10 % 0 . 15 Sequentially visible 21 % 0 . 21 29 % 0 . 31 32 % 0 . 27 Not visible 22 % 0 . 22 21 % 0 . 24 19 % 0 . 24 Table 5 Analyses of Covariance Results on Learning Outcomes Procedural knowledge Procedural flexibility Conceptual knowledge Factor F MSE p (cid:9) 2 F MSE p (cid:9) 2 F MSE p (cid:9) 2 Condition 4 . 74 . 67 . 012 . 12 5 . 68 . 660 . 005 . 14 4 . 41 . 37 . 016 . 11 Pretest 37 . 79 5 . 32 . 000 . 35 4 . 49 . 522 . 038 . 06 29 . 33 2 . 44 . 000 . 30 Teacher 2 . 68 . 38 . 106 . 04 0 . 97 . 113 . 327 . 01 0 . 66 . 05 . 420 . 01 (cid:2) Condition degrees of freedom are ( 2 , 66 ) ; all others are ( 1 , 70 ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 200 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND visual representations available during structure mapping reduced the working memory load required for participants to hold the representations active in mind , so they could use those resources more directly for structure mapping . In contrast , we suggest that having the representations presented sequentially may have imposed the highest burden on the executive function system , requiring students to effortfully inhibit attention to the misconception representation presented first . This representation was likely salient for its visual cues as well as for its coherence with prior knowledge ( hence being a common misconception ) . So , sup - pressing the impulse to retain and use this representation as it was and rather to rerepresent this information through structure mapping may have been particularly effortful and thus successful less of the time . Performing analogical reasoning would have required executive func - tion resources to revisit the misconception in light of subsequent strategies to discard its validity . However , for the Sequentially Visible group the misconception was no longer visible throughout the com - parison ; thus , making it more difficult to identify misalignments between the appropriate strategy and the misconception . As dual coding theory would suggest , reinforcing exemplars through visual and auditory presentations leads to greater retention ( Clark & Paivio , 1991 ) . Higher retention for the details of presented representations might explain why participants in the sequential con - dition were most likely to retain and produce the misconception at posttest , rather than showing evidence of schema formation—which would have been expected if the students performed structure map - ping . There is significant literature suggesting that people tend to use data in the world to confirm their biases , potentially leading toward difficulties in drawing appropriate inferences from analogies ( Brown , 2014 ; Zook , 1991 ) . Thus in this case this confirmation bias seems to have led participants to retain the misconception as presented . In sum , these results provide insight into the role of visual representations in schema formation . Presence of visual represen - tations can aid structure - mapping and schema formation when representations of all compared solutions are visible , in particular to improve conceptual understanding . However , having visual representations presented only sequentially can actually hinder structure mapping , leading to retention of the details of the repre - sentations rather than the overarching schema . This is particularly evident in the situation tested here , in which one representation being compared is a common misconception . Presenting analogs sequentially increased usage of the misconception on posttest when compared to having the analogs presented simultaneously , which suggests that the visibility of the analogs may play an important role in either supporting or derailing structure mapping . Implications for Theory and Practice The findings from this study have the potential to inform U . S . teaching practices as well as to contribute to several areas of cognitive scientific literatures . From a theoretical standpoint , these findings extend previous laboratory - based results on analogical learning to classroom contexts , using a video - based methodology with high ecological validity . In addition , the work extends studies of visual representations to examine the role of visual representations on schema formation when relational analogs include a misconception . Misconceptions are mostly unexplored in prominent structure - mapping models ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Forbus , 2011 ) . Conceptual change literature ( Vosniadou , 2013 ; Chi , 2013 ; Carey & Spelke , 1994 ) has investigated how people overcome misconceptions in the context of science edu - cation ( Chinn & Brewer , 1993 ; Brown & Clement , 1989 ; Brown , 2014 ) , and recently in mathematics ( Vamvakoussi & Vosniadou , 2012 ) , but the influence of misconceptions on structure - mapping models remains to be fully defined . So , this study has potential to contribute to both the conceptual change and analogy literatures . These results are also informative in moving toward recommenda - tions for teachers regarding optimal use of visual representations during instructional comparisons—particularly for leading discus - sions about multiple ways of solving single problems . From an instructional perspective , showing visual representations and making mathematical comparisons is common to everyday mathematics in - struction ( Richland et al . , 2007 ) . Thus shifting to leave all source and target representations visible throughout a full mathematical discus - sion , rather than only while they are first being presented , requires only a reorganization of existing routines rather than a large time investment and modification of current practice . Thus this interven - tion is feasible for integration into current teaching practices . Table 6 Pairwise Comparisons , by Condition With Pretest and Teacher as Covariates for Both Posttests Knowledge type AV vs . SV AV vs . NV SV vs . NV Procedural knowledge . 007 . 778 . 013 Procedural flexibility . 001 . 129 . 071 Conceptual knowledge . 005 . 041 . 407 Note . The numbers above reflect p - values . The numbers in bold are p - values (cid:8) . 05 . Table 7 Summary of Mann - Whitney U Pairwise Comparisons of the Common Misconception Immediate posttest Delayed posttest Mann Whitney U p - value Mann Whitney U p - value AV vs . SV 208 0 . 034 178 . 5 0 . 007 AV vs . NV 277 . 5 0 . 49 270 . 5 0 . 41 SV vs . NV 263 0 . 159 266 0 . 179 Note . Bonferroni adjustment renders alpha levels at p (cid:4) . 0167 ( . 05 / 3 ) . Figure 3 . Estimated marginal means across both posttests on procedural knowledge , procedural flexibility , and conceptual knowledge by condition . Error bars are standard errors . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 201 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON Additionally , the use of more ecologically valid stimuli to test teaching practices through a videotaped teacher guided lesson , instead of static written learning materials , ideally allows for greater gener - alizability of our findings . Though , we warn against interpreting these results to indicate that making analogs visible simultaneously will always lead to successful structure mapping and mathematical schema formation . Only that if the analogs being compared are informative and the learner notices their relationship does making them visible simultaneously aid in abstraction . A primary constraint to implementation of making representations visible throughout lessons is space . When codesigning this lesson with teachers we faced the challenge that teachers often use their presentation space ( e . g . , white boards ) for many purposes including daily schedules and reminders , which may reduce the amount of space available to leave multiple representations visible . This challenge is compounded by the trend to reduce presentation space through the use of such technologies as electronic whiteboards , such as innovative white board technologies ( IWB ; De Vita , Verschaffel , Elen , 2014 ) . These innovations enable teachers to control the board from their computer in a dynamic fashion , allowing for advanced preparation or careful design of visual representations , which can be a great strength . However there is also typically less room to make multiple represen - tations visible , because these boards are about a third of the size of typical classroom chalk or white boards . These data suggest that IWBs ( e . g . , Smart boards ) have the potential to be highly effective at instantiating single visual representations at a time , much as in our sequentially visible condition , which led to the lowest learning gains and greatest rate of misconceptions . Thus , our data imply that teachers could enhance learning by invoking creativity in using these techno - logical options to make a record of multiple visual representations . In summary , these findings suggest that instructional recommen - dations should emphasize the utility of making compared representa - tions visible simultaneously , but more broadly to highlight the impor - tance of supporting learners in aligning , mapping , and drawing inferences about the similarities and differences across representations such as multiple solution strategies for a problem . Teachers should also be made aware of the challenges inherent in making such com - parisons when one of the representations is a misconception . In such cases , students may need additional support to control their attentional responses to the misconception in order to engage in more productive knowledge rerepresentation and new schema formation . In the context of instructional analogies , it is important to consider that visual representations should highlight relationships between representa - tions , not just increase salience , memorability , and clarity of one representation . The latter has the potential to support deeper encoding of a misconception , rather than desired schema formation that leads to generalizable learning . Limitations and Future Directions The current study provides important findings on the role of visual representations for challenging a common misconception through structure - mapping in the mathematical area of proportional reasoning . While this is an area that is critical for students’ future attainment of algebra ( Kilpatrick et al . , 2001 ) , a broader variety of mathematical domains need to be tested to examine the universality of our results before making a clear guideline for teachers . A strength of our study is that the instructional stimuli derive from videodata of a real classroom lesson , leading to a simulation of an everyday classroom learning experience , with the aim to increase the study’s generalizability to teaching practices . While video lessons are an increasing trend with the heightened use of methodologies such as “flipped classrooms” ( Jinlei , Ying , & Baohui , 2012 ) in higher edu - cation , elementary students generally interact with live teachers , in - stead of recordings of a teacher . Despite this , video can convey emotion , body language , and other nonverbal cues , thus offering a more realistic medium than text - based or computerized materials . Further , teacher actions within a video lesson are more translatable to a true lesson . Thus , this technology has high potential for maximizing internal and external validity for testing findings evidenced in laboratory contexts and translating them to teaching practices as well as isolating the efficiency of instructional methods that teachers routinely use in their classrooms . At the same time , there are limits to the simulation , so a future direction for this work would be to extend the methodol - ogy into testing teacher - delivered material . Additional future direc - tions include using the video methodology to test the efficacy of additional aspects of the instructional routines to provide additional explicit guidelines , including use of teacher gestures or order of presenting contrasting representations . References Alfieri , L . , Nokes - Malach , T . J . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2013 ) . Learning through case comparisons : A meta - analytic review . Educational Psychologist , 48 , 87 – 113 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2013 . 775712 Bjork , R . A . ( 1988 ) . Retrieval practice and the maintenance of knowledge . In M . M . Gruneberg , P . E . Morris , & R . N . Sykes ( Eds . ) , Practical aspects of memory II ( pp . 396 – 401 ) . London , UK : Wiley . Booth , J . L . , Lange , K . E . , Koedinger , K . R . , & Newton , K . J . ( 2013 ) . Using example problems to improve student learning in algebra : Differ - entiating between correct and incorrect examples . Learning and Instruc - tion , 25 , 24 – 34 . Brown , D . E . ( 2014 ) . Students’ conceptions as dynamically emergent structures . Science & Education , 23 , 1463 – 1483 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11191 - 013 - 9655 - 9 Brown , D . E . , & Clement , J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming misconceptions via analogical reasoning : Abstract transfer versus explanatory model con - struction . Instructional science , 18 , 237 – 261 . Carey , S . , & Spelke , E . ( 1994 ) . Domain - specific knowledge and concep - tual change . In . L . A . Hirschfeld & S . A . Gelman ( Eds . ) , Mapping the mind : Domain specificity in cognition and culture ( pp . 169 – 200 ) . Cam - bridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Carrier , M . , & Pashler , H . ( 1992 ) . The influence of retrieval on retention . Memory & Cognition , 20 , 633 – 642 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03202713 Chi , M . T . H . ( 2013 ) . Two kinds and four sub - types of misconceived knowledge , ways to change it , and the learning outcomes . In S . Vosnia - dou ( Ed . ) , The international handbook of conceptual change ( 2nd ed . , pp . 49 – 70 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203154472 . ch3 Chinn , C . A . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1993 ) . The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition : A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction . Review of Educational Research , 63 , 1 – 49 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346543063001001 Cho , S . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Cannon , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Analogical reasoning in working memory : Resources shared among relational integration , inter - ference resolution , and maintenance . Memory & Cognition , 35 , 1445 – 1455 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03193614 Clark , J . M . , & Paivio , A . ( 1991 ) . Dual coding theory and education . Educational Psychology Review , 3 , 149 – 210 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01320076 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 202 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND Common Core State Standards Initiative . ( 2010 ) . Common Core State Standards for Mathematics . Washington , DC : National Governors As - sociation Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers . De Vita , M . , Verschaffel , L . , & Elen , J . ( 2014 ) . Interactive whiteboards in mathematics teaching : A literature review . Education Research Interna - tional 2014 , Article ID 401315 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2014 / 401315 Durkin , K . , & Rittle - Johnson , B . ( 2012 ) . The effectiveness of using incor - rect examples to support learning about decimal magnitude . Learning and Instruction , 22 , 206 – 214 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2011 . 11 . 001 English , L . D . , & Halford , G . S . ( 1995 ) . Mathematics education : Models and processes . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fyfe , E . R . , Rittle - Johnson , B . , & DeCaro , M . S . ( 2012 ) . The effects of feedback during exploratory mathematics problem solving : Prior knowl - edge matters . Journal of Educational Psychology , 104 , 1094 – 1108 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028389 Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog0702 _ 3 Gentner , D . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Computational models of analogy . Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews : Cognitive Science , 2 , 266 – 276 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wcs . 105 Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of simi - larity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 277 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learning and transfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 393 – 405 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . L . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 80 ) 90013 - 4 Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . L . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 83 ) 90002 - 6 Goswami , U . ( 2001 ) . Analogical reasoning in children . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , and B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 437 – 470 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Hart , K . M . ( 1984 ) . Ratio : Children’s strategies and errors . Windsor , UK : NFER - Nelson . Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 ) . Analogy and relational reasoning . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 234 – 259 ) . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oxfordhb / 9780199734689 . 001 . 0001 Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1989 ) . Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction . Cognitive Science , 13 , 295 – 355 . Hunting , R . P . ( 1983 ) . Emerging methodologies for understanding internal processes governing children’s mathematical behaviors . Australian Journal of Education , 27 , 45 – 67 . Jinlei , Z . , Ying , W . , & Baohui , Z . ( 2012 ) . Introducing a new teaching model : Flipped classroom . Journal of Distance Education , 4 , 46 – 51 . Kaput , J . , & West , M . ( 1994 ) . Missing value proportional reasoning problems : Factors affecting informal reasoning patterns . In G . Harel & J . Confrey ( Eds . ) , The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics ( pp . 61 – 85 ) . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Karplus , R . , Pulos , S . , & Stage , E . ( 1983 ) . Proportional reasoning of early adolescents . In R . Lesh & M . Landau ( Eds . ) , Acquisition of mathematics concepts and processes ( pp . 45 – 90 ) . Orlando , FL : Aca - demic Press . Kilpatrick , J . , Swafford , J . , & Findell , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 2001 ) . Adding it up : Helping children learn mathematics ( Mathematics Learning Study Committee , Center for Education , Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education , National Research Council ) . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Retrieved from http : / / www . nap . edu / catalog / 9822 . html Lamon , S . ( 1993a ) . Ratio and proportion . In T . P . Carpenter , E . Fennema , & T . A . Romberg ( Eds . ) , Rational numbers : An integration of research ( pp . 131 – 156 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Lamon , S . ( 1993b ) . Ratio and proportion : Connecting content and chil - dren’s thinking . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 24 , 41 – 61 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 749385 Lo , J . - J . , & Watanabe , T . ( 1997 ) . Developing ratio and proportion schemes : A story of a fifth grader . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 28 , 216 – 236 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 749762 McDaniel , M . A . , Roediger , H . L . , III , & McDermott , K . B . ( 2007 ) . Generalizing test - enhanced learning from the laboratory to the class - room . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 200 – 206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03194052 Morrison , R . G . , Doumas , L . A . A . , & Richland , L . E . ( 2011 ) . A computational account of children’s analogical reasoning : Balancing inhibitory control in working memory and relational representation . Developmental Science , 14 , 516 – 529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2010 . 00999 . x Morrison , R . G . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Truong , B . ( 2001 , August ) . Working memory modularity in analogical reasoning . Presentation given at the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , Edinburgh , UK . Morrison , R . G . , Krawczyk , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , Hummel , J . E . , Chow , T . W . , Miller , B . L . , & Knowlton , B . J . ( 2004 ) . A neurocomputational model of analogical reasoning and its breakdown in frontotemporal lobar degeneration . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 16 , 260 – 271 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / 089892904322984553 National Mathematics Panel . ( 2008 ) . Foundations for success : The final report of the National Mathematics Advisory Panel . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Education . Nunnally , J . C . , Bernstein , I . H . , & Berge , J . M . T . ( 1967 ) . Psychometric theory ( Vol . 226 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 398 – 415 . Paas , F . , Renkl , A . , & Sweller , J . ( 2003 ) . Cognitive load theory and instructional design : Recent developments . Educational Psychologist , 38 , 1 – 4 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15326985EP3801 _ 1 Peugh , J . L . , & Enders , C . K . ( 2004 ) . Missing data in educational research : A review of reporting practices and suggestions for improvement . Re - view of Educational Research , 74 , 525 – 556 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346543074004525 Richland , L . E . , Bjork , R . A . , & Linn , M . C . ( 2007 ) . Cognition and instruction : Bridging laboratory and classroom settings . In F . Durso , R . Nickerson , S . Dumais , & T . Perfect ( Eds . ) , Handbook of applied cog - nition ( pp . 555 – 583 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 9780470713181 . ch21 Richland , L . E . , & Burchinal , M . R . ( 2013 ) . Early executive function predicts reasoning development . Psychological Science , 24 , 87 – 92 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797612450883 Richland , L . E . , Kornell , N . , & Kao , S . L . ( 2009 ) . Leave no test behind : Failed retrieval on a pretest can enhance future learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 15 , 243 – 257 . Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s devel - opment of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy problems . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 273 . Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Discrim - inating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psychol - ogy , 35 , 28 – 43 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2009 . 09 . 001 Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Mathematics : Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1142103 Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Schneider , M . ( in press ) . Developing conceptual and proce - T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 203 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON dural knowledge of mathematics . In R . Cohen Kadosh & A . Dowker ( Eds . ) , Oxford handbook of numerical cognition . Oxford , UK : Oxford Press . Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2007 ) . Does comparing solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural knowledge ? An experimental study on learning to solve equations . Journal of Educational Psychology , 99 , 561 – 574 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 99 . 3 . 561 Rittle - Johnson , B . , & Star , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Compared to what ? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual knowledge and procedural flexibil - ity for equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 529 – 544 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0014224 Roediger , H . L . , III , & Karpicke , J . D . ( 2006a ) . The power of testing memory : Basic research and implications for educational practice . Per - spectives on Psychological Science , 1 , 181 – 210 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1745 - 6916 . 2006 . 00012 . x Roediger , H . L . , III , & Karpicke , J . D . ( 2006b ) . Test - enhanced learning : Taking memory tests improves long - term retention . Psychological Science , 17 , 249 – 255 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2006 . 01693 . x Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Differ - ent effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 – 468 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 15 . 3 . 456 Schwartz , D . L . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 1998 ) . A time for telling . Cogni - tion and Instruction , 16 , 475 – 522 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s1532690xci1604 _ 4 Shimizu , Y . ( 2003 ) . Problem solving as a vehicle for teaching mathemat - ics : A Japanese perspective . Teaching Mathematics Through Problem Solving : Prekindergarten - Grade , 6 , 205 – 214 . Smith , J . P . , III , diSessa , A . A . , & Roschelle , J . ( 1993 ) . Misconceptions reconceived : A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition . Jour - nal of the Learning Sciences , 3 , 115 – 163 . Star , J . R . , & Rittle - Johnson , B . ( 2009 ) . It pays to compare : An experimental study on computational estimation . Journal of Experi - mental Child Psychology , 102 , 408 – 426 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2008 . 11 . 004 Stein , M . K . , Engle , R . A . , Smith , M . S . , & Hughes , E . K . ( 2008 ) . Orchestrating productive mathematical discussions : Five practices for helping teachers move beyond show and tell . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 10 , 313 – 340 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10986060802229675 Vamvakoussi , X . , & Vosniadou , S . ( 2012 ) . Bridging the gap between the dense and the discrete : The number line and the “rubber line” bridging analogy . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 14 , 265 – 284 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10986065 . 2012 . 717378 Vosniadou , S . ( 2013 ) . Conceptual change in learning and instruction : The framework theory approach . In S . Vosniadou ( Ed . ) , The international handbook of conceptual change ( 2nd ed . , pp . 11 – 30 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203154472 . ch1 Waltz , J . A . , Lau , A . , Grewal , S . K . , Holyoak , K . J . ( 2000 ) . The role of working memory in analogical mapping . Memory and Cognition , 28 , 1205 – 1212 . Zook , K . B . ( 1991 ) . Effects of analogical processes on learning and misrepresentation . Educational Psychology Review , 3 , 41 – 72 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01323662 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 204 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND Appendix A Transcript Sample of the Video - Lesson ( regular type (cid:4) “suggested speech” , bold type (cid:4) “suggested teacher actions” ) Let’s go back to our original problem and pull this altogether . I’d like us to think about how these strategies are different and how they are similar . This is really important part of what we are doing today . Let’s start with reviewing why Ryan’s strategy is not the best way to solve this problem . Remember in Ryan’s strategy , he tried sub - tracting “total shots tried” from “shots made” and tried to compare the missed shots ( point to the subtraction results of 8 and 9 ) to figure out who was the better free - throw shooter . But we found out that this strategy does not work . Remember when Ken made 0 shots in the counterexample ( point to the counterexample ) , but still missed less shots ? From this example , we learned that we cannot subtract shots tried from shots made ( point to the subtraction results of 8 and 9 ) and then compare the shots missed . Subtraction is not the right way to solve this problem . Now , how is this different from Carina’s strategy ? To find out who is better she first set up Ken and Yoko’s shots made and shots tried as a fraction . Without looking at the numbers ( cover the numbers with your palm ) , how is comparing the fractions of shots made and shots tried for Ken and Yoko , in Carina’s strategy ( point to the shots made and shots tried ratio ) fundamentally different from com - paring shots missed only in Ryan’s way ( point to the subtraction results of 8 and 9 ) ? Brief Pause (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Well , Ryan only compared one unit , shots missed ( point to shots missed ) , whereas Carina compared two units ( shots made and shots tried ) . Why did she do that ? Because they shot a different amount . So , if we want to know who is better at shooting free throws when they do not shoot the same number of shots , we have to compare the number of shots made and the number of shots tried . This relationship of comparing shots made to shots tried is called a RATIO . Thus , WRITE : A relationship between two quantities is a RATIO . So , after Carina set it up as a ratio , she made the shots tried of Ken and Yoko , the 20 and the 25 , equal to each other . She did this by finding the LCM of , 20 and 25 , which was 100 ( point to the ratio of 64 / 100 and 60 / 100 ) , and then she multiplied 12 by 5 and 16 by 4 to get 60 and 64 respectively ( point to the part where Carina did the calculations on the board ) . Remember , she multiplied 12 by 5 because that’s the number of times she had to multiply 20 to make 100 , and she multiplied 16 by 4 because that’s the number of times it takes 25 to make 100 . Therefore , since we found the LCM and now the shots tried for both Ken and Yoko are equal ( point to shots tried ) , we can compare their shots made ( point to shots made ) . So the point here is that we have to make the shots made equal in order to compare who is better . This was a good strategy , but the problem with this strategy was when we tried to find the LCM for harder numbers like 19 and 25 ( point to these numbers ) we had a hard time . We found out from Maddie’s strategy that we could just divide shots made with shots tried . Let’s try to figure out why Maddie’s strategy works by comparing it to Carina’s . This is the really important part of what we are doing today . Something that is similar between Carina’s and Maddie’s , which is different from Ryan’s strategy , is that they both take into account two labels : shots tried and shots made . So they use the same units to compare who is better . . . ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 205 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON Appendix B Problems Used in the Immediate Posttest ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 206 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 207 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 208 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 209 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 210 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 211 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON ( Appendices continue ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 212 BEGOLLI AND RICHLAND Received October 28 , 2014 Revision received April 29 , 2015 Accepted May 1 , 2015 (cid:2) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 213 TEACHING MATHEMATICS BY COMPARISON