Ambiguity , polysemy , and vagueness DAVID TUGGY Abstract Ii is often assumed that there arefixed boundaries between the categories of ambiguity and vagueness . Ambiguous meanings are ( intuitively ) quite sepa - rate , having little or nothing in common beyond the phonological structure they share , whereas vague meanings have so much in common that it is difficult to separate them . Cases of polysemy fall in between the two : the meanings are clearly distinguishable , yet also clearly related . If cases of polysemy are examined at all carefully , it becomes quite difficult to maintain the hypothesis offixed boundaries . Traditional linguistic testsfor ambiguity vs . vagueness fail to yield clear judgments in such cases , and in fact can easily be made to yield opposing judgments by varying the context . Within the Cognitive Grammar framework ( Langacker 1987 ) ambiguity and vagueness may be seen äs occupying opposite ends of a continuum with polysemy in the middle . This continuum ' s main parameter is the degree of salience of subcases vis a vis a subsuming Schema . The model leads one to expect the sorts ofin - between cases that are infactfound , and the influence of the linguistic context is also predicted . This model keeps the insights of traditional treatments but also easily accommodates data that are problem - aticfor those treatments . 1 . Introduction : Tests for ambiguity vs . vagueness The difference between ambiguity and vagueness is a matter of whether two or more meanings associated with a given phonological form are distinct ( ambiguous ) , or united äs non - distinguished subcases of a single , more general meaning ( vague ) . A Standard example of ambiguity is bank " financial Institution " vs . bank " land at river edge " , where the meanings are intuitively quite separate ; in aunt " father ' s sister " vs . aunt " mother ' s sister " , however , the meanings are intuitively united into one , " parent ' s Cognitive Linguistics 4 - 3 ( 1993 ) , 273 - 290 0936 - 5907 / 93 / 0004 - 0273 $ 2 . 00 © Walter de Gruyter 274 Z ) . Tuggy sister " . Thus ambiguity corresponds to Separation , and vagueness to unity , of different meanings . Several kinds of tests have been proposed to render this difference measurable . The " logical " test of Quine ( 1960 ) will not centrally concern us here ; it involves seeing if a sentence " X and not X " can be true ; the ( supposed ) acceptability of This is the bank [ river edge ] but it is not the bank [ financial Institution ] indicates that bank is ambiguous ; the unaccept - ability of I have an aunt [ father ' s sister ] but I do not have an aunt [ mother ' s sister ] indicates vagueness for aunt . There is a " definitional " test ( since Aristotle ) which involves seeking a meaning common to the two ; if such is found , then it is taken äs the correct definition , and it is vague äs to the differences between the original two meanings . Thus since there is ( supposedly ) no meaning common to the two meanings of bank it is ambiguous ; since for aunt there is a common meaning ( parent ' s sister ) , it takes precedence over the two more specific meanings and the word is ambiguous . The " linguistic " tests ( Lakoff 1970 and others ) will concern us more ; they involve grammatical constructions which are taken äs requiring semantic identity , such äs " X does / did Z and so does / did Y " . If Z äs done by X and Z äs done by can be given " crossed " readings without the semantic oddness known äs zeugma , the meaning of Z is taken to be vague ; if zeugma results , Z is ambiguous . Thus the ordinari - ness of I have an aunt [ father ' s sister ] and so does Bill [ have an aunt ( mother ' s sister ) ] indicates that the meanings are taken to be the same , and thus aunt is vague ; the unacceptability of the zeugmatic / went the bank [ financial Institution ] and so did Bill [ go to the bank ( river edge ) ] , which could only be said facetiously , indicates that bank is ambiguous . A fourth distinction which is sometimes mentioned ( e . g . Kempson 1977 : 182 ) is that puns can be constructed with ambiguous but not vague structures ; thus a pirate burying his gold at the edge of the river could be said to be putting his money in the bank , which is an ( admittedly bad ) pun ; such a pun could not be readily made , if at all , on the two meanings of aunt . Geeraerts ( 1993 [ this issue ] ) argues that ( a ) the three tests do not always agree with each other , and ( b ) by changing the context , all three tests can be made to yield indeterminate results . He is particularly concerned to demonstrate that even for the Standard paradigm examples of ambigu - ity , if you try hard enough you can get the tests to yield equivocal results . He concludes that the conception of ambiguity and vagueness äs classical categories with fixed boundaries and no gradations of membership is , at the least , strongly called into question . The possibility that they are categories formed on a pro to type pattern thus merits investigation . Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 21S 2 . The fuzzy borderline between ambiguity and vagueness 2 . 1 . Polysemy Geeraerts ' conclusions are supported solidly by a different sort of data , not the paradigm cases but rather borderline cases where there is clearly a meaning common to the sub - meanings in question ( and thus by the definitional test there is only one meaning ) , but nevertheless there are strong enough diflferences in meaning to produce equivocal results or judgments of ambiguity from the linguistic tests . 1 These cases are tradi - tionally considered under the rubric of polysemy : 2 traditional definitions ( e . g . Lyons 1977 : 550 ; Zwicky and Sadock 1975 : 2 ) have lexical ambiguity ( or homonymy ) äs involving two lexemes , polysemy a single lexeme with different distinct senses , and vagueness a lexeme with a single but non - specific meaning , i . e . , the lexeme may subsume other meanings but those meanings are not distinguished from each other or from the more inclusive " true " meaning . Thus polysemy is a sort of halfway point between ambiguity and vagueness . As Deane ( 1988 : 327 , 345 ) puts it , " In effect , the three types form a gradient between total semantic identity and total semantic distinctness " , and " Polysemy seems somehow to straddle the border between identity and distinctness . " Any conscientious lexicographer will admit to at least occasional difficulty in deciding whether two clearly related meanings associated with the same phonological form are to be listed äs a single entry in the dictionary or not ( e . g . Hartmann ' s [ 1983 : 6 - 7 ] discussion of senses of bank ) \ most make frequent use of sub - entries and sub - sub - entries to ease the difficulty . These cases constitute massive evidence , from any and every language , that the categories of ambiguity and vagueness are not absolute . 2 . 1 . 1 . The verb paint . For an English example , consider the meaning ( s ) of the verb paint . A structure such äs she is painting ( it ) can convention - ally be used to refer to an indefinitely large number of situations , including the following ( and many others ) : ( i ) painting a portrait in oils on canvas , ( ii ) painting a landscape with watercolors on paper , ( iii ) painting trompe l ' oeil on the interior wall and floor of a house , ( iv ) painting a mural on the exterior wall of a public building , ( v ) painting a decorative border on an interior wall , ( vi ) painting the walls of a room with a single color of paint for decorative purposes but also to preserve them , ( vii ) painting the exterior of a house primarily to preserve it , ( viü ) painting furniture , ( ix ) painting a car with an air gun , ( x ) painting stripes on a parking lot or roadway by driving a paint - spraying machine , ( xi ) applying makeup to the face , or ( xii ) applying iodine or some other colored disinfectant to 276 D . Tuggy the body after or prior to an incision , with a swabbing motion . The concepts coded by paint in these different situations clearly have some - thing important in common : they all involve applying some colored substance to a surface . This , by the Aristotelian definitional test , is the meaning of the word , which is therefore presumably vague . However , the different situations vary along a number of parameters such äs the nature of the substance applied ( usually it is a liquid , properly called paint [ N ] , which dries into a thin tough layer on the surface , but not in the cases of [ xi - xii ] ) , the nature of the surface and the extent to which it is covered äs a whole , whether one color or a combination of colors is applied , the Instrument used for application ( usually a brush or less typically a roller , but not in [ ix - xii ] ) , the kind of physical activity involved in the application , the purpose of the application ( with protection and visual esthetic enhancement being the two major types ) , the kinds of abilities and training needed to do the application properly , etc . Many cases are obviously closer to each other than others along these parame - ters ; e . g . ( i ) and ( ii ) are much closer than ( i ) and ( x ) or ( i ) and ( xii ) . 2 . l . 2 . Ambivalent results on the linguistic tests . The linguistic tests yield equivocal results in cases of this sort . If I have been painting a watercolor landscape ( ii ) and Jane a portrait in oils ( i ) , a sentence like ( 1 ) / have been painting and so has Jane is perfectly normal , indicating vagueness rather than ambiguity for paint . If I have been painting stripes on the road ( x ) , however , while Jane painted a portrait , ( 1 ) feels zeugmatic : I do not believe I could utter it except facetiously . This indicates that paint is ambiguous . Combinations of ( i ) and ( xi ) or ( i ) and ( xii ) would be even more anomalous and clearly zeugmatic . If I was painting the exterior of a house ( vii ) and Jane a portrait , the sentence would still strike me äs odd , but not nearly äs odd äs clear cases of zeugma do . I would not judge that this oddness amounts to a clear indication of either ambiguity or vagueness , rather it might be taken to indicate something in between . 3 If I were painting a mural on a wall ( iv ) , it would be better ; if she were painting a mural and I doing the more normal wall painting of ( vi ) or ( vii ) I think it would be almost , but still not entirely , normal ; if she were painting a decorative border on a wall ( v ) and I a flat coat of paint ( vi ) , the sentence would be quite normal . The acceptability of sentence ( 1 ) in the different cases is not a discrete , binary property , and it seems to correlate at least roughly to the closeness of the kinds of painting along the parameters mentioned above . 2 . 1 . 3 . The influence of context . Equally importantly , the linguistic context can affect the acceptability of such test sentences . For instance , Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 277 when the stem paint is used with the nominalizing suffix - er , the distinc - tions of purpose of painting and skills and training needed to paint well become more important . Thus , although sentence ( 1 ) is almost normal in a case of ( iv ) and ( vi ) or ( vii ) ( mural vs . normal wall painting ) , it sounds facetious to say , if Jane and I do those activities professionally , ( 2 ) I am a painter and so is Jane . If I paint stripes on a road for a living and she paints oil portraits ( i and x ) , it sounds downright ludicrous . On the other band , I could say , non - facetiously , ( 3 ) When Fm painting I try to get the color on evenly t and so does Jane , with virtually any combination of the kinds of painting involved . If paint is used transitively further differences emerge . In cases ( i - ii ) and usually ( iii - v ) the direct object designates not the surface to which paint is applied , but either the artistic figure created in paint on that surface , or something of which that artistic figure is a representation . A similar construal is also normal for ( x ) , though roadway stripes are not precisely " artistic figures " , and the direct object designates only the stripes themselves , not anything which they might represent . Marginally in ( iii - iv ) and ( x ) , more easily in ( v ) and ( xii ) , and normally in ( vi - ix ) and ( xi ) the object is the surface . Example ( xii ) , however , would normally take the disinfectant äs object . This means that for some combinations ( e . g . [ v ] and [ xii ] a sentence like ( 4 ) / have been painting it and so has Jane is not possible since there is no referent of it that can normally do Service in both cases . In other cases the same object can be construed , but its relationship to the process of painting is different in the two cases , and thus the sentence still does not work : e . g . , if Jane is painting my house in sense ( ii ) ( i . e . , creating an artistic representation of it in watercolors on paper ) and I am painting it in sense ( vi ) or ( vii ) ( äs a housepainter ) , to say ( 5 ) / am painting the house and so is Jane can only be facetious . Similarly ( 6 ) Jane is painting her grandfather ' s portrait — bright green sounds like a pun on senses ( i ) and ( vi ) or ( vii ) . 2 . 1 . 4 . Summary . So , is paint ambiguous , or is it vague ? Both , or per - haps neither . A füll answer would require elucidating more carefully than we have done here the relationships among all these meanings and many others , including figurative meanings ( paint a gloomy picture ofthe pros - pects for peace \ nominal meanings , and so forth . These meanings are separable , yet they can also be correctly united . Webster ' s New Collegiate Dictionary makes separate entries for nominal and verbal meanings , treating them exactly äs it does clearly ambiguous forms , 4 with multiple subdivisions of both entries ( the verb entry lists 4 transitive and 2 intransi - tive meanings , plus submeanings for a total of 12 definitions ; the noun entry has 3 main meanings and a total of 7 definitions ) . The American 278 D . Tuggy Heritage Dictionary lists only one main entry , with nominal and verbal subsections ( 6 nominal and 10 verbal definitions ) ; other dictionaries do it still differently . I do not think anyone would want to say that one dictionary is right and the others wrong : rather we are dealing with very complex groupings of meanings which can be rightly united ( treated äs vague ) for some purposes and distinguished ( treated äs ambiguous ) for others . The dictionary makers have made intelligent , even praiseworthy choices for the purposes they have in mind , but the meanings they are representing do not fall into classical categories , internally homogeneous and with absolute boundaries between them ; thus no one way of Splitting them up , or of uniting them , is absolutely right . 5 Thousands of other examples , from every language I know , could be given to illustrate the same point : the same set of meanings can be both separable ( ambiguous - like ) and unitable ( vague - like ) . Any time a diction - ary entry has sub - entries , and especially sub - sub - entries , the dictionary makers have in effect said " these meanings are united , but they are also usefully distinguished . " And surely our native Speaker intuitions confirm the same point . A chess set , a set in tennis , a set of dishes , and a set in logic ; or breakiug a stick , a law , a horse , water , ranks , a code , and a record ; in each case the meanings are clearly rather different from each other , but do they not have something in common äs well ? Our seeing the differences between them does not cancel out our ability to see them äs the same thing ( and thus call them by the same name ) . We see what is common between getting food ready to eat and counselling a person about to be traumatized , and that accounts for us calling both activities preparing ; yet it feels like a pun when you hear on the radio advice on how to prepare your turkey for Thanksgiving dinner — by breaking it to him gently ( " Tom , are you religious ? " ) . Wrenches , keys , and faucets have a lot in common , and that doubtless is why they are all called Have in Spanish , but must we therefore suppose that Spanish Speakers don ' t distinguish them ? Rather the evidence , from the linguistic tests , would show that they can and often do do so . A Nahuatl Speaker can certainly distinguish the rising of the sun from leaving a house from a chicken hatching or a seed sprouting , but he calls all these processes ( and others ) kTsa ' emerge ' , and they clearly do have important elements in common , some more than others . 2 . 2 . Diachronie change Another issue that is problematic for a model which posits classical categories for ambiguity and vagueness , with no gradation between them , is diachronic change . It is common for meanings that at one stage are Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 279 united ( vague ) to become separate over time ( occasionally the opposite occurs äs well ) , and the change seems to be gradual rather than abrupt . For instance , Lewis ( 1967 : 139 ) , after a careful delineation of cumulative small changes in the meanings of sense , says of the juridical vs . grammati - cal meanings of sentence ' . " This is an excellent example of the merely Homophonie Status to which the different uses of a word are finally reduced . If you said ' Jeremy Taylor can boast the longest sentence of any English writer ' and someone replied Toor Wilde had a longer one \ this would be a pure pun . " 2 . 3 . Summary In sum , then , the synchronic existence of cases where the borderline between ambiguity and vagueness is blurred , together with instances of gradual diachronic change across that border , casts doubt on whether there is an absolute , hard and fast line of demarcation between the two categories . 3 . A cognitive model If a model of ambiguity and vagueness ( or ambiguity , polysemy , and vagueness ) äs well - defined categories , internally homogenous and with clear boundaries , does not work , what does ? Categories based on proto - types have proved useful for analyzing many other linguistic distinctions ( e . g . , Lakoff 1987 ; Langacker 1987 ) ; perhaps they are appropriate for this one äs well . I would suggest the following model within Langacker ' s Cognitive Grammar framework . 6 3 . 1 . Categorization in Cognitive Grammar Following Langacker ( 1987 , etc . ) , we call what two cognitive structures have in common a " schema " , and represent its relationship to its elabora - tions ( or subcases ) by arrows from the schema to each elaboration ( Figure l a ) ; such relationships form the basis for categorization . 7 Both Schemas and their elaborations can coexist in a language ; they exist to the degree that they are established ( entrenched ) in Speakers ' minds through repeated usage . Well - entrenched structures , ceteris paribus , are more salient than less - entrenched structures , i . e . , they occur more energet - ically . Entrenchment can be viewed äs a kind of enduring salience , i . e . , salience apart from relatively transitory effects such äs directed attention or heightened activation due to contextual factors . Degree of salience is 280 D . Tuggy l < C > l * - * . a . b . ' 7 \ c . Figure l . Schemas and elaborations represented by the thickness and continuity of a box enclosing the struc - ture in question ( and secondarily by gray - scaling the representation of the structure itself ) : thus Figure Ib shows a salient structure A and a less salient structure B , both subsumed by marginally salient Schema C ; if transitory salience effects are not factored in , the degree of salience will be equivalent to the degree of entrenchment . Another parameter which we should distinguish is elaborative distance , which we represent by the length of the arrows from Schema to elaboration : 8 a Schema is distant from its elaborations when relatively many specifications of the elabora - tions must be despecified to form the Schema , and close when relatively few must be despecified . Thus in Figure Ic , C is at a greater elaborative distance from A and B than in Ib . ( One might , for example , take A , B , and C in Ib to be CAT , WEASEL , and MAMMAL THAT EATS MICH , respectively , while in Ic they might be DOG , STOOL , and THING WITH LEGS FOUND IN HUMAN DWELLINGS . ) It will be readily seen that the Aristotelian definitional test amounts to looking to see if there is a Schema subsuming two meanings and making that the definition . Many linguists seem to operate on the assumption that once such a Schema is found , the subcases it subsumes may be safely ignored , regardless of their degree of entrenchment or salience . I am suggesting , however , that to the degree that they are salient they must not be ignored . 3 . 2 . The characterization ofambiguity and vagueness The prototypical case of ambiguity is where two semantic structures , associated with the same phonological structure ( which is called their phonological pole \ are both well - entrenched ( and therefore salient ) , while there is no well - entrenched and elaboratively close Schema , also linked to the phonological pole , subsuming them . 9 This is represented in Figure 2a . 10 Prototypical vagueness , on the other hand , involves mean - ings which are not well - entrenched but which have a relatively well - Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 281 Figure 2 . The ambiguity - vagueness cline entrenched , elaboratively close Schema subsuming them , äs represented in Figure 2e . n Elaborateness ( non - schematicity ) of a semantic structure correlates with a smaller extensionality ; the extension of a Schema includes those of its elaborations . Thus Figure 2 corresponds to Figure 3 , where Venn diagrams represent the extension of the structures involved . 12 Again thickness and continuity of the lines ( with gray - scaling ) represents salience , and relative size represents schematic distance . 3a , like 2a , repre - sents prototypical ambiguity , and 3e , like 2e , prototypical vagueness . It is perhaps more intuitively obvious from this sort of diagram that in the ambiguous case it is easy to separate the meanings and hard to unite them , whereas in the vague case it is relatively hard to separate them and easy to unite them . It is important to realize that Figure 3 is a representation of the extension of the concepts ( i . e . , of the ränge of cases characterized by each concept ' s cognitive specifications ) , not a representation of the extent of the cognitive specifications themselves ( such äs is implied by diagrams utilizing the " container " metaphor , e . g . , Langacker 1987 : 75 , Figure 2 . 4a , and many other places ) . More extensive specifications ( greater " elabora - tion " ) corresponds to a lesser extension : thus a diagram like Figure 4 , representing the extent of semantic specifications , would represent the same semantic structures äs Figure 3 in quite opposite fashion ( 4a = 3a , 4c = 3c , 4e = 3e ) . The diagrams in Figure 4 make it clear that the Schema is completely immanent to its elaborations ( Langacker 1987 : 180 , 438 - 439 ) : i . e . , they contain all its specifications and more ; the Schema a . , , b , Figure 3 . The ambiguity - vagueness cline showing extensionality of semantic structures 282 D . Tuggy a · e ^ " ~ ^ ~ ^ m » * . Figure 4 . JÄe ambiguity - vagueness cline showing extent of semantic structures comprises those specifications which are common to the two subcases . Again relative size of a Schema vs . its subcase represents cognitive dis - tance : when the Schema is much smaller than the subcase that means the subcase adds many specifications to those of the Schema and is thus quite distant from it . For many purposes , Speakers will " filter out " specifications below a certain level of salience . If the threshold of salience is set higher than the level of salience of any uniting schema in 2a / 3a or of the elaborate structures ( the subcases ) in 2e / 3e , 2a / 3a will have two completely separate meanings attached to the same phonological pole , while 2e / 3e has only one meaning . ( A rough visual analog to imposing such a threshold can be achieved by squinting more or less tightly at Figures 2 - 6 . 13 ) This corresponds exactly to the traditional characterizations of the ambigu - ity / vagueness distinction . 3 . 3 . The in - between cases : Polysemy Since the differences between Figure 2a and 2e ( 3a and 3e ) are gradual , we can expect to find cases in the middle , where a schema exists but is not salient and / or is distant ( 2b / 3b ) , or where the subcases are somewhat salient but not so much so äs the schema ( 2d / 3d ) , or even where both the schema and the subcases are salient ( 2c / 3c ) . These of course are the polysemous cases discussed in section 2 . 1 , the border straddling cases , with meanings both clearly separable and clearly united . But the impor - tant thing is that the differences among the categories are gradual , not absolute . Note that if a high enough threshold of salience is imposed ( if a Speaker " squints " tightly enough ) , the schema in 2b ( 3b ) is filtered out , leaving a configuration which is effectively the same äs 2a ( 3a ) . Similarly , if the threshold of salience is set above the level of salience of the sub - cases in 2d ( 3d ) , 2d ( or 3d ) becomes effectively equivalent to 2e ( 3e ) . This , together with the influence of contextual salience mentioned below ( 3 . 4 . 3 ) , makes it even more impossible to draw absolute boundary lines between the categories of ambiguity , polysemy , and vagueness . Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 283 3 . 4 . Fitting the data to the model 3 . 4 . 1 . Straightforward cases . This model fits with the sorts of phen - omena we find in languages . The case of bank " financial Institution " and " edge of a river " fits very nicely at the ambiguous end of the spectrum : the two meanings are well established , and the nearest Schema subsuming the two would be something like " Thing " , which is quite distant and is not linked to the phonological pole / baenk / ( 5a , cf . 2a ) . At the vague end ( 5e cf . 2e ) we can place aunt , with the non - salient subcases " father ' s sister " vs . " mother ' s sister " subsumed at a minimal elaborative distance under the concept " parent ' s sister " , which is clearly better established and thus more salient than they äs a meaning of aunt . An example of 2c ( 5c ) would be the notions of artistic painting ( including painting in oils and watercolors äs in [ i - ii ] above ) and of typical utilitarian painting ( subsuming [ vi - viii ] and others ) : both well - established concepts , but clearly united under an also well - established Schema not greatly distant from the subcases . 3 . 4 . 2 . Flexibility . Figure 2 of course oversimplifies things . Although elaborative distance between a Schema and its elaborations tends to correlate inversely to entrenchment of the Schema , the parameters are not absolutely parallel ; Figure 2 does not represent this . Also one typically is dealing not with two or three meanings but with many more , arranged in multiply overlapping hierarchies — cf . Figure 6 , of which 5c is an abbreviation , with 5c = 6a - c . ( Figure 6 itself is of course far from exhaus - tive of the meaning of paint . ) Furthermore it is relatively rare for the subcases in question to have the same degree of salience ; they are more likely to differ along this parameter , äs in Ib - c ( and , again , 6 ) . These would all be valid criticisms if the presentation in Figure 2 were intended äs absolute , but they are in fact predicted by the model , which has built into it the flexibility to accommodate them . Granted that Figure 2 is incomplete in this way , the main point nevertheless remains valid : To the degree that a group of meanings and any Schema subsuming them c . APPLYPWNTTOSURFACE UTUTARUNPAKT Figure 5 . Typical examples along the ambiguity - vagueness cline 284 D . Tuggy ÄPPLY MAKEUP r T0FACE OSWRBCTAKrTOPÄTOfTS SQDY Figure 6 . Painl approaches the configuration given in 2a , we can call it a case of ambigu - ity , and to the degree that it approaches 2e , it is vagueness . 3 . 4 . 3 . The influence of context . Given this model , the influence of context comes for free . For salience is not a static characteristic , but a dynamic one . Among the factors enhancing it is entrenchment , äs pre - viously noted , but also degree of activation produced by context . 14 When a cognitive structure has itself been recently activated , whether in the linguistic or in some other cognitive context , or when structures closely linked to it have been activated , it retains a residual activation , and it will reactivate at a higher level of energy . 15 Thus when the word painter or even more especially the phrase be a painter is used äs in sentence ( 2 ) above , the specifications attached to - er " one who does the verb profes - sionally " , and to the phrase be a V - er , enhance the salience of those portions of the meaning ( s ) ofpaint which have to do with innate abilities and skills employed , purpose for which done , and so on . This moves the configuration of 5c towards one more like 2b , increasing the salience of the elaborations at the expense of the Schema . The fact that the same two readings of paint feel more ambiguous in ( 2 ) than in ( 1 ) is thus to be expected . In sentence ( 3 ) , in contrast , the focus is on the even spreading of the color in painting , which characterizes both subcases and therefore the schema äs well ; thus the differences between the subcases are not especially activated and the schema ( i . e . , what is common to the subcases ) is rendered more salient . This moves the configuration of 5c towards one more like 2d , which explains why all the senses of paint test äs vague by Ambiguity . polysemy and vagueness 285 scntencc ( 3 ) . 16 When paint is used intransitively , äs in ( 1 ) , the nature of thc objoct is less salient : When it is used transitively , äs in ( 4 ) or ( 5 ) , it is rendercd more salient , and must match in the two cases construed for idcniity - of - scnsc anaphora to function normally . 3 . 4 . 4 . Puns . Puns like ( 6 ) can also be explained : They are a special casc of context enhancing the salience of meanings . In general puns involvc a double context , in which two meanings associated with a particular phonological pole are rendered salient , Thus saying that a piratc burying bis gold by the river is putting Ms money in the bank involvcs thc context of the river edge , which renders salient that meaning / W / A , but also the phrase / wf ( your ) money in ihe bank , which strongly aclivatcs [ hcßnancial Institution meaning . The two meanings are overlaid on euch othcr , producing the semantic discomfort we call a pun . Thc S i t u a t i on in ( 6 ) is similar : The construction paint X ' s portrait strongly activales , and thus renders salient , a meaning like ( i ) ( Figure 6d ) , while paim cou ) R activates something like ( v i - i x ) ( 6e ) . Both meanings are t h us rcndcred salient by the context , yielding a configuration like 2b , and overlaid on each other . In exactly the same way , the phrase prepare your turkey for Thanksgiving dinner renders salient one meaning of prepare , whilc thc continuation by breaking it to him gently renders anothcr meaning salient , and the superimposition of the two salient meanings conslitutcs a pun . 3 . 4 . 5 . Diachronie change . And , finally , the model clearly shows the distinction between ambiguity and vagueness to be a gradual one , with synchronic Variation of meanings along the parameters of differentiation . This brings ease to the problem of diachronic change from one category to the other . There is no hard and fast boundary that a form needs to j u mp all at once : it can straddle the fence indefinitely , shifting its weight back and forth , before gradually moving more to one side than the other . 4 . Summary I commend this model to you on the following grounds : ( 1 ) The theoretical constructs involved are well motivated on indepen - dent grounds ( see extensive argumentation in Langacker 1987 and elsewhere ) . ( 2 ) The traditional view of the ambiguity / vagueness distinction is seen äs essentially correct ; its intuitive characterizations fit the model nicely . It was only wrong if the categories were made absolute . 286 D . Tuggy ( 3 ) The value of the traditional linguistic and definitional tests is affirmed : they clearly and correctly distinguish prototypically vague from prototypically ambiguous structures . The different behavior of ambiguous and vague structures in puns also fits into the model . ( 4 ) The model correctly allows for a ränge of in - between ( polysemous ) cases , neither ambiguous nor vague in the prototypical sense ( although in the cases we examined they are predictably vague by the definitional test ) . ( 5 ) The influence of context ( including the possibility of puns between related senses of a polysemous form ) is accounted for automatically . ( 6 ) The gradual nature of the ambiguity / vagueness distinction allows for gradual rather than abrupt diachronic shifting from one category to the other . Received 19 October 1991 Summer Institute of Linguistics Revision received 19 March 1992 Notes 1 . Quine ' s logical test is difficult for me to apply in these cases ( äs in most others ) . Applying it , for instance , to examples mentioned below , I could say , of a case of painting stripes in a parking lot ( x ) or even more of swabbing iodine ( xii ) , " She ' s painting , but she ' s not ( really ) painting " . By that I would mean that what she is doing may be properly called painting , but it is not painting proper , i . e . it is not the prototypi - cal kind of painting . This might be taken äs indicating ambiguity , but it is not very satisfactory ; it does not precisely yield the " painting in one sense but not the other " reading that Quine was after . Also it does not work for more prototypical cases — e . g . ( i ) , or ( vi ) or ( vii ) . In general , however , to say of a person in any of these situations " She ' s painting , but she ' s not painting " , with no special Intonation , seems infelicitous if not anomalous . This rather indicates vagueness . On the other hand , " This is the bank but it ' s not the bank " is far from felicitous for me äs well . Kempson ( 1977 : 129 ) , for rather different reasons , also concludes that " the characterization of ambiguity äs the simultaneous assignment to a sentence of the values true and false has not provided a criterion for deciding unclear cases ; it merely accentuates the point of disagreement . " 2 . Traditional treatments of polysemy , however , tend to concentrate on cases in which the senses involved are not äs closely related äs those I am interested in : e . g . , they would be more likely to discuss whether the nominal and verbal senses of paint can be considered the same lexeme than to consider the distinctions among verbal senses I list in ( i - xii ) . 3 . Lyons ( 1977 : 554 ) considers such in - between cases with the verb play : " Could we delete the second occurrence of the form play s in [ She play s chess better than she play s the flute ] > And what about [ ? He played scrum - half in the afternoon and Hamlet in the eveningW " Lyons concludes that " It may well be that the whole notion of discrete lexical senses is ill - founded . " 4 . " Vaint v £ " vs . " 2 paint« " . The treatment is thus exactly parallel to that of ' ^ painter n Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 287 . . . one that paints " ( with subcases for artists and for housepainters and such ) vs . " 2 painter n [ . . . prob . fr . MF pendoir . . . ] : a line used for securing or towing a boat " vs . " 3 painter n . . . [ alter , ofpanther ] . . . COUGAR " ; three meanings with little or nothing in common beyond designating a thing of some sort . Cf . Lyons * ( 1977 : 21 - 22 ) comment , " The fact that there are two separate entries means that the Compilers or editors of the dictionary have decided that two distinct lexemes are involved ( and not one lexeme with two meanings " ) . 5 . Langacker 1 s discussion of the notion " lexical item " ( 1987 : 388 ) is apropos : " A category is coherent to the extent that its members are densely linked by well - entrenched catego - rizing relationships of minimal distance . . . . The coherence of a category is naturally a matter of degree . . . To the extent that a semantic network with common symbolization [ i . e . linked to a common phonological pole ] approximates a coherent category , we can reasonably speak of a lexical item . Despite its convenience , however , this construct is more a descriptive fiction than a natural unit of linguistic organization . Not only is coherence inherently a matter of degree , but also the definition allows a single network to be divided into lexical items in multiple and mutually inconsistent ways . I regard this äs a realistic characterization of the phenomena in question . " 6 . Most of this discussion is prefigured to some extent in Tuggy ( 1981 : 56 - 59 , 72 ) , and l have been using the essence of the diagram in Figure 2 at least since 1984 . Nevertheless , and although Langacker ( 1988 : 137 - 139 ) credits my work , the ideas involved rest crucially on constructs of his theory , and in any case they came to me at least in part through discussions with him , Sue Lindner , Mary Ellen Ryder , Jeff Burnham , Barbara Levergood , and others . Thus I can claim no absolute credit for them . 7 . For the discussion of this paper an essentially Aristotelian definition of schema is adequate , in which the Schema contains only ( and all ) material common to the sub - cases , and any concept which includes that material is a subcase . This , while not the only possible conceptualization , is doubtless the prototypical one , and is that described repeatedly by Langacker ( e . g . 1987 : 68 , 132 - 138 ) . The main point of this paper with respect to it is that ( i ) the existence of such a Schema äs part of the meaning of a lexical item does not preclude the existence of its subcases : in fact the subcases may well be more salient than the schema ; and ( ii ) such variations in salience among a Schema and its subcases account for the non - absoluteness of the distinctions between ambiguity , ( polysemy ) , and vagueness . A separate question is whether this conception of a schema is sufficient . ( This is one of the important issues addressed in Geeraerts ' paper in this issue . ) Specifically , can a schema contain " either / or " specifications , or lists of alternative characteristics which do not have anything in common , or can it consist of specifications which are not characteristic ( e . g . can one speak of a " schema " uniting checkmate and pawn , con - sisting of the game of chess , which figures saliently in the meaning of both but charac - terizes neither ) ? Although I do not argue it here , I believe such " Schemas " ( if the term is appropriate to use for them ) do indeed serve to unite concepts into categories and thus are relevant to the concerns of this paper . Langacker ( e . g . 1987 : 69 , 92 - 3 ) speaks at length of a relationship of " partial schematicity " or " extension " in which there is conflict between the specifications of the " schema " and the " elaboration " , using it to describe the relationship between a prototype and non - prototypical members of the same category , or between the literal and figurative senses of a metaphor , or a gram - matical pattern and an ill - formed instance of that pattern ; the prototypical kind of schematicity is the limiting case along a parameter of compatibility , in which there is no conflict of specifications . I would expect that there are other parameters involved in the other cases of non - prototypical " schemas " ( those involving alternatives or lists , 288 D . Tuggy non - characteristic specifications , etc . ) , and that the prototypical schematicity will again prove to be the limiting and most salient case . In any case , I believe that the conclusions outlined above still hold : Both the uniting concept ( of whatever type ) and the concepts which it unites may exist simultaneously , and differences in salience among them will make the configurations we recognize äs ambiguity and vagueness non - absolute . 8 . The limitations of 2 - dimensional representation make this convention impracticable for most purposes ; it should not be taken too seriously in Figure 6 , for instance . It has not to my knowledge been used in other publications on Cognitive Grammar . 9 . Ultimately there will always be some Schema uniting any two cognitive structures , even if it be only the superschema ENTITY ( Langacker 1987 : 198 ) , which corresponds to the notions " concept " or " cognitive structure " . Frequently there is even some slightly more fully specified Schema ; e . g . THING , which unites the two meanings ofbank ( 5a ) , or LARGE PHYSICAL THING , which would unite the river edge sense ofbank with the physical building sub - sense of the financial Institution sense . The important things to notice , however , are that such a Schema will be quite distant in cases of clear ambiguity , and , more importantly , that it will not be linked directly to the phonological pole of the lexical item in question . Thus THING is not a meaning of / baenk / . Another consideration , closely related to elaborative distance , is the possible exis - tence of Schemas intermediate between the uniting Schema and the elaborations , but not linked to the same phonological pole . The uniting Schema will not usually still be linked to the phonological pole in such a case . One example , however , might be the Schema MOST IMPORTANT PART , which is arguably a meaning of head ( it is used pro - ductively , especially with adjectival head ) , Although the cutting piece of a machine designed for cutting is its most important part and in some cases it is called a head ( e . g . , in a milling machine ) , in many other cases it is not ( e . g . , in a carpenter ' s plane or a pair of scissors ) . 10 . In Figures 2 - 6 the connecting links from phonological structures are represented äs varying in salience directly with the salience of the semantic structures to which they connect . Actually it is in some sense the salience of the link which is primary . For assessing position along the ambiguity / vagueness continuum , what counts is not salience of meanings äs they might be measured objectively , from some outside view - point , but rather their salience äs measured from the phonological pole äs point of access . E . g . , the concept THING is , in and of itself , presumably quite a salient one in English Speakers ' minds , probably more so than RIVER EDGE or FINANCIAL INSTITUTION , but it is not directly accessed from the phonological structure / baenk / , so from the perspective of that phonological structure it is relatively non - salient , äs represented in Figure 5a . 11 . Figures 2a and e are essentially the same configurations äs Langacker ' s ( 1988 : 138 ) Figures 3b and 3a . 12 . This diagram may be instructively compared with Geeraerts ' ( 1991 : 202 ) representation of the meaning of vers ; if Figure 6 were converted into this type of diagram the result would be similarly complex . Note however that Geeraerts ' diagram does not represent salience , except in the cross - hatching that marks the area which includes the " most central meaning " . 13 . This is somewhat misleading in that squinting requires effort ; the default case of looking is to have the eyes wide open . In cognition presumably the default case is rather to have a fairly high threshold of salience ( i . e . , to attend only to structures which are quite highly activated ) , and it will require effort to lower that threshold and " see " moredetail ( cf . Kosslyn 1980 : 53 , 165 - 166 ; Langacker 1987 : 381 ) . Ambiguity , polysemy and vagueness 289 14 . Wc arc hcrc dcaling with what happens from the perspective of a hearer dccoding spccch . Things arc doubtless raore complex from the perspective of a thinkcr , for whom volition und othcr factors are more active in establishing what cognitive struc - tures arc salicnt . It is hcre that Geeraerts ' " searchlight " metaphor ( see this issuc , pp . 25K 260 , 263 ) is especially appropriate ; the thinker can turn the searchlight of salicncc ( heightencd cognitive activity ) where he wants to ( and has the mental encrgy In ) , not just whcrc the lights are already on most strongly . Hc thcn , if hc wishcs to communicate äs a Speaker , can construct a context which will evokc parallel saliences for the hearer ; il is the hearer ' s dccoding of such a communication that we arc dcaling w i t h . Iwen hcre , of course , volition and other factors can enter the picture ; hearers are also active thinkers . But when these other factors are allowed lo counteracl the elTect of contcxl . they gcncrally foul up the communication process , In ideal communication hetween a skilled Speaker and a cooperative hearer , the pre - established saliences of cntrenchmcnt and the influence of context are the most important factors dctcrmining what is salient in the hearer ' s mind . 15 . This sä nie meehanism is what accounts for hearers ' choosing of one possible meaning instead of othcrs because it fits the context . Thus if onc says The current slammed the boat tigainxt the bank or the current carried the boat into the reeds , the speciiicalions of current and html , involving äs they do the notions of watcr moving in a stream , produce a sccondury uctivation in conccpts closcly linked with them , such äs hed ( of the stream ) or the river edge sensc of bank or the aquatic plant sense of reed . This makcs it quite improbable that hearers of the scntences will think of the financial Institution scnse of hunk or the musical Instrument sense of reed all , much less to the exclusion of the river edge or aquatic plant sensc . Of course a larger context ( c . g . , of a fiood overllowing a town , with pcrhaps an orchestra bravely carrying on despite the water rising around them ) might render those meanings salient instead or äs well . If both mcanings are snnullancously salient , the sentcnces will feel like puns ( 3 . 4 . 4 ) . 16 . In u eontext of overt comparison , any feature whatsoever which two homophonous semantic struclurcs havc in common can function äs a salient Schema , rcndcring the conliguration vague and allowing identity - of - scnsc anaphora to function . This is the significance of Deanc ' s sentence ( 1988 : 345 ) : Financial banks resemble thoMe you / ind by rivcrs : they controi , respectively , the flow of money and of water . As Dcanc says , " in elTect , the contexl tcmporarily crcates a single category " . In the extreme case , where the only relevant feature two semantic structures have in common is linkage to the same phonological pole , a context of naming or dcfinition can set up just that äs the most salient feature . This is the point of Geeraerls ' sentence : Daddy , what exactly do you call a bank : the place where we moor the boat or the place where l bring m v savings ? — Well , son , the place where we moor the boat is a bank , but so is the plaee where you bring your savings ( this issue , p . 245 ) . References The American Heritage Dictionary ofthe English Language 1978 New College Edition . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . A ristolle Post . Anal . Il . xiii , In Barnes , Jonathan ( ed . ) 1984 , The Complete Works of Aristotle : The Revised Oxford Translation . Princeton : Princeton University Press . 290 D . Tuggy Deane , Paul 1988 Polysemy and cognition . Lingua 75 , 325 - 361 . Geeraerts , Dirk 1991 The lexicographical treatment of prototypical polysemy . In Tsohatzidis , Savas L . ( ed . ) , 195 - 210 . 1993 Vagueness ' s puzzles , polysemy ' s vagaries . Cognitive Linguistics , this issue . Hartmann , R . R . K . 1983 On theory and practice . In Hartmann , R . R . K . ( ed . ) , Lexicography : Principles and Practice , London : Academic Press , 3 - 11 . Kempson , Ruth M . 1977 Semantic Theory . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Kimball , John P . ( ed . ) 1975 Syntax and Semantics , Vol . 4 . New York : Academic Press . Kosslyn , Stephen Michael 1980 Image and Mind . Cambridge , M A : Harvard University Press . Lakoff , George 1970 A note on vagueness and ambiguity . Linguistic Inquiry l , 357 - 359 . 1987 Women , Fire and Dangerous Things . What Categories Reveal about the Mind . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Langacker , Ronald W . 1987 Foundations of Cognitive Grammar . Vol . 1 : Theoretical Prerequisites . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . 1988 A usage - based model . In Rudzka - Ostyn , B . ( ed . ) , 127 - 161 . ( Also in Langacker 1991 : 261 - 288 . ) 1991 Concept , Image , and Symbol : The Cognitive Basis of Grammar . Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter . Lewis , C . S . 1967 Studies in Words . 2nd edition . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lyons , John 1977 Semantics ( 2 volumes ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Quine , Willard V . O . 1960 Word and Object . Cambridge , M A : MIT Press . Rudzka - Ostyn , Brygida ( ed . ) 1988 Topics in Cognitive Linguistics . Amsterdam : John Benjamins , Tuggy , David 1981 The transitivity - related morphology of Tetelcingo Nahuatl : An exploration in Space grammar . Doctoral dissertation , University of California , San Diego . Tsohatzidis , Savas L . ( ed . ) 1991 Meanings and Prototypes : Studies in Linguistic Categorization . London and New York : Routledge . Webster ' s New Collegiate Dictionary 1977 Springfield , M A : Merriam . Zwicky , Arnold M . and Jerrold M . Sadock 1975 Identity tests and how to fail them . In John P . Kimball ( ed . ) , 1 - 36 .