Discussion of a Set of Points in Terms of Their Mutual Distances ∗ Gale Young and A . S . Householder Psychometrika – Vol . 3 , No . 1 March , 1938 Abstract Necessary and suﬃcient conditions are given for a set of numbers to be the mutual distances of a set real points in Euclidean space , and matrices are found whose ranks determine the dimension of the smallest Euclidean space containing such points . Methods are indicated for determining the conﬁguration of these points , and for approximating to them by points in a space of lower dimensionality . Ordinarily a set of points is speciﬁed by giving its coordinates in a suitable reference system ; and the dimensionality of the set , the problem of approxi - mating it by a lower dimensional set , etc . , can be discussed in terms of these coordinates . It may be , however , that only the distances of the points from each other are known , and it is desired to give a similar discussion on this basis . Consider a set of n points , and let a i = 1 . . . n − 1 , be the vector from point n to point i . Let a ij be the component of a i along the j - th axis of an orthogonal coordinate system with origin at point n and let A denote the matrix ( a ij ) . The dimensionality of the point set is equal to the rank of A and to the rank of B = AA 0 . The elements of B are given by b ij = a i . a j . The vector from point i to point j is v ij = a j − a i , and by taking the scalar product of each side with itself there results the familiar ‘cosine law’ : d 2 ij = d 2 jn + d 2 in − 2 a i · a j , where d ij is the distance between points i and j . From this it follows at once that b ij = ( d 2 in + d 2 jn − d 2 ij ) / 2 , ( 1 ) so that AA 0 is expressible in terms of the mutual distances only . Thus ( I ) The dimensionality of a set of points with mutual distances d ij is equal to the rank of the n − 1 square matrix B whose elements are deﬁned by ( 1 ) . ∗ This paper was written in response to suggestions by Harold Gulliksen and by M . W . Richardson . The latter is working on a psychophysical problem in which the di - mensionality of a set of points whose mutual distances are available is a central idea . 1 A matrix ﬁrst given by Cayley in 1841 , and involving the points in more symmetric fashion , may be used in place of the matrix B . First , the matrix C = − 2 B has evidently the same rank r as B . Border this to obtain the η + 1 square matrix D =   C 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0   . Since C is symmetric it has a non - vanishing r × r principal minor M r . The determinant of the minor S =   M r 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0   has for its value | s | = | M r | · (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0 1 1 0 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = − | M r | , as we see by a Laplace expansion . Hence the matrix D has rank r + 2 at least . If D had a greater rank there would be some minor M r + 1 of order r + 1 of C for which   M r + 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0   is non - singular . But since M r + 1 is singular , the determinant of this matrix is − | M r + 1 | = 0 . Hence the rank of D is exactly r + 2 . Now perform the following operations on D : These are so - called elementary transformations , and do not change the rank of a matrix . The result is F =   0 d 212 . . . d 21 n 1 d 221 0 . . . d 22 n 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . d 2 n 1 d 2 n 2 . . . 0 1 1 1 . . . 1 0   ( 2 ) Thus ( II ) The dimensionality of a set of points with mutual distances d ij is less than the rank of the n + 1 square matrix F given by ( 2 ) . Consider next the conditions under which a set of numbers d ij = d ji can be the mutual distances of a set of real points in Euclidean space . It is evident to begin with that if such a set of points exists then any other such set deﬁnes a ﬁgure which is congruent ( or symmentric ) to the ﬁrst . Moreover , if we form the matrix B whose elements are deﬁned by Equation ( 1 ) , then necessarily B is symmetric , and is equal to the product AA 0 of the matrix A of coordinates of 2 these points , in any coordinate system with origin at point n , by the transpose of this matrix . Hence B is positive semi - deﬁnite . Conversely , if B is positive semi - deﬁnite , then such points do exist , and to show this we need only exhibit a matrix A . Since B then has only positive or zero latent roots , there exists an orthogonal matrix σ such that B = σ L 2 σ 0 = ( σL ) ( σL ) 0 , ( 3 ) where L 2 = [ λ 21 , λ 22 . . . λ 2 r , 0 . . . 0 ] ( 4 ) is a diagonal matrix of the latent roots of B . Hence we may take A = σ L , ( 5 ) and the theorem is proved : ( III ) A necessary and suﬃcient condition for a set of numbers d ij = d ji to be the mutual distances of a real set of points in Euclidean space is that the matrix B whose elements are deﬁned by equation ( 1 ) be positive semi - deﬁnite ; and in this case the set of points is unique apart from a Euclidean transformation . For the case n = 3 , the condition that B be positive semi - deﬁnite is equiva - lent to the familiar triangle law : that each side of a triangle be less than , or equal to , the sum of the other two . In general , the positiveness of the determinant of the 2 × 2 principal minor on rows i and j gives the triangle relation on d in , d jn and d ij ; while the corresponding requirement on the larger principal minors gives an extension of this law . The present problem of determining a matrix A which speciﬁes the conﬁguration of the set of points is merely a generalization of the familiar trigonometry problem of ﬁnding a triangle when the lengths of its sides are given . For the actual factorization of the matrix B we may refer to a method given by Thurstone ∗ . Methods of ﬁtting a lower dimensional set of points to a given set are also available † , so that the complete analysis of a set of points is possible given the mutual distances only . ∗ Thurstone , L . L . , Vectors of Mind , Chicago : University of Chicago Press , p . 78 † Eckart , Carl , and Young , Gale , “The Approximation of One Matrix by Another of Lower Rank , ” Psychometrika , 1936 , 1 , 211 - 218 . 3