Clathrin is required for Scar / Wave - mediated lamellipodium formation Je´re´mie J . Gautier 1 , Maria E . Lomakina 2 , Lamia Bouslama - Oueghlani 3 , 4 , Emmanuel Derivery 1 , Helen Beilinson 1 , Wolfgang Faigle 3 , Damarys Loew 3 , Daniel Louvard 3 , 4 , Arnaud Echard 5 , Antonina Y . Alexandrova 2 , Buzz Baum 6 and Alexis Gautreau 1 , 3 , 4 , * 1 CNRS UPR3082 , Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , Avenue de la Terrasse , 91198 Gif - sur - Yvette Cedex , France 2 N . N . Blokhin Cancer Research Center of Russian Federation , Kashirskoe shosse , 24 , 115478 Moscow , Russia 3 Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 4 CNRS UMR144 , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 5 Institut Pasteur , Membrane traffic and cell division laboratory and CNRS URA 2582 , 25 - 28 rue du Dr Roux , 75724 Paris Cedex 15 , France 6 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University College London , Gower St , London , WC1E 6BT , UK * Author for correspondence ( alexis . gautreau @ lebs . cnrs - gif . fr ) Accepted 20 June 2011 Journal of Cell Science 124 , 3414 – 3427 (cid:2) 2011 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 081083 Summary The Scar / Wave complex ( SWC ) generates lamellipodia through Arp2 / 3 - dependent polymerisation of branched actin networks . In order to identify new SWC regulators , we conducted a screen in Drosophila cells combining proteomics with functional genomics . This screen identified Clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) as a protein that binds to the SWC and whose depletion affects lamellipodium formation . This role of CHC in lamellipodium formation can be uncoupled from its role in membrane trafficking by several experimental approaches . Furthermore , CHC is detected in lamellipodia in the absence of the adaptor and accessory proteins of endocytosis . We found that CHC overexpression decreased membrane recruitment of the SWC , resulting in reduced velocity of protrusions and reduced cell migration . By contrast , when CHC was targeted to the membrane by fusion to a myristoylation sequence , we observed an increase in membrane recruitment of the SWC , protrusion velocity and cell migration . Together these data suggest that , in addition to its classical role in membrane trafficking , CHC brings the SWC to the plasma membrane , thereby controlling lamellipodium formation . Key words : Scar / Wave complex , Arp2 / 3 complex , Actin , Clathrin , Lamellipodium Introduction Lamellipodia are protrusions of the plasma membrane that define a leading edge during cell migration ( Abercrombie et al . , 1970 ) . The membrane is projected through the force provided by actin polymerisation , which can be mainly ascribed to the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex that generates branched actin networks ( Pollard , 2007 ) . In mammalian cells , the three Wave proteins have emerged as the major activators of the Arp2 / 3 complex at the leading edge ( Insall and Machesky , 2009 ; Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Yamazaki et al . , 2003 ) . The small GTPase Rac controls lamellipodium formation through Wave proteins ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Wave proteins are embedded into multiprotein complexes , the purification of which provided the molecular link between the small GTPase Rac and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ; Insall and Machesky , 2009 ) . The canonical Wave complex contains five subunits , namely , Sra , Nap , Abi , Brk1 and Wave ( Gautreau et al . , 2004 ; Kobayashi et al . , 1998 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . However , like Wave proteins , most subunits of the Wave complex are encoded by paralogous genes , which are variably expressed in different cell types , giving rise to a combinatorial complexity of the Wave complexes that can be assembled ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . The most ubiquitous Wave complex is composed of Sra1 , Nap1 , Abi1 , Brk1 and Wave2 ( Gautreau et al . , 2004 ) . Despite this complexity , a core mechanism regulating Wave complex activity has recently emerged . This mechanism involves Rac and phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ] . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , the product of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , is produced in response to Rac signalling and further activates Rac in a positive feed - back loop ( Weiner et al . , 2002 ; Weiner et al . , 2006 ) . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is essential for lamellipodium formation and is involved in recruiting the Wave complex to the plasma membrane through a direct interaction ( Oikawa et al . , 2004 ; Sossey - Alaoui et al . , 2005 ) . In vitro , the purified Wave complex is inactive ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ismail et al . , 2009 ) . Addition of GTP - bound Rac at high concentration is sufficient to activate the Wave complex through a conformational exposure of the Arp2 / 3 activating domain of Wave ( Ismail et al . , 2009 ) . The membrane , however , plays a crucial role in Wave complex activation , because liposomes containing PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and prenylated GTP - bound Rac are much more potent activators than soluble Rac alone ( Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) . In addition to this minimal set of activators , BAR ( Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ) domain - containing proteins are involved in Wave complex activation and membrane protrusion ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . In the study reported here we used Drosophila cells to identify regulators of the Scar / Wave complex ( SWC ; Wave is referred to as Scar in this organism ) . In Drosophila cells , a single SWC 3414 Research Article J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e exists because each subunit of the SWC is encoded by a single gene , and the SWC controls lamellipodium formation , as in mammalian cells ( Ismail et al . , 2009 ; Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Using a screen combining proteomics with functional genomics , we found Clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) as a protein that binds to the SWC and that regulates lamellipodium formation . These two properties of CHC are conserved from Drosophila to mammalian cells . Importantly , we show that the novel function of CHC in lamellipodium formation depends on its ability to promote the recruitment of the SWC to the plasma membrane , but appears independent of its classical role in membrane trafficking . Results Identification of CHC as a putative regulator of SWC function in Drosophila cells We reasoned that activators of SWC should both bind to the SWC and produce the characteristic phenotype associated with SWC inactivation . Thus we designed a dual screen in Drosophila cells , in which the proteins that bind to the SWC were identified through proteomics and the genes producing the phenotype associated with SWC inactivation were identified upon RNA interference ( RNAi ) - mediated inactivation . We raised polyclonal peptide antibodies targeting the subunits of the Drosophila SWC ( supplementary material Table S1 ) . The antibody targeting the Sra1 subunit was very efficient at immunoprecipitating the SWC from Drosophila S2 cells ( Fig . 1A ) . A large - scale immunoprecipitation was performed with an excess of lysate so as to saturate the antibody with its specific target and thus to minimise the recovery of cross - reactive proteins . The immunoprecipitate lane was cut in 54 gel slices from top to bottom and each slice was analysed by liquid - chromatography – tandem - mass - spectrometry ( LC - MS / MS ) . This analysis resulted in the identification of 135 Drosophila proteins associated with the SWC ( supplementary material Table S2 ) . In parallel , we carried out a genome - wide RNAi screen in S2 receptor plus ( S2R + ) cells for cell shape defects using an established methodology ( Kiger et al . , 2003 ) . For this purpose , a library of 21 , 306 distinct double - stranded RNAi ( dsRNA ) was used . Two immunofluorescences per dsRNA were then individually examined for the morphology of the cell periphery . Drosophila cells depleted of the SWC have a characteristic periphery displaying numerous spikes ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Using our genome - wide screen , 35 genes that produced these characteristic spikes upon RNAi - mediated inactivation were identified ( Fig . 1B ) . As expected , genes encoding Arp2 / 3 complex subunits and the small GTPases , Rac1 , Rac2 and Cdc42 were retrieved ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Twenty - eight genes not previously ascribed to this phenotypic class were identified . These genes include those encoding a formin , a SCF ubiquitin ligase complex , proteins previously involved in intracellular traffic , such as clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) and dynein light chain , and nuclear factors involved in transcription and RNA metabolism . The other phenotypic classes are reported elsewhere ( Rohn et al . , 2011 ) . Importantly , the intersection between candidates identified through proteomics and functional genomics contained two gene products , Hrb27C and CHC ( Fig . 1C ) . Hrb27C contains two RRM domains that bind to RNA molecules . Only ambiguous mammalian orthologues , where the homology does not extend beyond the RNA - recognition motif ( RRM ) domains , were identified . By contrast , CHC is a conserved protein with a well - established function as a vesicular coat component . We thus decided to focus on CHC . Interestingly , the Clathrin light chain was not identified by either screen . We confirmed the phenotype of CHC - depleted cells using S2 cells and an independent non - overlapping dsRNA ( Fig . 1D ) . Indeed , CHC - depleted cells had a spreading defect with the characteristic spikes associated with SWC inactivation . CHC thus fitted the criteria we had defined for a protein potentially regulating SWC function . CHC depletion , but not several other ways to impair clathrin - mediated trafficking , affects lamellipodium formation To confirm these results and to identify whether they were repeatable in other organisms , we turned to human HeLa cells , from which the ubiquitous Wave complex has been purified and characterised ( Gautreau et al . , 2004 ) . Specific co - immunoprecipitation of CHC was detected upon immunoprecipitation of the whole SWC using two independent polyclonal peptide antibodies recognising the Abi1 and Wave2 subunits of the SWC ( Fig . 2A ) . CHC thus co - precipitates with the SWC in both Drosophila and human cell lines . HeLa cells normally form a limited number of lamellipodia . To induce them , transient transfection of active Rac , such as the Q61L mutant that is defective in GTPase activity , is often used . However , this procedure gives highly inhomogeneous results because of variable individual levels of expression , precluding accurate quantification . So we turned to the electroporation of the purified Rac1Q61L protein , an experimental system that we previously characterised for the analysis of a precursor in the assembly of the SWC ( Derivery et al . , 2008 ) . With this method it is possible to introduce a defined dose of protein homogeneously into the cell population . Rac1Q61L was purified and electroporated into HeLa cells in suspension . Cells were then plated in Petri dishes for biochemical analysis or onto coverslips for immunofluorescence analysis . The purified protein indeed entered the cell , as revealed by the increase in total Rac ( Fig . 2B ) . A pulldown experiment using the CRIB domain of PAK indicated that the Rac1Q61L was GTP bound . As expected , this procedure induced a ‘fried egg’ morphology in the vast majority of HeLa cells , with a continuous lamellipodium covering the entire cell periphery ( Fig . 2C ) . This lamellipodium , best revealed by the actin branch marker cortactin ( Cai et al . , 2008 ) , was associated with the development of radial focal adhesions ( supplementary material Fig . S1 ) and potentiated cell spreading ( Fig . 2C ) . We then depleted Nap1 , a subunit of the SWC , or CHC by transfecting HeLa cells with shRNAs encoding plasmids ( Fig . 2D ) . Nap1 depletion resulted in a destabilisation of the other subunits , Sra1 , Wave2 , Abi1 and Brk1 , as previously described in several organisms and cell types ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ) . As expected , CHC depletion impaired transferrin uptake that depends on clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Fig . 2E ) . We then compared the Rac response of CHC - depleted cells to cells depleted of Nap1 . In both CHC - and Nap1 - depleted cells , the lamellipodium induced by active Rac was aberrant ( Fig . 2C ) . Instead of being smooth and continuous over the cell periphery , it was frequently interrupted by spikes , which were reminiscent of the spikes observed in Drosophila cells , although significantly shorter . Both Nap1 - and CHC - depleted cells had a reduced area following Rac electroporation , Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3415 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e suggesting that their aberrant lamellipodia are impaired in powering cell spreading ( Fig . 2C ) . Some cells in the population transfected with shRNA targeting CHC managed to spread efficiently and formed continuous lamellipodia . We observed that these cells with normal lamellipodia were usually the ones less efficiently depleted of CHC ( Fig . 3A ) . We thus decided to quantify the extent of CHC depletion , surface area and spike formation on a cell - by - cell basis . Indeed , the majority of CHC shRNA - transfected cells that exhibited a lower CHC intensity than control cells also had a smaller surface area ( Fig . 3B , lower left quadrant ) . Conversely , the majority of cells transfected with control shRNA showed high CHC intensity and large cell area ( upper right quadrant ) . The phenotype of spike formation was less penetrant than the reduced cell area , because one third of cells efficiently depleted of CHC formed no spikes . However , the remaining two thirds of CHC - depleted cells had five or more spikes , a number that is very rarely reached by control cells ( upper left quadrant , Fig . 3B ) . These observations indicate an agreement between the level of depletion of CHC and the occurrence of these two phenotypes . Similar results were observed with two unrelated shRNA constructs that efficiently targeted CHC ( Fig . 3C ) . Together these results indicate that CHC , like the SWC , is required for lamellipodium formation in human cells , as well as in Drosophila cells . The defect in lamellipodium formation observed upon CHC depletion might be an indirect effect of defective membrane trafficking . Indeed , there are numerous ways in which clathrin depletion could affect lamellipodium formation . For example , signalling growth factor receptors , which trigger lamellipodia , are known to be endocytosed in clathrin - coated pits ( Scita and Di Fiore , 2010 ) . This was one of the reasons why we used electroporation of active Rac in the experiments described above rather than growth factor stimulation to analyse lamellipodium formation . Even Rac traffics and the intracellular trafficking of Rac was shown to be important in Fig . 1 . Identification of CHC as a protein regulating the SWC . ( A ) Lysates from Drosophila S2 cells were immunoprecipitated with Sra1 antibody or non - immune IgG . The five subunits of the SWC were detected upon Coomassie Blue staining . Subunits are indicated on the right of the gel and standards , in kDa , on the left . The whole Sra1 lane was analysed by mass spectrometry to identify putative partners of the complex . ( B ) Scheme and results of the RNAi screen . dsRNAs targeting 88 % of Drosophila genes were used to deplete individual proteins from S2R + cells . Depleted cells were stained for actin , tubulin and DNA , and pictures automatically taken . Genes found to produce the characteristic phenotype associated with depletion of the SWC , i . e . numerous spikes at the cell periphery , are listed in the table . ( C ) Scheme of the dual screen that identified Clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) and Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 27C ( Hrb27C ) as common candidates of the two approaches . The number of candidates obtained using each approach is indicated . ( D ) Confirmation of the phenotype using an independent dsRNA targeting CHC and a dsRNA targeting the Abi subunit of the SWC as a positive control . Non - adherent S2 cells were spread on concanavalin - A - coated coverslips for 1 hour , and then stained with fluorescent phalloidin . Scale bar : 10 m m . Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3416 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e order to restrict its signalling to the leading edge of migrating cells ( Palamidessi et al . , 2008 ) . These findings are likely to explain why the giant lamellipodium induced by exogenous Rac in our assay is isotropic , i . e . not restricted to a leading edge . To examine whether the classical role of clathrin in membrane trafficking has an impact on this new role we describe , lamellipodium formation , we sought to specifically inactivate the role of clathrin in trafficking . To generate vesicles , clathrin is recruited through different adaptor proteins at various cellular locations ( Robinson , 2004 ) . We first used brefeldin A ( BFA ) , which blocks recruitment of coat proteins to membranes , including AP1 – clathrin and GGA – clathrin to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and endosomes , and causes disassembly of the Golgi . Treatment of cells with BFA for 20 minutes resulted in the expected redistribution of the Golgi marker GM130 , indicating that the drug treatment was effective ( Fig . 4A ) . This BFA treatment , however , had no effect on lamellipodium formation . We then directly depleted the adaptor complexes AP1 and AP2 using shRNA - encoding plasmids ( Fig . 4B ) . As expected , AP1 depletion impaired steady state distribution of the mannose 6 - phosphate receptor , and AP2 depletion strongly impaired transferrin uptake . The depletion of AP1 , unlike CHC depletion , did not induce defective lamellipodia , as evidenced by the number of spikes and the Rac - dependent increase in cell area ( Fig . 4C ) . It even had a slightly potentiating effect on the increase of cell area . AP2 Fig . 2 . CHC associates with the SWC and is required for Rac - dependent formation of lamellipodia in HeLa cells . ( A ) Co - immunoprecipitation of endogenous CHC with endogenous Wave complex using either Abi1 or Wave2 antibodies . These two antibodies immunoprecipitate the whole SWC as indicated by the retrieval of a third subunit , Sra1 . ( B ) Cells were electroporated with purified Rac1Q61L . The input panel shows the increase of total Rac , and a GST pull - down experiment , using the CRIB domain of PAK , shows that Rac1Q61L is indeed GTP bound . ( C ) Cells were depleted of CHC or Nap1 , a subunit of the SWC , by shRNA transfection . Nap1 - or CHC - depleted cells were electroporated in suspension with active Rac , replated on collagen - type - I - coated coverslips , allowed to spread for 2 hours and stained with cortactin antibodies . The inset panels are higher magnification images of the boxed regions in the panels above . CHC depletion was associated with defective lamellipodia as indicated by spikes interrupting the circular lamellipodia and the decreased area compared with control cells ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . Scale bars : 10 m m ; 1 m m inset panels . ( D ) Control of depletion by western blot of whole cell lysates . As expected , Nap1 depletion was associated with a decrease in the levels of all other subunits of the ubiquitous SWC , namely , Abi1 , Wave2 , Sra1 and Brk1 . Tubulin was used as a loading control . ( E ) CHC depletion , but not Nap1 depletion , impairs transferrin endocytosis . Values are means ¡ s . e . m . of three independent flow cytometry experiments . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3417 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e depletion had also no detrimental effect on lamellipodium formation , even though the AP2 complex is the adaptor complex that recruits clathrin to the plasma membrane . Altogether these experiments indicate that the effect of clathrin depletion on lamellipodium formation is unlikely to be a secondary consequence of defective trafficking . CHC localises to the lamellipodium , but is not involved in endocytosis at this location We sought to colocalise CHC with SWC at the lamellipodium . HeLa cells electroporated with active Rac is not the optimal system for this purpose , because the enrichment of the SWC at lamellipodia is very limited ( supplementary material Fig . S1 ) . Fig . 3 . Defects in lamellipodium formation are associated with the extent of CHC depletion . ( A ) CHC - depleted cells electroporated with Rac1Q61L were analysed by cortactin or CHC immunofluorescence . Only the cell that is efficiently depleted ( indicated with a star ) has a small surface area and numerous spikes at its periphery . ( B ) Cell - by - cell analysis of cell area , number of spikes and CHC intensity . The coloured numbers indicate the percentage of cells of each category in each quadrant . ( C ) Two additional shRNA constructs targeting CHC have a similar effect on cell area and spike formation ; analysed as above ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . Scale bars : 10 m m . Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3418 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e We thus turned to meningioma cells , which spread very efficiently without exogenous Rac . Simple examination of these cells using epifluorescence microscopy reveals an enrichment of cortactin at the periphery ( supplementary material Fig . S2A ) . This enrichment is not observed when a soluble protein , such as RhoGDI , is stained , indicating that enrichment at the periphery is not an artefact due to an increase in membrane thickness in this region . A detectable localisation of the SWC at these lamellipodia was found using Wave2 polyclonal antibody ( pAb ; Fig . 5 ) or Brk1 monoclonal antibody ( mAb ; supplementary material Fig . S2B ) . Upon depletion of either Wave2 or Brk1 , staining of the plasma membrane was lost ( supplementary material Fig . S2B , C ) . X - 22 mAb , a well - characterised antibody recognising CHC , also clearly stained Fig . 4 . The role of CHC in lamellipodium formation can be experimentally uncoupled from its role in membrane traffic . ( A ) Treatment of Rac - electroporated HeLa cells with brefeldin A ( BFA ) for 20 minutes resulted in the expected redistribution of the Golgi marker GM130 , but had no effect on lamellipodium formation ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . Scale bars : 10 m m . ( B ) Depletion of AP1 and AP2 adaptor proteins from HeLa cells upon shRNA transfection was analysed by western blotting of whole cell lysates . AP1 depletion induced the expected redistribution of cation - dependent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( CD - M6PR ) . AP2 depletion impaired transferrin endocytosis , as expected ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . of three independent experiments ) . ( C ) None of these adaptor depletions impaired lamellipodium formation upon Rac electroporation . AP1 depletion even led to an increase in cell area ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3419 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Fig . 5 . Clathrin , but not its endocytic adaptor and accessory proteins , colocalises with the SWC in lamellipodia . Meningioma cells were spread on fibronectin - coated coverslips to induce lamellipodia and then stained with the indicated antibodies . A maximum intensity projection of five spinning disk confocal sections is shown . Insets show a magnified view of a peripheral region of a single confocal plane to visualize potential colocalisation . Both pAb and mAb targeting CHC stained lamellipodia . Lamellipodia were stained by Wave2 antibodies , but not by antibodies targeting the endocytic adaptor , AP2 , or the endocytic accessory proteins , Eps15 , CALM and epsin . With these endocytic markers , colocalisation with CHC was restricted to internal clathrin - coated pits . These results suggest that peripheral CHC is involved in lamellipodium formation , but not in endocytosis . Scale bars : 10 m m . Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3420 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e lamellipodia . Using confocal sections , we found that CHC colocalises with Wave2 . A polyclonal antibody targeting CHC produced similar staining of the lamellipodia . In addition to the lamellipodial staining there was the expected punctuated staining at the ventral membrane using both CHC antibodies ( Fig . 5 ) . As expected , both punctate ventral and peripheral stainings obtained with either antibody disappeared upon CHC depletion ( supplementary material Fig . S2D ) . The CHC punctae at the ventral membrane correspond to classical clathrin - coated pits , as indicated by their colocalisation with the adaptor complex AP2 Fig . 6 . The peripheral pool of clathrin is required for the formation of SWC - dependent lamellipodia . ( A ) Meningioma cells were depleted of subunits of the Wave complex ( Brk1 , Nap1and Wave2 ) , of AP2 or of CHC using transfection of siRNAs . Depleted meningioma cells were spread on fibronectin - coated coverslips to induce lamellipodia , stained with cortactin antibodies and observed by epifluorescence . Depletion of Wave complex subunits resulted in defective lamellipodia as indicated by reduced cell area and spike induction ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . ( B ) CHC depletion , but not AP2 depletion , induces defects in lamellipodium formation ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Upon AP2 depletion , the peripheral pool of CHC is not affected . Upon CHC depletion , Wave2 is no longer enriched at the plasma membrane . Scale bars : 10 m m or 1 m m in the inset . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3421 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e and the so - called endocytic accessory proteins , Eps15 , CALM and epsin ( Fig . 5 ) . The endocytic accessory proteins promote the assembly of the clathrin lattice around endocytic cargoes clustered by AP2 . Importantly , none of these endocytic proteins was detected in the lamellipodia with CHC , suggesting that CHC is unlikely to be involved in endocytosis at the lamellipodium . We depleted meningioma cells of the SWC by transfecting siRNAs targeting either Brk1 , Nap1 or Wave2 subunits . Each of Fig . 7 . CHC controls membrane recruitment of SWC . ( A ) HeLa cells were fractionated into cytosol and membrane fractions . Cell fractionation was validated using RhoGDI and transferrin receptor ( TfR ) as markers of cytosol and membrane fractions , respectively . ( B ) CHC depletion decreased the amount of SWC in the membrane fraction ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . of three independent experiments ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Expression and membrane distribution of endogenous CHC , PC - tagged CHC and myristoylated PC - tagged CHC . Transfected cells were fractionated . Myr – CHC was mostly bound to membranes , whereas overexpressed CHC was mostly cytosolic . Overexpressed CHC decreased the membrane pool of the SWC , whereas Myr – CHC increased it ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . of three independent experiments ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . ( D ) Overexpression of CHC or Myr – CHC did not affect clathrin - mediated endocytosis , because transferrin uptake was unaffected . ( E ) CHC overexpression impaired Rac - dependent lamellipodia , as evidenced by the increased number of spikes within lamellipodia and the smaller cell area ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , n . 50 cells in each condition ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . The inset panels are higher magnification images of the boxed regions in the panels above . Scale bar : 10 m m or 1 m m in the inset . Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3422 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e these transfections induced defective lamellipodia ( Fig . 6A ) , indicating that lamellipodia depend on SWC in this cellular system as well . We also depleted meningioma cells of CHC or AP2 . Similarly to Rac electroporated HeLa cells , CHC depletion , but not AP2 depletion , induced defective lamellipodia ( Fig . 6B ) . This confirmed that the role of CHC in lamellipodium formation does not rely on its function in endocytosis . Accordingly , AP2 depletion did not impair the peripheral staining of CHC ( Fig . 6C ) . This peripheral staining of CHC was also observed by total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , confirming it was associated with flat lamellipodia ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . This observation indicates that CHC localisation at lamellipodia is independent from AP2 , the most established adaptor complex of endocytosis . CHC controls membrane recruitment of the SWC , lamellipodium protrusion and cell migration Wave2 was no longer enriched at the plasma membrane of CHC - depleted meningioma cells , consistent with their defective lamellipodia ( Fig . 6C ) . This observation raised the possibility that CHC controls the distribution of the SWC between the cytosol and the membranes . This was examined using biochemical fractionation of HeLa cells . The procedure we used efficiently separated membranes ( both plasma membrane Fig . 8 . CHC controls the protrusion rate of leading edges and cell migration . ( A ) Swiss 3T3 cells were transfected with CHC , Myr – CHC or control plasmid together with a GFP - expressing plasmid . Transfected cells , identified by green fluorescence ( inset ) were observed by DIC microscopy . Scale bar : 10 m m . ( B ) Kymographs show lamellipodial activity along the line orthogonal to the leading edge of the cells shown in A . The beginning and the end of a typical cycle of protrusion and retraction are indicated by white arrows . Velocity was calculated during the protrusion phase of each cycle . In CHC - expressing cells , the length of protrusions decreased and lamellipodia protruded at a lower velocity than in control cells . By contrast , in Myr – CHC - expressing cells , the velocity increased . Furthermore , the frequency of cycles also increased ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . , seven cells were analysed per condition , between one and three kymographs per cell , with several protrusive cycles on each kymograph , giving a total of cycles ranging from 38 to 47 ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Swiss 3T3 cells transfected as above were seeded as islands of 700 m m diameter . The number of GFP - positive cells that migrated outside the initial island was counted after 24 hours of incubation . CHC overexpression significantly impaired cell migration , whereas Myr – CHC overexpression potentiated cell migration ( values are means ¡ s . e . m . of six to 19 independent experiments ; * P , 0 . 001 ) . Scale bar : 100 m m . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3423 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e and endomembranes ) from the cytosol , as indicated by the respective markers , transferrin receptor , an integral membrane protein , and soluble RhoGDI ( Fig . 7A ) . Upon CHC depletion , the membrane pool of Wave2 was reduced to approximately a quarter of the level in control cells ( Fig . 7B for quantifications ; supplementary material Fig . S4A for western blot ) . To test whether CHC is able to bring the SWC to the plasma membrane , we fused CHC with an N - terminal myristoylation sequence . Myr – CHC and CHC as a control were tagged with a protein C epitope ( PC ) to detect their expression . As expected , Myr – CHC was almost completely membrane bound , in contrast to endogenous or exogenous CHC , and indeed , the membrane pool of Wave2 increased upon expression of Myr – CHC ( Fig . 7C for quantifications ; supplementary material Fig . S4B for western blot ) . Conversely , the overexpression of wild - type CHC decreased significantly the amount of membrane Wave2 . This effect of CHC overexpression was unanticipated , but was even more pronounced than the effect of Myr – CHC . By contrast , the overexpression of CHC or of Myr – CHC had no effect on tranferrin endocytosis ( Fig . 7D ) . Because CHC overexpression decreased the amount of SWC in the membrane fraction , similar to CHC depletion , we expected a defect in lamellipodia formation . Indeed , Rac1Q61L electroporation induced defective lamellipodia in CHC - overexpressing HeLa cells , as evidenced by the increased number of spikes and decreased spreading ( Fig . 7E ) . When overexpressed CHC was targeted to the membrane through myristoylation , these defects were not present . Hence , CHC overexpression uncouples the two functions of CHC . Because CHC overexpression impairs the formation of SWC - dependent lamellipodia without affecting clathrin - mediated endocytosis , we selected this method to assess the role of clathrin in cell migration . To analyse the role of CHC in migration , we turned to murine fibroblast cells that migrate faster than HeLa cells . Swiss 3T3 cells were transfected with CHC , Myr – CHC or the control plasmid , together with a GFP plasmid to identify transfected cells before time - lapse imaging by DIC microscopy ( Fig . 8A ) . The leading edge activity of these cells was characterised by cycles of protrusion and retraction ( supplementary material Movie 1 ) . Retraction occurs when the lamellipodium tip detaches from the substratum and moves backward forming a membrane ruffle . Kymograph analysis of leading edges in transfected cells revealed that CHC overexpression significantly reduced the velocity of lamellipodia , whereas Myr – CHC significantly increased it ( Fig . 8B ) . Myr – CHC expression induced frequent membrane ruffles . By contrast , CHC - overexpressing cells generated significantly shorter protrusions followed by reduced ruffles . The frequency of ruffles in CHC - expressing cells was also half that in Myr – CHC - expressing cells . These observations are , therefore , perfectly in line with the respective effects of these constructs on membrane recruitment of the SWC , which is essential for the generation of a branched actin network that projects the plasma membrane ( Derivery and Gautreau , 2010 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ) . To examine how these defects in lamellipodium protrusion affect cell migration , we used an assay , in which islands of cells were seeded through a microfluidic device perforated with holes of 700 m m in diameter . Swiss 3T3 cells were transfected as above with CHC , Myr – CHC or a control plasmid in combination with a GFP plasmid . The islands were fixed and examined after seeding or after incubation for 24 hours . GFP - expressing cells were then counted . CHC overexpression significantly decreased the number of cells migrating outside the initial island compared with the control , whereas Myr – CHC expression significantly increased the number of migrating cells ( Fig . 8C ) . The ability of these cells to migrate is thus associated with the velocity of protrusions and the amount of SWC at the membrane . Discussion The dual screen we conducted using Drosophila cells was aimed at identifying novel regulators of the SWC involved in lamellipodium formation . Surprisingly , this screen identified CHC , a major coat protein involved in membrane trafficking . A molecular interaction between the Sra1 subunit of the SWC and CHC was recently reported by Hoflack and colleagues ( Anitei et al . , 2010 ) . However , they found that this interaction played a role in the generation of tubular carriers derived from the TGN , a classical function for clathrin . By contrast , the atypical function of CHC in lamellipodium formation we report here seems to be independent from its well - established role in membrane trafficking . The evidence against an indirect effect on lamellipodium formation through defective membrane trafficking is threefold . ( 1 ) We were able to uncouple the two functions of CHC , using adaptor depletions or BFA . These experiments impaired trafficking , but not lamellipodium formation . ( 2 ) Conversely , overexpression of CHC impaired lamellipodium formation , but not trafficking . ( 3 ) CHC was detected in lamellipodia without the adaptor and accessory proteins mediating endocytosis . The two functions associated with the complex formed by CHC and SWC , generation of carriers from the TGN and lamellipodium formation , thus appear distinct , even though they share components . These shared components provide a simple explanation of why AP1 - depleted cells spread slightly more than control cells in response to Rac ( Fig . 4C ) , because the SWC , which is no longer recruited to the TGN in AP1 - depleted cells , can then perform its function at lamellipodia . The novel function of clathrin in controlling lamellipodia adds to the case for unconventional roles of clathrin . Indeed , clathrin was previously shown to stabilise the mitotic spindle ( Royle et al . , 2005 ) and to mediate p53 - dependent transcription ( Enari et al . , 2006 ) . This latter role is also independent of the light chains , as is the role of CHC in lamellipodium formation we describe here . CHC promotes lamellipodium formation through membrane recruitment of SWC . Indeed , our experiments using Myr – CHC suggest that CHC is able to bring the SWC to the membrane . In line with this idea , CHC depletion , or overexpression , greatly decreases the amount of SWC in the membrane pool . This role of clathrin in the recruitment of the SWC to the plasma membrane might explain the recent finding that clathrin is required for actin polymerisation at the immunological synapse ( Calabia - Linares et al . , 2011 ) , a structure that also depends on SWC activity ( Billadeau et al . , 2007 ) . The recent success of reconstituting the activation of purified SWC in vitro using prenylated Rac and liposomes containing PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 suggest that clathrin is not absolutely required to induce and maintain the active conformation of the SWC ( Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ) . The situation is analogous to the one described for BAR - domain - containing molecules of the IRSp53 family , which are crucial in vivo to deform the plasma membrane , to recruit and activate the SWC ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3424 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) , but which are similarly dispensable in in vitro assays . These results suggest that , even though actin dynamics have been beautifully reconstituted in vitro , the complexity of a lamellipodium , especially its membrane dynamics , has not yet been fully understood and recapitulated in vitro . It is striking that a major component of the endocytic machinery such as CHC should also be involved in SWC activation and in the formation of lamellipodia . Protrusion of the plasma membrane through actin polymerisation and membrane retrieval through endocytosis are antagonistic . Indeed , biophysical experiments have revealed that either one of these events , but never an unproductive combination of the two , is triggered by the same stimulus , a decrease in membrane tension ( Dai et al . , 1997 ; Raucher and Sheetz , 1999 ; Raucher and Sheetz , 2000 ) . The interaction between CHC and SWC might thus be involved in this coordination by locally shutting down endocytosis in membrane protrusions . Materials and Methods Cells and drugs Drosophila S2 cells were cultured at 26 ˚ C in Schneider’s medium containing 10 % foetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and penicillin – streptomycin . When S2 cells were grown in suspension culture using Erlenmeyer’s flasks under gentle agitation , the medium was supplemented with 1 : 100 volume of a 10 % Pluronic F - 68 solution ( Invitrogen ) . Meningioma , HeLa and 293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % FBS and penicillin – streptomycin . The meningioma cells ( # SF1335 ) used are a surgical isolate from a patient affected by a benign meningioma , a slow - growing tumour arising from arachnoidal cells of the meninges ( Rempel et al . , 1993 ) . Swiss 3T3 cells were incubated in DMEM supplemented with 5 % donor bovine serum . Mammalian cells were incubated at 37 ˚ C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 . Brefeldin A ( BFA ; Sigma ) was used at 5 m g / ml for 20 minutes . RNAi and transfections Details about the genome - wide screen using S2R + cells are described elsewhere ( Rohn et al . , 2011 ) . For RNAi - mediated inactivation , S2 cells were incubated with in vitro produced dsRNAs , as previously described ( Bouslama - Oueghlani et al . , 2007 ) . dsRNAs were produced from genomic amplified fragments using primers 5 9 - CTGTACGTGCTCAAGAAAAACG - 3 9 and 5 9 - GCATAGGTTCGGGTAGT - ATTGG - 3 9 for Abi ( CG9749 ) , or 5 9 - GTGCTTTTCGAGTTTCTGTGC - 3 9 and 5 9 - TATCAAAACCGTGGATACTTCG - 3 9 for CHC ( CG9012 ) . These fragments were from an independent library ( Echard et al . , 2004 ) . S2 cells treated with dsRNA were assayed by spreading on concanavalin - A - coated coverslips as described previously ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . HeLa and 293T cells were transfected with plasmids using electroporation or calcium phosphate precipitation , respectively . Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts were transfected using Lipofectamine LTX and the Plus reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Meningioma cells were transfected with 40 nM On - Target Plus SMART pool ( Dharmacon ) using lipofectamine RNAi Max ( Invitrogen ) and analyzed after 4 days . pSuper - Nap1 , pSUPER - CHC , pSUPER - AP1 c and pSUPER - AP2 m 2 were described previously ( Dugast et al . , 2005 ; Saint - Pol et al . , 2004 ; Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . For shRNA - mediated RNAi , cells expressed pSUPER plasmids for 3 days . The two additional CHC shRNAs ( # 2 : 5 9 - TAATCCAATTCGAAGACCAAT - 3 9 ; # 3 : 5 9 - AATGGATCTCTTTGAAT - ACGG - 3 9 ) were cloned into the psiRNA - h7SKblasti G1 plasmid and compared with the so - called scr control plasmid ( Invitrogen ) . For overexpression , cells expressed plasmids for 1 day . Plasmid constructions Full - length human clathrin heavy chain ( 1 – 1675 ) was amplified from the IMAGE : 6045540 clone and subcloned into custom - made plasmids , pcDNA5 FRT His - PC - TEV or pcDNA5 FRT Myr - PC - TEV between the Fse I and Asc I sites . This resulted in the fusion of CHC with the N - Terminal peptides , MHHHHH - HEDQVDPRLIDGKGGGDYDIPTTENLYFQGAMGRP , or MGSNKSKPKDED - GVDPRLIDGKGGGDYDIPTTENLYFQGAMGRP , respectively . All amplified inserts were verified by sequencing . Antibodies and immunofluorescence Anti - human Sra1 , Nap1 , Wave2 and Abi1 pAbs were described previously ( Gautreau et al . , 2004 ) . Anti - human Brk1 mAb ( clone 231H9 ) was described previously ( Derivery et al . , 2008 ) . Anti - tubulin mAb ( clone E7 ) was developed by M . Klymkowsky and obtained from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank . Anti - mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor mAb ( 22D4 ) was a kind gift from P . Benaroch ( Institut Curie , Paris ) . The following Abs were from commercial sources : anti - CHC ( for western blotting , mAb clone 23 , BD Biosciences ; for immunofluorescence , mAb X - 22 and pAb ab21679 , Abcam ) , anti - AP2 m 2 mAb ( for western blotting , clone 31 / AP50 , BD Biosciences ) , anti - AP2 a 2 mAb ( for immunofluorescence , clone AC1 - M11 , Abcam ) , anti - AP1 c ( clone 100 / 3 , Sigma ) , anti - Rac1 mAb ( clone 102 , Transduction Laboratories ) , anti - cortactin mAb ( clone 4F11 , Millipore ) , anti - transferrin receptor mAb ( clone H68 . 4 , Invitrogen ) , anti - RhoGDI pAb ( A - 20 , sc - 360 , Santa Cruz ) , anti - VASP mAb ( clone 43 , BD Biosciences ) , anti - paxillin mAb ( clone 165 , BD Biosciences ) , anti - CALM pAb ( C - 18 , sc - 6433 , Santa Cruz ) , anti - Eps15 pAb ( K - 15 , sc - 11716 , Santa Cruz ) , anti - epsin pAb ( R - 20 , sc - 8673 , Santa Cruz ) . HRP - conjugated antibodies were from Pierce . Fluorescent phalloidin and Alexa - Fluor - conjugated secondary antibodies were from Molecular Probes . For immunofluorescence , cells were fixed using 3 % paraformaldehyde then permeabilised with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 . They were then processed using standard techniques . None of the reported stainings was seen in control experiments , where the primary antibody was omitted . Cell fractionation HeLa cells or transfected 293T cells were lysed by nitrogen cavitation ( 500 psi for 20 minutes ; Parr Instruments ) in XB buffer ( 20 mM Hepes , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 7 ) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma ) . Debris and nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 600 g for 10 minute at 4 ˚ C . The supernatant ( total fraction ) was then centrifuged for 60 minutes at 150 , 000 g using a TLA - 100 . 4 rotor . The supernatant was the cytosolic fraction , and the membrane pellet was solubilised for 60 minutes in radioimmunoprecipitation assay ( RIPA ) buffer ( 50 mM Hepes , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , pH 7 . 7 ) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail . The membrane fraction was then centrifuged again for 60 minutes at 150 , 000 g to remove insoluble material . Transferrin uptake HeLa cells were co - transfected with the plasmid of interest and a GFP - expressing plasmid . Cells were serum starved for 30 minutes in internalisation medium ( DMEM , 0 . 5 % BSA , 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 ) at 37 ˚ C , washed in PBS and gently detached with trypsin . Cells were then washed with cold internalisation medium . Cells were incubated with Alexa - Fluor - 647 - conjugated transferrin ( 5 m g / ml ) for 1 hour at 4 ˚ C with gentle agitation . After one wash in cold internalisation medium , cells were resuspended in warm internalisation medium and placed in a 37 ˚ C water bath . An aliquot of cells was taken at each time point and quickly placed on ice in an excess of cold Stop medium ( PBS with 0 . 5 % BSA ) . Cells were then acid washed in 50 mM glycine , 150 mM NaCl , pH 3 , on ice for 3 minutes and acidity was neutralised by an excess of Stop medium . After two washes in Stop medium , cells were analyzed by flow cytometry ( MoFlo ASTRIOS , Beckman - Coulter ) . 10 4 GFP - positive cells were analyzed per sample and the geometrical mean fluorescence was determined using Summit software . Immunoprecipitations For immunoprecipitations , 10 10 S2 cells ( 2 . 5 l culture , 14 ml cell pellet ) were treated for 5 minutes with 1 mM protease inhibitor , di - isopropyl - fluoro - phosphate ( Sigma ) , with appropriate safety procedures . HeLa and S2 cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail ( 1 : 1000 ; Sigma P8340 ) . Extracts were clarified by centrifugation and ultracentrifugation , then incubated with 2 m g non immune rabbit IgG or affinity purified peptide antibodies , together with 10 m l of protein - A - Affiprep beads ( Bio - Rad ) for 2 hours at 4 ˚ C . Beads were then washed four times with RIPA buffer and resuspended in SDS loading buffer . SDS - PAGE was performed with NUPAGE 4 – 12 % Bis – Tris or 3 – 8 % Tris – acetate gels ( Invitrogen ) . Western blots were revealed using HRP - coupled antibodies , Supersignal kit ( Pierce ) and Fuji LAS - 3000 ( Fujifilm ) . Blots were quantified using ImageJ . Mass spectrometry Gel slices were reduced , alkylated and subjected to digestion with trypsin ( Roche Diagnostics ) . Extracted peptides were dried and resolubilised in solvent A [ 95 / 5 water / acetonitrile in 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) formic acid ] . The total digestion product of a gel slice was used per LC - MS / MS analysis . The extracted peptides were concentrated and separated on a LC - Packings system ( Dionex S . A . , Voisins - le - Bretonneux , France ) coupled to the nano - electrospray II ionisation interface of a QSTAR Pulsar I ( Applied Biosystems ) using a PICOTip ( 10 m m internal diameter , New Objectives ) . Bound peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5 – 50 % of solvent B [ 20 / 80 water / acetonitrile in 0 . 085 % ( w / v ) formic acid ] . Information - dependent acquisition was used to acquire MS / MS data , with experiments designed so that the two most abundant peptides were subject to collision - induced dissociation , using nitrogen as the collision gas , every 5 seconds . Data were searched using MASCOT ( Matrix Science ) software on the NCBI nr Drosophila melanogaster database . All data were manually verified in order to minimise errors in protein identification and characterisation . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3425 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e Electroporation of purified Rac protein For protein electroporation , GST - Rac1Q61L was purified from Escherichia coli BL21 * ( Invitrogen ) and Rac1Q61L cleaved off the GST using thrombin ( Sigma ) . Rac1Q61L was stored at 2 80 ˚ C in ( 20 mM Hepes , 100 mM KCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 7 ) . HeLa cells were trypsinised and resuspended at 25 6 10 6 cells / ml in DMEM containing 10 % FCS and 15 mM Hepes pH 7 . 5 . Cells ( 200 m l ) were mixed with 50 m l purified Rac1Q61L ( 40 m g ) . Cells were pulsed at 240 V and 950 m F in a 0 . 4 cm wide cuvette using a BTX ECM630 electroporator ( Harvard Apparatus ) . Cells were then quickly resuspended in the same medium , washed once , and plated for 2 hours onto glass coverslips or Petri dishes . For pull - down of active Rac , GST fused to the CRIB domain of PAK was purified from E . coli BL21 * . Electroporated cells ( 5 6 10 6 ) , spread on Petri dishes , were lysed with 500 m l of a solution containing 20 mM Tris - HCl , 150 mM NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , pH 7 . 5 . The clarified lysate was then incubated with 10 m l of glutathione beads ( 4B , GE Healthcare ) and 5 m g of GST or GST - CRIB for 2 hours at 4 ˚ C . Beads were quickly washed four times in the lysis buffer and resuspended in SDS loading buffer . Imaging HeLa and meningioma cells were plated for 2 hours onto glass coverslips coated with 20 m g / ml of collagen type I ( BD Biosciences ) or 50 m g / ml of fibronectin ( Sigma ) , respectively . Fixed cells were imaged by epifluorescence microscopy on an AxioObserver Z1 microscope ( Zeiss ) equipped with a 63 6 NA 1 . 4 oil immersion objective and an Orca - R 2 camera ( Hamamatsu ) . Where indicated , confocal optical sections were acquired with either of the following custom spinning disc confocal microscopes . The first one is based on a Nikon TE2000 - U inverted microscope , a Yokogawa CSU22 spinning disk head , a 100 6 NA 1 . 45 oil immersion objective and a CoolSnap HQ2 camera ( Photometrics ) , operated with Metamorph 7 . 1 . 4 software ( Molecular Devices ) . The second one is based on a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope , a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk head , a 100 6 NA 1 . 40 oil immersion objective and an Evolve camera ( Photometrics ) , operated with Metamorph 7 . 4 software . A maximum intensity z - projection was calculated between five consecutive planes separated by 200 nm . The TIRF microscope was based on a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope , a TIRF 60 6 NA 1 . 49 PlanAPO oil immersion objective , 491 nm and 561 nm lasers and a CoolSnap HQ2 camera ( Photometrics ) , operated with Metamorph 7 . 6 software . Binning was always set to 1 . For time - lapse microscopy , Swiss 3T3 cells plated onto glass coverslips were placed into chambers for live - cell imaging . Cells were observed with a Nikon Eclipse - Ti microscope equipped with a Plan - Neofluar 40 6 NA 1 . 3 DIC objective at 37 ˚ C . Images were acquired with an ORCA - ER camera ( Hamamatsu ) operated with NIS - Elements AR2 . 3 software ( Nikon ) . To analyse lamellipodial dynamics at the active cell edge , sequences were acquired for 10 minutes at 3 second intervals . For the migration assay , we used a custom - made microfluidic device composed of 96 holes of 700 m m diameter ( Micronit Microfluidics , PV Enschede , The Netherlands ) , which was applied for 1 hour onto glass coverslips to seed islands of GFP - transfected cells . Then coverslips were either fixed , or incubated for 24 hours before fixation . Images of the GFP signal and DAPI staining were acquired with a 10 6 objective . The proportion of transfected cells that had migrated outside the original circle was then calculated . Image analysis and statistics Analyses of images and movies were performed using ImageJ , Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Premiere software . Gamma settings were not adjusted . For measurements of CHC intensity , images were acquired with the same settings and the intensity was measured using ImageJ after background subtraction . Cell area was measured after manual thresholding of the cortactin staining using ImageJ . Spikes were counted visually . For all quantifications , a minimum of 50 cells of a representative experiment were analysed in each condition . Variations in cell area in independent experiments precluded the averaging of different experiments , but all experiments were repeated between two and six times . Kymographs were generated along a one - pixel - wide line oriented in the direction of protrusions , using ImageJ . For quantitative analysis , straight lines were drawn on kymographs from the beginning to the end of individual protrusions . Projections along the distance axis and the time axis , gave , respectively , the length and the duration of protrusion . The velocity of protrusion is the ratio between this length and duration . Cycles of protrusion followed by retraction were visually identified . The frequency was calculated by dividing the number of cycles by the duration of acquisition . For each transfection , seven cells were analysed with one to three kymographs per cell . Each kymograph shows several protrusive cycles giving a total ranging from 38 to 47 cycles in the different conditions . All statistics were performed using SigmaStat software ( SPSS ) . ANOVA was followed by pairwise comparisons using the Student – Newman – Keuls method , with an a factor set to 0 . 05 . When the requirements of normality or equal variance parameters failed to pass , statistics were performed on log 10 transformations , which gave normal data sets with equal variance . Acknowledgments We thank Philippe Benaroch , Laurence Goutebroze , Christophe Lamaze , Peter Lowe and Theresia Stradal for providing essential reagents . We thank Vic Small for sharing his unpublished assay for cell migration and Thomas Lecuit for suggesting the myristoylated CHC experiment . We thank Cathy Jackson for critical reading of the manuscript . We acknowledge the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank developed under the auspices of the NICHD and maintained by the University of Iowa . Funding This work was supported by fellowships from the Ministe ` re de l’Education et de la Recherche ( to J . J . G . and E . D . ) ; Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer ( to L . B . O . ) ; Agence Nationale pour la Recherche [ grant number ANR - 07 - JCJC - 0089 - 01 to A . E . ] ; University College of London ( to B . B . ) ; the Royal Society ( to B . B . ) and the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research ( to B . B . ) ; the Russian Foundation for Basic Research [ grant number 08 - 04 - 00452 - a to A . Y . A . ] . A . G . is supported by Fondation pour la Recherche Me´dicale ; Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ; and Agence Nationale pour la Recherche [ grant numbers ANR - 08 - BLAN - 0012 - 03 , ANR - 08 - PCVI - 0010 - 03 ] . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 081083 / - / DC1 References Abercrombie , M . , Heaysman , J . E . and Pegrum , S . M . ( 1970 ) . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp . Cell Res . 59 , 393 - 398 . Anitei , M . , Stange , C . , Parshina , I . , Baust , T . , Schenck , A . , Raposo , G . , Kirchhausen , T . and Hoflack , B . ( 2010 ) . Protein complexes containing CYFIP / Sra / PIR121 coordinate Arf1 and Rac1 signalling during clathrin - AP - 1 - coated carrier biogenesis at the TGN . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 330 - 340 . Billadeau , D . D . , Nolz , J . C . and Gomez , T . S . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of T - cell activation by the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 7 , 131 - 143 . Bouslama - Oueghlani , L . , Echard , A . , Louvard , D . and Gautreau , A . ( 2007 ) . RNAi depleted Drosophila cell extracts to dissect signaling pathways leading to actin polymerization . J . Biochem . Biophys . Methods 70 , 663 - 669 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 - 842 . Calabia - Linares , C . , Robles - Valero , J . , de la Fuente , H . , Perez - Martinez , M . , Martin - Cofreces , N . , Alfonso - Perez , M . , Gutierrez - Vazquez , C . , Mittelbrunn , M . , Ibiza , S . , Urbano - Olmos , F . R . et al . ( 2011 ) . Endosomal clathrin drives actin accumulation at the immunological synapse . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 820 - 830 . Dai , J . , Ting - Beall , H . P . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . The secretion - coupled endocytosis correlates with membrane tension changes in RBL 2H3 cells . J . Gen . Physiol . 110 , 1 - 10 . Derivery , E . and Gautreau , A . ( 2010 ) . Generation of branched actin networks : assembly and regulation of the N - WASP and WAVE molecular machines . BioEssays 32 , 119 - 131 . Derivery , E . , Fink , J . , Martin , D . , Houdusse , A . , Piel , M . , Stradal , T . E . , Louvard , D . and Gautreau , A . ( 2008 ) . Free Brick1 is a trimeric precursor in the assembly of a functional wave complex . PLoS ONE 3 , e2462 . Derivery , E . , Lombard , B . , Loew , D . and Gautreau , A . ( 2009 ) . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 777 - 790 . Dugast , M . , Toussaint , H . , Dousset , C . and Benaroch , P . ( 2005 ) . AP2 clathrin adaptor complex , but not AP1 , controls the access of the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class II to endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 19656 - 19664 . Echard , A . , Hickson , G . R . , Foley , E . and O’Farrell , P . H . ( 2004 ) . Terminal cytokinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1685 - 1693 . Enari , M . , Ohmori , K . , Kitabayashi , I . and Taya , Y . ( 2006 ) . Requirement of clathrin heavy chain for p53 - mediated transcription . Genes Dev . 20 , 1087 - 1099 . Gautreau , A . , Ho , H . - y . H . , Li , J . , Steen , H . , Gygi , S . P . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2004 ) . Purification and architecture of the ubiquitous Wave Complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 4279 - 4283 . Insall , R . H . and Machesky , L . M . ( 2009 ) . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : from simple machinery to complex networks . Dev . Cell 17 , 310 - 322 . Ismail , A . M . , Padrick , S . B . , Chen , B . , Umetani , J . and Rosen , M . K . ( 2009 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 561 - 563 . Kiger , A . A . , Baum , B . , Jones , S . , Jones , M . R . , Coulson , A . , Echeverri , C . and Perrimon , N . ( 2003 ) . A functional genomic analysis of cell morphology using RNA interference . J . Biol . 2 , 27 . Kobayashi , K . , Kuroda , S . , Fukata , M . , Nakamura , T . , Nagase , T . , Nomura , N . , Matsuura , Y . , Yoshida - Kubomura , N . , Iwamatsu , A . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1998 ) . Journal of Cell Science 124 ( 20 ) 3426 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e p140Sra - 1 ( specifically Rac1 - associated protein ) is a novel specific target for Rac1 small GTPase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 291 - 295 . Kunda , P . , Craig , G . , Dominguez , V . and Baum , B . ( 2003 ) . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of Scar / Wave to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1867 - 1875 . Lebensohn , A . M . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2009 ) . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol . Cell 36 , 512 - 524 . Machesky , L . M . and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 - 1356 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 - 3744 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 - 6941 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 - 735 . Oikawa , T . , Yamaguchi , H . , Itoh , T . , Kato , M . , Ijuin , T . , Yamazaki , D . , Suetsugu , S . and Takenawa , T . ( 2004 ) . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 420 - 426 . Palamidessi , A . , Frittoli , E . , Garre , M . , Faretta , M . , Mione , M . , Testa , I . , Diaspro , A . , Lanzetti , L . , Scita , G . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2008 ) . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 - 147 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 - 477 . Raucher , D . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Membrane expansion increases endocytosis rate during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 497 - 506 . Raucher , D . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 - 136 . Rempel , S . A . , Schwechheimer , K . , Davis , R . L . , Cavenee , W . K . and Rosenblum , M . L . ( 1993 ) . Loss of heterozygosity for loci on chromosome 10 is associated with morphologically malignant meningioma progression . Cancer Res . 53 , 2386 - 2392 . Robinson , M . S . ( 2004 ) . Adaptable adaptors for coated vesicles . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 167 - 174 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 - 1088 . Rohn , J . L . , Sims , D . , Liu , T . , Fedorova , M . , Schock , F . , Dopie , J . , Vartiainen , M . K . , Kiger , A . A . , Perrimon , N . and Baum , B . ( 2011 ) . Comparative RNAi screening identifies a conserved core metazoan actinome by phenotype . J Cell Biol . 194 , 789 - 804 . Royle , S . J . , Bright , N . A . and Lagnado , L . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 434 , 1152 - 1157 . Saint - Pol , A . , Yelamos , B . , Amessou , M . , Mills , I . G . , Dugast , M . , Tenza , D . , Schu , P . , Antony , C . , McMahon , H . T . , Lamaze , C . et al . ( 2004 ) . Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev . Cell 6 , 525 - 538 . Scita , G . and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2010 ) . The endocytic matrix . Nature 463 , 464 - 473 . Sossey - Alaoui , K . , Li , X . , Ranalli , T . A . and Cowell , J . K . ( 2005 ) . WAVE3 - mediated cell migration and lamellipodia formation are regulated downstream of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 21748 - 21755 . Steffen , A . , Rottner , K . , Ehinger , J . , Innocenti , M . , Scita , G . , Wehland , J . and Stradal , T . E . ( 2004 ) . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J . 23 , 749 - 759 . Suetsugu , S . , Kurisu , S . , Oikawa , T . , Yamazaki , D . , Oda , A . and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 571 - 585 . Takenawa , T . and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 - 48 . Weiner , O . D . , Neilsen , P . O . , Prestwich , G . D . , Kirschner , M . W . , Cantley , L . C . and Bourne , H . R . ( 2002 ) . A PtdInsP ( 3 ) - and Rho GTPase - mediated positive feedback loop regulates neutrophil polarity . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 509 - 513 . Weiner , O . D . , Rentel , M . C . , Ott , A . , Brown , G . E . , Jedrychowski , M . , Yaffe , M . B . , Gygi , S . P . , Cantley , L . C . , Bourne , H . R . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2006 ) . Hem - 1 complexes are essential for Rac activation , actin polymerization , and myosin regulation during neutrophil chemotaxis . PLoS Biol 4 , e38 . Yamazaki , D . , Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . , Kataoka , Y . , Nishikawa , S . , Fujiwara , T . , Yoshida , N . and Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) . WAVE2 is required for directed cell migration and cardiovascular development . Nature 424 , 452 - 456 . Clathrin in lamellipodium formation 3427 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e