zIncubascope zIncubascope : long - term quantitative imaging of multi - cellular assemblies inside an incubator Anirban Jana , 1 , 2 , 3 Naveen Mekhlieri , 1 , 2 Adeline Boyreau , 1 , 2 Aymerick Bazin , 1 , 2 Nadège Pujol , 3 Kevin Alessandri , 3 Gaëlle Recher , 1 , 2 Pierre Nassoy , 1 , 2 and Amaury Badon 1 , 2 1 ) LP2N , Laboratoire Photonique Numérique et Nanosciences , Univ . Bordeaux , F - 33400 Talence , France 2 ) Institut d’ Optique Graduate School & CNRS UMR 5298 , F - 33400 Talence , France 3 ) Treefrog Therapeutics , F - 33600 , Pessac , France ( * Electronic mail : amaury . badon @ institutoptique . fr ) ( Dated : 5 March 2024 ) Recent advances in bioengineering have made it possible to develop increasingly complex biological systems to recapit - ulate organ functions as closely as possible in vitro . Monitoring the assembly and growth of multi - cellular aggregates , micro - tissues or organoids and extracting quantitative information is a crucial but challenging task required to decipher the underlying morphogenetic mechanisms . We present here an imaging platform designed to be accommodated inside an incubator which provides high - throughput monitoring of cell assemblies over days and weeks . We exemplify the capabilities of our system by investigating human induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) enclosed in spherical cap - sules , hiPSCs in tubular capsules and yeast cells in spherical capsules . Combined with a customized pipeline of image analysis , our solution provides insight into the impact of confinement on the morphogenesis of these self - organized systems . I . INTRODUCTION Since the advent of novel microfabrication and microflu - idics techniques allowing a controlled production of three - dimensional cell cultures such as tumour spheroids or physio - mimetic organoids 1 , 2 , new needs in terms of optical imaging emerged . The search for novel techniques to improve the spa - tial resolution beyond the diffraction limit , with the constraint that acquisition times are inevitably restricted to a few seconds or minutes , is getting replaced with the quest for strategies that allow to monitor the growth and fate of these larger 3D supra - cellular assemblies . In particular , as mammalian cell cycle is of the order of one day , long - term imaging over several days to weeks is required to provide a dynamic perspective on biolog - ical processes . This is crucial for understanding phenomena with variable time scales , such as self - organization of cells , growth , and shape dynamics . Current efforts are mostly aimed at tackling two issues . The first one consists in performing a full 3D reconstruction of the organoids / spheroids to unveil the inner structure . This may require to “clear” the sample to reduce light absorption and scattering 3 , 4 with chemical treatment leading to sample fix - ation . Alternatively , optical techniques such as Optical Co - herence Tomography ( OCT ) 5 , 6 intrinsically improve the depth of light penetration and are exquisitely suited for live imag - ing since they are label - free methods and thus induce very low photo - toxicity . The second issue , which becomes cru - cial for screening applications , eg . in the pharmaceutical field , is to obtain statistics on the long - term fate of a large number of samples at the expense of information on the 3D structure . To this purpose , combining a sterile , temperature - and atmosphere - controlled environment in a sustained manner with optimal imaging capabilities becomes the main practical challenge . Conventional incubators that can precisely uphold such environments are available in all biology laboratories . However , displacing samples to and from the incubator to the microscopes is hazardous in terms of contamination risk and variations of the controlled environment . Automated imaging over time without repetitive manual intervention is thus highly sought - after . For imaging over days , the standard method is to enclose the entire microscope in an environmental box , which takes up space in the laboratory and is costly 7 – 9 . Moreover , the mi - croscope becomes unavailable over the imaging duration , hin - dering other experiments . Another readily practiced method is to mount an incubator chamber on the imaging platform of the microscope 7 – 9 . However , due to fluctuating conditions outside the chamber , condensation problems and light path disturbances may occur , compromising imaging for several days . Instead , installing an imaging setup in an incubator is easier and ensures a homogeneous environment for all the op - tical components , eliminating risks of differences in tempera - ture / humidity . Academic researchers and microscopy companies devel - oped compact solutions that comprises both the microscope module and the controlled environmental conditions 10 – 12 or systems that fit directly inside a conventional incubator 13 – 16 . While the majority of commercial solutions offer high opti - cal performances and automatic capabilities , the cost often re - mains prohibitive if needed outside dedicated imaging facili - ties . By contrast , academic solutions are usually cost - effective but specific to a targeted application . In this context , we re - cently developed a custom - made compact optical system ded - icated to the observation of a large population of multi - cellular spheroids or organoids 17 . More specifically , given the method we used to produce these three - dimensional aggregates that consists in encapsulating cell in hollow hydrogel ( namely al - ginate ) spherical capsules 18 , 19 , the samples are particularly sensitive to stage motion . To fulfil this requirement without compromising statistics , our “Incubascope” was designed to fit in a tabletop incubator and offer imaging over a large field of view in a single frame , i . e . without any sample motion 17 . zIncubascope 2 L2 CMOS LED L1 RM1 RM2 ZM GS TS MO SH LED L1 RM1 TS ( a ) ( b ) FIG . 1 . 3D rendering of the optical setup . ( a ) An orthogonal CAD representation of the zIncubascope , with illumination shown as a red cylinder , emerging from L1 . ( b ) A side view of the setup to highlight the optical path and the CMOS . In this first version , the apparatus was designed for imaging around 100 aggregates with a diameter of about 300 µm but at moderate spatial transverse and axial resolution ( 3 µm and 50 µm respectively ) . While this apparatus was particularly suitable to estimate the overall fate of a population of multi - cellular aggregates , the ability to investigate more finely at different spatial scales biological phenomena involving living spheroids or organoids was hindered due to the poor resolu - tion that was achieved . In this work , we present an augmented version of our ap - proach , which we coined the zIncubascope . The imaging setup has been improved from a hardware point of view in terms of compactness , versatility and the capability to image in the z - axis of the referential plane . It has also been supple - mented by a data analysis pipeline . Indeed , recognizing the importance of space inside an incubator , our zIncubascope has been engineered to occupy significantly less room com - pared to its predecessor . This gain in compactness is accom - panied by a decrease in the number of optical elements which in turn provides a simpler and more robust platform . Addi - tionally , the system is now compatible with microscope ob - jectives ( MO ) of different magnifications , so that spatial res - olution and field of view can be adapted to the sample and the purpose of the experiment . Finally , we developed custom - made codes to control the apparatus and to perform quantita - tive data analysis . In the following , we first describe the technical details and design principles that underpin our imaging platform , to en - able readers to grasp its features and capabilities , and to facil - itate replication of the platform . . Then , we provide a series of examples , highlighting the performance and versatility of the system across different biological samples , which are human induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) enclosed in spherical capsules , hiPSCs in tubular capsules and yeast cells in spher - ical capsules . In particular , we present evidence that the zIn - cubascope allows us to gain insight in the impact of confine - ment on the morphogenesis of these self - organized systems . II . IMAGING SETUP In this section , we describe the design and performances of the zIncubascope . More specifically , we detail ( 1 ) all opto - mechanical components required to achieve its assembly and the optical performances obtained , ( 2 ) the focus mechanism operation and capabilities and ( 3 ) the electric components . A . Imaging opto - mechanical components In this new version of a microscope inside an incubator , we have developed an imaging system with a minimal number of opto - mechanical components ( Thorlabs ) to ensure simplic - ity and ergonomics . For sample illumination , a single LED ( M625L4 LED , fig . 1 ) is used in combination with an aspheric lens ( L1 , fig . 1 ) to generate a collimated beam . A right - angle mirror mount ( KCB1 / M , RM1 , fig . 1 ) is used to redirect the beam from the horizontal to the vertical plane , illuminating the sample from above . The transmitted light is collected with an objective , whose magnification can be varied between 4X and 20X ( Olympus Plan Achromat 4X / 10X / 20X , MO , fig . 1 ) depending on the specific needs described in the results sec - tion . This plan - achromatic class of objectives provides rel - atively high numerical apertures ( NA = 0 . 10 - 0 . 4 ) for visible wavelengths , with large working distances ( 1 - 20 mm ) . This allows samples to be imaged through standard plastic Petri dishes ( bottom and slide thickness 1 mm , diameter = 35 mm ) , convenient for placement and media exchange . Customized 3D resin - printed platforms ( sample holder SH , fig . 1 ) are used to securely mount these Petri dishes . The dish fits snug in this mount to avoid displacements arising from external vi - brations or during change of media in the dish . The Petri dish holder is attached with a post onto a XYZ - translation stage ( LX30 / M , TS , fig . 1 ) . This translation stage can cover a vol - ume of 25x25x25 mm 3 which enables easy 3D localization of zIncubascope 3 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) 0 4 8 12 16 20 Pos ( µm ) 0 0 . 5 1 A . U . 7 | | 3 0 2 4 6 8 10 Pos ( µm ) 0 0 . 5 1 A . U . 8 | | 3 0 2 4 6 8 Pos ( µm ) 0 0 . 5 1 A . U . 8 | | 5 FIG . 2 . Optical performances of the experimental setup . Field of view and resolution obtained with ( a ) 4X ( red ) , scale bar = 500 µm , ( b ) 10X ( gold ) , ( c ) 20X ( blue ) objectives . the region of interests of the sample ( s ) in the Petri dish . The objective is fixed on a right - angle mirror mount ( KCB1 / M , RM2 , fig . 1 ) that reflects the signal to the horizontal plane onto a tube lens ( AC508 - 150 - A - ML , L2 , fig . 1 ) , that ultimately fo - cuses it onto a CMOS camera . The mirror mounts above and below the sample are easily screw - adjustable , facilitating rec - tifications in minor drifts of optical alignment that could ap - pear with time and usage . These corrections are necessary to obtain images with homogeneous contrast and minimal aber - rations . Utilization of three - dimensional space reduces the overall footprint of the system , without adding major com - plexities in the installation of the components . This system is designed to be modular , permitting reconfiguration or further compaction for specific purposes . It is even possible to ac - commodate an additional zIncubascope in the same incubator providing its size be at least 118 liters , which corresponds to the typical dimensions of incubators found in culture rooms . The CMOS camera used in the setup is a 20 - megapixel sensor with a pixel size of 2 . 4 x 2 . 4 µm 2 ( Basler acA5472 - 17um ) . As seen in Fig . 2 . a , in the imaging configurations of interest , the field of view ( FOV ) can be set at 6 x 4 mm 2 ( with the 4X objective ) , 2 . 3 x 1 . 6 mm 2 ( 10X ) and 1 . 15 x 0 . 8 mm 2 ( 20X ) . The theoretical resolution achieved is 3 . 8 µm ( 4X ) , 1 . 52 µm ( 10X ) and 0 . 95 µm ( 20X ) . In all cases the detection is diffrac - tion limited since each pixel on the camera is equivalent to 1 . 08 µm ( 4X ) , 0 . 432 µm ( 10X ) and 0 . 216 µm ( 20X ) . This is in agreement with the smallest elements visible on a USAF 1951 resolution target in the 3 different optical configurations ( Fig . 2 . b - d ) . B . Z - Drive system Organoids or 3D yeast assemblies imaged in this work have typical sizes in the range of 100 - 500 µm , but they are not monodisperse . Consequently , it is unlikely that all samples in the FOV have the same focal plane , thus leading to the ac - quisition of blurred images for most of them . Similarly , even the focal plane is initially chosen to have most samples in fo - cus , the growth of the aggregates will inevitably alter the fo - cus . This is all the more critical when objectives have high NA . Therefore , to acquire data from the full FOV , imaging in a single plane at any given time step is insufficient . Hence a simple servo motor ( ZM , fig . 3 . a ) ( Ref : MG996R , Tiankon - zIncubascope 4 gRC ) , with a suitable gear - train ( GS , fig . 3 . a ) is mounted on the Z - micrometer of the translation stage to ensure that in - focus images of all samples are taken at each time point . The resolution of the micrometer ( LX30 / M ) is 10 µm in dis - placement , and since we are not aiming for sub - cellular imag - ing ( typical size of cell 10 µm ) , the smallest stack size we chose is 10 µm . We observed that the servo motor used in the setup practically tends to lock and lacks consistency in angular rotations below 5 degrees . To address this limitation , we have set the minimum rotation step at 5 degrees . Considering these constraints and the fact that the servo motor has a maximum rotational range of 180 degrees , we have opted for a gear ratio of 36 : 25 ( driver : driven ) with the theoretical goal of achieving a minimum stack size of 10 µm over a range of 360 µm ( Fig . 3 . a ) . The gears are printed in resin ( envisionTEC HTM140 V2 ) using an Envision D4K 3D - printer . The gear ( G1 , in fig . 3 . a ) is secured with epoxy on a rotational stage with a sleeve that is mounted on the shaft of the motor . The driven gear ( G2 , fig . 3 ) is printed in the shape of a cap that is pressed fit on the knurled thimble of the micrometer . The motor - gear setup is mounted on a post and can be isolated from the micrometer to adjust the stage manually if needed . Through repeated testing using a customized setup ( see Supplementary Materials , section III C , Fig . S4 ) , the accuracy of the system has been evaluated for different step sizes with different pause intervals between each step to verify delays in movements . Overall , we have observed that the stage move - ment exhibits an accuracy ranging between 80 - 90 % . How - ever , local precision is very high , around 99 % for all step sizes , irrespective of pause intervals . In the applications de - scribed below , 3D reconstruction is not a primary aim com - pared to capturing events at different focal planes , and hence high precision time - lapses at selected focal planes without sig - nificant depth displacements are sufficient . C . Electrical and control components For illumination , the LED is controlled by a LED - driver ( LEDD1B ) modulated by an input voltage signal , generated through an Arduino ( Arduino DUE ) . The Arduino is also used to control the Z - motor , but the motor is powered and grounded with an isolated 5V USB input to avoid attenuation in the modulation of the illumination . The Arduino is com - manded using custom Python codes ( see Supplementary Ma - terials , section IV , Fig . S5 ) with a universal graphical user interface to ensure user - friendly control of the imaging sys - tem . III . RESULTS To validate the design , modularity , and performances of the zIncubascope , we have explored a variety of biological sam - ples with different system configurations . In this section , we will first monitor the luminogenesis of hiPSCs in spherical capsules ( section III A ) and study their morphology in tubular G1 ( n = 36 ) G2 ( n = 25 ) 5° step 10 µm step ( a ) 10 14 20 Command ( µm ) 5 10 15 20 A c he i v ed ( µ m ) 9 . 4 13 . 2 18 . 4 98 99 Precison ( % ) 0 100 200 300 P o s i t i on ( µ m ) ( b ) 0 10 20 30 40 Time ( s ) 0 100 200 300 P o s i t i on ( µ m ) ( c ) ( d ) 0 100 200 300 P o s i t i on ( µ m ) FIG . 3 . Mechanical performances of the axial scanning module . ( a ) Schematic of the gear - setup and motor mounted on the Z - microme - ter . ( b ) Step - sizes achieved for step - size commands . ( c ) Compilation of the steps achieved by the stage over 4 different runs at 10 µm step size commands with 1 second of resting time between successive steps . The horizontal shift in the curves is for easy visual interpreta - tion and has no physical significance . In snippet , a magnified section of the compilation . ( d ) Variation of the precision obtained from the 4 different runs ( shown in c ) at different positions . capsules ( III B ) at high spatial resolution . Finally , a demon - stration of the versatility of our approach will be demonstrated by imaging and analysing the growth of a large population of spherical capsules containing yeast at a reduced spatial reso - lution ( III C ) . Using the zIncubascope , we have studied the growth and behaviour of 3D colonies of hiPSCs in alginate spherical cap - sules . These capsules are obtained using a microfluidic encap - sulation technique called the Cellular Capsule technology 18 . Technical details about the method are provided in the sup - plementary materials ( section I C ) . The capsules typically have an outer diameter and a core diameter of 450 µm and 300 µm , respectively , with variations of about 10 % from one capsule to another 18 . Practically , from a given encapsulation batch , a few capsules are pipetted and seeded at the bottom of a poly - lysine coated Petri dish . In capsules containing a prototypical extracellular matrix , namely Matrigel ( Corning : 354234 ) , hiPSCs self - assemble and form cysts , i . e . spherical closed epithelia 20 . Depending on the initial seeding cell den - sity , only one or several cysts per capsule are nucleated and grow in the capsule compartment . These cysts have different sizes and are located at different depths inside the capsules . We thus took advantage of the z - drive system that we imple - mented to analyse the morphometric parameters of the cysts in time . zIncubascope 5 ( a ) ( b ) 2 5 1 3 4 FIG . 4 . 3D observation of hiPSCs in spherical capsules . ( a ) Full - field view of the Petri dish ( 2 . 3 x 1 . 6 mm 2 ) seeded with capsules with the stage positioned at 80 µm above an initial reference point ( position = 0 µm ) at t = 126 hours . Scale bar = 500 µm . ( b ) Cropped image of the capsule marked in ( a ) at four different focal positions ( 0 , 80 , 160 , 240 µm ) , allowing visualizations of the three cysts at different depths at t = 126 hours . Scale bar = 200 µm . A . Growth of 3D hiPSCs colonies in spherical alginate capsules Figure 4 . a shows a full field view ( ∼ 2 . 3 x 1 . 6 mm 2 ) of cysts - containing capsules in a Petri dish . Imaging is per - formed with a 10X objective for 100 hours ( Day 1 to Day 6 ) from 24 hours after encapsulation ( Day 0 ) . Image acquisition is performed every 90 minutes with z - step set at 40 µm over a range of 80 µm from Day 1 to Day 3 since the dynamics are slow and the cellular assemblies are relatively small ( Supp . Video 1 ) . From Day 4 till Day 6 images are acquired every 60 minutes over a stack of 240 µm with a step - size of 80 µm ( Supp . Video 2 , Supp . Video 3 ) . Culture medium is replen - ished on Day 1 , Day 2 , and Day 4 without removing the Petri dish from the imaging stage . In this configuration , at least 10 capsules can be imaged in full FOV with sufficient resolution for analysis and post - processing . As seen in Fig . 4 ( b ) , some cysts are out of focus for a given z position of the stage . How - ever , with the movable z - stage , all cysts in the field of view can ultimately be brought in focus ( Fig . 4 ( b ) ) , and thus be easily captured and analysed . Within the first 2 days after encapsulation , hiPSCs - laden capsules reside in a medium containing the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 , which is known to improve the survival of hiPSCs upon dissociation from 2D culture 21 . Y27632 is then removed on Day 2 to avoid alteration of the metabolism of hiPSCs 22 and we observed that the cells cluster ( Fig . 5 ( a ) , 59h post - encapsulation ) . A hollow cyst - like structure with a lumen ap - pears at the end of Day 2 ( Fig . 5 ( a ) , 62 - 65h ) , and the cell - layer continues to grow with expansion of the lumen ( Fig . 5 ( b ) ) over the following days . Quantification of the growth rate of these lumenized structures is performed from the end of Day 3 to Day 5 . Using a customized analysis ( see Supple - mentary Materials , II A , Fig . S1 ) , the thickness of the closed epithelium , t , and its internal radius , r , are measured at 70 positions around the cyst . ( Fig . 5 ( c ) ) . The cellular vol - ume is calculated using the spatially averaged thickness and lumen radius , considering the system as concentric spheres ( 4 / 3 × π × ( ( r + t ) 3 − r 3 ) ) . Fitting of the cellular volume with an exponential yields the apparent population doubling time ( PDT ) 20 assuming the volume increment is governed by cell proliferation and that changes in individual cell volumes can be neglected . The PDT obtained using an exponential fit on the data is 15±0 . 39 h ( N = 5 ) ( Fig . 5 ( d ) ) . This value is in agree - ment with proliferation rates reported in the literature for em - bryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells 23 – 25 , suggesting that death rate is negligible in our cellular capsules . Our anal - ysis also reveals that the thickness of the cell layer increases linearly with the lumen radius . Beyond a critical lumen ra - dius of around 40 µm , there is a change in the slope , and more specifically an enhanced thickening with lumen radius ( Fig . 5 ( e ) ) . This effect can be described using a generic morpho - elastic model by assuming that cyst growth is anisotropic 26 . However , deeper biological investigation , which is beyond the scope of the present paper , would be required to decipher the zIncubascope 6 93 h 113 h 123 h 133 h 103 h 5 ( c ) ( e ) ( f ) 113 h 123 h 133 h 103 h 1 ( d ) 59 h 62 h 65 h 68 h 71 h ( b ) ( a ) 93 h Detection Detec � on Image FIG . 5 . Spatio - temporal analysis of cyst shape in spherical capsules . ( a ) Emergence of a central lumen from a cluster of cells . Scale bar = 50 µm ( b ) Time lapse of cyst growing in capsule 1 and capsule 5 marked in Fig . 3 ( a ) over 40 hours at different preset z - positions over time . Scale bar = 200 µm ( c ) Detection of the cellular layer of the cyst to estimate the lumen radius and the thickness of the cyst . ( d ) Variation of the volume ( normalized with the initial volume of each cyst ) of the cell layer of the cysts ( marked in Fig . 4 ( a ) ) with time . ( t = 0 ) refers to 93h post encapsulation . ( e ) Evolution of the lumen radius of the cysts with the thickness for different cysts ( marked in Fig . 3 ) underlying mechanism . Note that in all experiments reported here , cysts have not reached confluence , i . e . hit the walls of the capsule and get confined , at Day 5 . As reported in 20 , this phenomenon usually occurs after Day 6 and is followed by a collapse of the lumen due to progressive thickening of the cellular envelope . B . hiPSCs growth and morphology in tubular alginate capsules In a D’Arcy Thomson perspective 27 , the second case of study described here consists in investigating how 3D hiPSCs colonies that spontaneously self - assemble into spherical cysts as shown above , will accommodate in a lower symmetry cap - sule . To do that , we encapsulated hiPSCs in hollow alginate tubes . The fabricated tubes ( see Supp . Materials , section I C ) typically have an outer diameter and a core diameter of around 260 µm and 170 - 185 µm , respectively , and has a length of around 1 m upon formation . In contrast to the closed spher - ical capsules , cysts are never completely confined in tubes . There is a partial release of confinement along the main axis of the tube . We have studied the growth dynamics and the role of partial confinement on the morphogenesis of these tubular cellular systems . A large FOV coupled with high spatial reso - lution and z - imaging capability offered by the zIncubasscope has been utilized to acquire and analyse these behaviours . As for capsules , the 10X configuration has been used . In the present imaging configuration , a length of around 1 . 6 mm of the tube can be accommodated in the FOV of 2 . 3 x 1 . 6 mm 2 ( Fig . 6 ( a ) ) . Practically , on Day 1 ( 24h after encapsulation ) , a section of the tube is selected , snipped , and placed on a poly - lysin coated Petri dish . In the FOV of 2 . 3 x 1 . 6 mm 2 shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) , we observed ( Supp . Video 4 ) that cells are ini - tially isolated or form tiny clusters of less than around 10 cells over the first 20 hours following encapsulation ( Day 0 ) . The cell density along the tube is heterogeneous and hence multi - ple cysts are formed . These assemblies seem to explore their surroundings along the length and width of the tube . With multi - focal acquisitions performed with steps of 20 µm , cells at different azimuthal positions can be resolved and monitored as they grow ( Fig . 6 ( b ) ) . As in the case of spherical capsules ( section III A ) , nucle - zIncubascope 7 20 h ( a ) 29 h 38 h 47 h 56 h 65 h 20 h ( b ) FIG . 6 . Early - time observation of hiPSCs growth in tubular capsules . ( a ) Full - field view of the petri - dish with an alginate tube at a stage positioned 30 µm above an initial reference position ( 0 µm ) at 20 hours after encapsulation . Scale bar = 200 µm . Insert : A region of interest in the tube at a focal plane 80 µm above the reference position . The inner and outer diameter of the hollow tube is shown with the green and yellow dotted lines , respectively . Scale bar ( for insert ) = 100 µm ( b ) In the region marked by a white ROI in ( a ) , appearance of clusters from single cells is shown over 45 hours ( day 1 to day 2 ) at 30 µm above an initial reference depth from the beginning of imaging . Scale bar ( for b ) = 200 µm . ation of a central lumen in small aggregates is observed at the end of Day 2 . The nascent cysts are observed to grow and glide along the axis of the tube , till they get confined radially by the alginate wall . From an initial spherical shape , the as - pect ratio of the cysts increases i . e . they become cylindrical cysts ( Fig . 7 ( a ) ) . Note that , since the time required for the cyst to be confined depends on the initial size of the cyst , and thus the initial cell density distribution , all events from cell clustering , lumen formation , spherical cyst growth to cyst de - formation can be captured within a single experiment using our setup . We have analysed one single cyst as it grows in a confined configuration from the end of Day 3 to Day 4 ( Fig . 7 ( a ) ) . Fig . 7 ( b ) shows the relative variations of the length and width of the cyst normalized by their dimension ( length and thickness , respectively ) L 0 taken at reference time ( cor - responding to 91 . 5 h post initiation of imaging ) as a function of time . An increase of 90 % in the axial length and 10 % increment in the radial direction within 18 hours of growth are observed . The centroid of the cyst undergoes minimal dis - placements with relatively higher displacements in the uncon - fined axial direction ( Fig . 7 ( b ) , insert ) . This implies similar proliferating fronts on both sides of the cyst axis and confine - ment of the system radially . Growth of the tubular cyst is characterized by measuring the volume of the cellular layer according to V = A × D , where A is the projected area and D is the diameter ( shown as width in Fig . 7 ( b ) ) of the tubular cyst . Similar to the spheri - cal cysts described above , the system undergoes an exponen - tial volume increase with an apparent PDT of 15 hours ( Fig . 7 ( c ) ) , suggesting that partial radial confinement does not slow zIncubascope 8 93 h 99 h 105 h 111 h 117 h ( a ) ( d ) 91 . 5 h 94 . 5 h 97 . 5 h 100 . 5 h 103 . 5 h 112 . 5 h 109 . 5 h 106 . 5 h 129 h 111 h 105 h 123 h 117 h 99 h ( f ) ( g ) 139 h 0 6 12 18 Time ( hrs ) 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 V / V 0 0 6 12 18 Time ( hrs ) 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 8 L / L 0 length width 0 10 20 30 Time ( hrs ) 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 h / h 0 radial axial 0 2 4 L ( % ) 0 2 4 W ( % ) ( e ) ( c ) ( b ) FIG . 7 . Multi - scale spatio - temporal observation and analysis of hIPSCs in tubular capsules . ( a ) Timelapse of an isolated cyst from 91 . 5 hours after encapsulation . Scale bar = 200 µm . ( b ) Variation of length ( resp . width ) of the cyst ( as shown in ( a ) ) over 18 hours with L 0 being the initial length ( resp . width ) at reference time t = 0 ( taken 91 . 5h after encapsulation ) . Length is marked by the blue line , width by the gold line . ( c ) Volume variation ( normalized with volume V 0 at t = 0 ) of the cell layer , as outlined in red in ( a ) . ( d ) Post - processed time - lapse of the cyst assembly shown in ( a ) as it proliferates . The thickness of the cell layer at the radial ( gold lines ) and axial ( green lines ) positions of the cyst front are measured and shown in gold and green , respectively . Scale bar = 200 µm . ( e ) Variation of the average thicknesses measured in the positions shown in ( d ) . The lines are visual guides . h 0 is the axial ( resp . radial ) thickness normalized by the value at time t = 0 corresponding to 91 . 5h post - encapsulation . ( f ) Full - field view time lapse of cysts as they proliferate in the tube captured at 100 µm above the reference position ( 0 µm ) . Scale bar = 200 µm . ( g ) Images of the tube at depths of 0 µm and 100 µm at t = 139h highlighting different features of the tube . ( Top ) The cell layer trapped in the lumen of the tube revealing incomplete fusions . ( Bottom ) The difference in cell - layer width at the axial tip and radial positions of the elongating cyst . Scale bar = 200 µm . down the proliferation rate of the cells within this cellular as - sembly . However , striking changes in the local morphology of the cellular envelope are frequently observed ( Fig . 7 ( d ) ) . The tip of the tubular cyst , which has no interaction with the alginate tube exhibits a cell layer that becomes progressively thinner and flattens as it continues to expand in the tube . In zIncubascope 9 contrast , the cell layer in contact with the inner alginate wall thickens with time . Figure 7 ( e ) displays the axial and radial thicknesses of the epithelium normalized to the local thick - ness at reference time t = 0 . The radial thickening is concomi - tant with the thinning of the cell layer at the tip . In Fig . 7 ( d ) , at time t = 111 h , or equivalently t = 19 . 5 h post - reference time , a cyst , resulting from the “docking” between two cysts ( on the left ) , comes in contact with another cylindrical cyst ( on the right ) . No striking change in the evolution of the thickness of the cyst tips is observed , suggesting that the interaction be - tween cysts does not affect the overall growth dynamics of the cellular assemblies of hiPSCs . Using the full FOV provided by the zIncubascope with the 10X objective , we then sought to inspect the processes that occur when multiple cylindrical cysts encounter each other . We most often observe that a layer of cells remains visible between the colliding cysts , indicating that , instead of coales - cence , cysts only dock to each other and leave “scars” . The two cell layers do not fuse but get distorted as the cellular assembly continues to grow ( Fig . 7 ( f ) , Fig . 7 ( g ) ( top ) ) , sug - gesting local differences in cell proliferation rates . Acquiring at multiple focal depths reveals peculiar features along the cel - lular tube axis at late stages of growth . In the reference focal plane ( z = 0 µm ) , Fig . 7 ( g ) ( bottom ) highlights that the free end of the cyst persists to be thin and flattened . At a depth of 100 µm above the reference position , in the region of con - frontation of the cysts , a cellular ridge spanning across the width of the tube is clearly observed and remains persistent for hours . These unique features can be easily captured and analysed over long periods of time , providing insights into the behaviour of partially confined hiPSCs assemblies . C . Yeast encapsulated in capsules The experiments reported above have focused on the study of mammalian cells . To demonstrate the versatility of our ap - proach , we then investigated yeast cells ( Saccharomyces cere - visiae ) encapsulated in alginate capsules . Yeast cells are gen - erally between 5 and 10 µm in diameter and proliferate in the form of clusters in the capsules that can be easily monitored with a low resolution objective ( Olympus Plan Achromat 4X , NA = 0 . 1 ) . The capsules are seeded on a poly - Lysine - coated Petri dish . Since the proliferation rate is expected to be much faster than mammalian cells ( in the 1 . 5 - 4 . 5 h range in fermen - tative conditions depending on temperature , with an optimal temperature around 20°C ) 28 , 29 , a time step of 15 minutes is set , and a single depth of focus is imaged ( Supp . Video 5 ) . The culture media is unchanged over the course of this ac - quisition . The imaging setup is placed in ambient tempera - ture to match the sub - optimal fermentation growth conditions in wine or beer production and acquisition is initiated 1 - hour post - encapsulation . In this configuration , we obtain a FOV of 6 x 4 mm 2 that allows around 100 capsules to be imaged in a single image ( Fig . 8 . ( a ) ) . As yeast division time is short , we readily observe the expansion of yeast cells inside capsules . In only few hours , most of the capsules get dark as the aggregates grow and den - sify ( Fig . 8 . ( c ) ) . To quantitatively assess the proliferation rate of yeast cells , we take benefit of the fact that , even on such a large FOV , the homogeneity of the illumination is constant , which permits to perform intensity measurements ( Fig . 8 . ( b ) ) . As a proof - of - concept , we restrict our study to 6 capsules taken randomly at different spots of the FOV to estimate the volume of the yeast cluster as a function of time ( Supplemen - tary Materials , section II C ) . A characteristic depth or thick - ness of the aggregate is calculated for each pixel using the Beer - Lambert’s law . The volume is derived by multiplying this length by the area of the pixel . The integration of these elementary “pixel volumes” yields the volume at a given time step . An exponential fit is then performed on the normalized volumetric growth from 4 hours after initiation of imaging to estimate the doubling time of the aggregate , which is found to be equal to 330 ± 35 minutes ( n = 6 ) , in agreement with the range of reported values in the literature 28 , 29 . The delay in at - taining an exponential regime of growth can be assigned to a lag phase in which yeast cells are metabolically active but still do not proliferate 30 . Besides the encapsulated yeast , we ob - serve free floating yeast cells in the medium , which might be due to ill - formed capsules generating leaks . Growth of these free yeast leads to a rapid coverage of the Petri dish , which darkens the field of view and imposes to stop acquisition after only 12 hours ( Supp . Video 5 ) . IV . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION In this work , we have developed the zIncubascope , an imag - ing platform which is a tailored solution for medium - to - high - throughput monitoring of cell assemblies inside an incuba - tor . The utility and performances of our setup have been ex - emplified by imaging hiPSCs cysts encapsulated in alginate capsules of spherical and tubular shapes over days as well as encapsulated yeast clusters over hours . The spatial and tem - poral resolution achievable with this setup allow us to per - form quantitative analysis on a statistically sufficient number of samples in a single experimental run . We developed a cus - tomized pipeline of image analysis codes which , when com - bined with our experimental setup , offers a compact , versatile , and cost - effective imaging solution . First , our apparatus was designed to fit on a small bread - board ( 25x30 cm ) in order to be accommodated inside an in - cubator . In this new configuration , two zIncubascopes can even be housed inside standard incubators , thus increasing the capability of imaging either more numerous or more diverse samples . The imaging setup has been designed with the per - spective of easy installation and maintenance . This solution is based only on the shelf components and 3D printed parts for which CAD files are provided ( see GitHub page 31 ) . The ergonomy of our solution also lies in the codes we have devel - oped in Python to control the apparatus . Instructions on how to install and adapt these open - source codes are also provided . The second main advantage of our experimental apparatus is its versatility in terms of field of view and spatial resolution . In contrast to our previous work 17 where the system was de - signed for a large parfocal length microscope objective ( MO ) , zIncubascope 10 ( c ) 1 2 3 0 h 2 h 4 h 6 h 8 h 10 h 12 h 0 h 2 h 4 h 6 h 8 h 10 h 12 h 0 h 2 h 4 h 6 h 8 h 10 h 12 h 1 2 3 4 5 1 4 7 6 ( a ) ( b ) 7 0 4 8 12 Time ( hrs ) 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 V / V 0 ( d ) FIG . 8 . Large - scale observation of encapsulated yeast . ( a ) Full - field view ( 6 x 4 mm 2 ) of the Petri dish seeded with capsules encapsulated with yeast . Scale bar 1 mm . ( b ) Expanded version of capsules from the extremities of the FOV highlighting the homogeneity of the illumination and focal plane . Scale bars = 100 µm ( c ) Time lapse of proliferation of the yeast aggregates in capsules ( marked in ( a ) ) from 5 hours post - encapsulation over 12 hours . ( d ) Variation of the volume ( normalized with the initial volume of each aggregate ) of the yeast aggregates ( marked in ( a ) ) with time . ( t = 0 ) refers to 5 h post encapsulation . An exponential fit is performed from 75 minutes . here our system is compatible with all MO whose parfocal length is equal to 45 mm . By simply changing the MO , we can explore different systems at different spatial scales as il - lustrated in this work . It is worth pointing out that all experi - ments were carried out in bright field mode , as we decided to keep the hardware as simple as possible . Integrating an epi - fluorescence mode will indeed augment the capacities at the expense of increased complexity and price , which is here be - low 3k C ( without the computer and incubator ) . Thirdly , we have addressed the imaging analysis difficulty by developing custom made codes both in Python and Matlab ( available at 31 ) . These streamlined codes are convenient to use and to adapt to similar cases without advanced program - ming knowledge . No deep - learning or GPU use that can be more challenging to implement are necessary . Yet , our simple analysis enabled us to address diverse biological behaviours and unveil unreported behaviours of hiPSCs lumenized clus - ters . Indeed , while self - assembly of hiPSCs into cysts that resemble lumenized epiblast found in the development of an embryo 32 has been reported in vitro previously 20 , 33 – 35 , we bring evidence for new morphological observations . First , in contrast with other advanced methods consisting in tracking single cells with rainbow reporters 25 , we could estimate the population doubling time ( PDT ) of hiPSCs in these 3D cysts by accurate monitoring of the volume of the epithelial layer . Second , we obtained hints that cyst growth seems to occur in two phases ( Fig . 5 ( e ) ) . Third , the qualitative observation that i ) growth of cylindrical cysts in conditions of partial confine - ment in a tubular capsule leads to the spontaneous emergence of anisotropic morphology marked by thin tips , and ii ) cylin - drical cysts docking most often leads to incomplete coales - cence , suggesting that merging of hiPSC epithelia is inhibited via their basal side reinforced by a basal membrane . We hope that the dual advantage in the hardware implementation and the customized analytic pipeline will be a major asset for a wider dissemination . zIncubascope 11 Our solution was shown to be suitable and sufficient to ob - tain sharp images of hollow three - dimensional samples , with - out the use of deep - learning techniques 36 . However , scat - tering and aberrations tend to prevent observations of thick samples in depth with enough contrast such as in the case of solid spheroids . In such configurations , projected images have been used to monitor and analyse the growth of multi - cellular assemblies 18 . Finally , even with a motorized stage in the axial direction , it is of note that our apparatus does not perform optical sectioning , thus true 3D imaging . Using the framework of the zIncubascope , with the addition of mini - mal opto - mechanical components , we aim to implement ad - vanced imaging techniques like optical coherence tomography or light field microscopy to address the current constraints . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all the other members of the BiOf ( Bioimaging and Optofluidic ) team , in particular Camille Douillet , Au - rélien Richard , Laetitia Andrique , Léon Rembotte , Fernanda Lopez - Garcia , for beta testing the device and suggesting im - provements . We are also grateful to all the colleagues that encouraged us to develop a user - friendly version of the zIn - cubascope by expressing enthusiastically their need for such an instrument . This project was supported by grants from the French National Agency for Research ( ANR - 22 - CE42 - 0019 , ANR - 21 - CE18 - 0038 , ANR - 21 - CE19 - 0029 ) and the In - stitut National du Cancer ( PLBIO 20 - 135 ) . The authors also acknowledge the financial support from the Grand Research Program « LIGHT » Idex University of Bordeaux , the Gradu - ate program « EUR Light S & T » PIA3 ANR - 17 - EURE - 0027 and GdR ImaBio . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request . REFERENCES 1 S . Yang , H . Hu , H . Kung , R . Zou , Y . Dai , Y . Hu , T . Wang , T . Lv , J . Yu , and F . Li , “Organoids : The current status and biomedical applications , ” MedComm 4 , e274 ( 2023 ) . 2 J . Kim , B . - K . Koo , and J . A . Knoblich , “Human organoids : model systems for human biology and medicine , ” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 21 , 571 – 584 ( 2020 ) . 3 L . Lallemant , C . Lebreton , and M . Garfa - Traoré , “Comparison of differ - ent clearing and acquisition methods for 3d imaging of murine intestinal organoids , ” Journal of Biological Methods 7 ( 2020 ) . 4 E . A . Susaki and M . Takasato , “Perspective : extending the utility of three - dimensional organoids by tissue clearing technologies , ” Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 9 , 679226 ( 2021 ) . 5 S . Azzollini , T . Monfort , O . Thouvenin , and K . Grieve , “Dynamic optical coherence tomography for cell analysis , ” Biomedical Optics Express 14 , 3362 – 3379 ( 2023 ) . 6 T . Monfort , S . Azzollini , J . Brogard , M . Clémençon , A . Slembrouck - Brec , V . Forster , S . Picaud , O . Goureau , S . Reichman , O . Thouvenin , et al . , “Dy - namic full - field optical coherence tomography module adapted to commer - cial microscopes allows longitudinal in vitro cell culture study , ” Communi - cations Biology 6 , 992 ( 2023 ) . 7 https : / / www . lis . ch / thebox . html . 8 http : / / www . oko - lab . com / . 9 https : / / www . tokaihit . com / . 10 https : / / www . sartorius . com / en / products / live - cell - imaging - analysis / live - cell - analysis - instruments . 11 https : / / www . perkinelmer . com / fr / product / opera - phenix - plus - system - hh14001000 . 12 https : / / www . zeiss . com / microscopy / fr / produits / systemes - d - imagerie / celldiscoverer - 7 . html . 13 G . Gürkan and K . Gürkan , “Incu - stream 1 . 0 : an open - hardware live - cell imaging system based on inverted bright - field microscopy and automated mechanical scanning for real - time and long - term imaging of microplates in incubator , ” IEEE Access 7 , 58764 – 58779 ( 2019 ) . 14 D . Jin , D . Wong , J . Li , Z . Luo , Y . Guo , B . Liu , Q . Wu , C . - M . Ho , and P . Fei , “Compact wireless microscope for in - situ time course study of large scale cell dynamics within an incubator , ” Scientific reports 5 , 18483 ( 2015 ) . 15 G . O . Merces , C . Kennedy , B . Lenoci , E . G . Reynaud , N . Burke , and M . Pickering , “The incubot : A 3d printer - based microscope for long - term live cell imaging within a tissue culture incubator , ” HardwareX 9 , e00189 ( 2021 ) . 16 B . Diederich , R . Lachmann , S . Carlstedt , B . Marsikova , H . Wang , X . Uwu - rukundo , A . S . Mosig , and R . Heintzmann , “A versatile and customizable low - cost 3d - printed open standard for microscopic imaging , ” Nature com - munications 11 , 5979 ( 2020 ) . 17 A . Badon , L . Andrique , A . Mombereau , L . Rivet , A . Boyreau , P . Nassoy , and G . Recher , “The incubascope : a simple , compact and large field of view microscope for long - term imaging inside an incubator , ” Royal Society Open Science 9 , 211444 ( 2022 ) . 18 K . Alessandri , B . R . Sarangi , V . V . Gurchenkov , B . Sinha , T . R . Kießling , L . Fetler , F . Rico , S . Scheuring , C . Lamaze , A . Simon , et al . , “Cellular capsules as a tool for multicellular spheroid production and for investigating the mechanics of tumor progression in vitro , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 , 14843 – 14848 ( 2013 ) . 19 K . Alessandri , M . Feyeux , B . Gurchenkov , C . Delgado , A . Trushko , K . - H . Krause , D . Vignjevi´c , P . Nassoy , and A . Roux , “A 3d printed microfluidic device for production of functionalized hydrogel microcapsules for culture and differentiation of human neuronal stem cells ( hnsc ) , ” Lab on a Chip 16 , 1593 – 1604 ( 2016 ) . 20 P . J . Cohen , E . Luquet , J . Pletenka , A . Leonard , E . Warter , B . Gurchenkov , J . Carrere , C . Rieu , J . Hardouin , F . Moncaubeig , et al . , “Engineering 3d micro - compartments for highly efficient and scale - independent expansion of human pluripotent stem cells in bioreactors , ” Biomaterials 295 , 122033 ( 2023 ) . 21 K . Watanabe , M . Ueno , D . Kamiya , A . Nishiyama , M . Matsumura , T . Wataya , J . B . Takahashi , S . Nishikawa , S . - i . Nishikawa , K . Muguruma , et al . , “A rock inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells , ” Nature biotechnology 25 , 681 – 686 ( 2007 ) . 22 S . I . Vernardis , K . Terzoudis , N . Panoskaltsis , and A . Mantalaris , “Human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells maintain phenotype but al - ter their metabolism after exposure to rock inhibitor , ” Scientific reports 7 , 42138 ( 2017 ) . 23 L . Liu , W . Michowski , A . Kolodziejczyk , and P . Sicinski , “The cell cy - cle in stem cell proliferation , pluripotency and differentiation , ” Nature cell biology 21 , 1060 – 1067 ( 2019 ) . 24 K . W . Orford and D . T . Scadden , “Deconstructing stem cell self - renewal : genetic insights into cell - cycle regulation , ” Nature Reviews Genetics 9 , 115 – 128 ( 2008 ) . 25 D . El - Nachef , K . Shi , K . M . Beussman , R . Martinez , M . C . Regier , G . W . Everett , C . E . Murry , K . R . Stevens , J . E . Young , N . J . Sniadecki , et al . , “A rainbow reporter tracks single cells and reveals heterogeneous cellular dynamics among pluripotent stem cells and their differentiated derivatives , ” Stem Cell Reports 15 , 226 – 241 ( 2020 ) . 26 J . Ackermann , P . J . Cohen , K . Alessandri , A . Leonard , P . Nassoy , J . - F . Joanny , and M . B . Amar , “Morpho - elasticity of human pluripotent stem cell cysts , ” Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 160 , 104778 zIncubascope 12 ( 2022 ) . 27 D . Thompson , “On growth and form . ( ed . bonner , jt ) cambridge , ” ( 1992 ) . 28 M . L . Slater , S . O . Sharrow , and J . J . Gart , “Cell cycle of saccha - romycescerevisiae in populations growing at different rates . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 74 , 3850 – 3854 ( 1977 ) . 29 K . Y . F . Lip , E . García - Ríos , C . E . Costa , J . M . Guillamón , L . Domingues , J . Teixeira , and W . M . van Gulik , “Selection and subsequent physiolog - ical characterization of industrial saccharomyces cerevisiae strains during continuous growth at sub - and - supra optimal temperatures , ” Biotechnology Reports 26 , e00462 ( 2020 ) . 30 B . R . Gibson , S . J . Lawrence , J . P . Leclaire , C . D . Powell , and K . A . Smart , “Yeast responses to stresses associated with industrial brewery handling , ” FEMS microbiology reviews 31 , 535 – 569 ( 2007 ) . 31 https : / / github . com / BiOflab / zIncubascope . 32 M . N . Shahbazi , “Mechanisms of human embryo development : from cell fate to tissue shape and back , ” Development 147 , dev190629 ( 2020 ) . 33 M . N . Shahbazi , A . Jedrusik , S . Vuoristo , G . Recher , A . Hupalowska , V . Bolton , N . M . Fogarty , A . Campbell , L . G . Devito , D . Ilic , et al . , “Self - organization of the human embryo in the absence of maternal tissues , ” Na - ture cell biology 18 , 700 – 708 ( 2016 ) . 34 K . Taniguchi , Y . Shao , R . F . Townshend , Y . - H . Tsai , C . J . DeLong , S . A . Lopez , S . Gayen , A . M . Freddo , D . J . Chue , D . J . Thomas , et al . , “Lumen formation is an intrinsic property of isolated human pluripotent stem cells , ” Stem Cell Reports 5 , 954 – 962 ( 2015 ) . 35 M . Simunovic , J . J . Metzger , F . Etoc , A . Yoney , A . Ruzo , I . Martyn , G . Croft , D . S . You , A . H . Brivanlou , and E . D . Siggia , “A 3d model of a human epiblast reveals bmp4 - driven symmetry breaking , ” Nature cell biology 21 , 900 – 910 ( 2019 ) . 36 T . Kassis , V . Hernandez - Gordillo , R . Langer , and L . G . Griffith , “Or - gaquant : Intestinal organoid localization and quantification using deep con - volutional neural networks , ” bioRxiv , 438473 ( 2018 ) .