T h e J ou r n a l o f E x p e r i m e n t a l M e d i c i n e ARTICLE JEM © The Rockefeller University Press $ 15 . 00 Vol . 204 , No . 6 , June 11 , 2007 1395 – 1403 www . jem . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20070234 1395 Buruli ulcer ( BU ) , caused by Mycobacterium ulcer - ans ( Mu ) , is the third most common mycobacte - rial disease , after tuberculosis and leprosy , and represents an emerging global threat , with a markedly increased incidence in tropical coun - tries over the last decade ( 1 ) . Infection with Mu leads to destruction of both cutaneous and subcu - taneous tissues . The pathology of BU is strongly associated with the production of mycolactone , because injection of purifi ed toxin into the skin of guinea pigs is suffi cient to provoke ulcers , and strains of Mu defi cient for its biosynthesis do not cause disease ( 2 ) . The human immune response to Mu follows a complex scheme consisting of three phases . Lesions typically start as a single , painless , acid - fast positive subcutaneous nodule , edema , or plaque , enlarging over time . Histopathological analysis of human and animal skin biopsies ( 3 – 5 ) , as well as quantitative measurement of cytokine mRNAs in human tissues ( 6 , 7 ) , have shown that nod - ules are the site of potent Th1 cell – oriented anti - mycobacterial infl ammatory responses . As the disease progresses , ulcers eventually form and are characterized by extensive necrosis of subcuta - neous tissues and dermal collagen ( 4 ) . Surprisingly , in the face of considerable cellular necrosis , there is minimal infl ammation . Moreover , sup - pression of Th 1 responses , as indicated by de - fective systemic production of IFN - γ , has been repeatedly reported in BU patients with active ulcers ( 7 – 12 ) . Importantly , the defect in the IFN - γ response by T cells is not antigen specifi c and resolves during healing or after surgical excision of the lesions ( 11 , 12 ) , thus indicating Selective suppression of dendritic cell functions by Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin mycolactone Emmanuelle Coutanceau , 1 Jeremie Decalf , 3 Angelo Martino , 2 Aurélie Babon , 2 Nathalie Winter , 2 Stewart T . Cole , 1 Matthew L . Albert , 3 and Caroline Demangel 1 1 Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Bactérienne and 2 Unité de Génétique Mycobactérienne , Genomes and Genetics Department , Institut Pasteur , 75724 Paris , Cedex 15 , France 3 Immunobiologie des Cellules Dendritiques , Immunology Department , Institut Pasteur , 75724 Paris , Cedex 15 , France Mycolactone is a polyketide toxin produced by Mycobacterium ulcerans ( Mu ) , the causative agent of the skin disease Buruli ulcer ( BU ) . Surprisingly , infected tissues lack infl ammatory infi ltrates . Structural similarities between mycolactone and immunosuppressive agents led us to investigate the immunomodulatory properties of mycolactone on dendritic cells ( DCs ) , the key initiators and regulators of immune responses . At noncytotoxic concentrations , phenotypic and functional maturation of both mouse and human DCs was inhibited by mycolactone . Notably , mycolactone blocked the emigration of mouse - skin DCs to draining lymph nodes , as well as their maturation in vivo . In human peripheral blood – derived DCs , mycolactone inhibited the ability to activate allogeneic T cell priming and to produce infl ammatory molecules . Interestingly , production of the cytokines interleukin ( IL ) 12 , tumor necrosis factor 𝛂 , and IL - 6 was only marginally affected , whereas production of the chemo - kines macrophage infl ammatory protein ( MIP ) 1 𝛂 , MIP - 1 𝛃 , regulated on activation , normal T cell expressed and secreted , interferon 𝛄 – inducible protein 10 , and monocyte chemo - attractant protein 1 was abolished at nanomolar concentrations . Importantly , mycolactone endogenously expressed by Mu mediated similar inhibitory effects on 𝛃 - chemokine produc - tion by DCs . In accordance with the histopathological features of BUs , our results suggest that bacterial production of mycolactone may limit both the initiation of primary immune responses and the recruitment of infl ammatory cells to the infection site . Moreover , they highlight a potential interest in mycolactone as a novel immunosuppressive agent . CORRESPONDENCECaroline Demangel : demangel @ pasteur . fr Abbreviations used : ADLN , auricular draining lymph node ; BU , Buruli ulcer ; iDC and mDC , immature and mature DC , respectively ; IP , IFN - γ – inducible protein ; MCP , mono - cyte chemoattractant protein ; MFI , mean fl uorescence inten - sity ; MIP , macrophage infl am - matory protein ; Mycobacterium ulcerans , Mu ; PGE 2 , prostaglandin E 2 ; PI , propidium iodide ; PKS , polyketide synthase ; RANTES , regulated on activation , normal T cell expressed and secreted ; TLR , Toll - like receptor . E . Coutanceau and J . Decalf contributed equally to this study . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . 1396 DENDRITIC CELL IMMUNOSUPPRESSION BY MYCOLACTONE | Coutanceau et al . that the presence of Mu is critical for local and systemic sup - pression of cellular responses . Intriguingly , the structure of mycolactone reveals a mac - rocyclic polyketide , typical of a large class of natural products produced by actinomycetes . The structure of mycolactone shares similar features with the macrocyclic triene rapamycin from Streptomyces , the macrolide lactone FK506 , and the soil fungi metabolite cyclosporine A , all potent immunosuppres - sive drugs altering the functional immunobiology of lym - phocytes and DCs ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jem . org / cgi / content / full / jem . 20070234 / DC1 ) . DCs are key players in the initiation of cellular responses and the regulatory processes leading to impaired cellular immunity . On the basis of the structural resemblances of mycolactone with these immunosuppressors , and from the observation that BU patients with active ulcers display cellular anergy , we postulated that mycolactone may exert immunomodulatory properties on DCs . The present study utilizes both mouse and human primary DCs and demonstrates that mycolactone is indeed a potent suppressor of the capacity of DCs to prime cellular immune responses and produce the chemotactic signals critical for the initiation of an infl ammatory response . Our results provide novel information into the pathogenesis of Mu infection and further characterize a potentially useful immunosuppres - sive agent . RESULTS Effect of mycolactone on DC viability Given the data that mycolactone induces cell death in several cell types , it was initially important to assess the impact of the toxin on DC viability . The induction of apoptosis in immature and mature DC ( iDC and mDC , respectively ) preparations after exposure to mycolactone for 24 – 48 h was determined by phosphatidylserine exposure ( Annexin V staining ) and loss of membrane integrity ( propidium iodide [ PI ] staining ) . In both mouse and human DCs , we observed a dose - dependent in - crease in the percentage of apoptotic iDCs ( Fig . 1 , A and C ) . Induction of apoptosis nevertheless remained marginal with mycolactone doses < 50 ng / ml . Interestingly , iDCs of both mouse and human origin were more sensitive to mycolactone - induced apoptosis than mDCs ( Fig . 1 , B and D ) . This was the case when LPS or TNF was used as a maturation stimulus . Of note , only low levels of necrotic cells were observed in the cell cultures ( unpublished data ) . Mycolactone inhibits DC maturation We next examined whether the maturation of DCs is infl u - enced by exposure to mycolactone . Only mycolactone doses < 50 ng / ml were considered , and PI + cells were excluded Figure 1 . DCs survive exposure to mycolactone doses < 50 ng / ml . ( A and B ) Induction of apoptosis in mouse bone marrow – derived DCs after exposure to mycolactone . The analysis was performed on CD11c + - gated cells incubated with mycolactone for 24 or 48 h concomitantly with 10 ng / ml LPS ( iDCs ) or after 24 h of stimulation with 10 ng / ml LPS ( mDCs ) . ( C and D ) Induction of apoptosis in human peripheral blood – derived DCs incubated with mycolactone for 24 or 48 h concomitantly ( iDCs ) or after 48 h of stimulation with TNF - α / PGE 2 ( mDCs ) . Annexin V + / PI − cells were identifi ed as early apoptotic cells , Annexin V + / PI + cells were identifi ed as late apoptotic cells , and Annexin V − / PI − cells were identifi ed as live cells . Data are mean percentages and are representative of three independent experiments . Figure 2 . Mycolactone blocks DC maturation . ( A ) Representative histograms of CD83 and CD25 expression on human iDCs after stimula - tion by TNF - α / PGE 2 in the presence of increasing doses of mycolactone for 48 h . ( B ) MFI of CD83 and CD25 expression on iDCs after stimulation by TNF - α / PGE 2 for 48 h in the presence of mycolactone . Each line corre - sponds to one of the n donors . JEM VOL . 204 , June 11 , 2007 1397 ARTICLE from the fl ow cytometric analysis . A strong inhibitory eff ect was seen in human iDCs matured by TNF - α / prostaglandin E 2 ( PGE 2 ) , as demonstrated by the failure to up - regulate CD83 and CD25 ( Fig . 2 A ) . Although the mean fl uorescence intensity ( MFI ) for CD83 and CD25 expression varied among donors , we observed a reproducible inhibition of maturation when iDCs were exposed to mycolactone ( Fig . 2 B ) . To bet - ter quantify the inhibitory eff ect of mycolactone , the per - centage of inhibition was calculated for several DC maturation markers ( CD83 , CD25 , CD80 , and CD40 ; Table I ) . Data from iDCs exposed to maturation stimuli for 24 and 48 h are shown . CD83 was the most aff ected marker , with a signifi - cant reduction in surface expression 24 h after treatment in the presence of 20 ng / ml mycolactone . CD25 expression was also markedly altered , whereas the expression of CD80 and CD40 was only marginally modifi ed . Similarly , in mouse iDCs stimulated with LPS in the presence of mycolactone , we observed a dose - dependent inhibition of CD86 and MHC class II surface expression ( unpublished data ) . To determine if this eff ect was reversible , we washed out the mycolactone after 24 h and returned them to culture wells containing maturation stimuli . In both the mouse and hu - man culture systems , inhibition of maturation persisted af - ter mycolactone was removed from the culture medium ( unpublished data ) . Mycolactone inhibits functional maturation and migration programs in DCs To evaluate mycolactone eff ects on DC migration , we used an in vivo migration model in which TNF - α is injected in - tradermally into the ear , which triggers a massive traffi cking of DCs into the auricular draining lymph node ( ADLN ) ( 13 ) . DC migration was quantifi ed by sacrifi cing the mice after 4 h and assessing the number and maturation state of DCs emi - grating from the skin . When mycolactone was coadminis - tered with TNF - α , we observed a striking reduction in the proportion of migratory DCs ( Fig . 3 A ) . In addition , we ob - served a reduced CD86 and MHC class II surface expression on DCs that crawled out of the skin , as well as on DCs that reached ADLNs in the conditions under which mice had been injected with mycolactone ( Fig . 3 B and not depicted ) . These data indicated that mycolactone impairs the capac - ity of DCs to undergo maturation and up - regulate the ma - chinery required for eff ective migration to the draining lymph node . We also observed an inhibition of functional maturation in human DCs . This was shown by assaying for the priming of allogeneic T cells in a mixed lymphocyte reaction . Strikingly , exposure of DCs to 10 ng / ml mycolactone during matura - tion resulted in > 70 % inhibition of their allostimulatory ca - pacity ( Fig . 4 ) . Collectively , the data in Figs . 2 – 4 demonstrate that exposure of DC to noncytotoxic doses of mycolactone results in the inhibition of both phenotypic and functional maturation of DCs . Figure 3 . Mycolactone inhibits functional maturation of DCs in vivo . ( A ) Mice were injected intradermally into the ear with TNF - α alone ( − ) or TNF - α + mycolactone ( + ) . After 4 h , mice were killed . Ear explants were placed in an overnight culture , and the number of DCs in the crawl - out population was determined . Data are means and SD of CD11c + PI − cell numbers from pooled skin explant cultures of two independent experiments . ( B ) Histograms of MHC class II and CD86 expression on DCs ( CD11c + PI − ) from skin explant cultures of mice injected with TNF - α alone ( white ) or TNF - α + mycolactone ( black ) . Data are representative of pooled skin explant cultures from two independent experiments . Figure 4 . Mycolactone reduces the allostimulatory capacity of human DCs . The proliferation of peripheral blood lymphocytes after incubation with allogeneic mycolactone - treated DCs is shown . DCs were matured in vitro with TNF - α / PGE 2 in the presence of 0 , 10 , or 25 ng / ml mycolactone for 48 h and extensively washed before addition to the lymphocytes . T cell proliferation was measured after 6 d of co - culture . Data are means and SD of [ 3 H ] thymidine incorporation measured on triplicate wells and are representative of fi ve independent experiments . 1398 DENDRITIC CELL IMMUNOSUPPRESSION BY MYCOLACTONE | Coutanceau et al . Mycolactone - treated DCs fail to produce chemoattractant molecules In addition to the IFN - γ response defect in Mu - infected patients , the ulcers are characterized by an abnormally low amount of infl ammation . We therefore evaluated the eff ect of mycolactone on iDC biology , as tissue DCs play an im - portant role in the initiation of an infl ammatory response and the attraction of innate eff ector cells to the site of infection . We performed a broad screen of infl ammatory cytokines and chemokines produced by DCs after exposure to Toll - like receptor ( TLR ) ligands . As shown in Fig . 5 ( A and B ) , mycolactone treatment only moderately aff ected the capac - ity of mouse or human DCs to produce IL - 12 upon stimu - lation with LPS or poly I : C , TLR - 4 , and TLR - 3 ligands , respectively . Similarly , little eff ect was seen on TNF - α and IL - 6 production in LPS - or poly I : C – stimulated human DCs ( Fig . 5 , D and E ) . In mouse DCs stimulated with LPS , mRNA expression for IL - 6 was not substantially modifi ed ( Fig . 5 C ) . Inhibition of IL - 1 α and IL - 1 β mRNA expression was observed in LPS - stimulated mouse iDCs , but no comparable suppression of IL - 1 β production could be detected in LPS - or poly I : C – stimulated human DCs ( unpublished data ) . Therefore , exposure of iDCs to mycolactone during stimula - tion does not critically modify their expression of infl amma - tory cytokines . In contrast , the production of macrophage infl ammatory protein ( MIP ) 1 α , MIP - 1 β , regulated on activation , normal T cell expressed and secreted ( RANTES ) , IFN - γ – inducible protein ( IP ) 10 , and monocyte chemoattractant protein ( MCP ) 1 was markedly reduced by a 24 - h exposure of human iDCs to 25 ng / ml mycolactone ( Fig . 6 ) . This was evident in both LPS - and poly I : C – treated iDCs . However , this inhibitory eff ect was not observed with the neutrophil chemoattractant IL - 8 , the expression level of which was not modifi ed by mycolactone treatment in LPS - or poly I : C – stimulated human iDCs ( Fig . 6 ) . To evaluate whether myco - lactone endogenously expressed by Mu could mediate similar eff ects , we infected iDCs with WT Mu and compared it with a mycolactone - defi cient mutant ( mup045 ) . Interestingly , all of the proinfl ammatory eff ects of adding the WT Mu were Figure 5 . Mycolactone - treated DCs only moderately alter the expression of infl ammatory cytokines by iDCs . ( A ) Concentration of IL - 12 ( p40 subunit ) in culture supernatants from mouse iDCs stimulated with LPS in the presence of 0 or 50 ng / ml mycolactone for 48 h or left unstimulated ( unstim ) . ( C ) IL - 1 α , IL - 1 β , and IL - 6 mRNA expression is shown for mouse iDCs stimulated with LPS for 48 h in the presence of increasing doses of mycolactone . ( B , D , and E ) Production of IL - 12 ( p70 ) , TNF - α , and IL - 6 is shown for human peripheral blood – derived iDCs stim - ulated with LPS or poly I : C in the presence of increasing doses of myco - lactone for 24 h . Data are means and SD and are representative of two independent experiments . JEM VOL . 204 , June 11 , 2007 1399 ARTICLE masked by the presence of endogenous mycolactone , whereas mup045 was capable of inducing a moderate cytokine and chemokine response ( unpublished data ) . In addition , we added LPS to the Mu - infected DC cultures and found that endogenous mycolactone was indeed capable of inhibiting the production of the β - chemokines MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , and RANTES , as well as MCP - 1 and IP - 10 ( Fig . 7 and not depicted ) . As a control , we added back exogenous mycolac - tone to the mup045 - infected DC cultures . Based on these studies , we conclude that the immunosuppressive eff ects of mycolactone account for the abnormal infl ammatory response in BUs . D I S C U S S I O N Until recently , it was assumed that Mu was the only Myco - bacterium species producing mycolactone . In fact , other mycolactone - producing mycobacteria have been isolated from fi sh and frogs presenting ulcerative diseases ( 14 – 17 ) . All these species contain versions of the Mu virulence plasmid , pro - duce mycolactones , and show genetic relatedness to Mu and M . marinum , a Mycobacterium species causing localized skin granulomas in humans and an acute lethal pathology in fi sh ( 18 ) . On the basis of a genetic analysis , Yip et al . ( 18 ) sug - gested that mycolactone - producing mycobacteria may have evolved from a common M . marinum progenitor to form two Figure 6 . Mycolactone considerably affects the expression of infl ammatory chemokines by iDCs . The expression of MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , RANTES , IP - 10 , MCP - 1 , and IL - 8 chemokines is shown for human monocyte - derived iDCs , or TNF - α / PGE 2 – matured mDCs , after stimulation with LPS or poly I : C in the presence of increasing doses of mycolactone for 24 h . Data are means and SD and are representative of two indepen - dent experiments . Table I . Inhibition of CD83 , CD25 , CD80 , and CD40 expression in human peripheral blood – derived DCs after stimulation with TNF - α / PGE 2 in the presence of mycolactone iDC + TNF - 𝛂 / PGE 2 Treatment duration 24 h 48 h Mycolactone dose ( ng / ml ) 20 50 20 50 CD83 43 * 77 * 53 * 67 * CD25 28 34 * 33 59 * CD80 1 31 5 24 CD40 4 5 19 37 MFIs of mycolactone - treated DCs were compared with the MFI of control DCs using the Wilcoxon nonparametric test . Mean inhibition percentages calculated on n independent experiments ( n = 3 – 6 ) are shown . * , P < 0 . 07 . 1400 DENDRITIC CELL IMMUNOSUPPRESSION BY MYCOLACTONE | Coutanceau et al . ecotypes causing disease in either ectotherms or endotherms , such as humans . The expression of mycolactone - like com - pounds nevertheless remains restricted to these particular species , and no such complex polyketides have thus far been isolated from other pathogenic mycobacteria . Polyketides are a diverse class of secondary metabolites produced by polyketide synthases ( PKSs ) . Mycobacteria ex - press a remarkable arrays of PKSs , which generate multiple cell wall – associated lipids ( 19 ) . At the interface with the host immune system , some of these envelope components have been shown to be important virulence factors and immune modulators . For example , in M . tuberculosis , glycosylation of the PKS products phenol phtiodiolones leads to the genera - tion of phenolic glycolipids , which are potent inhibitors of proinfl ammatory cytokine release by monocyte - derived mac - rophages ( 20 ) . With respect to mycolactone , the genetic basis of its biosynthesis has been recently elucidated with the isola - tion of a 174 - kb plasmid encoding three modular PKSs ( 21 ) . Interestingly , mycolactone PKSs present highly unusual features in terms of size and structure , and mycolactone is the fi rst example of a complex polyketide isolated from pathogenic mycobacteria . In fact , the macrocyclic polyketide structure of mycolactone shares similarities with that of complex polyketides typically produced by fi lamentous soil actinomycetes such as Streptomyces . Strikingly , analysis of the chromosomal sequence reveals that numerous PKS genes are inactivated in Mu , sug - gesting that energy and PKS - specifi c substrates are preferen - tially allocated to mycolactone biosynthesis in this species ( 22 ) . In the present study , we demonstrate that this original polyketide has the unique capacity to modulate DC functions in a selective manner . The ulcerative properties of Mu have been attributed to the cytopathic action of mycolactone , which is able to cause growth arrest in cultured fi broblasts , as well as cell death via apoptosis in fi broblast and macrophage cell models after 3 – 5 d of exposure ( 23 ) . Cell susceptibility to mycolactone activity nevertheless varies with the cell type . For example , Mu lipid extracts showed no cytostatic activity on Jurkat T cells , whereas they markedly suppressed the cell - cycle progression and viability of a mouse pre – B cell line ( 24 ) . In the present study , we found that the susceptibility of DCs to mycolac - tone cytotoxicity was higher during the immature state . Col - lectively , these observations suggest that the molecular target of mycolactone is ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells but may be diff erentially expressed , depending on the cell type or the cell activation state . Although the mechanism by which mycolactone acts as a cytotoxic agent is intriguing , we have focused on the immuno - suppressive eff ects of nontoxic doses . We found that myco - lactone strongly aff ects the maturation of both mouse and human DCs . In particular , we show a failure to up - regulate the phenotypic markers of the mature DCs CD83 and CD25 , and to a lower extent CD80 and CD40 . This maturation defect was not reversed by removal of mycolactone from cell - culture medium , suggesting that mycolactone durably aff ects DC maturation . In addition , we demonstrate that mycolac - tone - treated DCs show a reduced allostimulatory capacity and that they are inhibited in their ability to cross - present an - tigens to T cells ( Fig . S2 , available at http : / / www . jem . org / cgi / content / full / jem . 20070234 / DC1 ) . That said , other fea - tures of maturing DCs remained intact . In particular , phago - cytic activity of DCs , as measured by the quantity of intracellular fl uorescent beads after 4 h , was not reduced by coincubation of the cells with 10 – 100 ng / ml mycolactone ( unpublished data ) . The fact that mycolactone limits the migratory properties of DCs , as well as their ability to mature and activate antigen - specifi c T cells in vivo ( Fig . S3 ) , thus further suggests that mycolactone suppresses the capacity of DCs to prime cellular immune responses . These fi ndings may help explain the global defect in IFN - γ production by T cells in BU patients and the fact that once BU lesions are excised , there is a resto - ration of Th1 cellular responses ( 12 ) . We also explored the eff ect of mycolactone on the ability of DCs to secrete proinfl ammatory molecules . Surprisingly , we observed a selective eff ect on inducible chemokines . In particular , mycolactone blocked the production of the monocyte and lymphocyte chemoattractants MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , IP - 10 , RANTES , and MCP - 1 . MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , and Figure 7 . Endogenous production of mycolactone blocks the expression of infl ammatory chemokines by Mu - infected iDCs . The expression of MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , and RANTES is shown for human monocyte - derived iDCs after infection with WT Mu or a mycolactone - defi cient mutant ( mup045 ) , using an multiplicity of infection of 1 : 1 or 5 : 1 acid - fast bacilli / cell , in the presence of 10 μ g / ml LPS . Controls include medium only , iDCs stimulated with LPS in the presence of 25 ng / ml mycolactone , and iDCs infected with mup045 in the presence of 25 ng / ml mycolactone . Data are means and SD and are representative of four independent experiments . JEM VOL . 204 , June 11 , 2007 1401 ARTICLE RANTES are ligands for CC chemokine receptor 5 , which is specifi cally expressed by iDCs and Th1 T cells ( 25 , 26 ) . Defective production of these infl ammatory chemokines is therefore likely to interfere with both the innate and adap - tive immune responses to Mu infection . Specifi cally , decreased β - chemokine production by mycolactone - exposed DCs may limit the recruitment and activation of iDC precursors to the infl ammation site . In addition , defective production of these CC chemokine receptor 5 ligands , as well as the CXC che - mokine receptor 3 ligand IP - 10 , is likely to interfere with the homing capacity of IFN - γ – secreting T cells to infected tissues . This hypothesis is strongly supported by the observation that , in contrast to DCs infected with mup045 , DCs infected with the WT strain failed to produce the chemokines MIP - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , and RANTES . In accordance with the histopatho - logical features of BUs , bacterial production of myco lactone may therefore be responsible for suppressing the innate immune responses of iDCs , thus preventing the traffi cking of infl am - matory cells to the ulcerative lesion . The exogenous addition of mycolactone to mup045 - infected DCs resulted in a strong reduction of their β - chemokine response to infection , further demonstrating the critical im - portance of the toxin in this process . Interestingly , the inhibi - tion of β - chemokine production by exogenous mycolactone in mup045 - infected DCs was incomplete , particularly in the case of MIP - 1 β , suggesting that mycolactone may regulate the expression of other immunosuppressive agents . Suppression of these infl ammatory chemokines was nearly complete with minimal doses of mycolactone , whereas the expression of the infl ammatory cytokines TNF - α , IL - 12 , and IL - 6 was only marginally modifi ed . Accordingly , IL - 12 , IL - 1 β , and TNF - α mRNA were detected at considerable levels in lesions from BU patients and were not substantially modu - lated between the nodular and ulcerative stages of the disease ( 6 ) , suggesting that mycolactone has little impact on the level of expression of these cytokines in vivo . Th 1 cellular responses , as measured by IFN - γ production , are vigorous during the nodular stage of BU and become defective at later stages of the disease . From our results , we can propose that , in contrast to infl ammatory cytokines , defective infl ammatory chemo - kines may constitute a hallmark of early Mu infection , as well as a sensitive indicator of BU progression from the nodular to the ulcerative stage . Given the structural similarity between mycolactone and the immunosuppressive drugs FK506 and rapamycin ( Fig . S1 ) , it is interesting to examine their respective activities . FK506 and rapamycin are structural analogues binding the same intracellular receptor , FKBP12 , even though the resulting complex targets a different molecule . Although FK506 and rapamycin are used clinically to suppress activated T cells , recent data suggest that they also aff ect DC diff erentiation and function ( 27 , 28 ) . Interestingly , FK506 has been shown to modulate the production of β - chemokines ( 29 , 30 ) . How - ever , FK506 blocks the production of infl ammatory cytokines such as IL - 12 and TNF - α ( 27 ) , as well as IL - 8 ( 31 , 32 ) , all molecules that are not altered in mycolactone - treated DCs . Our results therefore suggest that mycolactone binds a dif - ferent molecular target than FK506 or rapamycin . Further work will be required to map the precise mechanism under - lying mycolactone immunosuppressive activity . In con - clusion , we demonstrate in this study that mycolactone inter feres with DC biology in a unique manner , which helps account for the pathologic features of BU . Moreover , we show that mycolactone inhibits DC maturation with a se - lective eff ect on the chemotactic signals critical for the initi - ation of an infl ammatory response . This specifi city of action defi nes a novel class of potentially useful immunosuppres - sive agents . MATERIALS AND METHODS Bacterial strains . Mu 1615 ( Trudeau Mycobacterial Culture Collection strain ; American Type Culture Collection ) was originally isolated in Malaysia from human skin biopsies . The mup045 mutant ( MU1615 : : Tn118 ) possesses a transposon insertion inside the mup045 gene , which results in its inability to produce mycolactone ( 3 , 21 ) . The Mu 1615 and mup045 mutant strains were provided by P . L . Small ( University of Tennessee , Knoxville , TN ) . The bac - teria were grown on agar plates ( 7H9 ; DIFCO ) supplemented with 10 % oleic acid – albumin – dextrose ( Becton Dickinson ) at 31 ° C . For infection studies , bacteria from exponentially growing cultures were harvested and resuspended in a DC culture medium before homogenization by fi ltration through a sy - ringe needle and enumeration by the Ziehl - Neelsen procedure . Bacteria were added to DC cultures at a multiplicity of infection of 1 : 1 or 5 : 1 , and plates were centrifuged for 2 min at 700 rpm before incubation at 37 ° C . Animals . 6 - wk - old C57BL / 6JIco and OT2 female mice were purchased from Charles Rivers Laboratories . Animals were maintained under specifi c pathogen - free conditions and used at 8 – 12 wk of age . All animal work was approved by institutional animal experimentation committees . Mycolactone preparation . Mycolactone purifi cation was performed as previously described ( 2 ) . The purity of the preparation was controlled by mass spectrometry analysis , as previously described ( 33 ) . Generation of DCs from mouse bone marrow . Bone marrow – derived DCs were essentially generated by the procedure described by Inaba et al . ( 34 ) . In brief , total bone marrow was recovered from the femurs of C57 / BL6 mice , and cell suspensions were stained with a cocktail of M5 / 114 ( anti – MHC class II ) , RA3 - 6B2 ( anti - B220 ) , HO2 . 2 ( anti - CD8 ) , GK1 . 5 ( anti - CD4 ) , and RB6 - 8C5 ( anti – Ly - 6G ) antibodies , followed by magnetic bead negative selection . The remaining cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % FCS , 50 μ M 2 - ME , 2 . 5 ng / ml recombinant mouse GM - CSF and 10 ng / ml recombinant mouse IL - 4 . Generation of DCs from human peripheral blood . PBMCs were isolated from whole blood by sedimentation over a Ficoll - Hypaque gradient ( GE Healthcare ) . T cell – enriched and T cell – depleted fractions were pre - pared by adherence to plastic in 1 % single donor plasma . iDCs were pre - pared from the T cell – depleted fraction by culturing cells in the presence of 1 , 000 U / ml GM - CSF ( Berlex ) and 500 – 1 , 000 U / ml IL - 4 ( R & D Systems ) for 6 d . Cultured cells consisted of > 75 % CD14 – CD83 – HLA - DR + DCs , with contaminating cells being B cells and dying myeloid cells . To generate mDCs , cultures were stimulated on day 6 with 50 ng / ml TNF - α ( Qbiogene ) and 10 mM PGE 2 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 36 – 48 h , as previously described ( 23 ) . At that time , cells were > 85 % CD14 – CD83 + HLA - DR hi DCs . DC cytokine production analysis . The production of IL - 12 by mouse DCs was measured in culture supernatants after a 48 - h stimulation with 10 μ g / ml LPS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in the presence of mycolactone , using an ELISA assay based on the detection of p40 subunit ( Biolegend ) . Expression of cytokine 1402 DENDRITIC CELL IMMUNOSUPPRESSION BY MYCOLACTONE | Coutanceau et al . mRNA by mycolactone - exposed mouse DCs was also measured after a 48 - h stimulation with 10 μ g / ml LPS , using the multiprobe RNase protec - tion assay ( BD Biosciences ) . In brief , a 32 P - labeled mcK - 2b template was prepared . Total mRNA , isolated from DCs using RNAzol ( Cinna / TEL - TEST ) , was then hybridized with the probes and digested with RNase . Pro - tected probes were analyzed by migration on polyacrylamide gel ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) , according to the manufacturer’s protocols . Templates for the housekeeping genes L32 and GAPDH were used to normalize the total RNA content of the samples . Cytokine and chemokine release by monocyte - derived DCs was mea - sured by Luminex ( 12 - plex kit ; Biosource International ) . 30 , 000 – 45 , 000 iDCs ( TNF - α / PGE 2 – matured DCs ) were stimulated with 10 μ g / ml LPS or poly I : C ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in 200 μ l RPMI 1640 with 1 % human serum for 20 h , in the presence of the doses of mycolactone indicated in the fi gures . Alternatively , 100 , 000 iDCs were infected with Mu ( WT or mup045 ) and incubated for 20 h in the presence of 10 μ g / ml LPS . 50 μ l of supernatants or standard were incubated with antibody - linked beads for 2 h , washed twice , and incubated for 1 h with biotinylated secondary antibodies . A fi nal incubation of 30 min with streptavidin - PE was performed before data acqui - sition ( 100 events minimum per bead ) on a 100 IS apparatus ( Luminex ) . Values above or below the standard curves were replaced by the lowest or highest concentrations measured . Allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction . 2 × 10 5 purifi ed T cells per well were plated with mDCs exposed to the doses of mycolactone indicated in the fi gures in RPMI 1640 with 5 % pooled human serum ( Labquip ) . Co - cultures were incubated for 4 – 5 d at 37 ° C and pulsed with 1 μ Ci ( 0 . 037 MBq ) [ 3 H ] thymidine during the last 16 h of culture . [ 3 H ] thymidine incorporation was measured by means of a liquid scintillation counter ( Micro96 ; Skatron ) . Skin explant cultures and preparation of ADLN cell suspensions . C57BL / 6 mice ( n = 5 ) were injected intradermally in the ear with 50 ng TNF - α ( R & D Systems ) , with or without 50 μ g mycolactone . 4 h later , ani - mals were killed , and ears were surgically removed . Dorsal and ventral halves were split and layered on RPMI 1640 with 10 % FCS , 100 mM Hepes , and 100 μ g / ml penicillin . After 24 h at 37 ° C , ear skin explant migrating cells were pooled and fi ltered through a 70 - μ m nylon mesh before antibody staining . ADLN cells were dissociated from the matrix by a 25 - min incuba - tion at 37 ° C with 1 mg / ml collagenase D and 40 μ g / ml DNase I ( Roche Diagnostics ) in RPMI 1640 . Cells were collected and washed in PBS before FACS analysis . Online supplemental material . Fig . S1 shows the structures of mycolac - tone , cyclosporin A , rapamycin , and FK506 . Fig . S2 depicts in vitro cross - presentation studies . Fig . S3 shows that mycolactone inhibits the capacity of DCs to prime lymphocytes in vivo . The percentage of proliferating CFSE + cells was calculated as previously described ( 35 ) . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jem . org / cgi / content / full / jem . 20070234 / DC1 . The authors wish to thank Pamela L . Small for originally providing the strain 1615 and the mup045 mutant . We gratefully acknowledge the Association Française Raoul Follereau and the National Institutes of Health ( grant RO1 - AI49418 and National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases contract NO1 AI - 75320 ) for fi nancial support . The authors have no confl icting fi nancial interests . Submitted : 1 February 2007 Accepted : 24 April 2007 R E F E R E N C E S 1 . Wansbrough - Jones , M . , and R . Phillips . 2006 . Buruli ulcer : emerging from obscurity . Lancet . 367 : 1849 – 1858 . 2 . George , K . M . , D . Chatterjee , G . Gunawardana , D . Welty , J . Hayman , R . Lee , and P . L . C . Small . 1999 . Mycolactone : a polyketide toxin from Mycobacterium ulcerans required for virulence . Science . 283 : 854 – 857 . 3 . Coutanceau , E . , L . Marsollier , R . Brosch , E . Perret , P . Goossens , M . Tanguy , S . T . Cole , P . L . C . Small , and C . Demangel . 2005 . Modulation of the host immune response by a transient intracellular stage of Mycobacterium ulcerans : the contribution of endogenous mycolactone toxin . Cell . Microbiol . 7 : 1187 – 1196 . 4 . Guarner , J . , J . Bartlett , E . A . S . Whitney , P . L . Raghunathan , Y . Stienstra , K . Asamoa , S . Etuaful , E . Klutse , E . Quarshie , T . S . van der Werf , et al . 2003 . Histopathologic features of Mycobacterium ulcerans infection . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 9 : 651 – 656 . 5 . Oliveira , M . S . , A . G . Fraga , E . Torrado , A . G . Castro , J . P . Pereira , A . L . Filho , F . Milanezi , F . C . Schmitt , W . M . Meyers , F . Portaels , et al . 2005 . Infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans induces persistent infl ammatory responses in mice . Infect . Immun . 73 : 6299 – 6310 . 6 . Phillips , R . , C . Horsfi eld , J . Mangan , K . Laing , S . Etuaful , P . Awuah , K . Nyarko , F . Osei - Sarpong , P . Butcher , S . Lucas , and M . Wansbrough - Jones . 2006 . Cytokine mRNA expression in Mycobacterium ulcerans - infected human skin and correlation with local infl ammatory response . Infect . Immun . 74 : 2917 – 2924 . 7 . Prevot , G . , E . Bourreau , H . Pascalis , R . Pradinaud , A . Tanghe , K . Huygen , and P . Launois . 2004 . Diff erential production of systemic and intralesional IFN - γ and IL - 10 in nodular and ulcerative forms of Buruli disease . Infect . Immun . 72 : 958 – 965 . 8 . Gooding , T . M . , P . D . R . Johnson , D . E . Campbell , J . A . Hayman , E . L . Hartland , A . S . Kemp , and R . M . Robins - Browne . 2001 . Immune response to infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans . Infect . Immun . 69 : 1704 – 1707 . 9 . Gooding , T . M . , P . D . R . Johnson , M . Smith , A . S . Kemp , and R . M . Robins - Browne . 2002 . Cytokine profi les of patients infected with Mycobacterium ulcerans and unaff ected household contacts . Infect . Immun . 70 : 5562 – 5567 . 10 . Gooding , T . M . , A . S . Kemp , R . M . Robins - Browne , M . Smith , and P . D . R . Johnson . 2003 . Acquired T - helper 1 lymphocyte an - ergy following infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans . Clin . Infect . Dis . 36 : 1076 – 1077 . 11 . Westenbrink , B . D . , Y . Stienstra , M . G . Huitema , W . A . Thompson , E . O . Klutse , E . O . Ampadu , H . M . Boezen , P . C . Limburg , and T . S . van der Werf . 2005 . Cytokine responses to stimulation of whole blood from patients with Buruli ulcer disease in Ghana . Clin . Diagn . Lab . Immunol . 12 : 125 – 129 . 12 . Yeboah - Manu , D . , E . Peduzzi , E . Mensah - Quainoo , A . Asante - Poku , D . Ofori - Adjei , G . Pluschke , and C . A . Daubenberger . 2006 . Systemic suppression of IFN - γ responses in Buruli ulcer patients resolves after surgical excision of the lesions caused by the extracellular pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans . J . Leukoc . Biol . 79 : 1150 – 1156 . 13 . Belkaid , Y . , H . Jouin , and G . Milon . 1996 . A method to recover , enu - merate and identify lymphomyeloid cells present in an infl ammatory dermal site : a study in laboratory mice . J . Immunol . Methods . 199 : 5 – 25 . 14 . Mve - Obiang , A . , R . E . Lee , E . S . Umstot , K . A . Trott , T . C . Grammer , J . M . Parker , B . S . Ranger , R . Grainger , E . A . Mahrous , and P . L . C . Small . 2005 . A newly discovered mycobacterial pathogen isolated from laboratory colonies of Xenopus species with lethal infections produces a novel form of mycolactone , the Mycobacterium ulcerans macrolide toxin . Infect . Immun . 73 : 3307 – 3312 . 15 . Ranger , B . S . , E . A . Mahrous , L . Mosi , S . Adusumilli , R . E . Lee , A . Colorni , M . Rhodes , and P . L . C . Small . 2006 . Globally distributed my - cobacterial fi sh pathogens produce a novel plasmid - encoded toxic mac - rolide , mycolactone F . Infect . Immun . 74 : 6037 – 6045 . 16 . Rhodes , M . W . , H . Kator , A . McNabb , C . Deshayes , J . M . Reyrat , B . A . Brown - Elliott , R . Wallace , K . A . Trott , J . M . Parker , B . Lifl and , et al . 2005 . Mycobacterium pseudoshottsii sp . nov . , a slowly growing chromo - genic species isolated from Chesapeake Bay striped bass ( Morone saxatilis ) . Int . J . Syst . Evol . Microbiol . 55 : 1139 – 1147 . 17 . Trott , K . A . , B . A . Stacy , B . D . Lifl and , H . E . Diggs , R . M . Harland , M . K . Khokha , T . C . Grammer , and J . M . Parker . 2004 . Characterization of a Mycobacterium ulcerans - like infection in a colony of African tropical clawed frogs ( Xenopus tropicalis ) . Comp . Med . 54 : 309 – 317 . 18 . Yip , M . J . , J . L . Porter , J . A . Fyfe , C . J . Lavender , F . Portaels , M . Rhodes , H . Kator , A . Colorni , G . A . Jenkin , and T . Stinear . 2007 . Evolution of Mycobacterium ulcerans and other mycolactone - producing myco - bacteria from a common Mycobacterium marinum progenitor . J . Bacteriol . 189 : 2021 – 2029 . JEM VOL . 204 , June 11 , 2007 1403 ARTICLE 19 . Cole , S . T . , R . Brosch , J . Parkhill , T . Garnier , C . Churcher , D . Harris , S . V . Gordon , K . Eiglmeier , S . Gas , C . E . Barry III , et al . 1998 . Deciphering the biology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the complete genome sequence . Nature . 393 : 537 – 544 . 20 . Reed , M . B . , P . Domenech , C . Manca , H . Su , A . K . Barczak , B . N . Kreiswirth , G . Kaplan , and C . E . Barry III . 2004 . A glycolipid of hyper - virulent tuberculosis strains that inhibits the innate immune response . Nature . 431 : 84 – 87 . 21 . Stinear , T . P . , A . Mve - Obiang , P . L . C . Small , W . Frigui , M . J . Pryor , R . Brosch , G . A . Jenkin , P . D . R . Johnson , J . K . Davies , R . E . Lee , et al . 2004 . Giant plasmid - encoded polyketide synthases produce the macrolide toxin of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 1345 – 1349 . 22 . Stinear , T . P . , T . Seemann , S . Pidot , W . Frigui , G . Reysset , T . Garnier , G . Meurice , D . Simon , C . Bouchier , L . Ma , et al . 2007 . Reductive evolu - tion and niche adaptation inferred from the genome of Mycobacterium ulcerans , the causative agent of Buruli ulcer . Genome Res . 17 : 192 – 200 . 23 . George , K . M . , L . Pascopella , D . M . Welty , and P . L . C . Small . 2000 . A Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin , mycolactone , causes apoptosis in guinea pig ulcers and tissue culture cells . Infect . Immun . 68 : 877 – 883 . 24 . Pahlevan , A . A . , D . J . M . Wright , C . Andrews , K . M . George , P . L . C . Small , and B . M . Foxwell . 1999 . The inhibitory action of Mycobacterium ulcerans soluble factor on monocyte / T cell cytokine production and NF - κ B function . J . Immunol . 163 : 3928 – 3935 . 25 . Dieu - Nosjean , M . C . , A . Vicari , S . Lebecque , and C . Caux . 1999 . Regulation of dendritic cell traffi cking : a process that involves the par - ticipation of selective chemokines . J . Leukoc . Biol . 66 : 252 – 262 . 26 . Esche , C . , C . Stellato , and L . A . Beck . 2005 . Chemokines : key players in innate and adaptive immunity . J . Invest . Dermatol . 125 : 615 – 628 . 27 . Abe , M . , and A . W . Thomson . 2003 . Infl uence of immunosuppressive drugs on dendritic cells . Transpl . Immunol . 11 : 357 – 365 . 28 . Hackstein , H . , T . Taner , A . F . Zahorchak , A . E . Morelli , A . J . Logar , A . Gessner , and A . W . Thomson . 2003 . Rapamycin inhibits IL - 4 - induced dendritic cell maturation in vitro and dendritic cell mobilization and function in vivo . Blood . 101 : 4457 – 4463 . 29 . Park , C . W . , B . H . Lee , H . J . Han , C . H . Lee , and H . K . Ahn . 2005 . Tacrolimus decreases the expression of eotaxin , CCR3 , RANTES and IL - 5 in atopic dermatitis . Br . J . Dermatol . 152 : 1173 – 1181 . 30 . Staruch , M . J . , R . Camacho , and F . J . Dumont . 1998 . Distinctive calcineurin - dependent ( FK506 - sensitive ) mechanisms regulate the pro duc - tion of the CC chemokines macrophage infl ammatory protein ( MIP ) - 1 α , MIP - 1 β , and RANTES vs IL - 2 and TNF - α by activated human T cells . Cell . Immunol . 190 : 121 – 131 . 31 . Kohyama , T . , H . Takizawa , S . Kawasaki , N . Akiyama , M . Sato , K . Ito , and K . Yamamoto . 1999 . A potent immunosuppressant FK506 inhibits IL - 8 expression in human eosinophils . Mol . Cell Biol . Res . Commun . 1 : 72 – 77 . 32 . Sasakawa , Y . , S . Sakuma , Y . Higashi , T . Sasakawa , T . Amaya , and T . Goto . 2000 . FK506 suppresses neutrophil chemoattractant production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells . Eur . J . Pharmacol . 403 : 281 – 288 . 33 . Hong , H . , P . J . Gates , J . Staunton , T . Stinear , S . T . Cole , P . F . Leadlay , and J . B . Spencer . 2003 . Identifi cation using LC - MSn of co - metabolites in the biosynthesis of the polyketide toxin mycolactone by a clinical isolate of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Chem . Commun . ( Camb . ) 22 : 2822 – 2823 . 34 . Inaba , K . , M . Inaba , N . Romani , H . Aya , M . Deguchi , S . Ikehara , S . Muramatsu , and R . M . Steinman . 1992 . Generation of large num - bers of dendritic cells from mouse bone marrow cultures supplemented with granulocyte / macrophage colony - stimulating factor . J . Exp . Med . 176 : 1693 – 1702 . 35 . Lyons , A . B . , and C . R . Parish . 1994 . Determination of lymphocyte division by fl ow - cytometry . J . Immunol . Methods . 171 : 131 – 137 .