VoLUME 56 , NUMBER 9 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 3 MAR . cH 1986 Atomic Force Microscope G . Binnig " ~ and C . F . Quate ' ' Edward L Gi . nzton Laboratory , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 and Ch . Gerber " IBM San Jose Research Laboratory , San Jose , California 95193 I , Received 5 December 1985 ) The scanning tunneling microscope is proposed as a method to measure forces as small as 10 N . As one application for this concept , we introduce a new type of microscope capable of investi - gating surfaces of insulators on an atomic scale . The atomic force microscope is a combination of the principles of the scanning tunneling microscope and the stylus profilometer . It incorporates a probe that does not damage the surface . Our preliminary results in air demonstrate a lateral resolu - 0 0 tion of 30 A and a vertical resolution less than 1 A . PACS numbers : 68 . 35 . Gy % e are concerned in this paper with the measure - ment of ultrasmall forces on particles as small as single atoms . % e propose to do this by monitoring the elas - tic deformation of various types of springs with the scanning tunneling microscope ( STM ) . ' It has been a common practice to use the displacement of springs as a measure of force , and previous methods have relied on electrostatic fields , magnetostatic fields , optical waves , and x rays . Jones ~ has reviewed the devices that use variable capacitances and he reports that dis - placements of 10 4 A can be measured . SQUIDs3 are superconducting elements that measure the expulsion of magnetic fields in variable - inductance devices . They are used in gravity gradiometers to measure dis - placements of 10 6 A . Tabor and co - workers in their work with van der Waals forces have used optical in - terference methods to measure displacements of 1 A . With an x - ray interferometer constructed from a single crystal of silicon , Deslattes ' has also measured dis - placements of 10 A which is about 1 ' / 0 of the nuclear diameter . We are proposing a new system wherein the STM is used to measure the motion of a cantilever beam with an ultrasmall mass . The force required to move this beam through measurable distances ( 10 A ) can be as small as 10 ' N . The masses involved in the other techniques are too large to reach this value . This level of sensitivity clearly penetrates the regime of inter - atomic forces between single atoms and opens the door to a variety of applications . The atomic force micro - scope ( AFM ) is a new tool designed to exploit this lev - el of sensitivity . It will be used to investigate both conductors and insulators on an atomic scale . % e en - vision a general - purpose device that will measure any type of force ; not only the interatomic forces , but elec - tromagnetic forces as well . % ith the STM , 6 the atomic surface structure of con - ductors is well resolved . For bulk insulators7 an equivalent method is missing although the stylus profi - lometer ( SP ) 8 9 has been developed into a powerful microscopic technique . Teague et al . ' have used the SP to record three - dimensional images of surfaces with a lateral resolution of 1000 A and a vertical resolution of 10 A . A related technique is the scanning capaci - tance microscope described by Matey and Blanc . " They report a lateral resolution of 5000 A and a verti - cal resolution of 2 A . The SP has much in common with the STM . The tip in the STM and the stylus in the SP are both used to scan the surface , sense the variations of the sample , and generate three - dimensional images . The stylus in the profilometer is carried by a cantilever beam and it rides on the sample surface . This means that a rough surface can be plastically deformed . " The radius of this stylus is about 1 p , m , and the loading force ex - tends from 10 to 10 N . ' The spring in the AFM is a critical component . % e need the maximum deflection for a given force . This requires a spring that is as soft as possible . At the same time a stiff spring with high resonant frequency is necessary in order to minimize the sensitivity to vi - brational noise from the building near 100 Hz . The resonant frequency , fo , of the spring system is given by f0 = ( I / 2sr ) ( k / nto ) ' , where k is the spring con - stant and ttto is the effective mass that loads the spring . This relation suggests a simple way out of our dilem - ma . As we decrease k to soften the spring we must also decrease mo to keep the ratio k / mo large . The limiting case , illustrated in Fig . 1 , is but a single atom adsorbed at site A in the gap of an STM . It has its own mass and an effective k that comes from the coupling to neighboring atoms . The mass of the spring in manmade structures can be quite small but eventually microfabrication ' 4 will be employed to fabricate a spring with a mass less than 10 ' 0 kg and a resonant frequency greater than 2 kHz . Displacements of 10 A can be measured with the STM when the tunneling gap is modulated . The force VoLUME 56 , NUMBER 9 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 3 M ~ RcH 1986 T ATOM E3 SCANNERS , A C FE E DBACK F FEEDBACK D ST & F AFM BLOCK ( ALUMINUM ) X Z Q Y FIG . 1 . Description of the principle operation of an STM as well as that of an AFM . The tip follows contour B , in one case to keep the tunneling current constant ( STM ) and in the other to maintain constant force between tip and sample ( AFM , sample , and tip either insulating or conducting ) . The STM itself may probe forces when a periodic force on the adatom 3 varies its position in the gap and modulates the tunneling current in the STM . The force can come from an ac voltage on the tip , or from an externally applied mag - netic field for adatoms with a magnetic moment . A : AFM SAMPLF B : AFM DIAMOND TIP C : STM TII ( Au ) LI : CANTILEVER , STM SAMPLE E : MODULATING PIEZO F : VITON . 25 mm DIAMOND TIP . 8 mm LEVER { Au - FOIL ) ~ FIG . 2 . Experimental setup , The lever is not to scale in ( a ) . its dimensions are given in ( h ) . The STM and AFM piezoelectric drives are facing each other , sandwiching the diamond tip that is glued to the lever . required to produce these displacements is 2 & & 10 ' N and this is reduced by 2 orders of magnitude when a cantilever with a 0 of 100 is driven at its resonant fre - quency . AFM images are obtained by measurement of the force on a sharp tip ( insulating or not ) created by the proximity to the surface of the sample . This force is kept small and at a constant level with a feedback mechanism . % hen the tip is moved sideways it will follow the surface contours such as the trace 8 in Fig . 1 . The experimental setup is shown in Fig . 2 . The can - tilever with the attached stylus is sandwiched between the AFM sample and the tunneling tip . It is fixed to a small piezoelectric element called the modulating piezo which is used to drive the cantilever beam at its resonant frequency . The STM tip is also mounted on a piezoelectric ele - ment and this serves to maintain the tunneling current at a constant level . The AFM sample is connected to a three - dimensional piezoelectric drive , i . e . , the x , y , z scanner . A feedback loop is used to keep the force acting on the stylus at a constant level . Viton spacers are used to damp the mechanical vibrations at high fre - quencies and to decouple the lever , the STM tip , and the AFM sample . The tip is brought in close proximi - ty to the sample by mechanical squeezing of the Viton layers . High - frequency ( ) 100 Hz ) filtering of build - ing vibrations is done as in the pocket - size STM ' with a stack of metal plates separated by Viton . We have operated the AFM in four different modes which relate to the connections of the two feedback circuits , one on the STM and the other on the tip . All four of these modes worked in principle . They each served to maintain a constant force , fo , between the sample and the diamond stylus while the stylus fol - lowed the contours of the surface . In the first mode we modulated the sample in the z direction at its resonant frequency ( 5 . 8 kHz ) . The force between the sample and the diamond stylus — the small force that we want to measure — deflects the lev - er holding the stylus . In turn , this modulates the tun - neling current which is used to control the AFM - feedback circuit and maintain the force fo at a constant level . In the second and third modes , the lever carrying the diamond stylus is driven at its resonant frequency in the z direction with an amplitude of 0 . 1 to 10 A . The force , fo , between sample and stylus changes the resonant frequency of the lever . This changes both the amplitude and phase of the ac modulation of the tunneling current . Either of these can be used as a sig - nal to drive the feedback circuits . In the fourth mode we used one feedback circuit . It was connected to the AFM and it was controlled by the tunneling current in the STM . This system maintained the tunneling gap at a constant level by changing the force on the stylus . The fourth mode was further improved by reconnec - tion of both feedback circuits in such a way that the AFM sample and the STM tip were driven in opposite directions with a factor n less in amplitude for the STM tip . The value of a ranged from 10 to 1000 . In contrast to previous methods , the absolute value of fo , the force on the stylus , was not well defined ex - cept at the beginning of the measurement . The defor - mation of the spring , 4z , is we11 calibrated at the start - ing point , but as the measurement proceeds each com - ponent of the system moves in an unknown way be - cause of thermal drifts . These change the initial cali - bration . Additionally , we know that the three - dimensional motion of the AFM sample must produce modest amounts of change in Az so as to compensate for the simultaneous motion of the stylus as it follows 931 MARCH 1986 VOLUME 56 , NUM MBER 9 PHYSICAL R EVIEW LETTER level is determined e suspect that this ev ed eared out . % e su netrate the film . n m necessary to pen 11 y the force that Is n ds we use s d ma11 forces we the & rs f ' t three method d there we lose the fine struc - below the threshold an r the handmade ture . rovements over he crease the resolution to t e ion sed h here should increase t e atomic we will be a e s ' 4 will microfabrication techniques liow us to reduce d . % hen the instru - a ow ers of magnitu e . er unl ' t by several or e in an ultra Ig - v be well characterized we w ere experience t a ' ll at eas f agnitude . With now at least 2 orders o m c ' ' h thermally induced vi ra - these optimum c conditions t e er at room e t mperature will ill limit s tions N . If h to 10 ~ ~ that the lower limit t e 300 mK we estimate a cooled below m when we compare it " I th es interesting w ' ls teratomic forces . In t to t e in the binding energy is w1 I h ld together with the rials that are e If we arbitrarily equate wea h dt of06 acting throug a t ee h nergy to a force in energy o e f 1 V is equivalen A we in find that a binding f rces therefore 0 — li m 0 ' N for ionic bonds to M f f tM some o vit of our instrum The limiting sensitivi y . Therefore , even in ln the s ifts the force fa will vary of the surface . e , m a senc b thth ' " u h e that Is ep certaIn rang 0 f the surface and the a ue roved to e The fourth mode p its shown in FIgs . 1 % ' e used it to re cord the resu s h for two differen t b e . the topograp y an Th Al 03 ) surface . f m each other by areas o e x axis are displaced rom I dif 1o h 3 d t th d therma r ' th he vertical dash ' ' . in ed lines of Fig . m ' s that variation in the y e direction o topog these de on the traces we can e the noise amplitu c on lvc a can estimate perio i d c corrugation below j , A when t e th th th d d 100 A . re inferi - t ese which might be related to wa water h AFM . Th fi the surfaces o t e films coverlllg rihto te the s tructure on the g hen the app Ie I ' d force exceeded onl be observed whe the structure was For smaller forces t e threshold . For sm 30 ZO IQ s on a ceramic ( Alq03 ) sample . . 3 . The AFM trace is near The vertical scale tran a f 10 - " / A . For the l tip of 10 8 N . The stabili yo t f the regulated orce i drift 3x10 traces are disp ace 10 N . e Th successive trac along the y axis . ther area of the ceramic ed under A were recorde * traces for another area d with le . The curves grouped under - p the lowest to the ig set g The force fo was rese duced below this level . x10 Nfort e ra value near 5x 932 VOLUME 56 , NUMBER 9 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 3 M & RCH 1986 than these values . Therefore , we should be able to measure all of the important forces that exist between the sample and adatorns on the stylus . Finally , we want to point out that these forces also exist in the tunneling microscope itself and that they can have a strong influence on the data collected with the STM . " ' The STM could be used as a force mi - croscope in the mode described here by simply mount - ing the STM tip on a cantilever beam . We are pleased to thank J . Pethica for his inspiring talk on the problems of the tip at the STM workshop in Oberlech , Austria , which — although some months later — probably triggered the idea for the AFM . We also want to express our appreciation to H . Rohrer and D . Pohl for those stimulating discussions . This work was supported in part by a grant from the IBM Cor - poration and in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . ' ~ Also at IBM San Jose Research Laboratory , San Jose , Cal . 95193 , and on leave from IBM Research Laboratory , Zurich , Switzerland . ~ ~ ~ Also at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center , Palo Alto , Cal . 94304 . & ' ~ on leave from IBM Research Laboratory , Zurich , Switzerland . ' G . Binnig and H . Rohrer , Sci . Am . 253 , 50 ( 1985 ) . 2R . , V . Jones , Proc . IEEE 17 , 1185 ( 1970 ) . 3E . R . Mapoles , Development of Sauperconducting Gravity Gradiomerer for a Test of the Inverse Square Lavv ( University Microfilm International , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 1981 ) , p . 4 ; J . Clark , Physics ( Amsterdam ) 126BAC , 441 ( 1984 ) . 4D . Tabor and R . H . S . Winterton , Proc . Roy . Soc . Lon - don , Ser . A 312 , 435 ( 1979 ) ; J . N . Israelachvili and D . Ta - bor , in Progress in Surface and Membrane Sciencee , dited by J . F . Danielli , M . D . Rosenberg , and D . A . Cadenhead ( Academic , New York , 1973 ) , Vol . 7 . sR . D . Deslattes , Appl . Phys . Lett . 15 , 386 ( 1968 ) . 66 . Binnig , H . Rohrer , Ch . Gerber , and E . Weibel , Phys . Rev . Lett . 49 , 57 ( 1982 ) , and 50 , 120 ( 1983 ) . 7Thin insulating films can be studied with the STM as il - lustrated in G . Binnig , H . Fuchs , J . Kubler , F . Salvan , and A . R . Williams , to be published . SJ . B . P . W ' illiamson , Proc . Inst . Mech . Eng . 182 , 21 ( 1967 ) . 9K . H . Guenther , P . G . % ierer , and J . M . Bennett . Appl . Optics 23 , 3820 ( 1984 ) . ~ OE . C . Teague , F . E . Scire , S . M . Backer , and S . % ' . Jen - sen , Wear 83 , 1 ( 1982 ) ; see also P . A . Engel and D . B . Millis , Wear 75 , 423 ( 1982 ) . " J . R . Matey and J . Blanc , J . Appl . Phys . 57 , 1437 ( 1985 ) . ' zE . J . Davis and K . J . Stout , Wear 83 , 49 ( 1982 ) . ' T . Vorburger , private communication . ' 4K . E . Peterson , Proc . IEEE 70 , 420 ( 1982 ) . ~ sB . H . Flowers and E . Mendoza , Properties of Mauer ( Wi - ley , London , 1970 ) , Chap . 3 , pp . 22 - 55 . ' H . Krupp , W . Schnabel , and G . Walter , J . Colloid Inter - face Sci . 39 , 421 ( 1972 ) . ' 7J . H . Coombs and J . B . Pethica , IBM J . Res . Dev . ( to be published ) . These authors point out that the forces between the sample and the tip in the STM , especially when the tip presses against an oxide layer , can be strong enough to alter the calibration of the z piezo , E , C . Teague , Room Temperature Gold - Vacuum - Gold Tun - neling Experiments ( University Microfilms International , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 1978 ) , Chap . 4 , pp . 141 - 148 , where he discussed the van der Waals forces of attraction between two gold spheres used in vacuum tunneling . 933