JCB JCB : Report T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y 3509 The Rockefeller University Press J . Cell Biol . Vol . 216 No . 11 3509 – 3520 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201702033 Introduction Metastasis formation is a complex multistep process that re - quires cancer cells to move from their tissue of origin to neigh - boring and distant organs ( Joyce and Pollard , 2009 ; Wirtz et al . , 2011 ) . Through their journey , cancer cells cooperate with the tumor microenvironment , which promotes their invasion ( Mueller and Fusenig , 2004 ; Joyce and Pollard , 2009 ) . Can - cer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) are the most abundant cells in the tumor microenvironment ( Kalluri and Zeisberg , 2006 ) . They are a unique cell population , as they can modulate cancer cell invasion directly by secreting proinvasive stimuli and indi - rectly by remodeling the matrix ( Attieh and Vignjevic , 2016 ) . During the progression of carcinoma , after breaching of the basement membrane , cancer cells reach the tumor stroma , encountering CAFs and the ECM . At this stage , the influence of CAFs on tumor invasion is still debated ( Kalluri , 2016 ) : it has been shown that depleting CAFs from the stroma induces tumor invasion ( Özdemir et al . , 2014 ; Rhim et al . , 2014 ) , but most studies agree that an enrichment in CAFs stimulates cancer cell invasion ( De Wever et al . , 2004 ; Orimo et al . , 2005 , Gaggi - oli et al . , 2007 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ) . There is also disagreement concerning the mechanism by which CAFs act : Do they en - hance the invasive capacity of cancer cells through diffusible molecules ( De Wever et al . , 2004 ; Orimo et al . , 2005 ) ? Or is their physical presence required to contract and align the ma - trix ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ; Sanz - Moreno et al . , 2011 ; Calvo et al . , 2013 ) , facilitating cancer cell invasion ( Riching et al . , 2014 ) ? Most new studies highlight the importance of contrac - tility in CAFs in stimulating invasion . However , the ability of CAFs to remodel the matrix by other mechanisms ( degradation , stiffening , or deposition of new ECM ) and the interdependence between those mechanisms have been poorly studied . For ex - ample , highly contractile cells are characterized by stable and long - lived fibrillar adhesions that deposit and assemble new ECMs ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , ECM deposition by CAFs is a direct consequence of their contractility . The tumor stroma is known to be enriched in matrix proteins like fibronec - tin ( FN ) and tenascin C that favor tumor progression ( De Wever et al . , 2004 ; Oudin et al . , 2016 ) , but it is still not known which of the two functions , contractility or matrix deposition , is re - sponsible for cancer cell invasion . Here , we investigate how CAFs induce invasion of can - cer cells through the ECM . Using a combination of pharmaco - logical and genetic perturbations , we modulated the ability of CAFs to contract , deposit , and degrade the matrix . We found that FN assembly by CAFs via integrin - α v β 3 is critical to stim - ulate cancer cell invasion . Cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) are the most abundant cells of the tumor stroma . Their capacity to contract the matrix and induce invasion of cancer cells has been well documented . However , it is not clear whether CAFs remodel the matrix by other means , such as degradation , matrix deposition , or stiffening . We now show that CAFs assemble fibronectin ( FN ) and trigger invasion mainly via integrin - α v β 3 . In the absence of FN , contractility of the matrix by CAFs is preserved , but their ability to induce invasion is abrogated . When degradation is impaired , CAFs retain the capacity to induce invasion in an FN - dependent manner . The level of expression of integrins α v and β 3 and the amount of assem - bled FN are directly proportional to the invasion induced by fibroblast populations . Our results highlight FN assembly and integrin - α v β 3 expression as new hallmarks of CAFs that promote tumor invasion . Cancer - associated fibroblasts lead tumor invasion through integrin - β 3 – dependent fibronectin assembly Youmna Attieh , 1 , 2 Andrew G . Clark , 1 Carina Grass , 1 , 3 Sophie Richon , 1 Marc Pocard , 4 Pascale Mariani , 5 Nadia Elkhatib , 6 Timo Betz , 7 Basile Gurchenkov , 1 and Danijela Matic Vignjevic 1 1 Institut Curie , Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , UMR 144 , Paris , France 2 Sorbonne Universités , University Pierre and Marie Curie , University of Paris 6 , Institute of Doctoral Studies , Paris , France 3 Department of Biochemistry , Technische Universitaet Munich , Munich , Germany 4 Chirurgie digestive et cancérologique , Hôpital Lariboisière , Université Paris Diderot , Sorbonne Paris Cité , Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris , Paris , France 5 Department of Surgery , Institut Curie , Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University , Paris and Saint Cloud , France 6 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1170 , Gustave Roussy Institute , Université Paris - Saclay , Villejuif , France 7 Center for Molecular Biology of Inflammation , Cells - in - Motion Cluster of Excellence , Institute of Cell Biology , Münster University , Münster , Germany © 2017 Attieh et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms / ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 4 . 0 International license , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 4 . 0 / ) . Correspondence to Youmna Attieh : youmna . attie @ curie . fr Abbreviations used : AA , antibiotic – antimycotic ; α - SMA , α smooth muscle actin ; CAF , cancer - associated fibroblast ; CAFcm , CAF - conditioned media ; CAFdm , CAF’s diffusible molecules ; FAP , fibroblast activation protein ; FN , fibronectin ; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; NAFs , noncancer - associated fibroblasts ; PDG FR - β , PDGF receptor β . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3510 Results and discussion The physical presence of CAFs in the matrix is required to induce cancer cell invasion To investigate the role of CAFs in cancer invasion , we isolated CAFs and noncancer - associated fibroblasts ( NAFs ) from the tumor and the neighboring healthy tissue of the colon of pa - tients , respectively , ending with a couple of NAFs and CAFs per patient . We characterized all cell populations using mark - ers of activated fibroblasts ( see Materials and methods ; Fig . S1 A ) . In all patients , CAFs and NAFs expressed α smooth muscle actin ( α - SMA ) , fibroblast activation protein ( FAP ) , and PDGF receptor β ( PDG FR - β ; Fig . S1 A ) , indicating that even though they were isolated from seemingly healthy tissue , NAFs exhibit features of activated fibroblasts . To assess the role of CAFs and NAFs in cancer cell in - vasion of the ECM , we embedded spheroids of CT26 cancer cells in a collagen I matrix either alone or together with CAFs or NAFs ( Fig . 1 A ) . This 3D model recapitulates the scenario of a tumor mass invading the stroma . The invasion capacity of cancer cells was quantified using a custom analysis software 3 d after embedding ( see Materials and methods ; Fig . 1 B ) . CT26 is an invasive cancer cell line ( Geraldo et al . , 2013 ) , and in this assay , cells invaded the collagen matrix even when cul - tured alone ( Fig . 1 , A and C ) . However , in the presence of fi - broblasts , the invasion of cancer cells was further enhanced , as previously shown for other noninvasive cancer cell lines ( Fig . 1 , A and C ; Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ; Labernadie et al . , 2017 ) . CAFs were also more potent in increasing invasion compared with their paired NAFs ( Fig . 1 , A and C ) . To validate that this phenotype was not caused by an increased attraction of CAFs compared with NAFs by the tumor , we quantified the number of fibroblasts and their distance from the spheroid . Both CAFs and NAFs accumulated at 50 – 120 µm from the spheroid edge , and they were found in similar numbers ( Fig . 1 D ) . This suggests that the increased invasion index in the presence of CAFs is most likely caused by an increased potential to secrete proinvasive diffusible molecules or to remodel the matrix . We next investigated whether CAFs have to be present in collagen gels to stimulate invasion of cancer cells or whether their diffusible molecules are sufficient . In one of the condi - tions , we added CAF - conditioned media ( CAFcm ) to spher - oids embedded in collagen . Alternatively , we cultured CAFs in the distant presence of cancer cell spheroids ( CAF’s diffusible molecules [ CAFdm ] ) ; in the latter condition , CAFs were not present in the matrix to remodel it , but the secretome cross talk of both cell types was maintained ( Fig . 1 E , schemes ) . In both cases , cancer cells invaded collagen gels to a similar extent as in control conditions ( Fig . 1 E ) , indicating that the physical presence of CAFs in the matrix is necessary to in - crease cancer cell invasion . These data show that CAFs induce more cancer cell in - vasion compared with their paired NAFs and that diffusible molecules of CAFs are not sufficient . Interestingly , the over - all ability of fibroblasts to induce cancer cell invasion did not correlate with the expression levels of commonly used CAF markers ( Fig . S1 B ) . FN deposition by CAFs induces cancer cell invasion The necessity of CAFs to be physically present in the matrix to induce invasion points toward their role in matrix remodeling . Although NAFs were embedded into the ECM , they did not induce cancer cell invasion . These findings indicate that CAFs , and not NAFs , can remodel the matrix to induce inva - sion . Proteomic data analysis of two fibroblast couples from colon cancer patients show enrichment in FN in the secretome and proteome of CAFs compared with their paired NAFs ( ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRI DE partner repos - itory with the dataset identifier PXD003670 ) . In addition , FN is known to be enriched in the tumor microenvironment and is a proinvasive ECM protein ( Wolanska and Morgan , 2015 ; Oudin et al . , 2016 ) . FN could thus be deposited by CAFs to promote cancer cell invasion . To test this hypothesis , we in - hibited FN expression in CAFs using small interfering RNA ( Fig . S1 C ) . Depletion of FN in CAFs from all patients ab - rogated their ability to stimulate the invasion of cancer cells , indicating that FN is necessary for CAFs to induce cancer cell invasion ( Fig . 2 A and Fig . S1 D ) . This result was surprising , as it has been shown that CAFs mainly stimulate cancer cell invasion by contracting and align - ing the matrix ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ; Calvo et al . , 2013 ) . Indeed , live imaging of cancer cell spheroids and CAFs in collagen revealed that CAFs were active in remodeling the matrix ( Video 1 ) . CAFs aligned and pulled collagen fibers perpendicularly to the edge of the spheroids , facilitating the mi - gration of cancer cells ( Video 2 and Fig . 2 , B and C ) , whereas in the absence of CAFs , collagen fibers were oriented parallel to the spheroid edge ( Fig . 2 C ) , which is not favorable for cancer cell invasion ( Provenzano et al . , 2006 ; Kopanska et al . , 2016 ) . However , FN - depleted CAFs ( CAFsiFN ) retained the ability to align collagen fibers in the same fashion ( Fig . 2 C ) . Analysis of the width and length of collagen fibers remodeled by CAFsiCtrl and CAFsiFN also showed no difference between the two cell populations , demonstrating that FN depletion had no effect on the overall topography of the collagen matrix ( Fig . 2 D ) . CAFsiFN also contracted and applied mechanical forces on the matrix similarly to control CAFs , indicating that depletion of FN in CAFs has no consequence on their ability to apply me - chanical forces on the matrix ( Fig . 2 , E and F ) . When inhibiting the contractility of CAFs using myosin II inhibitor blebbistatin ( Fig . S1 E ) , collagen alignment and contraction were abrogated , as well as downstream FN assem - bly , as previously shown ( Fig . 2 G ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007 ) . In this condition , cancer cells did not invade the matrix , either alone or in the presence of CAFs ( Fig . S1 F ) . Together , these results demonstrate that both contractility and FN are import - ant for CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . However , the over - all ability of fibroblasts to induce cancer cell invasion did not significantly correlate with their capacity to contract collagen , especially in the case of couple 3 , where NAFs and CAFs dis - played similar collagen contraction ( Fig . S1 G ) . This suggests that mechanical forces are important for CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion , as they induce FN assembly . However , if not fol - lowed by FN deposition , mechanical forces by CAFs are not sufficient to promote invasion . Finally , it has been suggested that invadopodia , the ac - tin - rich structures responsible for matrix degradation , could also exert mechanical forces on the matrix and switch on a contractile phenotype ( Aung et al . , 2014 ) . As contraction and degradation of the matrix could be interdependent , we also checked for the role of proteolysis in CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . Inhibition of matrix proteolysis using broad spec - trum matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) inhibitors GM6001 and Fibroblasts lead tumor invasion via fibronectin • Attieh et al . 3511 Figure 1 . CAFs induce invasion of cancer cells through matrix remodeling . ( A ) Maximum intensity projections of cancer cell spheroids in collagen I , with or without fibroblasts , at day 3 . CT26 cancer cells express LifeAct - GFP ( green ) ; F - actin ( red ) and DNA ( cyan ) were stained with phalloidin - rhodamine and DAPI , respectively . Bar , 100 µm . ( B ) 3D rendering of spheroids at day 3 . Invasion is quantified using the invasion counter software . Red dots represent nuclei of invading GFP cancer cells ( migrated out of the spheroid ) . ( C ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion alone ( blue box ) and in the presence of NAFs ( green boxes ) or CAFs ( red boxes ) for three different patients . P - values are compared with cancer cells alone ( in gray ) and to cancer cells with CAFs ( in black ) using Newman - Keuls multiple comparisons test ( * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . ( D , left ) Quantification of the density of NAFs and CAFs from all three patients around the spheroid . Fibroblast density is defined as the number of nuclei of non - GFP cells normalized to the surface area of the spheroid contour in 3D . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test . ( Right ) Quantification of the mean distance of NAFs and CAFs from the spheroid . The mean distance from the spheroid was defined as the distance from the nuclei of non - GFP cells to the closest point along the cancer cell spheroid contour . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test . ( E , left ) Schematic representation of the experiment . Cancer cells were embedded in collagen gels ( a ) . CAFs were either mixed with cancer cells in the collagen droplet ( b ) , their conditioned media was added to cancer cells ( c ) , or they were plated around the collagen droplet ( d ) . ( Right ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion alone , in the presence of CAFcm or CAFdm , or in the presence of CAFs for three different patients . Invasion index is defined as the ratio between the number of invading nuclei of GFP cancer cells and the area of the spheroid contour . Quantification results are expressed as box and whiskers ( minimum to maximum ) of at least n = 3 separate experiments . P - values are compared with cancer cells alone ( in gray ) and to cancer cells with CAFs ( in black ) using Newman - Keuls multiple comparisons test ( * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . CC , cancer cells . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3512 Figure 2 . CAFs deposit FN to induce cancer cell invasion . ( A ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion alone or in the presence of CAFs from patient 2 , depleted or not for FN . P - values are compared with cancer cells alone ( in gray ) and to cancer cells with CAFs ( in black ) using Newman - Keuls multiple com - parisons test ( * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . ( B ) Time - lapse sequence of CT26 cancer cells and CAFs from patient 1 in collagen . CT26 cancer cells express LifeAct - GFP ( green ) , CAFs are stained with a lyophilic carbocyanine dye ( red ) , and collagen is acquired by reflection ( blue ) . Time is in hours and minutes ( HH : mm ) . Bar , 200 µm . The magnified region is represented by the white square . Bar , 100 µm . ( C , top ) Overlaid images of collagen I matrices containing cancer Fibroblasts lead tumor invasion via fibronectin • Attieh et al . 3513 BB94 abrogated the spontaneous invasion of cancer cells , as previously shown ( Poincloux et al . , 2009 ; Wolf et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , CAFs rescued cancer cell invasion in the presence of MMP inhibitors ( Fig . S1 H ) , indicating that CAFs can stim - ulate an invasion of cancer cells that is independent of MMPs . When treated with BB94 , CAFs still contracted collagen plugs ; thus , CAFs’ ability to contract the matrix did not depend on their ability to degrade it ( Fig . S1 I ) . Interestingly , FN - depleted CAFs failed to rescue cancer cell invasion in the presence of MMP inhibitors ( Fig . 2 H and Fig . S1 J ) . Together , these data show that in the presence of CAFs that are able to deposit FN , cancer cells can invade the matrix in an MMP - independent manner . These findings could provide an explanation of the failure of MMP inhibitors in clinics . As a major constituent of the tumor microenvironment , CAFs can provide an alternative escape mechanism for cancer cells by aligning collagen fibers and assembling the FN that en - ables cancer cell invasion . CAFs secrete and assemble more FN than NAFs FN fibrillogenesis is a complex multistep process . Cells secrete FN as soluble dimers , which then bind to integrin receptors , unfold , and associate with each other to form a fibrillary ma - trix ( Wolanska and Morgan , 2015 ) . It is possible that CAFs are more efficient in assembling FN than NAFs and consequently induce more invasion of cancer cells . To address this , we com - pared the capacity of CAFs and NAFs to secrete and assem - ble FN ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . The analysis of the conditioned media showed that CAFs secrete more FN compared with NAFs ( Fig . 3 A ) . Similarly , CAFs assembled more FN fibrils compared with their paired NAFs ( Fig . 3 B ) . Moreover , the amounts of secreted and assem - bled FN by fibroblasts significantly correlated with the invasion index ( Fig . 3 C ) . This result indicates that the ability of fibro - blasts to induce cancer cell invasion directly correlates with the amount of FN they produce . To further discriminate between the roles of secreted and assembled FN in cancer invasion , based on the estimation of the amount of FN secreted by CAFs ( Fig . 3 A ) , we added 250 ng / ml of soluble FN to cancer cell spheroids . We observed that sup - plementing collagen with soluble FN did not induce invasion ( Fig . 3 D ) . This was not surprising , as CAFs’ secreted mole - cules did not promote cancer cell invasion ( Fig . 1 C ) . Together , these results show that CAFs secrete and assem - ble FN more efficiently than NAFs and point toward the impor - tance of FN assembly in CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . As the invasion induced by all fibroblast populations most signifi - cantly correlated with the amount of assembled FN , we uncover a signature of CAFs and a link between ECM remodeling by CAFs and cancer cell invasion . These results are in agreement with a new study in which the analysis of FN expression in tumors from 435 head and neck cancer patients revealed an inverse correla - tion between high levels of FN and patient prognosis ( Gopal et al . , 2017 ) . Besides serving as a cue in the ECM that cancer cells haptotact toward ( Oudin et al . , 2016 ) , FN also establishes che - motactic gradients by modulating the bioavailability of growth factors such as hepatocyte growth factor ( Rahman et al . , 2005 ; Hynes , 2009 ) . Therefore , by being in close proximity to each other , CAFs could stimulate the invasion of cancer cells toward FN and the growth factors FN matrices retain . Integrin - α v β 3 is necessary for FN assembly As soluble FN did not stimulate cancer cell invasion , we addressed the role of assembled FN . FN is assembled via transmembrane proteins , integrins ; more specifically , mostly via integrin - α 5 β 1 and - α v β 3 ( Wolanska and Morgan , 2015 ) . We correlated the amounts of integrin isoforms α 5 , α v , β 1 , and β 3 in CAFs to their ability to induce invasion . Integrin - α v and - β 3 expression showed the highest correlation , hinting at the importance of integrin - α v β 3 in CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion ( Fig . S2 , A and B ) . We next tested whether β 3 - or α 5 - depleted CAFs ( Fig . S2 , C and D ) could induce invasion . In this condition , the amount of secreted FN by CAFs was unchanged ( Fig . S2 E ) . In the presence of both CAFsi - α 5 and CAFsi - β 3 , invasion was sig - nificantly reduced ( Fig . 4 A ) . This effect was confirmed using cilengitide , an inhibitor of integrin - β 3 ( Fig . 4 B ) . FN assembly by CAFsi - β 3 was markedly reduced compared with control CAFs and α 5 - depleted CAFs ( Fig . 4 C and Fig . S2 F ) and was not caused by an impaired migration of CAFs toward cancer cells ( Fig . S2 G ) . These results indicate that integrin - β 3 and - α 5 are necessary for CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . They also validate the requirement of FN assembly for cancer cell inva - sion , as silencing of integrins or blocking of integrin - β 3 or of contractility in CAFs does not affect FN secretion but abrogates cancer cell invasion ( Fig . S2 E ) . Because the fluorescence signal in 3D assays is nontrivial to quantify , we assessed the amount of assembled FN on 2D cell spheroids alone or together with control or FN - depleted CAFs from patient 1 generated using CurveAlign . The yellow line indicates the edge of the spheroid , and the green lines indicate fiber orientation with respect to the closest point on the spheroid edge . Bar , 100 µm . ( Bottom ) Rose plots representing the frequency of distribution of the absolute angles of collagen fibers within the range of 0 – 90° with respect to the closest point on the spheroid edge . ( D , left ) Maximum intensity projections of CAFs from patient 1 treated with siRNA scrambled control ( CAFsiCtrl ) or with siRNA targeting FN ( CAFsiFN ) . F - actin is stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( green ) , FN is immunostained ( magenta ) , and collagen is acquired using second harmonic generation ( cyan ) . Bar , 20 µm . ( Right ) Quantification of collagen fiber width and length using CT - FIRE . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test for at least n = 3 stacks over n = 2 separate experiments . ( E , left ) Control and FN - depleted CAFs from patient 1 cultured in collagen I gels 1 d after embedding . ( Right ) Percentage of gel contraction of control and FN - depleted CAFs from patient 1 calculated using the formula 100 × [ gel area ( T0 ) − gel area ( T1 ) ] / gel area ( T0 ) . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test for n = 3 over n = 6 separate experiments . ( F , left ) Traction force map of control and FN - depleted CAFs from patient 1 on collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels with Young’s modulus of 5 kPa . Color code gives the magnitude of traction stress in Pa , which corresponds to forces of piconewton / squared micrometers . ( Right ) Corresponding mean force ( strain energy ) exerted by CAFs over a 30 - min time lapse . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test for n = 10 cells over n = 2 separate experiments . ( G ) Maximum intensity projections of cancer cell spheroids in collagen I gels with CAFs from patient 1 treated with siRNA scrambled control , siRNA against FN , or blebbistatin at day 3 . Bar , 100 µm . Magnified regions are repre - sented by the white squares . CT26 cancer cells express LifeAct - GFP ( green ) , F - actin is stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( red ) , FN is immunostained ( cyan ) , and collagen is acquired using reflection ( white ) . Bar , 50 µm . ( H ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion alone or in the presence of control or FN - depleted CAFs treated with BB94 from patient 3 . Invasion index is defined as the ratio between the number of invading nuclei of GFP cancer cells and the area of the spheroid contour . All quantification results are expressed as box and whiskers ( minimum to maximum ) of at least n = 3 separate experiments . P - values are compared with cancer cells alone ( in gray ) and to cancer cells with CAFs ( in black ) using Newman - Keuls multiple comparisons test ( * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3514 substrates . Surprisingly , depletion of integrin - α 5 did not alter FN assembly by CAF 1 d after plating , though the ability to assemble FN was reduced upon depletion of integrin - β 3 ( Fig . S3 A ) . In contrast , when fibroblasts were cultured for 3 d and allowed to reach confluency , depletion of integrin - α 5 or - β 3 re - duced FN fibrillogenesis ( Fig . 4 D ) . These results suggest that integrin - β 3 mediates FN assembly at an early stage , whereas α 5 could be required later on for sustained assembly of FN fibers . Integrin - α 5 and - β 3 are required at different stages of FN fibrillogenesis As our results indicate that both integrin - α 5 β 1 and - α v β 3 are re - quired for FN fibrillogenesis , we next wondered about their local - ization in CAFs and with respect to FN fibers . In 2D , integrin - α 5 was found in the center of the cells in mature fibrillar adhesions colocalizing with FN fibers . α v β 3 was present at the cell periph - ery , at focal adhesions partially colocalizing with FN puncta ( Fig . 5 A ) . In 3D collagen matrices , integrin - α v β 3 accumulated at the cell poles along with FN deposits ( Fig . 5 B ) , whereas in - tegrin - α 5 was localized all along the cell periphery ( Fig . S3 B ) . The localization of integrin - α v β 3 at the cell periphery suggests its requirement during initial cell – matrix interactions . Indeed , after letting the cells adhere for 2 h , integrin - α v β 3 al - ready clustered , whereas integrin - α 5 was not yet recruited ( Fig . 5 C ) . However , as blocking of integrin - β 3 did not alter the CAFs’ contractility ( Fig . S3 C ) , these results indicate that inte - grin - α v β 3 is required at the initial steps of FN fibrillogenesis , downstream of contractility . Figure 3 . CAFs secrete and assemble more FN than NAFs . ( A ) Immunoblot analysis . Conditioned media prepared from NAFs and CAFs from three patients were probed with FN antibody . α - Tubulin served as a loading control . Protein amount is represented by normalizing to α - tubulin . Results are rep - resented as column bars for n = 3 separate experiments . For the FN scale : soluble FN loaded at a range of 300 to 0 . 75 ng . ( B , left ) Immunostaining of FN ( green ) in NAFs and CAFs from three patients . F - actin is stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( red ) , and DNA was stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 20 µm . ( Right ) Quantification of assembled FN . Amount of assembled FN is defined as the amount of fluorescence in a cell ( integrated density ) normalized to the area of the cell and the background fluorescence . P - value is calculated using Mann – Whitney test for n = 20 cells over n = 2 separate experiments . ( C ) Scatter dot graphs correlating the invasion index of cancer cells in the presence of fibroblasts from all three patients with the amount of secreted ( left ) and assembled FN ( right ) by fibroblasts . Quality of linear regression is represented by the values of p and r 2 . ( D ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion in a collagen matrix or in a collagen and FN matrix . Invasion index is defined as the ratio between the number of invading nuclei of GFP cancer cells and the area of the spheroid contour . Quantification results are expressed as box and whiskers ( minimum to maximum ) for at least n = 3 separate experiments . * * * , P < 0 . 001 . A . U . , arbitrary units . Fibroblasts lead tumor invasion via fibronectin • Attieh et al . 3515 Integrin - β 3 specifically accumulates at areas of high - traction force and is stationary within focal adhesions , whereas integrin - β 1 is more mobile and thus prone to relocate to fibril - lar adhesions ( Rossier et al . , 2012 ; Schiller et al . , 2013 ) . In - hibition of myosin disassembles β 3 clusters without affecting levels and localization of integrin - β 1 ( Schiller et al . , 2013 ) . This could explain why treatment of CAFs with blebbistatin abrogates FN assembly . However , depletion of α v β 3 does not alter CAFs’ ability to contract collagen , indicating that α v β 3 is downstream of contractility . Figure 4 . Integrin - α v β 3 is necessary for FN assembly . ( A ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion alone or in the presence of control CAFs , α 5 - depleted CAFs , and β 3 - depleted CAFs from patient 3 . ( B ) Quantification of cancer cell invasion in the presence of CAFs from patient 2 , with or without cilengitide treatment . ( A and B ) Invasion index is defined as the ratio between the number of invading nuclei of GFP cancer cells and the area of the spheroid contour . All quantification results are expressed as box and whiskers ( minimum to maximum ) of at least n = 3 separate experiments . P - values are compared with cancer cells alone ( in gray ) and to cancer cells with CAFs ( in black ) using Newman - Keuls multiple comparisons test ( * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Maximum intensity projections of CAFs from patient 2 treated with siRNA scrambled control , siRNA against integrin - α 5 or integrin - β 3 , or cilengitide . Bar , 100 µm . Magnified regions are represented by the white squares . F - actin is stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( green ) , FN is immunos - tained ( magenta ) , and collagen is acquired using second harmonic generation ( cyan ) . Bar , 20 µm . ( D , left ) Immunostaining of FN ( green ) in control CAFs , FN - depleted CAFs , α 5 - depleted CAFs , and β 3 - depleted CAFs from patient 2 , 3 d after plating . F - actin was stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( red ) , and DNA was stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 40 µm . ( Right ) Graph represents the percentage of assembled FN relative to control conditions defined as the amount of fluorescence in a monolayer ( integrated density ) normalized to the number of nuclei . Quantification results are expressed as column bars with mean ± SEM . Depleted CAFs were compared with control CAFs for n = 10 frames over n = 4 separate experiments . P - value is calculated using Newman Keuls multiple comparisons test ( * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 ) . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3516 In cells plated on RGD - rich substrates , α v β 3 localizes at focal adhesions and , unlike β 1 , is responsible for force - dependent focal adhesion maturation ( von Wichert et al . , 2003 ; Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2013 ; Changede et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , α v β 3 could be involved in mediating the signal , from contractility to formation of fibrillar adhesions . This hypothesis is supported by a study showing that pulling on vascular smooth muscle cells using anti - β 3 antibody – coated beads , and not α 2 or β 1 , resulted in the activation of downstream signaling ( Goldschmidt et al . , 2001 ) . Similarly , a blockade of integrin - β 3 , but not - β 1 , abro - gates DNA synthesis induced by mechanical strain in vascular smooth muscle cells ( Wilson et al . , 1995 ) . Because in our study we used collagen , which is not an RGD substrate , α v β 3 localization at focal adhesions is Figure 5 . Integrin - α 5 and - β 3 are required at different stages of FN fibrillogenesis . ( A ) Immu - nostaining of CAFs on 2D coverslips for integ - rins α 5 and α v β 3 ( green ) and FN ( magenta ) . F - actin was stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( red ) , and DNA was stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 40 µm . ( B ) Maximum intensity projec - tions of CAFs in 3D collagen matrices immu - nostained for integrin - α v β 3 ( green ) and FN ( magenta ) . Collagen was acquired using sec - ond harmonic generation ( cyan ) . Bars : ( main image ) 40 µm ; ( magnified image ) 10 µm . ( C ) Immunostaining of CAFs 2 h after plating for integrin - α 5 or - α v β 3 ( green ) and FN ( magenta ) . F - actin was stained with phalloidin - rhodamine ( red ) , and DNA was stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bar , 20 µm . ( A – C ) Magnified regions are rep - resented by white squares . ( D ) Model : CAFs present in the collagen I – rich tumor stroma secrete FN . ( Top ) Contractile forces exerted by CAFs align the ECM and activate α v β 3 at the sites of focal adhesions . ( Bottom ) α v β 3 ac - tivation leads to the formation of fibrillar adhe - sions and FN fibrillogenesis . Fibroblasts lead tumor invasion via fibronectin • Attieh et al . 3517 somewhat surprising . The possible explanation is that because of the presence of serum and cellular FN secreted by the cells themselves , cells are constantly exposed to RGD motifs . It has also been shown that α v β 3 localizes to the cell’s edge inde - pendently of RGD upon stimulation by growth factors such as FGF ( Kiosses et al . , 2001 ) . In the context of a tumor where CAFs , blood vessels , or cancer cells constantly secrete FN and growth factors , the nature of the matrix would not really matter , as it is constantly enriched in RGD peptides . In conclusion , our study shows that diffusible molecules secreted by CAFs are not sufficient to induce cancer cell inva - sion . Instead , CAFs’ remodeling of the matrix is the key player . We propose a model in which contractility of CAFs is neces - sary for downstream activation of the integrin - α v β 3 and assem - bly of FN puncta . α 5 β 1 becomes critical only at later stages of FN assembly at fibrillar adhesions ( Fig . 5 C ) . Because the ability of all fibroblast populations to assemble FN directly correlates with their ability to induce cancer cell invasion , we demonstrate that ECM deposition ( more specifically , FN fibril - logenesis ) is the key component for CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . Finally , we show that integrin - β 3 is the major driver for FN assembly in CAFs , as its inhibition abrogates CAF - mediated cancer cell invasion . Materials and methods Cell lines CT26 mouse intestinal cancer cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection . Cells were cultured in DMEM ( Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Invitrogen ) and 5 % CO 2 . Cells were in - fected with a lentiviral GFP plasmid according to standard procedures . Isolation and culture of primary fibroblasts Human primary fibroblasts were isolated from fresh colon tumors ( CAFs ) and adjacent noncarcinoma tissue ( NAFs ) samples from pa - tients treated at Lariboisière Hospital , Paris , with the written consent of the patients and approval of the local ethics committee . Samples were treated as previously described ( Amatangelo et al . , 2005 ) . In brief , tis - sues were collected after surgical resection in RPMI buffer and washed in PBS supplemented with 10 % antibiotic – antimycotic ( AA ; Gibco ) . 100 - mm 2 tissue culture plates were scratched using a scalpel , and tis - sue pieces of ∼ 1 – 2 mm 2 were cut and placed on the junctions . After isolation , the tumor pieces were kept in 10 ml DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Life Technologies ) and 10 % AA . 24 h later , the me - dium was changed and AA concentration was reduced to 5 % . From this point , the medium was changed every 2 d , reducing AA concentra - tion by half every time , until AA concentration reached 1 % . Fibroblasts typically started going out of the tissues after 2 – 3 wk . When having reached confluency , fibroblasts were trypsinized and plated on 30 KPa of 30 - mm 2 soft plates ( Excellness ) that were previously coated with 5 µg / ml of rat tail collagen I ( Corning ) in DMEM polymerized at 37°C for at least 24 h . Soft plates were used to avoid activation of fibro - blasts by matrix rigidity . Unless stated otherwise , all fibroblasts were cultured on soft plates and kept in their primary nontransformed state until passage 10 . After isolation , all cell populations were character - ized for the presence of markers of activated fibroblasts : α - SMA , FAP , and PDG FR - β ( Fig . S1 A ) . Western blotting Protein lysates were obtained from fibroblasts seeded on soft plates at passage 3 . Protein lysates were processed according to standard procedures . In brief , cells were washed with PBS , lysed in radio - immunoprecipitation assay buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM EDTA , and 150 mM NaCl ) supplemented with prote - ase and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and boiled in Laemmli buffer for 5 min . The samples were separated in SDS - PAGE gradient gels ( 4 – 15 % ) , transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane using the BioRad system , and blocked in 5 % nonfat dried milk dissolved in PBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween for 30 min at RT . The membranes were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C followed by incubation with peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT . Immunoreactive bands were detected using an ECL - plus kit ( Roche ) . Quantifications were done using ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) by normalizing the protein amount to α - tubulin or GAP DH amounts ( loading controls ) . Antibody description and working dilu - tions can be found in Table S1 . Invasion assay Agarose ( Invitrogen ) was dissolved in water to a concentration of 0 . 01 g / ml and boiled . 150 µl of the solution was added to a 48 - well plate , and agarose was left to polymerize for at least 10 min at RT . A solution of 10 4 cells / ml of CT26 cancer cells was made , and 75 – 100 µl of the solution was added to the wells . The wells were subsequently filled with DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , and spheroids were left to form for 3 – 4 d . 30 - mm 2 tissue culture plates were specifically fashioned for the invasion assay : three holes ∼ 3 – 4 mm in diameter were drilled in a plate and widened around the edges using a scalpel . The bottom of the dish was covered with epoxy ( Loctite ) , and 20 × 20 – mm square coverslips were glued to the dish overnight at RT . 1 d before the exper - iment , the dishes were silanized with 3 - aminopropyl - trimethoxysilane ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The dishes were washed extensively with water and treated for 30 min with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde followed by a final wash . This treatment was made to avoid collagen detachment from the plastic holes because of the high contractility exerted by CAFs . 2 mg / ml of rat tail collagen I ( Corning ) was prepared in DMEM , 10× PBS , and 1 M NaOH , to a pH of 7 . The solution was kept on ice to avoid collagen polymerization . Spheroids were embedded in 15 µl collagen drops containing 5 × 10 3 fibroblasts , positioned in the hole of the culture plate . After filling all three holes , the plate was flipped every 30 s for 5 min in order for the cells to stay in the middle of the collagen drop ( preventing sedimentation of spheroids to the glass or to the collagen / air interface ) . Collagen was left to polymerize for an additional 15 min at RT before 3 ml DMEM supplemented with 5 % FBS and 1 % AA were added . Cancer cells were left to invade for 3 d before fixing and staining . For evaluation of cancer cell invasion in the presence of CAFdm , 15 × 10 3 CAFs were plated around the three collagen droplets on the plastic dish . For evaluation of cancer cell invasion in the presence of CAFcm , three sets of 15 × 10 3 CAFs were plated on 30 - mm 2 soft plates in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS for 1 d to properly adhere . CAFs were then extensively washed with serum - deprived DMEM and incubated in 1 ml of serum - deprived media . Conditioned media were harvested 24 h later ( 3 ml in total ) , supplemented with 5 % FBS and 1 % AA , and added on a tissue culture plate containing three collagen droplets of single spheroids . Collagen contraction assay 1 . 5 × 10 5 fibroblasts were suspended in 1 . 5 ml of 2 - mg / ml rat tail col - lagen I ( Corning ) and added to a 24 - well plate in triplicates ( 500 µl / well ) . After 30 min of incubation at RT , collagen plugs were detached from the walls of the well with a scalpel , and DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS was added . Images of the collagen plugs were acquired JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3518 at time 0 ( T0 ) and after 24 h ( T1 ) using a microscope ( M165FC ; Leica ) . To obtain the gel contraction value , the relative area of the gel was measured using ImageJ software at T0 and T1 , and the percent - age of contraction was calculated using the formula 100 × [ gel area ( T0 ) − gel area ( T1 ) ] / gel area ( T 0 ) . Collagen topography measurements Fibers’ alignment and their angles with respect to the spheroid edge were measured on images acquired using reflection microscopy with the available software , CurveAlign in MatLab . The angles of colla - gen fibers compared with the spheroid edge were determined for 10 slices per condition . Fiber width and length were measured on images acquired using second harmonic generation with the available soft - ware , CT - FIRE in MatLab . Inhibitors and siRNA Blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , BB94 ( AbCam ) , and cilengitide ( Sell - eckchem ) were used at 15 , 5 , and 1 µM , respectively . They were mixed with the media and added to the invasion assay after collagen polym - erization . GM6001 ( Millipore ) was used at 20 µM and was mixed with both the collagen before its polymerization and added to the media as previously described ( Wolf et al . , 2013 ) . For protein knockdowns using siRNA , CAFs were cultured in standard conditions and transfected using HiPerFect ( 301704 ; Qiagen ) . 6 × 10 4 CAFs were plated in a well of a 6 - well plate and subjected to transfection using 100 nM siRNA . siRNA was purchased from Qiagen , and sequences are listed in Table S2 . 3D immunofluorescence Spheroids embedded in collagen were fixed using 4 % PFA in PBS for 30 min at RT and washed with PBS . Anti - FN antibody was added in 500 µl PBS , and dishes were left under agitation at RT for 2 d . Spher - oids were then washed with PBS and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 30 min at RT . DNA and F - actin were stained using DAPI and phalloidin , respectively ( Life Technologies ) . Collagen was imaged using confocal reflection microscopy . For integrin stainings , CAFs were embedded in collagen drops for 3 d in identical culture conditions and then fixed and stained simi - larly to spheroids . Permeabilization was performed for 15 min to avoid damaging the cell membrane . Antiintegrin antibodies were added in 500 µl PBS , and the dishes were left under agitation at RT for 2 d . Ap - propriate secondary antibodies were added in 500 µl PBS along with phalloidin - rhodamine . Collagen was imaged using second harmonic generation . In all conditions , cells were imaged at a similar distance from the coverslip using the same settings . Quantification of FN secretion and expression CT26 cancer cells were incubated in 10 ml of serum - deprived DMEM at a density of 10 6 cells for 24 h . The media were collected , passed through 0 . 2 - µm filters to eliminate cell debris , and added on soft plates containing 1 . 5 × 10 5 fibroblasts for 3 d . The media were collected , filtered again , and a 300 - µl sample was processed according to West - ern blot standard procedures . 30 µl of all samples was loaded into a polyacrylamide SDS - PAGE gel ( our Laemmli sample buffer being 2× concentrated , this volume corresponds to 15 µl of sample ) . For the pu - rified FN scale , samples were loaded in the same fashion with an FN concentration ranging from 50 ng / ml to 20 µg / ml ( corresponding total FN amount ranging from 0 . 75 to 300 ng ) . For quantification of FN secretion by integrin and FN - depleted CAFs , CAFs were plated in a well of a 6 - well plate and treated with RNAi against FN as previously described in the section Inhibitors and siRNA . CAFs were then extensively washed with serum - free DMEM , incubated in 1 ml of serum - free DMEM , and retransfected with another round of siRNA to maintain protein depletion . Media were collected , filtered , and processed for Western blotting as already described . Cytotoxicity and viability tests 10 4 CAFs were plated in triplicate in a 96 - well plate in DMEM sup - plemented with 10 % FBS and treated with siRNA for 3 d as described in the Inhibitors and siRNA section . For testing cilengitide effects , CAFs were plated in the same conditions for 3 d without siRNA treat - ment . CAFs were then washed and treated with either another round of siRNA or 1 µM cilengitide for 24 h . 100 µl of conditioned media of each condition was harvested for cytotoxicity tests using the Cyto - toxicity Detection kit LDH ( Roche ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Remaining cells were used for viability tests using cell proliferation reagent WST - 1 ( Roche ) according to the manufac - turer’s recommendations . 2D immunofluorescence For quantification of FN assembly in CAFs and NAFs , fibroblasts were plated on glass coverslips in CT26 - conditioned media . For the remaining 2D stainings , fibroblasts were plated on glass coverslips in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . For staining of early FN assem - bly and integrin localization , cells were fixed 24 h after plating . For staining of mature FN fibers on confluent monolayers , cells were fixed 3 d after plating . Cells were fixed using 4 % PFA in PBS for 20 min at RT and washed with PBS . Anti - FN antibody was added for 1 h at RT . Cells were then washed and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 5 min at RT . Antiintegrin antibodies were added for 1 h at RT . After an additional round of PBS washing , secondary antibodies along with DAPI and phalloidin were added for 1 h at RT to stain DNA and F - actin , respectively . Coverslips were mounted on slides in AquaPoly - mount ( Polysciences ) and imaged using an upright wide - field micro - scope ( DM6000 ; Leica ) with a 63× / 1 . 32 NA oil immersion objective . The images were processed and quantified with ImageJ . The amount of assembled FN per cell is calculated by normalizing the amount of fluorescence in a cell ( integrated density ) to the area of the cell and the background fluorescence . Traction force microscopy Traction force microscopy experiments were performed as previously described ( Elkhatib et al . , 2014 ) . For traction force measurements , Fluo - Sphere bead solution ( 0 . 2 µm , 505 – 515 nm ; Invitrogen ) was added at 2 . 5 % volume . For time - lapse imaging , we used an inverted wide con - focal spinning - disk microscope ( 40× oil immersion objective , NA 1 . 3 ; Roper / Nikon ) . A fluorescent image of beads and a phase contrast image of the cells were recorded every 3 min during 30 min . At the end of the measurement , cells were detached by adding 10 % Triton X - 100 ( Euro - medex ) , and a reference image without cells was recorded . To ensure good quality imaging of fluorescent beads , we performed Z stacks of 30 images with a distance of 1 µm and automatically chose the optimal focus ( MetaMorph software ) . We used a previously described correlation algorithm to extract the bead displacement fields ( Elkhatib et al . , 2014 ) . Imaging 3D samples For time - lapse experiments , CAFs were stained with a lyophilic car - bocyanine dye ( Vybrant DiI - Cell Labeling Solutions ; ThermoFisher ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . Cells were embed - ded in collagen as described in the Invasion assay section . The dish was incubated at 5 % CO 2 and 37°C in the on - stage incubator ( Okolab ) . For fixed and live 3D samples , images were acquired with an inverted AOBS two - photon laser - scanning confocal microscope ( SP8 ; Leica ) coupled with a femtosecond laser ( Chameleon Vision II ; Coherent Inc . ) Fibroblasts lead tumor invasion via fibronectin • Attieh et al . 3519 using a 25× / 1 . 0 NA water immersion objective . The microscope was equipped with three nondescanned HyD detectors : NDD1 ( 500 – 550 nm ) , NDD2 ( ≥ 590 nm ) , and NDD3 ( 405 nm ) . Fluorescence channels were recorded simultaneously using the excitation wavelength 980 nm . Collagen was visualized by either second harmonic generation using the excitation wavelength 910 nm or by confocal reflectance micros - copy that does not interfere with DAPI staining , using light at a wave - length of 488 nm and a standard photomultiplier tube detector at a low gain ( 500 V ) . Images were recorded every 10 min up to 72 h . 3D stacks were obtained at a step size of 2 - µm intervals . The images were pro - cessed with the Leica Application Suite , ImageJ , and Imaris ( Bitplane ) . Invasion counter software Quantification of cell invasion from spheroids was performed using a custom semiautomated image analysis program written in Python using the following packages : numpy , scipy , matplotlib , scikit - image , and PyQt4 . Image stacks of nuclei were first loaded into a custom GUI , and the spheroid contour was determined using adjustable Gaussian filtering , thresholding , and 3D morphological operations . The nuclei of invading cells were then automatically detected using adjustable Gaussian filtering , thresholding , and size exclusion . Centroid positions were determined by taking a weighted mean of the intensity for each nucleus . The positions of invading cancer cell nuclei were then man - ually verified and modified as necessary . Based on the LifeAct - GFP signal ( expressed in cancer cells only ) , the nuclei of cancer cells were discriminated from the nuclei of fibroblasts . The invasion index , defined as the number of invading cancer cells normalized to the surface area of the spheroid contour in 3D , was then determined . This normalization is necessary to control for the slight variability in spheroid size . Because of the high optical density of the spheroids , only the bottom half of the spheroid was visible . To quantify the distance of fibroblasts from the spheroid , the distance from the nuclei of non – LifeAct - GFP cells to the closest point along the cancer cell spheroid contour was determined . Fi - broblast density was defined as the number of nuclei of non - GFP cells normalized to the surface area of the spheroid contour in 3D . Statistical analyses All experiments were performed in triplicates in two to six indepen - dent experiments . All statistical analysis and graphic representations were performed using Prism software ( GraphPad ) . Data are repre - sented as box and whiskers ( minimum to maximum ) . To show pro - tein amounts and percentages , data are represented as column bars ( mean ± SEM ) . Statistical significance was determined with one - way ANO VA . The Newman - Keuls test was applied for multiple compar - isons of different conditions . The Mann – Whitney t test was applied for paired comparisons . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows ( a ) the levels of CAF markers in all fibroblast popula - tions , ( b ) the effect of FN depletion on cancer cell invasion in CAFs from all couples , ( c ) that blocking of contractility inhibits cancer cell invasion but that contractility of fibroblasts does not correlate with in - vasion , and ( d ) the effect of MMP inhibition on cancer cell invasion . Fig . S2 shows the levels of integrins in all fibroblast populations and the effects of integrin - α 5 and - β 3 depletion on fibroblast viability , mi - gration , FN secretion , and cancer cell invasion . Fig . S3 shows that de - pletion of integrin - β 3 inhibits FN assembly in CAFs 24 h after plating , but not contractility and integrin - α 5 localization in CAFs embedded in collagen . Videos 1 and 2 show live imaging of cancer cell spheroids and CAFs embedded in collagen . Tables S1 and S2 list antibodies and siRNA sequences , respectively , used in this study . Acknowledgments We thank all the members of the Vignjevic laboratory for helpful dis - cussions and for proofreading the manuscript , especially Ralitza Sta - neva and Shruthi Narayanan for explanations on the CurveAlign software . We especially thank Marie Irondelle , Matthieu Maurin , and Olivier Renaud for their help with high - resolution imaging of integrin stainings . We acknowledge the Nikon Imaging Center at Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - Institut Curie , PICT - IBiSA at Lhomond , sup - ported by the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale ( grant FRM N° DGE20111123020 ) , the Cancérôple - IdF ( grant n°2012 - 2 - EML - 04 - IC - 1 ) , the National Cancer Institute ( grant n° 2011 - 1 - LAB EL - IC - 4 ) , the Cell and Tissue Imaging Platform - PICT - IBiSA ( member of France – Bioimaging , ANR - 10 - INBS - 04 ) of the Genetics and Developmental Biology Department ( UMR3215 / U934 ) of Institut Curie for help with light microscopy , supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche ( grant ANR - 11 BSV2 012 01 ) , the European Research Council ( grant F . DEL BENE , ERC ZEB RAT ECT UM N°311159 ) , and the Fondation pour la Recherche sur le Cancer ( ARC SFI20121205686 ) . We also thank La Ligue Contre le Cancer ( grant to Y . Attieh ) and the European Molecular Biology Organization ( grant to A . G . Clark ) . This work was supported by Labex CelTisBioPhy ( grant to Y . Attieh and D . M . Vignjevic ) and ERC - 2012 - StG _ 20111109 grant STA RLIN ( to D . M . Vignjevic ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : Y . Attieh and D . M . Vignjevic conceived of the study . Y . Attieh performed the majority of the experiments . C . Grass helped with experiments . N . Elkhatib and T . Betz assisted with traction force microscopy . A . G . Clark wrote the program to quantify cell inva - sion . P . Mariani , M . Pocard , and S . Richon collected clinical samples for the study . B . Gurchenkov assisted with live experiments . Y . Attieh and D . M . Vignjevic wrote the manuscript with input from A . G . Clark . D . M . Vignjevic supervised the project . Submitted : 6 February 2017 Revised : 6 July 2017 Accepted : 1 August 2017 References Amatangelo , M . D . , D . E . Bassi , A . J . Klein - Szanto , and E . Cukierman . 2005 . Stroma - derived three - dimensional matrices are necessary and sufficient to promote desmoplastic differentiation of normal fibroblasts . Am . J . Pathol . 167 : 475 – 488 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0002 - 9440 ( 10 ) 62991 - 4 Attieh , Y . , and D . M . Vignjevic . 2016 . The hallmarks of CAFs in cancer invasion . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 95 : 493 – 502 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2016 . 07 . 004 Aung , A . , Y . N . Seo , S . Lu , Y . Wang , C . Jamora , J . C . del Álamo , and S . Varghese . 2014 . 3D traction stresses activate protease - dependent invasion of cancer cells . Biophys . J . 107 : 2528 – 2537 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 07 . 078 Calvo , F . , N . Ege , A . Grande - Garcia , S . Hooper , R . P . Jenkins , S . I . Chaudhry , K . Harrington , P . Williamson , E . Moeendarbary , G . Charras , and E . Sahai . 2013 . Mechanotransduction and YAP - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation and maintenance of cancer - associated fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 : 637 – 646 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2756 Changede , R . , X . Xu , F . Margadant , and M . P . Sheetz . 2015 . Nascent Integrin Adhesions Form on All Matrix Rigidities after Integrin Activation . Dev . Cell . 35 : 614 – 621 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 11 . 001 De Wever , O . , Q . D . Nguyen , L . Van Hoorde , M . Bracke , E . Bruyneel , C . Gespach , and M . Mareel . 2004 . Tenascin - C and SF / HGF produced by myofibroblasts in vitro provide convergent pro - invasive signals to human colon cancer cells through RhoA and Rac . FAS EB J . 18 : 1016 – 1018 . Elkhatib , N . , M . B . Neu , C . Zensen , K . M . Schmoller , D . Louvard , A . R . Bausch , T . Betz , and D . M . Vignjevic . 2014 . Fascin plays a role in stress fiber JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3520 organization and focal adhesion disassembly . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1492 – 1499 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 023 Gaggioli , C . , S . Hooper , C . Hidalgo - Carcedo , R . Grosse , J . F . Marshall , K . Harrington , and E . Sahai . 2007 . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carcinoma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1392 – 1400 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1658 Geraldo , S . , A . Simon , and D . M . Vignjevic . 2013 . Revealing the cytoskeletal organization of invasive cancer cells in 3D . J . Vis . Exp . 80 : e50763 . Goetz , J . G . , S . Minguet , I . Navarro - Lérida , J . J . Lazcano , R . Samaniego , E . Calvo , M . Tello , T . Osteso - Ibáñez , T . Pellinen , A . Echarri , et al . 2011 . Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal caveolin - 1 favors tumor invasion and metastasis . Cell . 146 : 148 – 163 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 05 . 040 Goldschmidt , M . E . , K . J . McLeod , and W . R . Taylor . 2001 . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction in vascular smooth muscle cells : frequency and force response characteristics . Circ . Res . 88 : 674 – 680 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1161 / hh0701 . 089749 Gopal , S . , L . Veracini , D . Grall , C . Butori , S . Schaub , S . Audebert , L . Camoin , E . Baudelet , A . Radwanska , S . Beghelli - de la Forest Divonne , et al . 2017 . Fibronectin - guided migration of carcinoma collectives . Nat . Commun . 8 : 14105 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms14105 Hynes , R . O . 2009 . The extracellular matrix : not just pretty fibrils . Science . 326 : 1216 – 1219 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1176009 Joyce , J . A . , and J . W . Pollard . 2009 . Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 9 : 239 – 252 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2618 Kalluri , R . 2016 . The biology and function of fibroblasts in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 16 : 582 – 598 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc . 2016 . 73 Kalluri , R . , and M . Zeisberg . 2006 . Fibroblasts in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 6 : 392 – 401 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc1877 Kiosses , W . B . , S . J . Shattil , N . Pampori , and M . A . Schwartz . 2001 . Rac recruits high - affinity integrin alphavbeta3 to lamellipodia in endothelial cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 316 – 320 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35060120 Kopanska , K . S . , Y . Alcheikh , R . Staneva , D . Vignjevic , and T . Betz . 2016 . Tensile Forces Originating from Cancer Spheroids Facilitate Tumor Invasion . PLoS One . 11 : e0156442 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0156442 Labernadie , A . , T . Kato , A . Brugués , X . Serra - Picamal , S . Derzsi , E . Arwert , A . Weston , V . González - Tarragó , A . Elosegui - Artola , L . Albertazzi , et al . 2017 . A mechanically active heterotypic E - cadherin / N - cadherin adhesion enables fibroblasts to drive cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 : 224 – 237 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3478 Mueller , M . M . , and N . E . Fusenig . 2004 . Friends or foes - bipolar effects of the tumour stroma in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 4 : 839 – 849 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc1477 Orimo , A . , P . B . Gupta , D . C . Sgroi , F . Arenzana - Seisdedos , T . Delaunay , R . Naeem , V . J . Carey , A . L . Richardson , and R . A . Weinberg . 2005 . Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF - 1 / CXCL12 secretion . Cell . 121 : 335 – 348 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 02 . 034 Oudin , M . J . , O . Jonas , T . Kosciuk , L . C . Broye , B . C . Guido , J . Wyckoff , D . Riquelme , J . M . Lamar , S . B . Asokan , C . Whittaker , et al . 2016 . Tumor Cell - Driven Extracellular Matrix Remodeling Drives Haptotaxis during Metastatic Progression . Cancer Discov . 6 : 516 – 531 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 15 - 1183 Özdemir , B . C . , T . Pentcheva - Hoang , J . L . Carstens , X . Zheng , C . C . Wu , T . R . Simpson , H . Laklai , H . Sugimoto , C . Kahlert , S . V . Novitskiy , et al . 2014 . Depletion of carcinoma - associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival . Cancer Cell . 25 : 719 – 734 . ( published erratum appears in Cancer Cell . 2015 . 28 : 6 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 005 Poincloux , R . , F . Lizárraga , and P . Chavrier . 2009 . Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 - MMP trafficking to invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 3015 – 3024 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 034561 Provenzano , P . P . , K . W . Eliceiri , J . M . Campbell , D . R . Inman , J . G . White , and P . J . Keely . 2006 . Collagen reorganization at the tumor - stromal interface facilitates local invasion . BMC Med . 4 : 38 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1741 - 7015 - 4 - 38 Rahman , S . , Y . Patel , J . Murray , K . V . Patel , R . Sumathipala , M . Sobel , and E . S . Wijelath . 2005 . Novel hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) binding domains on fibronectin and vitronectin coordinate a distinct and amplified Met - integrin induced signalling pathway in endothelial cells . BMC Cell Biol . 6 : 8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2121 - 6 - 8 Rhim , A . D . , P . E . Oberstein , D . H . Thomas , E . T . Mirek , C . F . Palermo , S . A . Sastra , E . N . Dekleva , T . Saunders , C . P . Becerra , I . W . Tattersall , et al . 2014 . Stromal elements act to restrain , rather than support , pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer Cell . 25 : 735 – 747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 021 Riching , K . M . , B . L . Cox , M . R . Salick , C . Pehlke , A . S . Riching , S . M . Ponik , B . R . Bass , W . C . Crone , Y . Jiang , A . M . Weaver , et al . 2014 . 3D collagen alignment limits protrusions to enhance breast cancer cell persistence . Biophys . J . 107 : 2546 – 2558 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 10 . 035 Roca - Cusachs , P . , A . del Rio , E . Puklin - Faucher , N . C . Gauthier , N . Biais , and M . P . Sheetz . 2013 . Integrin - dependent force transmission to the extracellular matrix by α - actinin triggers adhesion maturation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 110 : E1361 – E1370 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1220723110 Rossier , O . , V . Octeau , J . B . Sibarita , C . Leduc , B . Tessier , D . Nair , V . Gatterdam , O . Destaing , C . Albigès - Rizo , R . Tampé , et al . 2012 . Integrins β 1 and β 3 exhibit distinct dynamic nanoscale organizations inside focal adhesions . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 : 1057 – 1067 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2588 Sanz - Moreno , V . , C . Gaggioli , M . Yeo , J . Albrengues , F . Wallberg , A . Viros , S . Hooper , R . Mitter , C . C . Féral , M . Cook , et al . 2011 . ROCK and JAK1 signaling cooperate to control actomyosin contractility in tumor cells and stroma . Cancer Cell . 20 : 229 – 245 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2011 . 06 . 018 Schiller , H . B . , M . R . Hermann , J . Polleux , T . Vignaud , S . Zanivan , C . C . Friedel , Z . Sun , A . Raducanu , K . E . Gottschalk , M . Théry , et al . 2013 . β 1 - and α v - class integrins cooperate to regulate myosin II during rigidity sensing of fibronectin - based microenvironments . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 : 625 – 636 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2747 von Wichert , G . , G . Jiang , A . Kostic , K . De Vos , J . Sap , and M . P . Sheetz . 2003 . RPTP - α acts as a transducer of mechanical force on α v / β 3 - integrin – cytoskeleton linkages . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 143 – 153 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200211061 Wilson , E . , K . Sudhir , and H . E . Ives . 1995 . Mechanical strain of rat vascular smooth muscle cells is sensed by specific extracellular matrix / integrin interactions . J . Clin . Invest . 96 : 2364 – 2372 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI118293 Wirtz , D . , K . Konstantopoulos , and P . C . Searson . 2011 . The physics of cancer : the role of physical interactions and mechanical forces in metastasis . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 11 : 512 – 522 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc3080 Wolanska , K . I . , and M . R . Morgan . 2015 . Fibronectin remodelling : cell - mediated regulation of the microenvironment . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 43 : 122 – 128 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BST20140313 Wolf , K . , M . Te Lindert , M . Krause , S . Alexander , J . Te Riet , A . L . Willis , R . M . Hoffman , C . G . Figdor , S . J . Weiss , and P . Friedl . 2013 . Physical limits of cell migration : Control by ECM space and nuclear deformation and tuning by proteolysis and traction force . J . Cell Biol . 201 : 1069 – 1084 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201210152 Zaidel - Bar , R . , R . Milo , Z . Kam , and B . Geiger . 2007 . A paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation switch regulates the assembly and form of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 137 – 148 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03314