American Economic Association The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory Author ( s ) : William Thomson Source : Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . 37 , No . 1 ( Mar . , 1999 ) , pp . 157 - 183 Published by : American Economic Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2564728 Accessed : 21 - 04 - 2016 19 : 40 UTC Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at http : / / about . jstor . org / terms JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Journal of Economic Literature This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Journal of Economic Literature Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) , pp . 157 - 183 The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory WILLIAM THOMSON ' 1 . Introduction HERE ARE MY recommendations for writing economic theory ( and , to some extent , giving seminar presenta - tions ) . My intended audience is young economists working on their disserta - tions or preparing their first papers for submission to a professional journal . Although I discuss general issues of presentation , this essay is mainly con - cerned in its details with formal models . It does not cover the writing up of em - pirical work . However , since most pa - pers begin with the introduction and the analysis of a model , I hope that it will be useful to anyone , irrespective of field , and not just to fledgling theorists . The principles of good writing - sim - plicity , clarity , unity - are universal , but when it comes to putting them into practice , multiple choices are often available , and these recommendations to follow unavoidably reflect my personal tastes . Also , they are occasionally in - compatible . This is where judgement comes in . Exercise yours . I make much use of the imperative mode , but I can well imagine that you will come down differently on a number of the issues I raise . What is important is for you to think about them . Good writing requires revising , revis - ing , and revising again . Undoubtedly , you will spend many months perfecting your first papers , but this work is one of the wisest investments that you will ever make . In your future papers , you will face the same issues again and again , and with the experience you will have gained , you will be able to handle them quickly and efficiently . Do not think that if your ideas are interesting , people will read your work whether or not it is well written . Your papers are competing with many others that constantly arrive on the desks of the people you hope to reach , so if it is not clear to them fairly quickly that they will get something out of reading your work , they will not even start . Finally , putting your results on paper is not subsidiary to producing them . The process of writing itself will lead you to 1 Department of Economics , University of Rochester , Rochester , NY 14627 . This is an ab bre - viated version of a paper entitled " Writing Papers , " which is available from the author upon request . I encourage readers to send me their comments at wth2 @ troi . cc . rochester . edu . I thank Marcus Berliant , Youngsub Chun , Jacques Cremer , John Duggan , James Foster , Tarnk Kara , Jerry Kelly , Bettina Klaus , Kin Chung Lo , Leslie Marx , Lionel McKenzie , Philip Reny , Suzanne Scotchmer , and Jean - Max Thomson for their help - ful comments and James Schummer for making a reality of my fantasy of letters tumbling down a cliff ( footnote 10 ) in accordance with the laws of physics . I also thank Toru Hokari for the figures . My greatest debt is to John McMillan , Martin Os - borne , John Pencavel , James Schummer , the edi - tors , and two anonymous referees of this journal for their numerous and extremely useful sugges - tions . 157 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 158 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) new knowledge . Learn to write but also write to learn . 2 2 . General Principles Convey your message efficiently . 3 By leafing through your article , a reader should be able to easily spot the main results , figure out most of the notation , and locate the crucial definitions needed to understand the statement of each theorem . Readers who have found your central points interesting and want to know more , but have little time to invest in your work , should then be able to get an idea of your methods of proof by visual inspection . It is often quite infor - mative just to glance at the way an argument is structured and to identify the central assumptions and the known theorems on which it is based . Think about the way you read a paper . You probably do not proceed in a linear way . Instead , you scan it for the formal re - sults and look around them for an expla - nation of the notation and terminology that you do not recognize or guess . You do not like having to spend too much time to find what you need . Your read - ers probably feel the same way about your work . The Components of a Paper . Your ti - tle should be as descriptive of your topic as possible . Devote time to your abstract , as it is on that basis that many potential readers will decide whether to continue . In your acknowledgment foot - note , be generous . Include the seminar participant who suggested a name for a condition you introduced , or directed you to a pertinent reference . Your ap - portionment of credit among the vari - ous people who helped you , however , should be commensurate with the time and effort they spent and the usefulness of the suggestions they made . The referee who sent you five pages of comments deserves recognition in a separate sentence . In your introduction , briefly place your work in the context of the existing literature and describe your main find - ings . Do not start with a two - or three - page survey of the field ; your reader will want to know what your contribu - tion is sooner than that . Use plain lan - guage , and skip the technical details . Your literature review should not be a mere enumeration of previous articles . In describing the work on which you build , give priority to the development of the ideas rather than to telling us who did what , although this information should be included , and where you stepped in should be unambiguous . You need not repeat in the body of the pa - per all of the points that you made in the introduction , although some repeti - tion is unavoidable . On the other hand , I do not generally favor relegating proofs to appendices ( more on this later ) . Your conclusion should not be a re - hashing of the introduction . However , a compact summary of your results and a statement of the main lesson to be drawn from your analysis is a good lead to a list of specific open questions and a general discussion of promising direc - tions for future work , all of which do belong there . In your bibliography , give the relevant background papers . If a good survey is available , mention it . You may have to include papers that you did not use , and papers that you discovered only after you completed yours . Check references carefully , and update them as papers get published . 2 I owe this formula to William Zinsser ' s 1989 pedagogical essay . Writing to Learn , a book that I strongly recommend . 3 This paper is longer than the average , but ex - cept in Lake Wobegon , not all papers can be shorter than the average . Actually , I d not have a recommendation on how long a paper should be , except for " Make it as long as it needs to be , no longer , and no shorter . " If its structure is clear , length by itself is not a problem . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 159 The structure of your paper should be clear , as should the structure of each section , each subsection , and each para - graph . To better see how your para - graphs fit together , summarize each of them in one sentence . Does the string of these sentences make sense ? It should . Perform this exercise also at the level of subsections , and then sections . Show that what you did is interesting and has not been done before . To show that your results are significant , the temptation is great to present them with the utmost generality , with big words , and in gory detail . Resist it ! Try instead to make your argument appear simple , and even trivial . This exercise in humility will be good for your soul . It will also give referees a warm feeling about you . Most importantly , it will help you prove your results at the next level of generality . Because the refereeing process and publication constraints often have the unfortunate effect of wiping out from a paper most of what could make it easily understandable , you may think that if yours does not contain at least one re - sult that looks difficult , it is not ready for submission . You are rightly proud of the sophisticated reasoning that led you to your findings . Nevertheless , work hard to make them look simple . 4 To show that what you do has not been done before , explain how your as - sumptions differ from the assumptions used in related literature , and why these differences are significant , both conceptually and technically . Demon - strate your knowledge of this literature by citing the relevant articles and tell - ing us how they pertain to your subject . Also , motivate your work , but do not over - motivate it , or your readers will get suspicious . Do not forget the process by which you made your discovery . By the time your paper is finished , it will cover an arbitrary number of goods and agents , general production possibilities , uncer - tainty , and so forth , and nobody will un - derstand it . If you read it several months later , you will not understand it either . You got to your main theorem in small steps , by first working it out for two agents , two goods , linear technolo - gies , and with no uncertainty , and by drawing lots of diagrams . It is also by looking at simple versions of your model that your reader will understand the central ideas , and it is most likely these central ideas , not the details of proofs , that will help her in her own work . Reproducing the process of discovery in a paper is not easy , but try . In a semi - nar , quite a bit more can be done be - cause of the informality of the occasion . Explaining how you came to the formu - lation you eventually chose and to your results , however , is not a license to a rambling discussion in which notation , definitions , assumptions , and motiva - tion are all mixed up , like the ingredi - ents of a big salad . Even worse is adding some semi - formal algebraic ma - nipulations ( tossing the salad ? ) , and suddenly confronting us with the sen - tence : " We have therefore proved the following theorem : . . . " As a reader , I feel as if I have been mugged when I find myself in that situation . Another principle that has wide valid - ity is that good exposition means going back and forth between the general and the particular , and I will give several illustrations of it . Learn from your errors . There is nothing like having misunderstood something to really understand it , and 4As a young economist , it is natural that you should be proud of the complicated things you achieve ; as you get older , you will become proud of the simple things you do . ( Of course , it is not because you will not be able to handle the compli - cated things anymore . ) This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 1 l Iournal of Ennnrnoic Literature Vni YYYVX I ( March 1999 there is nothing like having seriously misunderstood it to really , really under - stand it . Instead of being embarrassed by your errors , you should cherish them . I will even say that you cannot claim to have understood something un - til you have also very completely under - stood the various ways in which it can be misunderstood . It has been said be - fore , and better : " Erreur , tu n ' es pas un mal . " ( Gaston Bachelard 1938 ) Your readers are likely to be victims of the same misunderstandings that you were . By remembering where you had trouble , you will anticipate where you may lose them , and you will give better explanations . In a seminar , quickly identifying the reason why someone in the audience is confused about some as - pect of your paper may save you from a 10 - minute exchange that otherwise \ Vould force you to rush through the second half of your presentation . 3 . Notation Chioose notation that is easily recog - n iz7able . If you have no problem remem - bering what all of your variables desig - iate . congratulations ! But you have been working on your paper for several mwonths nowv . Unfortunately , what you call x is what your reader has been calling mn since graduate school . The best notation is notation that can be guessed . When you see a man walk - ing down the street with a baguette un - der h1is arm and a beret on his head , you do not lhave to be told he is a French - man . You know he is . You can immedi - atelv and legitimately invest him with all the attributes of Frenchness , and this greatly facilitates the way you think and talk about him . You can guess his clildlren ' s names - Renee or Edmond - and chuckle at his supposed admiration for Jerry Lewis . Simnilarly , if Z designates a set , call its members z and z ' , perhaps x , y , and z , but certainly not b , or f . Upon en - countering z and z ' , your reader will im - mediately know what space they belong to , how many components they have , and that these components are called zi and 4 . If ( D is a family of functions , re - serve the notation ( p and p , ( perhaps wr or even f ) for members of the family , but certainly not oc or m . If Ri is agent i ' s preference relation , you may have to designate his most pre - ferred bundle in some choice set by bi ( Ri ) , his demand correspondence by di ( Ri ) , and so on , but dropping this func - tional dependence may not create ambi - guities . For instance , you may write bi and di , provided that you designate agent j ' s most preferred element in the choice set and his demand correspon - dence by bj and dj , and the comparable concepts when agent i ' s preferences are changed to Ri by bi and d ' . Designate time by t , land by ( , alter - natives by a , mnemonic notation by mn and so on ( and make sure that no two concepts in your paper start with the same letter ) . Some letters of the alphabet are used in certain ways so generally in your field that their common interpretation may get in the way of other uses that you want to make of them . You will prob - ably be better off accepting tradition . Do not designate just any quantity by e . Reserve this letter for small quantities or quantities that you will make go to zero . 5 Call your generic individual i , his preference relation Ri , his utility func - tion ui , and his endowment vector 0oi . The production set is Y . Prices are p , 5 I like the fragile look of my e , especially when my printer is running out of toner . How could one doubt that the quantity it designates is about to fade into nothingness ? However , as a referee re - minded me , in econometrics , the error term e is not necessarily a small quantity , but rather a quan - tity that one would like to be small . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 161 quantities q . Calligraphic letters often refer to families of sets ; so , a is a mem - ber of the set A , which is chosen from the family A . Choose mnemonic abbreviations for assumptions and properties . Do not re - fer to your assumptions and properties by numbers , letters , or letter - number combinations . Since you state your first theorem on page 10 , it will be virtually impossible for us to remember then what " Assumptions A1 - A3 and B1 - B4 " are , but the fact that " Assumptions Diff , Mon , and Cont " refer to differentiabil - ity , monotonicity , and continuity will be obvious to a reader starting there . Choose these abbreviations carefully : If you write Con , we may not know whether you mean continuity or convex - ity , so write Cont or Conv . The cost to you is one extra strike on your key - board , but your small effort will save us from searching through the paper to find which property you meant . Admit - tedly , naming each assumption in a way that suggests its content is not always possible , especially in technical fields . It is common to introduce in paren - theses an abbreviation for a condition , next to the full name of the condition at the time it is formally stated . When the abbreviation is used later on , the paren - theses are no longer needed . 6 In axiomatic analyses , many authors refer to axioms by numbers or abbrevia - tions , but I do not see any advantage to that . The argument that numbers and abbreviations save space is not very con - vincing given that they will not shorten a 20 - page paper by more than five lines , and they certainly will not save time for your reader . If you use differ - ent typeface for your axioms , which I strongly recommend ( for instance ital - ics , or slanted type ) , each axiom stands out from the text and is perceived glob - ally , as a unit : it is not read syllable by syllable . An alternative way to achieve this important visual separation of the axioms from the text is to capitalize them . Never use abbreviations in a section heading . Do not bother introducing a piece of notation if you use it only once or twice . There is no point in defining a new piece of notation if you hardly ever use it . How many times should a concept be used to deserve its own symbol ? Three times ? Four times ? I will let you decide . Certainly , do not bother introducing notation that you never use . I feel the same way about utility nota - tion when only preferences are in - volved . It is wonderful , of course , that preference relations satisfying certain properties can be represented by nu - merical functions , and these repre - sentations are sometimes useful or even necessary . But it has become a common excuse to use them even in situations where in fact they only clutter the text . Suppose , for instance , that you want to write that the allocation rule S is strat - egy - proof . This means that for every agent i , announcing his true preference relation Ri is preferable to announcing any false preference relation Rj inde - pendently of the announcements made by the other agents . Then ( here I will skip the quantifications ) you can write " ui ( S ( u ) ) > uj ( S ( u _ j , u ' ) ) , " but is such an expression preferable to " S ( R ) Ri S ( R _ i , Ri ) ? " If your paper involves long strings of terms of that form , as may well be the case , utility notation will contribute to an unnecessarily messy look . Matters are worse if you discuss cer - tain normative issues of welfare eco - nomics , social choice , or public finance , because in these fields utility functions have cardinal significance . Even though your theory may only involve the under - lying preference relations , some of your 6 When you begin a proof , write " Proof : " and not " ( Proof : ) . " This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 162 journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) readers will come from a different tra - dition and be tempted to compare utili - ties , or equate them , or maximize their sum , and so on . On the other hand , if you address some problem of demand theory and you need to calculate matri - ces of partial derivatives , then of course you cannot avoid utility notation . Do not define in footnotes important notation that is unlikely to be familiar to your reader , and that you will use in the body of the paper . More generally , do not refer in the main text to terms , ideas , or derivations introduced in a footnote or in a remark , since the reader may have skipped it . There is a hierarchy here that you have to respect . Save on mathematical symbols . Do not use symbols that are not necessary . For instance , try to avoid multiple sub - scripts and superscripts . If you have only two agents , call their consumption bundles x and y , with generic coordi - nates Xk and yk ( instead of xi and x2 , with coordinates Xlk and x2k ) . In a text , com - binations of subscripts and superscripts look a little better than only subscripts , but in a blackboard presentation , watch out for the sliding superscripts that end up as subscripts . If F is your generic no - tation for a solution to the bargaining problem , you can certainly refer to the Nash solution as FN , and when you ap - ply it to the problem ( S , d ) with feasible set S and disagreement point d , you will get FN ( S , d ) . But why not simply desig - nate the Nash solution by N ? If you can choose the disagreement point to be the origin , as is almost always the case without loss of generality , ignore it in the notation . Altogether , you will calcu - late N ( S ) , a much lighter expression than FN ( S , d ) . If you systematically search for such notational simplications , your text will be much cleaner . Bounds of summation or integration are often ( I agree , not always ) unambi - guous . There is then no need to indi - cate them . Do not write 1h = 1Xi , FN Xi , X , xi , XNxi , or li = , . , n xi when , in most cases , Y xi is perfectly clear . I assure you , upon encountering Xxi , your read - ers will be unanimous in assuming that you are summing over i when i runs over its natural domain . Similarly , and although the set consisting of agent i alone should be denoted by { i } , if you need to refer to it on multiple occasions , you are better off dropping the curly brack - ets . Do apologize for the abuse of nota - tion though . Similarly , if 0 designates a list of objects indexed by agents in the set N , you should refer to the shorter list from which the i - th component has been deleted as ON \ fi } , but it has become standard to write - i . I welcome the shortcut , and I used it earlier . Expres - sions can be considerably lightened by using such tricks . Imagine that you are on a diet and that each symbol is worth one calorie . You will quickly discover that you can do with half as many . You will improve the readibility of your text and lose weight . Do not let the reader guess or infer from the context what your inequality symbols mean . Define them the first time you use them . Doing that in a foot - note is acceptable . 7 Alternatively , you can give them in a preliminary section of notation . 4 . Definitions Be unambiguous when you define a new term . Make it immediately clear that indeed it is new . Do not let your reader think that you may have already 7x > y means xi ? yi for all i ; x > y means x > y and X y ; x > y means xi > yi for all i . You could also use x > y , x > y , and x > > y . It is a very common convention to define these symbols in a footnote , and this is where most of us will look for them when we need them . It is therefore a good idea for you also to define yours in a footnote . Some peo - ple have an aversion to footnotes , but personally , I love them . In academic writing , they are often the only place where you will find evidence of life . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 163 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Figure 1 . Examples of increasing functions and of functions that are not increasing . ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) : These functions are increasing . ( d ) and ( e ) : Th - ese functions are not . given the definition but she missed it , or that you are assuming she knows the definition . Here are three possible ways of in - troducing a definition : 1 . " A function is monotone if . . . " ; 2 . " A function is ' monotone ' if . . . " ; 3 . " A function is said to be monotone if . . . " I prefer the first format and use it throughout this essay , because its phrasing is direct and its different typeface will facilitate its retrieval , if needed . Concerning the typeface , I recommend boldface or boldface italics over italics or plain text between quotation marks , neither of which makes the new terms stand out sufficiently . You should probably dis - play the crucial definitions separately , and you may precede each of them by the word Definition in boldface ( see the examples below ) . But do not intro - duce all definitions in this way , espe - cially if you have many of them , as it will get tedious . Focus on the critical ones . To avoid repeating quantifications that are common to several definitions , you can group these definitions and state the quantification once : " An allo - cation rule is efficient if for all prefer - ence profiles R , and all allocations z that it selects for R , there is no other allocation z ' that all agents find at least as desirable as z and at least one agent prefers ; it is weakly efficient if instead there is no other allocation z ' that all agents prefer to z . " To emphasize certain aspects of your paper , such as important conclusions , exploit the typographical choices at your disposal . Italics is a good one . However , if everything is emphasized , nothing is . When introducing a novel definition , give illustrative examples . If the defini - tion is a property that an object may or may not have , exhibit : 1 . Objects that satisfy the definition ; 2 . Objects that do not satisfy the definition ; 3 . Objects that satisfy the definition but almost do not ; 4 . Objects that do not satisfy the definition but almost do . Examples in Categories 3 and 4 are particularly im - portant as they are responsible for most of the work in the proofs . Conversely , they may be the ones that allow the proofs to go through ! In a paper , giving a range of examples that are repre - sentative of all four categories is , once again , not easily achieved because of space limitations , but in seminars this can sometimes be done . Here are two illustrations : Definition . A functionff : [ 0 , 1 ] - eD R is increasing if for all t , t ' E [ 0 , 1 ] with t > t ' , we have f ( t ) > f ( t ' ) . Figures la and lb are dangerous , be - cause they may plant in your reader ' s mind the seed that you will work with This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 164 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) R ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ R R , R3 a b a b a c d b ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 2 . Examples of single - peaked and of non - single - peaked preference relations . ( a ) These relations are single - peaked , with peaks at a for R1 and at b for R2 . ( b ) These relations are single - peaked too , but they are not sufficiently representative of the whole class due to their symmetry . Readers who have not worked with such preferences often assume that symmetry is part of the definition , so you should emphasize that most single - peaked preferences do not have that property . ( c ) These relations are not single - peaked , since R5 has two local maxima , at a and b , and R6 is maximized at any point of the non - degenerate interval [ c , d ] . functions that are linear , or perhaps concave . Figure Ic is what you need : it represents an increasing function in its full generality , with a kink , a convex part , a concave part , and a discontinu - ity . Figure Id is useful too , as it shows a typical violation of the property . Figure le is very important because it makes it clear that you want more than that the function be " nondecreasing . " 8 Definition . The continuous preference relation R defined on [ 0 , 1 ] , with asym - metric part P , is single - peaked if there exists x * E [ 0 , 1 ] such that for all x , x ' E [ 0 , 1 ] with either x < x ' ? < x * or x * < x ' < x , we have x ' P x . Figure 2 presents the graphs of the numerical representations of six prefer - ence relations . Obviously , R2 is single - peaked and R5 is not . But your viewer may not immediately think of R1 as be - ing single - peaked because its repre - sentation achieves its maximum at a corner , or may think that R6 is admissi - ble , although its representation has a " plateau " and not a peak . You should also make her aware of the fact that you include preferences that do not exhibit the symmetry illustrated in Figure 2b . All of these examples will be very useful to ensure that she fully perceives the boundary of your domain . Write definitions in logical sequences . Introduce terms in such a way that the definition of each new one only involves terms that are already defined , instead of asking your readers to wait until the end of the sentence or paragraph for everything to be clarified . For instance , state the dimensionality of the commodity space before you in - troduce consumers or technologies . In the standard model , a consumer is no more than a preference relation defined over a subset of that space , together with an endowment vector in the space ; a technology is simply a subset of the space . In each case , it is therefore natu - ral to specify the space , that is , the 8 Several readers of this essay objected to sen - tences such as " this function is nondecreasing , " which sounds too much like " this function is not a decreasing function , " but means something else . Perhaps we should speak of a " nowhere - decreas - ing function . " This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 165 number of goods , first . Therefore , do not write : " R ? Dmon is the class of increas - ing preferences R , where by increasing is meant that for all x , y E Rle with x ? y , we have x R y , ( being the dimensional - ity of the commodity space . " Instead write : " Let t E RN be the number of goods . The preference relation R de - fined on fR ' is increasing if for all x , y E Rl ' with x ? y , we have x R y . Let Pmon be the class of increasing preferences . " As another example , in which Rn de - notes a domain of preference profiles in an n - person economy , do not write : Definition . The social choice correspon - dence F : RZn > A is Maskin - monotonic if for all R , R ' E RZn and all a EF ( R ) , if for all i E N , L ( a , Ri ) c L ( a , R ' j ) , then a EF ( R ' ) , where L ( a , Ri ) is the lower contour set of the preference relation Ri at a , with R and R ' being profiles of preference relations de - fined over A , some alternative space , and Maskin being an economist at Harvard . Instead write : Definition . Let Maskin be an economist at Harvard . Let A be a set of alterna - tives . Given Ri , a preference relation de - fined over A , and a , an alternative in A , let L ( a , Ri ) be the lower contour set of Ri at a . The social choice correspondence F : R ! n - - A is Maskin - monotonic if for all R , R ' E Rn and all a EF ( R ) , if for all i EN , L ( a , Rj ) : L ( a , RX ) , then a E F ( R ' ) . Even better , first introduce the basic notation - you will probably use it in other definitions and in the proofs - and only then give the definition . This sepa - ration will help highlight the essential idea of the definition . 9 Begin with : " Let A be a set of alternatives . Given Ri , a preference relation defined over A , and a , an alternative in A , let L ( a , Ri ) be the lower contour set of Ri at a . Let ' k be a class of admissible preference rela - tions defined over A . A social choice correspondence associates with every profile of preference relations in Rn a nonempty subset of A . " Now , you can state the definition : Definition . The social choice correspon - dence F : R1n > A is Maskin - monotonic if for all R , R ' E Rin and all a E F ( R ) , if for all i E N , L ( a , RJ ) c L ( a , R ' ) , then a E F ( R ' ) . You may also want to display the hypothesis and the conclusion : Definition . The social choice correspon - dence F : RIn > A is Maskin - monotonic if for all R , R ' e Rn and all a EF ( R ) , if for all i E N , L ( a , Ri ) 5 L ( a , Ri ' ) , then a EF ( R ' ) . If the hypotheses and the conclusions are simple enough , however , as they are in this example , displaying them may not be needed . Some will object to the double " if ' in the condition as I wrote it , and it does sound awkward . What about replacing the first one with something like " when - ever " ? Another option is to write : " L ( a , Ri ) : L ( a , R ' ) for all i E N implies aEF ( R ' ) " I have seen the recommendation to drop the punctuation at the end of dis - played formulas ( the hypothesis and the conclusion of the last statement of Maskin - monotonicity ) , but there is far from complete agreement about this . Personally , I prefer all my sentences to be fully punctuated . 10 9 Same thing with propositions and theorems : Do not introduce new notation in their state - ments . 10 When my daughters were in primary school , I occasionally went to their school to help out with the kids ' writing , and my main job was to check that every sentence they wrote began with a capi - tal letter and ended with a period . I have learned this lesson well , and when I see a sentence that does not end with a period , I experience the same queasiness as when I step too close to the edge of an open s This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 166 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) Make sure that the informal descrip - tions of your definitions match their formal statements . If you write : " A fea - sible allocation is Pareto efficient if there is no other feasible allocation that all agents find at least as desirable and at least one agent prefers , " your formal definition should not be ( still using R to denote a preference profile and intro - ducing 1P for the set of Pareto efficient allocations ) : " z eP if ( i ) z eZ and ( ii ) for all Z ' E Z such that for some i E N , z ' i Pi zi , there is j E N such that zj Pj z . " Instead write : " z EP if ( i ) z E Z and ( ii ) there is no z ' EZ such that for all i eN , z / Ri zi , and for some j E N , zj ' Pj zj . " Separate formal definitions from their interpretations . Formal models can often be given several interpretations . It is , therefore , of great value to sepa - rate the formal description of your model from the interpretation you in - tend in your particular application . For example , first write : Definition . Let Vn be a domain of n - person coalitional games . A solution on Vn is a function that associates with every game Ve VI , a point x E Rn such that Exi < v ( N ) ' 11 Then explain : " If F is a solution on vn , V is a game in Vn , and i is a player in N , the number Fi ( v ) can be interpreted as the ' value to player i of being in - volved in the game v , ' that is , the amount that he would be willing to pay to have the opportunity to play it . Alter - natively , it can be thought of as the amount that an impartial arbitrator would recommend the player should receive . " The advantage of this separation is that it will help your reader ( and even yourself ) discover the relevance of your results to other situations that she ( and you ) had not thought about initially . To pursue the example I just gave , the the - ory of coalitional games is also the the - ory of cost allocation . Some of your readers are interested only in applica - tions , and not in abstract games ; others do not care for the applications . You can catch the attention of all by first giving general definitions and then pointing out the various possible inter - pretations of your model . Present the basic concepts of your theory in their full generality . You will almost certainly use concepts that are meaningful much beyond the frame - work of your paper . It is preferable to introduce them without imposing the extra assumptions that you will need to invoke for your analysis . When you ex - plain what a Walrasian equilibrium is , do not assume convexity , monotonicity , or even continuity of preferences . ' 2 Of course , these properties are relevant when you turn to the issue of existence of these equilibria , but they have noth - ing to do with the concept of a Wal - rasian equilibrium itself . When you introduce a piece of nota - tion , tell your reader what kind of mathematical object it designates , whether it is a point in a vector space , a set , a function , and so on . Do not write " A pair ( p , x ) is a Walrasian equilib - rium if . . . " Instead , first define the price simplex ASe - in the { - dimensional Euclidean space and define the alloca - tion space X . Then , write " A pair ( p , x ) E Ae - 1 x X is a Walrasian equilib - rium if . . . " Similarly , do not write " The function ( p is strategy - proof if . . . k , " but instead , after having defined the set of Dossible Dreference 11 Here we have a bit of a notational problem as the n exponent to Vn indicates the n - player case , whereas the n exponent to RI ' indicates the n - fold cross - product of R by itself . To avoid it , you could write V ( n ) , but I do not think that the risk of confu - sion is sufficiently high to justify the parentheses . 12 Discontinuous preferences are not easy to il - lustrate graphically , so if you give a graphical illus - tration of your concept , you probably should pre - sent it for continuous nreferences . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 167 profiles Rn ( the cross - product of INI copies of 1R indexed by the members of N ) , and the allocation spac ' e X , write " The function ( p : R1 - XX strategy - proof if . . . " Indicating explicitly the nature of the objects that you introduce is especially important if the reader may not be fa - miliar with them . By writing " A triple ( it , X , y ) E Ae - 1 ) 12 XRtI - l ) n x RI " is a Lin - dahl equilibrium if . . . , " you help her realize that t has components in - dexed by agents ( these are the Lindahl individualized prices ) . By the way , a sequence of elements of X is not a subset of X , but a function from the natural numbers to X . So , you cannot write { xklke N : X . Nor can you write { xk } E X . Speak of " the sequence { xk } of elements of X , " or of " the sequence { xk } where for all k e N , xk EX . " When you define a concept , indicate what the concept depends on . Do not write " The function f is differentiable at t if blah , blah , blah of t . " Since what follows " if ' depends on t , you should write " The function f is differentiable at t ( including " at t " in the expression in italics ) if blah , blah , blah of t . " Then , you can continue and say " The function f is differentiable if it is differentiable at t for all t in its domain . " A marginal rate of substitution is calculated at a point , so speak of agent i ' s marginal rate of substitution at xi . For an ex - ample taken from the theory of imple - mentation , speak of a monotonic trans - formation of agent i ' s preferences at xi , and not just of a monotonic trans - formation . When you define a new variable as a function of old ones , it should appear on the left - hand side of the equality or identity symbol . If M has already been defined , and M ' is introduced next , with a value equal to M , you should write " Let M ' = M , " and not " Let M = M ' . " Do not assume that your readers are necessarily familiar with the definitions you use . There is rarely complete agree - ment on definitions in the literature . Apparently standard terms are often un - derstood differently by different peo - ple . Therefore , define the terms you use , even some that you can legiti - mately assume everyone has already seen . " Core " , " public goods , " and " in - centive compatibility " are examples of terms that are common enough , but de - fine them . The word " rationality " fre - quently appears in formal developments in game theory without a definition being given . Do not make such a mis - take . Refer to a given concept by only one name or phrase , even if you have sev - eral natural choices . Make one and stick to it . Indicate in parentheses next to your definition , or in a footnote , the other terms that appear in the litera - ture . When you first discuss the general idea , you may use different terms in or - der to vary language and avoid repeti - tions repetitions , which admittedly do not sound very good , but after you have formally defined the concept and bap - tized it , only refer to it by its name . The terms " game " , " game form , " and " mechanism " are used by different authors to designate the same concept . Choose one . For example write : " A game form ' 3 is a pair ( S , h ) . . . " You can also write : a " game form ( also known as a mechanism ) , " thereby tell - ing us that your intention is to use the phrase " game form " since it is in boldface italics , but reminding us that the term " mechanism " is also used . You would be confusing us if you wrote " a mechanism ( or game form ) . . " Do not populate your paper with in - dividuals , agents , persons , consumers , and players . One species is enough . 13 The terms " game " or " mechanism " are some - times used . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 168 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) Universal quantifications can be written as " for all , for any , and " for every ; " given " can also introduce some object taken arbitrarily from some set . I have seen proofs in which all four ways of quantifying were used , and that did not look good . Be careful about " for any . " If you write " If for anyx E X , f ( x ) > a , . . . , " it really is not clear whether you mean " for all x " or " for some x . " The terms " preference relation , " " utility , " and " utility function " are used interchange - ably by some authors , but you should not do so . There are important concep - tual distinctions here , to which I al - luded earlier . Choose language so as to help keep them straight . In areas where language has not set - tled yet , you may have several , perhaps many choices . Do not take this as a license to go back and forth between several terms . Instead , seize the opportunity to steer terminology in the direction you favor . Name your concepts carefully . When you introduce a definition , you need to find a good name for it , a term or a phrase that suggests its content . If you use a multi - word expression , do not worry too much about its length . Your priority is that it should be clear which concept you are designating . In any case , you can also use abbreviated forms of the expressions you chose . A good way of preparing us for an abbre - viated expression is as follows : " A feasi - ble allocation is ( Pareto ) - efficient if there is no other feasible allocation that all agents find at least as desirable and at least one agent prefers . " Later on , you can simply talk about " efficient al - locations . " Unless you use several no - tions of efficiency , in which case you obviously need to distinguish between them by means of different phrases , the shorter expression is unambiguous and slightly easier to use . Actually , I do not think that long ex - pressions are much of a problem in a text , as I explained earlier . In a seminar presentation , however , they may be . On these occasions , look for relatively short ones . Alternatively , you can use the long and more descriptive expression a few times , and when you think that the concept has been absorbed by your audience , tell them : " From here on , I will only use the following shorter expression : . Avoid unnecessary technical jargon . If a function is order - preserving , do not say that it satisfies " order - preserv - ingness " ; the name of the property is " order - preservation . " I do not like the phrase " one - player coalition , " which we use when discussing cooperative games ; you may have to speak separately of in - dividual players and of coalitions ( sets of two or more players ) . A theorem is proved by a person , not by a paper : " this result is established by Smith ( 1978 ) " is better than " this result is es - tablished in Smith ( 1978 ) . " In common language , " preferring " means what in economese we often call " strictly pre - ferring , " and in our dialect we have the phrase " weakly preferring , " which does violence to standard English too . In most cases , we can rephrase so as to avoid these conflicts with common us - age . When you feel you cannot avoid a conflict , give priority to your statement being unambiguous . Keeping in mind that a given condi - tion may have different interpretations that depend on the context , choose neu - tral expressions that cover the various applications over expressions that are too intimately linked to the particular set - up to which your paper mainly per - tains . The requirement that an alloca - tion rule be monotonic with respect to an agent ' s endowment can be seen from the strategic viewpoint ; it will make it unprofitable for the agent to destroy some of the resources he controls . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 169 Alternatively , it may be motivated by fairness considerations ; the agent should derive some benefit from an increase in the resources he has earned . Instead of phrases taken from game theory or from the theory of fair allocation , how - ever , use a neutral expression such as " monotonicity , " ( or " endowment monotonicity " if you also discuss mono - tonicities with respect to other parame - ters ) , and let your readers decide which interpretation they prefer . Designate assumptions by names that help keep the logical relations between them in mind . Strict monotonicity should imply monotonicity , a condition that in turn should imply weak mono - tonicity . In an axiomatic study , axioms often come in a variety of forms of dif - ferent strengths . Name them so as to make their hierarchy clear . Challenge dominant terminology and usage if you find them inadequate . If your paper is a follow - up to someone ' s published work , as it almost certainly is , do not feel compelled to use the same language if it was not well chosen , even if the writer is a prominent member of the profession . The same comment ap - plies to notation . For instance , why should the adjective " fair " be used to designate allocations that are both equi - table and efficient , as it was in the early fairness literature ? In common lan - guage , the term has no efficiency connotation . Refer to " equitable and efficient allocations . " The word " endow - ment " suggests ( admittedly , it does not imply ) resources that are owned " ini - tially , " prior to exchange and produc - tion , so the expression " initial endow - ment " is redundant . Just speak of the agents ' endowments . ' 4 The condition of " independence of irrelevant alterna - tives " that Nash used in his axiomatic derivation of what we now call the Nash solution , is dangerous . I prefer a phrase such as " contraction independence , " which is suggestive of the geometric op - eration that is being performed , without of course allowing us to infer exactly what this operation is , but Nash ' s ex - pression is no more informative . The reader will decide on her own whether these contractions are irrelevant . " Maskin - monotonicity " is really an in - variance condition : it states the invari - ance of the social choice under certain transformations of preferences - the term " monotonic " is appropriate to describe these transformations - and designating it by a phrase such as " in - variance under monotonic transfor - mations " might be a better idea , espe - cially for audiences that are not familiar with the implementation literature . ( In general , naming conditions after their authors is not as useful as naming them in a way that suggests their con - tent . ) If the length of this alternate ex - pression bothers you , what about " Maskin - invariance " ? If you decide to introduce a new phrase , do not forget to also indicate the names that are commonly used . Of course , the English language was not developed to label concepts of mathematics or economics , but the closer the fit between the concept you have to name and the common meaning of the word you choose , the better . For most of your conditions , you cannot hope to find a short phrase describ - ing without ambiguity hypothesis and conclusion ; strike the right balance between compactness and precision . 14 Besides , if you have to consider changes in the endowment of a player , to find out for in - stance whether the owner of two left gloves may gain by throwing away one of them prior to enter - ing the market , you will have to make him go from the pleonastic " initial initial endowments " to the oxymoronic " final initial endowments , " and what - ever benefit he may derive from his clever move will be more than cancelled by the embarrassment of using bad English . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 170 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) Use technical terms correctly . Do not use the term " vector " unless you will perform vector space operations . If you have in mind a collection of objects taken from some set , the appropriate terms are " lists " , " ordered lists , " or " profiles . " For instance , the notation ( R1 , . . . , Rn ) refers to an ordered list of preference relations ( or a preference profile ) , not a vector of preference rela - tions : you will probably not compute ( RI + R2 ) / 2 . On the other hand , it is often appropriate to present a list ( si , . . . , sn1 ) of strategies as a strategy vec - tor ; for instance , in a game form de - signed to implement a solution to a public goods problem , a strategy for an agent may be a public good level , and the outcome function may select the av - erage of the announced levels . Con - sumption bundles are usually vectors . You often compute averages of con - sumption bundles or multiply them by two . Do not confusefunctions with the val - ues they take . If fAFlR - > DR is a function , f ( x ) is the value the function takes when its argument is x . So f ( x ) cannot be dif - ferentiable , or concave , and so on . These are properties off and not of its values . Designate the function simply by f ( this is better than f ( . ) ) . By the same token , ui ( x1 ) is not agent i ' s utility function ; ui is . Conversely , if ui is agent i ' s utility function , it is not also the par - ticular value that this function takes for a certain choice of its argument . If F is a solution to a class of bargaining prob - lems , and S is a problem in its domain of definition , F ( S ) is not a solution any - more , but something like a " solution outcome , " the " solution outcome of S . " Alternatively , you can call F a " so - lution concept " and refer to F ( S ) as the " solution of S . " Get a good dictionary , and , if English is not your first language , ask for assis - tance . To weed out from your text galli - cisms , nipponisms , sinicisms , and so on , get the help of a native gardener . 5 . Writing Proofs Learn LATEX or Scientific Word . One of the first choices you have to make is that of a typesetting software . For your dissertation , I strongly endorse LATEX , ( or TEX , or Scientific Word , whichever one you can handle ) . LATEX makes plain text look beautiful , and because it un - derstands the structure of mathematical expressions , its benefits for the writing of mathematics cannot be measured . Moreover , it is widely used ( in mathe - matics , it has truly become the type - setter ' s LATIN , and you will find it very convenient when collaborating with coauthors dispersed throughout the world . A reader of a previous version of this essay suggested that I recommend the " LATEX Graphics Companion " of Goosens , Rahtz , and Mittelbach ( Ad - dison - Wesley ) and " PSTricks " of Timo - thy van Zandt , advice that was seconded by another reader . If you do not know how to use these softwares , ask one of your younger classmates to teach you ( knowledge about computers goes from the young to the old ) . Also , use a spell - check . When submitting a paper to a journal , respect their style guidelines . The optimal ratio of mathematics to English in a proof varies from reader to reader , but there is a consensus on a middle range . A proof written entirely in English is often not precise enough and is too long ; a proof written entirely in mathematics is impossible to under - stand , unless you are a digital computer of course . Modern estimation tech - niques have shown that the optimal ra - tio of mathematics to English in a proof lies in the interval ( 52 % , 63 . 5 % ) . Pick the point in that interval that is right for you and stick to it . However , the theorems themselves should be stated This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 171 All I have to do is deduce , from what I know of you , the 1 q { way your mind works . Are you the kind of man who would put the poison into his own glass , or into the glass of his enemy ? . . . Now a great fool . . . would place the wine LI z X i in front of his own goblet , because he would know that < ffi only another great fool would reach first for what he was given . I am clearly not a great fool , so I will clearly not jE f9 @ 11 11 lS I reach for your wine . . . We have now decided the poi - 2 na 11l soned cup is most likely in front of you . But the poison is powder made from iocane and iocane comes only from Australia and Australia , as everyone knows , is peopled with criminals and criminals are used to having people not AWA trust them , and I don ' t trust you , which means that I can 1 ' < a 11 clearly not choose the wine in front of you . . . But again , you must have suspected I knew the origins of iocane , so you would have known I knew about tIe criminals and 2 criminal behavior , and therefore I can clearly not choose t ~ the wine in front of me . ( b ) ( a ) Proof : This follows from the inclusion ( p c P , Part ( i ) Proposition 1 , and Lemma 1 applied to ( p . QED ( c ) Figure 3 . The ratio of mathematics to English in a proof should be in the interval [ 52 % , 63 . 5 % ] . ( a ) This proof has too much math . Due to the density of mathematical symbols , it is virtually impossible to understand . ( I can only make out that it states the existence of ducks having certain properties . ) ( b ) This game - theoretic proof due to William Goldman ( 1973 ) has too much English ; it is not precise enough and is too long . Not surprisingly , two paragraphs down , the character who produced it is dead . ( c ) This proof is just right , said Goldilocks , and that is the one she read . It is indeed pleasantly short and clean . Wouldn ' t you like to know what theorem it proves ? in the simplest English possible . The reader who wants to know more than the probably informal description of re - sults given in your introduction , but does not have much time , will be able to gain a much more precise under - standing of your contribution at a very small cost by just reading the theorems . I admit that this is sometimes difficult to achieve , and for technical papers it is probably impossible , but you should try . Avoid long sentences . A good way to prevent ambiguities is to mainly write one - clause sentences . If English is not your native language , this will also greatly help you avoid grammatical er - rors . Finally , it will force you to write sentences in logical sequences . Here is an illustration of the idea : " Let ( S , h ) be a game form . Let Rn be a class of ad - missible profiles of preference rela - tions . Given RC eRn , the triple ( S , h , R ) is a game . A Nash equilibrium of ( S , h , R ) is a point s E S such that for all i E N and all s ' i E Si , we have hi ( s ' i , si ) Ri hi ( s ) . If s E S is an equilibrium , h ( s ) e Z is its cor - responding equilibrium outcome . Let E ( S , h , R ) c Z denote the set of equilib - rium outcomes of the game ( S , h , R ) . The game form ( S , h ) implements the correspondence : p : 7n - Z if for all preference profiles R E Rn , we have E ( S , h , R ) = ( p ( R ) . You may think that your chance for a This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 172 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) Nobel prize in literature will not im - prove much by this staccato style . Yet I could name several grammatically im - paired writers who hardly ever used subordinate or relative clauses and yet got to make the trip to Stockholm ! If you really do not like such choppy writing , in your very last draft , recon - nect some of your shortest sentences . Similarly , break your text into para - graphs of reasonable size , keeping in mind that too much of a good thing is a bad thing : a sequence of one - sentence paragraphs is not pleasant to read . A certain amount of redundancy is useful , but do not overdo it . Giving an informal description of the main steps of a proof in addition to the formal proof is not strictly necessary , but it might be quite helpful . Any such expla - nation , however , should not appear within the proof itself , but outside and preferably before , so as to prepare us for it . The proof itself should be as con - cise as you can make it without hamper - ing readibility . Similarly , when you state a difficult definition , assist us by giving an informal explanation in addi - tion to the formal statement . Here , too , give it before the formal statement , as this placement will prepare your read - ers for it . It will also save them ' 5 frusta - tion : it is indeed annoying to spend time trying to understand a complicated concept when it is first given , only to discover two paragraphs down that the author was willing to help after all . The same comment applies to fig - ures . If you provided a figure to illus - trate a proof , thank you , but why didn ' t you say so ahead of time , so that we could identify on it the variables as you first introduced them and use it to fol - low your argument ? Warning us of the existence of a figure is especially impor - tant because , if your typesetting experi - ence is as limited as mine , you will find it hard to control where the figure ends up ( my computer always seems to make those kinds of decisions ) , and a figure illustrating a particular proof might very well appear on the page that follows the proof instead of next to the proof . It is often worth explaining very sim - ple things , especially in seminars where you will not have the time to explain the complicated ones in any detail , and es - pecially at the beginning . Indeed , if you lose your audience then , you may have a hard time retrieving it . After stating an " if and only if theo - rem , " do not refer to the " if part " and the " only if ' part , or the " sufficiency part " and the " necessity part . " Most people will not know for sure which di - rection you mean . I have even seen some of the greatest economists being confused about this , and in my personal pantheon , they are people whose ap - proach to economics cannot be de - scribed as " literary . " Restate the result in each direction as you discuss it . Simi - larly , would you guess that most of your professors really do not know what a marginal rate of substitution is ? But it is true ! To most of us , a sentence such as " Agent l ' s marginal rate of substitu - tion at zo is greater than agent 2 ' s " only means that the two agents ' indifference curves through zo have different slopes at zo . We just hope that which is steeper will be cle ' ar when we really need to know . Of course , we would never admit it in public , and I most certainly would never put such a confession in writing , for fear of being forever shunned by my colleagues ! Instead , compare the 15 Did you notice that I sometimes refer to " the reader , " sometimes to " your reader " ( in the singu - lar ) , sometimes to " your readers " ( in the plural ) , sometimes to " us , " your readers ? This is an exam - ple of an inconsistency of style that should be avoided . Just like this " should be avoided " since I have throughout addressed you , my reader ; there - fore , I should have written , " that you should avoid . " I return to this issue at the end of this essay . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 173 agents ' marginal rates of substitution of good 2 for good 1 at the point zo ; even better , simply talk about their indiffer - ence curves being more or less steep at zo . It is a great unsolved mystery of neu - roscience that someone can prove the fanciest theorems in the most abstract spaces and yet have trouble with some very elementary operations . Remember that . After all , haven ' t you called your relatives in England when it was 3 a . m . there , after having carefully calculated that it would be 3 p . m . ? You might have failed in such a trivial calculation , and yet brilliantly passed exams where much more of your intellect was being tested . Use pictures . Even simple pictures can be of tremendous help in making your seminar presentations more vivid . Figures are also very important to lighten a paper , to provide relief from long verbal or algebraic developments , and to illustrate definitions and steps of proofs . Of course , a figure is not a sub - stitute for a proof , and the proof should be understandable without it , but it may give the main idea , and thereby cut by half ( probably much more than that , ac - tually ) the time your reader will need to understand it . Again , remember the hundreds of little diagrams that you drew on your way to your results . Label your figures as completely as possible . Label the allocations , the sup - porting prices , and the endowments . To indicate the efficiency of an allocation , it often helps to shade the upper con - tour sets in the neigborhood of that al - location . Label a few indifference curves for each agent ( some redundancy is useful ) . If you assume convexity of preference relations and if in fact you draw the indifference curves strictly convex , who owns which indifference curve will be unambiguous . But if you do not make that assumption - you may very well work with linear preference relations or non - convex ones - this own - ership will not always be so clear . Avoid unnecessary arrows . You can most often position your labels close to the items they designate without creating ambi - guities . Use arrows only if the figure would get too crowded , in particular if the label is too long . 16 Have one enumeration for each cate - gory of objects . Number definitions separately from propositions , theorems , and so on . Some authors use a single list for all of their numbered items , so that for example , Definition 15 , which is the tenth definition , is followed by Theo - rem 16 , which is the third theorem , this theorem being followed by Corollary 17 , which is the only corollary . . . and so on . Multiple lists are preferable , as they help us understand the structure of the paper . If you have two main sec - tions , with one theorem in each , label the theorems Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 . Having a single list certainly fa - cilitates retrieving a needed item , but this benefit is too small . Bringing out the structure of your paper is more important . 17 State your assumptions in order of decreasing plausibility or generality . When introducing your assumptions , start with the least controversial ones , and write them in order of decreasing plausibility . For utility functions , do not write Al : ui is strictly concave ; A2 : ui is bounded ; A3 : ui is continuous . Instead , and here I do not attempt to give names to the conditions , write : Al : ui is 16 Look at the map of the city where you live - there are hundreds of them - and you will note that all the streets are labeled without arrows and yet without ambiguities ! You surely do not need arrows in your figures . 17 For long documents such as books , adding to the label of a theorem the page number on which it is stated might be useful : Theorem 3 . 123 is the third theorem of the chapter and appears on page 123 . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 174 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) continuous ; A2 : ui is bounded ; A3 : ui is strictly concave . Introduce your assumptions in re - lated groups . For a general equilibrium model , Assumptions A1 - A5 pertain to consumers and Assumptions B1 - B6 per - tain to firms . For a game , Assumptions A1 - A3 pertain to the structure of the game and Assumptions B1 - B2 to the behavior of the players . Figure out and indicate the logical re - lations between assumptions and groups of assumptions . If you have many condi - tions , and many logical relations be - tween them , it is helpful to present these relations in the form of diagrams . The best way to do this is by means of Venn diagrams , each bubble symboliz - ing the set of objects satisfying one of the conditions . When you draw two partially overlap - ping bubbles associated with Conditions A and B , it is because you have identi - fied at least one object satisfying A but not B ; at least one object satisfying B but not A ; at least one object satisfying both . You can also use a diagram of arrows and crossed arrows . The advantage of Venn diagrams is that by drawing the bubbles of appropriate size , you can also convey information about the rela - tive strengths of conditions . If A is much stronger than B , draw a much smaller bubble for A . If you prove a theorem under B , whereas A was used in previous literature , your reader will certainly want to know how significant your weakening is . You need to give her some sense of it . Another advantage of Venn diagrams is that they make it easy to indicate the joint implications of several conditions . If A and B together imply C , the two bubbles symbolizing them intersect within the bubble symbolizing C . With the other technique , you would have to merge two arrows emanating from A x F Wed , Bed Figure 4 . How to indicate logical relations between concepts . Key : X is the feasible set , P the set of Pareto - efficient allocations , F the set of envy - free allocations , B9ed the set of allocations meeting the equal division lower bound , Wed the set of equal division Walrasian allocations . The set of feasible allocations is so large in relation to the set of Pareto - efficient allocations that its bubble does not even fit in the page . There are continua of Pareto - efficient allocations and of envy - free allocations but typically a finite number of Walrasian allocations . A small tip : breaking the boundary of a bubble to make room for its label is the best way to make unambiguous wlhat is being labelled . and B and point the merged arrow at C . You will end up with a big mess . A dis - advantage of Venn diagrams is that for them not to be misleading , you need to figure out all of the logical relations between your conditions . But this is another advantage : you need to figure out all of the logical relations between your conditions ! ' 8 You will not regret doing the work . When you use arrows , by not linking two conditions , you un - ambiguously indicate not knowing how they are related . That option does not exist with Venn diagrams . When you use Venn diagrams , you can sometimes draw the bubbles in a way that suggests some of the structure of the sets ' they designate : if the set is convex , draw a convex bubble ; if it is defined by a system of linear 18 An effective way to do this is as follows : figure out all the illogical relations ; what is left are the logical relations . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 175 C A < A B B w D < C ( a ) ( b ) Figure 5 . Venn diagrams convey much more information than arrows . The two diagrams seem to convey the same information about logical relations , but the Venn diagram ( a ) allows you to show that " few " objects satisfy condition A but not condition C , whereas many satisfy condition B but not condition A . It also allows you to place individual objects , such as the Walrasian rule or the Shapley value , in the appropriate places . ( b ) I made this diagram of arrows deliberately messy to strengthen my claim that Venn diagrams are more informative than diagrams of arrows , but even if I had been fair , bubbles would have looked better . inequalities , make its boundary polyg - onal ; if it is a lattice , draw it as a diamond , and so on . Make sure that there are objects sat - isfying all the assumptions that you are imposing . Have at least one example . After stating that you will consider economies satisfying Assumptions 1 - 10 , exhibit one that does satisfy all of these assumptions ( try Cobb - Douglas ; it will probably work ) . If the class of objects satisfying your assumptions is empty , any statement you will make about all of them will be mathematically correct , but of limited usefulness . Use a common format for the formal statements of your results , and for parts of proofs that are similar . If you have several results that are variants of each other , present them in the same format so as to make their relation to each other immediate . If you first state : Theorem 1 . If A , B , and C , then D and E . do not write your next theorem , which differs from Theorem 1 in that C is replaced by C ' and E is replaced by E , as Theorem 2 . Suppose A and B . In ad - dition , consider the class of economies satisfying C ' . Then D . Also , E holds . Instead , use a paralell format : 19 Theorem 2 . If A , B , and C ' , then D and E . The relation between Theorems 1 and 2 will then be obvious , and your reader will discover it by simply scan - ning them . By choosing a different for - mat , you would force her to actually read their entire statements , and make the comparisons , hypothesis by hy - pothesis and conclusion by conclusion , that are needed for a good under - standing of how the results are related . In some cases , it will be possible to pre - sent the two theorems as Parts 1 and 2 19 This incorrect spelling of paralell ( Darn , I did it again ! ) is an unfortunate consequence of my having finally mastered that of A . Mas - Colell ' s name ( the name for which , in my estimation , the ratio of occurrences of incorrect to correct spell - ings is the highest in the profession ) . Do spell names correctly . Dupont does not want to be con - fused with Dupond any more than Schultze identi - fies with Schulze . Hernandez and Fernandez are two different people . Thompson is very attached to his " p , " and I know for a act that Thomson has no desire for one . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 176 7ouirnal of Fconomic Titerature Vnl YYYV ! ! ( AMarch 199 of a single theorem . 20 Physical proxim - ity and common format are two impor - tant ways in which you will facilitate your reader ' s task . Similarly , a proof may contain several parts having identical or almost identi - cal structures . Present them so as to make this obvious . Instead of writing Case 1 and Case 2 separately , write Case 1 first , and make sure it is in per - fect shape ; then copy it and make the minimal adjustments that are necessary to cover Case 2 . The similarity of phras - ing and format will unambiguously sig - nal to your reader that if she has under - stood the first part , she can skip the second part . Or if she decides to read Case 2 , the marginal cost she will incur will be very small . Divide proofs into meaningful units , clearly identified . Indent and double in - dent to indicate structure . Name and number these units : Step 1 , Step 2 , Case 1 , Subcase la , Subcase lb , Case 2 , Claim 1 , Claim 2 . If the proof is suffi - ciently complex , give each step or claim a title indicating its content . Make sure we know whether this title is a state - ment that you will prove , or an obvious conclusion that we should reach on our own : Step 1 : The domain of the correspon - dence ( p is compact . Claim la : The domain is bounded . To see this . . . Claim lb : The domain is closed . This follows from Lemma 1 . Step 2 : The correspondence ( p is upper semi - continuous . If the steps are conceptual units of independent interest , and certainly if they are used in other parts of the pa - per , as opposed to pertaining to a list of similar cases that have to be checked in turn , call them lemmas ( or lemmata , which is the plural form of lemma in Greek ; not lemmatas , unless you really have lots of them ! ) , and present tlhem separately . If a proof is long , you may have to number the successive state - ments that it is composed of . Then , you can refer to them by numbers . Unfortu - nately , this quickly increases the com - plexity of the proof , ( I mean , how com - plex it looks ) . If you do this , only number the essential statements . For instance , if you end a sentence by estab - lishing a statement that is used as a hy - pothesis in your next sentence , and if the statement is not used elsewhere , you need not number it . Gather all the conditions needed for a conclusion before the conclusion instead of distributing them on both sides . Hy - potheses come first and together . Do not write " If A and B , then D since C . " or " If A and B , then D . This is because C . " Instead , write " If A , B , and C , then D . " Especially for long statements , it helps to visually separate the hypothe - ses from the conclusions by " then " , " we have " , or " it follows that " . If you write " Since A , B , C , and D , " we will not be sure whether you mean " Since A , then B , C , and D , " or " Since A and B , then C and D " , although technically , the for - mer interpretation has to be the correct one . Similarly , mathematical statements usually look better when all the quanti - fications appear together , preferably at the beginning , instead of being dis - tributed on both sides of the predicate . For instance , instead of " For all x eX , we have xi > yi for all i e N , " write " For all x E X and all i E N , we have xi > yi . By the way , this example illustrates a con - flict between two of the recommenda - tions that I have made . I just advised to separate mathematical expressions by 20Capitalize the word theorem when you refer to a specific theorem , as in Theorem 1 above , but not in a sentence such as " Capitalize the word theorem when . . . " Same rule for propositions , sections , and so on . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 177 English words : " for all i E N , xi > yi , does not read as well as " for all i eN , we have xi > yi , " but the formulation " xi > yi for all i E N , " in which the quantification over agents occurs after the inequality , also achieves the desired separation , and it is shorter . Be specific about which assumptions , or which parts of assumptions , you need for each step . Do not write " The above assumptions imply that f is increasing " if you need only some of the above as - sumptions to prove thatf is increasing . Write " Assumptions 3 and 4 imply thatf is increasing " . Even better , if you do not need Part ( i ) of Assumption 4 , write " Assumption 3 and Part ( ii ) of Assump - tion 4 together imply that f is increas - ing " . Similarly , if Theorem 3 follows from Lemmas 1 and 2 , show us exactly how it follows . Do not write " A and B imply C and D , " if in fact " A implies C and B implies D . " At a very small addi - tional typing cost , you can be much more precise . When you cite a theorem , be as exact as possible . Refer to a textbook that most of your readers are likely to own or be familiar with . This is especially important for theorems that exist in sev - eral forms ; we need to know which ver - sion you are using . Also , you should probably cite the English edition of a classic text instead of the translated ver - sion in your native language , even though that is the one you know well . So write : " By the Brouwer fixed point theorem ( Debreu 1959 , p . 26 ) . . . Add - ing the page number is a nice touch . Verify the independence of your hy - potheses . For each hypothesis in each theorem , check whether you could pro - ceed without it . Do not write " Under Assumptions A , B , and C , then D , " if A and B together imply C , or if A and B together imply D . Having put together a toy for one of my daughters , I discovered some parts left in the box . Either these were re - placement parts , or I had done some - thing wrong ( I will not tell you which , but as a clue , let me say that there never are replacement parts in the box ) . Similarly , after QED , look in the box for stranded hypotheses . You might have made a mistake , but you might also be pleasantly surprised to find that you can actually prove your theorem without differentiability . Wouldn ' t you be thrilled if your result applied to Banach lattices ( which you did not even know existed two weeks ago ) , while you thought you were working in boring n - dimensional Euclidean space ? Sometimes , you will be unable to show that a certain hypothesis is neces - sary for the proof and unable to con - clude without it either . This is an un - comfortable situation that should keep you up late at night . A given hypothesis may be the con - junction of several more elementary ones . Then , try to proceed without each of its components in turn . For instance , if you have shown that " Under compact - ness of the set X , conclusion C holds , " do not only check that without compact - ness , C might not hold anymore . In - stead , ask whether " Under boundedness of X , C holds " and whether " Under closedness of X , C holds . " Explore all possible variants of your results . If you prove that " A and B to - gether imply C , " do not limit yourself to that statement . Find out whether simi - lar statements hold with A replaced by the closely related conditions A ' , AO , and A , or B replaced by B ' and B * , or C replaced by CO . Knowing statement P is not enough . Discover as many state - ments as possible that are close to P and are also true , and statements that are close to P but are not true . It is as use - ful to understand the multiplicities of statements around the one you are proving that could be true but are not , This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 178 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) as the statement that you are proving . It may even be more useful . Comment on the main variants of your theorem but keep to yourself the least significant ones . Do not leave ( too many ) steps to the reader . Give complete arguments . Some steps in a proof may involve standard manipulations and detract from your main point . Perhaps they should not be in the body of the paper , but in an ap - pendix . Do not take them out though . Your reader may not be familiar with a derivation that you have seen and per - formed hundreds of times . Just having the option of assessing the length of a step and recognizing the names of fa - miliar theorems on which it is based will be helpful to her in checking her understanding of the logic of your argu - ment , even if she does not actually read all the details . In general , I do not like too much of the work to be relegated to appendices . When I first look at a pa - per , I skip most of it anyway , and if I decide to study it more seriously , I find it annoying to have to go back and forth between the body of the paper and the appendix . If you think a step is obvious , look again . Do not think that your errors necessarily occurred in the hard parts of your proofs ( I should say , what you think are the hard parts of your proofs ) . They may very well have hidden in ( what you think are ) the easy parts , tak - ing advantage of your overconfidence . After completing your paper , search for the " clearlys " and " obviouslys " and make sure that what you claimed was clear and obvious is , if not clear and obvious , at least true . 21 Numerical examples are not always useful . It is commonly thought that nu - merical examples provide easy introduc - tions to complicated proofs . This is true only if the examples are well chosen . A general algebraic expression has in fact the advantage of reminding us of the logic of an argument . If , to fix ideas , you choose xi = 1 and X2 = 8 , the number 9 will refer to the sum xI + X2 but it might be helpful to remember this origin : so write " 1 + 8 " instead , or " 9 ( = 1 + 8 ) " . The expression xl + X2 is often preferable . In a three - player game , write the number of coalitions as 23 - 1 ; we do not care much if that number is equal to 7 . Also , by using numerical examples in - stead of algebraic notation , you lose track of units of measurement . It makes it harder to check the correctness of expressions . When you vary a parameter , as a re - sult of which agent l ' s income goes from 5 to 7 and agent 2 ' s income from 8 to 5 , it will soon be difficult to remem - ber which ones are the initial incomes , which ones are the final incomes , and whose income is 5 and when . If you use well - chosen algebraic notation , for in - stance by calling the incomes Ii and 12 before the change and I ' i and 1 ' 2 after the change , your reader cannot be confused . If you insist on using numbers , choose them so that whatever opera - tions you perform on them do not turn them into monsters . If you will divide xi by 2 , choose xi even ; if you will take its square root , do not choose xi = 10 . Actu - ally , I take this back . It depends : if the incomes are 5 and 7 initially , and they are cut in half , they will be 5 / 2 and 7 / 2 after the change and the fractions will make it easier to remember that they are the new ones . If they were even , you would be tempted to perform the division to get integers and again , the new incomes would be hard to tell apart from the old ones . In filling a payoff matrix , take all 21 Do not deduce from this , however , that sim - ply deleting the " clearlys " and " obviouslys " will necessarily eliminate all of your errors . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Youne Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theoru 179 payoffs to be integers between 0 and 9 so that you do not need to separate them by commas . In each cell of the payoff matrix you can also & place the payoffs of the row player slightly higher than that of the column player . More useful than numerical examples are examples with a small number of agents , a small number of goods , and no production . Then you can save on sub - scripts , you can use an Edgeworth box , and in your proof you can appeal to the intermediate value theorem instead of to a general fixed point theorem . By the same token , general arguments are sometimes easier to understand than their applications to special situations : it is more transparent why a competi - tive equilibrium is Pareto efficient when the proof is presented in the gen - eral case than for a Cobb - Douglas ex - ample , say . There is indeed little to be learned from the calculations for a special case . Similarly , illustrating a general phe - nomenon by means of a perhaps incom - pletely specified geometric example is more informative than a complete argu - ment based on a particular numerical example . The reason is that it may be hard to identify which features of the numerical example are essential to the phenomenon . For instance , to prove that in an Edgeworth box economy there could be several Walrasian equi - libria , an example in which preferences are suggested by means of a few indif - ference curves for each of the two agents suffices . Of course , a few indif - ference curves do not constitute a pref - erence map , and you have to rely on your readers ' experience with such maps for them to mentally complete your figure , or convince themselves that the completion can be done . The alter - native is for you to give entire maps , which in most cases will be by means of explicit numerical representations for them . These representations will often be quiter complicated , and although they will prove your point beyond doubt , I strongly believe that they will hamper the understanding of the circumstances under which multiple equilibria occur . If you want to name your agents , do it in a way that helps . When you think numbering your agents from 1 to 4 is too dry in describing an example , try real names , but choose them carefully so as to make it easy to remember who is who . Naming them Bob , Carol , Ted , and Alice will be cute but may be coun - terproductive . Ted most certainly does not belong in this group . Also , they should be ordered alphabetically : Alice , Bob , Carol , and Dwayne are your four consumers . In honor of a favorite writer , I have long wanted to call agents 1 and 2 Qfwfq and Xlthlx , but which is actually easier to remember , that agent 1 is endowed with good 1 and agent 2 is en - dowed with good 2 , or that Qfwfq is en - dowed with apples and Xlthlx endowed with oranges ? By the way , in a seminar , avoid cul - tural references that are obscure to too large a fraction of your audience , but by all means , do not avoid cultural references altogether because you fear that some of your audience may not un - derstand them . Sometimes it will not be easy to decide . Do you think that in or - der to prevent those of my readers who don ' t know French from feeling ex - cluded , I should have resisted the temp - tation to quote " Erreur , tu n ' es pas un mal , " thereby depriving the others of this beautiful maxim ? Which of the cri - teria of social choice theory is the right one here ? 22 22 Once , I referred to Bob and Carol , Ted and Alice in a seminar in which I discussed matching theory , and a member of the audience commented that I was showing my age ! I was unfortunately not quick enough h owing my age once again - to This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 180 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) Do not collapse two or three simi _ lar statements into one by indicating the variants in parentheses . Consider the following definition : " The func - tion f : FR - - > R is decreasing ( increasing ; non - decreasing ) if for all x , y E DR with x > y , f ( x ) < f ( y ) ( respectively f ( x ) > f ( y ) ; f ( x ) ? f ( y ) ) . The only way for us to be sure we understand this triple definition is to read it three times ( once for decreasing , once for increasing , and once for non - decreasing ) , and yet it is pretty simple . More complicated statements in that format require a mental gymnastics that will unnecessarily exhaust us . Just re - state the complete sentence in the various forms you need . I also have a lot of trouble with " and / or " ( or is it " or / and " ? ) . Do not start a sentence with a piece of mathematical notation . Journal edi - tors will red - pencil you if you do , and I agree with them that it does not look good , especially if the notation is lower case . " x designates an allocation " is not pretty . " I is the set of individuals " is not as bad because I is uppercase ( but what a grammatical provocation ! ) . " Let x des - ignate an allocation " is what editors will prefer . Be consistent in your writing style . Do not switch back and forth between first person singular , first person plural , and passive forms . If you write : " In sec - tion 3 , I show that an equilibrium ex - ists . In Section 4 , we establish unique - ness . To prove these results , it is assumed that preference relations are strictly convex and have infinitely dif - ferentiable numerical representations . For the proof of the main theorem , one appeals to the Brouwer fixed point theorem . Section 5 concludes . " your readers will think you need psychiatric help . Are you " I " or " we " ? Is it because these assumptions are embarrassing that you suddenly hide behind the pas - sive form ? Believe me , we have all made embarrassing assumptions . And why do you let Section 5 conclude when you did all the work ? The passive form is found awkward by me and our advice here is to have it replaced . " I " is per - haps too personal . Between " I " and " we " , I choose " we " , but if you choose " I , " we will respect your choice . 23 Similarly , do not travel back and forth between present and future tenses . Do not write : " First , I prove ex - istence . Then I will apply the theorem to exchange economies . I conclude with open questions . " In most cases , using the present tense throughout , even in describing past literature , is just fine . Choose the sex of your agents once and for all . Flip a coin . If it is a boy , rejoice ! If it is a girl , rejoice ! And don ' t subject them to sex change operations from paragraph to paragraph . 24 Two - person games are great for sexual equal - ity . Make one player male and the other female . This will actually facilitate talk - ing about the game and help your reader keep things straight . It will also save you from the awkward " he or she , " " him or her , " , " his or her " ! Alterna - tively , you may be able to refer to your reply that by understanding that I was showing my age , and remarking on it , he was showing his . He was right though . I recently asked the students in my graduate class whether they understood the allusion . Not one of them did . And yet , " Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice " ( it ' s a movie ) came out only yesterday ( 30 years ago , to be precise ) ! From now on , I will use this example only when I give lectures in retirement homes . 23 As a reader , I rather like the " I " form , which is more engaging , but I am not comfortable using it in formaf papers . I use " I " here only because of the informal style that I chose for this paper . Para - doxically , the " we " form is less obstrusive than the " I " form . " We " can also be interpreted as " you and the reader , " whom you are taking along , but then be careful if you refer to " our previous work " . 24 For a book , alternating between male and female between chapters might be acceptable though . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 181 agents in the plural , or choose one of them to be a firm , and refer to it as " it . " Be consistent in your choice of run - ning indices . If N = 1 , . . . , n , do not write interchangeably " for all i E N , " or " for all i E1 , . . . , n , " or " for all i = 1 , . . . , n . " Pick one formula and stick to it . In most situations , the quantification on the set of agents ( to take an example ) is clear . Skip it and write " for all i . " This helps keep down the density of symbols . In general though , it is good to indi - cate membership explicitly . For in - stance , instead of " There exists z for which . . . " , write " There exists zeZ for which . . " Therefore , for consistency of style and esthetic reasons , when everything else is explicity quantified , it bothers me a little not to see member - ship indicated for the set of agents , even if it is pretty obvious that they come from N and not from Mars . So instead of " For all i such that . . I would write " For all iE N such that . . . " Do not put quantifiers in the middle of a sentence in English . A sentence such as " Blah , blah , blah , Vx such that P ( x ) , blah , blah , blah 3y such that Q ( x , y ) and blah , blah , blah . " does not look good . Write " for all " and " there exists . " If the mathematical statements introduced by the quantifi - ers are complex enough , pull them out from the text in English and display them on separate lines , as follows : " Blah , blah , . . . , blah , blah , Vx such that P ( x ) , 3y such that Q ( x , y ) , and blah , blah , blah . " The quantifications should always be unambiguous . Remember also that tak - ing the negation of a properly written mathematical statement , with no hidden quantifications , is a trivial operation . The only mathematical symbols that do not bother me in a text in English are < , C , and E , ( and the other symbols of the same kind such as the strict in - equalities , the strict inclusions , the preference statements , . . ) , read as prepositions or verbs . " Blah , blah , blah , since x < y , and x eA , and therefore , blah , blah , blah , f is continuous , is fine . 3 situations where it is convenient to quantify once and V25 . For instance , you can open your proof by stating : " In what follows , S denotes an arbitrary ele - ment of E . " Then the requirement that the function F : X 1 R2 satisfies " for all S E X , F ( S ) > 0 " can simply be written as : Positivity : F ( S ) > 0 . 26 Indicate the end of proofs clearly . Use QED ( for quod erat demonstran - dum ) , or Halmos ' El ( I suppose , for quod erat quadrandurn . 27 ) . Delete 25 See the problem with starting a sentence with a piece of mathematical notation ( Section 6 . 10 ) ! When I wrote earlier that you should not put quantifiers in the middle of a sentence in English , I should have said : do not put them anywhere in such a sentence . 26 Or " F > 0 " . By the way , do not place your foot - note markers at the end of mathematical expres - sions , as they will look like exponents . Placing them be ond the punctuation mark , as the typo - graphica convention requires , and as I have done here , helps , although logic would sometimes dic - tate that the marker be attached to a word inside the clause ( or the sentence ) that ends with the punctuation mark . Compare the marker for this footnote with the marker for the previous one : the position of that earlier marker did not create any ambiguity , as I am sure that you did not think that my intention was to raise the universal quantifier to any power ; still it did not look pretty . The same problem arises with quotation marks . I just wrote " F > 0 " . The rule is to write " F > O . " This is in agreement with logic if you think of the whole sen - tence , including the period that ends it , as being the unit that is being discussed . In other contexts , it may be the requirement " F > 0 " that is under discussion but here , and given that quotation marks look a little like double prime , I admit that placing them after a needed punctuation mark is better , so refer to the requirement " F > 0 , " which is proved in Section 2 . 27 Circulus ? What about a little circle to indi - cate the beginning of a proof , matching the little square that closes it ? This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 182 Journal of Economic Literature , Vol . XXXVII ( March 1999 ) the redundant " This completes the proof , " which precedes D in your current draft . 6 . Conclusion If you follow all of the above recom - mendations , not only will you be pleased with yourself , your seminar audiences enlightened , your classmates impressed , your parents proud of you , and you will land a job in a top - five de - partment , but most importantly , your adviser will be happy . I readily admit that each of them does not amount to much . However small imperfections , when added together , will take your pa - per over the line that separates those that can be understood from those that can - not . An Archimedian principle is at work here . You will lose your readers or your seminar audiences much earlier than nec - essary . In fact , you too will be confused . Do not fool yourself : very few of your readers will take the time to understand your whole paper , and a large fraction of your seminar audience will not have the faintest idea of what you are talking about when you are half - way through . So , every bit will help in keeping the attention of a few a little longer . If you are used to certain notational conventions , or terminology , or ways of structuring a proof , they almost neces - sarily seem the best to you , and perhaps the only ones worth considering . You have to be open - minded and genuinely experiment with other formulations . Only then can you decide what is truly best . The first few times you use a new piece of notation or a new term or a new format , it will appear strange to you . Give it a chance . Let time elapse beween revisions . If your paper is so familiar to you that you essentially know it by heart , you will never discover your mistakes . You need to let it sit in a drawer for a while . When you pick it up again , it will have a freshness that will allow you to see immediately where it can be improved . Good writing requires rewriting , and rewriting again . When after many drafts , your paper has become like a smooth and shiny pebble that fits snugly in the palm of your hand , treat yourself to a box of Belgian chocolates . And if you have found these recommendations useful , please save me one ! 7 . Related Literature As I started circulating this paper , several readers gave me references to similar pedagogical essays written by mathematicians . I am happy to report that their recommendations are not al - ways in contradiction with mine . I found Nicholas Higham ( 1993 ) particu - larly helpful . Paul Halmos ' essay in the Norman Steenrod et al . ( 1983 ) vol - ume is often cited and deservedly so . Leslie Lamport ' s ( 1986 ) manual is beau - tiful . ( I will even consider forgiving the author for his maxim " All axioms are dull . " ) William Strunk and Edmund White ( 1979 ) is a well - known general manual of style . The Merriam - Webster Dictionary of English Usage is an invaluable source , and I am quite fond of the American Heritage Diction - ary of the English Language . An exam - ple of a beautifully written text is the monograph by Gerard Debreu ( 1959 ) . REFERENCES American Heritage Dictionary . 1992 . Houghton Mifflin Company , Third Edition . Bachelard , Gaston . 1938 . La Formation de l ' Esprit Scientifique . Chicago Manual of Style . 1993 . Fourteenth edi - tion . Chicago and London : U . Chicago Press . Debreu , Gerard . 1959 , Theory of Value . New York : Wiley . Goldman , William . 1973 . The Princess Bride . Balentine Books . Higham , Nicholas J . 1993 . Handbook for the Mathematical Sciences . Philadelphia : Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Thomson : The Young Person ' s Guide to Writing Economic Theory 183 Lamport , Leslie . 1986 . LaTeX . Addison - Wesley Publishing Company . Merriam - Webster ' s Dictionary of English Usage . 1994 . Springfield , MA : Merriam - Webster Inc . Steenrod , Norman E . ; Paul R . Halmos , Menachem M . Schiffer , and Jean A . Dieudonne . 1983 . How to Write Mathematics . Rhode Island : American Mathematical Society . Strunk , William and Edmund B . White . 1979 . The Elements of Style . New York : Macmillan Co . Zinsser , William . 1988 . Writing to Learn . Harper and Row . This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 43 . 154 on Thu , 21 Apr 2016 19 : 40 : 04 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms