Memory & Cognition 1998 , 26 ( 4 ) , 716 - 730 Expertise as mental set : The effects of domain knowledge in creative problem solving JENNIFER WILEY University ofPittsburgh , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania Experts generally solve problems in their fields more effectively than novices because their well structured , easily activated knowledge allows for efficient search of a solution space . But what hap pens when a problem requires a broad search for a solution ? One concern is that subjects with a large amount of domain knowledge may actually be at a disadvantage , because their knowledge may con fine them to an area of the search space in which the solution does not reside . In other words , domain knowledge may act as a mental set , promoting fixation in creative problem - solving attempts . A series of three experiments in which an adapted version of Mednick ' s ( 1962 ) remote associates task was used demonstrates conditions under which domain knowledge may inhibit creative problem solving . The possession ofa large body of domain knowledge is central to expertise . However , the domain knowledge ofexperts is marked not just by its amount but also by its structure ( Bedard & Chi , 1992 ; Ericsson & Staszewski , 1989 ) . The organization ofdomain knowledge in a way that is accessible , proceduralized , integrated , and principled enables experts to excel at memory and problem - solving tasks in a number ofcharacteristic ways . An expert can typ icallyrecognize , store , and retrieve largemeaningful chunks ofdomain - related information . An expert ' s processing is also commonly more abstract or conceptual than that of a novice . The proceduralization ofan expert ' s knowledge base tends to allow for quick and easy access to memory and possible solution paths . Further , an expert ' s knowledge usually contributes to better problem representation , as experts are able to engage in a more qualitative analysis ofa problem - for example , by recognizing relevant fea tures , inferring missing information , and imposing con straints in order to narrow the possible search for a solu tion . Over the past 20 years , these distinguishing marks of expertise have been found to be quite robust across a wide variety ofdomains ( see Chi , Glaser , & Farr , 1988 ; Er icsson & 1 . Smith , 1991 ) . Yet , expert performance is not uniformly superior , and the above characteristics ofexpert processing may sometimes lead to inferior performance in particular conditions . When Nonexperts Outperform Experts A number ofstudies have demonstrated that novices or individuals at an intermediate level ofknowledge may be This article is based on a dissertation submitted to the University of Pittsburgh in partial fulfillment of the requirements for a Ph . D . The au thor thanks her advisor , James F . Voss , and her committee , Kevin Ash ley , Robert Glaser , and Jonathan Schooler , for their suggestions and support ; Mara Georgi for her assistance in data coding ; and Colleen Seifert , Steven Smith , and Barry Stein for their comments on an earlier version of this paper . Correspondence should be addressed to 1 . Wiley , Department of Psychology , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , MA 01003 ( email : jwiley @ psych . umass . edu ) . seen to outperform experts . A first group of studies , re lated to the domain - specific nature ofexpertise , indicates that novices may outperform experts in conditions in which experts cannot make use oftheir domain knowledge . For example , chess experts ' recall ofrandomized chess boards is slightly worse than that of novices ( Chase & Simon , 1973 ) . Similarly , Voss , Vesonder , and Spilich ( 1980 ) found that individuals with low baseball knowledge recalled a significantly greater number ofbaseball - irrelevant propo sitions from a text passage describing one half - inning of a baseball game than did individuals with high baseball knowledge . Further , studies have found no advantage for experts on tasks in which the presentation of domain related stimuli does not correspond to typical structures ofthe domain , such as memory for novice - generated pas sages about baseball ( Voss et aI . , 1980 ) . Experts can also be worse at accurately judging their own performance within their domain . Glenberg and Epstein ( 1987 ) showed that physics and music experts overestimated their com prehension ofa text about their area ofexpertise , whereas nonexperts showed a more accurate calibration . Even though the experts did comprehend the texts better than did the nonexperts , the experts were overconfident in their abilities and were less accurate than nonexperts in their estimation of their understanding of the text . A second group ofstudies indicates that novices or in termediates surpass experts on tasks that require memory for the surface structure ofpresented information . In med ical diagnosis tasks , the intermediate effect has been well documented ( Patel & Groen , 1991 ; Schmidt & Boshuizen , 1993 ) . The basic finding is that , although doctors are more accurate at diagnosis , they are worse than interme diates , such as third - year interns , at recalling or recog nizing the exact information that they were presented with to make their decisions . Likewise , baseball experts are worse than novices on recognition tasks that require verbatim memory for baseball stories ( Arkes & Freedman , 1984 ) . When asked to select only the exact sentences that were actually in the text they had read , experts were more Copyright 1998 Psychonomic Society , Inc . 716 likely than novices to choose synonymous distractors or inferences based on the presented material . Experts in computer programming ( Adelson , 1984 ) are worse at rec ognizing programs they have analyzed than are novices . And , although expert radiologists have better memory for atypical ( and hence diagnostic ) features of X rays that they have seen , they are noticeably worse than novices at recognizing normal X rays ( Myles - Worsley , Johnston , & Simons , 1988 ) . In these cases , experts are at a disadvantage as a result ofthe more abstract or principled nature of their processing , which , in most domain - related circumstances , leads to better or more efficient performance . A third group of studies indicates that experts can be outperformed by novices when a new task or context runs counter to highly proceduralized behaviors . Experts per form worse than novices when a shift from a standard means of representation is required or when a standard re sponse is inappropriate . For example , waitresses and bar tenders perform surprisingly poorly at Piaget ' s water - level task , as compared with groups without intensive liquid filled container experience , presumably because the rep resentation required to correctly solve the task is not the one that is offunctional importance in their fields ( Hecht & Proffitt , 1995 ) . Instead of shifting to an appropriate way of framing the task , waitresses and bartenders continue to use the representation that is usually relevant to their job performance . Likewise , Marchant , Robinson , Anderson , and Schadewald ( 1991 ) found that expert accountants were less likely than novices to correctly apply new infor mation they had just read about a tax law that disqualified certain standard business deductions . In another study , Frensch and Sternberg ( 1989 ) found that expert bridge players had a harder time than novices adapting to a new version ofthe game that changed the bidding procedure . In these studies , highly proceduralized domain knowl edge , which is usually advantageous in processing do main - related information , may have led the experts to act less flexibly in new contexts . The present study investigated another condition in which people with less domain knowledge may outper form people with a large amount of domain knowledge namely , creative problem solving . Experts have been seen to solve problems in their fields more effectively than novices because a well - structured , easily activated knowl edge base allows for efficient search of a solution space and possibly for automatic access to promising solution paths . But what happens when a problem requires a broad search for a solution outside the usual scope of the do main ? One possibility is that subjects with expertise in the domain might actually be at a disadvantage , because their knowledge may confine them to an area ofthe search space in which the solution does not reside . In other words , domain knowledge may act as what traditionally has been called a mental set in the problem - solving literature , constraining search and promoting fixation in the cre ative problem solving of experts . EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 717 Mental Set and Fixation in Creative Problem Solving A number ofclassic examples ofmental set and fixa tion in problem solving have come from the Gestalt psy chologists in their studies of insight problems ( Duncker , 1945 ; Luchins , 1942 ; Maier , 1931 ) . Such problems are often described as requiring productive and nonroutine thinking for a solution - that is , there must be no estab lished procedures that could be used to guarantee a solu tion ( as in arithmetic problems ) and the solution must not be wholly formed in memory ( as in the case of a prob lem that has been solved before ) . Instead , when a person approaches an insight problem , the means toward the so lution are initially nonobvious , and the solution requires either a completely original approach or a novel combina tion of diverse bits of information through remote asso ciations in memory ( Weisberg & Alba , 1981 ) . In one of the first studies of mental set , Maier ( 1931 ) brought subjects into a room with two strings hanging from the ceiling more than an arm - span apart . On the floor were a chair , pliers , and ajar of tacks . The subjects were asked to tie the two strings together . One insightful solution is to use the pliers as a weight on a pendulum by tying the pliers to one string and swinging it while grasping the other string . However , this solution does not come easily to subjects who tend to see pliers as a grasping tool and not as a weight . Twofactors contribute to the difficulty of solving this problem . First , the solution to this problem is impeded by the subject ' s mental set , which , in this case , is the tendency to consider only the normative use ofan object . Second , the solution may be further impeded be cause the first solution attempt often causes the solver to fall into a rut . Gestalt psychologists have called the inabil ity to escape a mental set , such as the one associated with an initial solution attempt , fixation ( Woodworth & Schlos berg , 1954 ) . Thus , it is not only the inappropriateness of the initial mental set but , more importantly , the fixation promoted by such a set that delays or blocks a successful solution to these problems . More recently , fixation has been studied in relation to conformity with examples . For instance , Jansson and Smith ( 1991 ) found that design students produced inap propriate solutions on a design task more often after being shown an inappropriate example . Smith , Ward , and Schumacher ( 1993 ) found that showing subjects an example constrained the generation of new category members . Similarly , students ' knowledge ofreal animals constrained their generation ofimaginary animals ( Ward , 1994 ) . In these cases , the example seemed to establish a mental set , which , in tum , promoted fixation on features of the example . Inanother recent demonstration , S . M . Smith and Blank enship ( 1991 ) examined fixation using Mednick ' s remote associate task ( RAT ) . The RAT grew out of Mednick ' s ( 1962 ) beliefthat the novel combination ofremote asso ciations underlies the creative process . The standard RAT 718 WILEY involves the presentation of three words , such as blue , knife , and cottage , and prompts the subject to generate a fourth wordthat forms a familiar phrase with each ofthree . In this case , the fourth word could be cheese , forming the phrases blue cheese , cheese knife , and cottage cheese . S . M . Smith and Blankenship induced fixation on the RAT by priming meanings of words that were irrelevant to solution . When an irrelevant associate was presented in italics next to each word in a problem , the subjects were significantly less likely to solve the problems . How ever , when the subjects were given an incubation period between the initial problem - solving attempt ( with the ir relevant prime ) and a second attempt ( without primes ) , the effects of the primes dissipated , and the subjects ' ability to solve the problems improved . One way ofview ing these findings is that priming the irrelevant meanings instilled a mental set , which produced an inappropriate initial problem - solving attempt as well as fixation on the incorrect solutions , preventing a broad search of the so lution space . The present study investigates whether domain knowl edge may be seen to influence solution attempts in a sim ilar way . Since domain knowledge is easily and possibly automatically activated when experts encounter domain relevant material , domain knowledge may have an in fluence on solution attempts that is similar to that ofthe externally imposed primes in the studies above . In other words , domain knowledge mayact as a mental set and pro mote fixation in problem solving . Although it may not be surprising to find that expert knowledge can act as a mental set , as experts may rely on their domain knowledge to inform an initial solution attempt , the more interest ing question is whether experts will experience more fix ation than novices will , when the initial solution that is suggested by domain knowledge is inappropriate . Offur ther interest is how such fixation might be overcome and whether the source of fixation plays a role in whether or not an incubation period will improve problem solving . In three experiments , the possible existence and nature ofa mental set and of fixation that is due to the posses sion ofa large amount ofdomain knowledge was inves tigated . The first experiment demonstrated that domain knowledge can indeed act as a mental set and promote fixation in creative problem solving . In the second exper iment , it was investigated whether the fixation that was due to domain knowledge could be eliminatedwith a warn ing . In the third experiment , the effect of incubation on fixation was examined as a function ofwhether the fixa tion was internally generated ( knowledge based ) , rather than externally primed . EXPERIMENT 1 To test the hypothesis that domain knowledge can act as a mental set and promote fixation in creative problem solving , subjects with varying amounts of baseball knowl edge performed an RAT ( adapted from Mednick , 1962 ) . For this experiment , 10 items were created , such that the first word could have been part of a baseball - related term . For example , I baseball - related problem consisted ofthe words plate , broken , and rest , with the intended solution of home , which would form the phrases home plate , bro ken home , and rest home . Another 10problems were based on Mednick ' s original stimuli . As none of the Mednick based items contained a first word that was related to a baseball term , these trials are termed neutral . The blue , knife , cottage example that was mentioned above is an example ofa neutral trial . Two versions were created for each baseball - related trial . In one version - for example , the plate , broken , rest example given above - the answer that was suggested by the baseball - related meaning of the first word formed a phrase with both the second and the third words and thus was the solution . These versions of the trials are termed baseball consistent . For a second version ofeach trial , the third word was replaced by a word that would not form a good phrase with the answer suggested by the baseball related meaning ofthe first word . For example , the second version ofthe above prublem had the words plate , broken , and shot . The intended answer was glass , forming the phrases plate glass , broken glass , and shotglass . In these trials , the answer suggested by the baseball - related mean ing of the first word formed a phrase with the second word but not with the third . Because the subject did not know that the solution suggested by the baseball term would not work until the third word appeared , these ver sions ofthe baseball - related trials were termed baseball misleading . Ifexpertise does impose a set and promote fixation in problem solving , subjects with higher amounts of baseball knowledgeshould be less ableto generate correct solutions than subjects with less domain knowledge when answers primed by baseball terms are incorrect ( that is , on base ball - misleading trials ) . It is presumed that there will be no differences in performance on neutral trials . Method Subjects . Twenty - four University of Pittsburgh undergraduates enrolled in introductory psychology courses participated in this ex periment to fulfill a course requirement . Subjects were run in groups ofl to 12 . Materials . Mednick ' s ( 1962 ) RAT was adapted for use in this experiment . The adapted RAT was composed of 20 items . Ten of the itemswere based on Mednick ' s original stimuli . Another 10items were created with a first word that could be part of a baseball relatedphrase . The second and third words inall items wereneutral that is , not baseball related . Twoversions were made ofeach base ball related item . In one version , the trials were baseball - consistent , and the solution was the word that formed a baseball - related phrase with the first term . In a second version , the trials were baseball mis leading , and the solution was not the word that formed a baseball related phrase with the first term . Tocreate this second version , the third word ofeach baseball trial was replaced by another word . The baseball - misleading trials did have a solution , just not the one sug gested by the baseball - related meaning ofthe first term . The stimuli for the adapted RAT are presented in the Appendix . Procedure . The subjects were told that they would perform sev eral problem - solving tasks . The experiment was run on IBM - PC compatible computers using Micro Experimental Lab software EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 719 Table 1 Mean Scores ( and Standard Deviations ) on Domain Knowledge Questionnaire and Gender Breakdown for Each Experiment 5 I 4 4 2 3 24 . 7 5 . 0 8 . 9 3 . 5 4 I I 4 3 2 3 2 3 2 I 4 3 2 I 4 Experiment I 2 No warning Warning 3 No fixation , no incubation No fixation , incubation Fixation , no incubation Fixation , incubation M 23 . 4 26 . 4 High Knowledge LowKnowledge SD No . Males No . Females M SD No . Males No . Females 6 . 7 9 3 8 . 4 4 . 7 4 8 7 . 7 7 . 2 2 . 6 ( Schneider , 1988 ) . Before beginning the RAT , the subjects were given an example , five practice items , and some acceptable solutions for the practice items . All the subjects then performed the adapted RAT . In this version ofthe task , the three words were presented one at a time , cumulatively . This presentation format differs from both Mednick ' s ( 1962 ) and S . M . Smith and Blankenship ' s ( 1991 ) , and was instituted to maximize the possibility of finding fixation ef fects . The first word appeared alone in the center of the screen for 5 sec , after which it wasjoined by the second word , which appeared under it . After another 7 . 5 sec , the first two words were joined by the third word , which appeared under them , and the subject had 30 sec in which to produce the fourth word . The subject could an swerat anytime during the 30 - sec problem - solving period by press ing the space bar , typing in a solution word , and pressing the return key . However , if the 30 sec passed and the subject had not yet re sponded , the three words disappeared , and the subject was told to enter a solution word and press the return key . The subject had 20 sec to respond , after which the next trial was presented . Each subject received 10 neutral trials and 10 baseball - related trials . Fiveofthe baseball - relatedtrials were consistent with the so lution suggested by the baseball term , while 5 were misleading . Pre sentation order and baseball trial type were randomized , such that each subject received only one version of each item . Responses and response times were recorded by computer . The response time that was analyzed was the duration from the onset ofthe third word until the subject finished entering a word and pressed the return key or until the trial ended ( including both the 30 - sec problem - solving and 20 - sec response periods ) . The subjects then completeda 24 - item mental rotation task ( Shep ard & Metzler , 1971 ) , a 10 - item anagram task , a 9 - item Gestalt completion task ( Street , 1931 ) , and a multiple - choice baseball term recognition test . In the recognition task , the subjects were asked to pick the wordthat completed the baseball term - for example , world : ( 1 ) time , ( 2 ) run , ( 3 ) house , ( 4 ) series . All four additional tasks were presented by computer . The subjects were given up to 15 sec to complete each mental rotation task , 20 secto complete each anagram , and 30 sec to complete each Gestalt completion task . The baseball recognition task had no time constraint . Responses and response times were recorded by computer . The final task was a 45 - item paper - and - pencil short - answer test of baseball knowledge , the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire from Spilich , Vesonder , Chiesi , and Voss ( 1979 ) . No feedback was given on any task . Scoring . Because a number ofRATproblems received responses that were not the intended solution , an acceptability rating proce dure was devised . First , twojudges categorized all solutions as either definitely not correct or possibly correct . Items that both judges called definitely not correct were coded as incorrect . For instance , the answer black to the item sleep , board , and cat was coded as in correct because , although black board and black cat are good phrases , both judges agreed that black sleep or sleep black was not . Answersthat one or both of thejudges categorized as possiblycorrect responses ( n = 71 ) , as well as the intended answers ( n = 30 ) , were thengiven to a new group ofsubjects tobe rated foracceptability . Ten raters ( 5 high - knowledge and 5 low - knowledge ) were shown the same example item and practice items with suggested solutions as the experimental subjects . They werethen asked to rate on a 10 - point scale how good ofa phrase each possible solution made with each ofthe words in each problem , with I meaning not at all good , and 10 meaning very good . All the solutions that formed phrases re ceiving average ratings similar to the intended answers , either in overall rating or on a phrase - by - phrase basis , were accepted as cor rect solutions . To be specific , an overall rating for each answer was computed by summing the goodness ratings for that answer with all three words in a problem . The lowestaverage overall rating foran in tended answer was 23 . 8 ( SD = 3 . 3 ) . All unintended answers with av erage overall ratings greaterthan 23 . 8 were accepted as correct ( n = 8 ) . In addition , the lowest per phrase average goodness ratings for intended answers were 7 . 2 , 5 . 1 , and 7 . 0 , for the first , second , and third words ofa problem , respectively . All unintended answers that had an average overall rating greater than 19 . 3 but no single rating less than 5 . 1 were also accepted as correct ( n = 9 ) . The mental rotation , Gestalt completion , and anagram tasks served as filler tasks in later experiments . The recognition task was employed simply to ensure that all the subjects , even low - knowledge subjects , were familiar with the baseball terms . The Baseball Knowl edge Questionnaire was used to determine the relative knowledge level ofthe subjects . ResultsThesubjects were divided into two baseball knowl edge groups via median split on the scores ofthe Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire . Performance on the RATwas analyzed in terms ofproportion ofcorrect solutions and response time for each knowledge group and trial type . For all analyses , analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) were computed , with repeated measures on trial type . Both significant and nonsignificant main effects are reported . However , interactions are only reported when they are sig nificant , unless they pertain to an experimental hypoth esis . Especially of interest was the presence ofa mislead ing effect , or decrement in performance on misleading trials , for the high - knowledge subjects . Baseball knowledge . Performance on the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire ranged from 2 to 32 correct an swersout ofa possible 45 . Those subjects scoring lessthan 720 WILEY Table 2 Mean Proportions ( and Standard Deviations ) of Correct Solutions , Intrusions , and Response Times ( in Seconds ) in Experiment 1 M SD 20 . 6 11 . 5 20 . 9 12 . 4 23 . 0 12 . 2 24 . 7 13 . 4 26 . 8 14 . 3 31 . 4 15 . 2 . 1I . 15 . 31 . 37 Condition M SD Low knowledge Neutral . 50 . 29 Consistent . 40 . 28 Misleading . 40 . 16 High knowledge Neutral . 50 . 18 Consistent . 38 . 18 Misleading . 15 . 17 Solutions Intrusions RT M SD 15were categorized as low knowledge , and subjects scor ing 15 or more were categorized as high knowledge . The mean scores and gender breakdown of each knowledge group are included in Table 1 . Even the low - knowledge subjects were familiar with the baseball terms used in this study , as all the subjects were able to indicate the correct baseball terms on the baseball term recognition test . The high - knowledge groups in these experiments have noticeably lower means on the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire than do the high - knowledge groups in the Voss studies , since they selected subjects after pretesting large groups on the questionnaire . For example , the high knowledge groups in Voss et al . ( 1980 ) had means of41 . 3 and 40 . 0 . Although the lower mean allowed for a mix of male and female subjects among the high - knowledge groups , it creates a concern that the observed effects may be more appropriately attributed to intermediate levels ofdomain knowledge . A separate analysis performed on just the highest knowledge subjects in the present study ( who were comparable to the high - knowledge subjects in previous studies ) confirmed that significant mislead ing effects could be found in the most knowledgeable subjects as well . Because this analysis pooled across the three experiments , it is included at the end of the third experiment . Correct solutions . A 2 X 3 ( knowledge level X trial type ) ANOVAwas computed , using proportion ofcorrect solutions as a dependent measure . Table 2 presents the mean proportion ofcorrect solutions for each condition . No significant main effect was found for knowledge level , but there was a significant effect oftrial type [ F ( 2 , 44 ) = 8 . 56 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 001 ] . Tukey ' s HSD indicated that there were more correct solutions to neutral trials than to misleading trials , with consistent trials not differing sig nificantly from either of the other two . There was a significant interaction between knowledge level and trial type [ F ( 2 , 44 ) = 4 . 06 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 02 ] . Pairwise comparisons revealed that , for high - knowledge subjects , misleading items were solved less often than ei ther neutral [ t ( 11 ) = 4 . 69 , p < . 001 ] or consistent items [ t ( 11 ) = 3 . 09 , p < . 01 ) . There was no difference in the number ofcorrect solutions between neutral and consis tent items for the high - knowledge subjects ( t = 1 . 66 ) , nor between any ofthe items for the low - knowledge subjects ( ts < 1 . 3 ) . A contrast comparing correct solutions for neutral and consistent trials together against misleading trials revealed a significant misleading effect for the high - knowledge subjects [ t ( 11 ) = 4 . 53 , p < . 0001 ] but not for the low knowledge subjects ( t < 1 ) . Further , the interaction ofthis misleading effect by knowledge group was significant [ F ( 1 , 44 ) = 4 . 03 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 02 ] - that is , high knowledge subjects were more likely to show a decrement on misleading problems versus neutral and consistent problems than were low - knowledge subjects . This sug gests that the knowledge X trial type interaction was due to a greater misleading effect among the high - knowledge subjects . Incorrect answers on misleading trials were further an alyzed on the basis ofwhether they were related to base ball . Incorrect answers related to baseball were termed intrusions . High - knowledge subjects made baseball related intrusions on . 31 ( SD = . 37 ) ofmisleading trials , whereas low - knowledge subjects only made baseball related intrusions on . 11 ( SD = . 15 ) ofthe misleading tri als . This difference approached significance [ t ( 22 ) = 1 . 72 , P < . 10 ] , suggesting that the more knowledgeable sub jects tended to be fixated in the solution suggested by their baseball knowledge . Response time . A 2 X 3 ( knowledge level X trial type ) ANOVA that used response time as a dependent measure was computed . As can be seen in Table 2 , there was a significant main effect oftrial type [ F ( 2 , 44 ) = 4 . 68 , MS e = 28 . 16 , p < . 01 ] . Tukey ' s HSD indicated that mis leading trials had significantly longer response times than either neutral or consistent trials , which were not signif icantly different from each other . The main effect for knowledge level was not significant ( F = 1 . 45 ) , nor was the interaction between knowledge level and trial type ( F = 1 . 00 ) , although response times did tend to be longer for the high - knowledge subjects on the misleading trials . DiscussionThemisleading effect was greater for high - knowledge subjects than for low - knowledge subjects . For misleading items , high - knowledge subjects were much less likely than were low - knowledge subjects to arrive at a correct solution . High - knowledge subjects were also more likely to give incorrect baseball - related responses to misleading items . These results suggest that high - knowledge subjects were fixated in their problem solving . One explanation for this effect is that the domain knowledge ofexperts is being activated by the content of the problems . Domain knowledge not only acts as a men tal set suggesting an initial solution , but also fixates the high - knowledge subject on the domain - related initial so lution attempt . This is consistent with previous findings ( see , e . g . , Ward , 1994 ) that knowledge of real - world ex amples can constrain the generation ofnovel animals or objects . Further , the present study extends such findings by investigating fixation effects among problem solvers with different levels of knowledge . However , an alternative explanation is that high knowledge subjects may simply be more sensitive to the fact that a number of the trials seem to do with baseball . Because using one ' s domain knowledge is usually of benefit , experts may be engaging their knowledge inten tionally , without realizing that it is harming their perfor mance on the misleading trials ( note that there was no feedback given ) . Thus , it seems important to differentiate fixation that might be occurring as the result ofan inten tional strategy ( " Hey , a lot ofthese are about baseball , I should look for a baseball - related term " ) from fixation that is the result ofthe more - or - Iess automatic activation ofthe knowledge structure . This issue is the focus ofEx periment 2 . A concern that may be raised because of the use of a median - split procedure is simply that the high - knowledge and low - knowledge populations may vary in more than just their knowledge ofbaseball andthat ability differences between the two groups may be underlying the poorer problem solving in the high - knowledge group . However , this concern does not seem warranted here . To begin with , the critical variable is a within - subjects difference score that is , high - knowledge subjects perform as well as low knowledge subjects on neutral trials but less well on the misleading trials . Second , previous studies using median split procedures on the same Baseball Knowledge Ques tionnaire have looked directly at measures ofability and found no differences between high - and low - knowledge groups ( see , e . g . , Fincher - Kiefer , Post , Greene , & Voss , 1988 ; Spilich et aI . , 1979 ) . It is interesting that no facilitating effects were found for the high - knowledge subjects on the baseball - consistent trials . One possible explanation is that the baseball - related solutions were easily accessible for both the high - and low - knowledge subjects ; hence , low - knowledge subjects were able to solve the baseball - consistent problems just as wellas the high - knowledge subjects . On the other hand , low - knowledge subjects were able to ignore the baseball related meaning when it was not appropriate , whereas high - knowledge subjects were not , which resulted in fixa - EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 721 tion among the high - knowledge subjects on the misleading problems . Another possibility is that , if the subjects had been given just baseball - consistent problems , high - knowledge subjects might have shown an advantage over the low knowledge subjects . It may be that the presence of the baseball - misleading items in thepresent experimentcaused interference even on the baseball - consistent problems . Because the main interest ofthis study is the fixation that may be caused by domain knowledge and because the presence ofthe baseball - consistent trials may be cuing the use ofbaseball knowledge , for Experiments 2 and 3 only neutral and misleading trials were used . EXPERIMENT 2 Experiment 1 demonstrated mental set and fixation in problem solving among high - knowledge subjects . Ex periment 2 tested whether this fixation that was due to do main knowledge could be eliminated by warning the sub jects not to use their baseball knowledge . The subjects either received no information about the task , as in Ex periment 1 , or were told explicitly that some ofthe items might be related to baseball terms but that thinking of such terms would not help their performance . Further , to elim inate any helpfulness ofbaseball knowledge , the subjects were given only misleading baseball trials . Ifthe mental set and fixation ofhigh - knowledge sub jects is due to the assumption that it is beneficial to use one ' s knowledge whenever it seems relevant , high knowledge subjects should be more successful at solving misleading trials when they are explicitly told that their knowledge will not help them . However , if , as predicted , the mental set and fixation ofhigh - knowledge subjects is related to the activation of knowledge itself , warning high knowledge subjects not to use their knowledge should not produce any improvement in performance on misleading trials , as compared with a no - warning condition . Method Subjects . Ten University of Pittsburgh undergraduates enrolled in introductory psychology courses participated in this experiment to fulfill a course requirement . In addition , 10 volunteers from the university community who responded to newspaper , poster , and usenet advertisements participated in this experiment and received $ 5 . The subjects were run in groups of 1to 6 . Both the warning and nonwarning conditions consisted of an equal number ofpaid and un paid subjects . Because domain knowledge was not assessed until the end ofthe experiment , 4 additional subjects were run to complete the design . In all cases , only the first 5 subjects run in each cell were used for analysis , yielding an equal number of high - knowledge and low knowledge subjects in each condition . Procedure . The procedure was the same as that in Experiment I , except that , after the possible solutions to the practice trials were presented , half the subjects received the warning , " Some of these itemsmay bring baseball - related terms to mind . However , you should try to ignore them because they will not lead you to the correct so - 722 WILEY Table 3 Mean Proportions ( and Standard Deviations ) of Correct Solutions , Intrusions , and Response Times ( in Seconds ) in Experiment 2 Correct Condition M SD No Warning Warning Intrusions RT Correct Intrusions M SD M SD M SD M SD M RT SD 9 . 6 6 . 2 10 . 4 8 . 1 26 . 6 26 . 8 0 . 2 . 10 . 14 . 26 . 18 . 38 . 26 . 12 2 . 2 3 . 2 23 . 1 26 . 5 3 . 4 . 10 . 15 . 15 . 09 . 56 . 46 . 10 LowknowledgeNeutralMisleading Effect High knowledge Neutral . 58 . 08 18 . 5 3 . 1 . 52 . 16 22 . 0 Misleading . 20 . 16 . 24 . 21 27 . 9 3 . 6 . 30 . 14 . 18 . 06 29 . 9 Effect . 38 9 . 4 . 22 7 . 9 Note - Misleading Effect for Correct Solutions = ( Proportion correct on neutral items ) - ( Proportion correct on misleading items ) . Misleading Effect for Response Time = ( Response time on misleading items ) - ( Response time on neutral items ) . lution . " The other half of the subjects received no warning , as in Experiment 1 . All the subjects received I0 misleading baseball trials and I0 neutral trials . Item presentation order was randomized for each subject . ResultsPerformance on the RAT was analyzed in terms of proportion of correct solutions and response time for each condition . Especially ofinterest were the replication of the misleading effect found for the high - knowledge subjects in Experiment 1and the effect ofthe warning ma nipulation . Baseball knowledge . Performance on the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire ranged from 3 to 39 correct answers , with those subjects scoring less than 15 catego rized as low - knowledge and those subjects scoring 15 or more categorized as high - knowledge . The mean scores and gender breakdown for each condition and knowledge group are included in Table 1 . All the subjects were able to indicate the correct baseball terms on the baseball term recognition test . Correct solutions . Using the same procedure as that in Experiment 1 , a 2 X 2 X 2 ( knowledge level X warning X trial type ) ANaYA was computed on the number ofcor rect solutions . Table 3 presents the mean proportion cor rect for each condition . No significant main effects were found for knowledge level or warning . There was a sig nificant main effect for trial type [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 19 . 66 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p < . 001 ] , as more correct solutions were offered for neutral than for misleading trials . The interaction be tween knowledge level and trial type was marginally sig nificant [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 4 . 22 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p < . 06 ] . On the basis ofthe results of Experiment 1 , a planned multiple comparison was computed on the no - warning condition alone . It indicated that , without the warning , high - knowledge subjects were less likely than low knowledge subjects to make a correct response on mis leading trials versus neutral trials [ F ( 1 , 8 ) = 8 . 34 , MS e = 0 . 01 , P < . 02 ] , replicating Experiment 1 . Planned pair wise comparisons within each knowledge group revealed a significant misleading effect for the high - knowledge sub - jects ( t ( 4 ) = 7 . 76 , p < . 01 ] but none for the low - knowledge subjects ( 1 ( 4 ) = 1 . 20 , p > . 29 ] . Interestingly , although the main effect for warning was not significant [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 2 . 32 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p < . 15 ] , the manipulation appeared to have the opposite ofits intended effect , with a greater proportion ofcorrect solutions over all in the no - warning condition ( M = . 46 ) than in the warning condition ( M = . 37 ) . Although the warning was supposed to help the experts , it seemed instead to hurt the performance of low - knowledge subjects , as the knowl edge level X warning condition interaction was margin ally significant [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 3 . 54 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p < . 08 ] . A post hoc comparison for the low - knowledge subjects , using Scheffe ' s test , indicated that the low - knowledge subjects made fewer correct responses on both neutral and misleading items in the warning condition than in the no - warning condition [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 8 . 44 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p < . 01 ] . The same test on the performance ofhigh - knowledge subjects yielded no difference between warning and no warning conditions ( F < 0 . 1 ) . Although the three - way ( knowledge level X warning X trial type ) interaction was not significant , a planned com parison computed for just the high - knowledge subjects revealed that a warning did not significantly improve per formance on misleading versus neutral items for the high knowledge subjects [ F ( I , 16 ) = 1 . 89 , MS e = 0 . 02 , p > . 10 ] , indicating that a warning did not lessen the misleading effect for the high - knowledge subjects . Taken together , these results suggest that , rather than selectively helping the high - knowledge subjects to overcome their fixation on misleading items , the warning manipulation may have caused fixation on all items to some extent for the low knowledge subjects . Finally , as in Experiment 1 , high - knowledge subjects tended to offer a greater number of incorrect baseball related solutions on the misleading trials ( . 21 , SD = . 15 ) , or intrusions , than did the low - knowledge subjects ( . 14 , SD = . 09 ) , although this result was not significant [ t ( 18 ) = 1 . 24 , p < . 23 ] . Response time . A 2 X 2 X 2 ( knowledge level X warning X trial type ) ANaYA , using response time as a dependent measure , was computed . The means for each condition are presented in Table 3 . There was no signifi cant effect of knowledge level on response time , nor was there a significant main effect that was due to the warn ing . A significant main effect was observed for trial type [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 19 . 93 , MS e = 13 . 73 , p < . 001 ] , with mislead ing trials taking longer than neutral trials . Further , the overall knowledge level X trial type interaction was sig nificant , indicating that , regardless of warning condition , the high - knowledge subjects showed a significantly greater slowdown on the misleading trials , as compared with neutral trials , than did the low - knowledge subjects [ F ( 1 , 16 ) = 8 . 74 , MS e = 13 . 73 , p < . 01 ] . Discussion Experiment 2 replicated the main result of Experi ment I - namely , that , on misleading trials , unwarned high - knowledge subjects were less likely than unwarned low - knowledge subjects to arrive at a correct solution , in dicating that the high - knowledge subjects were fixated in their problem - solving attempts . Further , although there did seem to be a slight improvement on misleading items , warning the high - knowledge subjects not to use their do main knowledge did not significantly improve their per formance . The warning manipulation seems to have had an un intended effect on the low - knowledge subjects . The de crease in the proportion ofcorrect solutions for the low knowledge subjects on all trials in the warning condition suggests that the low - knowledge subjects were fixated in some way by the instruction not to think of baseball related solutions . The suggestion not to use one ' s baseball knowledge may have compelled the low - knowledge sub jects to look for baseball - related solutions , similar to the effects ofsuggestions not to think of white bears or pink elephants that Wegner ( 1989 ) has observed . Unfortu nately , the subjects were not asked whether they actually believedthe warning , and the subjectscould also have been driven to look for baseball - related solutions if they felt they were being deceived by the experimenter . Although it is unclear whether the warning failed to significantly improve performance because subjects were unable to stop thinking about baseball or because subjects did not believe the warning , these results are consistent with a number ofexperiments that have found that people have difficulty avoiding the use of stored or presented examples in creativity tasks , even when they are warned not to use such information ( Jansson & S . M . Smith , 1991 ; S . M . Smith & Tindell , 1997 ; S . M . Smith et aI . , 1993 ; Ward , 1994 ) . Further , this experiment did provide a clear replication of Experiment 1 . In the nonwarning condition , along with an observed misleading effect on the propor tion of correct solutions , high - knowledge subjects had longer response times on misleading versus neutral prob lems than did low - knowledge subjects . Also , as in Experi ment I , the high - knowledge subjects were more likely to make intrusions ( incorrect baseball - related solutions ) on the misleading items than were the low - knowledge sub - EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 723 jects . These results offer converging evidence that the high - knowledge subjects were fixated in their solution at tempts by the activation of their domain knowledge . EXPERIMENT 3 An important distinction should be made between the mental set and fixation that are due to domain knowledge , observed in the present study , and the kinds of mental sets that havebeen considered in the literature , for themost part , that are experimentally produced . Traditional demon strations of mental set and fixation have used sets that are externally imposed on the subject through the presen tation ofan object in a specific context or through prac tice at a task prior to the experimental task . On the other hand , the proposed fixation from expertise is the result ofan internally generated set , and this may lead to some interesting differences in how the fixation that is due to extensive domain knowledgemayor may not be overcome . Most prominently , it would seem that , if the fixation observed in the high - knowledge individuals is the result of the easy activation ofa well - formed knowledge base , simply introducing an incubation period may not do any thing to help free a subject from the fixation that is due to an internally generated set . However , an incubation period may help break fixation from an externally imposed set , as the delay would allow for the dissipation ofthe in appropriate activation . This would , in tum , suggest that distributed effort toward problem solution ( i . e . , taking a break during the solution phase ) may be the most effective tactic for less knowledgeable subjects . More knowledge able subjects , on the other hand , should not benefit from a distributed effort , since their success depends on the dis missing of internally activated irrelevant stimuli . Even after a delay , high - knowledge subjects should experience the same fixation when their domain knowledge is acti vated by the content of the reintroduced problem . In a third experiment , the extent to which the mental set and fixation that are a function ofdomain knowledge are different from an externally imposed set was investi gated . As noted previously , S . M . Smith and Blankenship ( 1991 ) have demonstrated that fixation can be induced by the presentation of irrelevant word associations be fore or during the RAT . They have further shown that the fixation that is due to such priming dissipates after an in cubation period , presumably as the irrelevant activation fades . The fixation that is due to internally generated sets , however , may not be as easy to overcome , since the activation of irrelevant word meanings comes from the expert ' s domain knowledge . To test this notion , the first experiment was repeated , but this time fixation was in duced . One halfofthe high - and low - knowledge subjects were primed for the misleading meanings of terms in cluded in the RAT ( i . e . , baseball terms for the baseball tri als and irrelevant associations for the neutral trials ) . Fur ther , all the subjects performed the RAT twice - half immediately after the first attempt and half with a 10 min period of incubation intervening , during which the 724 WILEY Table 4 Mean Proportions ( and Standard Deviations ) of Correct Solutions , Intrusions , and Response Times in Experiment 3 No FixationInduced FixationInduced Correct Intrusions RT Correct Intrusions RT Condition M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD LowknowledgeNeutral . 53 . 24 21 . 7 6 . 4 . 58 . 16 19 . 3 5 . 7 Misleading . 46 . 19 . 14 . 10 25 . 7 10 . 1 . 32 . 15 . 30 . 17 24 . 8 8 . 2 Effect . 07 4 . 0 . 26 5 . 5 HighknowledgeNeutral . 64 . 16 17 . 8 4 . 8 . 58 . 19 18 . 5 6 . 4 Misleading . 27 . 15 . 20 . 12 27 . 8 7 . 1 . 36 . 21 . 33 . 30 23 . 7 6 . 8 Effect . 37 10 . 0 . 22 5 . 2 Note - Misleading Effect for CorrectSolutions = ( Proportioncorrecton neutral items ) - ( Proportioncorrect on mislead ingitems ) . MisleadingEffectforResponse Time = ( Responsetimeonmisleadingitems ) - ( Responsetimeonneutralitems ) . subjects performed demanding tasks . It was predicted that low - knowledge subjects would show an effect due to the fixation manipulation , as wellas more ofan incubation effect , as compared with high - knowledge subjects . High knowledge subjects should show neither an effect due to the fixation manipulation nor any improvement due to incubation . Method Subjects . Forty volunteers from the university community who responded to newspaper , poster , and usenet advertisements partic ipated in this experiment and received $ 5 . The subjects were run in groups of I to 4 . Because baseball knowledge was not assessed until the end of the experiment , an additional 3 subjects were run to com plete the design . In all cases , only the first 5 subjects run in each cell were used for analysis , yielding equal numbers of high - and low knowledge subjects in each condition . Procedure . The procedure was the same as that in Experiment I , except that halfof the subjects performeda short - term memory task prior to the experiment . This was the fixation - induced condition . The other halfof the subjects did not perform the short - term mem ory task and began the experiment with the RAT , as in Experi ment I . This wasthe nonfixation condition . In addition , all the sub jects received the RAT twice . Incubation was manipulated by having half of the subjects perform the second RAT immediately after the first ( no - incubation condition ) , whereas the other halfre ceived the second RAT after the mental rotation , anagram , and Gestalt completion tasks ( incubation condition ) . The subjects in the no - incubation condition performed these tasks after the second RAT . All the subjects then completed the baseball term recognition test and the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire . The task that was used to induce fixation was based on a proce dure developed by S . M . Smith and Schumacher ( 1992 ) . The sub jects were told that they were performing a short - term memory task . Three words were presented on the screen at the same time . Sub jects had 5 sec to find two 2 - word phrases that could be made out of the words . They then had to remember those phrases for 10 sec , after which they were asked to type in their responses . The words used for this task were two words from each RAT item and either the baseball - related solution ( for the baseball trials ) or a word that formed phrases with the words but was not the solution ( for the neu tral trials ) . The stimuli that were used for each item are included in the Appendix in parentheses . The actual presentation order of the words was such that no two words in succession formed a phrase . The order of the items was randomized for each subject . At no time inthis experiment were the subjects told that the study could be related to baseball . For both administrations of the RAT , all the subjects received 10 neutral trials and 10 misleading baseball trials . ResultsPerformance on the first RAT was analyzed in terms ofproportion ofcorrect solutions and response time for each knowledge level and fixation group . In addition , performance on the second administration ofthe RATwas analyzed in terms of improvement over the first admin istration as a function ofknowledge group , fixation , and incubation group . Ofspecific interest were replicating the misleading effects found for high - knowledge subjects in earlier experiments , testing whether a misleading effect could be induced in low - knowledge subjects by the fixa tion manipulation , and , ifso , testing whether it could then be attenuated by incubation . Baseball knowledge . Performance on the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire ranged from 3 to 33 correct answers , with those subjects scoring less than 15catego rized as low knowledge and those subjects scoring 15 or more categorized as high knowledge . The mean scores and gender breakdown for each condition are shown in Table 1 . All the subjects indicated the correct baseball terms on the recognition test . Correct solutions on the first remote associates task . Using the same acceptability rating procedure for correct solutions as that in Experiments 1 and 2 , a 2 X 2 X 2 ( knowledge level X fixation X trial type ) ANOVA was computed on the number of correct solutions . Table4 pre sents the mean proportion correct for each condition . No significant main effects were found for either knowledge level or fixation . There was a significant main effect for trial type [ F ( l , 36 ) = 42 . 53 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 0001 ] , as a greater number ofcorrect solutions were offered for neu tral trials than for misleading trials . Further , the three - way interaction between fixation condition , knowledge level , and trial type was significant [ F ( I , 36 ) = 4 . 93 , MS e = 0 . 03 , P < . 03 ] . Planned multiple comparisons were per formed for each fixation condition and knowledge level . As was found in Experiments I and 2 , a planned multiple comparison in the nonfixation condition indicated that high - knowledge subjects were less likelyto make a correct EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 725 TableS Mean Proportions ( and Standard Deviations ) of Unsolved Items Solved at Retest in Experiment 3 Low Knowledge High Knowledge No incubation Incubation No incubation Incubation Condition M SD M SD Effect M SD M SD Effect No fixationNeutral . 32 . 27 . 40 . 40 . 08 . 56 . 29 . 21 . 22 - . 35 Misleading . 07 . 15 . 21 . 29 . 14 . 12 . 16 . 11 . 07 - . 01 FixationNeutral . 20 . 22 . 35 . 27 . 15 . 50 . 29 . 29 . 10 - . 21 Misleading . 11 . 17 . 27 . 29 . 16 . 30 . 22 . 09 . 12 - . 21 Note - Incubation Effect = ( Incubation improvement ) - ( No incubation improvement ) . response on misleading trials , as compared with neutral trials , than were low - knowledge subjects [ F ( 1 , 18 ) = 6 . 36 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 02 ] . Pairwise comparisons within knowl edge group revealed a significant misleading effect for the high - knowledge subjects [ t ( 9 ) = 4 . 69 , P < . 001 ] but none for the low - knowledge subjects [ t ( 9 ) = 1 . 15 , p > . 27 ] . The same overall multiple comparison did not approach significance in the fixation - induced condition ( F < I ) . Planned pairwise comparisons were performed to test the effectsof the fixation manipulation for each knowledge group . The fixation manipulation did have its intended effect among the low - knowledge subjects , as they made fewercorrect responses on misleading versus neutral trials in the fixation condition [ t ( 9 ) = 9 . 75 , p < . 0001 ] . High knowledge subjects made fewer correct responses on misleading versus neutral items in the fixation condition as well [ t ( 9 ) = 2 . 50 , p < . 03 ] . Thus , both high - knowledge and low - knowledge subjects showed a misleading effect in the fixation condition . Further , the fixation manipulation significantly in creased the proportion ofintrusions on misleading trials among both the low - and high - knowledge subjects [ t ( 38 ) = 2 . 57 , P < . 01 ] . The mean proportions of intrusions for each condition and their standard deviations are pre sented in Table 4 . As in the first two experiments , in the nonfixation conditions , high - knowledge subjects tended to make more intrusions overall ( . 20 , SD = . 12 ) than did low - knowledge subjects ( . 14 , SD = . 10 ) but not signifi cantly so [ t ( 18 ) = 1 . 21 , P < . 24 ] . Taken together , these results suggest that the fixation - inducing procedure used in Experiment 3 was successful at inducing a set in the low - knowledge subjects that was similar to that of the high - knowledge subjects . Response time on the first remote associates task . A 2 X 2 X 2 ( knowledge level X fixation X trial type ) ANOVA , using response time as a dependent measure , was computed . The means for each condition are presented in Table 4 . There was no main effect for either knowledge level or fixation . A significant main effect was observed for trial type [ F ( 1 , 36 ) = 30 . 50 , MS e = 24 . 98 , P < . 0001 ] , with misleading trials taking longer than neutral trials . The three - way interaction between fixation , knowledge level , and trial type approached significance [ F ( I , 36 ) = 2 . 72 , MS e = 24 . 98 , P < . 11 ] . On the basis of the results of Experiment 2 , a multiple comparison in the nonfixa tion condition indicated that high - knowledge subjects tended to have longer response times on misleading versus neutral trials than did low - knowledge subjects [ F ( I , 18 ) = 3 . 45 , MS e = 26 . 71 , p < . 08 ] , which is similar to the result from Experiment 2 . Improvement on second remote associates task . The measure of improvement from the first RAT to the second was taken from S . M . Smith and Blankenship ( 1991 ) : improvement = ( number newly solved at retest ) / ( total number ofproblems - number solved at first test ) . This measure represents the proportion of problems not solved during the initial test that were correctly solved at retest . A 2 X 2 X 2 X 2 ANOVA ( knowledge level X fixation X incubation X trial type ) was computed , using this measure . There was a significant effect oftrial type [ F ( I , 32 ) = 15 . 22 , MS e = 0 . 05 p < . 001 ] - that is , at retest , more ofthe unsolved neutral problems were solved than of the unsolved misleading problems . Further , a two - way interaction between knowledge level and incubation was significant [ F ( I , 32 ) = 8 . 59 , MS e = 0 . 05 , P < . 01 ] . As is illustrated in the third and last column of Table 5 , low knowledge subjects solved more problems at retest when there was a delay ( incubation period ) between their ini tial test and retest than when the retest immediately fol lowedthe initial test . In other words , low - knowledge sub jects demonstrated a positive incubation effect . On the other hand , high - knowledge subjects solved more un solved problems at retest when the retest immediately fol lowed the initial test than when there was a delay , result ing in negative incubation effects . Discussion The nonfixation condition replicated the results ofEx periments I and 2 , as high - knowledge subjects were sig nificantly less likely than low - knowledge subjects to pro duce a correct response to misleading trials in the first RAT , demonstrating a mental set and fixation that were due to domain knowledge . High - knowledge subjects also tended to have longer response times on misleading trials than did low - knowledge subjects , which is similar to the finding from Experiment 2 . Low - knowledge subjects showed a significant mis leading effect that was due to the fixation manipulation , 726 WILEY Dependent MISLEADING EFFECTS ACROSS EXPERIMENTS Table 6 Misleading Effects ( and Standard Deviations ) Across All Three Experiments Note - Misleading Effect for Correct Solutions = ( Proportion for neu tral items ) - ( Proportion for misleading items ) . Misleading Effect for Response Time = ( Response time on misleading items ) - ( Response time on neutral items ) . In three experiments , a clear effect offixation that was due to domain knowledge was observed in problem solv ing , suggesting that expertise can indeed instill a mental set and promote fixation . Across all experiments , the subjects with the most domain - related knowledge were least able to solve problems correctly when their knowl edge suggested an inappropriate solution . Greater domain knowledge was also related to slower overall response times and more intrusions . Even though these additional effects did not reach significance in each individual ex periment , when Experiment 1and the nontreatment con - dependent variables - proportion ofintrusions made and response time - were less consistent . For response time , misleading effects were significant for high - knowledge subjects in Experiment 2 and neared significance in Ex periment 3 , but not in Experiment 1 . High - knowledge sub jects tended to make more intrusions on misleading trials , but the effect was not significant in anyone experiment . Although effects were not always significant , however , trends consistent with a greater misleading effect for high knowledge subjects were present . Thus , to test for overall misleading effects for high - knowledge subjects , the data for Experiment 1 and the nontreatment conditions ofEx periments 2 and 3 were analyzed together . A 2 X 2 ( knowledge level X trial type ) ANOVA re vealed a significant knowledge level by trial type inter action for all three dependent variables . Across experi ments , high - knowledge subjects made fewer correct solutions [ F ( l , 52 ) = 17 . 66 , MS e = 0 . 03 , p < . 0001 ] , had longer response times on misleading versus neutral items [ F ( l , 52 ) = 8 . 15 , MS e = 23 . 08 , p < . 01 ] , and were more likely to make intrusions on misleading items than were low - knowledge subjects [ t ( 52 ) = 2 . 25 , p < . 03 ] . The over all means for each variable are presented in Table 6 . Additional analyses were performed on just the most knowledgeable subjects . As already noted , the high knowledge groups in the present experiments scored much lower than the high - knowledge groups from previ ous baseball - knowledge studies ( e . g . , Voss et al . , 1980 ) . The 10 highest scoring subjects from across the nonma nipulated conditions ( Experiment 1 , the nonwarning con dition of Experiment 2 , and the non - fixation - induced condition ofExperiment 3 ) of the three experiments had a mean score on the Baseball Knowledge Questionnaire of32 . 3 and were comprised of9 males and 1 female . This highest scoring group was significantly less likely to solve the misleading problems correctly ( . 17 ) than the neutral problems [ . 59 ; F ( l , 9 ) = 62 . 02 , MS e = 0 . 01 , P < . 0001 ] and made a significant proportion ofintrusions on misleading items [ . 30 ; F ( 1 , 9 ) = 8 . 75 , MS e = 0 . 05 , p < . 02 ] . Further , the highest knowledge subjects took signifi cantly longer on misleading trials ( 30 . 5 sec ) than on neu tral trials [ 20 . 7 sec ; F ( l , 9 ) = 10 . 30 , MS e = 47 . 34 , p < . 01 ) . The results of these separate analyses confirm that even the highest knowledge subjects experienced significant misleading effects in their problem solving . GENERAL DISCUSSION SD M SD M SD M Correct Solutions Intrusions RT Condition as they made fewer correct solutions on misleading items than on neutral items when they had been primed on irrel evant solutions . High - knowledge subjects , on the other hand , performed worse on misleading items , regardless offixation condition . This finding is consistent with the idea that the expert ' s mental set may be the result of the automatic activation oftheir domain knowledge . For the high - knowledge subjects , the priming ofthe irrelevant so lutions would be redundant with the activation that may already be occurring because oftheir domain knowledge ; thus , the priming tasks should have had no additional ef fect on their problem solving . In addition to an induced fixation effect , an incubation effect was observed for the low - knowledge subjects . As predicted , low - knowledge subjects showed more benefit from a delay between problem - solving attempts on both neutral and misleading items . On the other hand , a negative incubation effect was observed for the high - knowledge subjects , as they showed more benefit from the no - delay condition . High - knowledge subjects showed significant improvement on both neutral and misleading items when the second problem - solving attempt immediately fol lowed the first . The fact that a delay had such opposite ef fects on performance in these two conditions suggests that there may be two quite different ways of escaping fixa tion . When impasses are generated by particular problem solving attempts or contexts , they may be more likely to be overcome by incubation . On the other hand , the present results suggest that , when impasses are related to the pos session ofdomain knowledge , a continued or massed ef fort may allow for more improvement . LowknowledgeNeutral . 52 . 24 21 . 5 8 . 5 Misleading . 43 . 16 . 13 . 12 24 . 6 10 . 1 Effect . 09 3 . 8 High knowledge Neutral . 57 . 17 21 . 0 9 . 9 Misleading . 20 . 17 . 26 . 27 29 . 4 10 . 1 Effect . 37 8 . 4 A significant misleading effect on the proportion of correct solutions reached by high - knowledge subjects was found in Experiment 1 and replicated in the no - warning condition of Experiment 2 , as well as in the nonfixation condition of Experiment 3 . Significant effects for the other ditions in Experiments 2 and 3 were examined together , greater misleading effects were found for high - knowledge subjects than for low - knowledge subjects on all three variables . The poorer performance of high - knowledge subjects on the misleading problems is consistent with the hy pothesis that domain knowledge can act as a mental set . It appears that domain knowledge not only biases a first solution attempt but also fixates the high - knowledge sub ject by defining and narrowing the search space , prevent ing a broad search , and decreasing the chances offinding an appropriate solution . Further , in Experiment 2 , warning the subjects not to use their knowledge for problem solv ing did not improve performance on misleading items . As a result , the subjects at lower levels of knowledge ( but not no - knowledge ) were more flexible in their prob lem solving , reaching correct solutions more often than the most knowledgeable subjects . The specific conditions that this effect was observed under were ( I ) on a creative problem - solving task , where creative is defined as requir ing productive ( as opposed to reproductive ) thinking , and ( 2 ) on a task that was ofa level of complexity such that novices could engage in problem solving to the same ex tent as experts . The inherent tension ofprior knowledge as both facil itator and inhibitor ofcreativity has been ofinterest since the earliest studies on insight problems ( e . g . , Maier , 1931 , 1945 ) and has received attention recently within the cre ative cognition literature ( S . M . Smith , Ward , & Finke , 1995 ; Ward , S . M . Smith , & Vaid , 1997 ) . There is no doubt that extensive domain knowledge is critical for the solution ofmany problems . Prior knowledge is what pro vides the solver with possible solutions or associations in the first place . In many cases , more domain knowledge means access to a wider variety ofsolutions . Within their domains , extensive domain knowledge allows experts to work on problems that would be very difficult or impos sible for less knowledgeable individuals to attempt . And , as the complexity of a particular problem - solving task increases , the advantages ofextensive domain knowledge in allowing an expert to approach a problem may wash out the potential disadvantages . However , it seems there are also situations where prior knowledge , whether ofa do main or of examples , may be detrimental to problem solv ing , by making the solver vulnerable to fixation effects . In sum , the contribution of the present study is that it extends earlier work on fixation in problem solving in two ways . First , the present study demonstrated that mental set and fixation may occur as the result ofdomain knowledge , and second , the third experiment , in particu lar , suggests that there are important differences between mental blocks that are the result of domain knowledge and those that are the result of the experimental context . How Is Mental Set Due to Domain Knowledge Broken ? The source ofa mental set seems to play an important role in determining how fixation may be best overcome EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 727 and creative thinking achieved . Not only was fixation observed in the problem solving ofhigh - knowledge sub jects in all experiments , but , in Experiment 3 , the fixation manipulation was also successful at fixating the low knowledge subjects through priming irrelevant solutions . Further , for low - knowledge subjects , the fixation induced by this manipulation was attenuated by introducing a delay between solution attempts . For the high - knowledge subjects , however , fixation was lessened when the sec ond problem - solving attempt immediately followed the first . In other words , low - knowledge subjects demon strated more flexible thinking as a result ofa distributed effort at problem solving , whereas high - knowledge sub jects demonstrated more flexible thinking as the result of a massed effort . One explanation for these findings is that , whereas breaking the novice set may depend on simply waiting for the activation of recently primed irrelevant associa tions to fade ( S . M . Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) , break ing the expert set may require more active suppression or inhibition of the irrelevant solution paths that are acti vated by prior knowledge . Since each time an expert newly encounters domain - related information irrelevant solutions may be reactivated by domain knowledge via retrieval from long - term memory , the expert would not benefit from a break between repeated solution attempts , or incubation . Instead , during the course ofthe problem solving , experts may need to suppress or inhibit the ac tivation for irrelevant solutions that are generated by their knowledge , which would more likely result from continuous or massed solution attempts . Along these lines , Mednick himself ( 1962 ) suggested that massed sessions ofcreative work should be more successful than distributed sessions . Mednick offered the view that it is only once one gets past " the conventional and stereo typed associations to the elements ofa problem " that one can begin to entertain the more remote associations which are the key to creative solutions . Especially for ex perts whose domain - related associations may be quite ro bust , it may take time to get beyond initial solution at tempts , thereby suggesting that experts ' creative problem solving would benefit from a massed effort . Thus , the observed negative incubation effect can be seen to be the result ofhigh - knowledge subjects being able to suppress or inhibit the activation of irrelevant solutions only when problem - solving attempts were continuous . One difficulty with this explanation for the observed negative incubation effect is that the most improvement was seen for high - knowledge subjects on the neutral items . If experts are benefiting from a massed session because it allows them to suppress irrelevant solutions prompted by their domain knowledge , especially perfor mance on the misleading items should improve . It could be that the fixation of the high - knowledge subjects on mis leading items may have caused a more general interfer ence on all items and that a prolonged effort allowed the high - knowledge subjects to lessen this overall interfer ence , but an improvement in misleading items along with 728 WILEY neutral items in all conditions would make this a more satisfying explanation . Instead , the most improvement on misleading items was seen when the high - knowledge subjects were in the fix ation condition . In some respects , the fixation condition could be seen as a hint where , although the right answer was not given , the wrong answerwas , explicitly . Given this hint , high - knowledge subjects in the no - delay condition were the most successful at solving misleading problems . This explanation of how high - knowledge subjects over come their fixation on misleading problems is consistent with the opportunistic - assimilation hypothesis , which sug gests that the advantage ofan incubation period is not in providing a time in which inappropriate activations may fade , but in providing an opportunity for the solver to en counter relevant cues for solution ( Seifert , Meyer , David son , Patalano , & Yaniv , 1995 ) . In support ofthis explana tion , Yaniv , Meyer , and Davidson ( 1995 ) found incubation effects on a rare - word definition task only when subjects were exposed to the target word between problem - solving attempts . Outside ofhighly controlled experimental con texts , it seems quite plausible that the successful solution ofpreviously unsolved problems could depend on a com bination ofthese two mechanisms - that is , both the fading ofirrelevant associations and the exposure to relevant cues would improve the chances ofsuccessful solution . How ever , the negative incubation effect observed here among high - knowledge subjects is not fully explained by either the active - suppression or the opportunistic - assimilation hypotheses , or by both ofthem together . Further investi gation is needed to answer the interesting questions of when negative incubation effects might be found in gen eral and why the high - knowledge subjects improved more on neutral items without a delay and without hints from the fixation condition in particular . Expertise as Mental Set It is important to note that the present study did not in vestigate the effects of expertise on domain - related cre ative problem solving per se ; rather , it provided a demon stration ofhow the possession of a largeamount ofdomain knowledge may constrain the generation of solutions in the problem solving ofexperts . There is reason to believe that the mental set that was due to domain knowledge demonstrated in this study may be generalizable across many domains of expertise and problem - solving tasks . The Marchant et al . ( 1991 ) result , in which experienced accountants were less able to adapt to a new tax law , can also be seen as an example offixation , in that experts fail to consider relevant new information because oftheir pre vious knowledge . Also , to the extent that experts may be seen to rely heavily on their prior knowledge and less on the specific information given for problem representa tion , it is plausible that they may be fixated by that knowl edge . And there are studies in many domains that suggest that , in fact , experts tend to consider less information than do novices in their problem solving . For example , Chiesi , Spilich , and Voss ( 1979 ) found that subjects with high baseball knowledge used less information to make recognition judgements about baseball passages than did low - knowledge subjects . Among similar studies , Devine and Kozlowski ( 1995 ) found that subjects with high bas ketball knowledge made better basketball - related deci sions than novices but searched for less information during solution . Experts also used less information than did nov ices in auditing ( Bedard , 1989 ) , medical internship and residency decisions , and financial analysis ( Johnson , 1988 ) . Lesgold ( 1984 , personal communication ) , has sug gested that expert radiologists not only spend less time than less skilled individuals looking at X rays and fixate at fewer locations , but also report more information about the X rays than could possibly be available from their fixation points . Isenberg ( 1986 ) found that experienced business managers solving simulated management prob lems used less of the information available and often leapt to solutions before the problems were fully pre sented . Similar results have been found in relation to medical diagnosis ( de Graaff , 1989 ) . It is not just the lack of search but the early commitment to a solution path seen in these last few studies that suggests that experts in a number of domains may be susceptible to mental set and fixation in their problem solving . Over the past 20 years , many studies have examined how the possession of a large , structured body of do main knowledge enables experts to excel at memory and problem - solving tasks . Previous studies , using the same tests of baseball knowledge as the present study , found that high - knowledge subjects have more extensive , inte grated , and conceptual memory of domain - related text ( Spilich et aI . , 1979 ) and process domain - related text more efficiently ( Fincher - Kiefer et al . , 1988 ) . However , in the present experiments , the possession of the same domain knowledge led to inferior performance in problem solving . Like other characteristics of expertise , the advantage of extensive knowledge in generating problem representa tions may benefit problem solving in most domain - related circumstances . Extensive domain knowledge allows ex perts to infer missing information , make assumptions , and post constraints on a problem space , all ofwhich can lead to a narrower and usually more efficient search for a so lution . But the present study suggests that the influence ofdomain knowledge on generating problem representa tions may also have its costs , putting experts at a disad vantage when remote associations must be considered or combined in novel ways . REFERENCES ADELSON , B . ( 1984 ) . When novices surpass experts : The difficulty ofa task may increase with expertise . Journal ofExperimental Psychology : Learning . Memory , & Cognition , 10 , 483 - 495 . ARKES , H . R . , & FREEDMAN , M . R . ( 1984 ) . A demonstration ofthe costs and benefits ofexpertise in recognition memory . Memory & Cognition , 12 , 84 - 89 . BEDARD , J . ( 1989 ) . Expertise in auditing : Myth or reality ? Accounting . Organizations & Society , 14 , 113 - 131 . BEDARD , J . , & CHI , M . ( 1992 ) . Expertise . Current Directions in Psy chological Science , 1 , 135 - 139 . CHASE , W . G . , & SIMON , H . A . ( 1973 ) . The mind ' s eye in chess . In W . G . Chase ( Ed . ) , Visualinformation processing ( pp . 2I5 - 28 I ) . New York : Academic Press . CHI , M . T . H . , GLASER , R . , & FARR , M . J . ( 1988 ) . The nature ofexper tise . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . CHIESI , H . , SPILICH , G . , & Voss , J . F . ( 1979 ) . Acquisition of domain related information in relation to high and low domain knowledge . Journal ofVerbalLearning & VerbalBehavior , 18 , 257 - 273 . DE GRAAFF , E . ( 1989 ) . A test of medical problem solving scored by nurses and doctors : The handicap of expertise . Medical Education , 23 , 381 - 388 . DEVINE , D . J . , & KOZLOWSKI , S . ( 1995 ) . Domain - specific knowledge and task characteristics in decision making . OrganizationalBehavior & Human Decision Processes , 64 , 294 - 306 . DUNCKER , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( Whole No . 270 ) . ERICSSON , K . A . , & SMITH , J . ( 1991 ) . Towarda general theory ofex pertise . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ERICSSON , K . A . , & STASZEWSKI , J . ( 1989 ) . Skilled memory and exper tise : Mechanisms ofexceptional performance . In D . Klahr & K . Ko tovsky ( Eds . ) , Complex information processing : The impact ofHer bert A . Simon ( pp . 235 - 268 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . FiNCHER - KIEFER , R . , POST , T . , GREENE , T . , & Voss , J . F . ( 1988 ) . On the role ofprior knowledge and task demands in the processing oftext . Journal ofMemory & Language , 27 , 416 - 428 . FRENSCH , P . A . , & STERNBERG , R . J . ( 1989 ) . Expertise and intelligent thinking : When is it worse to know better ? In R . 1 . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology ofhuman intelligence ( Vol . V , pp . 157 188 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . GLENBERG , A . M . , & EPSTEIN , W . ( 1987 ) . Inexpert calibration ofcom prehension . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 84 - 93 . HECHT , H . , & PROFFITT , D . R . ( 1995 ) . The price of expertise : Effects of experience on the water - level task . Psychological Science , 6 , 90 95 . ISENBERG , D . J . ( 1986 ) . Thinking and managing : A verbal protocol analysis of managerial problem solving . Academy ofManagement Journal , 29 , 775 - 788 . JANSSON , D . G . , & SMITH , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Stud ies , 12 , 3 - 1 I . JOHNSON , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Expertise and decision under uncertainty . In M . T . H . Chi , R . Glaser , & M . 1 . Farr . ( Eds . ) , The nature ofexpertise ( pp . 209 - 228 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . LESGOLD , A . ( 1984 ) . Acquiring expertise . In J . R . Anderson & S . M . Kosslyn ( Eds . ) , Essays in honor ofGordon Bower ( pp . 31 - 60 ) . San Francisco : Freeman . LUCHINS , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanization in problem solving : The effect ofEinstellung . Psychological Monographs , 54 ( Whole No . 248 ) . MAIER , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans : II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal ofComparative Psychology , 12 , 181 - 194 . MAIER , N . R . F . ( 1945 ) . Reasoning in humans : III . The mechanisms of equivalent stimuli and of reasoning . Journal ofExperimental Psy chology , 35 , 349 - 360 . MARCHANT , G . , ROBINSON , J . , ANDERSON , U . , & SCHADEWALD , M . ( 1991 ) . Analogical transfer and expertise in legal reasoning . Organi zational Behavior & Human Decision Processes , 48 , 272 - 290 . MEDNICK , S . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psy chological Review , 69 , 200 - 232 . MYLES - WORSLEY , M . , JOHNSTON . W . , & SIMONS , M . A . ( 1988 ) . The in - EXPERTISE AS MENTAL SET 729 fluence of expertise on X - ray image processing . Journal ofExperi mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 14 , 553 - 557 . PATEL , V . L . , & GROEN , G . 1 . ( 1991 ) . The general and specific nature of medical expertise . In K . A . Ericsson & 1 . Smith . ( Eds . ) , Toward a general theory ofexpertise ( pp . 93 - 125 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . SCHMIDT , H . G . , & BOSHUIZEN , H . P . A . ( 1993 ) . On the origin ofinterme diate effects in clinical case recall . Memory & Cognition , 21 , 338 - 351 . SCHNEIDER , W . ( 1988 ) . Micro Experimental Laboratory : An integrated system for IBM PC compatibles . Behavior Research Methods . In struments , & Computers , 20 , 206 - 217 . SEIFERT , C . M . , MEYER , D . E . , DAVIDSON , N . S . , PATALANO , A . L . , & YANIV , I . ( 1995 ) . Demystification of cognitive insight : Opportunis tic assimilation and the prepared - mind perspective . In R . 1 . Sternberg and 1 . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature ofinsight ( pp . 65 - 124 ) . Cam bridge , MA : MIT Press . SHEPARD , R . N . , & METZLER , J . ( 1971 ) . Mental rotation of three dimensional objects . Science , 171 , 691 - 703 . SMITH , S . M . , & BLANKENSHIP , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Incubation and the per sistence offixation in problem solving . American Journal ofPsychol ogy , 104 , 61 - 87 . SMITH , S . M . , & SCHUMACHER , J . S . ( 1992 , April ) . A test oftransfer appropriatefixation in problem salving . Paper presented at the 1992 Midwestern Psychological Association , Chicago . SMITH , S . M . , & TINDELL , D . R . ( 1997 ) . Memory blocks in word frag ment completion caused by involuntary retrieval oforthographically related primes . Journal ofExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Mem ory , & Cognition , 23 , 1 - 16 . SMITH , S . M . , WARD , T . B . , & FINKE , R . A . ( Eds . ) ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . SMITH , S . M . , WARD , T . B . , & SCHUMACHER , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Constraining effects ofexamples in a creative generationtask . Memory & Cognition , 21 , 837 - 845 . SPILICH G . J . , VESONDER , G . T . , CHIESI , H . J . , & Voss , J . E ( 1979 ) . Text processing of domain - related information for individuals with high and low domain knowledge . Journal ofVerbalLearning & VerbalBe havior , 18 , 275 - 290 STREET , R . E ( 1931 ) . A Gestalt completion task ( Teacher ' s College Con tributions to Education , No . 481 ) . New York : Columbia University , Teachers College Press . Voss , J . E , VESONDER , G . , & SPILICH , H . ( 1980 ) . Text generation and re call by high - knowledge and low - knowledge individuals . Journal of VerbalLearning & VerbalBehavior , 19 , 651 - 667 . WARD , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role ofcategory struc ture in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 , 1 - 40 . WARD , T . B . , SMITH , S . M . , & VAID , 1 . ( Eds . ) ( 1997 ) . Creative thought : An investigation ofconceptualstructures and processes . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . WEGNER , D . M . ( 1989 ) . Whitebears and other unwantedthoughts . New York : Viking / Penguin . WEISBERG , R . w . , & ALBA , J . W . ( 1981 ) . An examination ofthe alleged role of " fixation " in the solution of several " insight " problems . Journal ofExperimental Psychology : General , 110 , 169 - 192 . WOODWORTH , R . , & SCHLOSBERG , H . ( 1954 ) . Experimentalpsychology . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . YANIV , I . , MEYER , D . E . , & DAVIDSON , N . S . ( 1995 ) . Dynamic memory processed inretrieving answers to questions : Recall failures , judgments ofknowing , and acquisition ofinformation . Journal ofExperimental Psychology : Learning . Memory , & Cognition , 21 , 1509 - 1521 . ( Continued on next page ) 730 WILEY APPENDIX Remote Associates and ( Short - Term Memory Task ) Stimuli Word 1 Word 2 Word3A Solution A Word3B Solution B 1 . LICK ( SPRINKLE ) ( MINES ) SALT ( GOLD ) 2 . ( BAR ) ( HARD ) CANE CANDY ( STOOL ) 3 . TYPE ( GHOST ) ( STORY ) WRITER ( BOOK ) 4 . ( CAT ) SLEEP ( BOARD ) WALK ( BLACK ) 5 . ( SHIP ) ( OUTER ) CRAWL SPACE ( SHAPE ) 6 . ( THIN ) PICK ( SKATE ) ICE ( ROLLER ) 7 . SCOTCH ( WORM ) ( RED ) TAPE ( SILK ) 8 . ( BOTTLE ) TIE ( BREAK ) NECK ( WATER ) 9 . ( HEARTED ) ( FEET ) BITTER COLD ( BIG ) 10 . FAMILY ( APPLE ) ( HOUSE ) TREE ( GREEN ) 11 . ( WILD ) ( DARK ) FORK ( PITCH ) SENSE HORSE 12 . ( PLATE ) ( BROKEN ) REST ( HOME ) SHOT GLASS 13 . ( SHORT ) ( TRUCK ) SIGN ( STOP ) GUN HAND 14 . ( FULL ) ( DOWN ) HEAD ( COUNT ) WIND BLOWN 15 . ( WORLD ) ( CONCERT ) TELEVISION ( SERIES ) TRADE FREE 16 . ( FLY ) ( BOY ) BEARING ( BALL ) WEIGHT PAPER 17 . ( STRIKE ) ( WHITE ) LAW ( OUT ) MEDAL GOLD 18 . ( CENTER ) ( WORK ) CORN ( FIELD ) MEAL PIECE 19 . ( FORCE ) ( BACK ) ROOM ( PLAY ) CHICKEN FEED 20 . ( STOLEN ) ( TAX ) ARMY ( BASE ) PRIVATE PROPERTY ( Manuscript received February20 , 1997 ; revisionaccepted for publicationJuly 11 , 1997 . )