Situated Dissemination through an HCI (cid:58) orkplace 1 Ko - Le Chen , 2 Rachel Clarke , 1 Teresa Almeida , 1 Matthew Wood , 3 David S . Kirk 1 Open Lab , Newcastle University Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK k . l . chen2 @ newcastle . ac . uk 2 Twisted Digits , Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK rachel @ twisteddigits . co . uk 3 Northumbria University , Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK david . kirk @ northumbria . ac . uk ABSTRACT Researchers working in domains such as Research through Design and Feminist HCI have been questioning “dissemination practices” and their impact on our capacity to produce reflexive accounts of research in publications . This paper examines academic dissemination practices within HCI research communities from an institutional to individual level . We unpack the practice via a meta - review of recent literature published in CHI and other venues on ‘What is HCI ? ’ . We review the core text on this debate and other similar discussions on HCI methodologies and reflexive accounts of research in domains such as ‘Research through Design’ and ‘Feminist HCI’ . We highlight the importance of practicing reflexivity through dissemination and introduce ‘Research Fictions’ in the form of video essays and live performances , produced by the first author with her colleagues , based on their HCI submissions . Through experimenting with alternative dissemination formats , we argue that our exploratory processes engender a practice of reflexivity within a research lab . Author Keywords Research fiction ; Situated Dissemination ; Reflexivity ; Feminist HCI ; Research Through Design . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous ; INTRODUCTION In this paper we apply Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) and feminist STS lens to examine the epistemological underpinnings of ongoing conversations regarding Human Computer Interaction’s ( HCI ) disciplinarity [ 19 , 24 , 32 , 46 ] . We argue that such epistemological commitments have a direct impact on knowledge production within HCI that is further constructed through specific dissemination practices and constrains how practices of reflexivity can be articulated . As we review recent discussions on the nature of HCI as an academic discipline ( e . g . [ 43 , 46 ] ) we utilise this review to focus on knowledge production within HCI and how this has been constructed and constrained through dissemination practices , and in doing so we offer a new way of considering the debate surrounding the scientific nature of HCI . To extend this discussion we borrow from feminist STS approaches to knowledge [ 8 , 21 , 23 , 26 ] , applauding and extending the development of reflexive accounts of practice developed so far in HCI , and examine a feminist orientation of reflexive practice as a way of problematizing the need for HCI to be a discipline . Finally , we respond with our own productive critique via the making of ‘Research Fictions’ , a series of video essays and performances produced by the first author in collaboration with colleagues at an HCI workplace , that utilise what we term situated dissemination practice . We will review three key themes in the text : ( 1 ) ‘producing knowledges’ , ( 2 ) ‘encountering reflexivity’ and ( 3 ) ‘making research fictions’ . Across these three themes’ leaky borders are concepts that inform our own practices of dissemination . We term the themes as such because they are only a temporary arrangement created in order to articulate our arguments in this paper format and so they should not be taken as the essential categories suggested by the built - in hierarchical headings types in the ACM template . We’ll expand on this discussion of the paper format in theme one , as we review methodologies and types of knowledge ( s ) formulated and recognised in HCI literature . We review the state - of - the - art in terms of HCI dissemination , located both in and outside submission venues , and we further unpack these formulations of new knowledges by examining the way they are presented in conventional academic paper formats . By doing so we produce a socio - material critique [ 36 ] of the dynamic between knowledge production and disciplinarity [ 42 ] . In theme two we draw attention to the practice of reflexivity in research [ 3 , 13 , 45 , 49 ] . The notion of reflexivity is widely used across HCI sub - domains , and here we are focused on how reflexivity is understood as a practice in feminist HCI [ 3 ] and research - through - design [ 4 , 7 ] frameworks . We ask , what are the self - disclosed areas of research that discuss reflexive practice in HCI literature ? We conclude by suggesting that this reflexivity , although widely practiced in the context of ‘researcher - participants’ relations , is not yet extended to the representation and dissemination of knowledges produced in the processes described around these relations . In the final theme , we introduce the first Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2017 , May 06 - 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4655 - 9 / 17 / 05… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025696 It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2078 author’s case studies on situated dissemination practice as ‘Research Fictions’ . This paper is a synthesis of the first author’s doctoral research argument and presents partial accounts of conversations with her collaborators on the case studies , and meetings about this paper’s premise with PhD supervisors . Thus the main body of this paper is written from a ‘we’ perspective , acknowledging that this paper is a result of multiple dialogues between the five authors , as well as in ‘I’ , in describing experiences related to the first author’s practice and creative decisions in the construction of the ‘Research Fictions’ . This paper is accordingly part of the first author’s own reflexive practice , and the process of writing it can be considered as inherent to the concerns documented within the text . Our submission is motivated by a sense that there is still a general lack of resources or institutional support ( at multiple levels ) that allows for HCI researchers to constructively engage in alternative conceptualizations of dissemination practices . The contribution of this paper is an attempt to broaden the discussion of alternative modes of dissemination in order to support more reflexive practices in HCI research . Although there are slow developments emerging attempting to create alternative dissemination practices , there is a lack of understanding of the opportunities and potential of doing so in relation to reflexivity and its role in the production and dissemination of research . PRODUCING KNOWLEDGES Science communication Research requires the production , transfer and presentation of knowledge and within each disciplinary domain particular kinds of knowledges are privileged and deemed acceptable and communicable . The way in which this is predominantly supported is through the production of peer - reviewed papers . This production is commonly known as science communication [ 50 ] , which became a public debate when Tim Gowers , a mathematician at Cambridge , wrote a blogpost expressing his decision to withdraw from voluntary peer - reviewing [ 29 ] . The protest was joined by other academics and has since been coined as the ‘academic spring’ . Gower’s action serves to remind us that there is a political and financial economy supporting objective science . We hope to further problematise the issue in this paper via the debate within HCI on its scientific status . Thorin [ 53 ] summarised scholarly communication from a global perspective in three distinct aspects : ( 1 ) the process of conducting research , developing ideas and communicating informally with other scholars and scientists ; ( 2 ) the process of preparing , shaping and communicating to a group of colleagues what will become formal research results ; and ( 3 ) the ultimate formal product that is distributed to libraries and others in print or electronic format . The third aspect , in which a ‘formal product’ is distributed , refers to the academic ‘paper’ , by far the most commonly used medium for distributing research outcomes . Unlike public engagement where any research outputs may be packaged as part of a press release for an arbitrary public audience , dissemination can be seen as a constant exchange between an individual and institutions , particularly those who host discourse ( the publishers ) . While the politics of publishing models have been extensively discussed in the press , very little is understood in terms of what actually takes place when an author produces a paper that gets published or remains unpublished . We may have access to our own academic workplaces where academic writing takes place and submissions are considered a part of routine tasks . While most people with membership in an institution can offer anecdotal accounts of witnessing their colleagues shouting at their computer screen or lamenting that their writing doesn’t make sense , the processes involved with preparing materials for submissions are not often interrogated at the workplace . So what , in an ethnomethodological sense , is a paper submission ? Publications of HCI discourse are generally organized in the same fashion as other scientific disciplines , in that there is ‘a’ HCI discourse hosted by the Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) . It would follow therefore , that any attempt to answer the question What is HCI ? resides in the community and memberships that constitute this discipline . Members of the discipline interact through access to literature in journals , magazines and conference proceedings , reading and submitting papers , taking part in peer - reviews and attending conferences . But what is the socio - material [ 34 ] construction of a paper , and how does this impact on its relationship to knowledge ? We might ask , what actually is a researcher’s relation to a published paper ? Is a paper a rendered copy of our thoughts ? Or a facsimile of a research project ? Or is it a most treasured artefact , the simple result of all the hard work one goes through during research ? Finally , is it simply an invitation for feedback and criticism ? Our study focusses on the researcher’s relationship to a paper - in - progress . Materiality of paper We start with a query to the HCI collective : What is a Paper ? Here we apply this question in order to review the latest contributions in HCI literature on new knowledge forms . This query is two - fold . Firstly , it serves to guide our literature review and helps us locate discourse in HCI that has previously responded to this question . Secondly , the query is installed here within this paper in order to foreground the materiality of this document . It is , in the most limited sense , our way of saying Achtung ! You are reading a paper submission ! And thereby forewarning , in a reflexive manner , the circumscribed way in which we are presenting our argument . So how does a paper ( re ) present knowledge , and in turn help to constitute and define a discipline ? There are an array of authors speaking from different domains in HCI who have It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2079 all argued for the need of more accommodating formats to articulate different methodologies and theories [ 4 , 7 , 12 , 25 ] . Our intention for the paragraphs below is not to compile a laundry - list of domains with their corresponding ‘types of knowledge’ but to highlight the most recent development from within HCI on the notion of knowledge forms and to some extent the materiality of knowledge . In the new Humanist HCI agenda , Bardzell et al [ 2 ] suggest such research could be communicated via a ‘humanist essay’ , a format where ‘an author writes in a distinctive voice , allowing her to speak subjectively of her experiences and processes of thinking . ’ While we feel such an essay is distinct from the traditional ‘scientific report’ , and as such represents progress in pushing the boundaries of a paper format , the attention to literary styles limits the breakthrough of this new research agenda by implying a strategy for ‘acceptance’ by potential peer - reviewers . A breakthrough agenda , with critical awareness of how our positioning in society impacts on how we know things , should not assume a desire for acceptance within the institutional context . Instead , we argue , a new agenda could be more potent in less known test - sites of communication before returning to the host discipline as ‘archival’ references . In sharp contrast to the Humanist HCI approach , Kostakos et al [ 32 , 39 ] argue for a more ‘scientific’ HCI and suggest that the main body of research papers should be written in objective language ( such as mathematics ) and that reports of findings should adhere to the motor - themes they have identified within the HCI corpus . As we discussed in reference to Gower’s case and the academic spring , the push for objective science is , in fact , a political move implicit to the publishing economy and the desire to make HCI research more categorical . Bardzell [ 4 ] illustrates how to apply aesthetics , in order to further the ‘development of a hermeneutic community capable of actively critiquing and interpreting the significance of these exemplars’ . Exemplars in this case being artistically produced design objects . However , suggesting that RtD’s main corpus should be an author’s reading of exemplars simply replaces a set of well - defined , highly crafted discursive norms and their associated formats ( i . e . objective science and peer - reviewed papers ) with another set of highly crafted discursive norms and formats ( e . g . RtD and intermediate knowledge [ 5 , 15 , 24 , 25 , 40 ] through the manifesto , annotated portfolio [ 7 ] , sequential art / comics [ 17 , 47 ] …etc ) . Among the discussions reviewed above , the use of terms such as knowing or knowledge are discussed regardless of the medium that it might be manifested in , or the domain from which it is viewed . However , knowledge is not a universal term - it is not clear when an author refers to a type of knowledge whether the knowledge is a cerebral experience ; simply ontologically associated with a methodology ; or if the knowledge is a material object such as a piece of writing that reports the outcome of a methodology . Our main purpose here is not to overtly critique or suggest to replace writing papers as a core medium of scientific communication , nor are we offering another lens to read text . Instead we draw attention to the academic paper as an item often treated as being without materiality , as being universal and a pure representation of knowledge , in order to expand notions of dissemination . Allowing ourselves to consider ‘paper - making’ as part of the practices surrounding knowledge production would also expand an understanding of other research practices such as reflexivity , a point we return to in the second theme . So far in HCI very little has been unpacked in terms of paper submissions , and although authors who have experienced drafting a paper know that the process is complex and often motivated by the needs for professional and institutional developments , it is still rarely documented or performed through traditional reporting styles in academic papers . Our focus here is on the everyday production of papers rather than the discursive norms that a conference or journal submission may prescribe . An accepted pupil in her discipline will often repeat her master’s teaching and follow the protocols of paper submissions . In this way an academic discipline is established - through successions . But a discipline is also necessarily dynamic and subject to change , in terms of new research agendas and social context . It is because of the liveliness of disciplinarity , that it is significant to critique modes of paper production as a first - order step to establish new modes of knowledge production . In this case we believe that theories of Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) and feminist STS can be utilised to guide our critique of papers . Often STS is criticized for being apolitical , or complicit in reinforcing the power structures of institutions by only paying attention to details [ 35 ] . We want to demonstrate that STS has utility in assessing larger political issues from a practitioner - centric angle . Utilizing aspects of feminist STS , in particular ‘situated knowledges’ , can lead directly to changes in one’s individual practices at a workplace . Thus an STS critique allows us to study the mediation between research and an institution via the production of papers , whilst feminist STS draws our attention to the mechanism of knowledge production ( in our case , the workplace ) . In the end we produce a critique that guides us in considering HCI as a discipline and the dissemination practices it may afford . In other words , we are able to approach an answer to What is HCI ? by contemplating What is a Paper ? and understanding our relationship to their production . Situated knowledges “A and not - A are likely to be simultaneously true . This correct exaggeration insists that even the simplest matters in feminist analysis require contradictory moments and a wariness of their resolution , dialectically or otherwise . It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2080 ‘Situated knowledges’ is a shorthand term for this insistence” [ 21 ] Haraway’s thesis on situated knowledges has served as a consistent concept for HCI researchers engaging in community research to acknowledge their positionality in complex network of people occupying a wide range of perspectives on an issue [ 3 , 13 , 16 ] . Along with standpoint theory , the development of situated knowledges has led to a feminist and social justice agenda within HCI advocating for greater reflexivity within research when reporting on researcher - participant relationships [ 3 ] . However , this often presents challenges in reporting these various perspectives in the paper format which often reduces reflexivity to what might be perceived as a static unmovable positionality or identity . This is illustrated in suggestions by Harrison et al : ‘A second consequence of taking situated knowledges as central to HCI is that detailed , rich descriptions of specific situations become particularly valuable as a knowledge product , as compared to generalized formalisms’ [ 22 ] . We understand that reflexive practice , in paying attention to details , steer us away from a universalist viewpoint . But the promise of situated knowledges here often remains unfulfilled when transcribed into research papers , as we still require these practices to be communicated through the paper and are required to submit this writing so that it is subject to the same conferences and journals as non - situated practice . We posit that however HCI literature tries to be inclusive and be more critically aware of context , guided by a rich selection of theories , there is no escaping from the situated - ness of HCI authors and their outputs within an academic framework centred on paper production and submission . There is still a tendency , for example , to speak on behalf of a ‘research project’ in the form ‘we’ , to anonymous peer - reviewers . Here we turn our attention to one of the most prominent hosts of HCI literature . The ACM SIGCHI ( CHI ) is an annual event that has its own historicity and has thus engendered , in large part , broader HCI research agendas . The CHI conference has a history of influencing how HCI concepts are presented and interpreted . It is the destination of international scholars who wish to engage in discussions on their work and join peer - reviewers in selecting new knowledge annually . The ACM Digital Library is a closed online depository for all of ACM conferences and journals . Previous discussions on HCI’s disciplinarity , or ‘disciplinary anxieties’ [ 20 , 46 ] are characterized by discourse that is constructed within the boundaries defined by ACM peer - reviewers . Hence there is a tendency to equate HCI to CHI , thus the CHI proceedings can be viewed as the way an audience would interact with HCI knowledge , as a technology . After all , in tackling the exchange between human agent and nonhuman actant in his own paper , Latour wrote : ‘My word processor , your copy of Common Knowledge . Oxford University Press , the International Postal Union , all of them organize , shape , and limit our interactions . To forget their existence - their peculiar manner of being absent and present - would be a great error . [ 34 ] . By applying Latour’s technical mediation as a formula for unpicking assumptions around people and tools , we are able to examine a mediation that takes place between an individual and an institution , via paper submissions . This approach allows us to view the publication process as a dynamic force , organizing people and theories via the medium of ‘paper’ ( or more realistically speaking , PDFs ) Each year a conference receives submissions from authors who help construct the discipline by suggesting research agendas and potential outcomes . The ACM organizes these inputs and serves as a ‘technology’ for researchers to ‘interact’ their texts with . In the last 20 years the ACM SIGCHI has organized the premier conference on HCI and created many different submission ‘tracks’ . Almost every year the conference introduces a new format for showcasing work at various degrees of completion . The ongoing attempts by committee members to try and encourage different disciplines to enter CHI manifested itself in incarnations such as workshops , special - interest - groups , and multimedia tracks such as design theatre , interactivity , video showcase and so on . The richness of CHI formats suggests an openness to different ways of communicating research [ 30 ] . These calls are intended to be inclusive , but only insomuch as submissions that adhere to the protocols set up by the conference . We argue that there needs to be more curatorially - oriented decisions in the design of these calls to respond better to major developments in HCI epistemologies . However , there are also major venue developments , such as the Research through Design conference [ 54 ] , the Pictorial [ 6 , 27 ] , and CHI stories . These formats encourage researchers to foreground concepts such as ‘visuality’ , ‘production value’ and ‘process’ and add to the richness and reflexivity in HCI discourse [ 18 , 27 ] . At the same time they also fall short of accommodating radical thinking with top - down calls designed by expert and non - expert panels . These formats of submission also encourage an arbitrary coupling of HCI knowledge and a medium . It illustrates that there is still a shortage of curatorial insights to the relationship of science and art practice in HCI . Rendering these as ‘test sites’ for experimental dissemination are rather casual attempts at the integration of non - paper submissions , and in few cases is the production of the work , and the nature of the submission itself , radically reflected on in an attempt to develop an understanding of or challenge the discipline . Perhaps there is a general distrust in art practices in HCI , as it is currently understood as yet another form of visual research output , as opposed to an established everyday researching practices . Our approach to art practice is built - in to the paper by maintaining an ‘internal conflict’ ( constructing a critique of academic papers , in the medium of academic papers ) . We wish to demonstrate that such internal conflict can be seen as a resource for creative It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2081 practice in HCI , especially for developing productive critiques of ongoing HCI research . The CHI community might move away from a need to answer What is HCI ? directly , as a result of which the various domains of HCI respond with conflicting accounts of the nature of the discipline , by suggesting instead that attention is focussed on the way HCI knowledges are produced through paper submissions to CHI ( and other venues ) . By doing so ( through a STS lens , for example ) there is utility in diffusing the conflicts across HCI domains and acknowledging the diverse nature of HCI research . ENCOUNTERING REFLEXIVITY Our second theme attempts to question whether the current most prominent dissemination strategies limits feminist practices in HCI . Using feminist STS to guide our discussion we focus particularly on reflexive feminist practice found in recent HCI literature . Reflexive practices In order to further the epistemological development afforded by situated knowledges in third paradigm HCI , we suggest that Haraway’s concept has potency in guiding us further in reporting research with / out papers . We argue that the exaggeration she sets out suggests a kind of situated dissemination practice , as a strategy for supporting reflexivity in our everyday dissemination practices . There is an unanticipated audience for reporting our research that could yield the ‘As and not - As’ of our research findings . This audience resides in ourselves , not just in an indulgent way , but in critical proximity [ 36 ] . Situated dissemination practice is the undocumented everyday thinking at our workplaces that a researcher engages in unconsciously . This unconscious , yet critical practice is the form of practice omitted from papers , as the process of preparing paper submissions prompts us as authors to organise our ideas as coherent , easy - to - grasp ideas . As we have demonstrated in our first critique , discourse on knowledge is also a discourse on power structures . Understanding who is knowing not only reveals intellectual agency , but also the mediations that take place between knowledges and the knowers . By analyzing dissemination practice through the lens of feminist STS , we may be able to further unpack what takes place in the production and representation of reflexive research towards paper submissions . We are explicitly framing translations in research from dissemination practices into research papers as an area of study with which to employ feminist STS techniques , so that a form of situated dissemination practice would consider ( to use Haraway’s exaggerated terminology ) the ‘As’ as research papers , and the ‘not - As’ as the situated dissemination practices that surround the production of these papers . We acknowledge that research contributions in HCI require scholars to engage in a discourse environment a priori to the principles these scholars try to work with . Thus it is unclear how reflexive practice should be carried out in an HCI research environment that has not developed around situated knowledges . Yet it is this ambiguity that has led to many epistemological developments in HCI literature . Bardzell [ 3 ] describes the qualities of being reflexive in research : ‘Research should be characterized by ongoing self - questioning about whether the research is delivering on its ambitions to be feminist , improve human quality of life , and undermine rather than reinforce oppressive social structures , etc’ . Here the authors highlight the importance of taking care of societal issues while criticality reflecting on the researcher’s own positioning - to be aware of where we sit in relation to the subject matter we are applying our research to . Thus the framing of reflexive practice is premised on researcher - participant relations . This is particularly relevant for design - oriented research in which proposals are generated in response to participants perceived needs . But there are pitfalls in organizing reflexivity around the researcher - participant . As Light , [ 38 ] discussed in extending Agre’s critical technical practice , such practice ‘require [ s ] a split identity – one foot planted in the craft work of design and the other foot planted in the reflexive work of critique’ . The nature of this split is intriguing . It might appear paradoxical , or if not , can it be assumed that it is a symmetrical ( i . e . 50 / 50 ) or asymmetrical split ? One possibility is for an integrated positioning where reflexivity comes through praxis . As Harrison et al . [ 21 ] suggests a way of checking - in on our epistemological difficulty is to ‘ engage in discussion of epistemological issues as a first - order part of technical practice , i . e . as regular research papers . ’ And so , we’ve arrived at papers again , where reflexive practice ultimately manifests itself as an academic object towards submissions . We argue that while it is important to take part in academic discourse and further research by contributing papers , perhaps being reflexive isn’t something that authors can easily document and evidence in writing because it is ongoing and relational [ 13 ] . Nor is it a practice with universal standards which could easily be subjected to peer - review scrutiny and be branded as rigorous research activity according to the metrics governing such things . A researcher exercising her ‘reflexive muscles’ through situated dissemination practice is akin to her doing her Pelvic Floor Exercise ( a topic of one of the Research Fictions documented in theme three of this paper ) , in that no one can see that you’re doing it , but it is an essential and healthy practice . This may be the inherent limitation of paper , in that it suppresses our ‘messy’ expressions [ 41 ] in favour of a coherent argument and narrative , often post - rationalised in order to make it recognisable as academic concepts . Lessons from a masterclass At the end of a seminar on feminism I ( first author ) approached the feminist lecturer leading the discussion and asked if she was aware of any feminist dissemination It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2082 practices , she replied : ‘no , it’s all very traditional , but I think being productive ( in critiquing it ) is key’ . The lecturer left the class with five implications for research practice that a feminist researcher may consider adopting . We review them below with regards to HCI practices and suggest how our situated dissemination practices may respond to each implication : 1 . Critique of objectivity : Knowledge involves power and struggle . The limitations of objective science highlighted by Haraway has been further developed in the third paradigm HCI literature [ 22 ] . There is a great resource of thinking in HCI that underpins design research and has led to the manifestation of intermediary knowledge [ 38 ] forms such as the ‘Annotated Portfolio’ . Our STS analysis adds to this problematisation of objectivity by drawing out underlying assumptions in paper writing and submission , which has a potent role in guiding HCI researchers towards producing knowledges in different domains . 2 . Politics of location : Social location of ‘the knower’ is salient but also not deterministic . It is worth noting that feminist scholars have a unique position in the power dynamic of institutional lives . Messer - Davidow [ 23 ] , in recognition of her own academic feminist privileges allowing her opportunities in using educational institutions , calls for action from feminist academics to ‘perform structuring mediations between ourselves as feminist agents and the system we want to change’ . So how can feminist HCI scholars working in their host institutions ( e . g . research labs , university departments ) ‘take care’ of external societal issues while attending reflexively to their own , local social agency ? 3 . How can we promote reflexivity and accountability in our research ? This is the most relevant implication to our critique in this paper . In suggesting ‘situated dissemination practice’ we wish to unpack the production reflexivity in paper writing . Thus we are utilising this critique to guide us in practicing reflexivity further towards the dissemination of research . Markham [ 41 ] commented on the ‘blackboxing’ of research , ‘Although methods texts offer extensive descriptions of how one might design research questions , collect data , manage and sort data , and apply analytical tools to this data , much of the actual process from data to conclusion remains a black box . Most often , especially in disciplines where interpretive reflexive inquiry is not taken for granted , these processes are not included in anything the audience might read . Instead , we see the tidied - up version of a long , messy , creative process of sense - making’ . We agree that often in qualitative research we conduct fieldwork , collect data , and then write up our analysis , but in a reality , that is a streamlined , post - rationalised version of a complex mix of activities . Clarke [ 13 ] et al articulated their reflexivity through practice , in the writing of their paper in which the use of a first person account is made explicit and linked strongly to the methods and principles she was working with . This approach embeds the author and allows readers of the research to understand the relationships being discussed . 4 . How might we as researchers subvert the dominant ‘performative scripts’ expected of us ? As HCI researchers , we may be able to build on subversion by engaging in institutional practices such as paper submissions while engendering our workplaces with alternative , reflexive dissemination practices . We argue that subverting dominant protocol can take place but it is difficult to detect the ‘performative scripts’ that we are adhering to , as they are often routinised as everyday actions in the workplace . However , we could deliberately disrupt these protocols , creating opportunities that allow us to examine these routines . In the following case studies we try to demonstrate how the concept of ‘reenactment’ can help redirect attention to our bodies in order examine the norms we perform daily . 5 . How can we negotiate ethically the relations of power which separate ‘the researcher’ from ‘the researched’ ? This is at the heart of many reflexive accounts of HCI literature [ 13 , 19 , 31 ] , where for example Clarke argues for being critically open , not stubbornly insisting on occupying a single perspective . Not only feminist - informed research deals with these questions , but user - centred , participatory design , and experience - centred design . This questioning is ongoing and well - considered . However , there are limitations for constructing reflexive accounts of non - objective knowledge , which may - or - may - not fit the existing protocols . At the forefront are situated knowledges , which are mostly required to be documented in text form , and that try to communicate technical practice from multiple standpoints . How might working interdisciplinarily , such as through the combination of feminist HCI and RtD frameworks , or even further afield , support or be accommodated by reflexive practices ? What should a reflexive account of research look like ? One possibility is in the setting of a new reflexive research agenda that would allow for ideas to be communicated in new formats that reflect the set of sensitivities the agenda introduces . In conclusion to this brief review of reflexive practices , we’ve addressed the need for reflexive accounts in papers , and how this has engendered HCI with a more situated approach in research , particularly design research . We have identified the difficulty with accommodating these reflexive practices in conventional written ( paper ) accounts of research , and noted that there is a shortage of discussions on what we term situated dissemination practice . Such shortage maybe a result of researchers taking their HCI workplaces , instead of publishing venues , as sites for reflection and reflexive accounting . Thus we have yet to witness discourse network on alternative dissemination because they are un - observed and undocumented . By integrating workplace studies and situated knowledges as a feminist reflexive practice , we propose a new approach in It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2083 understanding one’s own positionality as HCI researchers , in order to critique HCI knowledges . In the next theme we look at the potential for this to happen in non - submission - oriented research , and in particular at a set of collaborative reflexive practices we’ve titled ‘Research Fictions’ . MAKING RESEARCH FICTIONS At an HCI Workplace This paper is informed by the first author’s doctoral research , which focusses on dissemination practices within Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . Through observing and analysing dissemination practices at an HCI workplace ( Open Lab , Newcastle University ) , the research builds a critique of the discourse on HCI’s disciplinarity ( published in the ACM SIGCHI proceedings and other relevant publications available on the ACM Digital Library ) by questioning the nature of dissemination practices within the discipline . As we have illustrated in this paper , we believe these practices are fundamental to an understanding of HCI as a discipline . In this section we ( all authors ) give way to the paper’s first author , speaking from ‘I’ . Thus , I , as a researcher - practitioner , am able to make explicit the privileges and disadvantages my position entails in conducting the research and drafting this paper . Prior to undertaking the PhD I had already established my position as a freelance media artist having received a commission from a project named Lover’s Box [ 51 ] . This kicked - started my unofficial role at the lab in supporting my colleagues’ needs for project documentation ( mainly through photography and videography ) and I have continued this role throughout my doctoral studies . Like any workplace , the lab I am based at has its own particular rhythm and routine members adopt and work around . One of the key events that most members take part in is the ACM SIGCHI conference submission . Such an event often leads to many late nights before the deadline , and many more in the following weeks and months during the lead - up to the conference itself . One of my earliest CHI - related commissions from the lab was to help produce a showcasing video that demonstrated a project named BinCam [ 52 ] . It was during the making of this video that I began to understand the way project narratives are constructed in academia . The BinCam had already been reported in a newspaper , and my colleague at the time told me it was important for the video to maintain the same narrative . Unlike my previous experience working as a video artist , in which the medium is considered as part of the message , the academic narrative in this instance is assumed to remain consistent across media ; the video served as an output with preconfigured expectations more akin to marketing than as a research artefact in itself . Continuing my visual documentation practice became an intrinsic part of my research , as I have organised my fieldwork under a research - through - design framework [ 55 ] in which video plays a significant role . Maintaining a utilitarian visual practice in the documentation / promotion mode allows me to engage in the lab’s local dissemination practice whilst also producing a critique around it . I do this in part through more involved collaborations in which I bring my expertise as a filmmaker to the work of my colleagues and produce films that go beyond the standardized academic model I’ve described here . My positioning as both independent researcher and video ‘technician’ at the lab is key to the manner I build relationships with my colleagues , and the collaborations I forge with them including the following two case studies . By presenting my latest case studies , I wish to demonstrate two things : firstly , how the concept of situated dissemination was necessitated by ongoing ethnography at my workplace , and secondly , how art practices can be embedded in an STS critique . By unpacking how research fictions were produced as a critique of existing dissemination practice I wish to draw attention to the materiality and pitfalls of such critiques , a problem of STS that Ratto suggested as creating “textual doppleganger” [ 44 ] . Research Fictions ( RFs ) The nature of RFs means that there are many more failed or aborted attempts than successful ones that conceptualize the appropriate formats for situated dissemination . Here I have chosen to present two case studies which did materialize and were documented . Both collaborators in these case studies are listed as the third and fourth authors of this paper in acknowledgement of their providing me with raw materials ( in both cases data collected from qualitative processes ) of their research , and engaging with my research practice . The partial account I present here is from my own creative practitioner perspective . Instead of detailing the ethnomethodological part of the research , I will focus on how the research fictions emerged as a critiquing format of the existing dissemination practice at the lab . Having trained as a video artist in which I drew heavily from performance theories , I have developed specific themes to work with to further unpack academic paper as a medium and drawing attention to its materiality to my colleagues . I was particularly interested in the works of Cindy Sherman [ 28 ] . As a performance artist Sherman mainly uses photography as the medium of her work . Many of Sherman’s images are scenes of reenactments , and they evoke a sense of ‘have I seen this before ? ’ in their reading . An audience generates many layers of meaning simultaneously upon reading her works . The reenactments are fixed as still images , but these fixed images also reveal the lived process Sherman would have gone through to produce the imagery , as she is often dressed in specific costumes and prosthetic body parts that layer meaning . When you look at a Cindy Sherman image , you are also reading the technical specification of its production , as they tend to direct your attention towards the movements and construction behind the scenes . Schneider suggests in a philosophical reflection on the female subject in photography : It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2084 ‘Indeed , it would be possible to argue that “reenactment” has a profoundly feminist history , and to explore how its genesis as a site of fascination in the art world , has roots deep in the work of feminist artists and scholars who began to think of the body as stage , and in so thinking , began to wrestle productively with precedent by performatively replaying gesture , act , scenario , and image for criticism and revision’ [ 48 ] . When authoring a paper academic researchers might abstract certain processes of labour in order to give way to details that would resonate better with an academic audience . A paper also suggests its “production value” to its audience . But unlike performance art , the layering of meanings in papers tends to remove the researchers’ body from the accounts . Thus reenactment became the theme / question I explored in ‘GRWM’ [ 9 , 10 ] and ‘Inflatable’ [ 11 ] . Figure 1 . Image of Teresa taken by the first author . Fig . 1 ©Ko - Le Chen . Prior to making GRWM , a video essay , I have been photographing Teresa ( the third author ) and her wearable design work . I was particularly inspired by her experience in researching female intimate care [ 1 ] and the challenges she faced to try and fit the research in the CHI community . I have also taken part in many of her workshops and fieldtrips both as a participant and photographer . In GRWM I tried to capture one of those experiences where I shared intimate stories about the speculum with other women as part of a workshop . Our work relations became a collaborative one in the sense that I was able to capture visuals that she needed for dissemination purposes while I gained access to her research activities as a case study where an alternative account of her work was emerging . What the GRWM video alludes to is that regardless of the richness of the women’s stories , our voices are collected as data and stored in anonymity . The video essay aims to mimic the technical and aesthetic qualities of a YouTube video genre - - Get Ready With Me ( GRWM ) . By enacting a popularised form of female monologue , I created a female persona , portrayed by an actor in the video , in a fictionalized situation where she is reflecting on being confronted with the idea of herself being distributed as research knowledge . Inflatable is the second collaboration discussed here . Many informal conversations and semi - structured interviews with different colleagues took place before Inflatable was developed . Inflatable was based on Matt’s ( the fourth author ) PhD research design workshops where young people were invited to ‘map’ their ideas of sexuality , using craft materials , on to a series of gender - neutral blow - up dolls . Similar to Teresa’s work , Matt’s research was also synergistic to the theme I was exploring for RFs . In following the feminist HCI agenda and Haraway’s critique of science , I was keen to investigate how we could better construct research stories that foreground embodiment and avoid negating the situatedness of conducting research in these domains . The nature of Teresa and Matt’s research topics both highlight the need for a corresponding format that could better accommodate the sensitivities they contain . Figure 2 . Screengrab of the ‘GRWM’ video . Fig . 2 ©Ko - Le Chen . The performance took a long time to develop , as we were ambitious about what it could achieve , and there was time to brainstorm . The script development for Inflatable was more systematic in the sense that I had devised a production timetable to try to produce an approximately 20 - minute theatrical show that would be ready for a public viewing . Matt is an amateur stand - up comedy performer and took particularly well to the idea of semi - improvising a monologue to tell stories about the blow - up doll workshops he had organised . My focus in the production of the RF was to capture his experience in submitting his work to CHI and his receiving of peer - reviews , and how this might be performed and reenacted for an audience . In the one - off live performance , Matt stood in front of a crowd of approximately 60 people and performed a heightened reenactment depicting the running of a workshop on sexuality with young people . The performance blurred the experience of the workshop and its participants with the experience of viewing the event . In the gallery we produced soundscapes reminiscent of office ambient noise , the clattering of teacups , and so on , carefully producing an event mixing elements of theatre and comedy . Particularly effective , and interesting from my perspective , was Matt’s permission – and enthusiasm – for the inclusion of peer - review comments to his research proposal in the milieu of the audio soundscape . At the end of the show , a crescendo of voices read out online comments around Matt’s research , immersing him in audio recordings of criticism . The reading It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2085 of peer - review criticism , usually a private communication between researcher and reviewer , is transformed into an exaggerated , public , theatrical moment into which the researcher is immersed . Figure 3 . Event flyer for ‘Inflatable’ . Fig . 3 ©Ko - Le Chen . While my co - authors and I may already interpret these Research Fictions very differently , it is important for the work that this paper is submitted in order for the concept of RF and RF’s utility as a situated dissemination practice to be considered and debated . I want to be explicit in stating that neither of these research fictions are considered publications of research in themselves . They are self - published collaborations , and I view them principally as sense - making devices that me and the collaborators may re - visit at a later date , along with their being devices for continuous reflection within my doctoral thesis . Both pieces are principally intended as examples of situated dissemination practice , in which the work requires and seeks an audience in order to make the research practice ‘visible’ , but doesn’t preempt or contrive to generate an audience through a process of submission or a focus on a venue . Instead , the audience , and nature of the research fiction , are themselves generated as part of the dissemination practice . DISCUSSION Orthodoxy of paper The site of a paper submission is somewhere between our writing and the publisher . Perhaps unsurprisingly , philosophical questioning of academic scholarship has occurred ever since it was recognized as a human practice . In ‘St Jerome in his study’ [ 14 ] , we see a description of the site where scholarship takes place , and the painting is loaded with symbolism that is suggested to reveal a sense of urgency and even imminent death . The production of academic work is , accordingly , an age - old concern , and one that has been attributed a sense of heightened importance and a mysterious , even dangerous quality . Figure 4 . St Jerome in his study . As our review of HCI disciplinarity discourse reveals , on the horizon of paper submissions at all times is the potential of acceptance , and not only does the peer review process invoke rigour but it also signals the completion of a piece of research . Such work is ready , on acceptance , to be archived . Once archived , the paper becomes a referential object for members in the discipline to engage with , and so on and so forth . It is also ( through this process ) given an economical value in the publication system . A paper cannot be replaced or un - researched : its authors’ post - rationalised narratives become fixed . However , it is also ‘up - for - grabs’ , by other members of the discipline , who are able to interpret and respond to the paper with their own research , thus creating a network of citations . The citations themselves reflect and reconfigure the paper in particular ways . Through the STS lens we also suggest that an academic discipline is constructed principally by the host ( publisher ) of this discourse , its members who author and contribute knowledges , and non - human actants such as the paper - based format of submissions . Unpacking the practices that construct the discipline simultaneously informs us what the discipline actually is . Thus we conclude that we don’t need to know what HCI is per se , or how to categorise or define it against other disciplines , as long as we keep critiquing the discipline by focusing on the materials of its construction . We are not suggesting that the community should put the matter of What is HCI to rest . Instead we’ve pointed from this paper , to the PDF , to the digital library , to the dissemination of the discipline being the suitable subject of this enquiry . We argue that the dissemination strategies HCI currently offers has its limitations and should be subject to more scrutiny . There are knowledges that don’t get copied over into paper form , such as the anxiety that often drives work , the necessary and personal , situated struggles that make us intellectual agents in the academic network . So the paper is finite , and suppresses our reflexivity by subjecting it to submissions and their protocols . It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2086 Situated disseminations By introducing the notion of the situated dissemination we have extended the discussion in third - paradigm HCI on reflexive practices . Our review of situated knowledges in HCI discourse suggests that situated knowledges necessitate a situated dissemination practice , a reflexive practice in HCI that can be strengthened with more intellectual resource in the making of artefacts such as research fictions . In contrast to linear paper submissions , situated dissemination practice is recurring and local . In describing the making of research fictions we’ve drawn attention to our bodies as researchers at a workplace - sites where those collaborations took place . And these collaborations , which we present as a form of reflexive practice , were deliberated as themselves depicting , in heightened fashion , the activities of everyday research practice . We presented the making of research fictions ( RF ) as a form of situated dissemination practice that finds its own audience as opposed to targeting publication . In discussing the RFs the first author and her collaborators were left , perhaps , with more questions than answers . The anecdotal feedback we still receive today from colleagues who saw , for example , Matt’s performance force us to keep revisiting the decisions that were made to create the performative script . In this way they serve as continually constructive , reflexive accounts that allow us to engage with the research on multiple levels over time . Elements of our research fictions are only suggestive of the collaborator’s own research topics , but are also pertinent to critiques of qualitative research practice [ 36 , 41 ] . For example , the soundscape we produced for ‘Inflatable’ was prompted by a questioning of the romantic idea of participants’ self - confessions in audio recording as data [ 37 ] . Thus the performance critiques one’s own position as a researcher in the field , neither further from or closer to authenticity . Paradoxical submissions It would be inappropriate to conclude this paper submission without commenting again on the obvious paradox within it : that the format of this paper submission may at times contradict its own claims to other modes of research submission by conforming to the CHI proceedings format . However , we view it as a ‘smuggling’ act that tries to illustrate paradox as a necessary part of interdisciplinary research ; to be able to accommodate paradoxes and from the fissures between different belief systems we are able to locate opportunities to reflect on and productively critique what we produced . Instead of trying to unify different principles of thought and create overarching themes , there is a way out . By presenting the making of research fictions in this paper we are not intending to replace existing ‘paper’ formats . This paper is submitted so that doctoral critiques of HCI could reach the community it focuses on . It is a way of avoiding protest around the paper submission , by attempting to accommodate the paradox of its situation . We regard it as essential to grapple with dissemination practices that are unfamiliar , and by doing so allows us to re - examine familiar norms . The principle of disseminating research artefacts is to allow ourselves to engage in existing research practices by reflexively communicating our own experience in any selected medium that has the capacity to find its own audience . CONCLUSION In responding the growing interests on evaluating HCI as an academic discipline , we offered an alternative account by producing a socio - material critique of HCI discourses on HCI’s disciplinarity . Our analysis on dissemination practices , especially paper submission , establishes a new angle for considering what HCI research and knowledge consists of . Thus our critiques diffuse the tension between HCI domains that operates on contesting epistemologies . Our feminist STS critique highlighted the need for situated dissemination practices in situated knowledges , which has pertinence for reflexive practice communities such as feminist HCI and similar third - paradigm HCI research . Situated disseminations afford situated practice and vice versa in academia . Broadening our understanding and applications of Haraway’s project could enable researchers to stretch their reflexivity muscles further . Returning to our pelvic floor exercise metaphor , the beauty of the exercise is its ambiguity - no one can see you doing it , which allows you to exercise everywhere . This can only heighten research endeavours . Finally , we advocate for more critical awareness of our own HCI research workplaces . Considering workplaces as sites of knowledge productions helps to engender institutions that host our discourse with better sensitivities in their management and organization of knowledge , and find new and unknown audiences for the research they house . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Special thanks to Clara Crivellaro , Bettina Nissen and Matt Ozga - Lawn for their valuable comments and support . We also thank The NewBridge Project for providing us the space and resources to develop our ideas . REFERENCES 1 . Teresa Almeida , Rob Comber , Gavin Wood , Dean Saraf , and Madeline Balaam . 2016 . On Looking at the Vagina through Labella . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1810 - 1821 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858119 2 . Jeffrey Bardzell and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Humanistic HCI . interactions 23 , 2 ( February 2016 ) , 20 - 29 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2888576 3 . Shaowen Bardzell and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2011 . Towards a feminist HCI methodology : social science , feminism , and HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2087 Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 675 - 684 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979041 4 . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Lone Koefoed Hansen . 2015 . Immodest Proposals : Research Through Design and Knowledge . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2093 - 2102 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702400 5 . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , Peter Dalsgaard , Shad Gross , and Kim Halskov . 2016 . Documenting the Research Through Design Process . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 96 - 107 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901859 6 . Eli Blevis . 2016 . Being Photo - Visual in HCI and Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 983 - 995 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901863 7 . John Bowers . 2012 . The logic of annotated portfolios : communicating the value of ' research through design ' . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 68 - 77 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2317968 8 . Kirsten Campbell . 2004 . The promise of feminist reflexivities : Developing Donna Haraway ' s project for feminist science studies . Hypatia 19 , no . 1 ( 2004 ) : 162 - 182 . 9 . Ko - Le Chen . 2015 . GRWM : in the bathroom . In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference ( British HCI ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 314 - 314 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2783446 . 2783629 10 . Ko - Le Chen . 2015 . GRWM : in the bathroom . Video . Retrieved August 22 , 2016 from https : / / youtu . be / 1HgZdDoxv5w 11 . Ko - Le Chen . 2016 . Inflatable . Video . Retrieved December 11 , 2016 from https : / / youtu . be / 6OXnFWnzuAI 12 . Madeleine Clare Elish . 2010 . Responsible storytelling : communicating research in video demos . In Proceedings of the fifth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction ( TEI ' 11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 25 - 28 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1935701 . 1935707 13 . Rachel Clarke , Jo Briggs , Ann Light , and Pete Wright . 2016 . Situated Encounters with Socially Engaged Art in Community - based Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 521 - 532 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901882 14 . Pieter Coecke van Aelst . circa 1530 . Saint Jerome in his study . Retrieved December 26 , 2016 from http : / / art . thewalters . org / detail / 35964 / saint - jerome - in - his - study - 2 / 15 . Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Andrés Lucero . 2016 . Documenting Design Research Processes . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 16 Companion ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 73 - 76 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2908805 . 2913022 16 . Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1348 - 1358 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 17 . Thomas Dykes , Mark Blythe , Jayne Wallace , James Thomas , and Tim Regan . 2016 . RtD Comics : A Medium for Representing Research Through Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 971 - 982 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901821 18 . Sarah Fox and Daniela Rosner . 2016 . Extensions from the ' field ' : exploring alternative methods of research communication . interactions 23 , 4 ( June 2016 ) , 68 - 71 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948895 19 . Christopher Frauenberger . 2016 . Critical Realist HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 341 - 351 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892569 20 . Marjorie Garber . 2009 Academic instincts . Princeton University Press . 21 . Donna Haraway . 1988 . Situated Knowledges . The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Knowledge . Feminist Studies , Vol 14 , No 3 : 575 - 599 . 22 . Steve Harrison , Phoebe Sengers , and Deborah Tatar . 2011 . Making epistemological trouble : Third - paradigm HCI as successor science . Interact . Comput . 23 , 5 ( September 2011 ) , 385 - 392 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2011 . 03 . 005 23 . Joan E . Hartman , Ellen Messer - Davidow . 1991 . ( En ) Gendering Knowledge : Feminists in Academe . University of Chicago Press . 24 . Kristina Höök , Jeffrey Bardzell , Simon Bowen , Peter Dalsgaard , Stuart Reeves , and Annika Waern . 2015 . It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2088 Framing IxD knowledge . interactions 22 , 6 ( October 2015 ) , 32 - 36 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2824892 25 . Kristina Höök , Peter Dalsgaard , Stuart Reeves , Jeffrey Bardzell , Jonas Löwgren , Erik Stolterman , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . Knowledge Production in Interaction Design . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2429 - 2432 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2702653 26 . Lynette Hunter . 2002 . Critiques of Knowing : Situated textualities in science , computing and the arts . Routledge . 27 . Nadine Jarvis , David Cameron , and Andy Boucher . 2012 . Attention to detail : annotations of a design process . In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design ( NordiCHI ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 - 20 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2399016 . 2399019 28 . Amelia Jones , Amada Cruz . 1997 . Cindy Sherman : Retrospective . Thames & Hudson London 29 . Alok Jha . 2012 . Academic spring : how an angry maths blog sparked a scientific revolution . Retrieved August 11 , 2016 from https : / / www . theguardian . com / science / 2012 / apr / 09 / frus trated - blogpost - boycott - scientific - journals 30 . Joseph ' Jofish ' Kaye , Beverley Ford , Dianne Murray , Doug Sery , Peter Thomas , Steve Whittaker , and Shumin Zhai . 2013 . The future of HCI publishing in journals and books . In CHI ' 13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2465 - 2468 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468805 31 . Vera Khovanskaya , Eric P . S . Baumer , and Phoebe Sengers . 2015 . Double binds and double blinds : evaluation tactics in critically oriented HCI . In Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives ( AA ' 15 ) . Aarhus University Press 53 - 64 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21266 32 . Vassilis Kostakos . 2015 . The big hole in HCI research . interactions 22 , 2 ( February 2015 ) , 48 - 51 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2729103 33 . Michèle Lamont . 2009 . How professors think : Inside the curious world of academic judgment . Harvard University Press . 34 . Bruno Latour . 1994 . On technical mediation . Common knowledge , 3 ( 2 ) , pp . 29 - 64 . 35 . Bruno Latour . Critical Distance or Critical Proximity . Unpublished . Retrieved August 11 , 2016 from http : / / www . bruno - latour . fr / sites / default / files / P - 113 - HARAWAY . pdf 36 . John Law . 1991 Sociology of Monsters : Essays on Power , Technology and Domination . Routledge . 37 . Raymond M Lee . 2004 . Recording technologies and the interview in sociology , 1920 – 2000 . Sociology 38 , no . 5 ( 2004 ) : 869 - 889 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 % 2F0038038504047177 38 . Ann Light . 2011 . HCI as heterodoxy : Technologies of identity and the queering of interaction with computers . Interacting with Computers 23 , no . 5 ( 2011 ) : 430 - 438 . DOI = 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2011 . 02 . 002 39 . Yong Liu , Jorge Goncalves , Denzil Ferreira , Bei Xiao , Simo Hosio , and Vassilis Kostakos . 2014 . CHI 1994 - 2013 : mapping two decades of intellectual progress through co - word analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3553 - 3562 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2556969 40 . Jonas Löwgren . 2013 . Annotated portfolios and other forms of intermediate - level knowledge . interactions 20 , 1 ( January 2013 ) , 30 - 34 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2405716 . 2405725 41 . Annette Markham . " Remix cultures , remix methods : Reframing qualitative inquiry for social media contexts . " Global dimensions of qualitative inquiry ( 2013 ) : 63 - 81 . 42 . Peter Osborne . 2015 . Problematizing disciplinarity , transdisciplinary problematics . Theory , culture & society ( 2015 ) : DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0263276415592245 43 . Antti Oulasvirta and Kasper Hornbæk . 2016 . HCI Research as Problem - Solving . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4956 - 4967 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858283 44 . Matt Ratto . " 16 Textual Doppelgangers : Critical Issues in the Study of Technology . " DIY Citizenship : Critical Making and Social Media ( 2014 ) : 227 . 45 . Matt Ratto , Sara Ann Wylie , and Kirk Jalbert . 2014 . Introduction to the Special Forum on Critical Making as Research Program . The Information Society 30 , 2 ( March 2014 ) , 85 - 95 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01972243 . 2014 . 875767 46 . Stuart Reeves . 2015 . Human - computer interaction as science . In Proceedings of The Fifth Decennial Aarhus Conference on Critical Alternatives ( AA ' 15 ) . Aarhus University Press 73 - 84 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7146 / aahcc . v1i1 . 21296 47 . Duncan Rowland , Dan Porter , Mel Gibson , Kevin Walker , Joshua Underwood , Rose Luckin , Hilary Smith , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , Judith Good , Brendan Walker , Alan Chamberlain , Stefan Rennick It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2089 Egglestone , Joe Marshall , Holger Schnädelbach , and Steve Benford . 2010 . Sequential art for science and CHI . In CHI ' 10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2651 - 2660 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753846 . 1753848 48 . Rebecca Schneider . 2011 . Performing Remains : Art and war in times of theatrical reenactment . Taylor & Francis . 138 - 168 . 49 . Donald Schön . 1992 . Designing as reflective conversation with the materials of a design situation . Know . - Based Syst . 5 , 1 ( March 1992 ) , 3 - 14 . DOI = https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0950 - 7051 ( 92 ) 90020 - G 50 . The Future of Scholarly Scientific Communication . 2015 . Retrieved August 11 , 2016 from https : / / royalsociety . org / science - events - and - lectures / 2015 / 04 / future - of - scholarly - scientific - communication - part - 1 / 51 . Anja Thieme , Jayne Wallace , James Thomas , Ko Le Chen , Nicole Krämer , and Patrick Olivier . 2011 . Lovers ' box : Designing for reflection within romantic relationships . Int . J . Hum . - Comput . Stud . 69 , 5 ( May 2011 ) , 283 - 297 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2010 . 12 . 006 52 . Anja Thieme , Rob Comber , Julia Miebach , Jack Weeden , Nicole Kraemer , Shaun Lawson , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . " We ' ve bin watching you " : designing for reflection and social persuasion to promote sustainable lifestyles . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2337 - 2346 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208394 53 . Suzanne E . Thorin . 2006 . Global changes in scholarly communication . eLearning and digital publishing , pp . 221 - 240 . Springer Netherlands . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 3651 - 5 _ 12 54 . Jayne Wallace , Joyce S . R . Yee , and Abigail Durrant . 2014 . Reflections on a synergistic format for disseminating research through design . In CHI ' 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ' 14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 781 - 792 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2578865 55 . John Zimmerman , Erik Stolterman , and Jodi Forlizzi . 2010 . An analysis and critique of Research through Design : towards a formalization of a research approach . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 310 - 319 . DOI = 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858228 http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858228 It Could Be This Way CHI 2017 , May 6 – 11 , 2017 , Denver , CO , USA 2090