1 BUILDING COMMUNITIES OF INNOVATION IN NIGERIAN EDUCATION THROUGH COLLABORATIVE LEARNING By ASSOC . PROF . KEZIAH A . ACHUONYE Department of Curriculum Studies / Instructional Technology , Ignatius Ajuru University of Education , Port Harcourt . Abstract Nigeria is a dynamic society , a multi - ethnic nation characterized by diversity in religion and culture , steady growth in population , poor economy as a result of low productivity , high rate of unemployment and political instability . Therefore , education in Nigeria is constantly challenged to become more and more relevant and functional . In this era of information age , ubiquitous communication is stimulating collaboration and community - based development of new ideas , technologies , and practices , while ubiquitous information in capitalistic societies is requiring many companies and establishments to prize the creation of new knowledge and skills . Simply knowing how things have been done is no longer sufficient as creative output is valued , and often required , through collaborations among workers . This paper took its standpoint from the potentials in diversities , and advocates communal , collaborative nature of innovation , a shift from the individualistic perspective . The concept of communities of innovation was elaborated in view of the need for creativity and innovation in Nigerian education amidst some obvious hindrances which could be overcome through collaborations . Key Words : Innovation . Creativity . Communities of Innovation . Collaborative Learning . Nigeria Education Education and society are dynamic duos always interacting to produce and / or respond to changes . Educators are constantly thrown back to the drawing board to keep pace with such challenges to ensure functionality of the educational system . This 2 results in regular paradigm shifts as can be clearly observed in this era of Information Age ; emphasis is shifting from individuals to group interaction , brainstorming and collaborations to muster strength for consistent creativity and innovations in the society . The society has moved from Industrial Age to Information Age , which according to Feather ( 2003 ) , results in real economical , technological , sociological , and historical changes . The proceeds of these changes are ubiquitous access to information ( through the internet , public databases , digital media , etc . ) and ubiquitous communication , or access to social networks ( through emerging social technologies and mobile devices ) . These two trends combine to create a very different society from previous generations – one that necessitates a different understanding of how people learn and work as communities . Ubiquitous communication has stimulated collaboration and community - based development of new ideas , technologies , and practices , while ubiquitous information capitalistic societies has required many companies to prize the creation of new knowledge and skills through collaborations ( Proctor , 2005 ) . With these characteristics of Information Age ( ubiquitous access to information and social networks in ubiquitous communication ) , a new innovation economy has developed ( Banaham and Playfoot , 2004 , and Coakes and Smith , 2007 ) . It is therefore not surprising to see educational policies in Nigeria as mere shadows , not following the trends but has largely remained models of the Industrial Age ( Reigeluth , 1994 ) . This paper is therefore an attempt to propose framework - communities of innovation ( COI ) for understanding the communal , collaborative nature of innovation . It took theoretical standpoints from studies on social learning and creativity to buttress the need for group effort in creativity and innovation in Nigerian society . The Concept : Communities of Innovation ( COI ) Researchers have sought to describe the nature of a community focused on the creation of physical or conceptual artifacts . They have described these communities using various names such as wisdom network ( Benton and Giovagnoli , 2006 ) , knowledge creating communities ( Bielaczyc and Collins , 2006 ) , creative organizations ( Banahan and Playfoot , 2004 ) , communities of creation ( Sawhwey and Prandelli , 2000 ) , networked strategic communities of business ( Kodama , 2005 ) , and innovative knowledge communities ( Hakkarainen , Palonen , Paavola , & Lehtinen , 2004 ) . Coakes and Smith ( 2007 ) , used the term “communities of innovation” to describe a community development around a specific “innovation champion” , an individual champion rather than the community . Coakes and Smith ( 2007 ) , define Communities of Innovation ( COI ) as a form of Communities of Practice that are dedicated to the support of innovation . They suggest that COI can be formed from champions of innovation and their social network and that COI are safe places for the creation and support of innovatory ideas . COI are groups made up of motivated individuals working together World Educators Forum 3 towards a common goal , not because of orders from their superiors , but because they are convinced of their common cause . This study adopted the line of innovative nature of the community ( West , 2009 ) . Before examining the theoretical backbone of COI , three words that share close linkage and need clarification here are creativity , discovery and innovation . According to Hornby ( 2010 ) , creativity involves the use of skill and the imagination to produce something new ; discovery is finding or learning for the first time about something or somebody not known before , while innovation is the introduction of new things , ideas or ways of doing something , a new way of doing something . So , while creativity has typically been associated with idea generation , the term innovation expands to include idea development and implementation ( West , 2003 ) , and steady transformation and reformation ( Achuonye , 2008 ) . Theoretical Framework of COI Creativity researchers use the term to describe “the creation of an original and useful product” ( Mayer , 1999 : 449 ) , while innovation refers to change in product and process . Creativity was earlier mystified in genius and gifted people ; brilliant insight ( Snyder and Lopez , 2002 ) . However , further studies have demystified creativity as simply an extension of normal cognitive processes available to everyone involving stages of divergent and convergent thinking ( Smith , 2003 , and Ward , Smith , & Finke , 1999 ) ; creativity is an everyday thing that everybody could develop to different degrees ( Bowers , Farvolden , & Mermigis , 1995 ) . Innovation theories include not only initial divergent / convergent thinking processes , but also idea development , the overall innovation climate within the community , and factors related to implementation ( Amabile , Conti , Lazenby , & Herron , 1996 , and West , 2003 ) . Social learning theories brought to light the nature of collaborative work and learning ; what is shared in social learning – concepts of shared meaning , practice and innovation . Shared meaning entails how interaction between an individual , others , and the environment construct shared knowledge understood among all of the participating members . According to Vygotsky ( 1997 ) , before any concept is formed internally it exists external to the individual , and is thus social in nature . Bandura ( 1977 & 1986 ) , broadened these ideas of social interaction and suggested that behaviour and learning occurs as the result of continual interactions among the person , the environment , and the behaviour . Bandura’s views , opened new avenues for studying the effect of environmental / individual interactions on student learning , such as motivation , self - efficacy , self - regulation , and other factors currently studied as critical to successful learning . These concepts are also important to understanding shared innovation , which often depends on persons being intrinsically motivated and self - regulated while Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 4 innovation , according to him , occurs from the juxtaposition of diverse perspectives with the group’s shared understandings . Shared practice includes situated cognition and community of practice to offer understanding of how community members interact and bring new ideas into the group ( Brown , Collins , & Duguid , 1989 ) . Arguing that social participation is critical requirement for learning , Wenger ( 1998 ) , stated its four components as meaning ( learning as experience ) , practice ( learning as doing ) , community ( learning as belonging ) , and identity ( learning as becoming ) . As result , learning involves much more than knowledge acquisition because it engages the whole person in a co - constructive , interactive process oriented towards developing the expertise of people as they integrate into a professional community . A Shift from Individual to Group Innovations Earlier studies on creativity concentrated on individuals . Even when researchers referred to environmental and societal conditions , they did so to show how they influenced individual creativity ( Mayer , 1999 ) . This , according to Henry ( 2004 ) , is attributed to two reasons . Firstly , the predominantly Western psychological thinking about creativity that creativity is a quality which emanates from an individual . Countries like Japan have excellent record of continuous improvement in their products and processes , perhaps because they recognize that creativity is very much about collaboration over time and not just breakthrough by a few individuals ( Henry , 2004 : 170 ) . The second reason is the influence of cognitive psychology perception on creativity ( Mandler , 1995 ) . Paulus , Brown , and Ortega ( 1999 : 151 ) , stated , “this localization of creativity within the individual is consistent with a variety of cognitive or attributional biases that lead us to ignore the social creativity research , and the Western focus on the individual” . Nevertheless , in recent times , researchers are beginning to report an alternative view to creativity that emphasizes its group or social nature . Montuori and Purser ( 1999b ) opined that many creative activities today involve social and collaborative processes . Communities of innovation ( COI ) are all about group of people working and learning and supporting each other to achieve and foster innovative ideas and skills . Groupthink - Divergent / Convergent A group is defined as two or more people who are interrelated in some dynamic way ( Gross , 1998 ) . Central to group dynamics is interdependence . According to Schmuck and Schmuck ( 1992 ) , we all need continuous help from each other and that this type of interdependence is the greatest challenge to maturity of individual and group functioning . Emphasizing interdependence and strength in diversity can improve group divergent thinking process - ability to deviate from the normal to consider novel World Educators Forum 5 possibility ( the group generates as many novel ideas as possible ) . Closely associate with interdependence is group goal which was defined by Schmuck and Schmuck ( 1992 : 26 ) , as “the preferred or desired state / task that guides the behaviours of group members” . Group goal stimulates group think which is the type of thinking that occurs when people make decisions as a collective group based on a compulsion to maintain unanimity and each other’s approval , to the extent that critical , realistic thinking does not occur ( Parham ( 1988 ) , Volkov ( 1988 ) , and Schmuck and Schmuck ( 1992 ) . Group cohesiveness is found to be the major factor in groupthink ( Gross , 1998 ) . The more cohesive a group , the greater the member’s tendency to rationalize or intellectualize the decisions of the group , and the more pressure that may be applied on dissenting members to conform . Studies have proved that divergent thinking in a group is often hindered by groupthink . This , Gross ( 1998 ) , noted , may lead to inferior and often disastrous decisions ; or when a dominant person offers an idea that is prematurely accepted by the group ( Milliken , Bartel , & Kurtzberg , 2003 ; Nemeth & Nemeth - Brown , 2003 ; and Smith , 2003 ) . To prevent groupthink , Billy and Smith ( 1988 ) , Kempa and Ayob ( 1995 ) , suggested that qualified outsider’s opinions should be brought into the group ; seeking a balance in skills , backgrounds , and expertise within the group can also help groups avoid groupthink and improve group divergent thinking , and the group should hold a ‘second chance’ meeting to re - evaluate and voice any after thoughts or misgivings and to reaffirm the decision . Effective functioning of a group is also influenced by communication because the benefit derived from group diversity might not surface if members do not feel comfortable in expressing their dissenting opinions ( Nemeh and Nemeh - Brown , 2003 ) . These findings support the need for a strong community where members feel valued , confident , and interdependent with each other . After the phase of divergent thinking , comes the collaborative convergent thinking phase when the group must winnow the ideas to only the best to attain the group goal . Researchers like Goncalo 2004 , Nemeth , ( 1986 ) , characterize convergent negatively while others ( Larey , 1995 and Kaner and Karni , 2007 ) advocated a mix of positive divergent and convergent thinking within groups to foster creativity and innovation process . According to Milliken , Bartel , & Kurtzberg , 2003 , diversity among members is important in convergent thinking leading to superior ideas , and improved decisions due to an increased number of possible critical evaluations . In convergent thinking , independent judgment is important in keeping the group from attaining consensus before fully evaluating all ideas , a process called “premature closure” ( Kim , 2007 ) ; full participation by all group’s members as one unified whole is critical to successful innovation . COI Model Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 6 The key principles in the formation of COI are diversity , interdependence and full participation among group members ; generation and selection of ideas ; and a supportive environment for innovation . They form the elements for COI model as follows : Dynamic Expertise - ‘a lifelong learner’ , continuous effort to improve , is never satisfied at anything as the learner takes on new roles within the community : sometimes as the expert , sometimes as the novice but always growing in expertise . This is a ‘group flow’ , a fluid role - sharing within the group which , Csikszentmihalyi ( 1990b ) , argued that learning is best accomplished by learners continually pushing themselves to collaboratively complete intrinsically interesting projects that are just beyond their level of expertise . This kind of activity requires intense focus , learning , and development , but results in discovery and creation , ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1990b ) and most effectively makes the group innovative . Entrepreneurship and Ownership - ‘sole proprietorship’ a critical link to innovation ; members share intuitive knowledge through intense collaboration , a networking both inside and outside the group ( Banahan and Playfoot , 2004 , and Coakes and Smith , 2007 ) . Entrepreneurial networking allows members of the community to retrieve knowledge from other experts , re - use and repurpose the information , and create new knowledge that is then shared with the network . This keeps the community together and focused on an end goal , but enough flexibility to allow individual members to take ownership over their own projects and ideas . Inquiry - inquiry - based learning ; learners’ curiosities are agitated to generate problems , questioning , criticizing or rejecting some aspects of the accepted practice and existing wisdom . Innovative learners , according to Engestrom ( 1999 ) , must raise questions , analyze the situation , model a new explanation , examine and implement the model , reflect on the process , and consolidate the new practice . West ( 2009 ) , predicted that in the Innovation Age , the focus on group inquiry will become increasingly critical as problem - finding or seeking and defining questions to be solved , is the precursor of innovation . Group Reflectiveness - deep group thinking ; includes interpersonal and intrapersonal reflection . All models of innovative knowledge community highlight the importance of self - refection and reflection within a community . New knowledge often emerges as a consequence of these kinds of practices of reflection - in - action ( Hakkarainen , Palonen , Paavola , & Lehtinen , 2004 ) , and learning from past group failures ( Sawyer , 2008 ) . For any community to be truly innovative , it must foster this communal group introspection and reflection so that it can improve its own innovative processes . World Educators Forum 7 Innoversity - describes how innovation is linked to diversity in a community ( Justesen , 2004 ) . Diversity in this context is not based on racial or cultural terms but as variety in cognitive and skills abilities , ‘multiple perspectives’ that raises question about what is best approach and provides different possible solutions ; that allows for ‘new knowledge from previously separated domains to be exchanged and combined in new ways ; theses are critical to innovation Integrating COI into Classroom - Collaborative Learning The laudable tenets of COI will be of no benefit to Nigerian education if the question of integration into the classroom is not answered ; how can the school help Nigerian students to imbibe the culture of COI . This question on ‘how’ precisely hinges on strategy ; what strategy can the teacher use to help Nigerian students learn , live , and practice the tenets of communities of practice ? Precisely , the answer is any teaching method / strategy that encourages collaboration and cooperation ; any teaching method that provides platform for students to work and learn in small groups , supporting and helping each other to learn . According to ( Hornby , 2010 ) , collaboration is the act of working with another person or group of persons to create or produce something . When applied to learning environment it is referred to as collaborative learning . As stated in the Wikipedia ( 2014 ) , Collaborative learning refers to methodologies and environments in which learners engage in a common task where each individual depends on and is accountable to each other . To Anuradha ( 1995 ) , it is the grouping and pairing of students for the purpose of achieving an academic goal ; an instruction method in which students at various performance levels work together in small groups toward a common goal ; a situation in which two or more people learn or attempt to learn something together . Unlike individual learning , people engaged in collaborative learning capitalize on one another’s resources and skills ( asking one another for information , evaluating one another’s ideas , monitoring one another’s work , etc . ) . More specifically , collaborative learning is based on the model that knowledge can be created within a population where members actively interact by sharing experiences and take on asymmetry roles . In a collaborative environment , children and adult learners can in engage play , work , and other activities together ; individuals are actively engaged in a community in which learning takes place through explicit or implicit collaborative efforts . In a classroom setting , face - to - face or online , Collaborative learning activities may include collaborative writing , group projects , joint problem solving , debates , study teams , and other activities . In higher education , Collaborative learning in thesis circles is a good example of people learning together . In a thesis circle , a number of students work together with at least one professor or lecturer , to collaboratively coach and Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 8 supervise individual work on final ( e . g . undergraduate or M . Sc . ) projects . Students switch frequently between their role as co - supervisor of other students and their own thesis work , including receiving feedback from other students . In the secondary schools , Collaborative learning ( study groups , examination / test discussion group ) can lead to students’ success by deepening their understanding of a given topic ; actively engage students with material and each other to maximize knowledge retention . In this setting students utilized daily class worksheets and periodic group tests designed to be more challenging than individual homework or exams , and students quickly learn how they are able to solve problems as a group that they might not have struggled with on their own . At primary or secondary school level , Collaborative learning ( Classroom Consensus Group ) in a composition classroom can unite students when assigned open - tasks . Bruffee ( 1993 ) , introduced the learning method , Classroom Consensus Group , in which the instructor allocates groups of three to five ( three being ideal ) students and assigns a problem to be solved or question to be answered . There are two directions the non foundational task can be presented : as an indistinct , no right answer that generates discussion or propose an answer and request questions and a process of how the answer came to be . Once the task is assigned , the instructor backs off in order to resist the urge to intervene in students ' conversation . The goal is to remove focus of the instructor ' s authority . The instructor must keep time to ensure that the students are centered on analogizing , generalizing , and bridging their comprehension with others . Following group discussion , the instructor is to evaluate , not judge , the students ' work . Ideas should be presented to the entire class thus allowing the small groups to come together as a whole . It is then that the answers can be compared , gaps can be filled , and authority is not on one individual . At any level of education particularly , those that can read and write , collaborative learning can take a form of Collaborative scripts structure by creating roles and mediating interactions while allowing for flexibility in dialogue and activities . Researchers have shown that when compared with more traditional methods where students non - interactively receive information from a teacher , collaborative learning : 1 . not only increases interest among the participants but also promotes critical thinking ; there is persuasive evidence that cooperative teams achieve at higher levels of thought and retain information longer than students who work quietly as individuals 2 . improves student engagement and retention of classroom material 3 . drives students to be responsible for one another ' s learning as well as their own ; the success of one student helps other students to be successful . World Educators Forum 9 4 . gives students an opportunity to engage in discussion , take responsibility for their own learning , and thus become critical thinkers 5 . increases students ' time on tasks and motivation to learn , as well as students ' interpersonal relationships and expectations for personal success . 6 . enhances performance of lower - ability students ( working best in mixed groups ) , and medium - ability students ( doing best in homogeneous groups ) . 7 . improves comprehension of the text and critical - thinking skills for students across ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds . ( Johnson and Johnson , 1986 , and Totten , Sills , Digby , & Russ , 1991 ) Implementing Collaborative Learning : The first step using collaboration in classroom situation is to form heterogeneous or homogeneous groups . Groups can be formed using self - selection , random assignment , or criterion - based selection . Small groups of 3 - 6 are preferred to large groups because it is difficult to ensure that all members participate in large groups . When groups are formed , then , 1 . clearly specify the academic task - " group goals " 2 . explained collaborative learning structure to the students 3 . distribute an instruction sheet that points out the key elements of the collaborative process 4 . encourage the students to take active part in the discussion proffering solution or explaining facts . 5 . instruct students to listen carefully to the comments of each member of the group and be willing to reconsider their own judgments and opinions ( Anuradha , 1995 ) . As experience reveals , group decision - making can easily be dominated by the loudest voice or by the student who talks the longest . Hence , it was insisted that every group member must be given an opportunity to contribute his or her ideas . After that the group will arrive at a solution . According to Slavin ( 1989 ) , for effective collaborative learning , there must be " group goals " and " individual accountability " . When the group ' s task is to ensure that every group member has learned something , it is in the interest of every group member to spend time explaining concepts to group - mates . Research has consistently found that students who gain most from cooperative work are those who give and receive elaborated explanations ( Webb , 1985 ) . Evaluation in a collaborative learning setting is on an average basis - an average of the group score ( 50 % ) and individual score ( 50 % ) . Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 10 Significance of COI in Nigerian Education Keeping Together is Progress . Working Together is Success . ( Henry Ford ) The advances in technology and changes in the organizational infrastructure put an increased emphasis on teamwork within the workforce . Workers need to be able to think creatively , solve problems , make and take decisions as a team . Therefore , the development and enhancement of critical - thinking skills through collaborative learning is one of the primary goals of technology education . The secret of the clear - cut progress in technology in Japan and China have been linked to emphasis on group - driven innovation . On the contrary , the backwardness of Britain is their emphasis on individual innovation . Creativity may be initiated by an individual , but is fostered by innovative ideas and skills of others in the environment . There is strength in diversity particularly , when properly and positively harnessed . Nigeria is a country blessed with diversities in both human and material resources . Unfortunately , these diversities , rather than strength had been a source of weakness . This could be attributed to colonial influence of the British individualistic ideology . The negative influence is worsened by sole dependence on oil and gas exploration . Furthermore , initiatives and innovative ideas and skills are deterred by egocentric and ethnic adversities ; so much that more than fifty years after independence , Nigeria is wallowing in abject backwardness , fully dependent on other countries’ technologies . Government after government with their aspirations and policies , the desired technological freedom remains a mirage . A shift to COI integrated into the educational system in Nigeria would draw the strength in diversity . As buttressed by Raisch and Birkinshaw ( 2008 ) , successful COIs increase innovations ; they therefore have the potential to contribute to organizational ambidexterity , which refers to the organization’s dual capabilities of managing current business and being flexible and adaptable to meet future changes and demands . This would dissolve ethnic barriers , making Nigerians to shared meaning , practice and innovation ; working and learning from each other , acknowledging and supporting creativities and improving on them , taking them to next level through steady innovative ideas and skills . Conclusion This paper believes that a shift from individualistic innovation to group format as COI taught in schools through collaborative learning strategies would take Nigeria to the desired technological progress . Past educational policies , particularly the 6 - 3 - 3 - 4 system would have produced the expected change if embellished with the tenets of ‘ Keeping together is progress . Working together is success’ ; the strength in diversity , the tenets of COI . World Educators Forum 11 Nevertheless , this change might not come so easy ; some possible resistance and impediments are hereby foreseen in three major areas : a . Human resistance to change due to ignorance and perceived stress b . Curricular barriers - educators and curriculum planners would need to go back to the drawing board to make some changes emphasizing COI and collaborative learning c . Teacher educators would need to adjust to train teachers and retrain teachers to understand and practice the new trend Recommendations In the light of afore - mentioned obstacles , the following roadmaps are eminent : 1 . Nigerian populace should be educated by all means to discard the British individualistic innovative ideology and imbibe the Japanese group format , 2 . Educators should be motivated to embark on curriculum innovation to foster group innovations 3 . Pre - service and in - service teachers should be trained and re - trained to use collaborative learning methods to foster in Nigerian students strength in diversity and good team spirit . References Achuonye , K . A . ( 2008 ) . Trends in Nigerian Educational Innovations ( 2 nd ed . ) , Port Harcourt , Pearl Publishers . Amabile , T . M . , Conti R . , Coon H . , Lazenby J . , & Herron M . ( 1996 ) . Assessing the work environments for creativity . Academy of Management Journal , 39 ( 5 ) , 1154 - 1184 . Anuragha , A . G . ( 1995 ) . Collaborative Learning Enhances Critical Thinking . Journal of Technology Education 7 ( 1 ) Retrieved on 02 / 03 / 2014 from http : / / scholar . lib . vt . edu / ejournals / JTE / v7n1 / gokhale . jte - v7n1 . html Banahan , E . and Playfoot , J . ( 2004 ) . Socio - organizational challenges in the creative economy . In L . M . Camarinha - Matos & H . Afsarmanesh ( Eds . ) , Collaborative networked organizations : A research agenda for emerging business models . Boston : Kluwer Academic . Bandura , A . ( 1977 ) . Social Learning Theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . Social foundations of thought and action : a social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 12 Benton , S . , & Giovagnoli , M . ( 2006 ) . The wisdom network : An 8 - step process for identifying , sharing , and leveraging individual expertise . New York : York American Management Association . Bielaczyc , K . , & Collins , A . ( 2006 ) . Fostering knowledge - creating communities . In A . M . O’Donnell , C . E . Honnell , C . Emelo - Silver & G . Erkens ( Eds . ) , Collaborative learning , reasoning , and technology ( pp . 37 - 60 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Billy , F . C . & Smith , K . L . ( 1998 ) . Exploring the potential of problem - based learning in nurse education . Nurse education Today , 18 ( 5 ) , 353 - 361 . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , T he creative cognitive approach ( pp . 27 - 51 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , & Duguid , P . ( 1989 ) . Situation cognition and the culture of learning . Educational Researchers , 18 ( 1 ) , 32 - 42 . Bruffee , K . ( 1993 ) . Collaborative Learning . Baltimore , MD : The John Hopkins University Press . pp . 28 – 51 . Coakes , E . & P . Smith . ( 2007 ) . Developing communities of innovation by identifying innovation champions . The International Journal of Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management 14 ( 1 ) 74 - 85 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1990b ) . Flow : The psychology of optimal experience . New York : HarperCollins . Engestrom , Y . ( 1999 ) . Innovative learning in work teams : Analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice . In Y . Engestrom , R . Meittinnen & R . L . Punamaki ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on activity theory ( pp . 377 - 404 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Feather , J . ( 2003 ) . Theoretical perspectives on the information society . in S . Hornby & Z . Clarke ( Eds . ) , Challenge and change in the information society ( pp . 3 - 17 ) . London : Facet Publishing . Goncalo , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Past success and convergent thinking in groups : the role of group - focused attribution . European Journal of social Psychology , 34 ( 4 ) , 385 - 395 . World Educators Forum 13 Gross , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Psychology – The Science of mind and behaviour . Great Britain : Holder and Stoughton . Hakkarainen , K . , Palonen , T . , Paavola , S . & Lehtinen , E . ( 2004 ) . Communities of networked expertise : Professional and educational perspectives . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Henry , J . ( 2004 ) . Creative collaboration in organizational settings . In D . Miell & K . Littleton ( Eds . ) , Collaborative creativity : Contemporary perspectives ( pp . 158 - 174 ) . London : Free Association Books . Hornby , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Oxford Advanced learner’s Dictionary of current English . Oxford : Oxford Press . Johnson , R . T . , & Johnson , D . W . ( 1986 ) . Action research : Cooperative learning in the science classroom . Science and Children , 24 , 31 - 32 . Justesen , S . ( 2004 ) . Innoversity in communities of practice . In P . M . Hildreth & C . K imble ( EDS . ) , Knowledge networks : Innovation through communities of practice ( pp . 79 - 95 ) . Hershey , Pa . : Idea Groupn Publishing . Kaner , M . , & Karni , R . ( 2007 ) . Engineering design of service system : An empirical study . Information Knowledge Systems Management , 6 ( 3 ) , 35 - 263 . Kempa , R . & Ayob , A . ( 1995 ) . Learning from group work in science . International Journal of Science Education , 17 ( 6 ) , 743 - 54 . Kim , K . H . ( 2007 ) . The Two Torrance Creativity Tests : The Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking and Thinking Creatively In Action and Movement . In A . G . Tan ( Eds . ) , Creativity : A handbook for teachers . Singapore : World Scientific . Kodama , M . ( 2005 ) . New knowledge creation through leadership - based strategic community – a case of new product development in IT and multimedia business fields . Technvation 25 ( 8 ) , 895 - 908 . Larey , T . S . ( 1995 ) . Convergent and divergent thinking , group composition , and creativity in brainstorming groups . Ann Arbor , MI : ProQuest Information & Learning . Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye 14 Mandler , G . ( 1995 ) . Origins and consequences of novelty . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 9 - 26 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 449 - 460 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Milliken , F . J . , Bartel , C . A . , & Kurtzberg , T . R . ( 2003 ) . Diversity and creativity in work groups : A dynamic perspective on the affective and cognitive processes that link diversity and performance . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity : Innovation through collaboration ( pp . 32 - 62 ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Montuori , A . & Purser , R . E . ( 1999b ) . Social creativity : Introduction . In A . Montuori & R . E . Purser ( Eds . ) , Social creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 1 - 45 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Nemeth , C . J . ( 1986 ) . Differential contributions of majority and minority influence . Psychological Review , 93 ( 1 ) , 23 - 32 . Nemeth , C . J . & Nemeth - Brown , B . ( 2003 ) . Better than individuals ? The potential benefits of dissent and diversity for group creativity . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity ( pp . 63 - 84 ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press . Parham , C . ( 1988 ) . Psychology - study the behaviour of people . Cincinnati , Ohio : Smith – Western Publishing Co . Paulus , P . B . , Brown , V . , & Ortega , A . H . ( 1999 ) . Group creativity . In R . E . Purser & A . Montuori ( Eds . ) , Social creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 151 - 176 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Proctor , T . ( 2005 ) . Creative problem solving for managers : Developing skills for decision making . Reading : Routledge . Raisch , S . & J . Birkinshaw . ( 2008 ) . Organizational ambidexterity : Antecedents , outcomes , and moderators . Journal of Management 34 ( 3 ) 375 - 409 . Reigeluth , C . M . ( 1994 ) . The imperative for systemic change . In C . M . Reigeluth & R . J . Garfinkle ( Eds . ) , Systemic change in Education ( pp . 3 - 11 ) . Englewood Cliffs . NJ : Educational Technology Publications . Sawhwey , M . , & Prandelli , E . ( 2000 ) . Communities of Creation : Managing distributed innovation in turbulent markets . California Management Review , 42 ( 4 ) , 24 - 54 . World Educators Forum 15 Sawyer , R . K . ( 2008 ) . Group genius : the creative power of collaboration . New York : Perseus Books Group . Schmuck , R . A & Schmuck , P . A ( 1992 ) . Group processes in the classroom . ( 6 th Edt ) USA : W . M . C . Brown publishers . Slavin , R . E . ( 1989 ) . Research on cooperative learning : An international perspective . Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research , 33 ( 4 ) , 231 - 243 . Smith , S . M . ( 2003 ) . The constraining effects of initial idess . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity ( pp . 15 - 31 ) . Oxford University Press . Snyder , C . R . , & Lopez , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Handbook of positive psychology . New York : Oxford University Press . Totten , S . , Sills , T . , Digby , A . , & Russ , P . ( 1991 ) . Cooperative learning : A guide to research . New York : Garland . Volkoy , F . M . ( 1989 ) ( Eds . ) Psychology . Moscow : Progress Publishers . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1997 ) . Educational Psychology ( R . Silverman , Trans . ) . Boca Raton , FL : St . Lucie Press . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Creative cognition . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 189 - 212 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Webb , N . ( 1985 ) . Student interaction and learning in small groups : A research summary . Learning to Cooperate , Cooperating to Learn , 148 - 172 . Wenger , E . ( 1998 ) . Communities of practice : Learning , meaning and identity . Cambridge : Cambridge university Press . West , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Innovation implementation in work teams . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) . Group creativity ( pp . 245 - 276 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . West , E . R . ( 2009 ) . What is shared ? A framework for understanding shared innovation within communities . Educational Technology Research & Development , 57 ( 3 ) , 315 - 332 . Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia ( 2013 ) . Collaborative learning . Retrieved on 5 / 3 / 14 from http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Building Communities of Innovation in Nigerian Education through Collaborative Learning - Assoc . Prof . Keziah A . Achuonye