Making HCI Theory Work : An Analysis of the Use of Activity Theory in HCI Research Torkil Clemmensen , Victor Kaptelinin , and Bonnie Nardi Journal article ( Post print version ) Cite : Making HCI Theory Work : An Analysis of the Use of Activity Theory in HCI Research . / Clemmensen , Torkil ; Kaptelinin , Victor ; Nardi , Bonnie . In : Behaviour and Information Technology , Vol . 35 , No . 8 , 2016 , p . 608 - 627 . This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in on 04 May 2016 , available online : Behaviour and Information Technology http : / / www . tandfonline . com / 10 . 1080 / 0144929X . 2016 . 1175507 Uploaded to Research @ CBS : June 2016 Making HCI Theory Work : An Analysis of the Use of Ac - tivity Theory in HCI Research Torkil Clemmensen ( corresponding author ) 1 , Bonnie Nardi 2 , Victor Kaptelinin 3 1 Copenhagen Business School , Department of IT Management , Howitz - vej 60 , Frederiksberg , DK , tc . itm @ cbs . dk ; 2 UC Irvine , School of Infor - mation & Computer Sciences , Irvine , USA ; 3 Umeå University , Depart - ment of Informatics , Umeå , SE Abstract . This paper reports a study of the use of activity theory in HCI research . We analyze activity theory in HCI since its first appearance about 25 years ago . Through an analysis and meta - synthesis of 109 selected HCI activity theory pa - pers , we created a taxonomy of five different ways of using activity theory : 1 ) analyzing unique features , principles , and problematic aspects of the theory ; 2 ) identifying domain - specific requirements for new theoretical tools ; 3 ) developing new conceptual accounts of issues in the field of HCI ; 4 ) guiding and supporting empirical analyses of HCI phenomena , and ; 5 ) providing new design illustra - tions , claims , and guidelines . We conclude that HCI researchers are not only us - ers of imported theory but also theory - makers who adapt and develop theory for different purposes . Keywords : HCI theory ; activity theory ; theory use . 1 Introduction One way to analyze the role and current status of theory in HCI is to examine how researchers have questioned , critiqued , used , and devel - oped theory . This paper seeks to understand how HCI theory in general , and one theory in particular , activity theory , have been employed in HCI research . Our premise is that the role of theory in HCI remains an open issue . On the one hand , theory is apparently central to HCI as a research field . The very emergence of HCI was , to a large extent , the result of the application of a particular theoretical approach , information processing psychology , to the analysis and design of interactive systems ( Card , Moran , & Newell , 1983 ; Clemmensen , 2006 ) . Some of the most influential HCI works have been attempts to bring new theoretical insights to the field , ( e . g . , Bødker , 1991 ; Carroll , 1991 ; Dourish , 2001 ; Nardi , 1996 ; Winograd & Flores , 1986 ) . Recent years have brought conceptually ori - ented review papers that advocate clarifying what we know in subareas of HCI such as User Experience and Participatory Design ( Bargas - Avila & Hornbæk , 2011 ; Halskov & Hansen , 2015 ) . However , these efforts have not ensured the development of a solid and widely accepted theoretical foundation for HCI . This situation is perhaps similar to that in the related field of Information Systems , which some see as unsuccessful in developing sustainable and widely used theory ( Kjærgaard & Vendelø , 2015 ) . In HCI , the usefulness of the original in - formation processing psychology perspective was questioned early in the history of the field ( Carroll & Campbell , 1986 ) , and this perspective has never realized its promise of being a general theory of HCI ( Clemmensen , 2006 ) . A number of other approaches known as “second - wave theories” ( Bødker , 2006 ; Kaptelinin et al . , 2003 ) or “modern theo - ries” ( Rogers , 2012 ) such as the language - action perspective or distributed cognition , were introduced to HCI as alternatives to infor - mation processing psychology ( Carroll , 2003 ; Monk & Gilbert , 1995 ; Rogers , 2004 ; Winograd & Flores , 1986 ) . These theories have expanded the scope of HCI research , but each has its own challenges . First , the diversity of second - wave theories , which seem to partly overlap , raises questions regarding how to choose between them , or possibly how to combine them . Second , newer developments in HCI , especially the re - cent emphasis on experience , personal values , and designers’ creative self - expression , present a problem for second - wave theories ( Bødker , 2006 ) , and suggest that HCI researchers should adopt an eclectic per - spective not constrained by traditional distinctions between theory and practice , or laboratory experiments and field studies , see ( Rogers , 2012 ) . Examining these questions about how HCI researchers exploit the poten - tial of a specific theory for supporting research and development is thus a timely issue . To use theory to ask the big questions and produce new knowledge , HCI researchers need to know more about the sociocultural contexts of other researchers’ use of theory , in the same way that designers need to know users’ context of use in order to design systems and products for them . Knowing the sociocultural context of use of theory is not the same as understanding core topics for HCI , what kind of science HCI is , and how to study HCI . HCI does not have a set of core topics ( Kostakos , 2015 ; Liu et al . , 2014 ) or industrial constraints ( Newman , 1994 ) that drives the field forward , leaving open the question of the purposes for which we produce theory . HCI theory appears in many new and creative forms , from engineering modelling techniques , solutions , and tools ( Card , et al . , 1983 ) , to philosophically grounded discussions of categories of human - technology relations ( Fallman , 2011 ) . But in which contexts are which forms of HCI theory more useful ? Some argue that HCI should be stud - ied in practice ( Kuutti & Bannon , 2014 ) , but what are the researchers’ reflection on the usefulness of the theory in their context ? In this paper , we present an in - depth study of the use of activity theory as one theory that has been used extensively in HCI . We examine the purposes of using activity theory , the forms of activity theory researchers have used , “classic” texts and concepts , and authors’ reflections on the usefulness of the theory . We hope to give a sense of the empirical and theoretical landscape of activity theory in human - computer interaction , including what researchers have said about how it informed their prac - tice . 2 About activity theory in HCI This section provides a general outline of activity theory and a brief ac - count of how it became a theoretical framework in HCI . The section does not intend to present a comprehensive exposition of the conceptual struc - ture , historical developments , and current debates in activity theory . De - tailed discussions of these issues can be found , for instance , in Leontiev ( 1978 ) , Engeström ( 1987 ) , Nardi ( 1996 ) , Engeström et al . ( 1999 ) , and Kaptelinin and Nardi ( 2006 , 2012 ) . Activity theory , originally proposed by the Russian psychologist Alexey Leontiev ( Leontyev ) ( 1978 , 1981 ) has its roots in the Russian psychol - ogy of the early 20 th century . Two main ideas , comprising the foundation of activity theory , the social nature of human mind , and unity and insep - arability of human mind and act ivity , were formulated and elaborated by , respectively , Lev Vygotsky ( 1978 ) and Sergey Rubinshtein ( 1946 ) , mostly in the 1920s and 1930s . Vygotsky’s cultural - historical psychol - ogy ( 1978 ) considered culture and society as generative forces behind the very production of human mind , rather than external factors or con - ditions of its development . This general view was elaborated by Vygot - sky into a number of more specific concepts , such as “the universal law of human development” , according to which an individual’s mental func - tions appear as distributed between the person and other people ( i . e . , as “inter - psychological” ) before they become appropriated by the individ - ual ( i . e . , become “intra - psychological” ) . Rubinshtein ( 1946 ) argued that human mental processes ( the internal ) and human acting in the world ( the external ) are closely related and mutually determine one another . Leontiev’s activity theory builds on Vygotsky’s cultural - historical psy - chology ; it also adopts , and somewhat adapts , Rubinshtein’s principle of unity and inseparability of human mind and activity . The foundational concept of Leontiev’s theory is “activity” , understood as a purposeful , social , mediated , multi - level , and developing interaction between actors ( “subjects” ) and the objective world ( “objects” ) . A central claim of the approach is that it is activity that places the subject in objective reality and transforms the reality into a form of subjectivity ( Leontiev ( 1978 ) . The human mind emerges , exists , and develops within the context of hu - man activity as a whole , and therefore analysis of object - oriented activi - ties should be considered a necessary prerequisite for understanding the human mind . An extensive program of theoretical and empirical re - search , conducted by Leontiev and his colleagues explored co - develop - ment of activity and mind at different levels of analysis : from biological and social evolution to child development to the development of percep - tual and motor skills ( Leontiev , 1978 , 1981 ; Wertsch , 1981 ) . Activity theory emerged as an approach in Russian psychology , but eventually it transcended both geographical and disciplinary borders . In the last decades , especially since 1980s , Vygotsky’s cultural historical psychology and activity theory ( sometimes collectively labeled as “CHAT” , that is , “cultural - historical activity theory” ) became increas - ingly known in the West 1 , in particular , owing to the work of Michael 1 In this paper we do not account for what developments lead to ac - tivity theory being accepted in the West , and neither do we discuss Cole and James Wertsch ( 1986 ; see also Wertsch , 1981 ) . In addition , activity theory became an interdisciplinary framework , employed not only in psychology but also in education , organizational learning , and human - computer interaction . The extension of activity theory beyond geographical and disciplinary borders resulted in a major advancement of the theory itself . A well - known and influential version of activity theory that extends the notion of activity to provide an account of collective activities and organiza - tional practices , was proposed by Yrjö Engeström ( 1987 , 1999 ) . Engeström introduced the concept of the activity system model , which adds a third component , community , to Leontiev’s “subject - object” in - teraction . The model also discusses different means mediating three - way interaction between “subject” , “object” , and “community” : tools / instru - ments , rules , and division of labor . The activity system , model , as well as representations comprising networks of activity system models , were extensively used in studies of various real - life practices work practices , in which special attention was paid to contradictions in ( and between ) activity systems as driving the development of practices ( e . g . , related to the adoption of new technologies ) . Activity theory was introduced to HCI in the late 1980s - early 1990s , dur - ing a transition of the field from first - wave HCI , which was dominated by information processing psychology , to second - wave HCI which rec - ognized the importance of human agency and motivation , and the social context of technology use . To the best of our knowledge , the first attempt to systematically apply activity theory in HCI was made by Susanne Bødker ( 1989 , 1991 ) , who employed the theory to argue that in the anal - ysis and design of computing technology , it is critically important to take into account that people act through technology , rather than interact with it . More recently the theory has been used as a conceptual framework in a wide range of HCI studies , e . g . , ( Kaptelinin & Nardi , 2006 ; Nardi , 1996 ) and has established itself as one of the most influential theories in potential epistemological and ontological issues related to this pro - cess . A discussion of these issues can be found , for instance , in Wertsch ( 1981 ) , Kozulin ( 1984 ) , Cole and Wertsch ( 1986 ) , Cole ( 1996 ) , Kaptelinin and Nardi ( 2006 ) . HCI ( Rogers , 2012 ) . As shown in the analysis in this paper , activity the - ory has been used in wide range of HCI studies , for various purposes and in various roles . 3 Qualitative analysis and synthesis We conducted a qualitative analysis and meta - synthesis of the use of ac - tivity theory in a set of 109 HCI activity theory papers dating from the first introduction of activity theory to HCI in late 1980s , e . g . , Bødker ( 1989 ) . In contrast to quantitative meta - analysis which first selects a set of papers and then applies a pre - defined analysis framework to do a sta - tistical analysis , a qualitative meta - synthesis iteratively develops a tem - plate for analysis and synthesis of the content of the selected papers , given what is learned from reading the papers in each step , until it reaches a final version , which is then applied systematically on all papers ( King , 2012 ; Stewart et al . , 2012 ) . The development of the evaluation  Step 1 : Identify all publications that use the term ‘activity theory’ in Google Scholar ( 45600 ) , Scopus ( 2524 ) , WoS ( 1331 ) , and ACM DL ( 868 ) .  Step 2 : Exclude publications that do not explicitly fulfill these criteria : English language , use the term “activity theory” , published in an established , self - declared HCI outlet , and of academic nature with peer review . Results : 416 publications in HCI outlets .  Step 3 : Exclude posters , abstracts , editorials , commentaries , discussions , book reviews , short papers . Results : 320 full journal / conference papers .  Step 4 : Exclude papers that only cite or briefly mention activity theory . Results : 109 papers , the final set of papers for meta - analysis and synthesis . criteria had four steps , beginning with a simple keyword approach to give a sense of the landscape of possible activity theory papers by using search engines and citation databases , and then in the later steps take the more realistic steps of focusing on top level journals and conferences in HCI and ending , and ending up with five themes for analysis , Figure 1 . 3 . 1 Step 1 – Searching for ‘activity theory’ across disciplines To identify HCI activity theory papers , we began with the simple idea that an activity theory HCI paper was any paper that used the term ‘ac - tivity theory’ . Not all relevant research outlets could be found in a single database . For example , at the time of our search , ACM DL did not in - clude Computers in Human Behaviour , Interacting with Computers , and the INTERACT Conference . The results suggested varied numbers of potential activity theory papers : 45600 ( Google Scholar ) , 2524 ( Scopus ) , 1331 ( WoS ) , and 868 ( ACM DL ) for 1989 - 2014 . 3 . 2 Step 2 – Searching for ‘activity theory’ in HCI outlets Having gained a feeling for the overall size of the search space across disciplines , we then excluded all publications that were not in English , not peer - reviewed scientific publications , and not explicitly HCI rele - vant . We excluded books and other types of publications that were not journals or conference proceedings . We did not exclude conferences , as these are primary outlets for research in computer science . Journal and conference outlets with a focus other than HCI were excluded , e . g . , jour - nal and conference proceedings such as Mind , Culture , and Activity Cog - nition , Technology and Work , Ergonomics , Scandinavian Journal of In - formation Systems , and conference proceedings from conferences in re - lated fields such as Information Systems . We then did the search again , this time only in selected HCI outlets for the period from the beginning of the outlets publication and until and including 2014 , see Table 1 . At this point we had 416 papers . Figure 1 . Step - wise approach for identifying the set of papers and developing a evaluation criteria for analysis . 3 . 3 Step 3 – Regular full journal / conference papers We then excluded panel descriptions , posters , introductions to special issues or invited discussion papers , extended abstracts , and short papers . A total of 96 papers was excluded in this step , Table 1 . At this step we had 320 full papers . Table 1 . Search results for “activity theory” in selected HCI outlets ( until 2014 ) Source title Publications us - ing the term “ac - tivity theory” Excluded in step 2 ( editori - als , short pa - pers , etc ) CHI conference ( 1982 - 2014 ) 89 48 CSCW journal ( 1992 - 2014 ) 55 7 CSCW conference ( 1988 - 2014 ) 44 7 Interacting with Computers ( IwC ) ( 1995 - 2014 ) 42 10 International Journal of Human Computer Studies ( IJHCS ) ( 1994 - 2014 ) 35 2 INTERACT conference ( 1984 - 2014 ) 29 9 Computers in Human Behavior ( CHB ) ( 2001 - 2014 ) 28 2 Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) ( 1985 - 2014 ) 27 1 Behaviour & Information Technology ( BIT ) ( 1996 - 2014 ) 23 1 International Journal of Human Computer Interaction ( IJHCI ) ( 1989 - 2014 ) 21 5 ACM TOCHI journal ( 1994 - 2014 ) 20 3 AIS THCI journal ( 2009 - 2014 ) 3 1 Total 416 96 Note : Search performed June 2015 , in each outlet . 3 . 4 Step 4 – Substantial use of theory : forming the final set of papers for meta - analysis and synthesis We then selected the papers that had a “substantial use of activity theory” in the sense that they : cited at least one classic HCI activity theory text or a set of activity theory references , used activity theory to analyze a design , user activity , or concept ( such as affordances ) , or reflected on the use of activity theory in HCI ( see Table 2 ) . After having gone through the 320 full papers , we excluded 211 papers that did not show substantial use of activity theory . Table 2 . Evaluation criteria for an HCI paper with substantial use of activity theory ( 1 ) A clear example of an activity theory paper , it tells the reader in the title , abstract and keyword that this is about activity theory , it cites the reference HCI activity theory texts , it uses theory deeply and in a substantial way , and it reflects core HCI activity theory concerns . For example , the paper can be summarized as “…the model below was developed , inspired by activity theory…” ( 2 ) The paper is about activity theory , it does cite reference activity theory texts , and it uses theory in a reasonable way , although not too deep . For example , the paper draw on concepts taken from activity theory , such as “activity awareness” derived from Bødker , 1996 ; Bardram , 1998 , or “activity - based” or “activity - centric” concepts . ( 3 ) The paper is about activity theory per se , up to a point , and cites some , but not all relevant activity theory and activity theory texts . The use of activity theory may still be limited . ( 4 ) The paper is not an activity theory paper per se , but it is about core concerns for activity theory , and it does cite activity theory literature . For example a paper ana - lysing the concept of “context” , or papers that discuss activity theory , even if this is not the main aim of the paper , is a paper with substantial use of activity theory . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - papers falling below this line were excluded - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ( 5 ) The paper is not activity theory oriented in a deep way , but only cites some activity theory literature , and the paper is much more focused on some other , non - AT , con - cept . Though the paper may mention activity theory several times , it does not really use activity theory ( e . g . , the paper may cite Bødker , but does not say anything about activity theory ) . ( 6 ) Not much on activity theory per se . The paper does not have much on HCI activity theory per se , that is , only use of activity theory is a reference in one sentence to an activity theory paper . For example , the term “activity” may be mentioned in the paper , but activity theory is not discussed , except for a single citation , such as “It has been long known that the context of use is an important factor in human – com - puter interaction ( e . g . Suchman , 1987 ; Nardi , 1995 ) ” . We then analyzed and synthesized a final set of 109 papers ( Table 3 and the Appendix ) . Table 3 . 109 HCI papers that engage activity theory . Journals HCI ( 10 ) Bødker , 1989 ; Bødker , 1996 ; Bødker , 1998 ; Benyon and Imaz , 1999 ; Greenberg , 2001 ; Bødker and Andersen , 2005 ; Matthews , Rattenbury , and Carter , 2007 ; Bødker and Klokmose , 2011 ; Kaptelinin and Bannon , 2012 ; Jaferian et al . , 2014 BIT ( 8 ) Carroll , 1996 ; Arestova , Babanin , and Voiskounsky , 1999 ; Herrmann et al . , 2004 ; Convertino et al . , 2007 ; Chauvin , Morel , and Tirilly , 2010 ; Ang , Zaphiris , and Wilson , 2011 ; Lundvoll Nilsen , 2011 ; Korpelainen and Kira , 2013 IJHCS ( 10 ) Erskine , Carter - Tod , and Burton , 1997 ; McCarthy et al . , 1997 ; Decortis , Noirfalise , and Saudelli , 2000 ; Macaulay , Benyon , and Crerar , 2000 ; Wright , Dearden , and Fields , 2000 ; Carroll et al . , 2003 ; Norros and Nuutinen , 2005 ; Paulson , Cummings , and Hammond , 2011 ; Law and Sun , 2012 ; Belkadi et al . , 2013 IwC ( 12 ) Gobbin , 1998 ; Turner and Turner , 2001 ; Decortis , Rizzo , and Saudelli , 2003 ; Folcher , 2003 ; Pargman , 2003 ; Pargman and Wærn , 2003 ; Rabardel and Bourmaud , 2003 ; Meira and Peres , 2004 ; Carroll et al . , 2006 ; Barr , Noble , and Biddle , 2007 ; Norros , Liinasuo , and Hutton , 2011 ; Sjölie , 2012 CSCW ( 18 ) Engeström , 1999 ; Westerberg , 1999 ; Bardram , 2000 ; Barthelmess and An - derson , 2002 ; Clases and Wehner , 2002 ; Collins , Shukla , and Redmiles , 2002 ; Fjeld et al . , 2002 ; Halverson , 2002 ; Korpela , Mursu , and Soriyan , 2002 ; Miettinen and Hasu , 2002 ; Nardi , Whittaker , and Schwarz , 2002 ; Spasser , 2002 ; Zager , 2002 ; Carmien et al . , 2004 ; Schmidt and Wagner , 2004 ; Lauche , 2005 ; Nardi , 2005 ; Bødker and Petersen , 2007 IHCI ( 9 ) Honold , 2000 ; Bedny and Karwowski , 2003 ; Mühlfelder and Luczak , 2003 ; Chaiklin , 2007 ; Bedny , Karwowski , and Sengupta , 2008 ; Mohame - dally and Zaphiris , 2009 ; Bedny , Karwowski , and Bedny , 2010 ; Mahatody , Sagar , and Kolski , 2010 ; Bedny , Karwowski , and Bedny , 2012 CHB ( 10 ) Owen , 2001 ; Raven , 2006 ; Roda and Thomas , 2006 ; Liaw , Huang , and Chen , 2007 ; Young , 2008 ; Chan , 2009 ; Hannan , 2011 ; Zitter et al . , 2009 ; Dennen , 2014 ; Peña - Ayala , Sossa , and Méndez , 2014 TOCHI ( 6 ) Petersen , Madsen , and Kjær , 2002 ; Bardram , 2009 ; Benbunan - Fich , Adler , and Mavlanova , 2011 ; Convertino et al . , 2011 ; Oviatt et al , 2012 ; Tomlinson et al . , 2013 THCI ( 1 ) Luse et al . , 2011 Conferences CHI ( 10 ) Kuutti and Bannon , 1993 ; Kaptelinin , 2003 ; Voida and Mynatt , 2009 ; Sambasivan et al . , 2010 ; Baumer and Tomlinson , 2011 ; Yardi and Bruckman , 2011 ; Kaptelinin and Nardi , 2012 ; Park and Chen , 2012 ; Houben et al . , 2013 ; Kuutti and Bannon , 2014 CSCW ( 10 ) Engestrom , Y . , Engestrom , R . , and Saarelma , 1988 ; Kuutti and Arvonen , 1992 ; Bardram , 1998 ; Tuikka , 2002 ; Nardi , Schiano , and Gumbrecht , 2004 ; Neale , Carroll , and Rosson , 2004 ; Bardram and Doryab , 2011 ; Döw - eling , Schmidt , and Göb , 2012 ; Hautasaari , 2013 ; Quinones , 2014 INTERACT ( 5 ) Nardi et al . , 1993 ; Norris , Wong , and Rashid , 1999 ; Mwanza , 2001 ; Bødker and Klokmose , 2013 ; Klokmose and Bertelsen , 2013 Note : See the Appendix for a complete list of references to the 109 papers . At the same time as we narrowed down the set of papers , we developed our understanding of what to look for in an activity theory paper . In step four we ended up with five themes for analysis and synthesis . Our first and primary theme for the synthesis was the purpose of using activity theory , i . e . , the context in which activity theory was used . The use of theory in HCI research is context - specific , and depends on who uses the theory and how and why . Identifying the main purposes of using activity theory was our way to take the papers’ research contexts into account . The second theme was a paper’s reference to classic activity theory texts , i . e . , did the paper cite reference activity theory texts ? In bibliometry , a classic text is one that has not become obsolete after decades of popular - ity ( Walstrom & Leonard , 2000 ) . The Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction by Card , Moran and Newell ( Card , et al . , 1983 ) for example , is a classic HCI text . A classic text can be cited in many ways , e . g . , for authority or for specific arguments , all of which may tell us something about how researchers appropriate classic activity theory knowledge in a paper . The third theme was the specific activity theory concepts the paper used , i . e . , which activity theoretical concepts such as mediation , internaliza - tion , and development did the paper use ? This theme would provide in - sight as to whether a paper had used the theory as a gestalt , or used a few key concepts from the theory . The fourth theme was whether the paper employed activity theory alone or in combination with other theories . What role did activity theory play and how was it integrated with other theories ? The fifth theme was the authors’ comments and reflections on their uses of activity theory . What did the authors think worked and did not work in their papers ? Insights from the use of theory in psychology ( Greenwald , Pratkanis , Leippe , & Baumgardner , 1986 ) have indicated that too fixed a view on theory may obstruct research . Thus we could learn in what sense researchers expected activity theory to be useful , and whether social , cultural , organizational , technical or political issues had been associated with the use of activity theory . For the synthesis , all three authors analyzed the same set of 12 randomly selected papers , and discussed and adjusted the analysis . We then read and reread the 109 papers , systematically looking for relations between the ‘purpose of using AT’ and the other four categories in the final eval - uation criteria . 4 Findings In this section we discuss the variety of ways in which activity theory was used in the corpus of selected papers . The analysis is structured around the first of the five themes , identified in the previous section , i . e . , the papers are divided into five groups according to the main purpose of using the theory . The remaining four themes are then used to analyze each of the five groups of papers , one at a time . The decision to adopt this structure was based on the assumption that the use of theory in HCI research is context - specific . The way a theory is cited , the specific con - cepts that are found relevant , the place of the theory in the paper , and the perceived strengths and weaknesses of a theory , all depend on the partic - ular research context in which the theory is being employed for some meaningful purpose . Identifying the main purposes of using activity the - ory was a way for us to take the research contexts into account . The five - group division was produced in three steps . First , we differen - tiated between papers predominantly employing the theory as ( a ) an ob - ject of analysis , that is , focusing on activity theory per se ( e . g . , making the case for the theory as an HCI framework or comparing it to other theories ) or ( b ) a conceptual tool , that is , applying activity theory to sup - port analysis and / or design . The former group has five papers , while the overwhelming majority belongs to the latter group . At the second step , the 104 papers in the conceptual tool group were divided into two sub - groups depending on whether activity theory was used to support analy - sis ( 87 papers ) or design ( 17 papers ) . Finally , conceptual tool papers were further divided into three sub - groups : ( a ) meta - tool , that is , activity theory as a theoretical influence for developing a new analytical tool pro - posed in the paper ( 16 papers ) , ( b ) tool for conceptual analysis , that is , activity theory used as an analytical tool in a predominantly conceptual analysis of human - computer interaction ( 30 papers ) , and ( c ) tool for em - pirical analysis , that is , activity theory used as an analytical tool in a predominantly empirical analysis of human - computer interaction ( 41 pa - pers ) . Figure 2 schematically shows the divisions : Figure 2 . Dividing the corpus of selected HCI papers according to the main purpose of using activity theory . The five resulting groups are in bold typeface . Assigning papers to certain groups was often a non - trivial task . Many papers used theory for several purposes , for instance , an empirical study followed by a discussion of implications for design . Grouping problems were addressed by discussions among the three authors ; the final version of the group division is a result of a series of adjustments and modifica - tions stemming from the discussions . 4 . 1 Activity theory as an object of analysis In the five papers comprising this group , the main purpose of using the theory was to analyze and further develop activity theory . In these pa - pers , Nardi ( 1996 ) , Engeström ( 1987 ) and Bødker ( 1991 ) were used as early and authoritative source texts that present activity theory as a com - mon vocabulary and rich framework for studying context in HCI . The papers argued that activity theory provides a number of useful con - cepts that support the understanding of technology , including context , Whole set ( 109 papers ) Object of analysis ( 5 papers ) Conceptual tool ( 104 papers ) Analysis ( 87 papers ) Metatool ( 16 papers ) Conceptual analysis ( 30 papers ) Empirical analysis ( 41 papers ) Design ( 17 papers ) tool mediation , contradiction , object , and the hierarchical structure of ac - tivity . Bødker ( 1989 ) , Halverson ( 2002 ) , Decortis et al . ( 2003 ) , and Baumer and Tomlinson ( 2011 ) discussed the concept of context as a de - fining feature of activity theory . The emphasis on context suggests that activity theory can be a conceptual framework to describe technology in a particular setting “…situated within the broader organizational con - text” Halverson ( 2002 ) . Baumer and Tomlinson ( 2011 ) engaged with the activity theory concept of object in a comparison to distributed cognition . Decortis et al . ( 2000 ) discussed the similarities and differences between the notions of “goals” in distributed cognition and “object” in activity theory . Bedny and Karwowski ( 2003 ) noted that activity theory is useful for HCI because it “has precise units of analysis and carefully elaborated concepts and terminology” . The concept of tool mediation was discussed by Decortis et al . ( 2000 ) and Halverson ( 2002 ) . Halverson observed : “Naming a category ‘mediating artifacts’ focuses the analyst’s attention around those objects used by the subjects of the activity system . Naming helps communicate to others—particularly when they do not understand the particular domain . ” Decortis et al . ( 2000 ) noted that , “Contradictions within the activity and with social forces are then seen as the origin of any change” . Bedny and Karwowski ( 2003 ) studied inventory processes for a manufacturing firm and found the notion of hierarchy in activity theory useful : “ [ T ] his process is organized into a hierarchy of recursive subsystems directed to achieve goals of various operations and ac - tions…Hence , cognition should be studied as a continuous processing system and as a system of cognitive actions and operations” . Some authors mentioned difficulty learning activity theory concepts , and that comparative analysis with activity theory may be difficult due to the existence of multiple meanings of the key activity theory concepts . Baumer and Tomlinson ( 2011 ) remarked that activity theory may be dif - ficult to learn in that there are multiple meanings of the concept of object ( 2011 ) . At the same time , Halverson ( 2002 ) said that “Despite early calls that it was too difficult to learn [ activity theory ] …the range of practition - ers here—academics , members of large and small companies , as well as researchers—attest to its growing converts” . 4 . 2 Activity theory as a theoretical influence in the develop - ment of a new analytical tool In this group of 17 papers , activity theory was used for developing new analytical tools , either as a sole basis for developing a tool , or by com - bining it with other theory ( or theories ) to propose a new framework for analysis and evaluation , intended for a specific work or learning domain . For this purpose , tool mediation was an important concept . The ways activity theory can be applied appear to depend on multiple issues : the type of domain , whether it is used by a whole community or an individual researcher , what variant of the theory is used , and with which ontological perspective it is applied . Nardi ( 1996 ) , Engestrøm ( 1987 ) and Bødker ( 1991 ) were cited as introductions to activity theory’s history , key con - cepts , and how to apply the theory . The concept of tool mediation was the most important concept in this group of papers . Ang et al . ( 2011 ) devised a tool to guide the design of computer - based artifacts as support for constructionist learning systems . Belkadi et al . ( 2013 ) used activity theory to build a generic situation model of awareness in collaborative design . Bardram and Doryab ( 2011 ) built a tool to analyze qualitative data pertinent to activity in hospitals . Benbunan - Fich et al . ( 2011 ) cre - ated a tool to validate a set of metrics for multitasking . Bødker and Klok - mose ( 2011 ) developed a “human - artifact model” derived from activity theory to analyze ecologies of different kinds of artifacts used together in activities . Norros et al . ( 2011 ) created a tool for communities to design technologies for local activities . Bedny et al . ( 2010 , 2012 ) devised tools for reliability assessment and task complexity analysis . The concept of context was engaged to describe specific domains ( Bardram , 1998 ; Rabardel and Bourmaud , 2003 ; Spasser , 2002 ; Young , 2008 ; Jaferian et al . , 2014 ) . Kuutti and Bannon ( 1993 ) used the concept of the hierarchy of activity to develop a model of the process of enlarging the domain of HCI research . When reflecting on their use of activity theory , authors noted certain ben - efits but also problems to wrestle with . Mühlfelder and Luczak described problems analyzing dynamics over time ( 2003 ) . Ang et al . discussed dif - ficulties modelling interactions between activity systems ( 2011 ) . They argued that activity theory emphasizes cognitive aspects of human activ - ity , and may sometimes overlook organizational aspects as Engeström ( 1999 ) discussed . For certain types of human - human interaction anal - yses , some authors argued that activity theory needs to be supplemented with other theories to make it possible to develop more specific tools . For example , Meira and Peres needed specific linguistic tools for their analysis ( 2004 ) . Due to an elaborate theoretical vocabulary , activity the - ory may lead to analytical tools that are cumbersome or time consuming to use ( Bardram and Doryab , 2011 ) , which may also be the case for the new analytical tools derived from activity theory ( Belkadi et al . , 2013 ) . In sum , the main advantage of activity theory identified in this group of papers was that activity theory works with different ontological perspec - tives and helps avoid reductionism . Because it has a rich theoretical vo - cabulary and is open and expandable , activity theory can be used for analysis of a variety of human work domains , by both whole research communities and individual researchers . However , the papers also men - tioned that activity theory has some shortcomings when analyzing dy - namics over time and interaction between activity systems , and it may overemphasize analysis of cognition . 4 . 3 Activity theory as a theoretical frame for conceptual analyses In this group of 30 papers , researchers applied activity theory to concep - tualize various kinds of computer supported work and communication activities , with a focus on interfaces and development of IT systems . Classic texts were cited as explanations of different philosophical and psychological approaches to HCI , e . g . , as an alternative to the infor - mation processing model ( Barr , Noble , & Biddle , 2007 ) ; for activity the - ory’s philosophical foundations ( Benyon & Imaz , 1999 ) , and as a spe - cific instance of a general sociocultural approach ( Kaptelinin & Nardi , 2012 ) . Classic texts were also cited for defining key activity theory con - cepts , for example , defining levels of activity ( Bødker & Andersen , 2005 ) or Engeström’s approach to extending the concept of conflict ( Bødker , 1996 ) . An early paper by Kuuti and Arvonen ( 1992 ) cited Engeström ( 1987 ) for presenting a structural model of “…a “fundamen - tal type” of context , which is called activity” . Nearly all of the 30 papers used the concept of object to establish the objectives of activities and to identify specific things transformed in ac - tivity . Chaiklin ( 2007 ) , for example , established the object of his inquiry as obligatory mass schooling for all children to satisfy a societal need . Bødker and Andersen ( 2005 ) identified concrete objects in activities , e . g . , carpenters hit “nail objects , ” ship officers move “engine control ob - jects” from work station to work station at the ship’s bridge , and mari - time pilots identify “foreign ships objects” . Barr et al . ( 2007 ) noted that video games researchers study how “avatar objects” are transformed in game activities . Hannan ( 2011 ) observed that software development use cases can be “business objects” . Arestova et al . ( 1999 ) talked about com - puter - mediated communication as “new external tools ( both sign sys - tems and material objects ) ” . Kuutti and Bannon ( 2014 ) talked about the “object of [ HCI ] research” . Some researchers studied the concept of object itself , such as proposing pseudo - collective objects ( Zager , 2002 ) , and discussing definitions of the concept of object ( Greenberg , 2001 ) . Other concepts included the hi - erarchy of activity , mediation , contradiction , and development . For ex - ample , the concept of development was used to conceptualize historical development in mediators and the division of labor in Bødker and An - dersen ( 2005 ) and Sjölie ( 2012 ) , and for personal development in Carroll et al . ( 2006 ) . Affordance was given an activity theory interpretation in Kaptelinin and Nardi ( 2012 ) , who analysed affordances as instrumental within activity . Other authors noted that key activity theory concepts , such as mediators and objects , could be further conceptually developed , e . g . , into “co - occurring mediators” and “immediate and ultimate objects” ( Bødker and Andersen , 2005 ) . Processes of development can be ex - tended to concepts such as “instrumental genesis” that transform artifacts ( Rabardel & Bourmaud , 2003 ) . Mohamedally and Zaphiris used the con - cept of mediation to capture processes in diagramming design activities ( 2009 ) . Authors remarked that it is possible to integrate activity theory with other theories in a more comprehensive framework to analyze new situations . Some authors felt that activity theory by itself was not sufficient to con - ceptualize what goes on in work settings ( Hannan , 2011 ) . Kaptelinin and Bannon ( 2012 ) argued that activity theory needs to be further developed to deal with sets of interrelated activities that use shared pools of re - sources . Korpela et al . ( 2002 ) commented that activity theory by itself was not enough for the development of standard sets of data to compare across countries . 4 . 4 Activity theory as a conceptual tool for empirical anal - yses In this group of 41 papers , HCI researchers used activity theory as a the - oretical framework for empirical analysis to formulate specific questions for their studies . The papers focused on activity in diverse contexts in - cluding :  healthcare ( Engestrom , Y . , Engestrom , R . & Saarelma , 1988 ; Nardi et al . , 1993 ; Bardram 1998 ; 2000 ; Lundvoll Nilsen , 2011 ; Nardi et al . , 1993 ; Park and Chen , 2012 ) and elder care ( Westerberg , 1999 ) ,  education ( Carroll et al . , 2003 ; Law and Sun , 2012 ; Liaw et al . , 2007 ; Pargman , 2003 ; Pargman and Wærn , 2003 ; Raven , 2006 ; Turner and Turner , 2001 ) ,  corporate and industrial work ( Barthelmess and Anderson , 2002 ; Bødker and Petersen , 2007 ; Chauvin et al . , 2010 ; Collins et al . , 2002 ; Folcher , 2003 ; Lauche , 2005 ; Wright et al . , 2000 ; Miettinen and Hasu , 2002 ; Nardi et al . , 2002 ; Norros and Nuutinen , 2005 ; Owen , 2001 ; Schmidt and Wagner , 2004 ) ,  office work ( Voida and Mynatt , 2009 ) ,  household product usage ( Honold , 2000 ; Petersen et al . , 2002 ) ,  social media use ( Nardi et al . , 2004 ; Yardi and Bruckman , 2011 ; Dennen , 2014 ; Hautasaari , 2013 ) ,  technology use in urban slums ( Sambasivan et al . , 2010 )  technology use in controlled experimental settings ( Norris et al . , 1999 ; Bedny et al . , 2008 ; Chan , 2009 ; Paulson et al . , 2001 ; Oviatt et al . , 2012 ) . The papers in this group cited the classic texts as a general theoretical framework for empirical analysis . The classics were often cited together as a cluster that formed a uniform theoretical gestalt or a concrete ana - lytical framework to interpret empirical evidence . For example , Kor - pelainen and Kira ( 2013 ) cited Engestrøm ( 1987 ) and Nardi ( 1996 ) for presenting general activity theory . The activity theory concepts most widely used in the papers were tool mediation to help understand artifacts ; context to discuss meaningful hu - man activity ; and contradictions , tensions , and breakdowns , to help un - derstand the development of activity systems . Thirteen papers had a strong focus on tool mediation . For example , Bødker and Petersen ( 2007 ) studied a configuration of artifacts used in media production . Pargman and Waern ( 2008 ) studied collaborative writing tools . Bardram ( 1998 ) studied surgical tools . Oviatt et al . ( 2012 ) studied user interfaces for higher learning activities . Twelve papers focused on context . For exam - ple , Barthelmess and Anderson ( 2002 ) produced a rich contextual de - scription of software development as a collaborative activity . Owen ( 2001 ) analyzed the organizational context of workplace learning . Nine papers used the concept of contradiction , as well as the closely related notion of breakdown . For example , Miettinen and Hasu ( 2002 ) analyzed contradictions in a network of activity systems related to innovation . Law and Sun ( 2012 ) examined breakdowns in a set of video games . Hau - tasaari ( 2013 ) used the concept of hierarchy to analyse and design sup - port for Wikipedia article translation . In reflecting on their applications of activity theory , many authors com - mented that the breadth of activity theory helped position their research within a wider purview . Owen ( 2001 ) noted that , “The strength of activ - ity theory is that it draws attention to history and change , and the influ - ence of contradictory structures in mediating everyday work activity” . Bardram ( 2000 ) said , “Activity Theory informs—in the original sense of the word as giving form or character to—the task of analyzing coopera - tive work settings and devising mediating artifacts” . Korpelainen and Kira ( 2013 ) pointed out that the “strength of the activity system model lies in its being systemic and holistic” , but also pointed out that it could be “challenging to categorize the problems that were identified unequiv - ocally into the categories between different elements“ . In general , the reflections suggested that activity theory offers a rich framework that co - vers a wide range of HCI - relevant issues and factors including historical , social and organizational context . It was noted that empirical analyses informed by activity theory do not deliver specific predictions about the nature of work and its computer support . 4 . 5 Activity theory as a framework for design In this group of 17 papers , HCI researchers used activity theory to sup - port design reflexivity , provide a general structure for analysis and de - sign explorations , and develop a better understanding of the role of tech - nological artifacts in everyday contexts . Six papers reported the design of concrete systems : a table - top based groupware system ( Fjeld et al . , 2002 ) , an interactive learning environ - ment supporting children’s narrative activities ( Decortis et al . , 2003 ) , a desktop system for knowledge workers ( Houben at al . , 2014 ) , a personal project management system ( Kaptelinin , 2003 ) , and a hospital system for communication and information ( Bardram , 2009 ) . The last two systems implemented different versions of the activity - centric computing frame - work . Six papers dealt with design methodology . Several approaches to struc - turing and guiding the design process , informed by activity theory , were proposed : a methodology for designing corporate network security visu - alizations ( Luse et al . , 2011 ) , a conceptual model for the design of inter - active systems ( Döweling et al . , 2012 ) , guidelines for designing elec - tronic whiteboards ( Klokmose and Bertelsen , 2013 ) , a computer system design methodology based on Engeström’s activity system model ( Mwanza , 2001 ) , a framework for analysis , design , and evaluation of pe - ripheral displays ( Matthews et al . , 2007 ) , a methodology for modelling the development of groupware ( Herrmann et al . , 2004 ) , and dialogical techniques for the design of websites ( Erskine et al . , 1997 ) . The remaining five papers addressed a variety of other topics , such as the relationship between ethnography and theory in design ( Macauley et al . , 2000 ) ; designing sociotechnical support for people with cognitive disabilities ( Carmien et al . , 2004 ) ; conceptualizing notions of task ( Zitter et al . , 2009 ) and anticipation ( Peña - Ayala et al . , 2014 ) , both intended to support the design of learning environments ; and common ground and awareness in emergency management planning ( Convertino et al . , 2011 ) . The papers cited activity theory classics as providing guidance for design activities . For example , Houben et al . ( 2014 ) cited a classic text as their theoretical basis : “…we ground our design in Activity Theory ( AT ) ( Engeström 1987 ) ” , and “to make activity theory more concrete in con - text of the three problems of the contemporary desktop interface , we pre - sent three guidelines…” . Activity theory concepts used were context to inform design and describe use situations , tool mediation t o understand the role of technology in changes in work practices , and object to define the task to be supported by the design . For example , Mathews et al . said , “Activity Theory pro - vides a framework for describing user context…and consequently…a framework for describing how people and peripheral displays interact in various situations” ( 2007 ) . Klokmose and Bertelsen ( 2013 ) analyzed how information on a whiteboard was remediated to and from the white - board , and how designing artificial limitations on an electronic white - board could help maintain a key quality of a whiteboard—that when con - tent is erased , it is gone . Peña - Ayala et al . ( 2014 ) defined objects in the learning environment and how they were taken into account to support educational activities . When activity theory was the central theory it was used to provide gen - eral insights into the nature of design . New conceptual tools were illus - trated with concrete designs and details of implementation , and presen - tations of new systems were framed in activity theory discussions from which general claims were made . Klokmose and Bertelsen ( 2013 ) , for example , conceptualised the use of whiteboards with concepts derived from activity theory , and suggested how new designs could be based on the analysis . When activity theory played a secondary role , it was used to supplement insights from other frameworks , or used for comparison with the main design framework . Some authors noted that activity theory helped them maintain critical distance so they could analyze their settings more productively . Ma - cauley et al . ( 2000 ) said , “The explicit use of theoretical frameworks , at least those such as [ activity theory ] which are particularly suited to de - sign issues , discourages the tendency for ethnographers to see them - selves as ‘proxy users’ by encouraging greater reflexivity about the re - searcher’s role in constructing the object of study” . The main advantages of activity theory mentioned in the design papers were : providing a struc - ture for analysis and design explorations , understanding the role of arti - facts in everyday contexts , and supporting reflexivity . The papers mentioned certain limitations of activity theory . Mathews et al . ( 2007 ) observed that activity theory did not obviate the need for time consuming design processes : “The major limitation of our Activity The - ory framework is that it does not alleviate the difficulties of applying design and evaluation methods . It guides the design and evaluation pro - cesses , but design and evaluation methods remain challenging and time - consuming to employ” . As in other uses of activity theory , many authors found it advantageous to complement activity theory with other ap - proaches . Luse et al . ( 2011 ) observed : “ [ A ] marriage between concepts and techniques used by activity theorists and researchers applying design science would…be fruitful” . 4 . 6 Activity theory in use with other theories In many cases , authors used activity theory in conjunction with other theories . This finding is perhaps not surprising given that activity theory is a broad conceptual approach centered on concepts generically descrip - tive of human activity . Other theories were deployed for precision in spe - cific domains or topical areas . For example , Spasser used activity theory with a realist ontology to develop an evaluation framework for digital library use ( 2002 ) . Mühlfelder and Luczak used activity theory and con - ceptualizations of mental models to develop a new method for evaluating groupware ( 2003 ) . Meira and Peres paired activity theory with conver - sation analysis to evaluate educational software ( 2004 ) . Convertino et al . combined activity theory with a theory of small groups in a study of in - tergenerational groups ( 2007 ) . Young used activity theory , cognitive load theory , and flow experience theory to develop an integrated frame - work for internet - mediated experiences for children ( 2008 ) . Norros et al . used activity theory and cognitive ergonomics requirements engineering in a simulation of first responder services ( 2011 ) . Barr et al . ( 2007 ) used activity theory with value theory and semiotics to analyze emotions in videogames . Kuutti and Bannon clustered activity theory with other so - cial theories to discuss a turn to practice studies in HCI ( 2014 ) . Tomlin - son et al . ( 2013 ) applied activity theory in the development of a theory for collapse informatics , in particular to extend the notion of time to take into account the future . Activity theory has been combined with a wide range of other approaches including philosophical theories , social psy - chology , cognitive psychology , ethnomethodology , and systems devel - opment theory to create new analytical tools in varied domains . Some papers used activity theory in a limited way to buttress other ap - proaches . Quinones ( 2014 ) used activity theory to develop a coding scheme for analysing interviews . Carroll et al . ( 2003 ) used the concept of activity in formulating their own concept of “activity awareness . ” Chan ( 2009 ) employed Engeström’s notion of activity system to formu - late specific questions to be addressed in a study of decision support sys - tems . In some papers activity theory was referred to briefly in making general claims about its usefulness , conceptual validity , or relevance . For instance , Wright et al . ( 2000 ) suggested using activity theory to explore function allocation in human - computer systems , and both Pargman ( 2003 ) and Chauvin et al . ( 2010 ) noted that there are similarities between the approach they employ , instrumental genesis , and activity theory . All of that said , most papers used activity theory as the sole theory to conceptualize the research . 4 . 7 Summary Our qualitative analysis of the use of activity theory in a carefully derived set of HCI activity theory papers indicated that HCI researchers used ac - tivity theory for five different purposes . When synthesizing and summa - rizing these findings , we found five different roles for HCI researchers making activity theory work : ( 1 ) Meta - theoreticians considered activity theory itself as an object of analysis . They identified unique features and principles , as well as problematic aspects , of the theory and compared it to other “contex - tual” theories in HCI and related areas . For instance , Halvorson ( 2002 ) presented a systematic comparative analysis of activity theory and Hutchins’ distributed cognition theory as conceptual frameworks for CSCW research . ( 2 ) Theory - tool - makers used activity theory as a theoretical influence in the development of a new analytical tool . They identified needs and requirements for new theoretical tools and employed activity theory , sometimes in combination with other theories , to inform and guide the development of such tools . An example is Young ( 2008 ) which used activity theory in combination with cognitive load theory and flow experience theory to develop an integrated framework for ana - lyzing internet - mediated experiences of children . ( 3 ) Construct - developers employed activity theory as a tool for concep - tual analysis and development . They applied the theory to address central issues and challenges in HCI , often in response to the emer - gence of new technologies . By doing so they also developed new sub - concepts of existing concepts , or expanded the application scope of existing concepts . An example is the paper by Bødker and Ander - sen ( 2005 ) that conceptualizes the historical development of media - tors . ( 4 ) Data interpreters used activity theory as a tool for empirical analy - sis . They used key theoretical constructs of the theory to identify and categorize specific empirical phenomena . For example , Bardram ( 1998 , 2000 ) analyzed health care cooperative work settings and de - vised new artifacts . ( 5 ) Design - oriented researchers used activity theory as a framework for design . The theory guided the iterative design process , or helped de - velop claims about the nature of the design process . These research - ers provided new design illustrations , claims , and guidelines . An ex - ample is Mwanza ( 2001 ) which offered a design methodology based on Engeström’s activity system model . Table 4 summarizes the findings in the previous sections . Table 4 . The five purposes of using activity theory ( AT ) and related thematic findings . Purpose Use of activity theory classic texts Engagement with key activity theory concepts The role of activity theory in a HCI paper Reflections on the use of activity theory Object of analysis Classic texts are cited as early and authoritative , but difficult , source texts . The concept of context is the most im - portant AT concept AT can be the primary object for analysis , or one theory among other theories in a comparative analysis . AT has some unique features , and it has principles and is pre - cise , and hence possible to analyze per se . Comparative anal - ysis with AT may be difficult due to semantic problems with key concepts . Meta - tool Classic texts are cited as intro - ductions to AT’s history , key concepts and how to apply it . The concept of tool mediation is im - portant . AT concepts are used as either empirical , theoretical , or explanatory con - cepts . AT concepts may also be inter - preted with various domain specific as - sumptions . One approach is to focus on the AT framework and on basis of this develop a new analytical tool . Another approach is to mix AT with other theory in a new framework for analysis and evaluation for a specific work or learning domain . AT works with different ontological perspectives , it helps avoiding reductionism , and it has a rich theoretical vocabu - lary , good means for visualizations , and it is open and expand - able . Can be used for analysis of a variety of human work do - mains , and by both whole user communities and individual re - searchers . However , AT has shortcomings when analyzing dy - namics over time and interaction between activity systems , and it tends to focus on analysis of cognition . Conceptual analysis Classic texts are cited for providing explanations of dif - ferent philosophical and psy - chological approaches to HCI , and for defining selected con - cepts . The concepts of object and transformation are most important . AT concepts can themselves be topics for further conceptu - alization , and / or AT concepts can used to conceptualize activity and describe its specific characteristics . AT or a mix of AT and various other theory can be applied to conceptualize various computer sup - ported work and communication activities , with a focus on interfaces and development of IT sys - tems . AT works well to conceptualize real - world situations for comparison across a variety of national and organizational settings . AT concepts can be further developed , and non - AT concepts can be re - interpreted as AT concepts . However , AT should be more specific and flexible to be really useful for generalization . Empirical analysis Classic texts are cited for providing a general theoretical framework for empirical anal - ysis . The most important concepts are tool me - diation , which helps understanding the ar - tifacts ; context , which helps take into ac - count meaningful human activity ; and contradictions , tensions , and breakdowns , which help understand the development of activity systems . AT used alone directs empirical analysis by help - ing to formulate specific questions for the study . In a secondary role , selected AT concepts may in - form parts the analyses , or support claims for con - ceptual validity . AT offers a rich framework that covers a wide range of HCI - relevant issues and factors including historical , social and or - ganizational context . However , empirical analysis with AT does not deliver predications about the nature of work and computer support . Design Classic texts are cited for sup - porting design activities . The most important concepts used are context to inform design and describe use situations , tool mediation to understand the role of technology in changes in work practices , and object to define the task to be supported by the design . AT provides general insights into the nature of design . New conceptual tools may be illustrated with concrete designs and details of implementa - tion , and presentations of new systems may be framed in AT discussions from which general claims can be made . When AT plays a secondary role , it may be used to supplement insights from other , more central frameworks , or used for com - parison with the main design framework used . AT supports design reflexivity , providing a general structure for analysis and design explorations , and supporting a better understanding of the role of technological artifacts in every - day contexts . However , using activity theory it is hard to give concrete design examples , and practical guidance for design is missing . 5 Discussion 5 . 1 The roles of theory in HCI By focusing on activity theory , and conducting an analysis and meta - synthesis of 109 selected HCI activity theory papers , we created an em - pirically based taxonomy of five purposes of using activity theory , and used this to identify five roles for HCI researchers making HCI theory work . Rogers ( 2012 ) , in an overview of HCI theory , found that activity theory has been very popular in HCI as an explanatory framework that can “be mapped onto features of complex , real - world contexts” . While our analysis of a set of activity theory HCI papers confirms the use of ac - tivity theory for empirical analysis of real world contexts , our findings further identified four other uses of activity theory in HCI , as we have discussed . In addition , a number of broader issues of theory in HCI , regarding its relevance and patterns of use , emerged in our analyses and are discussed below . 5 . 2 Theory use vs . theory making Should HCI researchers be considered theory makers or theory users ? Kjærgaard and Vendelø ( 2015 ) found that Information Systems ( IS ) re - searchers studying sensemaking theory often used this theory without explaining it or providing substantial theoretical background or discus - sion . They concluded that IS research is mainly concerned with empir - ical phenomena , pays little attention to theory construction and devel - opment , and that therefore IS is less likely to gain recognition as a ref - erence discipline for other disciplines . In contrast , there are reasons to believe that HCI is in a good situation when it comes to providing theoretical influence on other disciplines . There are indications that HCI acts as a reference discipline ; for exam - ple , the classic activity theory HCI text Context and Conscioussness ( Nardi 1996 ) , has been widely cited outside HCI . Instead of theory use as passive consumption of a theory “product , ” we found numerous cases of theory development . These papers would for example tell the reader in the title , abstract and keyword that this is about activity the - ory , cite the reference HCI activity theory texts , use activity theory deeply and in a substantial way , and reflect core HCI activity theory concerns . We believe that HCI researchers can be described as not just “theory users” but also as “theory - makers” . However , not all HCI researchers are ( or should be ) either theory mak - ers or theory users . Many HCI papers may better be characterized as experience reports ( Newman , 1994 ) or merely challenging and provoc - ative ( Blackwell , 2015 ) , with little or no trace of theory . We found more than 200 full papers ( outside of the 109 in our corpus ) that mentioned activity theory , but did not report any substantial theory use or theory - making . 5 . 3 Practical relevance of HCI theory The results of our qualitative meta - synthesis suggest that HCI has not fallen prey to Kuutti’s ( 2010 ) concern that HCI research focuses only on practical usefulness to the exclusion of explanatory analysis . We found that the use of activity theory in design resulted in the develop - ment of concepts intended to be used by industry . We found that the papers we analyzed were concerned about topics of practical interest in varied domains of work , play , and learning . There are indications that historically , explicit use of theory in industry by HCI professionals tends to happen mostly in R & D contexts , or in consultancy work ( Clemmensen , 2003 ) . However , even the broad concept of usability , which hardly qualifies as theory , has been shown to be difficult to le - gitimize in industry and large organizations without first overcoming considerable organizational obstacles ( Cajander , Janols , & Eriksson , 2014 ) . One possibility is that there is a misfit between the kind of HCI theory potentially useful for the global IT companies who can afford to have strong R & D usability communities and who are top sponsors and contributors to HCI research ( Bartneck & Hu , 2009 ) , and the needs of other companies for more organizationally adapted and commercially oriented HCI theory . We believe that our proposed taxonomy can help HCI researchers become more aware of the purposes for which a theory is applied , and the outcomes of theory - making and use that can be ex - pected . 5 . 4 Various interpretations of theory in HCI research Our analysis shows that the meaning of theory itself varies from paper to paper ; it is not fixed and immutable . In this respect our study goes against the view that a given theory always has a particular form ( Gregor , 2006 ; Newman , 1994 ) . The diversity of interpretations of the - ory in different contexts is determined by a number of factors . First , we found several forms of activity theory being used , ranging from theory as a gestalt or framework for understanding context , to specific emphases on a few key concepts from activity theory such as mediation . Second , depending on the purpose of using activity theory , different concepts and principles were used . For instance , as shown in Table 5 , the notion of context was the most widely used by in meta - theoretical analyses , while in theory tool - making the most widely used was the notion of tool mediation . Table 4 . Papers with key activity theory concepts , across different roles of HCI theory Meta - the - orist Theory Tool - maker Construct - developer Empirical analyst Design theorist Total No % No % No % No % No % No % Context 4 80 6 38 11 37 18 44 10 59 49 45 Tool mediation 2 40 7 44 11 37 14 34 6 35 40 37 Object - oriented 2 40 4 25 13 43 7 17 5 29 31 28 Contradictions 2 40 3 19 6 20 10 24 3 18 24 22 Hierarchy 2 40 4 25 5 17 4 10 3 18 18 17 Transformation 2 40 4 25 5 17 4 10 3 18 18 17 Functional organ 1 20 2 13 1 3 5 12 0 0 9 8 Other 1 20 4 25 6 20 12 29 3 18 26 24 Total number of papers 5 100 17 100 28 100 41 100 17 100 108 100 Third , we found that activity theory was used in combination with other theories for different purposes and in different ways , such as compar - ing , adapting it to new work domains or to new technologies , or formu - lating design guidelines . Fourth , classic HCI theory texts were cited in many different ways , namely , as authoritative theory texts , introduc - tions to the theory , or source of definitions , frameworks for empirical analysis , or loose guidelines . This variation in the use of activity theory suggests that it is extremely flexible , avoids the dogmatism associated with some theoretical work , and is always growing and changing . In - deed activity theory itself always says that it will grow and change as all human artifacts do ( Kaptelinin and Nardi 2006 ) 5 . 5 Sociocultural implications of using HCI theory One obvious feature of activity theory is that it explicitly covers histor - ical , social , and organizational contexts to support a better understand - ing of the role of technological artifacts in these contexts . Authors sug - gested that activity theory should be developed more fully to account for analyzing dynamics over time , interaction between activity systems , and even more deeply engage social and organizational aspects . As HCI develops broader , problem - based approaches such as sustainable HCI , ICT for development ( ICTD ) , crisis informatics , and collapse in - formatics , the need to engage analyses of political economy and global dynamics suggests that activity theory must itself continue to develop . The complex global social arenas underlying broad societal issues cannot be studied in any deep way without considerations of economy and his - tory , little of which we saw in the articles we analyzed . At the same time , broad concerns of economy and environment must include a concept of an individual or collective subject with their objectives and concerns . For example , ( Pargman & Raghavan , 2014 ) argue that sustainability in HCI should examine topics such as a steady state economy and the “limits to growth” investigated in economic models . Such analytical approaches are essential , but if they do not weave in human subjects with agency and agendas , they will never truly inform the discipline of human - computer interaction . 6 Concluding remarks In this paper we analyzed how theory , and in particular activity theory , has worked out for HCI researchers . We found frequent and positive uses , and adaptation and development of activity theory in HCI . Our qualitative meta - synthesis indicated five specific purposes for which by HCI researchers use and make activity theory . HCI has produced activity theory classics that might approximate the classics of HCI information processing theory . We have discussed how our findings for activity the - ory may also be valid for other HCI theories . We expect that the diversity of issues and interests in our field will con - tinue to produce the blooming , buzzing confusion that is HCI , while at the same time , its theories will ensure grounding for continued develop - ment , much as information processing theory allowed for the emergence of HCI as a recognized field . HCI theory is accumulating , whether we like it or not . Concrete future research to follow up on this study would include inter - viewing HCI researchers from each category of our theory - makers . From a quantitative point of view , it would be interesting to test the initial char - acterization of five roles of theory and theory makers in HCI more for - mally and systematically by developing a codebook and by using inde - pendent raters from various HCI communities in the world . This could also be done for other theories than activity theory . Finally , the current study could be taken forward by studying the use of activity theory in related fields such as information systems , which has recently shown an increased interest in activity theory . ( Chatterjee , 2015 ) , discussing design based research , proposes that activity theory may be used to bridge between researchers from different fields , espe - cially social science and computer science , in a holistic manner in order to create design - based theories . We look forward to such cross - discipli - nary efforts to strengthen our understanding of information technology and its impact on individuals and society . 7 References 1 . Bargas - Avila , J . A . , and Hornbæk , K . 2011 . Old wine in new bottles or novel challenges : a critical analysis of empirical studies of user experience . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 11 , 2689 - 2698 , ACM . 2 . Barr , P . , Noble , J . , and Biddle , R . 2007 . Video game values : Human - computer interaction and games . Interacting with Computers , 19 ( 2 ) : 180 - 195 . 3 . Bartneck , C . , and Hu , J . 2009 . Scientometric analysis of the CHI proceedings . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 09 , 699 - 708 , ACM . 4 . Benyon , D . , and Imaz , M . 1999 . Metaphors and models : conceptual foundations of representations in interactive systems development . Human - Computer Interaction , 14 ( 1 ) : 159 - 189 . 5 . Blackwell , A . F . 2015 . HCI as an Inter - Discipline . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 15 , 503 - 516 , ACM . 6 . Bødker , S . 1989 . A human activity approach to user interfaces . Human - Computer Interaction , 4 ( 3 ) : 171 - 195 . 7 . Bødker , S . 1991 . Through the Interface : A Human Activity Approach to User Interface Design . New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . 8 . Bødker , S . 2006 . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human - computer interaction : changing roles , NordiCHI ' 06 , 1 - 8 , ACM . 9 . Bødker , S . , and Andersen , P . B . 2005 . Complex mediation . Human - Computer Interaction , 20 ( 4 ) : 353 - 402 . 10 . Cajander , Å . , Janols , R . , and Eriksson , E . 2014 . On the establishment of user - centred perspectives . Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational , NordiCHI ' 14 , 103 - 112 , ACM . 11 . Card , S . , Moran , T . P . , and Newell , A . 1983 . The Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction : Hillsdale , NJ : LEA . 12 . Carroll , J . M . 1991 . Designing interaction : Psychology at the human - computer interface ( Vol . 4 ) : CUP Archive . 13 . Carroll , J . M . 2003 . HCI models , theories , and frameworks : Toward a multidisciplinary science : Morgan Kaufmann . 14 . Carroll , J . M . , and Campbell , R . L . 1986 . Softening up Hard Science : reply to Newell and Card . Human Computer Interaction , 2 ( 3 ) : 227 - 249 . 15 . Chatterjee , S . 2015 . Writing My next Design Science Research Master - piece : But How Do I Make a Theoretical Contribution to DSR ? Proceedings of 23rd ECIS conference , Munster Germany , ECIS2015 Completed Research Papers : Paper 28 . 16 . Clemmensen , T . 2003 , September 1 - 5 , 2003 . Usability Professionals ' Personal Interest in Basic HCI theory . Proceedings of the ninth IFIP TC13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , INTERACT ' 03 , 639 - 646 , IOS Press . 17 . Clemmensen , T . 2006 . Whatever happened to the Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction ? a biography of the life of a psychological framework within a HCI journal . Information Technology and People , 19 ( 2 ) : 121 - 151 . 18 . Cole , M . 1996 . Cultural Psychology : A Once and Future Discipline : A Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . 19 . Cole , M . , and Werstch , J . V . 1986 . Preliminary remarks on the Soviet socio - cultural approach to mind and psychological research in the United States . Paper presented at the First International Congress on the Theory of Activity , Berlin October 1998 . 20 . Dourish , P . 2001 . Where the action is : The foundation of embodied interaction : Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 21 . Engeström , Y . 1987 . Learning by expanding : Cambridge University Press . 22 . Engeström , Y . 1999 . Activity theory and individual and social transformation . In Y . Engeström , R . Miettinen and R . Punamaki Eds . ) , Perspectives on Activity Theory , 19 - 38 . Cambridge University Press . 23 . Fallman , D . 2011 . The new good : exploring the potential of philosophy of technology to contribute to human - computer interaction . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 11 , 1051 - 1060 , ACM . 24 . Greenwald , A . G . , Pratkanis , A . R . , Leippe , M . R . , and Baumgardner , M . H . 1986 . Under what conditions does theory obstruct research progress ? Psychological Review , 93 ( 2 ) : 216 - 229 . 25 . Gregor , S . 2006 . The nature of theory in information systems . MIS Quarterly , 30 ( 3 ) : 611 - 642 . 26 . Halskov , K . , and Hansen , N . B . 2015 . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 – 2012 . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 74 : 81 - 92 . 27 . Kaptelinin , V . , and Nardi , B . 2012 . Affordances in HCI : Toward a mediated action perspective . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 12 : 967 - 976 , ACM . 28 . Kaptelinin , V . , Nardi , B . , Bødker , S . , Carroll , J . , Hollan , J . , Hutchins , E . , and Winograd , T . 2003 . Post - cognitivist HCI : second - wave theories . CHI ' 03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ' 03 : 692 - 693 , ACM . 29 . Kaptelinin , V . , and Nardi , B . A . 2006 . Acting with technology : Activity theory and interaction design : Mit Press . 30 . King , N . 2012 . Doing template analysis . in Symon , Gillian , and Catherine Cassell , eds . Qualitative organizational research : core methods and current challenges . Sage , 426 - 450 . 31 . Kjærgaard , A . , and Vendelø , M . T . 2015 . The role of theory adaptation in the making of a reference discipline . Information and Organization , 25 ( 3 ) : 137 - 149 . 32 . Kostakos , V . 2015 . The big hole in HCI research . interactions , 22 ( 2 ) : 48 - 51 . 33 . Kozulin , A . 1984 . Psychology in Utopia : Toward a Social History of Soviet Psychology . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . 34 . Kuutti , K . 2010 . Where are the Ionians of user experience research ? Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries , NordiCHI ' 10 , 715 - 718 , ACM . 35 . Kuutti , K . , and Bannon , L . J . 2014 . The turn to practice in HCI : Towards a research agenda . Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ' 14 : 3543 - 3552 , ACM . 36 . Leontiev Leontyev ) , A . N . 1978 . Activity , Consciousness , and Personality , ( Vol . 44 ) : Prentice - Hall Englewood Cliffs , Nj . 37 . Leontiev Leontyev ) , A . N . 1981 . Problems of the development of the mind . Moscow , Russia : Progress . 38 . Liu , Y . , Goncalves , J . , Ferreira , D . , Xiao , B . , Hosio , S . , and Kostakos , V . 2014 . CHI 1994 - 2013 : Mapping two decades of intellectual progress through co - word analysis . Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ' 14 , 3553 - 3562 , ACM . 39 . Monk , A . , and Gilbert , G . N . 1995 . Perspectives on HCI : diverse approaches : Academic Pr . 40 . Nardi , B . A . 1996 . Context and consciousness : activity theory and human - computer interaction : Mit Press . 41 . Newman , W . 1994 . A preliminary analysis of the products of HCI research , using pro forma abstracts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ' 94 , 278 - 284 , ACM . 42 . Pargman , D . , and Raghavan , B . 2014 . Rethinking sustainability in computing : from buzzword to non - negotiable limits . Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational , NordiCHI ' 14 : 638 - 647 , ACM . 43 . Rogers , Y . 2004 . New Theoretical Approaches for HCI . Annual review of information science and technology ( ARIST ) , 38 ( 1 ) : 87 - 143 . 44 . Rogers , Y . 2012 . HCI theory : classical , modern , and contemporary . Synthesis Lectures on Human - Centered Informatics , 5 ( 2 ) : 1 - 129 . 45 . Rubinshtein , S . L . 1946 . Foundations of General Psychology Second edition ed . . Moscow , Russia : Uchpedgiz in Russian ) . 46 . Stewart , J . , Baker , N . L . , Chaney , S . , Hashimov , E . , Imafuji , E . , McNely , B . , and Romano , L . 2012 . A qualitative metasynthesis of activity theory in SIGDOC proceedings 2001 - 2011 . Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on Design of communication , SIGDOC ' 12 , 341 - 348 , ACM . 47 . Vygotsky , L . S . 1978 . Mind in Society . The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press . 48 . Walstrom , K . , and Leonard , L . 2000 . Citation classics from the information systems literature . Information and Management , 38 ( 2 ) : 59 - 72 . 49 . Wertsch , J . V . e . 1981 . The Concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology : Armonk , NY : M . E . Sharpe . 50 . Winograd , T . , and Flores , F . 1986 . Understanding computers and cognition : A new foundation for design : Intellect Books . 8 Appendix – the 109 papers that engage activity theory 1 . Ang , C . S . , Zaphiris , P . , and Wilson , S . 2011 . A case study analysis of a constructionist knowledge building community with ac - tivity theory . Behaviour & information technology , 30 ( 5 ) : 537 - 554 . 2 . Arestova , O . , Babanin , L . , and Voiskounsky , A . 1999 . Psychological research of computer - mediated communication in Russia . Be - haviour and Information Technology , 18 ( 2 ) : 141 - 147 . 3 . Bardram , J . 1998 . Designing for the dynamics of cooperative work activities . Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference on Com - puter supported cooperative work , CSCW ' 98 , 89 - 98 , ACM . 4 . Bardram , J . E . 2000 . Temporal coordination - on time and coordina - tion of collaborative activities at a surgical department . Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 9 ( 2 ) : 157 - 187 . 5 . Bardram , J . E . 2009 . Activity - based computing for medical work in hospitals . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 16 ( 2 ) : 1 - 36 . 6 . Bardram , J . , and Doryab , A . 2011 . Activity analysis : Applying activ - ity theory to analyze complex work in hospitals . Proceedings of the 2011 ACM conference on Computer supported cooper - ative work , CSCW ‘11 , 455 - 464 , ACM . 7 . Barr , P . , Noble , J . , and Biddle , R . 2007 . Video game values : Human - computer interaction and games . Interacting with Computers , 19 ( 2 ) : 180 - 195 . 8 . Barthelmess , P . , and Anderson , K . M . 2002 . A view of software de - velopment environments based on activity theory . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Jour - nal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 13 - 37 . 9 . Baumer , E . P . S . , and Tomlinson , B . 2011 . Comparing activity theory with distributed cognition for video analysis : Beyond " kicking the tires " . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI’11 , 133 - 142 , ACM . 10 . Bedny , G . Z . , Karwowski , W . and Sengupta , T . 2008 . Application of systemic - structural theory of activity in the development of predictive models of user performance . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 24 ( 3 ) : 239 - 274 . 11 . Bedny , G . Z . , Karwowski , W . , and Bedny , I . S . 2012 . Complexity evaluation of computer - based tasks . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 28 ( 4 ) : 236 - 257 . 12 . Bedny , G . , and Karwowski , W . 2003 . A systemic - structural activity approach to the design of human - computer interaction tasks . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 16 ( 2 ) : 235 - 260 . 13 . Bedny , I . S . , Karwowski , W . , and Bedny , G . Z . 2010 . A method of human reliability assessment based on systemic - structural ac - tivity theory . International Journal of Human - Computer Inter - action , 26 ( 4 ) : 377 - 402 . 14 . Belkadi , F . , Bonjour , E . , Camargo , M . , Troussier , N . , and Eynard , B . 2013 . A situation model to support awareness in collaborative design . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 71 ( 1 ) : 110 - 129 . 15 . Benbunan - Fich , R . , Adler , R . F . , and Mavlanova , T . 2011 . Measuring multitasking behavior with activity - based metrics . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 18 ( 2 ) : 1 - 22 . 16 . Benyon , D . and Imaz , M . 1999 . Metaphors and models : Conceptual foundations of representations in interactive systems develop - ment . Human - Computer Interaction , 14 ( 1 ) : 159 - 189 . 17 . Bødker , S . and Petersen , A . B . 2007 . Seeds of cross - media produc - tion . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An In - ternational Journal , 16 , 5 , 539 - 566 . 18 . Bødker , S . 1989 . Human activity approach to user interfaces . Human - Computer Interaction 4 ( 3 ) : 171 - 195 . 19 . Bødker , S . 1996 . Creating Conditions for Participation : Conflicts and Resources in Systems Development . Human - Computer Inter - action , 11 ( 3 ) : 215 . 20 . Bødker , S . 1998 . Understanding Representation in Design . Human - Computer Interaction , 13 ( 2 ) : 107 – 125 . 21 . Bødker , S . , and Andersen , P . B . 2005 . Complex mediation . Human - Computer Interaction , 20 ( 4 ) : 353 - 402 . 22 . Bødker , S . , and Klokmose , C . 2013 . From Persona to Techsona . In P . Kotzé , G . Marsden , G . Lindgaard , J . Wesson and M . Winck - ler ( Eds . ) , Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 , vol . 8120 , 342 - 349 , Springer Berlin Heidelberg . 23 . Bødker , S . , Klokmose , C . N . 2011 . The Human - Artifact Model : An Activity Theoretical Approach to Artifact Ecologies . Human - Computer Interaction , 26 ( 4 ) : 315 - 371 . 24 . Carmien , S . , Depaula , R . , Gorman , A . and Kintsch , A . 2004 . Increas - ing workplace independence for people with cognitive disabil - ities by leveraging distributed cognition among caregivers and clients . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 13 ( 5 - 6 ) : 443 - 470 . 25 . Carroll , J . M . 1996 . Becoming social : Expanding scenario - based ap - proaches in HCI . Behaviour & Information Technology , 15 ( 4 ) : 266 - 275 . 26 . Carroll , J . M . , Neale , D . C . , Isenhour , P . L . , Beth Rosson , M . and Scott Mccrickard , D . 2003 . Notification and awareness : Syn - chronizing task - oriented collaborative activity . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 58 ( 5 ) : 605 - 632 . 27 . Carroll , J . M . , Rosson , M . B . , Convertino , G . and Ganoe , C . H . 2006 . Awareness and teamwork in computer - supported collabora - tions . Interacting with Computers , 18 ( 1 ) : 21 - 46 . 28 . Chaiklin , S . 2007 . Modular or integrated ? - an activity perspective for designing and evaluating computer - based systems . Interna - tional Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 22 ( 1 - 2 ) : 173 - 190 . 29 . Chan , S . H . 2009 . The roles of user motivation to perform a task and decision support system ( DSS ) effectiveness and efficiency in DSS use . Computers in Human Behavior , 25 ( 1 ) : 217 - 228 . 30 . Chauvin , C . , Morel , G . , and Tirilly , G . 2010 . The use of information and communication technology in the sea fishing industry . Be - haviour & Information Technology , 29 ( 4 ) : 403 - 413 . 31 . Clases , C . , and Wehner , T . 2002 . Steps across the border - coopera - tion , knowledge production and systems design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Jour - nal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 39 - 54 . 32 . Collins , P . , Shukla , S . , and Redmiles , D . 2002 . Activity theory and system design : A view from the trenches . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 55 - 80 . 33 . Convertino , G . , Farooq , U . , Rosson , M . B . , Carroll , J . M . , and Meyer , B . J . F . 2007 . Supporting intergenerational groups in com - puter - supported cooperative work ( CSCW . Behaviour & Infor - mation Technology , 26 ( 4 ) : 275 - 285 . 34 . Convertino , G . , Mentis , H . M . , Slavkovic , A . , Rosson , M . B . and Car - roll , J . M . 2011 . Supporting common ground and awareness in emergency management planning : A design research project . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 18 ( 4 ) : article 22 . 35 . Decortis , F . , Noirfalise , S . , and Saudelli , B . 2000 . Activity theory , cognitive ergonomics and distributed cognition : Three views of a transport company . International Journal of Human Com - puter Studies , 53 ( 1 ) : 5 - 33 . 36 . Decortis , F . , Rizzo , A . and Saudelli , B . 2003 . Mediating effects of active and distributed instruments on narrative activities . Inter - acting with Computers , 15 ( 6 ) : 801 - 830 . 37 . Dennen , V . P . 2014 . Becoming a blogger : Trajectories , norms , and activities in a community of practice . Computers in Human Be - havior , 36 : 350 - 358 . 38 . Döweling , S . , Schmidt , B . , and Göb , A . 2012 . A model for the design of interactive systems based on activity theory . Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , CSCW ‘12 , 539 - 548 , ACM . 39 . Engestrom , Y . , Engestrom , R . and Saarelma , O . 1988 . Computerized medical records , production pressure and compartmentaliza - tion in the work activity of health center physicians . Proceed - ings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer supported co - operative work , CSCW ‘88 , 65 - 84 , ACM . 40 . Engeström , Y . 1999 . Expansive visibilization of work : An activity - theoretical perspective . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 8 ( 1 - 2 ) : 63 - 93 . 41 . Erskine , L . E . , Carter - Tod , D . R . N . and Burton , J . K . 1997 . Dialogi - cal techniques for the design of websites . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 47 ( 1 ) : 169 - 195 . 42 . Fjeld , M . , Lauche , K . , Bichsel , M . , Voorhorst , F . , Krueger , H . , and Rauterberg , M . 2002 . Physical and virtual tools : Activity the - ory applied to the design of groupware . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 153 - 180 . 43 . Folcher , V . 2003 . Appropriating artifacts as instruments : When de - sign - for - use meets design - in - use . Interacting with Computers , 15 , 647 - 663 . 44 . Gobbin , R . 1998 . The role of cultural fitness in user resistance to in - formation technology tools . Interacting with Computers , 9 ( 3 ) , 275 - 285 . 45 . Greenberg , S . 2001 . Context as a dynamic construct . Human - Com - puter Interaction , 6 , 257 - 268 . 46 . Halverson , C . A . 2002 . Activity theory and distributed cognition : Or what does CSCW need to DO with theories ? Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) , 243 - 267 . 47 . Hannan , M . 2011 . Analysis of the collaborative activities in software development processes from the perspective of chronotopes . Computers in Human Behavior , 27 ( 1 ) : 248 - 267 . 48 . Hautasaari , A . 2013 . Could someone please translate this ? : activity analysis of wikipedia article translation by non - experts . Pro - ceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , CSCW ‘13 , 945 - 954 , ACM . 49 . Herrmann , T . , Hoffmann , M . , Kunau , G . and Loser , K . U . 2004 . A modelling method for the development of groupware applica - tions as socio - technical systems . Behaviour & Information Technology , 23 ( 2 ) : 119 - 135 . 50 . Honold , P . 2000 . Culture and context : An empirical study for the de - velopment of a framework for the elicitation of cultural influ - ence in product usage . International Journal of Human - Com - puter Interaction , 12 ( 3 - 4 ) : 327 - 345 . 51 . Houben , S . , Bardram , J . E . , Vermeulen , J . , Luyten , K . and Coninx , K . 2014 . Activity - centric support for ad hoc knowledge work : a case study of co - activity manager . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys - tems , CHI ’13 , 2263 - 2272 , ACM . 52 . Jaferian , P . , Hawkey , K . , Sotirakopoulos , A . , Velez - Rojas , M . , and Beznosov , K . 2014 . Heuristics for Evaluating IT Security Management Tools . Human - Computer Interaction , 29 ( 4 ) : 311 - 350 . 53 . Kaptelinin , V . and Nardi , B . 2012 . Affordances in HCI : Toward a mediated action perspective . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘12 , 967 - 976 , ACM . 54 . Kaptelinin , V . 2003 . UMEA : Translating interaction histories into project contexts . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘03 , 353 - 360 , ACM . 55 . Kaptelinin , V . and Bannon , L . J . ( 2012 . Interaction design beyond the product : Creating technology - enhanced activity spaces . Human – Computer Interaction , 27 ( 3 ) : 277 - 309 . 56 . Klokmose , C . , and Bertelsen , O . 2013 . The Mysterious Whiteboard . In P . Kotzé , G . Marsden , G . Lindgaard , J . Wesson and M . Winckler ( Eds . ) , Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 , vol . 8118 , 37 - 54 , Springer Berlin Heidelberg . 57 . Korpela , M . , Mursu , A . , and Soriyan , H . A . 2002 . Information sys - tems development as an activity . Computer Supported Coop - erative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 111 - 128 . 58 . Korpelainen , E . , and Kira , M . 2013 . Systems approach for analysing problems in IT system adoption at work . Behaviour and Infor - mation Technology , 32 ( 3 ) : 247 - 262 . 59 . Kuutti , K . and Arvonen , T . 1992 . Identifying potential CSCW appli - cations by means of activity theory concepts : a case example . Proceedings of the 1992 ACM conference on Computer sup - ported cooperative work , CSCW ‘92 , 233 - 240 , ACM . 60 . Kuutti , K . and Bannon , L . J . 1993 . Searching for unity among diver - sity : exploring the “interface” concept . Proceedings of the INTERACT ' 93 and CHI ' 93 conference on human factors in computing systems , INTERCHI ’93 , 263 - 268 , ACM . 61 . Kuutti , K . and Bannon , L . J . 2014 . The turn to practice in HCI : To - wards a research agenda . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘14 , 3543 - 3552 , ACM . 62 . Lauche , K . 2005 . Collaboration among designers : Analysing an ac - tivity for system development . Computer Supported Cooper - ative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 14 ( 3 ) : 253 - 282 . 63 . Law , E . L . and Sun , X . 2012 . Evaluating user experience of adaptive digital educational games with activity theory . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 70 ( 7 ) : 478 - 497 . 64 . Liaw , S . , Huang , H . , and Chen , G . 2007 . An activity - theoretical ap - proach to investigate learners ' factors toward e - learning sys - tems . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 ( 4 ) : 1906 - 1920 . 65 . Lundvoll Nilsen , L . 2011 . Collaboration and learning in medical teams by using video conference . Behaviour & Information Technology , 30 ( 4 ) : 507 - 515 . 66 . Luse , A . , Mennecke , B . E . , Triplett , J . L . , Karstens , N . , and Jacobson , D . 2011 . A Design Methodology and Implementation for Cor - porate Network Security Visualization : A Modular - Based Ap - proach . AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction , 3 ( 2 ) : 104 - 132 . 67 . Macaulay , C . , Benyon , D . , and Crerar , A . 2000 . Ethnography , theory and systems design : From intuition to insight . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 53 ( 1 ) : 35 - 60 . 68 . Mahatody , T . , Sagar , M . and Kolski , C . 2010 . State of the art on the cognitive walkthrough method , its variants and evolutions . In - ternational Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 26 ( 8 ) : 741 - 785 . 69 . Matthews , T . , Rattenbury , T . , and Carter , S . 2007 . Defining , design - ing and evaluating peripheral displays : An analysis using ac - tivity theory . Human - Computer Interaction , 22 ( 1 - 2 ) : 221 - 261 . 70 . Mccarthy , J . C . , Healey , P . G . T . , Wright , P . C . and Harrison , M . D . 1997 . Accountability of work activity in high - consequence work systems : Human error in context . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 47 ( 6 ) : 735 - 766 . 71 . Meira , L . and Peres , F . 2004 . A dialogue - based approach for evalu - ating educational software . Interacting with Computers , 16 ( 4 ) : 615 - 633 . 72 . Miettinen , R . , and Hasu , M . 2002 . Articulating user needs in collab - orative design : Towards an activity - theoretical approach . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An Interna - tional Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 129 - 151 . 73 . Mohamedally , D . , and Zaphiris , P . 2009 . Categorization Construc - tionist Assessment with Software - Based Affinity Diagram - ming . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 25 ( 1 ) : 22 - 48 . 74 . Mwanza , D . 2001 . Where theory meets practice : A case for an Ac - tivity Theory based methodology to guide computer system design . In M . Hirose ( Eds ) , Human - Computer Interaction - INTERACT ' 01 , Amsterdam , 342 - 349 , IOS Press . 75 . Mühlfelder , M . and Luczak , H . 2003 . Cognitive Analysis of Process Knowledge Transfer in Computer Supported Cooperative Work . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 16 ( 2 ) : 325 - 344 . 76 . Nardi , B . A . , Schwarz , H . , Kuchinsky , A . , Leichner , R . , Whittaker , S . , and Sclabassi , R . Turning away from talking heads : The use of video - as - data in neurosurgery . Proceedings of the INTERACT ' 93 and CHI ' 93 conference on human factors in computing systems , INTERCHI ’93 , 327 - 334 , ACM . 77 . Nardi , B . A . , Schiano , D . J . , and Gumbrecht , M . 2004 . Blogging as social activity , or , would you let 900 million people read your diary ? Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer sup - ported cooperative work , CSCW ‘04 , 222 - 231 , ACM . 78 . Nardi , B . A . , Whittaker , S . , and Schwarz , H . 2002 . NetWORKers and their activity in intensional networks . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 205 - 242 . 79 . Nardi , B . 2005 . Beyond bandwidth : Dimensions of connection in in - terpersonal communication . Computer Supported Coopera - tive Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 14 ( 2 ) : 91 - 130 . 80 . Neale , D . C . , Carroll , J . M . and Rosson , M . B . 2004 . Evaluating com - puter - supported cooperative work : models and frameworks . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’04 , 122 - 121 , ACM . 81 . Norris , B . , Wong , B . L . , and Rashid , D . " Wayfinding / navigation within a QTVR virtual environment : preliminary results . " ( 1999 ) . B . , D . o . Rashid , et al . 1999 . Wayfinding / navigation within a QTVR virtual environment : Preliminary results . In M . A . Sasse and C . Johnson ( Eds ) Human - Computer Interaction - INTERACT ' 99 : IFIP TC . 13 International Conference on Hu - man - Computer Interaction , INTERACT ' 99 , 1 - 8 , IOS Press . 82 . Norros , L . and Nuutinen , M . 2005 . Performance - based usability eval - uation of a safety information and alarm system . International Journal of Human Computer Studies , 63 ( 3 ) : 328 - 361 . 83 . Norros , L . , Liinasuo , M . and Hutton , R . 2011 . Evaluating the poten - tial of new technological tools for safety critical work . Inter - acting with Computers , 23 ( 4 ) : 299 - 307 . 84 . Oviatt , S . , Cohen , A . , Miller , A . , Hodge , K . and Mann , A . 2012 . The impact of interface affordances on human ideation , problem solving , and inferential reasoning . ACM Transactions on Com - puter - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 19 ( 3 ) : 22 . 85 . Owen , C . A . 2001 . The role of organisational context in mediating workplace learning and performance . Computers in Human Behavior , 17 ( 5 - 6 ) : 597 - 614 . 86 . Pargman , T . C . and Wærn , Y . 2003 . Appropriating the use of a Moo for collaborative learning . Interacting with Computers , 15 ( 6 ) : 759 - 781 . 87 . Pargman , T . C . 2003 . Collaborating with writing tools : An instru - mental perspective on the problem of computer - supported col - laborative activities . Interacting with Computers , 15 ( 6 ) : 737 - 757 . 88 . Park , S . Y . and Chen , Y . 2012 . Adaptation as design : Learning from an EMR deployment study . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘12 , 2097 - 2106 , ACM . 89 . Paulson , B . , Cummings , D . , and Hammond , T . 2011 . Object interac - tion detection using hand posture cues in an office setting . In - ternational Journal of Human Computer Studies , 69 ( 1 - 2 ) : 19 - 29 . 90 . Peña - Ayala , A . , Sossa , H . and Méndez , I . 2014 . Activity theory as a framework for building adaptive e - learning systems : A case to provide empirical evidence . Computers in Human Behavior , 30 : 131 - 145 . 91 . Petersen , M . G . , Madsen , K . H . , and Kjær , A . 2002 . The usability of everyday technology : emerging and fading opportunities . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 9 ( 2 ) : 74 - 105 . 92 . Quinones , P . - A . 2014 . Cultivating practice and shepherding technol - ogy use : supporting appropriation among unanticipated users . Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Computer sup - ported cooperative work , CSCW ‘14 , 305 - 318 , ACM . 93 . Rabardel , P . , and Bourmaud , G . 2003 . From computer to instrument system : A developmental perspective . Interacting with Com - puters , 15 ( 5 ) : 665 - 691 . 94 . Raven , J . M . 2006 . Functional organs and computer use within col - laborative group projects . Computers in Human Behavior , 22 ( 6 ) : 981 - 990 . 95 . Roda , C . and Thomas , J . 2006 . Attention aware systems : Theories , applications , and research agenda . Computers in Human Be - havior , 22 ( 4 ) : 557 - 587 . 96 . Sambasivan , N . , Cutrell , E . , Toyama , K . and Nardi , B . 2010 . Inter - mediated technology use in developing communities . Proceed - ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Compu - ting Systems , CHI ’10 , 2583 - 2592 , ACM . 97 . Schmidt , K . and Wagner , I . 2004 . Ordering systems : Coordinative practices and artifacts in architectural design and planning . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An Interna - tional Journal , 13 ( 5 - 6 ) : 349 - 408 . 98 . Sjölie , D . 2012 . Presence and general principles of brain function . Interacting with Computers , 24 ( 4 ) : 193 - 202 . 99 . Spasser , M . A . 2002 . Realist activity theory for digital library evalu - ation : Conceptual framework and case study . Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 81 - 110 . 100 . Tomlinson , B . , Blevis , E . , Nardi , B . , Patterson , D . J . , Silberman , M . S . and Pan , Y . 2013 . Collapse informatics and practice : The - ory , method , and design . ACM Transactions on Computer - Hu - man Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 20 ( 4 ) : article 24 . 101 . Tuikka , T . 2002 . Remote concept design from an activity theory per - spective . Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Com - puter supported cooperative work , CSCW ‘02 , 186 - 195 , ACM . 102 . Turner , P . , and Turner , S . 2001 . A web of contradictions . Interacting with Computers , 14 ( 1 ) : 1 - 14 . 103 . Voida , S . , Mynatt , E . D . 2009 . It Feels Better Than Filing : Everyday Work Experiences in an Activity - Based Computing System . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘09 , 259 - 268 , ACM . 104 . Westerberg , K . 1999 . Collaborative networks among female middle managers in a hierarchical organization . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 8 ( 1 - 2 ) : 95 - 114 . 105 . Wright , P . , Dearden , A . , and Fields , B . 2000 . Function allocation : A perspective from studies of work practice . International Jour - nal of Human Computer Studies , 52 ( 2 ) : 335 - 355 . 106 . Yardi , S . and Bruckman , A . 2011 . Social and technical challenges in parenting teens ' social media use . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ‘11 , 3237 - 3246 , ACM . 107 . Young , K . 2008 . Toward a model for the study of children ' s informal Internet use . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 2 ) : 173 - 184 . 108 . Zager , D . 2002 . Collaboration as an activity coordinating with pseudo - collective objects . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal , 11 ( 1 - 2 ) : 181 - 204 . 109 . Zitter , I . , Kinkhorst , G . , Simons , R . J . and Ten Cate , O . 2009 . In search of common ground : A task conceptualization to facili - tate the design of ( e ) learning environments with design pat - terns . Computers in Human Behavior , 25 ( 5 ) : 999 - 1009 .