Distributed Cognition and Interactions in the Context of Bioengineering Design Vanessa Svihla , Anthony J . Petrosino , and Kenneth Diller , University of Texas Email : vsvihla @ hotmail . com , ajpetrosino @ mail . utexas . edu , kdiller @ mail . utexas . edu Abstract : Distributed cognition is ubiquitous in design practice , yet most studies of design occur in isolation , resulting in a sequestered view . We examine in - situ student teams learning to design in a culturally - diverse bioengineering course , exploring students’ negotiation of roles and differing interactions in a distributed cognition system . Via triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data , we examine how students learn to design . Characteristics of authentic student design experiences have emerged and have implications for teaching design . Introduction Given increasing reliance on physically distributed collaboration , it is critical to understand design as collaborative activity and to examine different interactions such that we may prepare learners for the complex and global community they will enter . Design offers the opportunity to study problem solving that is situated and contextualized , ill - structured ( requiring preference and judgment and involving multiple solution paths to multiple possible solutions ) , dynamic , iterative , and complex ( multivariate , with interconnections between variables ) ( Jonassen , 2000 ) . The problem and solution co - evolve ( Cross , 2002 ) . Good design is tied to good problem scoping ( Atman , Chimka , Bursic , & Nachtmann , 1999 ) , which involves defining the problem . Expert designers take a broad approach ( Cross , 2002 ) , relying on procedural strategies , whereas novice designers rely on declarative knowledge and a depth - first approach ( Ho , 2001 ) . Experienced designers pay better attention to the customer needs , logistics , and constraints in the design task ( Bogusch , Turns , & Atman , 2000 ) . As designers become solution focused , they populate the design process with dynamic , temporary sub - goals ( Cross , 2002 ) . Design is a social , collaborative process ( Brereton , Cannon , Mabogunje , & Leifer , 1996 ; Wood , 2003 ) in which distributed cognition - problem solving occurring across individuals and tools - is critical ( Hutchins , 1995 ; Salomon , 1993 ) . Each team member has different technical skills and values such that the resultant “design is an intersection—not a simple summation - of the participants’ products” ( Dym , Agogino , Eris , Frey , & Leifer , 2005 ) . Learning in design may be cast as legitimate peripheral participation in a community of practice ( Lave & Wenger , 1991 ) , especially for college level design education . Understanding how and why groups differ , such as in how group members take up good ideas ( Barron , 2003 ) is an important part of understanding how design may be learned . Design has primarily been studied in sequestered tasks and with isolated designers , leading to an impoverished understanding of design processes and of how design may be learned . By considering how real design teams learn , we may have a broader understanding of the diverse practices in design , and also understand what might hinder learning in this context . By focusing on how interactions differ within and across teams , we may locate patterns that afford innovative , distributed design learning . Methods and Participants The participants of this study are cohorts of senior bioengineering students enrolled in the capstone , year - long design class at a large public university ( Cohort One : N = 56 , 40 males ; Cohort Two N = 54 , 27 males Cohort 3 : N = 63 , 47 males ) . Design teams were composed of 3 to 5 students and organized such that non - native English speakers ( 15 - 30 % of each cohort ) , were distributed across groups . Students complete a preliminary project , then for the remainder of the year complete designs sponsored by industry and hospitals . The preliminary project for Cohort 1 involved designing a digital stethoscope , whereas for Cohorts 2 and 3 the teams selected biomedical devices to redesign , such as nicotine patches and blood glucose meters . Various data were collected to surround the research questions : Survey data address prior experiences , course experiences , and beliefs about design and collaboration ; a subset of teams was followed closely , providing detailed views through observational , video and audio data , class artifacts , and interviews . Because data are naturally nested , analysis of quantitative data employed Hierarchical Linear Modeling ( HLM ) . For Cohort Three , data for Social Network Analysis have also been collected to answer emergent questions about the role of differing interactions across groups . When considering how groups differ , it is critical to consider how the design problems differ and to consider the problem as defined by the team . To this end , bioengineering professors scored the problem definitions and final designs according to how efficiently the students employed relevant factual and conceptual knowledge , and to what extent the problem as defined and final solution were innovative . These dimensions have been productive in the study of trajectories towards expertise ( Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Discussion Understanding why groups differ has proved challengingt as various common predictors have not been significant ( Rivale , Martin , & Diller , 2006 ) . The expert sorting indicates that both project difficulty and performance vary . Early efficiency does not correlate to final design innovation . This finding is compelling because it runs counter to how we generally teach : develop content and skills before having opportunities to apply them . Comparing Cohorts reveals significant differences in correlations among innovation and efficiency . Further exploration is needed to determine the source of this variance . Coding and HLM analysis of the pre , mid and post tests revealed significant differences : For Cohort One , there is a troubling decrease in “representation of customer needs” at the mid - test , whereas for Cohort two there is an increase . Students who completed a preliminary project in which they had to determine how to redesign a device had significantly higher gains than students who completed a more kit - based design task ( t = 3 . 256 , p = . 003 ) . Students attend to customer needs when they feel authentically engaged in design . Incorporation of customer needs involves multiple - perspective taking and is a critical aspect of design . The Constructivist Learning Environment Survey yields an understanding of practices in the classroom . HLM results of the CLES indicate the design course allows students to question their learning more than prior coursework tends to ( t = 3 . 515 , p = 0 . 002 ) , perhaps because they are responsible for their own learning , and students report greater personal relevance ( t = 3 . 181 , p = 0 . 003 ) resultant from engaging in authentic design experience . We also consider , in this on - going research , how differing interactions provoke different design experiences and consider intersections with innovative design . As part of our on - going efforts , we examine how teams break ill - structured problems up into sub - problems , and how they seek resources and make use of the experts available to them . Analysis of observational data has revealed preliminary modes of distributed cognition : “over - divide and conquer” and “everyone does everything” neither of which leverage distribute cognition , and “divide - enough and conquer” and “everyone participates” which do . Implications This research has implications for how design is taught ; by allowing students to have voice by selecting a device to redesign , the students recognize the importance of customer needs . However , we must still account for variance across teams . Understanding how teams interact differently can help us to provide explicit models for productive group interactions . Next steps include employing Social Network Analysis as a bridge between whole - class and case - study data , and continuing to analyze the observational data . References Atman , C . J . , Chimka , J . R . , Bursic , K . M . , & Nachtmann , H . L . ( 1999 ) . A comparison of freshman and senior engineering design processes . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 131 - 152 . Barron , B . ( 2003 ) . When Smart Groups Fail . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 12 ( 3 ) , 307 - 359 . Bogusch , L . L . , Turns , J . , & Atman , C . J . ( 2000 ) . Engineering design factors : how broadly do students define problems ? Frontiers in Education Conference , 2000 . FIE 2000 . 30th Annual , 2 . Brereton , M . F . , Cannon , D . M . , Mabogunje , A . , & Leifer , L . J . ( 1996 ) . Collaboration in Design Teams : How Social Interaction Shapes the Product . In N . Cross , H . H . C . M . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) , Analysing Design Activity ( pp . 319 - 341 ) . Chichester : Wiley . Cross , N . ( 2002 ) . Creative cognition in design : processes of exceptional designers . Paper presented at the Fourth conference on Creativity & cognition . Dym , C . L . , Agogino , A . M . , Eris , O . , Frey , D . D . , & Leifer , L . J . ( 2005 ) . Engineering Design Thinking , Teaching , and Learning . Journal of Engineering Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 103 - 120 . Ho , C . H . ( 2001 ) . Some phenomena of problem decomposition strategy for design thinking : differences between novices and experts . Design Studies , 22 ( 1 ) , 27 - 45 . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) . Cognition in the Wild : Cambridge , MA . : MIT Press . Jonassen , D . H . ( 2000 ) . Toward a Design Theory of Problem Solving . Educational Technology Research and Development , 48 ( 4 ) , 63 - 85 . Lave , J . , & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation : Cambridge University Press . Rivale , S . R . , Martin , T . , & Diller , K . R . ( 2006 ) . Gender Differences in Adaptive Expertise : Evaluation of a challenge based HPL biomedical engineering curriculum . Paper presented at the 9th International Conference on Engineering Education , San Juan , PR . Salomon , G . ( 1993 ) . Distributed Cognitions : psychological and educational considerations : Cambridge University Press . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efficiency and innovation in transfer . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 - 51 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Wood , W . H . ( 2003 ) . Integrating Social Issues into Design Theory . International Journal of Engineering Education , 19 ( 1 ) , 35 - 40 .