Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns Yoko Akama RMIT University , Melbourne , Australia yoko . akama @ rmit . edu . au Ann Light Malmö University , Sweden / University of Sussex , Brighton , UK ann . light @ mau . se Takahito Kamihira Senshu University , Tokyo , Japan kamihira @ isc . senshu - u . ac . ip ABSTRACT Participatory Design’s focus on people comes from a social demo - cratic vision . However , as climate and existential crises press us to consider wellbeing beyond humans alone , we ask what a pluriver - sal design agenda might include and what could be articulated as ‘participatory’ ? Necessarily , this inquiry has limits , as participation usually implies human voice , rights , representation and structures of decision - making . This paper commits to these concerns while asking ethical , political and onto - epistemological questions regard - ing how worlds and futures are shaped when more - than - human entities – plants , animals , rocks , rivers and spirits – participate in our becoming ? We offer a meeting of feminist techno - science with practices and philosophies from Japan and beyond to offer thought experiments in engaging with difference and plurality . And we give several examples of practice situated at ontological bound - aries to offer some novel thoughts on ‘participation otherwise’ , always - participating - with - many and the futures this could usher in . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centred computing → Interaction design ; Interaction design process and methods ; Participatory design . KEYWORDS More - than - human ontologies , posthumanism , feminist STS , Japan - ese Shinto , Indigenous cosmology ACM Reference Format : Yoko Akama , Ann Light , and Takahito Kamihira . 2020 . Expanding Partici - pation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Vol 1 ( PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 ) , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385016 1 INTRODUCTION The history of Participatory Design ( PD ) is human oriented , born in unease about the impact of automation on workers ( e . g . [ 20 ] ) and growing into wider concerns about the relation between peo - ple and technology ( e . g . [ 69 ] ) . However , to worry about the fate of Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7700 - 3 / 20 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385016 humans means to become concerned about the fate of all living beings , as the awareness of the vital interdependence of all life becomes more obvious . Even if we do not love bees for their own sake , pollinators are inextricable necessities for life on Earth to function . Latour ( [ 42 ] laments ‘Terrestrials in fact have the very delicate problem of discovering how many other beings they need in order to subsist ( p87 ) . . . as true for a wolf as for a bacterium , for a business enterprise as for a forest , for a divinity as for a family’ ( p95 ) . Recognition of these interdependencies and how they chal - lenge hierarchies of human dominion over others is evident in many fields , including political ecology , environmental humanities , new materialism , the posthuman , and more - than - human geographies ( e . g . [ 5 ] [ 8 ] [ 24 ] [ 26 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] ) . Such discourses re - think relations , dismissing generations of essentialized hierarchy and extending grasp of the world’s ‘agencies , dependencies , entanglements , and relations’ ( [ 23 ] : 17 ) . Design’s reading of these discourses , notably via Haraway , Barad , Tsing , Ingold and Escobar , reveals how dominant ‘Modern’ ideology has worked to divide and erode deep relationali - ties , producing unsustainable and unjust worlds ( [ 17 ] [ 22 ] [ 24 ] ) . Drawing on a broader frame of reference that includes feminist STS , posthumanism , Shinto and Indigenous cosmology , this paper explores common PD themes such as voice , representation , organiz - ing structure and decision - making . We consider what participation might mean if the focus were on always - participating - with - many , building on more - than - human theories that embrace primordial relationality and interdependence . We look at the conceptual issues involved in reconsidering the ‘who’ and ‘what’ of participation , before contemplating the ‘how’ of methodology that emerges with these alternative framings to provide examples of rethinking par - ticipation as expanded ways of being . 1 . 1 Contribution and Methodology We argue that engaging pluriversally requires us to embody mul - tiple worldviews and forge them into our thinking and practice . Our paper questions the human - only ‘who’ , ‘what’ and ‘how’ by threading PD’s usual concerns like voice , representation , structures of organization and future - making decisions through examples of participating - with - many . One context is Japan , which has main - tained spiritual traditions in domestic life alongside successive Western influences from science , technology and industrialization , so it is not uncommon for many to think of cars and robots as being spiritual [ 26 ] . Another account , from Britain , uses imagination in generative ways to open dialogue with PD and propose different onto - epistemologies as elements of a broad and plural inter - related vision . They combine to present a radically inclusive vision of PD theory and practice . 1 PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Yoko Akama et al . The paper acknowledges traditional politics , but it makes the case that , in response to climate change , anthropocentricity and species mass extinction , radical rethinking is needed in practice , as well recognizing pluriversal worlds [ 22 ] and the theory of more - than - human spheres ( see [ 23 ] for a good round - up ) . The political and ethical has historically been a crux of investigation for PD in designing technologies , systems and structures . PD navigated using concepts of power , access , labour , rights , inclusion , representation and voice , with particular interest in marginal or ‘resource - weak’ humans in democratic decision - making ( e . g [ 20 ] [ 64 ] ) . Designing otherwise does not abandon PD’s commitments to support peo - ple in their struggles , but we offer here another , complementary , view of relations with which to develop practice . If being and in - terconnection is respected and honoured in all humans and more - than - humans , then care must extend across further relationships . A widening and deepening of ‘self’ to include the more - than - human can also be ‘felt and conceived as protection of ourselves’ ( [ 60 ] : 35 ) . It reveals the trade - offs that are being made in prioritizing tradi - tional human - centred perspectives and helps us question how to manage such decisions in future . Our contribution here is methodological too . Creative non - fiction writing allows us to give accounts of participating - with - many . Con - temporary non - fiction makes writers visible , releases academic language from the overtly instrumental , and imbues theory with embodied subjectivity as a ‘politics of location’ ( [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 27 ] [ 78 ] ) . Sections of this paper are written in ‘first person’ to show how con - cerns are connected intimately to each author . Our experimentation follows advocacy to use methods of reporting that are appropriate to content [ 48 ] . This is an autoethnographic research method of sharing our experiences : demonstrating ‘how we come to know , name , and interpret personal and cultural experience’ ( [ 1 ] : 1 ) . It involves trying to translate the untranslatable and interpret cul - tural phenomena in language / English to share personal , nuanced and emotional experiences that we hope resonate with intimacy and vibrancy . Resisting the replicability required in empirical re - search , the paper offers theoretical provocation by demonstrating a different ‘how’ for thinking and being . All in all , this is not a straightforward paper but we hope it is intriguing to read . It introduces theory from philosophers , anthro - pologists , folklorists and feminist techno - scientists to offer ways to consider always - participating - with - many by : 1 ) decentring human perspectives to consider life across species ; 2 ) adopting simulta - neous multiple worldviews ; 3 ) embracing ‘non - living’ forms with ontologies ; and 4 ) relating the more - than - human to the becoming of everything . The first might be seen as a traditional inclusive framing to challenge us to hear many voices . The second to fourth give a rationale for upending universalist categorizing ( hierarchies , typologies and centres of focus ) to be replaced with entanglement and co - emergence . In this , we observe a paradox that requires us to link pluralism , or the acknowledgment of multiple ontologies , with an interrelatedness that speaks to the oneness of all . Our con - tribution , then , is to link radical rethinking with the impetus of designing . 2 BACKGROUND : THE MORE - THAN - HUMAN IN PD As Light ( [ 49 ] : 29 ) notes , ‘the very concept of participation presup - poses there is something going on beyond you to which you can be invited . Exploding the center produces a counter - concept of already - being - with’ . PD has long involved people without a voice and / or the power to express themselves . A compelling keynote by Patricia Marti at PDC 2006 argued for ways to include people with dementia and other barriers to full consensual engagement . Since then , youth , autism and other states impacting ‘full’ partic - ipation have come under scrutiny from , for example , Druin [ 19 ] , Spiel [ 71 ] and Keay - Bright [ 39 ] , noting proxies and carers may be engaged , and questioning how all people can be included according to the ethics of PD [ 64 ] . In other work , PD researchers with a broad view of planetary cohabitation have explored concepts of deep relationality , finding a fit between PD ambitions to include all stakeholders and theo - ries of interdependence of life . Heitlinger and colleagues [ 31 ] have interrogated the ethical , legal and methodological concerns that shape policies and practices in sustainable smart cities , urban in - formatics and IoT designs , critiquing participation that narrowly focuses on designing urban spaces for , and inhabited only by , hu - mans . Stahl and Lindström [ 72 ] conduct participatory events with residents in the Kingdom of Crystal ( Sweden ) , where the soil has been polluted by heavy metals from past glass - making industries . Trauma of this land is attended to by plants that remediate the toxi - city , sharpening our own awareness of how more - than - humans are participating in maintaining and repairing damages that humans cannot ‘undo’ alone . Morrison [ 58 ] writes with Narratta , a narwhal that speaks , feels and observes cultural landscapes and concerns for the Arctic . Such explorations respond to Haraway’s Staying with the Trouble [ 30 ] , addressing challenges of living and communicating with / in multiplicities of species to find connection and ‘make kin in lines of inventive connection as a practice of learning to live and die well with each other in the thick present’ ( p297 ) . Other prece - dents that consider how more - than - humans shape participation are focused on artefacts and technologies . Concepts like ‘thinging’ , ‘non - human actants’ and ‘object - oriented politics’ ( [ 9 ] [ 20 ] [ 36 ] [ 43 ] ) have shaped PD discourse in critical ways , following theory that rejects separating the human from socio - material entanglements . This ethical vigilance ranges from a refusal to render objects as inert , needing humans to give them agency and animacy [ 34 ] , to interrogating ways technology ( and design ) are shaping lives , fu - tures and ecologies . We note that more - than - human participation – systems , knowledges , practices – is often featured in reference to human - centred concerns : we care because these more - than - human things are made by us and affect us . So what does it mean to fore - ground the more - than - human without centring the human as the reason for attention and concern ? 2 . 1 Broadening Frameworks Other fields have attempted to grapple with these questions . Schol - ars in more - than - human participatory research detail projects that involve animals , insects , plants and elements as research partners [ 6 ] . Pitt reflects on how ‘planty knowledge’ challenges participatory 2 Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia research [ 62 ] . Bastian ( [ 6 ] : 19 ) remarks on Western anthropocen - trism that restricts how participation is imagined and ‘to whom . . . commitments might be made’ . Epistemological limits are re - vealed in her reflections : ‘efforts to think through the ethics of community - based research with water . . . provoked as much si - lence as discussion . That is , the participatory framing pushed us so far away from familiar “forms of interaction” that we found we had almost no conceptual frameworks to draw on’ ( [ 6 ] : 31 ) . These works reveal challenges in responding to more - than - human research part - ners , such as the one - sidedness of transformations in reporting and fundamental ontology . Viewing the encounters as participatory is problematic , but a bigger problem is lack of frames of reference . Questions of symbio - politics and the hierarchies of animacy arise too in multispecies ethnography , which follows genes , cells and a multitude of organisms that shape , and are shaped , by political , economic and cultural forces . Morton [ 59 ] claims that humans are always less than the sum of our parts ; living well means living with biome . Lim [ 51 ] compellingly asks how to live with HIV symptoms of infection as ‘stories’ told by the virus , listened to by bodies . Ask - ing whose and what stories are told ( and listened to ) heightens an acuteness for what participation means . In reading where others have gone , we recognize that we need different ways of encounter - ing if we are to enable an inclusive process that acknowledges the breadth of possible relations . 2 . 2 Not More , but Different Relations ‘Human exceptionalism’ refers to treating non - human beings as ‘other’ . Were we merely to address this by taking a broader sweep of living things as participants in our work , this would go some way to understanding power structures and how imbalances have arisen . However , there are more radical ways of considering futures , which speak , not to more stakeholders , but to different relations in the world . Escobar ( [ 22 ] : 101 ) asks if it is possible to develop a deeper notion of relationality ‘in which the relational basis of existence radically pervades the entire order of things’ . Like Haraway , he points to an ontology in which nothing pre - exists the relatings ; ‘we inter - are with everything on the planet’ ( ibid ) . Here , we use pluriversal to rec - ognize a variety of socio - cultural worldviews and differing realities , and most importantly , to embrace what might appear as contra - dictory ontologies or implausible realities . We show links between relationality and participation as both a way of grasping a unify - ing relational principle and understanding the local , contextual , entanglements of the many . Most ways of thinking where relationality sits at the heart of the ontology exist in small pockets marginalized by dominant , global - ized , Modern and neoliberal actions . We look at how this is already happening and how else it could take place . In arguing for pluriver - sal participation beyond just entertaining a different practical un - derstanding of how life can be lived , we propose an intellectually generous tangle of worldings in which many ways of being and knowing co - exist . This will be easier for readers with ‘Western’ notions of ‘living’ ( limited to entities with cell division ) to follow if they note 1 ) we discuss ontologies that draw differing lines between what is ‘living’ and ‘inert’ ; and 2 ) we consider what it means to move between these multiple ontologies . 2 . 3 Otherness , Alterity and Spirituality Pluriversality requires us to work with multiple worldviews and link them in our personal thinking and design research practices . Such ecological inclusivity is distinct from the politics of otherness and alterity as understood in critical theory and rights - based approaches to justice . 1 Marxist and feminist writers have used The Other [ 15 ] to denote a form of marginalization . The Other refers , by definition , to relations with a perceived primary ( and is , therefore , in a state of alterity to that primary : cis , white , male ) . In this way , The Other helps analyze and challenge structural politics . The idea of otherness we use is the ontological tangle that allows for many beings to co - exist , not all of which are made of living matter . There are scholars in anthropology , cultural theory , creative writing and more who have written about ghosts , magic , monsters and the supernormal as a deliberate tactic to bring these into view and question what knowledge sanctions and what it can omit , to deliberately trouble disciplinary certainties ( see [ 11 ] [ 40 ] ) . Encoun - ters are noteworthy because they can catalyze understandings that are beyond existing paradigms or imagination and jolt us out of complacency in a move towards altering perceptions [ 57 ] . For ex - ample , Popplow and Duque use the playful , rhetorical device of ‘Ghosts , idiots and Others _ _ _ _ _ _ . . . . to address tricky hinterlands of our engagements that all too often remain unspoken in design academic writing’ ( [ 63 ] : 4 ) . There are also encounters that go much further , beyond the comfort of Aristotelian reasoning , to employ ‘logics’ from different worldviews . An example is cancer - causing death magic , with de - structive power and entities that confront our realities and existence [ 73 ] . Bringing these relations to bear takes us well outside Mod - ern rationalist design thinking . Walker [ 79 ] argues that spirituality was systemically eroded in northern Europe , through Modernity , in favour of scientific investigation , empiricism and technologi - cal development . He connects spiritual erosion with accelerated consumption , damaging our planet and relations . There is work to accommodate religious practice in design ( e . g . [ 83 ] ) , but little allowing a more spiritual dimension to inform it . Here , we distin - guish between religion and spirituality , building on Buie’s techno - spirituality scholarship [ 12 ] . She defines religion as ‘a complex cultural and social framework . . . that facilitates the organized prac - tice of a faith tradition’ ( p7 ) , distinct from spirituality : ‘a person’s relationship with the sacred or transcendent , with their ultimate values , with what purpose and meaning that relationship enables them to create in their life’ ( p7 ) . Yet , even this definition falls short of our use of spirituality here , which has an expansive embrace beyond serving human needs alone . Many worldviews regard the sacred and transcendent as spiritual entities . These sacred entities might be trees , animals , rocks , mountains , and / or rivers . In many cultures around the world , more - than - human entities are revered for their wisdom , teachings and transcendence . Acknowledging the sentience of more - than - human entities of many kinds means resisting their assignment as 1 Ecological thinking has been criticized for failing to acknowledge structural issues such as gender and race . However , it is addressed in showing that patriarchy and colonialism derive from anti / a - ecological thought ( [ 28 , 84 ] ) . Yet , this analysis can overlookhumanexperienceofdiscriminationongroundsofgender , sexuality , ethnicity andmore ( and , extendingthistoanimals , thespeciesismthatresultsintheacceptability of factory farming . ) 3 PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Yoko Akama et al . narratives of socio - psychological production or political indices , or as performing a pragmatic social function for human value [ 35 ] . When more - than - human beings are embraced as they are , having a ‘worldly existence’ [ 35 ] , rather than subsumed in human values , participation can go beyond egalitarian , tolerant and liberal visions towards questions of co - ontology , where being and becoming are already always - with - many . 2 . 4 The politics of multiple ontologies Dominant forms of design are about doing , uncritically following Modern theoretical commitments . New conceptual work is needed to change accepted practices and here we can look to a range of the - orists . For instance , Haraway [ 29 ] draws from philosopher White - head to argue that ‘Beings do not pre - exist their relatings’ ( p6 ) . Morton [ 59 ] says we need ‘To think in [ a ] new - old way , to restruc - ture logic . . . to violate the logical “Law” of Noncontradiction’ ( p73 ) . Both suggest we consider relations differently and multiply . 2 . 5 Co - ontology and ‘Ontological Braiding’ We want to start this section by acknowledging learning in cultures where living with multiple ontologies has been a matter of neces - sity and survival . Indigenous nations and their peoples have been fighting for water , land and the cultural space to self - determine their futures since contact . A landmark Tribunal dealt with the first waterway to be legally recognized as having rights as a living being – the Whanganui River in Aotearoa ( New Zealand ) . We quote Salmond [ 65 ] , a professor with a life - long engagement with M¯aori peoples and worlds , using her words to prevent misrepresentation of a case with which we have no direct relationship . She talks of ‘the simultaneous relevance of alternative realities , not merely different perspectives on the same things’ ( p290 ) , including ontologies of rivers and peoples . Alter - native realities meet in this legal case , where settler conceptions of water as a material resource that can be owned and consumed collide with Te Ao M¯aori ( M¯aori world ) , which sees people , land , waterways and ancestors are inextricably bound together as one kin . Salmond quotes an Elder who spoke at the tribunal : Our river is stagnant and dying . The great river flows from the gathering of mountains to the sea . I am the river , the river is me . If I am the river and the river is me – then emphatically , I am dying ( p . 294 ) . We learn how several ‘worlds’ come into view in this case : Te Ao M¯aori or “the M¯aori world” . . . is a phrase often invoked by Maori speakers , where “ao” is a dimension of reality , often translated as “world” ( but without the implication of a bounded , singular whole that underpins that term in English ) . In contemporary parlance , Te Ao M¯aori is often paired as a dyad with Te Ao Pakeha ( roughly , European or Western ways of being ) just as Te Ao Hou ( the new world , contemporary life ) is paired with Te Ao Tawhito ( the ancient world , ancestral ways ) . Te Ao M¯aori and Te Ao Pakeha , in particular , which evoke complementary but different realities locked in ongo - ing exchanges , generate divergent and contested accounts of the world that require constant and careful negotiation ( p . 291 ) . Salmond further expands that ‘since the early contact period in New Zealand , M¯aori have engaged with a range of Western onto - logical styles , often very successfully , and sometimes exclusively’ ( p299 ) , remarking how many people are able to shift between differ - ent dimensions of reality : ‘ . . . at one moment , a person may stand in Te Ao M¯aori , where river ancestors are real and copresent , at another , they may speak and think as a physicist , or an historian , or a highly trained lawyer , with no evident sense of contradiction’ ( p . 301 ) . Salmond observes this as ‘ontological braiding’ and frames the Tribunal as a space ‘in which resonances as well as contradic - tions between different ontological styles are being recognized and new forms of order explored’ . However , she cautions not ‘to force a convergence of horizons’ ( p . 303 ) . We are inspired and guided by her account , by the different ontologies being embodied by individuals , and the power of Ao , accommodating worlds and movements between them . While we cannot know Ao as ontology , we attempt a small step towards one interpretation of ‘ontological braiding’ to explore what that might mean for us . From here on , we are going to move between ontologies and propose that readers attempt to hold two ( or more ) ontologies simultaneously in mind , as a means of fellow - travelling in our subversion of dominant design paradigms . 3 PLURAL WAYS OF BEING AND ORGANISING In this section , we present Japanese practices that live between worlds , followed by accounts from the two Japanese authors . The text will move between a curational style situating the experiential sections and first - person narratives . Japan’s everyday spirituality relates to Pre - imperial , ancient Shinto ( Koshinto ) , remarked by Kasulis , a scholar of Asian philos - ophy [ 37 ] , as ‘a manner of feeling about the world and of feeling one’s way through the world’ ( p3 ) . Koshinto is inter - relatedness with rocks , mountains , trees , animals , lands , waters , winds and peo - ple , imbued with spirituality . Some scholars have related Koshinto to animism [ 66 ] , a view that the natural world is made of a com - munity of spirits of which humans are just one part . This animistic characteristic is common to belief systems practiced in many cul - tures today ( see [ 74 ] ) . Japan shares these sensitivities , being an archipelago of islands that have maintained relationships with and respect for manifold forms of beings and non - beings . Certain ritu - als and landmarks ( such as shrines and cairns ) have continued to engage with more - than - human worlds ( ses [ 2 ] [ 55 ] ) . This ontology has co - existed with a highly technologized way of life , inviting an exploration of braiding what appear , on the surface , to be incom - mensurable states of being and becoming . 3 . 1 Places for Sacrosanct Encounters Koshinto spirituality is about inter - relatedness of plural worlds . This means nothing exists in - and - of - itself , but always as part of a whole that is continuously ebbing and flowing . Many places in Japan , such as Mt Fuji are considered sacred , with awe - inspiring power ( kami ) , and so are demarcated with a gate ( torii ) or rope ( shimenawa ) . The feeling of kami might be likened to experiencing natural wonders : a spectacular sunrise or the Grand Canyon . Awe is an overwhelming and humbling experience , a merging of self and other , forging the ‘relationship with a power or force , an element of life that it is not only greater than the self but is ontologically dif - ferent’ ( [ 21 ] : 124 ) . Kasulis [ 37 ] explains that particular sacred places 4 Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia are demarcated with a torii and shimenawa to act like a ‘bookmark’ to remind us , in our busy , modern lives , of our connection to awe , intimacy and belonging with the world . The word kami loosely refers to spirits , gods , deities , souls – anything that is revered – including the sun , a tempest or something mundane , like a well or a cooking pot [ 66 ] . The word referring to any animate or inanimate being speaks to diversity of forms that kami takes . Kasulis warns not to think that kami merely visit or inhabit the form ( like a rock ) , based on a view that starts from separating the form and kami to construct an external relationship . Instead the form is already kami . Japan’s devastating earthquake and tsunami on March 2011 , re - ferred to as 3 . 11 , destroyed as much as 80 % of coastal towns in Tohoku , northeast Japan . In surveying the damage , civil engineers Takeda and colleagues [ 75 ] plotted 215 shrines in the area to dis - cover that 75 % of those that survived contoured the edge of the tsunami’s reach . The researchers were made curious by another feature . The most common deity celebrated amongst the surviving shrines is Susano - o no mikoto , associated with sea - and water - related disasters . In Kojiki , Japan’s oldest written chronicle from the 8th century , Susano - o defeated yamata no orochi , a legendary eight - headed and tailed serpent - dragon that is said to be based upon the river Hi - i river that runs through Izumo ( now called Shimane , a place where many myths of Japan were born ) . From such legends , Susano - o is widely respected as a deity with powers over waters , associated with calming floods and preventing droughts and water - related diseases . From this , Takeda deduced that communities had erected shrines on these higher grounds , hundreds of years ago , to act as a repository of cultural memory to warn descendants of recurring tsunami in the local area . While 3 . 11 stands out in recent history for catalyzing a nuclear disaster , major cataclysms have repeated over thousands of years . Japan is an archipelago made up of more than 6 , 000 islands , formed on a volcanic fault line called the Ring of Fire that surrounds the Pa - cific Ocean . This region is known for tectonic plate shifts , typhoons and hurricanes ; natural disasters have been part of its geological and cultural history . Seismically - caused sea waves are so frequent that the Japanese word tsunami has been adopted in common Eng - lish . There are many folklores and oral histories about such natural disasters , like a giant catfish ( O - namazu ) , revered as a deity associ - ated with floods , heavy rain or earthquakes , appearing with vigour on Edo - period ( 1615 - 1868 ) woodcuts ( see [ 52 ] ) . Such folklores are also materialized as cairns and shrines throughout Japan . To live with disasters is , to use Haraway’s [ 30 ] words , ‘to live and die well with each other in the thick present’ ( p297 ) . In Shinto , death is just another stage of transformation – part of a natural cycle . Shrines are not mere buildings . Rocks are not just an inanimate fusion of minerals . They are not separate from the waves , winds , rain and earth that taught local communities how to live with the world’s rhythms . They are sentient beings with a living presence that is ( and has always been ) interrelated with cycles of creation and destruction . This is co - ontology , where being and becoming are always - participating - with - many . 3 . 2 Decision - Making with More - Than - Human We can see sacred places , such as shrines , as an embodiment of community history , teaching , knowledge and practices that spans hundreds of years . They are also a place for community future - planning and decision - making . Yoriai [ 55 ] is an unhurried system of collective decision - making by villagers to manage taxes , accounts , expenses and punishment . Up until the Edo period , yoriai were often held at shrines and temples , which were also built to accommodate places to eat and sleep because discussions , especially on matters of significance and complexity , would require days and weeks to estab - lish mutual understanding across diverse experiences and accounts . These places of decision - making are not ‘neutral’ civic spaces . A Japanese historian Oootsuka ( pers . comms . July 2019 ) explains how making decisions in the presence of village guardians and deities cannot be ignored as insignificant because acts of commitment are built upon ancient practices of making collective , sacred vows , called ikki keijo ( ‘of one intention alliance’ ) . This ritual , stemming from the Middle Ages , requires a group of people to draw up a doc - ument with their signatures to be burnt [ 33 ] . The ashes were mixed with a vial of divine water , passed from one member to another for a ritual sip , called ichimi shinsui ( ‘one taste of gods’ water’ ) . ‘All who had tasted the gods’ water were considered equal under this ritualistic conception of an ikki public . . . some surviving contracts for ikki alliances arranged the signatures of the participants in a circle that signified the equality of all members’ ( [ 33 ] : 115 ) . While the physical rituals of ikki keijo have eroded over the centuries , Ootsuka believes that Yoriai decision - making perpetuated a bind - ing allyship and obligation , witnessed by revered higher orders . The rituals , repeated over centuries , forged weighty bonds among a group that also included more - than - human beings , enhancing the impact of the slow pace and care taken to arrive at such decisions by the villagers . Such organisational structures and acts of decision - making are based on interrelationships among people and more - than - humans . This connectedness is an intimate kind of relation ‘in which each re - lated item is part of the other’ ( [ 37 ] : 13 ) . Sacred places like shrines act as visible , enduring , markers of interconnected worlds and , by ex - tension , life’s rhythms and cycles . The yoriai gatherings took place in such shrines , committing people to a binding , sacred obligation and raised attentiveness to always being interrelated : a continuous and never - ending relationship that extends beyond one’s lifetime . Agriculture , births , deaths , tsunami , earthquakes and people are all part of an inter - connected whole . These shrines are still there , rooted on lands that have been shaped by disasters , visited by resi - dents who are living with the awe - inspiring powers of that place . Such buildings , rocks and stories around them maintain a connec - tion that is visible and enduring , between how things were known , can be known and can be given significance . 3 . 3 Thinking Otherwise This next section is by Yoko , written to evoke the power and mean - ing of more - than - humans in the everyday . I hear a cracked whisper on the radio about a resident of Otsuchi , Itaru Sasaki , who calls his lost cousin from a disconnected phone box . ‘ . . . my thoughts could not be relayed over a regular phone line , I wanted them to be carried on the wind . . . . So I named it the wind telephone ( kaze no denwa ) . The idea of keeping up a relationship with the dead is not such a strange one in Japan . The line between our 5 PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Yoko Akama et al . world and their world is thin . . . ’ [ [ 54 ] ] . Otsuchi has one of the highest numbers of missing people in the 3 . 11 tsunami . Now thousands of people show up , randomly from all over , to speak on Sasaki’s kaze no denwa , installed on a hill that receives the sea breeze from the Pacific Ocean . These calls are deeply moving , yet familiar . Children call their grandparents , parents , siblings with reports of their daily lives and ask how they are . These echo everyday rituals . At the small Buddhist altar at our home , I greet my father and sister , who have passed away , with daily offerings of rice , water and incense , together with updates of our lives and to give gratitude for their love and protection . Kamihira - sensei sends me a Japanese newspaper article . My eye is caught by a black and white photo of a memorial in a Japanese newspaper . A roughly - hewn stone cairn , carved in old calligraphy warns that no houses should be built below this point on a hill [ [ 32 ] ] . Shadows cast by nearby branches cut crisp , dark lines across the lettering , adding gravity to its warning . The headline says ‘Cairn Wisdom Saves . ’ The depth of meaning is haiku - like , saying so much in so few words about human and more - than - human wisdoms . The article reports how the town survived the tsunami that devastated coastal towns in the northeast of Japan in 2011 , by heeding the cairn’s ancient warning . Although the tsunami reached to 70m from where this cairn stands , all the town’s buildings and almost all its residents survived , safe on higher ground . They lost one family who were visiting another town . Kamihira - sensei says it’s a compelling story of more - than - human communication and collaboration . I think about what Kamihira - sensei means . I imagine standing in front of this stone and I am overcome with heaviness . The words are carved in human words and hands , but the ‘voice’ feels more - than - human , evoking a witnessing by our ancestors , mountains and oceans . These ‘voices’ vibrate through the materiality of the stone and carving with a presence that is immense as time itself . These more - than - humans are here . They have always been here alongside , coexisting , and they will continue to be here . To me , this ‘cairn wisdom’ combines teachings of many things , not just about the survival of towns , but wisdom about coexisting with rhythms of beings that are far larger than human scale and lifespans . A quote by a geologist Bjornerud [ [ 10 ] ] pops into my head : ‘Early in an introductory geology course , one begins to understand that rocks are not nouns but verbs . . . bear [ ing ] witness to events that unfolded over long stretches of time . ’ ( p8 ) . Kamihira - sensei tells me that in Shinto , rocks grow . Sazareishi are awe - inspiring rocks often marked with a shimenawa as sacred and sentient beings . In the southern islands of Miyako and Hachijo , local residents revere giant boulders thrown up from the seabed in a tsunami [ [ 70 ] ] . The boulders are a breeding ground for migratory birds , a collaboration between earth and waves , and a symbol for awe and wonder . Rocks are not nouns but verbs . They are living . 4 OTHERWISE EXPERIMENTS Our second story attempts to braid worlds to change how people engage with the world they are used to . We explore a participatory practice designed to bring individuals into new relations , as ongo - ing work in how to structure human relations differently [ 50 ] . We offer it beside the first story , but speaking from other islands in a different sea . These islands also have practices worthy of wonder and exclamation , but because their dominant culture played a large part in determining what would be normalized as mundane , sci - entific , and logical across the world , it is more difficult for many Western thinkers to see this . 4 . 1 Sensibilities of Living and Being Ann does not have a Shinto heritage . Neither the historical religions of her culture nor her family’s atheism prepared her for growing into a world among so many other living and dying beings . Kasulis [ 37 ] makes the distinction that Judeo - Christian religions and Islam commemorate historical events , such as those associated with their founder , rather than simply a relation to the world , as Shinto and many Indigenous knowledges do . Lent [ 45 ] points to the growth of monotheism as introducing the notion of a one true way in the West and the conceptual end of plurality . Morton [ 59 ] suggests that Mesopotamian farming practices 12 , 000 years ago introduced a con - cept of civilization that values a wonder - destroying logic . All in all , Ann’s reading and her inheritance are not comfortable companions if celebrating more - than - human worlds is her ambition . I still recall my surprise at an evening spent celebrating the par - ticipatory design of a community garden without any reference to the wonder of things growing in it . Perhaps that things germinated and grew was too obvious . But living things are not the same as made things . When something lives or dies ; grows or wilts , it is not an act of human wrangling or persuasion . I have always wondered at this feature of life around me , spent time observing it , wanted to work with it to think about what counts as making , and indeed , have run projects that involve growing to reflect on our place ( s ) in the world [ [ 46 ] ] . It feels important for how to think , after all , that these elements of life ( and death ) march to their own beat . Not ultimately controlled by patriarchy or empire , not directly deterred by capitalism , individual living things grow or they don’t grow . And , despite alchemy , science , fertilizers , altered genetics , enhanced feeds and The Singularity , there is still no way to ensure that things come into being and no way to keep living things alive indefinitely . Amazing . So I am sitting in a workshop in the UK with five groups of people invited to think differently by me – and one group is working together on innovations inspired by animism . There is no mainstream animism in Britain . We don’t even have relics of a faith that imbues everything with its own spirit , though they existed . We merely have relic rituals celebrating plants and animals that are woven into the festivals of religions that displaced these beliefs . ( In the wilds of the countryside , people dress maidens and wells with flowers . ) But people talk about these absences , discussing that our experience is closer to animism than science allows and acknowledging that we accept spirit in the animals we know , but not the broader world . I walk through a meadow with a colleague , talking animatedly about what inhabits life around us . We are interrupted by a sudden mound alive with small butterflies and the scent of thyme radiating from low purple flowers . Bees crowd in . We stand there . Then I consider the fewer insects at home . The moment of connection is broken . There is something about the immediacy of interconnection that doesn’t know itself ; when my mind jumps elsewhere it is easy to move on and pick up our conversation . 6 Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia In work using parallel worlds to drive a sense of how things could be ‘other’ , I choose a world that features these sensitivities to include in the exercises I ask of participants . Because the workshop format uses counterfactual worlds , based on a changed history that needs bringing into the present , I use an episode from Sweden that involved Sámi nations . Of course , I worry that this risks a form of cultural appropriation . Acknowledging the possibility does not mitigate it , but it allows us to discuss it afterwards as part of our reflections . We are twisting history and history is political . This is the revised history I use ( Laestadius was the Swedish Sámi who influenced religion in Sweden towards a strict Protestantism , demon - strating some of the complexity involved in considering Indigenous ontologies ) : “Lars Laestadius ( 1800 – 1861 ) , the Swedish Sámi who founded the Laestadian pietist revival movement , has a mid - life conversion to the faith of his ancestors , which heavily influences religious developments in Sweden . Though varying considerably from region to region within Sápmi , traditional Sámi beliefs consist of three intertwining elements : animism , shamanism and polytheism . Animism perceives all things— animals , plants , rocks , rivers , weather systems , human handiwork and perhaps even words—as animated and alive . While Lutheranism persisted in some parts , it became increasingly tinged with pantheism and animism until , by the general turn to a new spiritualism in 1960s , Sweden led the world in everyday practices and beliefs elsewhere found in Japan’s pre - imperialist Shinto and in Indigenous faith systems . Over recent years , this animism has become more closely identified with the environmental movement . ” Inevitably there is a challenge to contemplating a different belief system . It is a greater challenge than entertaining a different material or economic circumstance ( other scenarios include : plastics are not invented ; the Brazilian rubber monopoly continues ) . I am watching the third group to tackle this brief . The first two have interesting outcomes : 1 ) a governance structure where officials must commune with lakes and hills for days before making any decisions ; 2 ) a ritual presentation of seeds for carbon capture and algae to un - block the flows of the world , collected from a trip outside the workshop building and described as a symbolic restocking of life . A common theme has been the exercise of power in and against this world . How does this sweet - natured yet vulnerable state ( condition or nation ? ) exist when there are expansionist tendencies round it , such as the Russian and British empires ? But this third group has cracked that problem . Not only do they work with flows in this world , but they can send arcs of energy to dance through the skies , showing a power that they deploy only to entertain each other at festivals , but which signals to other political systems what they have achieved . In this world , no empire will ever marginalize their ways of knowing . These three outcomes are based on the Sámi scenario and the mak - ing of cultural artefacts for the contemporary world inspired by it . Each time it is run , the process captures the imagination of the par - ticipants and they are able to play with ecological ideas of harmony , restoration and other intimacies across species . This , of all the briefs , has proved to be powerful in its opportunity for stimulating thinking about ‘being’ . It draws on hopes and clichés : film narratives , dreams and other renderings of a gentler world ; it speaks to a yearning for a different set of relations that are outside the direct experience of the participants . Perhaps there is little originality or ‘authenticity’ in the outcomes , but there is imagination and the act of being in - volved makes space for different pathways . The talking , making and negotiating together can be transformative . As workshop leader , I am transformed . I recall butterflies and the scent of thyme , the possibilities and challenges of community gar - dening and the achievement of shoots that sprout . And I wonder : is some vulnerability needed to know the more - than - human , as it is to be fully alive ? 5 DISCUSSION : PLURIVERSAL INTEGRITIES Escobar [ 22 ] quotes the Zapatistas in asking for a world where many worlds fit . Describing different ontologies and how we have experienced them and , in the last section , worked with them , we draw attention to the pluriversal worlds we are touched by and can conceive of , personally , as researchers , collaborators and ter - restrials . All these worlds fit together somehow . Acknowledging plurality ( and the pluriversal ) is merely naming and welcoming the pre - existing relationality of life . Here , in the discussion , we attempt to offer further structuring so that these thoughts and experiences can contribute to PD scholarship and reach beyond idiosyncratic storytelling in ways that are not too reductive , but abstracted enough to be transferable . To do this , we have looked around instead of looking ahead for wisdom and guidance [ 76 ] , addressing sources that may not have been accepted to date in scholarly fields . Tsing [ 76 ] laments , ‘theories of heterogeneity are still in their infancy’ ( p5 ) , to which we add that there are theories of heterogeneity but not in the places where mainstream scholars tend to look . As we evidence , there are stories that entangle beings in folklore and newspaper articles , reflecting worlds that are ‘obvious to ordinary participants and observers’ ( ibid ) . From this we can see that there are many kinds of everyday theories ( with a lower - case t ) imbuing sustained practices and philosophies that help us understand how always - participating - with - many is ongoing . We know the world ( s ) we inhabit needs a process to navigate and transition between the thought systems informing different life - views . This is not merely inclusive politics ; it also acknowledges how destructive the dominant growth - oriented and human - centric approach has been . Particularly , a deeper understanding of rela - tionality is needed in PD for our collective future - making . To make the point , we have given the example of how deep relationality exists in modern Japan and how participation ( using familiar ex - amples like decision and future - making ) has been shaped by it . In the description of yoriai , we show how such structures of thought can profoundly inform becoming through the sociotechnical ar - rangements of decision - making , and , in turn , be informed by these infrastructures . In a second example , considering deep relationality without the relevant cultural structures ( Britain ) , we invent them through design . This is disruptive thinking . World s have futures but we are re - minded that designing with and for those futures is ethically tangled and scaled . Colonialism and neoliberalism have spatialized futures . Planning ahead is further complicated by the flow of ideas constitut - ing a radical rethink of humans’ relations with living beings , ( seen in Haraway , Tsing , Morton , etc ) , by moves towards decolonising ( [ 28 ] [ 67 ] [ 77 ] ) and acknowledgment of the many ways coexisting 7 PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Yoko Akama et al . has been ignored ( e . g . [ 2 ] [ 35 ] [ 44 ] ) . If we connect these practical and ideological changes with the concept of pluriversal worlds of multiple ontologies , then the idea of solution crumbles beyond dis - sensus [ 9 ] and adversarial concerns [ 16 ] . There are troubles to stay with [ 30 ] instead of definable problems , as we work out what it means to live and die well in ‘the ruin that has become our collective home’ ( [ 76 ] : 3 ) . There are more - than - human approaches that replace reliance on the practices of human - centred problem - solving . 5 . 1 Aligning PD Ethics We commenced this paper by interrogating PD’s ethical starting point – that of protecting the underdog and looking for inclusion even when voices could not be heard directly . Yet , we questioned the human - only ‘who , what and how’ of these practices . In stories of co - existence with the rhythms and tempests of nature , we can hear many ‘voices’ being represented in material and non - material forms . Some are more visible , such as the words carved by ancestors on the stone cairn or folklore passed down over centuries . Some are less visible , such as rocks that grow in dialogue with waves , land , animals and weather . Some are intimate , whispered on a dis - connected telephone to the spirits of loved ones . Some are felt at an immense scale of time and space . It is important to note that the related structures of organising are not for humans alone to control . Local folklores – such as the O - namazu , the giant catfish , or legend of Susano - o defeating eight - headed serpent dragon – are shared to revere the power of more - than - human forces , to learn to live alongside them , to be shaped by inhabiting with the various forces of this world . The shrines , cairns , tsunami and boulders can be seen as ‘bookmarks’ [ 37 ] ‘designed’ to remind us ( humans with short lifespans and impatience for progress ) of this primordial co - habitation , premised on enduring intra - dependence [ 4 ] . To engage in PD with these thoughts in mind expands ontological categories and orientations to the work of structuring and reporting on struc - ture . Is it meaningful to talk about sentiency of infrastructuring , for instance , or is this too much ontological queering ? Asking about alternatives is especially important in contexts that have long lived with co - ontologies of always - participating - with - many . Similarly , in the story by Ann , there are more - than - human voices and representations . These exist in the movement of butterflies , the sound of bees and scent of thyme and meadows . These voices need a shift in gear – a slower pace and lower posture – to appreciate . It is no coincidence that the only group to collect materials in the open air was working on the Laestadian scenario . One does not need to be Shinto or have an animist faith to appreciate this kind of awe and wonder . The potency of these more - than - human stories is their familiarity and they are resilient and hopeful for this reason . It speaks to cultures with eroded reverence for life , which are hastening biodiversity loss and destabilizing the weather . In this impoverished cultural landscape , Ann’s story reminds us that it is only one thought away to place faith in creative imagination , to choose collective organising for future decision - making and to believe that communing with lakes and mountains has legitimacy . Namely , when extolling pluriverses , ecological inclusivity and always - participating - with - many , the usual ethical concerns in PD can be productive fulcra , without collapsing them under anthro - pocentric agendas . We can support the underdog and use voice , representation , structures of organisation and future - making in participating with the more - than - human . This is not to dismiss the value of a more functional approach to design , but to offer a realm of alternatives to be embraced as part of acknowledging plurality . In fact , for design researchers , who are already adept at anticipat - ing mess , errors and disruption , encounters of ‘perplexing alterity’ [ 57 ] need not raise suspicion , but be seen as a generative approach . For those schooled only in scientific detachment and unused to thinking outside traditional processes , we point out that the act of including ethics of others is itself an ethical choice . 5 . 2 The Ethics of Aligning with Many Worlds Yet , in considering plurality of ethics and ways of knowing , we have , like so many scholars , also spoken about situations in which we have no direct or reciprocal relations . This has its own ethical commitments . It is a precarious act ( requiring some courage ) to engage with Indigenous cosmopolitics and onto - epistemologies . We know that Indigenous peoples have suffered abuse through appropriation of their knowledge and experience , so those who are non - Indigenous must exercise extreme caution not to take Indige - nous thought as merely a source of ideas to draw on . Wiradjuri design scholar Sheehan ( [ 68 ] : 68 ) explains , Indigenous Knowledge ( IK ) ‘is a layered understanding that includes divergent streams of knowledge related within natural systems . IK generally is ontologi - cal because inquiry is situated within an intelligent and intelligible world of natural systems , replete with relational patterns for being in the world’ . Here , it is possible to respect without knowing fully . So we must not fear engagement – otherwise there will be little hope for reconciliation or chance to be guided by Indigenous wisdom . In - stead , we encourage curiosity , reflexivity , learning from and explor - ing with Indigenous peoples – it cannot only be their task to make others aware . This includes stepping into contested spaces where Indigenous and non - Indigenous subjects engage – what Nakata [ 61 ] calls the ‘cultural interface’ of ‘multiple and interconnected discourses , social practices and knowledge technologies that condi - tion how we all come to . . . understand our changing realities in the everyday , and how and what knowledge we operationalise in our daily lives’ ( p9 ) . Following Nakata , we suggest a reflexive , ethical vigilance to provide a nuanced explanation , starting with questions of what knowledge is encountered , how it has been interpreted , what claims are made by this , where this knowledge is placed and in relation to what , and how this might circulate . The focus woven through our accounts , of voice , representation and structures of decision - and future - making , is already championed by Indigenous peoples as a matter of sovereignty and self - determination , and there is much to learn ( see [ 3 ] [ 7 ] [ 53 ] ) . Non - Indigenous people must take responsibility to educate themselves as fellows trying to develop the capacity to understand multiple ontologies , including broadening ideas of sentience and relationality . 5 . 3 Methodologies of Always - Participating - With - Many This paper is conceptual , yet it offers radical strategies for the practice of always - participating - with - many . Instead of aspiring to replicability , the contribution is to demonstrate how a different how can come into being ; how to catalyse to think and do differently ; 8 Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia and how to present highly contextual descriptions that reinforce these insights . We have given several examples of cases where we are always - participating - with - many : a tsunami , places of Japanese decision - making , a workshop about futures , summer meadows . There are diverse ways and we can learn from all of them , just as decades of study of human participation is supported by hundreds of documented cases . First , if we are to adopt these radical strategies , we need to move our minds and hearts , as well as our practices , allowing for what Light [ 47 ] calls ‘the imaginative process of moving towards’ ( p86 ) to inform design . This might be an individual response , though dia - logue ( such as the one that fuelled this paper ) can help to articulate the implications of these encounters . The point of diversity is to hear from unanticipated sources , open up the space for different ways of knowing and allow things to enter . As with other forms of PD research , if we knew where we were going before looking beyond ourselves , we would not need the participation of others . But , we do not know all the answers and we learn by bringing others together and listening . So , this is a fundamental way that our discipline can respond positively . Second , we can learn from places and positions that recognize more - than - human sentience . We have drawn on Japan because two authors have a binding connection and lived experiences from that place . Speaking from our situatedness ( places and people ) is a valued methodology in PD , building on feminist and anthropology theory . As a third strategy , we can braid , juxtapose and interweave multiple worldviews , eroding separations between beings and non - beings in favour of greater entanglement between them . While inspired by it , this is not the same as ‘ontological braiding’ as intro - duced by Salmond [ 65 ] , where Te Ao M¯aori accommodates many ontologies , for we start with wholly different ways of knowing and being . Yet our attempt must resist collapsing plural ways of being and becoming under a universal ontological equivalence - we caution readers not to interpret our explorations in this way . We are all involved in impossible but necessary translations in aiming to link up worlds and share them . We recognise this challenge in submitting our work to an ACM publication with a dominant way of knowing ( see Light’s critique [ 48 ] ) . It is necessary to resist the compression that academic traditions impose on knowledge and accept contradiction . PD researchers may see this as a fact of living or as an epistemological device , depending on their starting point . The fourth strategy we suggest is to use the power in writing to present alternatives in alternative ways . We are inspired by non - fiction writing and auto - ethnography , using narrative form to link abstract , unfamiliar theories and personal experiences and share these engagements without collapsing them under generalisations . Last among strategies for embracing always - participating - with - many , we suggest that all of us start living more explicitly with more - than - humans and embody these practices by : 1 ) being with plants , other animals , trees , mountains and rocks to attune our pace with different rhythms and flows ; 2 ) keeping multiple worlds alive within ourselves so that these philosophies and cosmopolitics can inform dialogue without being flattened out ; 3 ) designing with and learning among people with deeply relational worldviews . The strategies above demonstrate what participation means when multiple ontologies are embraced . For readers wanting a more customary PD foothold , we offer method in the second story : an attempt to infuse relations with a different sensibility . This may address the ‘why’ of PD with more - than - human worlds for those who do not see altered orientations as an end in themselves . But this is not to substitute our suggestions with simple design solu - tions . To paraphrase the craftivism movement , ‘if we want a world that is beautiful , kind and fair , shouldn’t our activism be beautiful , kind and fair ? ’ ( http : / / craftivist - collective . com ) . Such workshops are activism in this vein , embodying gentle alternatives . 6 BEING DIFFERENT TO DO DIFFERENTLY In this paper , we have played with form and pushed ideas of what constitutes participation to a point that may not be comfortable for readers . This is an ongoing attempt to open up discussion and con - tribute fresh energy to PD . We have offered some ways of always - participating - with - many as processes by which ( PD ) scholars and practitioners might enrich their understanding of working with the more - than - human , without detailing how that more - than - human might manifest or what the experience might be . That remains open for others to determine . We need to change systems , lifestyles and imagination to aban - don siloed , anthropocentric , Modern thinking and avert the worst devastation in the offing . Design , in its extreme functionality and service to big industry , is both the handmaiden of devastation and a possible means of changing this fate . Our practice needs to propel us out of current modes of thought , but to resist functionalism when it threatens to close down a welcome for plural ways of knowing , in thinking , in material practice . Participatory designers are reflective , concerned with fellow beings , inclusion and ethics . Our practice is well - placed to lead change within Design disciplines , as has hap - pened before [ 41 ] . It can spur re - evaluation . Redesigning design , here , means welcoming alternative approaches and recognizing het - erogeneous practices that have always been designing - with - many ( [ 2 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] ) . We note that Escobar discovers design just as his own logic propels us , when thinking about many ontologies and ways of being , to speak of ecologies so complex and evolving that any intervention can only be contingent . It can only be an intra - action [ 5 ] not a decisive move . In other words , we are not talking about simple processes , but this reflects a tension in design’s traditional role as mediator between world - as - is and intentional change . There has never been a world - as - is : it has always been a changing , plural tangle of interactions and exchanges , not to be fully grasped . Explicitly encouraging people to apprehend life in this way has the dual merits of slowing down design ( thereby increasing chances of futures for all ) and ushering in greater appreciation of what we humans participate in . For us , this paper is a way to honour PD’s particular agenda by questioning dominant frames and singular worldviews , looking at precedents that do not stem from democratic motivations as the field understands them , but nonetheless occupy a similarly ethically - charged place . Instead , these more - than - human concerns offer a way to think past the limits of current design trajectories while engaging with the spiritual dimensions that are absent from design’s usual commitments . This seems to fill out so much that is missing . And , while this responds to PDC’20’s conference theme of 9 PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia Yoko Akama et al . ‘participation otherwise’ , we also see our paper aligned with calls to trouble PD’s dominant borders and assumed ‘Western’ - centricity . We hope the thinking across worlds that we have described as inspiration for us will also be inspirational for others . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Yoko would like to thank Linda Daley , Lucinda Strahan and invalu - able support and input from the Expanded Writers Group . Ann would like to thank Phil Jones , Caroline Bassett , Per - Anders Hill - gren and Kristina Lindström for inspiration in developing the On Some Other World workshop . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Tony Adams , Sarah - Holman Jones & Carolyn Ellis . 2015 . Autoethnography . Ox - ford , New York : Oxford University Press . [ 2 ] Yoko Akama . 2017 . Kokoro of Design : Embracing Heterogeneity in Design Re - search . Design and Culture : The Journal of the Design Studies Form , 9 ( 1 ) : 79 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17547075 . 2017 . 1280266 [ 3 ] Yoko Akama . , Debra Evans , Seth Keen , Fay McMillan , Mark McMillan & Peter West . 2017 . Designing Digital and Creative Scaffolds to Strengthen Indigenous Nations : Being Wiradjuri by Practising Sovereignty . Journal of Digital Creativity , ( Special Issue on Digital Citizenship ) : 1 – 15 . [ 4 ] Karen Barad . 2003 . Posthumanist Performativity : Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter . Signs : Journal of Women in Culture and Society , 28 ( 3 ) : 801 – 831 . [ 5 ] KarenBarad . 2007 . MeetingtheUniverseHalfway . DukeUniversityPress , Durham and London . [ 6 ] Michelle Bastian . 2017 . ‘Towards a more - than - human participatory research’ . In Participatory Research in More - than - human Worlds , Michelle Bastian , Owain Jones , Niamh Moore , Emma Roe ( eds . ) . Routledge , London , 19 - 37 . [ 7 ] Larissa Behrendt . 2003 . Achieving Social Justice : Indigenous Rights and Australia’s Future . The Federation Press , Annandale , Australia . [ 8 ] Jane Bennett . 2010 . Vibrant matter : A political ecology of things . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . [ 9 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn & Per - Anders Hillgren . 2012 . Agnoistic participa - tory design : working with marginalised social movements . CoDesign : Interna - tional Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts , 8 ( 2 – 3 ) : 127 – 144 . [ 10 ] Monica Bjornerud . 2018 . Timefulness : How thinking like a geologist can help save the world . Princeton University Press , Princeton and Oxford . [ 11 ] Maria del Pilar Blanco and Esther Peeren . 2013 . The Spectralities Reader : Ghosts and Haunting in Contemporary Cultural Theory . Bloomsbury , London and New York . [ 12 ] ElizabethBuie . 2019 . LetUsSayWhatWeMean : TowardsOperationalDefinitions for Techno - Spirituality Research . In CHI EA ’19 Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 1 – 10 . [ 13 ] Mary Cappello . 2014 . Propositions , Provocations – Inventions , In Bending Genre . Margot Singer and Nicole Walker ( eds . ) Bloomsbury , London . [ 14 ] David Carlin . 2017 . ’The Essay in the Anthropocene : towards entangled nonfic - tion’ , in TEXT Journal , Special Issue No 39 The Essay , April . [ 15 ] Simone de Beauvoir . 1972 / 1949 . The Second Sex , transl . H . M . Parshley . Penguin , London . [ 16 ] Carl DiSalvo . 2014 . Adversarial Design . CA : MIT Press [ 17 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers & Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the land - scape of sustainable HCI , Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , In Proc . CHI’10 . [ 18 ] Rick Dolphijn & Iris van der Tuin . 2012 . New materialism : Interviews & cartogra - phies . Open Humanities Press . Ann Arbor , MI . [ 19 ] Allison Druin , 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Be - haviour and Information Technology . 21 ( 1 ) : 1 - 25 . [ 20 ] Pelle Ehn , 2008 . Participation in design things , In Proc . PDC 2008 : 92 - 101 . [ 21 ] John Elfers & Patty Hlava . 2016 . The Spectrum of Gratitude Experience . Palgrave Macmillan . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 41030 - 2 [ 22 ] Arturo Escobar . 2018 . Designs for the Pluriverse : Radical Interdependence , Au - tonomy and the Making of Worlds . Durham and London : Duke University Press . [ 23 ] Laura Forlano . 2017 . Posthumanism and Design , she ji The Journal of Design , Economics , and Innovation . 3 , ( 1 ) , 16 - 29 . [ 24 ] Tony Fry . 2009 . Design Futuring : Sustainability , Ethics and New Practice . Oxford , UK : Berg . [ 25 ] Greg Garrard . 2016 . The Environmental Humanities : Notes Towards a Summary for Policymakers . In The Routledge Companion to the Environmental Humanities , UrsulaK . Heise , JonChristensenandMichelleNiemann ( eds . ) Routledge : 446 - 456 . [ 26 ] Robert M . Geraci . 2006 . Spiritual robots : Religion and our scientific view of the natural world Spiritual Robots : Religion and Our Scientific View of the Natural World . Theology and Science , 4 ( 3 ) : 229 – 246 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14746700600952993 [ 27 ] Anna Gibbs . 2015 . Writing as Method : Attunement , Resonance , Rhythm . In Affective Methodologies : developing cultural research strategies for the study of affect . Britta Timm Knudsen & Carsten Stage . ( eds . ) . Palgrave Macmillan . [ 28 ] Ghassan Hage , 2017 . Is Racism an Environmental Threat ? Polity Press . [ 29 ] Donna J . Haraway . 2003 . The Companion Species Manifesto : Dogs , People , And Significant Otherness . Prickly Paradigm Press . [ 30 ] Donna J . Haraway . 2016 . Staying with the trouble : Making kin in the Chthu - lucene . Durham and London : Duke University Press . [ 31 ] Sara Heitlinger , Marcus Foth , Rachel Clarke , Carl Disalvo , Ann Light , and Laura Forlano . 2018 . Avoiding Ecocidal Smart Cities : Participatory Design for More - than - Human Futures . Proc . PDC 2018 : 2 - 4 . [ 32 ] Shigeru Higashino , 2011 . 石 碑 の 教 え 守 る . Kohaku Shimpo Newspaper . 10 th April 2011 http : / / memory . ever . jp / tsunami / tsunami - taio _ 307 . html [ 33 ] Eiko Ikegami . 2005 . Bonds of Civility : Aesthetic Networks and the Political Origins of Japanese Culture . Cambridge University Press , New York . [ 34 ] Tim Ingold . 2010 . Bringing Things to Life : Creative Entanglements in a World of Materials . The National Centre for Research Methods Working Paper Series . Aberdeen University . [ 35 ] Casper B . Jensen , Miho Ishii , & Philip Swift . 2016 . Attuning to the webs of en . HAU : Journal of Ethnographic Theory , 6 ( 2 ) : 149 – 172 . [ 36 ] Helena Karasti . 2014 . Infrastructuring in Participatory Design . In Proc . PDC 2014 : 141 – 150 . [ 37 ] ThomasKasulis . 2004 . Shinto : TheWayHome . UniversityofHawai’iPress , Hawaii , US . [ 38 ] James E . Katz . 2006 . Magic in the Air : Mobile Communication and the Transfor - mation of Social Life , Transaction Publishers . [ 39 ] Wendy Keay - Bright . 2013 . Designing Interaction Though Sound and Movement with Children on the Autistic Spectrum . In Proc . ArtsIT 2011 , Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences , Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering ( LNICST ) , Springer . 1 - 9 . [ 40 ] Jeffrey J . Kripal , 2017 . Religion : Super Religion . Macmillan Reference USA . [ 41 ] Morten Kyng . 2010 . Bridging the Gap between Politics and Techniques : On the next practices of participatory design . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 22 ( 1 ) : 49 - 68 . [ 42 ] Bruno Latour . 2018 . Down to Earth : Politics in the New Climatic Regime , transl . Cathy Porter . Polity Press . [ 43 ] Bruno Latour & Peter Weibel . eds . 2005 . Making things public : Atmospheres of Democracy . MIT Press . Cambridge MA . [ 44 ] JonLaw & Lin , Wen - yuanLin . 2017 . TheStickinessofKnowing : Translation , Post - coloniality , and STS . East Asian Science , Technology and Society : An International Journal , 11 : 257 – 269 . [ 45 ] Jeremy Lent . 2017 . The Patterning Instinct . : A Cultural History of Humanity’s Search for Meaning . LA : Prometheus Books . [ 46 ] Ann Light and Christina Welch . 2018 . The cultural and spiritual aspects of grow - ingedibleplants : testingformeaningfulnessinLeeds , UK , in ( eds ) JoshuaZeunert and Tim Waterman , Routledge Handbook of Landscape and Food , Routledge , 572 - 584 [ 47 ] Ann Light . 2015 . Troubling Futures : can participatory design research provide a constitutive anthropology for the 21st century ? Interaction Design and Architec - ture ( s ) Journal - IxD & A , N . 26 , 2015 , 81 - 94 . [ 48 ] Ann Light . 2018 . Writing PD : Accounting for Socially - Engaged Research . Proc . PDC’18 [ 49 ] Ann Light . 2019 . Design and Social Innovation at the Margins : Finding and Making Cultures of Plurality , J . Design and Culture , 11 : 1 , 13 - 35 [ 50 ] Hannah Korsmeyer and Ann Light . 2019 . Learning to Anticipate Worlds through Participatory Speculative Design , Anticipation 2019 , Oslo , Norway , October 2019 [ 51 ] Bryan Lim . 2019 . Imagining a future with HIV ? Human - technological - microbial hi ( stories ) in the context of contemporary HIV medicine . In Multispecies Story - tellinginIntermedialPractices . LinnaeusUniversity . Växjö , Sweden . https : / / lnu . se / contentassets / 7560ee560c524095a1c1b674ce4a9a5e / multispecies - abstractsb . pdf [ 52 ] Ruth Ludwin & Gregory J . Smits . 2007 . Folklore and earthquakes : Native Ameri - can oral traditions from Cascadia compared with written traditions from Japan . In Myth and Geology . Luiggi Piccardi & Bruce Masse ( eds . ) , Geological Society of London . London : 67 – 94 . [ 53 ] Scott R . Lyons . 2000 . Rhetorical Sovereignty : What Do American Indians Want from Writing ? National Council of Teachers of English , 51 ( 3 ) : 447 – 468 . [ 54 ] Miki Meek . 2016 . 597 : One Last Thing Before I Go . Act 1 . A Really Long Distance . This American Life . http : / / www . thisamericanlife . org / radio - archives / episode / 597 / transcript [ 55 ] Tomohide Mizuuchi , Masako Miyata , Ryuichi Nambu . 2017 . The Development of Modern Design Methods through an Actor - Network Theory ( ANT ) Analysis of the Pre - modern Social Customs of Japan , Proc . International Association of Societies of Design Research 2017 : 1760 - 1769 . [ 56 ] Tsuneichi Miyamoto 2010 . The Forgotten Japanese : Encounters with Rural Life and Folklore . Stone Bridge Press , Berkeley California . 10 Expanding Participation to Design with More - Than - Human Concerns PDC ’20 : Vol . 1 , June 15 – 20 , 2020 , Manizales , Colombia [ 57 ] Akira Morita . 2017 . Encounters , Trajectories , and the Ethnographic Moment : Why “Asia as Method” Still Matters . East Asian Science , Technology and Society : An International Journal , 11 : 239 – 250 . [ 58 ] AndrewMorrison . 2018 . FutureNorth , NurtureForthDesignFiction , Anticipation and Arctic Futures . In Future North : The Changing Arctic Landscapes , edited by Janike K . Larsen and Peter Hemmersam , 119 – 41 . Routledge . [ 59 ] Timothy Morton . 2016 . Dark Ecology . Columbia University Press . [ 60 ] Arne Naess . 1987 . Self - realization : An ecolog1cal approach to being in the world . The Trumpeter ( 3 ) : 35 - 42 . [ 61 ] Martin Nakata . 2007 . the Cultural Interface . The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education , 36 : 7 – 14 . [ 62 ] Pitt , H . 2017 . Questioning care cultivated through connecting with more - than - human communities . Social and Cultural Geography 19 ( 2 ) : 253 - 274 . [ 63 ] LauraPopplowandMelisaDuque . 2017 . EngagingwithGhosts , Idiotsand _ _ _ _ _ _ - Otherness in Participatory Design , In Nordes’17 , Oslo . [ 64 ] Toni Robertson & Ina Wagner . 2013 . Ethics : engagement , representation and politics - in - action . In J . Simonsen & T . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . London and New York : Routledge : 64 – 85 . [ 65 ] Anne Salmond . 2014 . Tears of Rangi : Water , power , and people in New Zealand . HAU : Journal of Ethnographic Theory , 4 ( 3 ) : 285 – 309 . [ 66 ] George B . Sansom . 1978 . Japan : A Short Cultural History . Stanford University Press . Stanford , California . [ 67 ] Tristan Schultz , Danah Abdulla , Ahmed Ansari , Ece Canlı , Mahmoud Keshavarz , Matt Kiem , Luiza Prado de O . Martin , Pedro J . S . Vieira de Oliveira . 2018 . Editors’ Introduction . SpecialIssueonDecolonisingDesign , DesignandCulture , 10 ( 1 ) : 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17547075 . 2018 . 1434367 [ 68 ] NormSheehan . 2011 . IndigenousKnowledgeandRespectfulDesign : AnEvidence - Based Approach . Design Issues , 27 ( 4 ) : 68 – 80 . [ 69 ] Jesper Simonsen & Toni Robertson . 2013 . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge . New York . [ 70 ] MotoyukiShitamichi . 2015 . 津 波 石 ／ TsunamiBoulder . http : / / m - shitamichi . com / ts [ 71 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly & Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised chil - dren , In Proc PDC’18 : 171 - 1712 . [ 72 ] Åsa Ståhl & Kristina Lindström . 2019 . Un / Making Soil Communities – The un - faithful daughters of Linnaeus University . In Multispecies Storytelling in Interme - dial Practices . Linnaeus University . Växjö , Sweden . https : / / lnu . se / contentassets / 7560ee560c524095a1c1b674ce4a9a5e / multispecies - abstractsb . pdf [ 73 ] Paul Stoller . 2017 . Sorcery and the Supernatural in Niger and Mali . In Super Religion . Jay Kripal ( ed . ) . 219 - 230 . [ 74 ] Katherine Swancutt . 2019 . Animism . The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Anthro - pology , Retrieved August 24 , 2019 , from https : / / www . anthroencyclopedia . com / entry / animism [ 75 ] Tomoki Takada , Kimio Umetsu & Toshio Kuwako . 2012 . A study on the deity and spatial arrangement of shrines in tsunami disaster caused by the Tohoku earthquake . Journal of Japan Society of Civil Engineers ( Safety Problem ) , 68 ( 2 ) : 1167 – 1174 . [ 76 ] Anna Tsing . L . 2015 . The Mushroom at the End of the World : On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton and Oxford : Princeton University Press . [ 77 ] Linda Tuhiwai - Smith . 2012 . Decolonizing Methodologies : Research and Indigenous Peoples . Zed Publications . London and New York . [ 78 ] JulietvanLoon . 2017 . “Embodiedsubjectivityandtheprojectofthecontemporary literary essay” , TEXT Special Issue : The Essay , 39 . [ 79 ] Stuart Walker . 2013 . Design and Spirituality : Material Culture for a Wisdom Economy . Design Issues , 29 ( 3 ) , 89 – 107 . [ 80 ] Laura Watts . 2019 . Energy at the End of the World . Cambridge Massachusetts : MIT Press . [ 81 ] Sarah Whatmore . 2006 . Materialist returns : practising cultural geography in and for a more - than - human world . Cultural Geographies , 13 : 600 – 609 . [ 82 ] Ann - MarieWillis . 2006 . Ontologicaldesigning . DesignPhilosophyPapers , ( 2 ) : 1 – 11 . [ 83 ] Allison Woodruff , Sally Augustin & Brooke Foucault . 2010 . Sabbath day home automation : “it’s like mixing technology and religion” . In SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’07 ) : 527 - 536 . [ 84 ] Kathryn Yusoff . 2019 . A Billion Black Anthropocenes , Minnesota , MI : University of Minnesota Press . 11