This article was downloaded by : [ Oakland University ] On : 26 November 2014 , At : 02 : 03 Publisher : Taylor & Francis Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / hoce20 Reengineering IS Research and Its Intellectual Infrastructure for the Electronic Economy Alexander Hars , Omar A . El Sawy , Sanjay Gosain , Sabine Hirt , Il Im , David Kang , Zoonky Lee & Arjan Raven Published online : 18 Nov 2009 . To cite this article : Alexander Hars , Omar A . El Sawy , Sanjay Gosain , Sabine Hirt , Il Im , David Kang , Zoonky Lee & Arjan Raven ( 2000 ) Reengineering IS Research and Its Intellectual Infrastructure for the Electronic Economy , Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce , 10 : 2 , 67 - 83 , DOI : 10 . 1207 / S15327744JOCE1002 _ 1 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327744JOCE1002 _ 1 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions Reengineering IS Research and Its Intellectual Infrastructure for the Electronic Economy Alexander Hars Omar A . El Sawy Sanjay Gosain Department of Information and Operations Management Marshall School of Business University of Southern California Sabine Hirt Anderson Graduate School of Management University of California at Los Angeles Il Im David Kang Zoonky Lee Arjan Raven Department of Information and Operations Management Marshall School of Business University of Southern California The emerging electronic economy is bringing with it rapid advances in open networks and information technology ( IT ) capabilities , increasing global complexity and inter - dependence , and increasingly short business cycle times . Many enterprises are reengineering the way they carry out their business to take advantage of these new conditions . Inthisarticle , wecontendthatitisalsotimeforinformationsystems ( IS ) ac - ademics to fundamentally rethink the IS research process and the intellectual infra - structure that enables it in light of these new conditions . We first examine why the cur - rent IS research process needs to be changed . We then systematically analyze needed change along 6 dimensions . The change potentials are used to propose an IS research paradigm that is based on interactive knowledge repositories and collaborative elec - tronic networks . We propose a new intellectual infrastructure that is based on a new type of IT - enabled electronic space for the research community , which we term a cybrarium . A cybrarium is focused not only on the storage and dissemination but also JOURNAL OF ORGANIZATIONAL COMPUTING AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE 10 ( 2 ) , 67 – 83 ( 2000 ) Except for the first author , the names are in alphabetic order . CorrespondenceandrequestsforreprintsshouldbesenttoAlexanderHars , DepartmentofInforma - tion and Operations Management , Marshall School of Business , University of Southern California , Los Angeles , CA . E - mail : hars @ bus . usc . edu D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 on the synthesis of knowledge generated in the research community . We articulate the basic distinctions between electronic Web journals and cybrariums and show how a cybrarium leads to a fundamentally changed research process . We contend that such a redefined research process and its underlying intellectual infrastructure will enable the IS research community to make the transition to a large - scale global collaborative alliance that is faster , more forward looking , and cumulative . impact of information technology , knowledge creation , knowledge management , information systems research , collaboratory , electronic journal , business process reengineering 1 . THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH AREA : CHALLENGE AND OPPORTUNITY The research process and its intellectual infrastructure are major drivers of ad - vances in any field of study . Every field of study strives to improve the research methods and organizational arrangements through which research is carried out in a way that takes advantage of changes in the business , technological , and organiza - tional environments . Sometimes , changes in the environment provide unique op - portunities to make radical changes both to the way that research is carried out and to its intellectual infrastructure . In this article , we suggest that the emergence of the electronic economy is providing such an opportunity at this point in time for the in - formation systems ( IS ) research area . IS is a relatively new area that evolved into an independent field of study in the early 1980s . Since the time of its inception it has made significant progress : IS jour - nals are blossoming , IS research gets published in management journals , IS re - search contributions are acknowledged in practice , student demand for IS courses is growing , universities grant IS degrees , and the IS discipline has formed its own institutions such as the Association of Information Systems . Indeed , as far back as the early 1980s , a study of IS as a scholarly field found that it was emerging as an in - dependent discipline with its own tradition [ 1 ] . Every area of academic research has its own unique challenges that it tries to manage . The IS area has been no exception . We identified two core challenges that have been facing the IS research area in its first two decades : ( a ) the difficulty of building an endogenous research paradigm for the IS area that results in cumula - tive and distinct knowledge and ( b ) the paradox of managing the “storm - chasing” aspect of the research process associated with rapid technological change . We ex - amine each of these in the following sections . In 1987 , Culnan [ 2 ] assessed the intellectual development of IS based on a cocitation analysis and found that IS appeared to be emerging from the reference disciplines ( management science , economics , computer science , and organization science ) into an independent and coherent field . However , all through the years , there have been some mixed reviews about the extent of maturity of this emergence and the degree of consensus as to the body of IS work considered to be integral to the discipline . In 1989 , Banville and Landry [ 3 ] argued that the field of MIS is a “fragmented adhocracy [ which is ] largely open to an educated public [ and where ] 68 HARS ET AL . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 reputations are fairly fluid , … coalitions likely to be ephemeral and leadership is often of charismatic nature” ( p . 56 ) . Another study on IS research in 1993 , which fo - cused on the diversity in methods used and phenomena studied , found little evi - dence of change in maturity over a 10 - year period [ 4 ] . More recently , Benbasat and Weber [ 5 ] examined the diversity in the IS area and concluded that theoretical par - adigms are still being continually borrowed from other disciplines and that there are few paradigms that are endogenous to IS research . They argued that the emer - gence of distinct research paradigms is necessary for cumulative knowledge and for the maturation and cohesion of an academic discipline , even if it is based on a diversity of interdisciplinary subfields . That remains a core challenge for the IS re - search community . Part of the reason for this is that since the time of Keen’s influential 1980 article [ 6 ] , the conventional wisdom has been that the IS discipline would gain more re - spectability by drawing on paradigms from other disciplines . Although this bor - rowing provided a good start , it has the limitation that it draws on frameworks and methodologies that were devised for the natural , physical , or social sciences . Frameworks are orientations or sweeping ways of looking at a social world , provid - ing collections of assumptions , concepts , and forms of explanations [ 7 ] . Theories within a framework share major assumptions and concepts . Theories , in turn , al - low a researcher to frame the research and interpret its findings . Frameworks from other disciplines come with a different set of assumptions and a viewpoint that may obfuscate the core concerns of the IS discipline . Many empirical research ap - proaches , for example , are based on the implicit assumption of stable phenomena . Unfortunately , the phenomena in IS are often known to be transient . In areas such as decision support systems ( DSS ) , computer - aided software engineering ( CASE ) , and groupware , studies typically do not differentiate between the analysis of early exemplars of a new technology and the analysis of the technology per se ( which may be represented by mature exemplars that will only be available at some point in the future ) . Moreover , the methodological aspects of this problem have not re - ceived much attention . IS can perhaps better be ascribed to a type of science that Si - mon [ 8 ] called the Science of the Artificial . After all , IS are artifacts that we build for organizational contexts . They are also constantly changing in character and are driven by information technologies that are often unstable and emergent . This re - quires a different type of theory and methodological approach that is suited to these special characteristics of IS . Although a few attempts have been made to de - velop theory based on paradigms endogenous to the IS field itself [ 9 ] , we continue to revere theoretical paradigms from other areas even when they are not the best fit . We thus miss classes of theories that are key to the IS area and also miss out on building a more distinct and cumulative knowledge base for IS . The second core challenge that faces the IS research area is related to what we call storm chasing . Because of the many technological advances that appear every year and the many management fads that appear concurrently [ 10 ] , IS research , in its scramble to keep up , has tended to chase these “storms” as they loom and as they hit . Storm chasing may be a necessary mode of operation for IS research in the current business and technological environment , but the way that it is carried out does not lead to cumulative learning and advancement . We often seem to jump from fad to fad as they become “hot” without making a lasting impact and without REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 69 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 understanding the nature of storms and what to do to prepare for the next one . For example , as CASE - tool research has lost much of its following in midstream , many of its issues are being reinvented in business process reengineering ( BPR ) research without taking advantage of CASE findings . Examples are insights from CASE - tool research related to learning - curve issues , representational complexity , acceptance , and deployment [ 11 ] . In the same vein , have we been able to build a solid theory for designing executive IS that can inform the design of Internet search engines ? Have we been able to continue to develop theories for business knowl - edge representation , or did we lose interest when the excitement around expert systems disappeared ? The scorecard suggests that we are not very good at building a cumulative tradition with the holding pattern that we currently have in IS re - search . Consequently , the look - ahead capability of IS research is inadequate for a rapidly changing environment that requires early warning and look - ahead in - sights from research . Rethinking the research process and its intellectual infra - structure to better cope with this challenge will increase the effectiveness of IS research contributions . Apart from these two core challenges , there are developments that make it an opportune time for the IS community to rethink the IS research process : ( a ) the emergence of the electronic economy and ( b ) the ubiquity of information technol - ogy ( IT ) and its tight weaving into the very fabric of work and organizations . The electronic economy , with its open networks and global Internet access , provides a new IT infrastructure that enables easy and rapid information exchange , shared knowledge creation , and broad dissemination among a global research commu - nity . Furthermore , the ubiquity of IT in every area of business and organizations provides new opportunities for collection and analysis of data from organizations in ways never before possible , as we discuss later in this article . It could fundamen - tally transform the interactions between researcher and participant and lead to new research approaches . New IT capabilities enable us to do research in ways that previously were not practical or economically feasible . Data collection through video conferences , re - search collaboration using group technologies , data analysis using sophisticated neural network technologies , and rapid global dissemination of findings in multi - media forms through the Internet are but a few examples of the potential opportu - nities . In what has traditionally been a paper - centered environment , it would not be adequate to simply automate the processes in their current form . Rather , these advances can only be fully exploited if the research processes are reengineered . 2 . IDENTIFICATION OF THE POTENTIAL FOR CHANGE As in a typical business process reengineering project , the potential for change needs to be systematically identified . Building on the approach of Bennis and Mische [ 12 ] , we analyze the research process along five key dimensions . First , we need to determine the visions of the new IS research environment for the electronic economy and what new assumptions and characteristics it brings with it . Second , we need to evaluate existing and new information technologies that can enable this IS research process to be carried out in qualitatively different ways . Third , we need 70 HARS ET AL . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 to reexamine the structure of the subprocesses and their interrelations and the activ - ities that constitute them . Fourth , we need to analyze the information flows around activities in the process and how they can be changed to make the process more ef - fective . Finally , we need to examine how to embed a monitoring and cumulative learning capability that will enable us to continuously improve the process as it iter - ates through multiple cycles . Modifying the approach of Bennis and Mische [ 12 ] , we add one dimension , which is concerned with how knowledge is created and reused around the process . In contrast to a typical business process reengineering project , a research process is very knowledge intensive . Research is knowledge work that has as its deliverables the production of new knowledge that is actionable in that it informs both further research and practice . From an activity perspective , research is much less struc - tured than a typical production process , but there is much more focus on different types of knowledge outputs and how they are cumulated over time . The reuse of knowledge is the most critical distinguishing process characteristic of research . In the following , we first articulate a vision of the new IS research process and then analyze the other five dimensions of potential change with that vision in mind . For each dimension we note the current “as is” status and envision examples of desired “to be” states . 2 . 1 Vision of the New IS Research Process The vision of the new IS research process is driven by the emerging environment that surrounds it and the directionality of anticipated and desired changes . The in - crease of IT intensity and increasingly universal connectivity is accelerating the emergence of virtual market spaces [ 13 ] and virtual electronic communities [ 14 ] . This virtual component of the physical world is expected to continue to grow and become a more substantial component . We will thus see a greater need and more opportunities for research methodologies that can take advantage of virtual envi - ronments , such as data collection through software agents and prototyping of IS im - plementations through interactive simulations with autonomous agents . Further - more , as was argued previously , there is a need to find ways to increase the collective accumulation of knowledge . We thus need to examine how we can change the intellectual infrastructure to support a research process that is shared by a community of researchers such that we can transform it from its current cot - tage - industry status into a more large - scale global and collaborative alliance that has greater absorptive capacity [ 15 ] and results in a much more effective IS research process . Researchers cumulate new knowledge by sharing it and building on each others’ knowledge ; this knowledge sharing knows no institutional or geographical boundaries . It can be argued that , although there are some professional mecha - nisms in place for sharing knowledge , such as conferences and publications , they are inadequate . The IS community needs a more effective organization to be able to garner the large - scale research grants that scholars in physics , engineering , and medicine are able to get that involve hundreds of researchers . Technological inno - vations such as Internet - based preprint archives , which have been available in physics since 1991 [ 16 ] , still wait to be introduced into our field . The same argument REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 71 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 can be made in molecular biology , where genome databases have led to new ways of organizing and leveraging scientific data [ 17 ] . One may conclude from the previ - ous discussion that there needs to be a shift from a cottage industry of individual craftspeople who still carry out their tasks in small uncoordinated groups with hap - hazard schedules and responses to a more organized large - scale response . 2 . 2 The Potential of New Information Technologies New information technologies have the potential to enable new ways of carrying out the IS research process , and indeed , they already have . Salient examples of such technologies include the Internet / World Wide Web and natural language process - ing advances , whereas less obvious examples include technologies for real - time re - mote sensing . Table 1 shows examples of the impacts of emerging information tech - nologies on the different phases of the research process . It cannot be exhaustive ; rather , it indicates how we can take advantage of the capabilities of emerging infor - mation technologies to enable new ways of conducting IS research . Table 1 suggests that emerging information technologies can have structural im - pacts on three dimensions of the research process : ( a ) the way that collaboration can take place ; ( b ) the way that research knowledge is managed , searched , and dis - seminated ; and ( c ) the way that inferences can be made . Internet - based technolo - gies generally have the most potential impact on the collaborative aspects of research as they change our assumptions about the constraints of geographical dis - tance , global knowledge sharing , asynchronous collaboration , interfaces to practi - tioners and field data , and collaborative research cycle time . Indexing and search technologies have high potential impact on the management of research knowl - edge repositories and how they are built , organized , maintained , and accessed . Emerging artificial intelligence techniques and natural language advances have ex - cellent potential for augmenting our capabilities for intelligent inferencing , quali - tative reasoning , and content analysis . 2 . 3 Changing the Structure of the IS Research Process Every process can be divided into subprocesses or process phases . We can then systematically identify the change potential for a process by first analyzing each phase separately for its relevance to the overall process and for its specific change potential . In a second step , changes to the sequence of the phases need to be examined . As shown in Figure 1 , the typical research process in IS can be conceived as con - sisting of eight generic subprocesses or phases . The model is highly generic and similar to conceptualizations of research processes in other fields of science ( e . g . , [ 18 ] , p . 11 ) . It is not the only possible conceptualization . There can be variations in the phases and perspectives . A survey of the IS research methodology literature [ 19 ] , however , suggested that this is a representative set of subprocesses . The struc - turing into phases facilitates reasoning about different elements of the research process ; it does not imply that every project moves through all phases or that there 72 HARS ET AL . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 Table 1 Examples of Impacts of Emerging Information Technologies on the Research Process Technology Phase of Research Process ( Examples ) Examples of Potential Impacts Internet and groupware World Wide Web Dissemination of research results Identification of research issues , framing research question Evaluation of research results Instant publishing of results ( before review ) a , b Academic debate concerning research program , facilitate involvement of practitioners and sponsors c , d Recommendation of excellent papers replaces suppression of lesser articles through lengthy review a , b Groupware All phases Framing the research issue , peer review Increased collaboration in all research phases , [ cf . 25 , 29 ] a , b , e , f , g Asynchronous idea structuring in distance learning [ cf . 30 , 31 ] e Ubiquitous desktop video - conferencing Identifying the research issue Easier and more frequent discussions with practitioners and colleagues d , e , g Search and indexing technologies Search engines Surveying existing knowledge Fast and exhaustive topic search in one pass [ cf . 31 ] a , e Intelligent information extraction ( cf . 32 ] a , e , g Global information systems literature search a , e , g Indexing engines Disseminating research resultsEvaluation of results Automatic classification , linking , synthesis of research results as they appear e Automatic detection of potential inconsistencies with respect to other work e Data collection agents ( Web - crawlers ) Collecting the data Real - time data collection directly from point of practice c , d 3 - D visual data analysis Analyzing the data Effective use of intuitive visual capabilities of human brain in pattern detection a , f Artificial intelligence technologies Natural language processing Collecting the data Analyzing the data Evaluation of results Automatic intelligent transcription of oral interviews a , d Qualitative analysis of texts [ cf . 33 ] d Automatic creation of summaries , detection of links , and potential inconsistencies a , d Artificial intelligence and neural network data analysis , data mining Analyzing the data , making inferences Alternatives to multivariate regression techniques for pattern recognition [ cf . 34 ] d , f Expert systems – case - based reasoning systems Designing and operationalizing the research strategy Systems linked to research libraries and evolving templates may serve as research advisors f , g a Reduced cycle time . b Faster response . c Forward - looking research . d Improved relevance of research . e Cumulation of research results . f Improved quality time . g Convergence of research approaches . 73 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 may be no iterations between phases . Phases do not follow a strict sequence . Their order may be reversed , they may be carried out in parallel , and the research process is not always as rational as implied in Figure 1 . This mapping provides a generic skeleton that is sufficient for our purposes of understanding , analysis , and reengineering . IT enables us to carry out the phases of the research process in new and differ - ent ways . Table 2 contains examples of potential changes for each phase ; these are only the tip of the iceberg . In addition to process changes , Table 2 also lists changes in information flows around the processes . Due to the limitations of pa - per ( in an electronic version , each cell in the table could be exploded to yield more detail and possibly additional hierarchies ) , we cannot describe each of the changes listed . Table 2 shows that changes are not just technical in nature . They have a strong community element . Change will only materialize if the research community is in - volved as a whole . For example , currently much effort is often expended by the in - dividual researcher on identifying a research issue . The four phases from identifying the research issues to designing the research strategy may easily con - sume half of the time spent on a research project . Technical systems to organize and prioritize research issues are feasible , but a significant reduction of effort can only be achieved if a substantial part of the research community participates and if cor - responding procedures are evolved and internalized by the research community . Another example is the reuse of concepts from other research studies . Although a computer system can serve as a repository of concept definitions , operations , and templates and can provide functions for the detection of inconsistencies , the main - tenance of concept hierarchies , and the synthesis of knowledge , such a system will only be useful if it captures a large part of the knowledge generated by the research community . An individual or a small group is doomed to fail , as the initial effort in populating such a system is too high in comparison to the initial benefits . Dramatic 74 HARS ET AL . Figure 1 . The information systems research process . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 Table 2 Examples of Potential Changes to Information Systems’ Research and Their Impact Phase of the Research Process Process Structure Changes Impact Identifying the research issues Open research issues are maintained in an information systems’ community repository that is constantly updated Research issues and priorities become subject of intense academic discussion and are closely linked to the academic reward system Electronic discussion groups may replace local research advisor functions and conferences Faster response Improved relevance Improved relevance Improved allocation of research resources Convergence ; cumulating of knowledge Surveying existing knowledge and theories Organized search process that is done quickly and effectively rather than in a fragmented hit - or - miss mode from multiple sources [ cf . 25 ] Insights gathered during the survey process ( i . e . problems , inconsistencies , missing relations ) can directly be incorporated into the body of research knowledge and be used to guide others , even if these insights do not form part of the subsequent project Convergence , cumulative research Reduction of effort Cumulative research Convergence Framing the research issue / conceptualization Reuse of concepts from other research studies ; mechanisms are in place which discourage unnecessary redefinition of concepts More emphasis on well - defined , operational concepts as basis for knowledge and theory - building Cumulative research Reduction of effort Convergence , cumulative research Designing and operationalizingthe research strategy Can benchmark more readily with other previously executed designs that are available as templates Cumulative research Reduction of effort Collecting the data Can be selectively outsourced to data gathering organizations that begin to grow as an industry Faster response Integration with industry Analyzing the data – making inferences Can be done collaboratively with researchers who are in other locations or working on related projects Reduction of effort , risk Disseminatingresearch results Results disseminated instantly preceding review Results integrated with existing results Integration – synthesis requires considerable effort Reduction of cycle times Cumulative research Peer review of results and impacts Changes from a one - shot to a continuing process Recommendation of “valuable” papers replaces suppression of “low quality – relevance” papers Requires different reward system Cumulative research Improved relevance Better utilization of resources Improved relevance , cumulative research 75 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 improvement of the research process thus cannot be achieved on the level of the in - dividual . To reengineer the cottage craft , the community as a whole must trans - form itself into an industry . Severalchangesneedtobemadetoallphasesoftheresearchprocess . Toachievea dramatic reduction in cycle time , we need to squeeze time out of every phase and re - ducethecoordinationdelaysthatoccuracrossthem [ 20 ] . Toincreasetheflexibilityof the research process , we need to install early warning systems that help identify shiftsofcriticalissuesinthebusinessenvironmentandthatallowustoadaptivelyre - deploy our resources to cope with new research issues and emerging technologies . At the same time , to mitigate the storm - chasing effect , which may be further ampli - fiediftheprocessbecomesmoreflexible , weneedtoputinplacemechanismsforen - suring sustained research streams that strategically and systematically cumulate new knowledge . One fruitful institutional approach that ensures that research pro - jectsarepartofstableidentifiableresearchthemeshasbeenimplementedinresearchprogramsattheDelftUniversityofTechnologyintheNetherlands : “Through their contribution to research themes , research projects lead to generic insights and form the basis for the evolvement of the generic body of knowledge” [ 21 ] . Themes have to meet particular criteria , such as simultaneous internal and external recognizability , thesupportofcross - pollinationamongresearcherswithdifferentbackgrounds , and minimal engagement criteria . These engagement criteria are concrete , so , for exam - ple , a theme must have life of 5 to 10 years with a quality test after 5 years and should have at least five researchers actively pursuing it . Such institutional mechanisms re - quire a careful balance so as to not stifle the creativity of researchers in new and emergingareas . Itisnecessarytoencouragethesearchforcarefullythoughtthrough themes with high creative potential . The sequence of phases in the current research process can vary widely . This flexibility is needed because of the large variety of research problems and research approaches . A stricter sequence for the process would be counterproductive . Therefore , changes to the sequence of the phases are not needed . 2 . 4 Restructuring the Information Flows Around the Research Process The aim of restructuring information flows and activities is to facilitate the research process in terms of access to required information . In the current scenario , a large share of information potentially relevant to the research process is not formalized . This includes information on research areas , guidelines for research , profiles of re - searchers , and so on . Much information is fragmented across a large number of sources that are difficult to search . Table 3 outlines potential changes to the informa - tion flows , organized by the phase of the research process . In the new scenario , prac - titioners and researchers are closely linked , with the former feeding data about problem areas and relevant industry information for analysis and the latter feeding back research results . 2 . 5 Embedding Continuous Improvement Mechanisms To continuously improve the IS research process , monitoring and cumulative learn - ing capabilities need to be incorporated that will enable us to continuously improve 76 HARS ET AL . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 the process as it iterates through multiple cycles . Some of these capabilities could be automatic in terms of alerting us to new ways of doing research that are captured through a knowledge repository . Other capabilities would be more closely related to the governance of such a community - based research process . Still others would involve gathering ongoing input from key IS researchers and practitioners as to how the process is performing . 2 . 6 Knowledge Creation and Reuse Around the IS Research Process To take advantage of the new information technologies and changed information flows , we need to rethink how knowledge is created , organized , and reused around REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 77 Table 3 Examples of Potential Changes of Information Systems’ Information Flows and Their Impact Phase of the Research Process Information Flow Change Impact Identifying the research issues Continuous triggers from both practitioners and information systems’ research community From demand pull to supply push Data about which researchers work on which issues instantly available Faster response Forward - looking research Convergence of approaches Cumulative research Surveying existing knowledge and theories Information channel is universal and links to linked knowledge repositories on topic Knowledge is stored in different levels of synthesis and aggregation Besides results , also data and detailed information about the research process that led to the results may be available Convergence of approaches Cumulative research Cumulative research Reduction of effort Framing the research issue – conceptualization Information exchange with other researchers more pronounced Increased quality of research output Designing and operationalizing the research strategy Data about successful research designs from other projects instantly available Convergence of approaches Reduction of effort Collecting the data Configuring data gathering spaces in business process designs such that “point - of - use” data is available to researchers Same data may be used for multiple studies Forward - looking research Improved relevance Cumulative research Analyzing the data / making inferences Interim results accessible by other researchers and visible to outsiders who may comment if invited to Reduction of effort Cumulative research Disseminating research results Continuous updating and triggers about research result changes Other researchers who are impacted by new research results can be notified instantly Faster response Cumulative research Faster response Cumulative research Peer review of results and impacts Electronic process that is visible to outsiders and accessible to all for information and comment Improved relevance D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 the IS research process . Table 4 indicates that the transition from paper - centric to electronic knowledge requires fundamental rethinking of many aspects of knowl - edge . Electronic knowledge opens more possibilities than simply instant access and the incorporation of multimedia . It has no limitations in the size of contributions , which is one of the stated reasons that prompted the journal Organization Science to create a Web - based service called Organization Science Electronic Letters ( http : / / www . dartmouth . edu / tuck / osel ) as an extension—not a replacement—of the paper journal . More challenging than oversized contributions , however , is the possibility of incorporating very small contributions that may be individual thoughts or links . If researchers are only rewarded for large collections of thoughts like current articles , who will make the additions or revisions or engage in the criti - cal dialogue needed to cumulate knowledge ? The IS community will need to de - velop a better understanding of the different categories of knowledge produced in the research process and the relations between such knowledge . Another important change is that electronic knowledge may be active . Insights captured on paper al - ways need translation by a human before they can be put to use . Paper - based knowledge thus works as a buffer between the scholar and the practitioner . In con - 78 HARS ET AL . Table 4 Potential Changes to Knowledge Aspect of Knowledge Creation and Reuse Potential Change Medium and form of knowledge From paper - centric knowledge to electronic network - centric knowledge Smallest publishable unit of knowledge : individual thought instead of standard - format paper Knowledge not stored in text and figures only but also in the form of links , software executables , video , sound Active knowledge : Knowledge may be applied directly ( e . g . , expert systems , downloadable software ) without need for human translation Knowledge comes packaged in many shapes and sizes ( rather than just complete articles and books ) such as single insights , comments , critiques , questions , and concept definitions Structure of knowledge No need to collate knowledge along the time axis as in paper journals . Knowledge can be organized around explicit categories . This facilitates cumulative research and enables the detection of similarities , dependencies or inconsistencies . [ 34 ] Living knowledge : Each contribution can be maintained to incorporate new findings , comments etc . [ 24 ] As knowledge goes through many revisions , extensions , additions , it becomes increasingly difficult to attribute knowledge to individual authors . Intelligent methods for checking knowledge repository integrity Reuse of knowledge Sophisticated query and search engines to provide intelligent access Institutionalized methods for capturing new research findings into knowledge repositories Dissemination of knowledge From supply , push to demand pull Instant access ; distribution capacity is no longer a bottleneck Metamorphic knowledge : Knowledge may be presented in many different forms depending on the needs of the reader Dissemination and exchange of knowledge occurs many times during the research process—not just at the end D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 trast , some forms of electronic knowledge are directly executable . In appropriately structured domains , theories might be formulated as collections of rules within an expertsystem , which then could directlyinteractwithsoftwareagentsonbehalfofa user ; a new scheduling algorithm may be stored as an object - oriented program that can be downloaded and directly utilized . Active knowledge puts additional strain on the researcher and his / her responsibilities but may greatly increase the rele - vance and impact of research . Many other changes are outlined in Table 4 . Together they show that the transition to electronic knowledge enables and requires a funda - mental change in the research process . 3 . CYBRARIUMS : REDEFINING THE INTELLECTUAL INFRASTRUCTURE OF IS RESEARCH In the previous section , we showed that many opportunities exist to improve the IS researchprocess . WealsoshowedthatITplaysacentralroleasanenablerforfunda - mental change in IS research . The implementation of the reengineered research pro - cess strongly depends on the type of information system that is available to support it . We , therefore , propose that IS research should focus on the development of a new category of information system that embodies and enables the fundamental change outlinedintheprevioussections . Suchasystemneedstosupportresearchasacumu - lative community process . It needs to build on and extend current research in the ar - eas outlined in Table 2 , especially in groupware [ 22 – 24 ] and Web - based IS [ 25 , 26 ] . It cannot focus on automation but must focus on “augmenting the human intellect” ( [ 27 ] , p . 30 ) . The envisioned type of information system , for which we propose the name cybrarium , can be described as an electronic space for creating , synthesizing , and disseminating research knowledge across the research community . At the core of this new type of information system is the collaborative synthesis of research knowledge . A cybrarium not only stores and provides access to knowledge as cur - renttraditionalandelectroniclibraries ; itengagesthecontributorofknowledgeinan activedialogue , duringwhichrelationstoalreadyincorporatedknowledgeareiden - tified , knowledgeisintegratedintotheexistingbodyofknowledge , feedbackmaybe provided based on consistency rules , and other members of the community that have stakes in the subject are involved if necessary . Table 5 refines the characteristics of a cybrarium and contrasts it with traditional Web - based electronic journals . Whereas the Web journal is focused on disseminat - ing knowledge , the cybrarium is intended to synthesize knowledge . A body of shared , validated knowledge emerges from individual contributions and academic discussions . A cybrarium stores knowledge in different units , not only as tradi - tional articles but also as definitions of concepts , problems , subject areas , and so on . As new knowledge is added , it is compared to existing knowledge . Mechanisms exist to automatically detect relations , and procedures exist to eliminate conflicts . The structure of knowledge emerges through the contributions . It is dynamic and self - organizing . Whereas in an electronic journal the structure is predefined , typi - cally around different subject areas , in a cybrarium the structure is a result of the contributions and their relations ; it may change with every contribution . A cybrarium has different dimensions of knowledge ( concepts , articles , subject areas , problems ) . There is not one predominant ordering or access criteria . Whereas in REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 79 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 Web journals navigation is link based , in a cybrarium navigation often involves pattern matching searches where case - specific knowledge maps are generated at run time ( e . g . , subject areas with subareas , concepts , and texts for specific types of knowledge ) . Relations in a cybrarium are more powerful ; they may be of different types , indicating that the linked object is an author , a part of the current knowl - edge , a specialization of the current concept , and so on . Current Web - based jour - nals do not have typed or bidirectional links . A cybrarium also differs from an electronic journal in its interaction behavior . Whereas journals do not differentiate different modes of interaction , the cybrarium 80 HARS ET AL . Table 5 Characteristics of Cybrarium Versus Traditional Electronic Web Journals Cybrarium Characteristic Approach – Example Traditional Web - Based Journals Synthesizing knowledge Emergent knowledge structure Cluster analysis in network of concepts , bubble - up features Static knowledge structure Automatic detection of relations Synonym detection , information extraction , identification of related theories Not available Typed , bidirectional relations For example , allows navigation from cited to all citing documents Untyped , unidirectional links Pattern matching search For example , find all BPR articles by researchers previously involved with CASE Link - based navigation Interaction behavior Different interaction modes : learner , author , reviewer , user Interaction based on user models Does not support different interaction modes Active ; system may initiate discourse For example , on submission of an article , system identifies peers in topical area and sends e - mail request for review Passive ; user retrieves information Content - based feedback System identifies potential overlap with existing theories ( e . g . via concepts used ) No system feedback on submissions System learns from persons who retrieve information Patterns of information retrieval can be used to guide users ; simple approach : hit lists . System does not autonomously draw conclusions from interaction behavior Rules of governance Instant acceptance of submissions Leads to significant reduction of cycle time Acceptance only after review Contributions are never discarded Allows historical analysis Only revised versions are kept Every contribution is linked to its authors Allows direct access to other contributions of an author Pages can be published without authors Dynamic , internal evaluation system Dynamic review templates which can be analyzed for effectiveness Static , external , discrete evaluation system Note . BPR = decision support systems ; CASE = computer - aided software engineering . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 interacts with a person who wants to learn from the knowledge differently than with a reviewer who wants to validate knowledge . Not only may the knowledge be presented differently , but the system will also draw different conclusions from the way data are retrieved by participants in different modes . By observing interaction paths , the system may learn about perceived or missing relations between knowl - edge and use this to guide persons through the knowledge . In contrast to Web - based journals , a cybrarium is active . It may take initiative by notifying re - searchers that changes have occurred in which they may be interested . It may send an e - mail message to members of the research community , asking them to solve questions or participate in discussions . In contrast to journals , a cybrarium autono - mously gives feedback to the author when a new submission is added . This feed - back is based on content and the relations with knowledge already stored in the cybrarium . The cybrarium may ask the author to add some of his / her concepts to the knowledge base , to adjust knowledge structures in a specific dimension , or to explore relations with pieces of knowledge that have not yet been incorporated . In summary , the cybrarium engages the researcher in a productive discourse , during which it may initiate links to other members of the research community . The third key element of a cybrarium is its rules of governance . A cybrarium dif - fers from journals in that all submissions are instantly accepted and published . A cybrarium allows the research community to put new evaluation systems in place where articles are evaluated on their impact as observable through interaction be - havior or comments from readers or through their contribution to the emerging knowledge structure . The evaluation may be dynamic and the perspective on the contribution of an article may change over time . Contributions to a cybrarium are never discarded . Even when core insights are superseded , the articles themselves may still yield interesting insights , if only for historical purposes . Every contribu - tion is linked to its authors ; this poses a challenge for a cybrarium : New rules will have to be defined to establish the authorship when a contribution has evolved through the participation of many . Building and successfully implementing a full - blown cybrarium is both a chal - lenge and opportunity for the IS community . We contend that cybrariums provide the requisite intellectual infrastructure that will enable IS research to be an exem - plar for IT environments in the electronic economy . We believe it is through such an infrastructural change that IS research can strategically evolve from a cottage in - dustry of craftspeople to a large - scale global enterprise . We cannot envisage the details of the large - scale architecture of a family of IS cybrariums at this point . We do not know whether an intellectual field would be best augmented and supported through one metacybrarium that ties together the various strands of research and knowledge or whether we would be better served through a family of smaller interacting cybrariums . However , we do know that building a cybrarium for the IS community to reengineer the IS research process is the best and most critical place to start . Building such a cybrarium will provide the intellectual infrastructure that is needed for continuous enhancement through a self - organizing community effort . In addition , by refining the different aspects of a cybrarium , the IS community can concentrate on learning more about one of its critical core capabilities : developing new ways of leveraging IT to improve the management of knowledge . REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 81 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 There are many challenges in both building a cybrarium for improving the IS re - search process and reengineering the process . There are technical challenges in knowledge repository design and communication and user interface tools . There are community challenges in getting participation and consensus . There are inte - gration challenges in synergistically combining cybrariums with existing Internet and ISWorld Net resources [ 28 ] . There are electronic copyright and ownership is - sues that will increasingly emerge as contributions to knowledge become more community based . However , we hope that this article and our efforts will convince the IS research community that it is imperative that we face such challenges and changes if we want to reap the rewards of being an impactful research area in the business environment of the electronic economy . We also trust that this article will stimulate a rethinking of how to creatively use information technologies to change the knowledge infrastructure of the IS field . REFERENCES [ 1 ] M . J . CulnanandE . B . Swanson , “Researchinmanagementinformationsystems , 1980 – 1984 : Points of work and reference , ” MIS Quarterly , vol . 10 , no . 3 , pp . 289 – 301 , Sept . 1986 . [ 2 ] M . J . Culnan , “Mapping the intellectual structure of MIS , 1980 – 1985 : A co - citation analysis , ” MIS Quarterly , vol . 11 , no . 3 , pp . 342 – 350 , Sep . 1987 . [ 3 ] C . BanvilleandM . Landry , “CanthefieldofMISbedisciplined ? , ” CommunicationsoftheACM , vol . 32 , no . 1 , pp . 48 – 60 , 1989 . [ 4 ] M . J . Cheon and V . Grover , “The evolution of empirical research in IS : A study in maturity , ” Infor - mation and Management , vol . 24 , no . 3 , pp . 107 – 119 , 1993 . [ 5 ] I . BenbasatandR . Weber , “Researchcommentary : Rethinkingdiversityininformationsystemsre - search , ” Information Systems Research , vol . 4 , no . 7 , pp . 389 – 399 , 1996 . [ 6 ] P . G . Keen , “MISresearch : Referencedisciplinesandacumulativetradition , ”in Proc . FirstInt . Conf . on Information Systems , 1980 , pp . 9 – 18 . [ 7 ] W . L . Neuman , Social Research Methods—Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches . Needham Heights , MA : Allyn & Bacon , 1997 . [ 8 ] H . A . Simon , Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1981 . [ 9 ] J . Walls , G . Widmeyer , andO . A . ElSawy , “Buildinganinformationsystemsdesigntheoryforvigi - lant EIS , ” Information Systems Research , vol . 3 , pp . 36 – 59 , Mar . 1992 . [ 10 ] E . Abrahamson , “Managementfashion , ” AcademyofManagementReview , vol . 21 , no . 1 , pp . 254 – 285 , 1996 . [ 11 ] I . Vessey , S . L . Jarvenpaa , andN . Tractinsky , “Evaluationofvendorproducts : CASEtoolsasmeth - odology companions , ” Communications of the ACM , vol . 35 , pp . 90 – 105 , April 1992 . [ 12 ] W . Bennis and M . Mische , The 21st Century Organization : Reinventing Through Reengineering . San Diego , CA : Pfeiffer , 1995 . [ 13 ] J . F . Rayport and J . J . Sviokla , “Exploiting the virtual value chain , ” Harvard Business Review , pp . 75 – 85 , Nov . – Dec . 1995 . [ 14 ] A . Armstrong and J . Hagel , “The real value of on - line communities , ” Harvard Business Review , pp . 134 – 142 , May – June 1996 . [ 15 ] W . M . Cohen and D . A . Levinthal , “Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and inno - vation , ” Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 128 – 163 , 1990 . [ 16 ] P . Ginsparg , “Physicspreprinte - archive : Firststepstowardselectronicresearchcommunication , ” Computers in Physics , vol . 8 , no . 4 , pp . 390 – 396 , 1994 . [ 17 ] S . Hilgartner , “Biomolecular databases—New communications regimes for biology ? , ” Science Communication , vol . 17 , no . 2 , pp . 240 – 263 , 1995 . [ 18 ] M . Bunge , Philosophy of Science . Vol . 1 : From Problem to Theory . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction , 1998 . [ 19 ] H . - E . Nissen , H . K . Klein , andR . Hirschheim , Eds . , “Theinformationsystemsresearcharenaofthe 90’s , ” in ISRA Proc . , vol . 1 , 1990 . 82 HARS ET AL . D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014 [ 20 ] G . Stalk , Jr . , and T . M . Hout , Competing Against Time : How Time - Based Competition is Reshaping Global Markets . New York : Free Press , 1990 . [ 21 ] TU Delft School of Systems Engineering , Policy Analysis , and Management , “Research” [ Online ] , ( cited Feb . 21 , 2000 ) . Available : http : / / www . sepa . tudelft . nl / english / onderzoek / general . htm [ 22 ] J . H . Nunamaker , L . Applegate , andB . Konsynski , “Computer - aideddeliberation : Modelmanage - ment and group decision support , ” Operations Research , vol . 36 , no . 6 , pp . 826 – 839 , 1988 . [ 23 ] J . F . George , G . K . Easton , J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . , and G . B . Northcraft , “A study of collaborative groupworkwithandwithoutcomputer - basedsupport , ” InformationSystemsResearch , vol . 1 , no . 4 , pp . 394 – 415 , 1990 . [ 24 ] C . C . Marshall , F . M . Shipman , and R . McCall , “Making large - scale information resources serve communitiesofpractice , ” JournalofManagementInformationSystems , vol . 11 , no . 4 , pp . 65 – 86 , 1995 . [ 25 ] A . Barua , R . Chellappa , and A . Whinston , “Creating a collaboratory in cyberspace : Theoretical foundationandanimplementation , ” JournalofOrganizationalComputing , vol . 5 , no . 4 , pp . 417 – 442 , 1995 . [ 26 ] B . Ives and S . Jarvenpaa , “Will the Internet revolutionalize business education & research ? ” Sloan Management Review , pp . 33 – 42 , Spring 1996 . [ 27 ] D . Engelbart , “TowardaugmentingthehumanintellectandboostingourcollectiveIQ , ” Communi - cations of the ACM , vol . 38 , no . 8 , pp . 30 – 33 , 1995 . [ 28 ] B . Ives and R . Zmud , “ISWorld Net : Scholarly infrastructure for information systems , ” MIS Quar - terly , vol . 18 , pp . liv – lvi , Dec . 1994 . [ 29 ] M . R . Cutotski , J . M . Tenenbaum , andJ . Glicksman , “Madefast : Collaborativeengineeringoverthe Internet , ” Communications of the ACM , vol . 39 , no . 9 , pp . 78 – 87 , 1996 . [ 30 ] S . Kaplan , “The worlds collaborative work environment” [ Online ] , ( cited Jul . 3 , 1999 ) . Available : http : / / acsl . cs . uiuc . edu / kaplan / worlds . html [ 31 ] R . Watson , “Creating and sustaining a global community of scholars , ” MIS Quarterly , vol . 18 , pp . 228 – 231 , Sep . 1994 . [ 32 ] J . Cowie and W . Lehnert , “Information extraction , ” Communications of the ACM , vol . 39 , no . 1 , pp . 80 – 91 , 1996 . [ 33 ] U . Kelle , Computer - Aided Qualitative Data Analysis—Theory , Methods and Practice . London : Sage , 1995 . [ 34 ] T . Munakata , “New horizons in commercial and industrial AI , ” Communications of the ACM , vol . 38 , no . 11 , pp . 28 – 31 , 1995 . REENGINEERING IS RESEARCH 83 D o w n l o a d e d by [ O a k l a nd U n i v e r s it y ] a t 02 : 03 26 N ov e m b e r 2014