785 Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 LIVER BIOLOGY / PATHOBIOLOGY Retinoic Acid Receptor - β Is Downregulated in Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Cirrhosis and Its Expression Inhibits Myosin - Driven Activation and Durotaxis in Hepatic Stellate Cells Ernesto Cortes , 1 * Dariusz Lachowski , 1 * Alistair Rice , 1 * Antonios Chronopoulos , 1 Benjamin Robinson , 1 Stephen Thorpe , 2 David A Lee , 2 Lucia A Possamai , 3 Haiyun Wang , 4 David J Pinato , 5 and Armando E . del Río Hernández 1 Hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) are essential perisinusoidal cells in both healthy and diseased liver . HSCs modulate extracellular matrix ( ECM ) homeostasis when quiescent , but in liver fibrosis , HSCs become activated and promote excess deposition of ECM molecules and tissue stiffening via force generation and mechanosensing . In hepatocellu - lar carcinoma ( HCC ) , activated HSCs infiltrate the stroma and migrate to the tumor core to facilitate paracrine signaling with cancer cells . Because the function of HSCs is known to be modulated by retinoids , we investigated the expression profile of retinoic acid receptor beta ( RAR - β ) in patients with cirrhosis and HCC , as well as the ef - fects of RAR - β activation in HSCs . We found that RAR - β expression is significantly reduced in cirrhotic and HCC tissues . Using a comprehensive set of biophysical methods combined with cellular and molecular biology , we have elucidated the biomechanical mechanism by which all trans - retinoic acid promotes HSC deactivation via RAR - β - dependent transcriptional downregulation of myosin light chain 2 expression . Furthermore , this also abrogated me - chanically driven migration toward stiffer substrates . Conclusion : Targeting mechanotransduction in HSCs at the transcriptional level may offer therapeutic options for a range of liver diseases . ( Hepatology 2019 ; 69 : 785 - 802 ) . SEE EDITORIAL ON PAGE 484 H epatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) is the most relevant form of liver cancer and the second most deadly cancer globally . This disease develops most commonly in individuals with sus - tained liver fibrosis or cirrhosis , following chronic inflammation of the liver . ( 1 ) The development of fibrosis involves the deposition of high levels of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins and increased tissue tension , which together produce a stiff des - moplasia that promotes progression to cirrhosis . ( 2 ) Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease ( NAFLD ) , a grow - ing worldwide epidemic , ( 3 ) also involves liver fibrosis in a large number of cases . ( 4 ) The role of fibrosis in the early and late stages of liver diseases highlights Abbreviations : α - SMA , α - smooth muscle actin ; ATRA , all trans - retinoic acid ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; H & E , hematoxylin and eosin ; HCC , hepatocellular carcinoma ; HSCs , hepatic stellate cells ; MLC - 2 , myosin light chain 2 ; NAFLD , nonalcoholic fatty liver disease ; PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; PDAC , pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ; pMLC - 2 , phosphorylated myosin light chain 2 ; PSCs , pancreatic stellate cells ; RAR - β , retinoic acid receptor β ; TMA , tissue microarray . Received March 5 , 2018 ; accepted July 25 , 2018 . Additional Supporting Information may be found at onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / 10 . 1002 / hep . 30193 / suppinfo . * These authors contributed equally to this work . Supported by the European Research Council ( Grant Agreement 282051 ) . © 2018 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases . View this article online at wileyonlinelibrary . com . DOI 10 . 1002 / hep . 30193 Potential conflict of interest : Nothing to report . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 786 the urgent need to find therapies that target this desmoplastic reaction . Hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) are perisinusoidal cells , residing in the liver , ( 5 ) with roles in retinoid storage and force - mediated maintenance of the extracellular matrix . ( 6 ) In HCC , HSCs transition from a quiescent to a contractile activated state , and promote tumor development through production of a fibrotic stroma . ( 7 ) HSCs also engage in cross - talk with cancer cells in positive feedback loops that maintain the activated phenotype of HSCs as well as promote the growth of cancer cells . ( 8 ) Furthermore , the elevated deposition of fibronectin from activated HSCs drives the formation of the premetastatic niche that precedes liver coloniza - tion by pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( PDAC ) cells . ( 9 ) HSCs are generated in the bone marrow along with pancreatic stellate cells ( PSCs ) , ( 10 ) and share many equivalent functions with PSCs , such as stor - age of vitamin A droplets and ECM homeostasis . When activated , both cell types lose their vitamin A droplets and show high levels of stromal remod - eling through their contractile myofibroblast - like phenotype . ( 11 , 12 ) Cancer associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) , like activated HSCs and PSCs , are myofi - broblast - like cells and correspondingly drive tumor progression through restructuring of the tumor microenvironment . ( 13 ) The similarity between these cell types highlights the importance of cell mechan - ics in tumor malignancy , and suggests that targeting the mechanical phenotype of these cells would be pertinent . Activated HSCs , activated PSCs , and CAFs per - petuate fibrosis and a tumor - permissive microenvi - ronment through multiple positive feedback loops that increase the active population of these cells . The actomyosin - dependent mechanical loop remodels and stiffens the ECM to a fibrotic state , and then responds to external rigidity by increasing cell contractility though myosin light chain 2 ( MLC - 2 ) regulation and inducing pro - fibrotic signaling pathways . ( 6 , 12 - 14 ) In addition , HSCs have been shown to infiltrate into the tumor stroma and localize around the cancer cells , facilitating paracrine signaling . ( 15 ) Durotaxis , the pro - cess of directed migration based on substrate rigidity , has been observed in HSCs , and is suggested to lead to accumulation of HSCs and further potentiation of fibrosis as migrating HSCs become activated by the stiff environment . ( 16 ) The retinoic acid receptor family is known to modulate the function of HSCs , though the molec - ular mechanisms behind this regulation are not well understood . Elucidating the molecular events under - lying HSC activation holds the key to blocking pro - gression of early and advanced liver diseases . Here we show that expression of retinoic acid receptor beta ( RAR - β ) is significantly downregulated in patients with HCC and cirrhosis in comparison with healthy individuals . We observed that all trans - retinoic acid ( ATRA ) induces the RAR - β - mediated negative tran - scriptional regulation of MLC - 2 , and consequently reduces force generation and mechanosensing . These processes sustain the stiff microenvironment needed for the activated phenotype in HSCs . Furthermore , deactivated HSCs have an impaired ability to remodel artiCle iNForMatioN : From the 1 Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics Laboratory , Department of Bioengineering , Imperial College London , London , United Kingdom ; 2 School of Engineering and Materials Science , Queen Mary University of London , London , United Kingdom ; 3 Division of Integrative Systems Medicine and Digestive Disease , Imperial College London , London , United Kingdom ; 4 School of Life Sciences and Technology , Tongji University , Shanghai , China ; 5 Department of Surgery and Cancer , Hammersmith Hospital Campus , Imperial College London , London , United Kingdom . aDDress CorrespoNDeNCe aND repriNt reQUests to : Armando E . del Río Hernández , Ph . D . Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics Laboratory Department of Bioengineering , Imperial College London SW7 2AZ London , United Kingdom E - mail : a . del - rio - hernandez @ imperial . ac . uk Tel : + 44 2075945187 or David J . Pinato , M . D . , M . R . C . P . , M . Res . , Ph . D . Department of Surgery and Cancer Hammersmith Hospital Campus , Imperial College London W12 0HS London , United Kingdom E - mail : david . pinato @ imperial . ac . uk Tel : + 44 2075942804 Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 787 the matrix and do not display directed migration toward stiffer substrates . Materials and Methods tissUe MiCroarrays Tissue microarray ( TMA ) blocks were constructed as previously described ( 17 ) using 20 archival paraf - fin - embedded HCC tissue blocks and 10 healthy controls retrieved from the Imperial College London Tissue Bank ( Ethical Approval nr . R15058 ) . All exper - iments were performed in accordance with Imperial College guidelines and regulations . All experimental protocols have been approved by the Research Ethics Committee Wales approval 12 / WA / 0196 , license number 12275 . Written consent was obtained from all subjects . A consultant histopathologist reviewed all the materials prior to inclusion on freshly cut hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) slides . We con - structed TMA blocks using an MTA - 1 Microarrayer ( Mitogen , United Kingdom ) following H & E - slide guided microdissection of target tumor and surround - ing nontumorous areas . We obtained triplicates of 1 mm cores from separate central and peripheral areas of tumor and matching surrounding liver . Adequate sampling of target tissues was confirmed on a freshly cut H & E section from the recipient TMA block before downstream analysis . For quantification of the levels of RAR - β , MLC - 2 , and phosphorylated MLC - 2 ( pMLC - 2 ) in human liver tissues from healthy , cirrhosis , and HCC , the TMAs were obtained from Biomax ( Catalog number : BC03117 ) . MUriNe FiBrosis MoDel All research using live animals was approved by local ethics committees ( Imperial College Central Animal Welfare Ethical Review Board ) and was carried out under Home Office supervision in accordance with the European Directive 2010 / 63 / EU . All animals received humane care according to the criteria outlined in the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” prepared by the National Academy of Sciences and published by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH publication 86 - 23 revised 1985 ) Mice were housed in specific pathogen - free conditions in individually ventilated cages ( Techniplast UK Ltd ) . The environment was controlled with a 12 - hour light / dark cycle , ambient temperature of 21°C ( + / - 2°C ) , and humidity of 55 % ( + / - 10 % ) . Mice had access to irradiated diet ( Special Diet Services UK ) and water ( 25 ppm chlorine ) ad libitum . Five male C57BL / 6 mice , aged 8 - 12 weeks , were dosed twice weekly for 6 weeks with 0 . 4 μ L / g CCl 4 diluted 1 in 3 in olive oil , administered via the intraperitoneal route . Three male age - and strain - matched cohoused " vehicle only " control mice were dosed to the same regimen with the same by - weight volume of olive oil . Mice were culled 72 hours fol - lowing the last injection of CCl 4 . To validate the induction of fibrosis , Sirius Red staining was per - formed ( by the Department of Pathology , St Mary’s Hospital Imperial College London ) . The collagen proportionate area was calculated by quantification of the area of collagen ( Sirius Red – stained tissue ) as a proportion of the total tissue area using Image J . Eight representative fields at ×10 magnification were assessed for each mouse . Cell CUltUre aND aNtiBoDies Primary , culture - activated human HSCs , pas - sage 3 - 6 ( HHStec 5300 ; ScienCell , Carlsbad , CA ) , were cultured in phenol red medium ( DMEM - F12 HAM ; Sigma Aldrich , D6434 ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Gibco , 10500 - 064 ) , 1 % pen - icillin / streptomycin ( Sigma Aldrich , P4333 ) , and 1 % Fungizone R Amphotericin B ( Gibco , 15290 - 026 ) . HSCs were treated with 1 μ M ATRA dissolved in absolute ethanol ( Fisher , E / 0650DF / 17 ) for 10 days . Control HSCs were cultured with an equivalent amount of 0 . 1 % ethanol in media as vehicle con - trol . Medium for both control - and ATRA - treated HSCs was changed every 24 hours , and changing of media was performed in subdued light . Both con - trol - and ATRA - treated HSCs were incubated with phenol red culture medium supplemented with 2 % fetal bovine serum . HSCs were exposed to 1 μ M of RAR - β agonist ( cd2314 , Tocris , 3824 ) for 72 hours . RAR - β antagonist ( cd2665 , Tocris , 3800 ) was used at 1 µM . All cells were tested for mycoplasma con - tamination . Antibodies : RAR - β receptor ( Abcam , ab53161 ) , MLC - 2 ( Millipore , MABT180 , WB 1 / 100 and IF 1 / 200 ) , pMLC - 2 / Thr18 / Ser19 ( Cell Signalling , 3674 , WB 1 / 100 , IF 1 / 200 ) , α - smooth muscle actin ( α SMA ; Abcam , ab7817 , IF 1 / 200 ) , Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 788 Vimentin ( M0725 DAKO , IF 1 / 200 ) , collagen - I ( Abcam , ab34710 , IF 1 / 200 ) , fibronectin ( Abcam , ab2413 , IF 1 / 100 ) , anti - mouse horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ; Invitrogen , 626580 , 1 / 2 , 000 ) , anti - rabbit HRP ( Abcam , ab137914 , 1 / 2 , 000 ) , and anti - mouse 488 ( Invitrogen , A11029 , 1 / 400 ) . rt – pCr Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit ( Qiagen , 74104 ) and 1 µg of total RNA was reverse - tran - scribed using the High - Capacity RNA - to - cDNA kit ( Applied Biosystems , 4387406 ) according to the man - ufacturer’s instructions . Real - time quantitative PCR ( qPCR ) was performed using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix ( Applied Biosystems , 4309155 ) . Primer sequences : glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydroge - nase : forward - 5 ′ - ACAGTTGCCATGTAGACC - 3 ′ , reverse - 5 ′ - TTTTTGGTTGAGCACAGG - 3 ′ ; RAR - β : forward 5’ - AATAAAGTCACCAGGAATCG - 3’ and reverse , 5’ - CAGATTCTTTGGACATTCCC - 3’ ; MLC - 2 : forward , 5 ′ - ATCCACCTCCATC T CTT - 3 ′ and reverse , 5 ′ - AATACACGACCTCCTGTT - 3 ′ . iMMUNoFlUoresCeNCe staiNiNg Cell immunofluorescence staining was done on coverslips coated with 10 μ g mL −1 fibronectin ( Gibco , phe0023 ) . Following pertinent treatment , cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma , P6148 ) in Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( D - PBS ; Sigma , D8537 ) for 10 minutes , and then blocked and permeabilized with 0 . 2 % bovine serum albumin , 0 . 1 % Triton ( Sigma , T8787 ) in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) for 30 minutes . After blocking , cells were incu - bated with primary antibodies prepared in blocking solution overnight at 4 degrees in a humidified cham - ber . Then , cells were washed in D - PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 - conjugated secondary antibod - ies and phalloidin ( Invitrogen , A22283 , 1 / 1 , 000 dilu - tion ) prepared in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature . Finally , coverslips were washed in PBS and mounted in mounting reagent with 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylin - dole ( Invitrogen , P36931 ) . Immunofluorescent images were taken with Nikon Ti - e Inverted Microscope ( Nikon , Kingston - upon - Thames , United Kingdom ) with NIS elements software . CoMpUtatioNal aND BiopHysiCal MetHoDs The methodology for traction forces , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , mechanosensing , functional / remodeling assay , and durotaxis followed previously reported procedures . ( 12 , 16 ) A complete description can be found in Supporting methods information . Results rar - β is DeCreaseD iN CirrHotiC aND HCC HUMaN liVer tissUes To investigate whether RAR - β is differentially expressed in hepatic tissues , we used tissue microar - rays and immunofluorescence of human liver tissues from healthy individuals and patients with cirrhosis . Activated HSCs in vitro have been shown to have reduced expression of RAR - β compared with their quiescent state , ( 18 ) and HSCs isolated from choles - tatic liver fibrosis also show a diminished RAR - β expression . ( 19 ) We identified activated HSCs and other myofi - broblasts in the tissue section using positive staining of α - SMA , a widely accepted marker for activated HSCs . ( 5 ) We observed that RAR - β was abundantly expressed in healthy tissue , which was also character - ized by very low or negligible abundance of activated HSCs . In cirrhotic liver , RAR - β was greatly reduced in areas where activated HSCs were present ( Fig . 1A ; Supporting Fig . S1 ) , in concurrence with the known reduction of RAR - β expression in activated HSCs . ( 18 ) The overall expression of RAR - β across the tissue was 70 % lower in cirrhotic tissue compared with healthy tissue ( Fig . 1B ) . Solid tumors in multiple organs are characterized by a decrease in RAR - β expression . ( 20 ) We analyzed the gene expression of this receptor using samples of 371 patients with HCC and 50 healthy individuals from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset and observed that the expression of RAR - β in patients with HCC was significantly lower than in normal samples ( P = 7 . 11e - 06 ) ( Fig . 1C ) . This trend correlates with our immunofluorescence results , which indicates that the loss of RAR - β expression occurs primarily in the Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 789 Fig . 1 . RAR - β is down - regulated in activated HSCs , and ATRA activates RAR - β expression in HSCs . ( A ) Immunofluorescence images of healthy and cirrhotic liver human tissues , scale bar = 100 µm . Ten patients per condition and more than eight sections per patient . ( B ) Quantification of RAR - β expression in healthy and cirrhotic tissues . ( C ) Quantification of RAR - β expression in normal tissues and those from patients with HCC . ( D ) qPCR levels of RAR - β in HSCs , normalized to glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and relative to control . ( E ) Quantification of RAR - β staining in HSCs . ( F ) Representative images for immunofluorescence staining of HSCs , scale bar = 20 µm ( left ) and western blot bands for protein expression in HSCs ( right ) . All histogram bars represent mean ± SEM , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . t test . Three experimental replicates in all panels . Abbreviation : MFI , mean fluorescent intensity . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 790 activated HSC population , and reveals that like mul - tiple other tumors , loss of RAR - β expression may be associated with malignancy in the liver . atra iNDUCes tHe eXpressioN oF rar - β aND NegatiVely regUlates MlC - 2 IN VITRO ATRA is an active vitamin A metabolite and a known exclusive agonist of RARs , including RAR - β . ( 21 ) Vitamin A has been shown to positively reg - ulate RAR - β expression in rat maternal tissues . ( 22 ) HSCs are known to express all isoforms of the RAR family ( α , β , and γ ) , each of which are differentially responsive to various retinoids . ( 18 ) We treated HSCs with 1 µM ATRA for 10 days , a concentration and time comparable to those in previous studies on sim - ilar cells . ( 12 , 23 , 24 ) The mRNA expression of RAR - β was significantly increased in ATRA - treated HSCs compared with control ( Fig . 1D ) . RAR - β expression was also up - regulated at the protein level in HSCs after ATRA treatment ( Fig . 1E , F ; Supporting Fig . S2 ) . Collectively , this indicates an increase in RAR - β expression at both the gene and protein levels in response to ATRA . It has been observed that tissue tension promotes chronic HSC activation . ( 6 , 25 ) Thus , we investigated whether RAR - β activation in HSCs affected the expression of myosin light chain - 2 ( MLC - 2 ) , a key regulatory protein in cytoskeletal contractility . ( 26 ) Using qPCR , we observed that treatment of HSCs with a RAR - β agonist ( cd2314 ) for 72 hours induced a significant decrease in MLC - 2 mRNA expression , a reduction also observed with the 10 - day ATRA treat - ment . Combining ATRA treatment with a RAR - β antagonist ( cd2665 ) prevented the effect of ATRA , with control levels of MLC - 2 mRNA expression observed ( Fig . 2A ) . This suggests that ATRA down - regulates MLC - 2 levels through RAR - β activation . Immunofluorescence staining was also used to assess protein levels of MLC - 2 and its phosphory - lated active form , pMLC - 2 . Both ATRA treatment for 10 days and RAR - β agonist treatment for 72 hours were observed to reduce the protein levels of total MLC - 2 , and proportionally , levels of the active form of MLC - 2 ( pMLC - 2 ) ( Fig . 2B , C ) . Compared with the control condition , ATRA + RAR - β antago - nist treatment for 10 days , and RAR - β agonist treat - ment for 72 hours after RAR - β was knocked down using small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) , did not show significantly different levels of expression of either MLC - 2 or pMLC - 2 . We also studied the effect of ATRA treatment for 72 hours on the MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 levels of HSCs . We observed a significant inhibition in the levels of both MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 using immuno - fluorescence and Western blot . ATRA exposure for 72 hours after HSCs were treated with siRNA against RAR - β did not show significantly different levels of expression of MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 compared with control ( Supporting Fig . S3 ) . Taken together , these results confirm the negative regulation of MLC - 2 expression in HSCs via RAR - β . MlC - 2 is UpregUlateD iN CirrHosis aND HCC In order to investigate further the relationship between RAR - β and MLC - 2 in fibrosis , we assessed protein levels of RAR - β and MLC - 2 in healthy and fibrotic mouse models . We used C57BL / 6 mice , aged 8 - 12 weeks , and randomized them in two groups . One group was injected with CCl 4 ( via intra - peritoneal injection ) for 6 weeks to induce fibrosis and the other was administered olive oil as vehicle control . CCl 4 - induced fibrosis is a well - validated model of murine fibrosis . ( 27 ) To validate the induc - tion of fibrosis , Sirius Red staining was performed . The collagen proportionate areas increased around four times in tissues from CCl 4 treated mice com - pared with vehicle control ( Supporting Fig . S4 ) . We observed a significant reduction in the expression of RAR - β , and an overall 2 - fold increase in MLC - 2 expression in fibrotic tissues compared with vehicle control . We used α - SMA staining to identify HSCs ( myofibroblast phenotype ) and observed negligible levels of α - SMA in control tissues but substantial expression in fibrotic tissues , where the α - SMA - pos - itive stained areas showed almost no expression of RAR - β . In stark contrast , MLC - 2 staining colo - calized with the α - SMA - positive stained areas in CCl 4 - treated fibrotic tissues . In control tissues , MLC - 2 was expressed at very low levels and always in α - SMA - positive cells ( Fig . 2D ) . We then used human tissues from healthy , cirrhotic , and HCC livers and quantified the levels of expres - sion of RAR - β , MLC - 2 , and pMLC - 2 . Staining with α - SMA identified HSCs and other myofibroblast - like Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 791 Fig . 2 . ATRA downregulates expression and activation of MLC - 2 in HSCs via RAR - β ( A ) qPCR levels of MLC - 2 in HSCs , normalized to glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and relative to control . ( B ) Quantification of MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 staining in HSCs . ( C ) Representative images of MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 staining , scale bar = 20 µm . ( D ) Representative images of tissue immunostaining for murine livers ( vehicle control and CCl4 - induced fibrosis ) , scale bar is 50 µm ( left ) and quantification of immunofluorescence staining ( right ) , number of mice : five CCl 4 - induced fibrosis and three controls . All histogram bars represent mean ± SEM , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Three experimental replicates in all panels . Analysis of variance and Tukey’s post hoc test for A and B and t test for D . Abbreviation : MFI , mean fluorescent intensity . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 792 cells . In healthy tissues , we observed very little expres - sion of α - SMA , but substantial expression of RAR - β , most likely in healthy hepatocytes . Cirrhotic and HCC tissues showed large α - SMA - positive areas that colocal - ized with MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 but not with RAR - β expression ( Fig . 3A ) . Overall , the RAR - β expression was gradually and significantly decreased from healthy to cir - rhotic to HCC tissues , whereas MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 expression were upregulated 2 - fold from healthy to HCC tissues ( Fig . 3B ) . Based on tumor - node - metasta - sis staging criteria ( seventh edition ) , ( 28 ) we then classi - fied the HCC specimens according to their T stage in two groups : T1 / T2 ( early stage ) and T3 / T4 ( advanced stage ) . When we compared the T3 / T4 against the T1 / T2 group , we found a 20 % decrease in RAR - β expres - sion associated with a stage - dependent 30 % increase in MLC - 2 levels ( Fig . 3C ) . In order to conduct functional experiments in a physiological relevant system , we cultured HSCs on 12 kPa polyacrylamide gels , fabricated using a previ - ously reported protocol . ( 16 ) The use of these gels reca - pitulates a biomechanical environment close to fibrotic liver tissue . ( 29 ) RAR - β was expressed in control HSCs at a modest level , but the expression increased by 50 % following ATRA treatment for 72 hours . Notably , RAR - β showed a very high nuclear localization in ATRA - treated HSCs compared with control HSCs . ATRA treatment significantly decreased MLC - 2 levels in HSCs , but the levels comparable to control HSCs were observed following ATRA treatment in the presence of siRNA against RAR - β ( Fig . 3D , E ) . Taken together , these results indicate that MLC - 2 and pMLC - 2 are up - regulated in cirrhotic and HCC tissues and strongly suggest that ATRA treatment negatively regulates MLC - 2 via RAR - β in vivo . atra iNHiBits ForCe geNeratioN aND MeCHaNoseNsiNg iN HsCs Cytoskeletal rearrangement and increased actomy - osin contractility are required for the maintenance of the activated phenotype in HSCs . ( 30 ) Myofibroblasts , which bear phenotypic resemblance to activated HSCs , also require high cytoskeletal contractility for their function . ( 12 ) This highly mechanoresponsive and contractile phenotype of HSCs is adaptive in a wound - healing context but can promote fibrosis in a disease context . ( 25 ) We used elastic pillars to assess the effect of ATRA treatment on force generation in HSCs . Polydimethylsiloxane pillars were coated with fibronectin to facilitate cell attachment and the deflec - tion of each pillar was monitored during the process of cell spreading . The traction force per pillar was cal - culated using its deflection and the known Young’s modulus of the pillar array . ATRA - treated HSCs ( 10 days ) were observed to generate significantly reduced traction forces compared with control HSCs , but this inhibition was lost when ATRA was combined with RAR - β antagonist . Similarly , 72 - hour RAR - β agonist treatment significantly reduced force generation , but the effect was rescued when the treatment was per - formed after siRNA - mediated knock down of RAR - β ( Fig . 4A , B ) . 72 - hour ATRA treatment also led to sig - nificantly reduced force generation , whereas ATRA treatment combined with siRNA against RAR - β led to generation of forces similar to control ( Supporting Fig . S5 ) . Cytoskeletal stiffness is associated with the rheo - logical properties of cells and their ability to generate forces . ( 31 , 32 ) HSC activation requires reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , and cytoskeletal disrupting drugs , which are known to reduce the Young’s modu - lus of cells , ( 33 ) inhibit the activated phenotype . ( 34 ) We used AFM indentation of individual cells to study HSC elasticity and observed a reduced Young’s mod - ulus in 10 - day ATRA - treated HSCs ( softer HSCs ) , implying a reduced cytoskeletal tension . This effect was reverted when ATRA was supplied simultane - ously with the RAR - β antagonist . We also observed that RAR - β agonist ( 72 - hour treatment ) reduced the Young’s modulus , but not after HSCs were treated with siRNA against RAR - β ( Fig . 4C ) . Similarly , ATRA treatment for 72 hours led to cell softening , but no difference to control was seen when the treat - ment followed transfection of HSCs using siRNA against RAR - β ( Supporting Fig . S5 ) . The capacity of cells to apply forces on their sub - strates correlates with their ability to remodel the underlying matrix . ( 12 ) To further investigate the effect of ATRA on the ability of HSCs to remodel the ECM , we embedded Matrigel - collagen gels with HSCs and allowed them to contract the gels . 10 - day ATRA - treated HSCs showed a significantly reduced capacity to contract the gels , comparable to treatment of HSCs with the myosin II ATPase inhibitor Y27632 ( Fig . 4D ) . Treatment of cells with both ATRA and Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 793 Fig . 3 . MLC - 2 is upregulated in cirrhosis and HCC . ( A ) Representative images of human tissue immunostaining for healthy , cirrhotic , and HCC ( hepatocellular carcinoma ) livers , scale bar is 50 µm . ( B ) Quantification of immunofluorescence staining for panel A ( number of patients : 10 healthy , 22 cirrhosis , and 48 HCC ) . ( C ) Correlation of RAR - β and MLC - 2 expression in human HCC liver tissues . HCC tissues were classified and divided in two groups according to the tumor - node - metastasis stage ( 20 T1 / T2 and 25 T3 / T4 patients ) . ( D ) Representative images of immunofluorescence staining of HSCs seeded on 12 kPa polyacrylamide gels . The yellow arrow indicates the nuclear localization of RAR - β in the ATRA - treated HSCs , scale bar is 20 µm . ( E ) Quantification of fluorescence intensity for images in panel D . Histogram bars represent mean ± SEM , * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 ( t test ) . Abbreviation : MFI , mean fluorescent intensity . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 794 Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 795 Y27632 did not further reduce gel contraction , sup - porting the fact that ATRA exerts its effects through reduction of actomyosin contraction . Additionally , the ability to contract the gels was rescued by transfect - ing ATRA - treated HSCs with a plasmid to promote MLC - 2 overexpression ( Supporting Fig . S6 ) . Mechanosensing ECM rigidity also relies on cyto - skeletal rearrangement and actomyosin contractil - ity . ( 35 ) Mechanosensing was assessed using magnetic tweezers microrheology , in which fibronectin - coated magnetic beads are attached to the cell of interest via integrin receptors and undergo 12 consecutive pulses of equal force ( Fig . 4E ) . Mechanoresponsive cells reduce the amplitude of these pulses as force application to a localized cell area of integrins trig - gers an adaptive reinforcement , requiring cytoskeletal remodeling through the RhoA - ROCK - MLC - 2 sig - naling axis . ( 35 ) Ostensibly , this behavior allows a cell to regulate its cytoskeletal stiffness in response to its mechanical environment . We observed that control HSCs responded to the external mechanical stimulus applied by the bead by showing a significant cytoskel - etal stiffening , as the twelfth pulse was significantly smaller than the first pulse , whereas 10 - day ATRA - treated cells did not show this significant reduction ( Fig . 4F ) . This reveals that ATRA treatment impairs the ability of HSCs to respond to external forces , i . e . , mechanosensing . atra iNDUCes MeCHaNiCal QUiesCeNCe iN HsCs Force generation and mechanosensing of ECM rigidity are essential to promote the activated phe - notype in myofibroblasts . ( 36 ) The activation of stel - late cells is characterized by a lack of the cytoplasmic lipid droplets , which are present in the quiescent state , as well as increased expression of α - SMA and vimentin . ( 37 ) α - SMA contributes to mechanical ten - sion within myofibroblasts , ( 32 ) and the intermediate filament component vimentin can mediate cytoskele - tal organization and focal adhesion maturation . ( 38 ) Immunofluorescence staining of α - SMA and vimentin indicated higher levels of these proteins in control HSCs compared with 10 - day ATRA - treated HSCs . The effect of ATRA was lost in the presence of the RAR - β antagonist . The treatment of HSCs with RAR - β agonist ( 72 hours ) also decreased expres - sion of α - SMA and vimentin , and this effect was not observed when the treatment was performed after transfecting HSCs with siRNA RAR - β ( Fig . 5A , B ) . ATRA treatment for 72 hours and ATRA + siRNA RAR - β also followed the same trend ( Supporting Fig . S7 ) . qPCR analysis of control HSCs and 10 - day ATRA - treated HSCs confirmed the shift toward qui - escence as mRNA expression of both α - SMA and vimentin was significantly reduced ( Fig . 5C ) . Oil Red O staining was performed to determine the presence of cytoplasmic lipid droplets . ( 37 ) We confirmed that control activated HSCs showed minimal staining with Oil Red O , significantly less than observed in ATRA - treated HSCs ( Fig . 5D , E ) . Together , these results suggest the consistent acquisition of a quies - cent phenotype of HSCs following ATRA treatment . atra treatMeNt reDUCes proDUCtioN oF eCM proteiNs One of the hallmarks of fibrosis is the deposition of excess levels of ECM proteins , such as collagen and fibronectin . Activated HSCs , in their role as stroma - resident stellate cells , secrete both collagen and fibronectin at high levels . ( 2 ) The importance of fibronectin secretion in tumor microenvironments , and its transcriptional regulation in cancer , is sub - stantiated by the specificity of alternatively spliced Fig . 4 . ATRA suppresses force generation , gel contraction , and mechanosensing by HSCs . ( A ) Heat maps representing forces applied by HSCs on top of the pillars , scale bar 20 µm . ( B ) Quantification of average forces applied by HSCs on pillars . For control , ATRA , ATRA + RAR - β antagonist , RAR - β agonist , siRNA RAR - β + RAR - β agonist , n = 50 , 37 , 50 , 39 , and 49 cells , respectively . Mann - Whitney U test for significance , * * * P < 0 . 001 . ( C ) Quantification of cell stiffness with atomic force microscopy . Cantilevers used had a 15 - µm - diameter polystyrene bead attached . For control and ATRA , n = 60 , 44 , 27 , 25 , and 21 cells , respectively . Mann - Whitney U test for significance , * P < 0 . 05 . ( D ) Left : Quantification of contraction of gels embedded with HSCs , each dot representing a gel . Analysis of variance and Tukey’s post hoc test , * * * P < 0 . 001 . Right : Representative images of gel contraction ( Y27632 is an inhibitor of MLC - 2 activation and cell contractility . Discontinuous yellow lines mark the gel contours . ( E ) Schematic of the methodology to test mechanosensing using magnetic tweezers . ( F ) Left : Representative trace that shows the decrease in the amplitude of oscillation of a bead attached to a cell that can sense external mechanical stimuli ( mechanosensing ) . Right : Histogram shows relative bead displacement for the first and last pulse , n = 16 for control and ATRA . Mann - Whitney U test for significance , * * P < 0 . 01 . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 796 Fig . 5 . ATRA induces a quiescent morphology in HSCs . ( A ) Immunofluorescence images for the α - SMA and vimentin ( markers for myofibroblast phenotype ) , scale bar is 20 µm . ( B ) Quantification of the stained HSCs after treatment . The intensity of the staining was calculated by measuring MFI of cell area by ImageJ . ( C ) qPCR levels of α - SMA and vimentin in HSCs , normalized to glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and relative to control . ( D ) Representative images for Oil Red O staining of HSCs , yellow arrows indicate stained lipid vesicles , scale bar is 10 µm . ( E ) Quantification of Oil Red O staining , each dot represents a field of view . Histogram bars represent mean ± SEM , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 ( t test ) . Three experimental replicates in all panels . Abbreviation : MFI , mean fluorescent intensity . Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 797 isoforms of fibronectin in different cancers . For example , liver cancer is associated with increased expression of the extra domain - A ( EDA ) spliced form of fibronectin , ( 39 ) which can promote HSC motility . ( 40 ) Another spliced form of fibronectin , extra domain - B ( EDB ) , has been shown to promote fibroblast proliferation and deposition of fibronectin in mice . ( 41 ) Using qPCR , we observed that mRNA expression of fibronectin , fibronectin - EDA , fibronectin - EDB , and collagen I are significantly reduced following 10 - day ATRA treatment ( Fig . 6A ) , indicating the role of ATRA in inhibiting ECM protein tran - scription . At the protein level , immunofluorescence staining showed a significant reduction in both intracellular and extracellular fibronectin and colla - gen I in response to 10 - day ATRA treatment . The presence of the RAR - β antagonist during the 10 - day ATRA treatment reverted fibronectin and collagen I values to those observed in control HSCs . RAR - β agonist also significantly reduced expression of these ECM proteins , with rescue observed in combination with siRNA RAR - β ( Fig . 6B , C ) . 72 - hour ATRA treatment also reduced expression , with rescued expression when combined with siRNA RAR - β ( Supporting Fig . S8 ) . Collectively these results show that ATRA suppresses the transcription of collagen I and fibronectin , and their expression and secretion by HSCs . atra iNHiBits DUrotaXis iN HsCs We have previously reported that HSCs can per - form rigidity gradient directed movement toward a stiffer substrate , also known as durotaxis . ( 16 ) We used a dual - rigidity gradient gel to determine whether ATRA can inhibit the ability of HSCs to exhibit durotaxis . The fibrotic microenvironment that facilitates tumor progression has increased rigidity compared with the rest of the stroma ; therefore , durotaxis behavior in HSCs represents a further mechanical positive feedback loop by which HSCs accumulate in fibrotic areas and become activated to potentiate fibrosis . We observed that control HSCs perform durotaxis as previously shown , traveling on average 73 . 5 µm toward the stiff substrate over 5 . 5 hours . Treatment of HSCs with either ATRA or the RAR - β agonist ( cd2314 ) fully abrogated durotaxis behavior , with no observable migration along the stiffness gradi - ent . Durotaxis can be rescued in ATRA - treated cells with overexpression of MLC - 2 ( average distance travelled = 59 . 5 µm ) , indicating that ATRA exerts its effect by inhibiting myosin activity ( Fig . 7A , C ; Supporting videos 1 - 4 ) . Correspondingly , cell speed ( in all directions ) is also affected by RAR - β activa - tion , with control HSCs travelling on average 0 . 89 µm per minute and RAR - β activation by ATRA and the RAR - β agonist significantly reducing this speed to 0 . 36 and 0 . 33 µm per minute , respectively . As with durotaxis , MLC - 2 overexpression could rescue the cell speed of ATRA - treated cells to an average cell speed of 1 . 0 µm per minute , a value not sig - nificantly different from the control condition ( Fig . 7B ) . Together , this indicates the sensitivity of duro - taxis and cell migration to RAR - β signaling , pro - viding further evidence for the manifold effects of retinoid signaling in a variety of cell behaviors that can regulate cancer development through mechani - cal positive feedback loops . Discussion Retinoids , metabolites of vitamin A , have long been studied in cancer therapeutics because of their varied effects on cells , with one of the most success - ful examples shown in the treatment of promyelocytic leukemia . ( 42 ) There exists a close link between RAR - β expression and cancer , with loss of the RAR - β 2 iso - form occurring in breast , lung , esophagus , pancreas , cervix , and prostate tumors . ( 20 ) We report here that RAR - β expression is significantly reduced in both mouse models of fibrosis and human samples of cir - rhosis and HCC . Interestingly , this loss of expres - sion occurs in the tissue areas populated by HSCs . Therefore , our results corroborate the importance of RAR - β in cancer and suggest that RAR - β might be an attractive target to develop new therapies against HSCs to suppress the desmoplastic reaction associ - ated with HCC and cirrhosis . As the primary cell type that drives liver fibrosis , HSCs are an important target in ( 1 ) understand - ing the emergence and maintenance of fibrosis and ( 2 ) developing therapeutics to abrogate the tumor permissive microenvironment . ( 43 ) We show that MLC - 2 expression in vivo increases with fibrosis , Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 798 Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 799 and also with the development of HCC through cirrhosis , and that RAR - β activation in our in vitro liver model , using liver specific substrate rigid - ity , down - regulates MLC - 2 expression . Negative regulation of MLC - 2 in vitro inhibits cytoskele - tal tension , endogenous forces , mechanosensing , and ECM deposition , the key components of the signaling loop that initiates and maintains the Fig . 6 . ATRA inhibits synthesis and secretion of FN and collagen I by HSC . ( A ) qPCR levels of ECM proteins in HSCs , normalized to glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and relative to control . FN - EDA , FN - EDB . ( B ) Representative images for immunofluorescence staining of HSCs , scale bar 20 µm . ( C ) Quantification of FN , and collagen I staining in HSCs . Histogram bars represent mean ± SEM , * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 ( analysis of variance and Tukey’s post hoc test ) . Three experimental replicates . Abbreviations : FN , fibronectin ; FN - EDA , fibronectin extracellular domain A ; fibronectin extracellular domain B ; MFI , mean fluorescent intensity . Fig . 7 . ATRA inhibits durotaxis in HSCs . ( A ) Average cell movement distance on the soft - stiff rigidity gradient compared with single rigidity soft and stiff substrates presented as an average displacement ( positive values indicate directed movement toward stiff substrate , negative values toward soft substrate , and 0 indicates random movement ) . n = 3 independent experiments . Results are expressed as mean ± SEM . ( B ) Cell movement speed on the soft - stiff rigidity gradient compared with single rigidity soft and stiff substrates . Results are expressed as mean ± SEM . ( C ) Representation of the average displacements of HSCs . Quantification was done for 60 cells . Three experimental replicates in all cases . Results are expressed as mean ± SEM . Analysis of variance and Tukey’s post hoc tests were used for the analysis . Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 800 myofibroblast - like phenotype . ( 18 ) Our results there - fore reveal a previously unidentified mechanism to target mechanotransduction in HSCs by regulat - ing MLC - 2 transcription ( Fig . 8 ) , and we suggest that mechanical reprogramming of HSCs through RAR - β may be a plausible option for several liver disorders . Cancer cells can recruit HSCs through secre - tion of cytokines that guide the migration of HSCs through chemotaxis . ( 44 ) Mutually activating bidi - rectional crosstalk between hepatocytes and HSCs is known to promote a tumor - permissive micro - environment , and directed migration of HSCs to the tumor augments this crosstalk and HCC pro - gression . ( 8 ) We have recently shown that duro - taxis is another mechanism by which HSCs can be recruited to the fibrotic site , with directed migra - tion via a stiffness gradient . ( 16 ) Furthermore , the stiff environment generated by activated HSCs can recruit yet more HSCs through durotaxis , leading to accumulation . ( 43 ) Durotaxis therefore represents a cellular process that underpins multiple positive feedback loops . Notably , we observe that ATRA inhibits HSC durotaxis through down - regulation of MLC - 2 expression and subsequent mechanical deactivation , which implies that retinoid signaling can reduce intercell pro - oncogenic crosstalk , both between cancer cells and HSCs and within the wider HSC population . The potential therapeutic value of mechanical deactivation of HSCs through the RAR - β / MLC - 2 axis is not limited to HCC , as stromal remodeling by HSCs and other myofibroblast - like cells is essential in the progression of other diseases with a wider impact on the worldwide population , such as NAFLD . In NAFLD mouse models , a synthetic agonist of RAR - β has been shown to deactivate HSCs , leading to reduced steatosis and oxidative stress in the liver . ( 45 ) It has been documented that fibrosis in NAFLD is reversible , ( 46 ) and our observation that RAR - β acti - vation prevents stromal remodeling by HSCs , when viewed in conjunction with the previous studies on NAFLD mouse models , emphasizes the importance of retinoid signaling in HSCs and its wide - ranging therapeutic potential . Furthermore , it is known that PDAC cells form metastases in the liver preceding formation of the primary tumor . ( 47 ) Colonizing PDAC cells require a premetastatic niche in the liver , with the activation of HSCs , and subsequent increased fibronectin deposi - tion , indispensable for the formation of this niche . ( 9 ) Therefore , we propose that RAR - β may also be rele - vant for clinical intervention of PDAC metastasis in the liver . In conclusion , our combined findings highlight RAR - β as a transcriptional regulator of cell biome - chanics and microenvironmental remodeling in HSCs . The increasing but still emerging appreciation that Fig . 8 . Model illustrating the effect of RAR - β activation in HSCs . Hepatology , Vol . 69 , No . 2 , 2019 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . 801 mechanotransduction is fundamental in the biology of stromal cells such as HSCs should lead to innovative approaches in stromal reprogramming and reversal of several liver disorders . Acknowledgment : We thank the Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics Laboratory members for help and ad - vice throughout this work . D . J . P . acknowledges sup - port from the National Institute for Health Research as well as infrastructural support from the Imperial Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre , Cancer Research UK Imperial Centre , the Imperial Biomedical Research Centre , and the Imperial College Tissue Bank . reFereNCes 1 ) Sakurai T , Kudo M . Molecular link between liver fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma . Liver Cancer 2013 ; 2 : 365 - 366 . 2 ) Bataller R , Brenner DA . Liver fibrosis . J Clin Invest 2005 ; 115 : 209 - 218 . 3 ) Benedict M , Zhang X . Non - alcoholic fatty liver disease : An ex - panded review . World J Hepatol 2017 ; 9 : 715 - 732 . 4 ) Wobser H , Dorn C , Weiss TS , Amann T , Bollheimer C , Buttner R , et al . Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes induces fibrogenic activation of hepatic stellate cells . Cell Res 2009 ; 19 : 996 - 1005 . 5 ) Moreira RK . Hepatic stellate cells and liver fibrosis . Arch Pathol Lab Med 2007 ; 131 : 1728 - 1734 . 6 ) Carloni V , Luong TV , Rombouts K . Hepatic stellate cells and ex - tracellular matrix in hepatocellular carcinoma : more complicated than ever . Liver Int 2014 ; 34 : 834 - 843 . 7 ) Tsuchida T , Friedman SL . Mechanisms of hepatic stellate cell activation . Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017 ; 14 : 397 - 411 . 8 ) Coulouarn C , Corlu A , Glaise D , Guenon I , Thorgeirsson SS , Clement B . Hepatocyte - stellate cell cross - talk in the liver en - genders a permissive inflammatory microenvironment that drives progression in hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer Res 2012 ; 72 : 2533 - 2542 . 9 ) Costa - Silva B , Aiello NM , Ocean AJ , Singh S , Zhang H , Thakur BK , et al . Pancreatic cancer exosomes initiate pre - metastatic niche formation in the liver . Nat Cell Biol 2015 ; 17 : 816 - 826 . 10 ) Omary MB , Lugea A , Lowe AW , Pandol SJ . The pancreatic stellate cell : a star on the rise in pancreatic diseases . J Clin Invest 2007 ; 117 : 50 - 59 . 11 ) Jaster R . Molecular regulation of pancreatic stellate cell function . Mol Cancer 2004 ; 3 : 26 . 12 ) Chronopoulos a , robinson B , sarper M , Cortes E , Auernheimer V , Lachowski D , et al . ATRA mechanically reprograms pancreatic stellate cells to suppress matrix re - modelling and inhibit cancer cell invasion . Nat Commun 2016 ; 7 : 12630 . 13 ) Cirri P , Chiarugi P . Cancer associated fibroblasts : the dark side of the coin . Am J Cancer Res 2011 ; 1 : 482 - 497 . 14 ) lachowski D , Cortes e , pink D , Chronopoulos A , Karim SA , Morton JP , et al . Substrate rigidity controls activation and duro - taxis in pancreatic stellate cells . Sci Rep 2017 ; 7 : 2506 . 15 ) Amann T , Bataille F , Spruss T , Muhlbauer M , Gabele E , Scholmerich J , et al . Activated hepatic stellate cells pro - mote tumorigenicity of hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer Sci 2009 ; 100 : 646 - 653 . 16 ) Lachowski D , Cortes E , Robinson B , Rice A , Rombouts K , Del Rio Hernandez AE . FAK controls the mechanical activation of YAP , a transcriptional regulator required for durotaxis . FASEB J 2018 ; 32 : 1099 - 1107 . 17 ) Pinato DJ , Black JR , Trousil S , Dina RE , Trivedi P , Mauri FA , et al . Programmed cell death ligands expression in phae - ochromocytomas and paragangliomas : Relationship with the hypoxic response , immune evasion and malignant behavior . Oncoimmunology . 2017 ; 6 : e1358332 . 18 ) Hellemans K , Verbuyst P , Quartier E , Schuit F , Rombouts K , Chandraratna RA , et al . Differential modulation of rat hepatic stellate phenotype by natural and synthetic retinoids . Hepatology 2004 ; 39 : 97 - 108 . 19 ) Ohata M , Lin M , Satre M , Tsukamoto H . Diminished retinoic acid signaling in hepatic stellate cells in cholestatic liver fibrosis . Am J Physiol 1997 ; 272 : G589 - G596 . 20 ) Xu XC . Tumor - suppressive activity of retinoic acid receptor - beta in cancer . Cancer Lett 2007 ; 253 : 14 - 24 . 21 ) Blomhoff R , Blomhoff HK . Overview of retinoid metabolism and function . J Neurobiol 2006 ; 66 : 606 - 630 . 22 ) takeyama k , kojima r , Ohashi R , Sato T , Mano H , Masushige S , et al . Retinoic acid differentially up - regulates the gene expression of retinoic acid receptor alpha and gamma iso - forms in embryo and adult rats . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996 ; 222 : 395 - 400 . 23 ) Takami Y , Yamamoto I , Tsubouchi H , Gohda E . Modulation of hepatocyte growth factor induction in human skin fibroblasts by retinoic acid . Biochim Biophys Acta 2005 ; 1743 : 49 - 56 . 24 ) Sarper M , Cortes E , Lieberthal TJ , Del Rio Hernandez A . ATRA modulates mechanical activation of TGF - beta by pan - creatic stellate cells . Sci Rep 2016 ; 6 : 27639 . 25 ) Zhubanchaliyev A , Temirbekuly A , Kongrtay K , Wanshura LC , Kunz J . Targeting mechanotransduction at the transcriptional level : YAP and BRD4 are novel therapeutic targets for the rever - sal of liver fibrosis . Front Pharmacol 2016 ; 7 : 462 . 26 ) Zaidel - Bar R , Zhenhuan G , Luxenburg C . The contractome - a systems view of actomyosin contractility in non - muscle cells . J Cell Sci 2015 ; 128 : 2209 - 2217 . 27 ) Scholten D , Trebicka J , Liedtke C , Weiskirchen R . The carbon tetrachloride model in mice . Lab Anim 2015 ; 49 : 4 - 11 . 28 ) Edge SB , Compton CC . The American Joint Committee on Cancer : the 7th edition of the AJCC cancer staging manual and the future of TNM . Ann Surg Oncol 2010 ; 17 : 1471 - 1474 . 29 ) Mueller S , Sandrin L . Liver stiffness : a novel parameter for the diagnosis of liver disease . Hepat Med 2010 ; 2 : 49 - 67 . 30 ) Bataller R , Nicolas JM , Ginees P , Gorbig MN , Garcia - Ramallo E , Lario S , et al . Contraction of human hepatic stellate cells ac - tivated in culture : a role for voltage - operated calcium channels . J Hepatol 1998 ; 29 : 398 - 408 . 31 ) Stamenovic D . Effects of cytoskeletal prestress on cell rheologi - cal behavior . Acta Biomater 2005 ; 1 : 255 - 262 . 32 ) Wang N , Tolic - Norrelykke IM , Chen J , Mijailovich SM , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ , et al . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 282 : C606 - C616 . 33 ) Kuznetsova TG , Starodubtseva MN , Yegorenkov NI , Chizhik SA , Zhdanov RI . Atomic force microscopy probing of cell elas - ticity . Micron 2007 ; 38 : 824 - 833 . 34 ) Cui X , Zhang X , yin Q , Meng A , Su S , Jing X , et al . Factin cytoskeleton reorganization is associated with hepatic stellate cell activation . Mol Med Rep 2014 ; 9 : 1641 - 1647 . 35 ) Guilluy C , Swaminathan V , Garcia - Mata R , O’Brien ET , Superfine R , Burridge K . The Rho GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 Cortes , laCHowski , riCe , et al . Hepatology , February 2019 802 regulate the mechanical response to force on integrins . Nat Cell Biol 2011 ; 13 : 722 - 727 . 36 ) Ho YY , Lagares D , Tager AM , Kapoor M . Fibrosis - a le - thal component of systemic sclerosis . Nat Rev Rheumatol 2014 ; 10 : 390 - 402 . 37 ) Jesnowski R , Furst D , Ringel J , Chen Y , Schrodel A , Kleeff J , et al . Immortalization of pancreatic stellate cells as an in vitro model of pancreatic fibrosis : deactivation is induced by matrigel and N - acetylcysteine . Lab Invest 2005 ; 85 : 1276 - 1291 . 38 ) Liu CY , Lin HH , Tang MJ , Wang YK . Vimentin contributes to epithelial - mesenchymal transition cancer cell mechanics by me - diating cytoskeletal organization and focal adhesion maturation . Oncotarget 2015 ; 6 : 15966 - 15983 . 39 ) Rybak JN , Roesli C , Kaspar M , Villa A , Neri D . The extra - domain A of fibronectin is a vascular marker of solid tumors and metastases . Cancer Res 2007 ; 67 : 10948 - 10957 . 40 ) Olsen AL , Sackey BK , Marcinkiewicz C , Boettiger D , Wells RG . Fibronectin extra domain - A promotes hepatic stellate cell motil - ity but not differentiation into myofibroblasts . Gastroenterology 2012 ; 142 ( 928 - 937 ) : e923 . 41 ) Fukuda T , Yoshida N , Kataoka Y , Manabe R , Mizuno - Horikawa Y , Sato M , et al . Mice lacking the EDB segment of fibronectin develop normally but exhibit reduced cell growth and fibronectin matrix assembly in vitro . Cancer Res . 2002 ; 62 : 5603 - 5610 . 42 ) Ablain J , de The H . Retinoic acid signaling in cancer : the parable of acute promyelocytic leukemia . Int J Cancer . 2014 ; 135 : 2262 - 2272 . 43 ) Wells RG . The role of matrix stiffness in hepatic stellate cell ac - tivation and liver fibrosis . J Clin Gastroenterol . 2005 ; 39 ( 4 Suppl 2 ) : S158 - S161 . 44 ) Yang C , Zeisberg M , Mosterman B , Sudhakar A , Yerramalla U , Holthaus K , et al . Liver fibrosis : insights into migration of he - patic stellate cells in response to extracellular matrix and growth factors . Gastroenterology . 2003 ; 124 : 147 - 159 . 45 ) Trasino SE , Tang XH , Jessurun J , Gudas LJ . A retinoic acid recep - tor beta2 agonist reduces hepatic stellate cell activation in nonalco - holic fatty liver disease . J Mol Med ( Berl ) . 2016 ; 94 : 1143 - 1151 . 46 ) Ellis EL , Mann DA . Clinical evidence for the regression of liver fibrosis . J Hepatol . 2012 ; 56 : 1171 - 1180 . 47 ) Rhim AD , Mirek ET , Aiello NM , Maitra A , Bailey JM , McAllister F , et al . EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation . Cell 2012 ; 148 : 349 - 361 . Author names in bold designate shared co - first authorship . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found at onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / 10 . 1002 / hep . 30193 / suppinfo . A video abstract for this work can be found in the link : https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = o00B2b0suQc .