Review Src - family kinase signaling , actin - mediated membrane traf ﬁ cking and organellar dynamics in the control of cell fate : Lessons to be learned from the adenovirus E4orf4 death factor Josée N . Lavoie a , ⁎ , Marie - Claude Landry a , Robert L . Faure b , Claudia Champagne a a Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l ' Université Laval , L ' Hôtel - Dieu de Québec , CRCHUQ , Québec , Canada G1R 2J6 b Department of Pediatrics , CRCHUQ , Université Laval , Québec , Canada G1V 4G2 a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 24 March 2010 Accepted 15 April 2010 Available online 24 April 2010 Keywords : Cell death Mitosis Src - family kinases Recycling endosomes Rab11a Cdc42 Actin Golgi Mitochondria Adenovirus E4orf4 Syntaxin 6 Evidence has accumulated that there are different modes of regulated cell death , which share overlapping signaling pathways . Cytoskeletal - dependent inter - organellar communication as a result of protein and lipid traf ﬁ cking in and out of organelles has emerged as a common , key issue in the regulation of cell death modalities . The movement of proteins and lipids between cell compartments is believed to relay death signals in part through modi ﬁ cations of organelles dynamics . Little is known , however , regarding how traf ﬁ cking is integrated within stress signaling pathways directing organelle - speci ﬁ c remodeling events . In this review , we discuss emerging evidence supporting a role for regulated changes in actin dynamics and intracellular membrane ﬂ ow . Based on recent ﬁ ndings using the adenovirus E4orf4 death factor as a probing tool to tackle the mechanistic underpinnings that control alternative modes of cell death , we propose the existence of multifunctional platforms at the endosome - Golgi interface regulated by SFK - signaling . These endosomal platforms could be mobilized during cell activation processes to reorganize cellular membranes and promote inter - organelle signaling . © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605 2 . Emerging role for actin in organellar dynamics and traf ﬁ cking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1606 2 . 1 . Actin in determining death morphological hallmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1606 2 . 2 . Actin in determining cell fate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1606 2 . 3 . Actin and mitochondrial dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1606 2 . 4 . Golgi - based signaling and actin dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607 2 . 5 . Golgi dynamics and death signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607 2 . 6 . Early communication between Golgi and endosomes in cell death ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1608 3 . The adenovirus E4orf4 death factor as a probing tool for SFK - signaling at recycling endosomes and actin - regulated inter - organelle signaling 1608 3 . 1 . SFK - signaling and E4orf4 - induced cell death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1608 3 . 2 . Actin - dependent endosome dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609 3 . 3 . Endosome - to - Golgi membrane transport , Golgi dynamic changes and cell death signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1610 4 . Beyond cell death : potential role for SFKs in coordination of actin - based membrane traf ﬁ c during cell activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1611 4 . 1 . Membrane remodeling in mitosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1611 4 . 2 . SFKs in membrane traf ﬁ cking : paradigms and speculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1612 5 . Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1612 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613 Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 ⁎ Corresponding author . CRC , L ' Hôtel - Dieu de Québec , CRCHUQ , St - Patrick , 9 Rue McMahon , Québec , Qc . , Canada G1R 2J6 . Tel . : + 1 418 525 4444x15120 ; fax : + 1 418 691 5439 . E - mail address : josee . lavoie @ crhdq . ulaval . ca ( J . N . Lavoie ) . 0898 - 6568 / $ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2010 . 04 . 007 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cellular Signalling journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cellsig 1 . Introduction Caspase - dependent apoptosis has long been considered as the only mode of regulated cell death in animal cells . It is now generally accepted , however , that stress signaling can trigger multiple types of cell death whose contribution to the fatal outcome depends on the cell type and the context of death induction ( see [ 1 – 4 ] for reviews ) . Whether caspase - independent modes of cell death should be regarded as backups , failsafe mechanisms for apoptotic cell elimination or if they constitute important cell context - dependent safeguard mechanisms is still a question under debate [ 5 , 6 ] . Nevertheless , the mechanistic underpinnings that control alternative modes of cell death have several implications for human diseases in which the balance between cell proliferation and cell death is altered and foremost , for human cancers that bear multiple defects in apoptoticpathways [ 7 ] . Itisbecomingclear thatnewantitumor therapies should exploit multiple death pathways in cancer cells in order to circumvent tumor resistance to apoptosis . This would require a deep knowledge of different cell death modalities and of their relationships with stress signaling pathways . We know little , however , regarding molecular mechanisms underly - ing the complex biology of cell death . Recent advances have provided growing support for organelle - based signaling in the control of multiple death programs , which seem to share overlapping signaling pathways . The concept that virtually all organelles including the endoplasmic reticulum , mitochondria , the Golgi complex and endosomes can act as signaling platforms has received ample experimental support in the last decade [ 8 – 11 ] . Likewise , it has become clear that all organelles house classicalsignalingmolecules , whichcansensespeci ﬁ cstressesandinitiate caspase - dependent , and - independent death signaling once a critical thresholdofdamagehasbeenreached [ 12 – 14 ] . Mitochondrialmembrane permeabilization ( MMP ) has emerged as a key point of convergence of death - signaling events , leading to the release of a number of death - promoting factors regulating multiple cell death modalities [ 5 ] . MMP has been shown to act both upstream and downstream of caspases , as well as upstreamanddownstreamoforganelle - speci ﬁ ceventstakingplaceatthe endoplasmic reticulum , the endo - lysosomes , the Golgi complex or the nucleus ( Fig . 1 ) . Hence , an emerging view is that stress signals are propagated through the traf ﬁ cking of proteins and lipids between organelles , leading to changes in organellar dynamics and dramatic remodeling of the cell cytoskeleton that typify cell death execution . Accordingly , new fundamental issues about integration of orga - nelle ' s dynamics within signaling pathways and their regulation in response to exogenous cues ( e . g . stress signals ) have come to the front line . One in particular is the issue of the extent to which inter - organelle signaling is regulated in response to stress and the mechanism involved . In principle , it is possible that conserved signaling mechanisms within transport organelles , allowing intracel - lular traf ﬁ cking pathways to adjust to cellular needs or changes in status ( e . g . cell division , transformation ) [ 15 ] , might be perturbed or activated by stress as part of a global cellular response . There are indeed examples of directional translocation of lipids and proteins to different cell compartments during death processes , which might re ﬂ ect to some extent “ active ” traf ﬁ cking processes commonly stimulated by stress [ 14 ] . According to this hypothesis , changes in endosomal traf ﬁ cking could orchestrate the vast remodeling of organelles and cell shape . Such model would be consistent with the emerging role of endosomal traf ﬁ cking in directing large - scale actin and membrane remodeling during key biological responses including cell division and motility ( see [ 16 – 18 ] for recent reviews ) . Actin does seem to be intimately linked to organelle ' s dynamic changes during death responses . In this review , we will outline the emerging role of actin dynamics in mediating changes in the dynamics of organelles and traf ﬁ cking underlying various modes of cell death , with a focus on the phenomenology of mitochondrial and Golgi membrane fragmentation in relation to inter - organelle signaling . Based on novel ﬁ ndings using the adenovirus E4orf4 death factor , we will describe a role for Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) in actin - based membrane traf ﬁ cking at the recycling endosome - Golgi interface , which might be key to modify Golgi dynamics in response to stress and promote inter - organelle communication during death processes . SFKs are important regula - tors of cytoskeletal organization that respond to a variety of stimuli , including cellular volume perturbations and mechanical stress [ 19 ] . Recent work has suggested that SFKs might function to regulate the integrity and traf ﬁ cking of transport organelles and could do so by controlling the actin assembly required for membrane traf ﬁ cking [ 20 – 23 ] . On the basis of these developments , we will further discuss the potential relevance of SFK - signaling in the mobilization of recycling endosomes and Golgi - derived membrane carriers during cell activa - tion processes requiring a vast remodeling of actin and membranes . Fig . 1 . Simpli ﬁ ed view of general pathways incell death , illustrating examples of inter - organelle signaling events ; the nucleus wasomitted for simplicity and readers are referred to anotherexcellentreview [ 13 ] . Manystress - signaling pathwaystypi ﬁ edbyorganelle - basedsignalingcanbeactivatedbyasinglestimulusandthe ﬁ naldeathoutcomeisdetermined by cellular and environmental contexts . See text for details . ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; alternative death modalities include caspase - independent apoptosis , regulated necrosis , death associated with autophagy ( effectors are not illustrated ) , mitotic catastrophe and maybe others [ 180 ] . 1605 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 2 . Emerging role for actin in organellar dynamics and traf ﬁ cking 2 . 1 . Actin in determining death morphological hallmarks The cell cytoskeleton is formed by three ﬁ laments systems : actin , intermediate ﬁ laments and microtubules that interact with one another to coordinate cell biological activities with architectural organization . The execution phase of apoptotic cell death is typi ﬁ ed by hallmark morphological features driven by a dramatic reorganization of the cell cytoskeleton and leading to a disconnection of the three ﬁ lament systems [ 24 , 25 ] . Early in apoptosis , interphase microtubules and intermediate ﬁ laments are disassembled , while the actin – myosin cytoskeleton is reorganized and play a key role in apoptotic cell remodeling . The so - called “ extranuclear apoptosis ” has been sub - divided into three sequential phases : release / rounding , contraction / blebbing and condensation , which are characterized by assembly of a cortical actin ring , reorganization of focal adhesions and increased myosin II - based contractility [ 26 ] . Caspases cleave many cytoskeletal components including actin and upon activation , they largely contribute to the irreversible apoptotic cell remodeling [ 27 ] . Yet , morphological signs of apoptosis including cell rounding , shrinkage , blebbing and partial condensation are features of various alternative cell death modalities triggered in the absence of caspase activation . Calpains , which also cleave cytoskeletal components , are believed to play a role and the Rho - family of small GTPases has been involved in all phases of extranuclear apoptosis [ 26 , 28 ] . Admittedly , regulated changes in actin dynamics mediate the morphological features of several modes of cell death , whose major purpose is likely to be cellular packaging in preparation for a safe elimination of the damaged cell by phagocytosis . Nonetheless , changes in cell shape and volume , which can activate Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) and Rho GTPases [ 19 ] , often precede key biological features of cell death programs including mitochondrial membrane permeabilization . Therefore , changes in cell shape and actin are increasingly viewed as “ active ” players in death signaling [ 29 , 30 ] just as changes in cell shape and actin are now recognized to in ﬂ uence the progression of mitosis [ 31 ] . 2 . 2 . Actin in determining cell fate In mammalian cells , both actin stabilization and depolymerization were steadily reported to stimulating cell death in different cell types ( reviewed in [ 30 ] ) . This suggests that the dynamic state of actin , e . g . the rate of actin polymerization / depolymerization , modulates death signaling . The regulation of actin dynamics is achieved by complex signaling systems linking external and internal signals to remodeling events , which serve to adapt the shape of cells to cellular needs and environmental changes ( see [ 32 ] for an overview ) . Rho GTPases act as molecular switches to transduce signals to various membrane compartments [ 33 ] . In their GTP - bound conformation , they interact with and activate downstream target proteins regulating actin nucleation , actomyosin contraction , microtubule dynamics , lipid membrane composition and cell cycle progression . As such they have been involved in multiple biological functions including cell division , proliferation and survival , cell polarity and cell fate determination , cell migration and endosomal traf ﬁ cking , all of which are important in disease contexts ( e . g . cancer ) ( see [ 34 – 36 ] for reviews ) . The best - studied members of the Rho GTPase family RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 have all been involved in diverse cell death - signaling pathways , for instance those induced by TNF [ 37 ] , LPA [ 38 ] , bacterial toxins [ 39 ] and the adenovirus E4orf4 death factor [ 40 ] , among others . While Rho was clearly involved in increased cell contractility and membrane blebbing after some death stimuli , signaling through Rac and Cdc42 was mainly linked to cell survival pathways [ 28 ] . Because Cdc42 and Rac1 are cleaved by effector caspases at a site that is likely to interrupt downstream signaling [ 41 ] , it has been assumed that the cleavage of Cdc42 and Rac1 could further the apoptotic process by eliminating their normal function in promoting survival . As already pointed out , effector caspases activation is a rather late event with respect to cellular shrinkage susceptible to activate Rho GTPase pathways in several cell death models . Yet , few studies have explored the role of Rho GTPases upstream of caspases in organellar dynamic changes typical of regulated cell death responses . As we will discuss later , more recent data support a prevalent role for Cdc42 in upstream death signaling [ 42 , 43 ] by virtue of its ability to control actin polymerization and membrane traf ﬁ c at numerous sites ( see [ 44 ] for an overview ) . Thus it is generally admitted that actin regulates cell commitment to various types of cell death , but the question of whether actin dynamics regulate core components of cell death pathways has remained unclear for some time . Recent advances have shed novel light on this issue and have unraveled connections with organelle ' s morphogenesis and transport machineries . 2 . 3 . Actin and mitochondrial dynamics In mammalian cells , both the microtubule and actin systems control mitochondrial dynamics by regulating mitochondrial motility and position / anchoring , respectively [ 45 ] . In most cell types , mito - chondria form a dynamic reticular network that depends upon a balance between mitochondrial fusion and ﬁ ssion events for main - taining appropriate functions ( reviewed in [ 9 , 46 ] ) . Indeed , an imbalance in mitochondrial fusion / ﬁ ssion events has been directly linked to human diseases and to altered cellular resistance to stress . In mammalian cells , several large GTPases forming the core mitochon - drial morphogenesis machinery regulate mitochondrial shape changes . While dynamin - related GTPase Drp - 1 is the main regulator of ﬁ ssion , the Mitofusins ( Mfn1 and Mfn2 ) and OPA1 catalyze fusion of the outer and inner mitochondrial membrane , respectively [ 9 , 47 , 48 ] . In response to a variety of stresses , it was found that mitochondria show early clustering at the perinuclear region paralleled by a fragmentation of the reticular network that affects death signaling . Mitochondrial fragmentation was shown to result from increased Drp - 1 - mediated ﬁ ssion and decreased fusion events [ 49 , 50 ] , and was functionally linked to the release of mitochondrial death proteins and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential . Indeed , strong evidence indicates that the mitochondrial morphogenesis machinery plays an active , conserved role in death signaling through functional relation - ships with Bcl - 2 - family members , a subject extensively reviewed [ 46 , 51 , 52 ] . How fusion and ﬁ ssion processes are integrated within signaling pathways is only partially understood [ 9 ] . The actin cytoskeleton and actin - regulating proteins were in - volved in both mitochondrial ﬁ ssion and mitochondrial membrane permeabilization ( MMP ) in response to various stresses . Mitochon - drial ﬁ ssion involves the recruitment of cytosolic Drp - 1 , which becomes stably associated with mitochondria after apoptotic insults that modify its post - translational properties [ 49 , 53 – 56 ] . Actin regulates Drp - 1 - mediated mitochondrial ﬁ ssion by promoting its recruitment to mitochondria [ 57 ] , suggesting that actin could function in Drp - 1 traf ﬁ cking and / or scaffolding during cell death processes . Actin might also provide mechanical force favoring ﬁ ssion of the mitochondrial tubule , similar to its role in membrane traf ﬁ cking at the plasma membrane and at the Golgi complex [ 58 , 59 ] . Actually , there are intriguing similarities between basic aspects of mitochondrial dynamics ( fusion / ﬁ ssion ) and certain membrane traf ﬁ cking events within the endosomal and secretory pathways , which involve the production of lipids in ﬂ uencing membrane curvature and actin dynamics ( see [ 58 , 60 , 61 ] for reviews ) . Since the coordinated polymerization of actin ﬁ laments against cellular membranes is believed to provide the force for generating tubulovesicular mem - brane structures [ 62 ] , it seems reasonable to think that local changes 1606 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 in the dynamic state of actin could also play a role in mitochondrial shape changes . Further evidence indicates that regulators of actin dynamics such as co ﬁ lin / ADF and its partner CAP - 1 exhibit death - promoting activity upon their mitochondrial translocation prior to caspase activation [ 63 – 66 ] . Because the death - promoting activity of both co ﬁ lin and CAP - 1 requires their actin - binding domain , it was proposed that they could act to shuttle actin to the mitochondria . Actin is indeed cleaved by caspases , generating a 15 kDa pro - apoptotic fragment modi ﬁ ed by N - myristoylation and targeted to the mitochondria [ 67 ] . Only the active , dephosphorylated form of co ﬁ lin was found to translocate to the mitochondria where it promotes MMP in response to various death agonists , while a phosphorylated mimic of co ﬁ lin that can no longer regulate actin dynamics suppressed mitochondrial transloca - tion and cell death [ 63 ] . Since co ﬁ lin regulates virtually all actin - dependent processes through increasing the rate of actin depolymer - ization and facilitating actin ﬁ lament turnover [ 68 ] , these ﬁ ndings reinforce the notion that local changes in the dynamic state of actin might be key to mitochondrial dynamic changes during death signaling . Still , the mechanisms controlling activation and mitochondrial translocation of actin regulators in response to stress remain unknown . Changes in mitochondrial membrane lipid composition as a result of re - location of phospholipids to mitochondria , as it has been observed after stimulation of death receptors ( reviewed in [ 69 , 70 ] ) , are likely to in ﬂ uence binding of actin regulators , hence the dynamic state of actin and mitochondria - actin association . Fusion was shown to depend on a mitochondrial phospholipase D ( MitoPLD ) [ 71 ] , presumably to regulate the production of fusogenic lipid at the site of fusion . Thus changes in lipids could render mitochondria fusion incompetent while promoting actin - regulated ﬁ ssion . That ﬁ ssion involves the mitochondrial recruitment of Bif - 1 / endophilin B1 [ 72 ] , a Golgi - localized N - BAR domain - containing protein also functioning in autophagy and endocytosis [ 73 ] , further points to a role for actin and membrane traf ﬁ cking in coordinating mitochondrial dynamics with other cellular functions during biological responses . Such membrane binding / deforming proteins are typically involved in membrane traf ﬁ c and are intimately linked to actin dynamics through interac - tions with actin - regulatory networks [ 62 ] . Of pertinence here , Src kinase was shown to phosphorylate endophilin B1 within a region known to modulate its membrane curvature activity [ 74 , 75 ] , suggesting a mechanism whereby SFKs could in ﬂ uence mitochondrial dynamics . Nonetheless , direct evidence for actin dynamic changes at sites of mitochondrial membrane ﬁ ssion / fusion is missing and some actin - independent function was proposed , notably for co ﬁ lin [ 76 ] . Notwithstanding , recent work suggests a model whereby re - location of lipids and proteins favoring actin - dependent membrane dynamics could be driven by a polarization of membrane traf ﬁ c to the Golgi complex , which could promote traf ﬁ cking to the mitochondria ( see below ) . 2 . 4 . Golgi - based signaling and actin dynamics The Golgi complex orchestrates the processing and sorting of lipids and proteins en route from the ER or from endosomes to various destinations . The structure of the Golgi complex is highly dynamic . Its role as a signaling platform to both relaying plasma membrane - initiated signals to other organelles and initiating intracellular signaling events has received increasing interest [ 8 , 15 ] . In mammalian cells , the juxtanuclear position and structure of the Golgi is believed to help regulating and coordinating cellular remodeling during key biological processes such as cellular polarization and mitosis . For instance , Golgi positioning per se can in ﬂ uence polarized secretion , cell polarity and wound healing [ 77 ] . Given its two - way relationships with the endosomal / lysosomal system and with the ER , which in turn , is in close contact with mitochondria , the Golgi complex is exquisitely well positioned to coordinate inter - organelle signaling during global cellular remodeling responses including cell death processes . The function and structure of the Golgi complex rely on multiple interplays with cytoskeletal systems . While microtubules determine the juxtanuclear positioning of the Golgi complex in mammalian cells , the Golgi ' s actin – spectrin - based cytoskeleton contributes to the unique functional organization of Golgi cisternae [ 59 ] . Actin in ﬂ u - ences the structure and function of the Golgi at multiple levels , including cargo sorting and segregation , and ﬁ ssion of Golgi - derived membrane carriers . Indeed , components that trigger actin recruit - ment / polymerization including Cdc42 / N - Wasp / Arp2 / 3 [ 78 – 81 ] , dynamin 2 / cortactin / Arp2 / 3 [ 21 , 82 ] , LIMK / co ﬁ lin [ 83 – 85 ] and ADP - ribosylation factors ( Arfs ) [ 86 , 87 ] have been shown to in ﬂ uence Golgi membrane dynamics and transport functions at the ER / Golgi interface and at the trans Golgi . Recent data support a role for actin in cargo protein concentration and sorting at the trans Golgi similar to its role at the plasma membrane [ 84 , 85 , 88 , 89 ] . Accordingly , it has been suggested that actin is bound to the molecular machinery sorters , which in ﬂ uences the capture of speci ﬁ c secretory cargo for export . This implies that actin has to be assembled and disassembled in a regulated manner to organize molecular sorters and thus , that signaling could in ﬂ uence the sorting and transport of speci ﬁ c Golgi - derived cargo proteins through modifying actin dynamics . Of particular interest here , the function of these actin - regulating factors can be modulated through SFK - signaling [ 43 , 90 – 94 ] . This raises the possibility that SFK activation on Golgi membranes could control functional interactions between cargo proteins and the actin polymerization machinery to modulate transport [ 95 ] . Recently , a signaling cascade involving SFK - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation on the Golgi complex was described , which is engaged by ER chaperones binding to the KDEL receptors for recycling and leads to the activation of the intra - Golgi transport machinery [ 20 ] . This suggests that the Golgi initiates a signaling response to increased membrane input from the ER for achieving a balance with increased membrane output from the Golgi . The role played by actin dynamics downstream of SFKs was not explored in this particular study , but is conceivable . Indeed in another recent report , it was shown that SFKs phosphorylate dynamin 2 during transit of cargo proteins through the Golgi and such phosphorylation event seems to be required for the formation of Golgi - derived membrane carriers [ 21 ] . Dynamin 2 is predicted to act with cortactin on the actin assembly in ﬂ uencing ﬁ ssion of post - Golgi carriers and cargo export from the Golgi [ 82 , 96 ] . This suggests a model whereby activation of SFKs within Golgi membranes would promote the actin - dependent release of secretory vesicles , at least in certain cellular contexts . As we will discuss later , it seems that SFKs also in ﬂ uence actin - regulated Golgi - speci ﬁ c events in response to stress , a process that could be engaged upon increased endosomal ﬂ ow to the Golgi complex . Thus , a SFKs - actin signaling module may have a widespread role in regulation of the structure and function of the Golgi complex . 2 . 5 . Golgi dynamics and death signaling Golgi structure is highly dependent on a regulated balance between the amount of membranes being internalized at the cell surface and traf ﬁ cked through endosomal recycling pathways , and that generated at the ER . As we already mentioned , cell death processes are associated with dramatic changes in protein and lipid traf ﬁ cking . Thereafter , it is not surprising that the Golgi complex undergoes structural and functional changes in the form of budding and fragmentation of Golgi membranes in response to apoptotic insults . Initially regarded as a consequence of death signaling , Golgi fragmentation is now believed to play an active role in death signaling , at least , after some speci ﬁ c stresses that may be instigated within the endocytic or secretory pathways [ 97 , 98 ] . Such process is morphologically similar to mitotic Golgi disassembly that regulates 1607 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 the passage to mitosis [ 99 , 100 ] . While mitotic Golgi fragmentation relies on the phosphorylation of Golgi structural proteins , a growing number of proteins involved in Golgi structure and membrane traf ﬁ cking are cleaved by caspases . Evidence supports a role for a subset of these proteins in apoptotic Golgi disassembly , including golgin - 160 [ 101 ] , GRASP65 [ 102 ] and p115 [ 103 ] . It seems that caspase cleavage of Golgi proteins not only serve for Golgi dismantling and disposal , but would also participate to some death signalingpathways . For instance , it has been shown that caspase cleavage of p115 promotes its nuclear translocation and cell death progression through unknown mechanism [ 103 ] . Likewise , a cleavage - resistant golgin - 160 mutant was shown to delay caspase activation and apoptotic cell death induced by speci ﬁ c stresses including death receptors and ER - stress - inducing drugs [ 104 ] . Hence similar to its role in mitosis , Golgi disassembly in response to stress is speculated to release a pool of signaling proteins and lipids that would participate to inter - organelle signaling ( discussed in [ 99 , 100 ] ) . One main argument in support of a role for the Golgi in cell death regulation is that it houses several positive and negative regulators of multiple death pathways . Examples include caspase - 2 [ 101 ] , death receptors [ 105 – 107 ] and the multifunctional protein BRUCE that possesses caspase - inhibitory and hybrid E2 / E3 ubiquitinligaseactivities [ 108 ] . Intriguingly , BRUCEwasrecentlyinvolved in the transport / targeting of recycling endosomes and phosphotyrosine proteins to the midbody in late cytokinesis , a process that was also linked to SFK - signaling in mitosis [ 109 , 110 ] ( see Section 4 ) . Whether BRUCE couldcontributetoGolgi - basedsignalingunderstressconditionsbyvirtue ofitsinteractionwiththeendosomalsystemhasnotbeenexplored , butis conceivable given novel ﬁ ndings involving recycling endosome traf ﬁ c in Golgi - dependent death signaling . This will be discussed in the next section . Fragmentation and dispersal of Golgi membranes after stimulation of death receptors was found to promote associations between mitochondria and Golgi membranes [ 111 ] , suggesting that the Golgi complex might serve a key function in inter - organelle signaling through the traf ﬁ cking of lipids . For instance , the glycolipid GD3 normally synthesized on the luminal face of Golgi membranes and transported to the plasma membrane is translocated to the mito - chondria during apoptosis where it is speculated to promote MMP [ 112 , 113 ] . Notably , GD3 was found to traf ﬁ c from the plasma membrane to the mitochondria in response to TNF through a process implicating actin - dependent endosomal traf ﬁ cking [ 114 ] . This sug - gests that speci ﬁ c stress can be propagated from the Golgi to the mitochondria , by way of altered interactions between the actin cytoskeleton and the endosomal machinery . Although little is known regarding membrane traf ﬁ cking between Golgi and mitochondria , accumulating evidence indicates that mitochondria can make close contact with Golgi membranes and endo - lysosomal vesicles in a variety of systems ( discussed in [ 69 ] ) . Organelle membrane “ mixing ” between mitochondria , Golgi and endosomes has been observed after stimulation of death receptors [ 111 , 115 ] , which could contribute to mitochondrial membrane damage through promoting protein – lipid interactions likely relevant to the action of Bcl - 2 - family of proteins ( discussed in [ 69 , 70 , 116 ] ) . Based on these studies , it has been inferred that transfer of death - promoting factors between organelles and organellar membrane mixing could be favored by the coalescence of organelles to a perinuclear region prior to , or concurrent with caspase activation [ 14 , 111 , 117 , 118 ] . In that context , the dispersal of Golgi membranes could facilitate contacts with mitochondria and in ﬂ uence the mitochondrial morphogenesis machinery . 2 . 6 . Early communication between Golgi and endosomes in cell death ? Despite that caspase cleavage of Golgi proteins may clearly facilitate packaging of Golgi remnants for disposal , there are contrasting data regarding the exact role of caspase - mediated Golgi disassembly during variouscelldeathprocesses . ItisrelevanttonotethatGolgifragmentation as a result of effector caspase cleavage of Golgi proteins is a rather late event with respect to mitochondrial signaling , which triggers the breakdown of Golgi membranes into tubulovesicular elements incompe - tentforsecretion [ 97 ] . Recentworkhasindicatedthatanearlydispersalof Golgi “ ministacks ” priorto , orintheabsenceof effector caspaseactivation may re ﬂ ect changes in endosomal membrane traf ﬁ c and in Golgi ' s membrane lipid composition and could impinge on both caspase - dependent and - independent cell death [ 43 , 111 ] . Alterations in endosomal traf ﬁ c in the context of cell death have been mainly studied in response to Fas signaling . Fas engagement appears to have complex , cell context - dependent effects on intracel - lular membrane ﬂ ow ( see [ 119 ] for review ) . In so - called type II cells requiring mitochondrial ampli ﬁ cation of apical caspase signals and mobilization of an intracellular pool of Fas receptors , it was found that an initial wave of enhanced caspase - independent endocytosis upon Fas engagement was followed by an early dispersal of Golgi membranes [ 111 , 115 ] . Fas - enhanced membrane traf ﬁ c was further shown to rely on the actin - regulating Rho GTPase Cdc42 and was associated with a diversion of early and recycling endosomes that accumulated around the Golgi [ 42 ] . The exact repercussions on Golgi membrane dynamics and transport function were not determined . It was proposed , however , that diversion of membrane traf ﬁ c into recycling endosomes could be instrumental for the delivery of new death receptors to the cell surface on the one hand , while promoting inter - organelle communication on the other hand . Actually , retro - grade protein transport between endosomes and the Golgi complex is believed to provide a mechanism to establish pools of cargo for polarized secretion [ 120 ] and could be exploited during death signaling to mobilize death receptors and other Golgi - localized death effector molecules as well . In support of this notion , a similar polarization of recycling endosome traf ﬁ c mediated by Cdc42 was recently observed in response to staurosporine in the presence of caspase inhibitors [ 43 ] , which mainly activates mitochondria - depen - dent death processes . Further , a role for SFK - signaling was unraveled , providing a mechanism whereby stress signaling can perturb endosome - Golgi communication . 3 . The adenovirus E4orf4 death factor as a probing tool for SFK - signaling at recycling endosomes and actin - regulated inter - organelle signaling 3 . 1 . SFK - signaling and E4orf4 - induced cell death Adenovirus E4orf4 encodes a 14 - kDa product with no known catalytic activity or homology to cellular proteins . Like other small DNA virus proteins , E4orf4 is believed to act as a scaffold on which cellular proteins are assembled , hence disrupting “ normal ” signaling in mammalian cells . E4orf4 is not required for viral replication and its exact role during lytic infection is poorly understood [ 121 , 122 ] . However when expressed as a single product , E4orf4 was shown to kill a large variety of transformed and cancer cells through diverse mechanisms including caspase - dependent and caspase - independent apoptosis and mitotic catastrophe , while having little toxicity in normal human cells [ 121 , 123 – 129 ] . Thus similar to a number of “ tumoricidal ” factors recently described [ 130 , 131 ] , it seems that E4orf4 might target crucial oncogenic pathways upon which cancer cells have become addicted , raising great interest for the mechanisms involved . E4orf4 was shown to interact with two major signaling proteins : protein phosphatase 2A via binding to the B α subunit [ 126 , 132 ] , and SFKs through direct binding to the kinase domain [ 133 , 134 ] . Studies with E4orf4 mutants have suggested that both SFKs and PP2A regulate the death - promoting activity of E4orf4 via distinct mechanisms , depending on the cell context [ 126 , 132 , 134 ] . Here , we will focus on the role of SFKs . In a large variety of transformed and cancer cells , cell death in response to E4orf4 is intimately linked to SFK - signaling and 1608 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 E4orf4 phosphorylation on discrete tyrosine motifs typical of SFK substrates [ 133 – 135 ] . The phosphorylation of E4orf4 by SFKs was found to promote the assembly of SFK - signaling complexes on cellular membranes , favoring SFK phosphorylation of a subset of substrates having a common ability to regulate actin dynamics , while inhibiting SFK - signaling to survival pathways . Accordingly , E4orf4 is believed to hijack SFK - signaling in cancer cells to promote actin - dependent membrane remodeling , thereby creating an imbalance in SFK - signals that would activate cell death through multiple mechanisms [ 136 ] . As a transient activation of v - Src in normal epithelial cells is suf ﬁ cient to turn on E4orf4 ' s death promoting - activity ( unpublished results ) , E4orf4 may exploit SFK - signaling pathways up regulated in the process of cellular transformation . Indeed , evidence indicates that E4orf4 impairs key pathways regulated by SFKs in ﬂ uencing cell adhesion , cell motility and cell division in a variety of transformed and cancer cell lines [ 129 , 133 , 137 , 138 ] . 3 . 2 . Actin - dependent endosome dynamics A large body of evidence indicates that changes in actin dynamics are not a consequence of death signaling in response to E4orf4 , but rather contribute to signal transduction . One prevailing hallmark of E4orf4 - induced cell death in several cancer cell lines is the early assembly of a peculiar and polarized actin structure that requires the activity of SFKs [ 40 ] . This unique actin network is composed of a ring of actin – myosin anchored at the juxtanuclear region and connected to the cell cortex by prominent actin cables converging to atypically , enlarged focal adhesions that re ﬂ ect a marked increase in cell tension ( Fig . 2A ) . Accordingly , induction of dramatic cellular blebbing is preceded by the sudden collapse of the contractile structure and marks the onset of shrinkage and nuclear condensation [ 40 , 133 ] . It was found that large - scale actin remodeling in response to E4orf4 relies on the coordinated action of two major pathways involving Rho GTPases : a Rho / Rho Kinase / JNK / paxillin signaling axis that perturbs cell tension and adhesion dynamics [ 137 ] , and a Cdc42 / N - Wasp pathway that promotes actin polymerization on internal membranes and changes in recycling endosome dynamics [ 40 ] ( Fig . 2A ) . Both pathways were shown to cooperate in the transduction of a major death - promoting activity of E4orf4 that depends on actin dynamic changes . Indeed , it was shown that inhibition of actin dynamics per se using low doses of drugs perturbing actin polymerization markedly impairs E4orf4 killing and enhances clonogenic survival [ 40 , 133 ] . It was further found that assembly of the polarized actin network might re ﬂ ect the ability of E4orf4 to hijack a SFK - pathway at tubular recycling endosomes involved in the transport of signaling moieties controlling actin dynamics . In the early stages of E4orf4 expression prior to any change in cell morphology , E4orf4 was found to recruit active SFKs at tubular recycling endosomes labeled by Rab11a [ 43 ] . Rab11a belongs to the small Rab GTPases family controlling membrane identity and vesicle budding , motility and fusion [ 139 ] , and is mainly localized on recycling endosomes and at the trans Golgi [ 140 , 141 ] . Diversion of SFK - signaling to Rab11a - endosomes by E4orf4 was shown to activate Cdc42 , which in turn , drives local assembly of dynamic actin patches promoting the fragmentation of tubular endosomal elements into vesicular structures . Such process is probably re ﬂ ecting the formation of recycling endosomes - derived cargo carriers , which are then transported to perinuclear sites of actin assembly where Rab11a - endosomes were shown to accumulate ( Fig . 2B ) [ 40 , 43 ] . Concurrently , the cell was found to adopt a polarized organization with the nucleus pushed to one side ( Fig . 2 ) . Thus somehow , the SFK - signaling pathway activated by E4orf4 must be linked to sorting and targeting of proteins regulating actin dynamics at recycling endo - somes during polarization of cells . Actually , Rab11 has emerged as a key regulator of polarized endocytic transport during establishment of cell polarity , cytokinesis and cell migration , all of which require a spatial regulation of actin dynamics [ 18 , 142 ] . These observations indicated that diversion of endosomal recycling by E4orf4 might account for the profound structural and functional alterations associated with multiple death programs in response to E4orf4 . In support of this notion , the progression of E4orf4 - induced cell death in several cancer cell types , just as actin remodeling , were shown to rely Fig . 2 . ( A ) Schemeof thejuxtanuclear actin – myosinnetwork assembled by diversion ofSFK - signalinginE4orf4 - expressing cells . Red circles : recycling endosomes ; green tails : actin patchesnucleatedatthesurfaceofendosomes ; greenlines : actincablesandremodeledfocaladhesions ; N : nucleus . Seetextfordetails . ( B ) SingleplaneconfocalimagesofaHelacell transfected with E4orf4 - mRFP and GFP - Rab11a , showing the massive recruitment of recycling endosomes labeled by GFP - Rab11a to the forming juxtanuclear actin – myosin ring ( arrow ) labeled by phalloidin - Alexa 647 ( F - actin ) and along actin cables ( arrowheads ) . N : nucleus ; Bar , 10 µm . B - Reprinted from [ 43 ] . © American Society for Cell Biology ( 2009 ) . 1609 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 on a traf ﬁ cking pathway involving the SFKs Src and Yes , Cdc42 / actin , Rab11a and syntaxin 6 , a trans Golgi - associated traf ﬁ cking factor involved in the fusion of early / recycling endosomes with Golgi membranes [ 40 , 43 , 120 ] . 3 . 3 . Endosome - to - Golgi membrane transport , Golgi dynamic changes and cell death signaling From the study of Landry et al . , it can be inferred that the perinuclear recruitment of Rab11a - endosomes observed during various cell death processes might re ﬂ ect stress - induced deregulation of Rab11 - endosomal recycling in part , through the activation of a conserved Cdc42 - mediated retrogradetransportpathwaybetweenendosomesandtheGolgicomplex [ 42 , 43 , 143 ] . The traf ﬁ c of recycling endosomes has been mainly involved in theslow recycling of internalized membranes and signalingproteins to the plasma membrane or to the trans Golgi via retrograde membrane transport [ 144 , 145 ] . Consistently , both E4orf4 expression and treatment of cancer cells with staurosporine in the presence of caspase inhibitors were shown to impair the recycling of cargo proteins back to the plasma membrane [ 43 ] . In contrast , bona ﬁ de cargo of retrograde transport ( e . g . ShigatoxinB - subunit ) [ 120 ] andproteinsnormallyrecycledtotheplasma membrane ( e . g . transferrin ) [ 146 ] were transported to the Golgi complex at higher ef ﬁ ciency . Further in both cell death models , diversion of recycling endosome traf ﬁ c was functionally linked to death - promoting changes in the dynamics of Golgi membranes through the same SFK - effector pathway . These were manifested by increased fusion events between Rab11a - endosomes and Golgi membranes , leading to stretching and ﬁ ssion of Golgi elements at sites of endosomes - Golgi membranes contacts ( Fig . 3A ) [ 43 ] . Depletion of syntaxin - 6 was shown to prevent Golgi membrane fragmentation and cell death progression , linking endosome - to - Golgi membrane transport to Golgi membrane scattering andcelldeath ( Fig . 3B ) [ 43 ] . Overall , thesedataprovideddirectsupportfor a novel caspase - independent , SFK - dependent cross talk between recy - cling endosomes and the Golgi complex in the regulation of cell death . Such ﬁ ndings raise several issues regarding the mechanism whereby Rab11a - endosomes affect Golgi dynamics and on how the ensuing Golgi changes can engage death signaling . Landry et al . have described the emergence of actin structures at sites of stretching and ﬁ ssion of Golgi membranes in E4orf4 - expressing cells [ 43 ] , providing a hint on how recycling endosomes would remodel Golgi membranes . Several cycles of non - stochastic interactions between recycling endosomes and Golgi membranes could be observed at sites of Golgi membrane ﬁ ssion , which might re ﬂ ect the regulated delivery of proteins and lipids at Golgi membranes . Recycling endosomes are Fig . 3 . RemodelingofGolgimembranesuponincreasedtraf ﬁ cofrecyclingendosomestotheGolgicontributestothetransductionofcelldeath . ( A ) 3Dreconstructionofimagestacks of a Hela cell transfected with E4orf4 together with YFP - Rab11a ( recycling endosomes ) and GalT - mRFP ( 1 , 4 - galactosyl transferase , medial - trans - Golgi ) , showing fragmentation and scattering of Golgi stacks upon increased associations between recycling endosomes and Golgi membranes . Enlarged images of the boxed region show representative 3D - time sequence from confocal z - sections taken at 10 - s intervals . XZ views ( bottom images ) show the spatial superposition of YFP - Rab11a and GalT - mRFP , emphasizing the mixing of recycling endosome and Golgi membrane markers ( arrowheads inframes 90 s , 100 s ) followed by fragmentation of the Golgi element ( frames 110 s , 120 s ) ; dashed lines : x - axis . N : nucleus ; Bars : 10 µm . ( B ) Epi ﬂ uorescence images of Hela cells transfected with E4orf4 - mRFP showing a marked inhibition of Golgi fragmentation ( GM130 staining ) and of nuclear condensation ( Hoechst staining ) upon depletion of syntaxin 6 using siRNA ( siStx6 ) , compared to cells transfected with the control siRNA ( siCtl ) . See text for details . Adapted from [ 43 ] . © American Society for Cell Biology ( 2009 ) . 1610 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 enriched in lipid raft components including cholesterol and sphingo - lipids that promotes “ membrane curvature ” and provides a platform facilitating actin - regulated signaling [ 144 , 147 ] . Indeed , the input of tubular endosomal membranes into the trans Golgi network is seen as a way to “ inject ” membrane curvature and might have an important role in the formation of Golgi - derived membrane carriers [ 60 , 148 ] . Further , the endocytic recycling compartment was described as a center integrating vesicular transport with signaling modules con - trolling actin remodeling [ 142 ] . Actually , the actin polymerization complex Cdc42 / N - Wasp is assembled at recycling endosomes [ 149 ] and Src traf ﬁ cs through a pathway requiring Rab11 , actin and Rho GTPases [ 23 ] . It was further proposed that the Rab11 - endocytic recycling compartment could provide an intracellular reservoir of membranes that would become mobilized by signaling during dynamic rearrangement of the cell [ 150 ] . Accordingly , it is reasonable to think that stress - induced Golgi membrane fragmentation might be a consequence of a prolonged stimulation of Golgi membrane dynamics ( e . g . deformation , tubula - tion ) that would be caused by SFK - mediated input of tubular endosomal membranes into the Golgi . Based on current knowledge , it is further conceivable that increased actin polymerization upon mixing of the recycling endosome and Golgi membranes would be responsible for exaggerated tubulation , scission and exit of membrane carriers ( see model Fig . 4 ) [ 60 , 151 ] . Similar fragmentation and dispersal of Golgi stacks was recently observed upon prolonged activation of Src kinase that depends on dynamin 2 , lending further support for a role for actin [ 21 ] . It is currently unclear , however , if such increase in the retrograde transport of recycling endosomes is linked to a signaling cascade at the Golgi complex involving SFKs that would further mobilize the Golgi - based actin - regulated transport machinery for the capture of speci ﬁ c secretory cargo for export , or if it simply re ﬂ ects a Golgi - based stress response to increased endosomal ﬂ ow . In any case , the ensuing changes in Golgi dynamics were clearly shown to contribute to transduction of cell death in various models [ 43 ] . It seems that associations of Rab11a - endosomes and Golgi - derived vesicles with mitochondria are promoted in E4orf4 - expressing cells upon Golgi membrane scattering , which alter mitochondrial func - tional integrity ( unpublished results ) [ 43 ] . This is evocative of the “ membrane mixing ” process described upon Fas receptor engagement [ 111 , 115 ] and lend further support to the role of Golgi in inter - organelle signaling during global cellular responses to stress . 4 . Beyond cell death : potential role for SFKs in coordination of actin - based membrane traf ﬁ c during cell activation 4 . 1 . Membrane remodeling in mitosis According to recent advances on the role of SFKs and actin in cargo sorting and transport at the Golgi , it is feasible that the SFKs - Cdc42 - actin / Rab11a pathway described by Landry et al . could promote the recruitment of a subset of Golgi - localized effectors ( proteins and lipids ) that would convey signals to other organelles in part , via remodeling of membranes ( see model , Fig . 4 ) . This would be consistent with evidence involving the recruitment to focal adhesions of a perinuclear pool of paxillin in response to E4orf4 , a process linked to decreased adhesion turnover , increased cell tension and cellular blebbing [ 137 ] . Such a role for endocytic traf ﬁ c and Golgi membrane dynamics in the progression of cell death could be analogous to the role played by these processes in regulation of cell division . Indeed , a number of recent studies have revealed a bidirectional relationship between mitosis and endosomal traf ﬁ c , as endosomal traf ﬁ c controls mitosis and mitosis controls endosomal traf ﬁ c ( reviewed in [ 152 ] ) . Similarly , there is suf ﬁ cient evidence to suggest that stress signaling affects endosomal traf ﬁ c that in turn , in ﬂ uences the progression of cell death through Golgi dynamics [ 43 ] . Here we aim to highlight a potential role for SFK - signaling in coordinating membrane traf ﬁ cking and actin remodeling during both processes , based on similarities in actin and organelles dynamic changes taking place during mitosis and cell death responses . Indeed , E4orf4 was found to cause several defects in mitosis and cytokinesis ( unpublished results ) [ 129 ] , consistent with a role for SFK - signaling on some overlapping path - ways regulating mitosis and cell death processes . Furthermore , mitotic disassembly of the Golgi complex was recently reported to correlate with an increase amount of actin and Rab11 on Golgi membrane fractions analyzed by a quantitative proteomic approach [ 153 ] . These exciting new developments suggest that the molecular mechanism underlying stress - induced Golgi dynamic changes and Golgi disassembly in mitosis could share overlapping pathways that would control a basic function of the Golgi complex in polarized transport and cellular remodeling during cell activation . Although it has long been known that the activity of SFKs is cell cycle - regulated [ 154 , 155 ] , the targets of SFKs in mitosis remain poorly de ﬁ ned . Evidence indicates that SFKs may control entry into mitosis ( G2 / M transition ) [ 156 , 157 ] , as well as cytokinesis [ 110 ] . In mammalian cells , the completion of cytokinesis depends on the targeting of both recycling endosomes and secretory vesicles to the midbody , via polarized transport of Rab11 - recycling endosomes and exocytosis of post - Golgi vesicles ( see [ 16 , 18 , 158 ] for recent reviews ) . A prevailing view is that these vesicles would provide membranes for closure of the intercellular channel ( abscission ) and could also deliver lipids and actin - regulating factors for stabilizing the ingressing furrow . SFK - requirement for the completion of cytokinesis was linked to the delivery of SFK - phosphorylated proteins to the midbody through Rab11 - endosomes [ 110 ] . Conceivably , the SFK - regulated endosome - to - Golgi transport pathway described by Landry et al . could contribute to recruit a Rab11 - pool of intracellular membranes Fig . 4 . Working model : Mobilization of membranes during cell activation processes through a SFKs - , Cdc42 - , actin - , Rab11a - regulated transport pathway at the tubular recycling endosome – Golgi interface . Red tubules and vesicles : tubular recycling endosomes and — derived membrane carriers mobilized to the Golgi in an actin - dependent manner ( illustrated by green tails representing dynamic actin patches ) would deliver lipids and signaling proteins activating Golgi dynamics and possibly , a Golgi - based actin - dependent machinery for recruitment of post - Golgi carriers for polarized secretion . While normal recycling of cargos to the plasma membrane would be inhibited , polarized transport to various target compartments would be enhanced ( thick arrows ) . See text for details . 1611 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 and coordinate the polarized transport of recycling endosomes along with the secretion of Golgi - derived membrane carriers ( Fig . 4 ) . According to this model , Golgi dynamic changes in mitosis would be ﬁ ne - tuned with polarized membrane traf ﬁ cking to drive some of the dramatic actin changes required for cell division . Though to some extent , the peculiar actin – myosin ring organized by E4orf4 is evocative of the cortical actin – myosin ring driving furrow ingression ( Fig . 2A ) . Besides Golgi disassembly , cellular retraction and rounding up is another hallmark feature shared by cells entering mitosis and cell death processes . A number of circumstantial evidence points to a role for recycling endosome traf ﬁ cking . Such process could contribute to remodel the cortical actin cytoskeleton that seems to in ﬂ uence the correctassembly andpositioningofthemitoticspindleinearlymitosis [ 17 , 31 ] . Based on physical considerations , cell shape decrease should be accompanied by a decrease in cell surface area , which appears to result primarily from a transient block in endocytic recycling to the plasmamembraneattheG2 / Mtransition [ 159 , 160 ] , reminiscentofthe block in recycling endosome - to - plasma membrane transport ob - served during death processes [ 43 ] ( Fig . 4 ) . The cortex of mitotic cells , like the cortex of cells entering the “ extranuclear phase ” of cell death , is presumed to acquire stiffness owing to cortical actin remodeling taking place concurrently with cell rounding up and changes in membrane recycling [ 26 , 31 ] . Although the role of SFKs in early mitosis remains to be fully characterized , their contribution to the remodeling of cortical actin via regulation of membrane traf ﬁ c is highly plausible , based on the recent ﬁ ndings discussed here . Under chronic stress , however , diversion of recycling endosome traf ﬁ c could also account for impaired survival signaling and amplify the cellular stressresponse , bydecreasingrecyclingofessentialsurvivalmolecules at the plasma membrane ( e . g . receptor tyrosine kinases ) . According to these presumptions , E4orf4 could provide a probing tool to uncover some of the mechanisms underlying cell cycle - dependent modi ﬁ ca - tions of the endosomal and secretory compartments . 4 . 2 . SFKs in membrane traf ﬁ cking : paradigms and speculations In the previous sections , we have highlighted some of the emerging evidence supporting a role for SFKs in coordinating endosomal traf ﬁ cking and actin changes with organellar dynamics during stress responses . We have further argued that SFKs might be playing a similar function in mitosis , a process during which eukaryotic cells undergo the most dramatic changes in cytoskeletal organization and organelle dynamics . The recent ﬁ nding that SFKs modulate the activation , endosomal transport and signaling dynamics of some RTKs in a Rab11 - endosome , RhoB - and actin - dependent manner provides strong support to the argument that SFKs might exert their multiple biological functions by manipulating the spatial localization of signaling complexes ( reviewed in [ 161 ] ) . Moreover , among few reports in the literature on how signaling affects endocytic machinery , Src kinase was shown to in ﬂ uence clathrin - mediated endocytosis by phosphorylating various components of the traf ﬁ cking machinery including the clathrin heavy chain [ 162 , 163 ] , cortactin and dynamin [ 164 , 165 ] . Hence , SFKs appear to represent a node at which signaling and endosomal transport signi ﬁ cantly overlap . Because intracellular active SFKs are associated with both tubular recycling endosomes and Golgi membranes [ 20 , 21 , 23 , 43 ] , it seems plausible that SFKs could act in part , by regulating important interface pathways between recycling endosomes and the trans Golgi network involvingRhoGTPasesand Rab11 . Both thetubularrecyclingendosome and the trans Golgi network are emerging as highly dynamics , complex sortingstationstodistributecargos tovariouscompartments , whichare subjected to regulation by multiple traf ﬁ cking devices involving actin ( see [ 60 , 144 , 145 ] for recent reviews ) . Although it is increasingly recognized that the recycling endosome interfaces with the Golgi in cargo sorting and transport ( they can intersect also at a step post - trans Golgi sorting ) , little is known , however , on the mechanisms involved . Overall , we feel that there is suf ﬁ cient argument to suggest that SFKs could organize signaling platforms at the recycling endosome - Golgi interface that would coordinate actin - dependent steps in endosomal traf ﬁ cking with other cellular functions ( e . g . Golgi - , ER - , mitochondria dynamics ) during cell activation processes including cell division and proliferation , cellmotility , cellsurvival / death , allofwhicharein ﬂ uenced by endosomal traf ﬁ cking and are regulated by SFKs [ 144 , 161 , 166 ] . SFKs are comprised of nine related members , some being expressed in more specialized cells . They could organize distinct sorting devices in response to various signals and perhaps specify membrane traf ﬁ c in different cell types , for instance , in adipocytes , hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes where the vesicular compartment containing the glucosetransporterGLUT4seemstobegeneratedfromtubularrecycling endosomes and trans Golgi membranes and could be regulated by Rab11 , actin and Cdc42 ( see [ 167 , 168 ] for recent reviews ) . Such model regarding the mode of action of SFKs could provide a hint on why deregulation of SFK - signaling would have diverse consequences in several disease contexts , foremost , in cancer [ 169 – 171 ] . A major challenge for the future will be to identify SFK - targets within endosome - Golgi transport pathways in different models of cell activation to reach a better molecular understanding ( e . g . which cargos , transport pathways and stages in cargo genesis are regulated ) . To this end , knowledge gained from the study of the mode of action of E4orf4 in cancer cells , as well as novel molecular tools developed from these analyses might be instrumental . Along this line , a novel phosphotyrosine antibody ( α p42 - 2 ) raised against the residue most frequently phosphorylated by SFKs on E4orf4 was found to cross - react with SFK targets [ 134 , 172 ] , which were mostly detected in tubulo - vesicular endomembranes overlapping with recycling endosomes in various cellular contexts [ 173 ] ( unpublished results ) . Using such antibody to identify insulin - responsive SFK substrates , a proteomic analysis of hepatic Golgi / endosomes fractions revealed a series of known SFK substrates and novel exciting candidates [ 173 ] . While a number of putative substrates are yet to be characterized , it is already clear that targets can be distinguished with functions in actin remodeling ( e . g . β - catenin , annexins ) , in traf ﬁ cking ( e . g . sorting nexin 27 , septin 9 , V1 - ATPase subunit A , LRP - 1 ) and in metabolism ( e . g . GAPDH , pyruvate kinase PKM2 ) . It is worth noting that several of these targets have dual roles in actin dynamics and endosomal traf ﬁ c ( e . g . annexins [ 174 ] , septin 9 [ 175 ] ) , while others are emerging as key multifunctional proteins in cell death and carcinogenesis ( e . g . GAPDH [ 176 ] ) . Some recycling proteins like LRP - 1 [ 177 , 178 ] might be cargo - speci ﬁ c and act as scaffold proteins to organize SFK - signaling platforms that would regulate cargo traf ﬁ cking ( e . g . insulin receptor ) and recruitment ( GLUT4 ) in response to insulin . Actually , LRP - 1 was found in complex with internalized insulin receptors [ 173 ] and was independently identi ﬁ ed as an important component of GLUT4 storage vesicles [ 179 ] . Overall , this study reinforces the notion that SFKs might have a key role in coordinating actin - dependent steps in membrane traf ﬁ cking along the endocytic and secretory pathways in response to cell activation processes . 5 . Concluding remarks Studies conducted over the last decade have unraveled the central role played by organellar dynamics in cell fate regulation . How the dynamics of organelles are integrated within signaling pathways , however , is only beginning to be understood . Accordingly , an emerging view based on system biology that integrates death signaling within other biological networks has started to replace the traditional one of “ dedicated death machinery ” . However , the recognition that these membrane remodeling events are not incidental , but might be orchestrated at least in part through stress - responding traf ﬁ cking pathways has been hindered by a lack of knowledge on how signaling in ﬂ uences the traf ﬁ cking machinery . In 1612 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 this review , we have examined functional links between SFKs , actin dynamics , endosomal traf ﬁ c and organellar dynamics that might be relevant to the transduction of several death pathways in some cellular contexts , particularly in cancer cells . We have further discussed the possibility that SFKs might represent a node at which signaling and actin - based endosomal transport signi ﬁ cantly overlap , and proposed that SFKs might act at the recycling endosome - Golgi interface to regulate polarized endocytic transport during cell activation processes . Although speculative , we feel that there is suf ﬁ cient evidence to support this concept and hope that this review will stimulate further studies to elucidate the role of endosomal SFK - signaling in organelle ' s dynamic events . It is important to emphasize that the involvement of SFK - signaling as coordinators of the actin - dependent traf ﬁ cking machinery might differ in particular cellular contexts , given the diversity of potential targets within the endosomal and secretory pathways , as well as some possibilities for speci ﬁ city in signaling between different SFKs in different cell types . Deregulation of SFK - signaling and of many aspects linked to endosomal recycling in cancer ( e . g . cell polarity , motility , cell division ) highlights the need for a better understanding of the complexities involved . Given that the adenovirus E4orf4 protein seems to have evolved strategies to exploit some key endosomal SFK - pathway regulating Golgi ' s function and structure , adhesion dynamics and mitosis , it should provide a powerful probing tool to uncover some of the mechanisms involved and learn how to manipulate SFKs for achieving ef ﬁ cient killing of cancer cells . Acknowledgements We thank Marie - Chloé Boulanger for her expert work and insightful comments . We would like to acknowledge the work of former colleagues including Marie - Claude Gingras , Amélie Robert , Nicolas Smadja - Lamère and Andréane Sicotte . This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( Grant MOP 49450 to JNL ) and by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council ( RF : RGPIN371663 to JNL ; OGPO157551 to RLF ) . JN Lavoie is a Senior Scholar from the Fond de la Recherche en Santé du Québec . References [ 1 ] W . C . Cheng , S . B . Berman , I . Ivanovska , E . A . Jonas , S . J . Lee , Y . Chen , L . K . Kaczmarek , F . Pineda , J . M . Hardwick , Oncogene 25 ( 34 ) ( 2006 ) 4697 . [ 2 ] L . Galluzzi , N . Joza , E . Tasdemir , M . C . Maiuri , M . Hengartner , J . M . Abrams , N . Tavernarakis , J . Penninger , F . Madeo , G . Kroemer , Cell Death Differ . ( 2008 ) . [ 3 ] G . Kroemer , S . J . Martin , Nat . Med . 11 ( 7 ) ( 2005 ) 725 . [ 4 ] N . Hail Jr . , B . Z . Carter , M . Konopleva , M . Andreeff , Apoptosis 11 ( 6 ) ( 2006 ) 889 . [ 5 ] S . W . Tait , D . R . Green , Oncogene 27 ( 50 ) ( 2008 ) 6452 . [ 6 ] L . E . Broker , F . A . Kruyt , G . Giaccone , Clin . Cancer Res . 11 ( 9 ) ( 2005 ) 3155 . [ 7 ] D . R . Green , G . I . Evan , Cancer Cell 1 ( 1 ) ( 2002 ) 19 . [ 8 ] M . Sallese , M . Giannotta , A . Luini , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 ( 7 ) ( 2009 ) 801 . [ 9 ] V . Soubannier , H . M . McBride , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 ( 1 ) ( 2009 ) 154 . [ 10 ] A . Sorkin , M . von Zastrow , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 9 ) ( 2009 ) 609 . [ 11 ] H . M . Heath - Engel , N . C . Chang , G . C . Shore , Oncogene 27 ( 50 ) ( 2008 ) 6419 . [ 12 ] K . F . Ferri , G . Kroemer , Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 11 ) ( 2001 ) E255 . [ 13 ] V . Tembe , B . R . Henderson , Cell . Signal . 19 ( 6 ) ( 2007 ) 1113 . [ 14 ] J . E . Aslan , G . Thomas , Traf ﬁ c 10 ( 10 ) ( 2009 ) 1390 . [ 15 ] M . Sallese , T . Pulvirenti , A . Luini , Embo J . 25 ( 12 ) ( 2006 ) 2663 . [ 16 ] P . Steigemann , D . W . Gerlich , Trends Cell Biol . 19 ( 11 ) ( 2009 ) 606 . [ 17 ] L . Lanzetti , P . P . Di Fiore , Traf ﬁ c 9 ( 12 ) ( 2008 ) 2011 . [ 18 ] J . Jing , R . Prekeris , Histol . Histopathol . 24 ( 9 ) ( 2009 ) 1171 . [ 19 ] M . Koivusalo , A . Kapus , S . Grinstein , J . Biol . Chem . 284 ( 11 ) ( 2009 ) 6595 . [ 20 ] T . Pulvirenti , M . Giannotta , M . Capestrano , M . Capitani , A . Pisanu , R . S . Polishchuk , E . San Pietro , G . V . Beznoussenko , A . A . Mironov , G . Turacchio , V . W . Hsu , M . Sallese , A . Luini , Nat . Cell Biol . 10 ( 8 ) ( 2008 ) 912 . [ 21 ] S . G . Weller , M . Capitani , H . Cao , M . Micaroni , A . Luini , M . Sallese , M . A . McNiven , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA ( 2010 ) . [ 22 ] F . Bard , L . Mazelin , C . Pechoux - Longin , V . Malhotra , P . Jurdic , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 47 ) ( 2003 ) 46601 . [ 23 ] E . Sandilands , C . Cans , V . J . Fincham , V . G . Brunton , H . Mellor , G . C . Prendergast , J . C . Norman , G . Superti - Furga , M . C . Frame , Dev . Cell 7 ( 6 ) ( 2004 ) 855 . [ 24 ] D . K . Moss , J . D . Lane , Trends Cell Biol . 16 ( 7 ) ( 2006 ) 330 . [ 25 ] O . Ndozangue - Touriguine , J . Hamelin , J . Breard , Biochem . Pharmacol . 76 ( 1 ) ( 2008 ) 11 . [ 26 ] J . C . Mills , N . L . Stone , R . N . Pittman , J . Cell Biol . 146 ( 4 ) ( 1999 ) 703 . [ 27 ] R . C . Taylor , S . P . Cullen , S . J . Martin , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 3 ) ( 2008 ) 231 . [ 28 ] M . L . Coleman , M . F . Olson , Cell Death Differ . 9 ( 5 ) ( 2002 ) 493 . [ 29 ] C . D . Bortner , J . A . Cidlowski , Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 462 ( 2 ) ( 2007 ) 176 . [ 30 ] V . E . Franklin - Tong , C . W . Gourlay , Biochem . J . 413 ( 3 ) ( 2008 ) 389 . [ 31 ] P . Kunda , B . Baum , Trends Cell Biol . 19 ( 4 ) ( 2009 ) 174 . [ 32 ] J . L . Rohn , B . Baum , J . Cell Sci . 123 ( Pt 2 ) ( 2010 ) 155 . [ 33 ] A . J . Ridley , Trends Cell Biol . 16 ( 10 ) ( 2006 ) 522 . [ 34 ] S . J . Heasman , A . J . Ridley , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 9 ) ( 2008 ) 690 . [ 35 ] R . Karlsson , E . D . Pedersen , Z . Wang , C . Brakebusch , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1796 ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) 91 . [ 36 ] A . Hall , Cancer Metastasis Rev . 28 ( 1 – 2 ) ( 2009 ) 5 . [ 37 ] S . J . Mathew , D . Haubert , M . Kronke , M . Leptin , J . CellSci . 122 ( Pt12 ) ( 2009 ) 1939 . [ 38 ] X . Ye , I . Ishii , M . A . Kingsbury , J . Chun , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1585 ( 2 – 3 ) ( 2002 ) 108 . [ 39 ] C . Fiorentini , L . Falzano , S . Travaglione , A . Fabbri , Cell Death Differ . 10 ( 2 ) ( 2003 ) 147 . [ 40 ] A . Robert , N . Smadja - Lamere , M . C . Landry , C . Champagne , R . Petrie , N . Lamarche - Vane , H . Hosoya , J . N . Lavoie , Mol . Biol . Cell 17 ( 7 ) ( 2006 ) 3329 . [ 41 ] S . Tu , R . A . Cerione , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 22 ) ( 2001 ) 19656 . [ 42 ] M . Degli Esposti , J . Tour , S . Ouasti , S . Ivanova , P . Matarrese , W . Malorni , R . Khosravi - Far , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) 600 . [ 43 ] M . C . Landry , A . Sicotte , C . Champagne , J . N . Lavoie , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 18 ) ( 2009 ) 4091 . [ 44 ] M . C . Duncan , M . Peifer , J . Cell Biol . 183 ( 6 ) ( 2008 ) 971 . [ 45 ] I . R . Boldogh , L . A . Pon , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1763 ( 5 – 6 ) ( 2006 ) 450 . [ 46 ] D . F . Suen , K . L . Norris , R . J . Youle , Genes Dev . 22 ( 12 ) ( 2008 ) 1577 . [ 47 ] K . L . Cerveny , Y . Tamura , Z . Zhang , R . E . Jensen , H . Sesaki , Trends Cell Biol . 17 ( 11 ) ( 2007 ) 563 . [ 48 ] A . Zorzano , M . Liesa , D . Sebastian , J . Segales , M . Palacin , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . ( 2010 ) . [ 49 ] S . Frank , B . Gaume , E . S . Bergmann - Leitner , W . W . Leitner , E . G . Robert , F . Catez , C . L . Smith , R . J . Youle , Dev . Cell 1 ( 4 ) ( 2001 ) 515 . [ 50 ] M . Karbowski , D . Arnoult , H . Chen , D . C . Chan , C . L . Smith , R . J . Youle , J . CellBiol . 164 ( 4 ) ( 2004 ) 493 . [ 51 ] R . J . Youle , M . Karbowski , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 ( 8 ) ( 2005 ) 657 . [ 52 ] A . Autret , S . J . Martin , Mol . Cell 36 ( 3 ) ( 2009 ) 355 . [ 53 ] D . G . Breckenridge , M . Germain , J . P . Mathai , M . Nguyen , G . C . Shore , Oncogene 22 ( 53 ) ( 2003 ) 8608 . [ 54 ] D . Arnoult , N . Rismanchi , A . Grodet , R . G . Roberts , D . P . Seeburg , J . Estaquier , M . Sheng , C . Blackstone , Curr . Biol . 15 ( 23 ) ( 2005 ) 2112 . [ 55 ] S . Wasiak , R . Zunino , H . M . McBride , J . Cell Biol . 177 ( 3 ) ( 2007 ) 439 . [ 56 ] J . T . Cribbs , S . Strack , EMBO Rep . 8 ( 10 ) ( 2007 ) 939 . [ 57 ] K . J . De Vos , V . J . Allan , A . J . Grierson , M . P . Sheetz , Curr . Biol . 15 ( 7 ) ( 2005 ) 678 . [ 58 ] L . Lanzetti , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) 453 . [ 59 ] G . Egea , F . Lazaro - Dieguez , M . Vilella , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 ( 2 ) ( 2006 ) 168 . [ 60 ] M . A . De Matteis , A . Luini , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 9 ( 4 ) ( 2008 ) 273 . [ 61 ] M . G . Roth , Traf ﬁ c 9 ( 8 ) ( 2008 ) 1233 . [ 62 ] J . Saarikangas , H . Zhao , P . Lappalainen , Physiol . Rev . 90 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 259 . [ 63 ] B . T . Chua , C . Volbracht , K . O . Tan , R . Li , V . C . Yu , P . Li , Nat . CellBiol . 5 ( 12 ) ( 2003 ) 1083 . [ 64 ] E . Bertling , P . Hotulainen , P . K . Mattila , T . Matilainen , M . Salminen , P . Lappalainen , Mol . Biol . Cell 15 ( 5 ) ( 2004 ) 2324 . [ 65 ] C . Wang , G . L . Zhou , S . Vedantam , P . Li , J . Field , J . CellSci . 121 ( Pt17 ) ( 2008 ) 2913 . [ 66 ] F . Klamt , S . Zdanov , R . L . Levine , A . Pariser , Y . Zhang , B . Zhang , L . R . Yu , T . D . Veenstra , E . Shacter , Nat . Cell Biol . ( 2009 ) . [ 67 ] T . Utsumi , N . Sakurai , K . Nakano , R . Ishisaka , FEBS Lett . 539 ( 1 – 3 ) ( 2003 ) 37 . [ 68 ] V . O . Paavilainen , E . Bertling , S . Falck , P . Lappalainen , Trends Cell Biol . 14 ( 7 ) ( 2004 ) 386 . [ 69 ] I . M . Cristea , M . Degli Esposti , Chem . Phys . Lipids 129 ( 2 ) ( 2004 ) 133 . [ 70 ] W . Malorni , A . M . Giammarioli , T . Garofalo , M . Sorice , Apoptosis 12 ( 5 ) ( 2007 ) 941 . [ 71 ] S . Y . Choi , P . Huang , G . M . Jenkins , D . C . Chan , J . Schiller , M . A . Frohman , Nat . Cell Biol . 8 ( 11 ) ( 2006 ) 1255 . [ 72 ] M . Karbowski , S . Y . Jeong , R . J . Youle , J . Cell Biol . 166 ( 7 ) ( 2004 ) 1027 . [ 73 ] Y . Takahashi , C . L . Meyerkord , H . G . Wang , Cell Death Differ . 16 ( 7 ) ( 2009 ) 947 . [ 74 ] H . Yamaguchi , N . T . Woods , J . F . Dorsey , Y . Takahashi , N . R . Gjertsen , T . Yeatman , J . Wu , H . G . Wang , J . Biol . Chem . 283 ( 27 ) ( 2008 ) 19112 . [ 75 ] J . L . Gallop , C . C . Jao , H . M . Kent , P . J . Butler , P . R . Evans , R . Langen , H . T . McMahon , EMBO J . 25 ( 12 ) ( 2006 ) 2898 . [ 76 ] B . W . Bernstein , J . R . Bamburg , Trends Cell Biol . 20 ( 4 ) ( 2010 ) 187 . [ 77 ] S . Yadav , S . Puri , A . D . Linstedt , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 6 ) ( 2009 ) 1728 . [ 78 ] A . Musch , D . Cohen , G . Kreitzer , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , Embo J . 20 ( 9 ) ( 2001 ) 2171 . [ 79 ] A . Luna , O . B . Matas , J . A . Martinez - Menarguez , E . Mato , J . M . Duran , J . Ballesta , M . Way , G . Egea , Mol . Biol . Cell 13 ( 3 ) ( 2002 ) 866 . [ 80 ] J . L . Chen , L . Lacomis , H . Erdjument - Bromage , P . Tempst , M . Stamnes , FEBS Lett . 566 ( 1 – 3 ) ( 2004 ) 281 . [ 81 ] O . B . Matas , J . A . Martinez - Menarguez , G . Egea , Traf ﬁ c 5 ( 11 ) ( 2004 ) 838 . [ 82 ] H . Cao , S . Weller , J . D . Orth , J . Chen , B . Huang , J . L . Chen , M . Stamnes , M . A . McNiven , Nat . Cell Biol . 7 ( 5 ) ( 2005 ) 483 . [ 83 ] S . Rosso , F . Bollati , M . Bisbal , D . Peretti , T . Sumi , T . Nakamura , S . Quiroga , A . Ferreira , A . Caceres , Mol . Biol . Cell 15 ( 7 ) ( 2004 ) 3433 . [ 84 ] S . B . Salvarezza , S . Deborde , R . Schreiner , F . Campagne , M . M . Kessels , B . Qualmann , A . Caceres , G . Kreitzer , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 1 ) ( 2009 ) 438 . 1613 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614 [ 85 ] J . von Blume , J . M . Duran , E . Forlanelli , A . M . Alleaume , M . Egorov , R . Polishchuk , H . Molina , V . Malhotra , J . Cell Biol . 187 ( 7 ) ( 2009 ) 1055 . [ 86 ] C . D ' Souza - Schorey , P . Chavrier , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 347 . [ 87 ] T . Dubois , O . Paleotti , A . A . Mironov , V . Fraisier , T . E . Stradal , M . A . De Matteis , M . Franco , P . Chavrier , Nat . Cell Biol . 7 ( 4 ) ( 2005 ) 353 . [ 88 ] R . Chadda , M . T . Howes , S . J . Plowman , J . F . Hancock , R . G . Parton , S . Mayor , Traf ﬁ c 8 ( 6 ) ( 2007 ) 702 . [ 89 ] D . Goswami , K . Gowrishankar , S . Bilgrami , S . Ghosh , R . Raghupathy , R . Chadda , R . Vishwakarma , M . Rao , S . Mayor , Cell 135 ( 6 ) ( 2008 ) 1085 . [ 90 ] M . T . Brown , J . Andrade , H . Radhakrishna , J . G . Donaldson , J . A . Cooper , P . A . Randazzo , Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 ( 12 ) ( 1998 ) 7038 . [ 91 ] C . Furman , S . M . Short , R . R . Subramanian , B . R . Zetter , T . M . Roberts , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 10 ) ( 2002 ) 7962 . [ 92 ] R . J . Daly , Biochem . J . 382 ( Pt 1 ) ( 2004 ) 13 . [ 93 ] J . R . Peterson , J . Chernoff , Nat . Cell Biol . 8 ( 9 ) ( 2006 ) 905 . [ 94 ] S . Bharti , H . Inoue , K . Bharti , D . S . Hirsch , Z . Nie , H . Y . Yoon , V . Artym , K . M . Yamada , S . C . Mueller , V . A . Barr , P . A . Randazzo , Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 ( 23 ) ( 2007 ) 8271 . [ 95 ] H . Hehnly , M . Stamnes , FEBS Lett . 581 ( 11 ) ( 2007 ) 2112 . [ 96 ] S . M . Jones , K . E . Howell , J . R . Henley , H . Cao , M . A . McNiven , Science 279 ( 5350 ) ( 1998 ) 573 . [ 97 ] S . W . Hicks , C . E . Machamer , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 ( 3 ) ( 2005 ) 406 . [ 98 ] B . Short , A . Haas , F . A . Barr , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1744 ( 3 ) ( 2005 ) 383 . [ 99 ] A . Colanzi , D . Corda , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) 386 . [ 100 ] C . Rabouille , V . Kondylis , Cell Cycle 6 ( 22 ) ( 2007 ) 2723 . [ 101 ] M . Mancini , C . E . Machamer , S . Roy , D . W . Nicholson , N . A . Thornberry , L . A . Casciola - Rosen , A . Rosen , J . Cell Biol . 149 ( 3 ) ( 2000 ) 603 . [ 102 ] J . D . Lane , J . Lucocq , J . Pryde , F . A . Barr , P . G . Woodman , V . J . Allan , M . Lowe , J . Cell Biol . 156 ( 3 ) ( 2002 ) 495 . [ 103 ] R . Chiu , L . Novikov , S . Mukherjee , D . Shields , J . Cell Biol . 159 ( 4 ) ( 2002 ) 637 . [ 104 ] R . S . Maag , M . Mancini , A . Rosen , C . E . Machamer , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 6 ) ( 2005 ) 3019 . [ 105 ] S . J . Jones , E . C . Ledgerwood , J . B . Prins , J . Galbraith , D . R . Johnson , J . S . Pober , J . R . Bradley , J . Immunol . 162 ( 2 ) ( 1999 ) 1042 . [ 106 ] M . Bennett , K . Macdonald , S . W . Chan , J . P . Luzio , R . Simari , P . Weissberg , Science 282 ( 5387 ) ( 1998 ) 290 . [ 107 ] J . R . Bradley , S . Thiru , J . S . Pober , Am . J . Pathol . 146 ( 1 ) ( 1995 ) 27 . [ 108 ] H . P . Hauser , M . Bardroff , G . Pyrowolakis , S . Jentsch , J . Cell Biol . 141 ( 6 ) ( 1998 ) 1415 . [ 109 ] C . Pohl , S . Jentsch , Cell 132 ( 5 ) ( 2008 ) 832 . [ 110 ] K . Kasahara , Y . Nakayama , Y . Nakazato , K . Ikeda , T . Kuga , N . Yamaguchi , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 8 ) ( 2007 ) 5327 . [ 111 ] S . Ouasti , P . Matarrese , R . Paddon , R . Khosravi - Far , M . Sorice , A . Tinari , W . Malorni , M . Degli Esposti , Cell Death Differ . 14 ( 3 ) ( 2007 ) 453 . [ 112 ] G . van Meer , Q . Lisman , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 29 ) ( 2002 ) 25855 . [ 113 ] B . Tomassini , R . Testi , Biochimie 84 ( 2 – 3 ) ( 2002 ) 123 . [ 114 ] C . Garcia - Ruiz , A . Colell , A . Morales , M . Calvo , C . Enrich , J . C . Fernandez - Checa , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 39 ) ( 2002 ) 36443 . [ 115 ] P . Matarrese , V . Manganelli , T . Garofalo , A . Tinari , L . Gambardella , K . Ndebele , R . Khosravi - Far , M . Sorice , M . D . Esposti , W . Malorni , Biochem . J . 413 ( 3 ) ( 2008 ) 467 . [ 116 ] J . C . Sharpe , D . Arnoult , R . J . Youle , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1644 ( 2 – 3 ) ( 2004 ) 107 . [ 117 ] M . Degli Esposti , Methods Enzymol . 442 ( 2008 ) 421 . [ 118 ] K . Nozawa , M . J . Fritzler , Y . Takasaki , M . R . Wood , E . K . Chan , Cell Biol . Int . 33 ( 2 ) ( 2009 ) 148 . [ 119 ] R . Reinehr , D . Haussinger , Biochem . J . 413 ( 3 ) ( 2008 ) e11 . [ 120 ] L . Johannes , V . Popoff , Cell 135 ( 7 ) ( 2008 ) 1175 . [ 121 ] P . E . Branton , D . E . Roopchand , Oncogene 20 ( 54 ) ( 2001 ) 7855 . [ 122 ] M . J . Miron , P . Blanchette , P . Groitl , F . Dallaire , J . G . Teodoro , S . Li , T . Dobner , P . E . Branton , J . Virol . 83 ( 4 ) ( 2009 ) 1689 . [ 123 ] J . N . Lavoie , M . Nguyen , R . C . Marcellus , P . E . Branton , G . C . Shore , J . Cell . Biol . 140 ( 3 ) ( 1998 ) 637 . [ 124 ] R . C . Marcellus , J . N . Lavoie , D . Boivin , G . C . Shore , G . Ketner , P . E . Branton , J . Virol . 72 ( 9 ) ( 1998 ) 7144 . [ 125 ] R . Shtrichman , T . Kleinberger , J . Virol . 72 ( 4 ) ( 1998 ) 2975 . [ 126 ] R . Shtrichman , R . Sharf , H . Barr , T . Dobner , T . Kleinberger , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 ( 18 ) ( 1999 ) 10080 . [ 127 ] A . Livne , R . Shtrichman , T . Kleinberger , J . Virol . 75 ( 2 ) ( 2001 ) 789 . [ 128 ] A . Robert , M . J . Miron , C . Champagne , M . C . Gingras , P . E . Branton , J . N . Lavoie , J . Cell Biol . 158 ( 3 ) ( 2002 ) 519 . [ 129 ] S . Li , A . Szymborski , M . J . Miron , R . Marcellus , O . Binda , J . N . Lavoie , P . E . Branton , Oncogene 28 ( 3 ) ( 2009 ) 390 . [ 130 ] M . H . Noteborn , Eur . J . Pharmacol . 625 ( 1 - 3 ) ( 2009 ) 165 . [ 131 ] P . Bruno , C . R . Brinkmann , M . C . Boulanger , M . Flinterman , P . Klanrit , M . C . Landry , D . Portsmouth , J . Borst , M . Tavassoli , M . Noteborn , C . Backendorf , R . M . Zimmerman , Cell Death Differ . 16 ( 1 ) ( 2009 ) 184 . [ 132 ] R . C . Marcellus , H . Chan , D . Paquette , S . Thirlwell , D . Boivin , P . E . Branton , J . Virol . 74 ( 17 ) ( 2000 ) 7869 . [ 133 ] J . N . Lavoie , C . Champagne , M . C . Gingras , A . Robert , J . Cell Biol . 150 ( 5 ) ( 2000 ) 1037 . [ 134 ] C . Champagne , M . C . Landry , M . C . Gingras , J . N . Lavoie , J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 24 ) ( 2004 ) 25905 . [ 135 ] M . - C . Gingras , C . Champagne , Ma Roy , J . N . Lavoie , Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 ( 1 ) ( 2002 ) 41 . [ 136 ] M . C . Landry , A . Robert , J . N . Lavoie , Bull . Cancer 93 ( 9 ) ( 2006 ) 921 . [ 137 ] N . Smadja - Lamere , M . C . Boulanger , C . Champagne , P . E . Branton , J . N . Lavoie , J . Biol . Chem . 283 ( 49 ) ( 2008 ) 34352 . [ 138 ] S . Li , C . Brignole , R . Marcellus , S . Thirlwell , O . Binda , M . J . McQuoid , D . Ashby , H . Chan , Z . Zhang , M . J . Miron , D . C . Pallas , P . E . Branton , J . Virol . 83 ( 17 ) ( 2009 ) 8340 . [ 139 ] H . Stenmark , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 8 ) ( 2009 ) 513 . [ 140 ] O . Ullrich , S . Reinsch , S . Urbe , M . Zerial , R . G . Parton , J . Cell Biol . 135 ( 4 ) ( 1996 ) 913 . [ 141 ] W . Chen , Y . Feng , D . Chen , A . Wandinger - Ness , Mol . Biol . Cell9 ( 11 ) ( 1998 ) 3241 . [ 142 ] M . C . Jones , P . T . Caswell , J . C . Norman , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 549 . [ 143 ] H . Hehnly , K . M . Longhini , J . L . Chen , M . Stamnes , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 20 ) ( 2009 ) 4303 . [ 144 ] B . D . Grant , J . G . Donaldson , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 9 ) ( 2009 ) 597 . [ 145 ] J . S . Bonifacino , R . Rojas , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 8 ) ( 2006 ) 568 . [ 146 ] F . R . Max ﬁ eld , T . E . McGraw , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2 ) ( 2004 ) 121 . [ 147 ] G . R . Chichili , W . Rodgers , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 ( 14 ) ( 2009 ) 2319 . [ 148 ] J . Zimmerberg , M . M . Kozlov , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 1 ) ( 2006 ) 9 . [ 149 ] M . Parsons , J . Monypenny , S . M . Ameer - Beg , T . H . Millard , L . M . Machesky , M . Peter , M . D . Keppler , G . Schiavo , R . Watson , J . Chernoff , D . Zicha , B . Vojnovic , T . Ng , Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 ( 5 ) ( 2005 ) 1680 . [ 150 ] J . Saraste , B . Goud , Mol . Biol . Cell 18 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) 1430 . [ 151 ] H . Y . Yu , W . M . Bement , Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2 ) ( 2007 ) 149 . [ 152 ] M . Furthauer , M . Gonzalez - Gaitan , Cell Cycle 8 ( 20 ) ( 2009 ) 3311 . [ 153 ] X . Chen , E . S . Simon , Y . Xiang , M . Kachman , P . C . Andrews , Y . Wang , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 10 ) ( 2010 ) 7197 . [ 154 ] I . Chackalaparampil , D . Shalloway , Cell 52 ( 6 ) ( 1988 ) 801 . [ 155 ] S . Bagrodia , I . Chackalaparampil , T . E . Kmiecik , D . Shalloway , Nature 349 ( 6305 ) ( 1991 ) 172 . [ 156 ] S . Roche , S . Fumagalli , S . A . Courtneidge , Science 269 ( 5230 ) ( 1995 ) 1567 . [ 157 ] M . M . Moasser , M . Srethapakdi , K . S . Sachar , A . J . Kraker , N . Rosen , Cancer Res . 59 ( 24 ) ( 1999 ) 6145 . [ 158 ] G . Montagnac , A . Echard , P . Chavrier , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 ( 4 ) ( 2008 ) 454 . [ 159 ] E . Boucrot , T . Kirchhausen , Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( 19 ) ( 2007 ) 7939 . [ 160 ] G . Warren , J . Davoust , A . Cockcroft , EMBO J . 3 ( 10 ) ( 1984 ) 2217 . [ 161 ] E . Sandilands , M . C . Frame , Trends Cell Biol . 18 ( 7 ) ( 2008 ) 322 . [ 162 ] A . Wilde , E . C . Beattie , L . Lem , D . A . Riethof , S . H . Liu , W . C . Mobley , P . Soriano , F . M . Brodsky , Cell 96 ( 5 ) ( 1999 ) 677 . [ 163 ] E . C . Beattie , C . L . Howe , A . Wilde , F . M . Brodsky , W . C . Mobley , J . Neurosci . 20 ( 19 ) ( 2000 ) 7325 . [ 164 ] J . Zhu , D . Yu , X . C . Zeng , K . Zhou , X . Zhan , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 22 ) ( 2007 ) 16086 . [ 165 ] H . Cao , J . Chen , E . W . Krueger , M . A . McNiven , Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 ( 3 ) ( 2010 ) 781 . [ 166 ] P . A . Bromann , H . Korkaya , S . A . Courtneidge , Oncogene 23 ( 48 ) ( 2004 ) 7957 . [ 167 ] A . He , X . Liu , L . Liu , Y . Chang , F . Fang , Cell . Signal . 19 ( 1 ) ( 2007 ) 1 . [ 168 ] B . R . Rubin , J . S . Bogan , Vitam . Horm . 80 ( 2009 ) 155 . [ 169 ] V . G . Brunton , M . C . Frame , Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 8 ( 4 ) ( 2008 ) 427 . [ 170 ] L . C . Kim , L . Song , E . B . Haura , Nat . Rev . Clin . Oncol . 6 ( 10 ) ( 2009 ) 587 . [ 171 ] X . Cao , Q . D . You , Z . Y . Li , X . J . Wang , X . Y . Lu , X . R . Liu , D . Xu , B . Liu , Mini Rev . Med . Chem . 8 ( 10 ) ( 2008 ) 1053 . [ 172 ] N . Bilodeau , A . Fiset , G . G . Poirier , S . Fortier , M . C . Gingras , J . N . Lavoie , R . L . Faure , FEBS J . 273 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 992 . [ 173 ] N . Bilodeau , A . Fiset , M . C . Boulanger , S . Bhardwaj , E . Winstall , J . N . Lavoie , R . L . Faure , J . Proteome Res . 9 ( 2 ) ( 2010 ) 708 . [ 174 ] V . Gerke , C . E . Creutz , S . E . Moss , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 ( 6 ) ( 2005 ) 449 . [ 175 ] E . T . Spiliotis , W . J . Nelson , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( Pt 1 ) ( 2006 ) 4 . [ 176 ] A . Colell , D . R . Green , J . E . Ricci , Cell Death Differ . 16 ( 12 ) ( 2009 ) 1573 . [ 177 ] J . Herz , D . K . Strickland , J . Clin . Investig . 108 ( 6 ) ( 2001 ) 779 . [ 178 ] P . van der Geer , Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 12 ( 4 ) ( 2002 ) 160 . [ 179 ] M . P . Jedrychowski , C . A . Gartner , S . P . Gygi , L . Zhou , J . Herz , K . V . Kandror , P . F . Pilch , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 104 . [ 180 ] G . Kroemer , L . Galluzzi , P . Vandenabeele , J . Abrams , E . S . Alnemri , E . H . Baehrecke , M . V . Blagosklonny , W . S . El - Deiry , P . Golstein , D . R . Green , M . Hengartner , R . A . Knight , S . Kumar , S . A . Lipton , W . Malorni , G . Nunez , M . E . Peter , J . Tschopp , J . Yuan , M . Piacentini , B . Zhivotovsky , G . Melino , Cell Death Differ . 16 ( 1 ) ( 2009 ) 3 . 1614 J . N . Lavoie et al . / Cellular Signalling 22 ( 2010 ) 1604 – 1614