Extracting Hierarchical Topic Models from the Web for Improving Digital Archive Access Gregory Grefenstette Inria Saclay / TAO , Rue Noetzlin - Bât 660 91190 Gif sur Yvette , France gregory . grefenstette @ inria . fr Lawrence Muchemi Inria Saclay / TAO , Rue Noetzlin - Bât 660 91190 Gif sur Yvette , France lawrence . githiari @ inria . fr ABSTRACT Topic models provide a weighted list of terms specific to a given domain . For example , the terminology for painting , as a hobby , might include specific tools user in painting such brush , easel , canvas , as well as more specific terms such a common oil colors : deep aquamarine , cerulean blue , zinc white . For clothing , a topic model should include words such as shoes , boots , socks , skirt , hats , as well as more specific terms such as tennis shoes , cocktail dress , and specific brands of shoes , hats , shirts , etc . In addition to containing the characteristic terms of a topic , a topic model also contains the relative frequency of each term’s use in the topic text . This frequency is useful in information retrieval settings ; when a large number of results are returned for a query , they can be ordered by pertinence using the relative frequency of domain words to rank the responses . Providing a hierarchic topic model also allows an information retrieval application to create facets ( Tunkelang , 2009 ) , or categories appearing the result sets , with which the user can filter results , as on an online shopping site . One problem for many information retrieval platforms in digital humanity archives is the lack of topic models , other than those already foreseen and implemented when the archive was first digitized . A researcher wishing to look at a collection or archive from a new angle has no means of exploiting a new topic model corresponding to his or her axis of research . This obstacle has two causes : ( 1 ) technologically , the platform has to allow a re - annotation of the underlying archive with a new topic model . This technological problem is solvable by implementing a suite of natural language processing tools that can access the description of the textual description of elements in the archive , and identify there terms from a new topic model . For example , the commonly used information retrieval platform Lucene ( Grainger , 2014 ) allows the administrator to add new facet annotations to existing documents . A second , more difficult problem is ( 2 ) building a new topic model . When done manually , this is a time - consuming task , with no assurance of being complete or adequate , unless great expense is outlayed , as is the case for MeSH , a medical subject heading taxonomy ( Coletti and Bleich , 2001 ) , for which regular monthly meetings are held for maintaining and updating the terminology . For subjects less important for society , few such ontological resources exist . When topic models are created automatically they can homogenize existing terminology ( Newman et al , 2007 ) but often result in noise ( Steyvers , et al . , 2004 ) that may seem excessive to some archivists . Here we will present work we have been doing to produce clean taxonomies for ad - hoc subjects , based on directed crawling and language modeling , comparing the terminology of web pages that are in - topic to a much larger collection of off - topic text . We have had some success in producing cleaner taxonomies ( Grefenstette , 2015 ) [ first place in the taxonomy creation task ] and believe that that the same techniques can be applied to any domain . We are currently working on producing a wide range of taxonomies for annotation of personal data , found in user - generated text ( emails , facebook post , twitter feeds ) . In this talk we will present our natural language processing techniques and describe how they can applied to ad - hoc topics , creating a weighted topic model that can be used for annotating text with new facets . References Coletti , Margaret H . , and Howard L . Bleich . " Medical subject headings used to search the biomedical literature . " Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 8 . 4 : 317 - 323 . 2001 . Grainger , Trey , Timothy Potter , and Yonik Seeley . Solr in action . Manning , 2014 . Grefenstette , Gregory . " INRIASAC : Simple Hypernym Extraction Methods " . In Proceedings of Ninth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation ( SemEval 2015 ) , Denver , 2005 . Newman , David , Kat Hagedorn , Chaitanya Chemudugunta , and Padhraic Smyth . " Subject metadata enrichment using statistical topic models . " 7th ACM / IEEE - CS joint conference on Digital libraries , pp . 366 - 375 . ACM , 2007 . Steyvers , Mark , Padhraic Smyth , Michal Rosen - Zvi , and Thomas Griffiths . " Probabilistic author - topic models for information discovery . " In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pp . 306 - 315 . ACM , 2004 . Tunkelang , Daniel . " Faceted search . " Synthesis lectures on information concepts , retrieval , and services 1 . 1 : 1 - 80 . 2009 .