1 Nadel HM , et al . BMJ Leader 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 Mission possible : open innovation in nursing and patient care services at Massachusetts General Hospital Hiyam M Nadel , 1 Nour Al - Sultan , 1 Alex Berger , 1 Paula McCree , 2 Gaurdia Banister , 1 Olivia Jung 2 , 3 Brief report To cite : Nadel HM , Al - Sultan N , Berger A , et al . BMJ Leader Published Online First : [ please include Day Month Year ] . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 1 Institute for Patient Care , Mass General Brigham , Boston , Massachusetts , USA 2 Healthcare Transformation Lab , Mass General Brigham , Boston , Massachusetts , USA 3 Department of Health Policy and Management , UCLA , Los Angeles , California , USA Correspondence to Dr Hiyam M Nadel , Institute for Patient Care , Mass General Brigham , Boston , MA 02114 , USA ; hnadel @ mgh . harvard . edu Received 24 February 2023 Accepted 24 September 2023 © Author ( s ) ( or their employer ( s ) ) 2023 . No commercial re - use . See rights and permissions . Published by BMJ . ABSTRACTObjectives Although front - line nurses and staff are uniquely positioned to identify the inefficiencies and gaps in care delivery , formal processes are not always in place to hear from those very employees . Design We established a scalable process that embodies open innovation principles , to broaden and distribute the innovation locus . Setting Massachusetts General Hospital , Boston , MA . Particpitants We invited 8800 + nurses and other direct caregivers to participate in organisational problem solving . Interventions We solicited employees to ( 1 ) identify pain points and develop solutions and ( 2 ) crowd vote to indicate which ideas they want to see implemented . Results 177 employees submitted 225 ideas , and 928 cast a vote . The 40 participants who submitted top - voted ideas were invited to develop a detailed implementation plan ; of those , 27 submitted one . Four ideas emerged as winners . Conclusions Formulating a clear call for ideas , securing leadership buy - in and generating excitement about the process were essential to our efforts . Challenges associated with opening the innovation process involved managing a large volume of participants and submissions , and providing on - the - go training to nurses and staff who were not used to being asked to participate in organisational problem solving . INTRODUCTION Nurses and front - line staff who care for patients and their families throughout the continuum of care are ideally positioned to identify opportunities for innovation , given their unique understanding of the challenges , inefficiencies and gaps in care delivery . Innovation , which we define as the generation of novel and useful ideas and solutions , 1 2 often comes from those who are deeply entrenched in the problem . 3 – 5 Yet , effective formal processes are not always in place to hear from those very people . In 2016 , we at the Center for Innovations in Care Delivery ( CICD ) started to cultivate a process that promotes innovation among nurses and patient care services ( PCS ) staff by launching the Innovation , Design , Excellence and Awards ( IDEA ) programme here at Massachusetts General Hospital ( MGH ) . At MGH , PCS staff include a wide range of profes - sionals , including social workers ; physical , occupa - tional and respiratory therapists ; chaplains ; nursing assistants ; and unit secretaries . The IDEA programme provided funds and mentorship on human - centered design to nurses and PCS staff to enable them to develop solutions to clinical problems . However , the IDEA programme was limited in scale and received an average of only 17 responses per year ( figure 1 ) . Perceived barriers associated with the programme included the non - anonymised submission of ideas and the require - ment of a detailed proposal with a budget on the first pass . Pausing the programme during the COVID - 19 pandemic allowed us to consider how to expand the programme and address those barriers . We decided to implement and build on the Ether Dome Challenge ( EDC ) , which entails a contest of ideas that had been used in other departments at MGH , based on the literature on using crowdsourcing and open innovation mechanisms inside organ - isations . 3 5 – 8 This initiative was named after the hospital’s historic operating theatre , where the use of ether as an anaesthetic was first publicly demon - strated . The operational aims of this programme included : ► To develop an efficient way to engage a large number of clinical and administrative staff in the innovation process . ► To train clinical staff in innovation and human - centered design thinking . ► To provide an opportunity for front - line health - care workers to share ideas and feel heard . ► To strengthen partnerships within and beyond the hospital system by broadly engaging employees from all ambulatory and inpatient units . METHODS In the summer of 2021 , we invited all 8802 nurses and PCS staff at MGH to participate in the EDC . As the philanthropic funding for this initiative was directed to supporting nursing and PCS staff , physi - cians’ engagement in this initiative was limited to triaging and implementation of ideas . We created an online platform that enabled participants to anonymously contribute input from anywhere , at any time , on any device . To promote the EDC prior to launch , we created and distributed flyers and posters ( figure 2 ) in high - traffic areas of the hospital , attended in - person huddles and sent weekly emails that introduced the EDC . We presented the EDC in leadership meetings to engage unit leaders in building excitement about the challenge . We also developed a budget , which 2 Nadel HM , et al . BMJ Leader 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 Brief report covered the promotional materials , participation incentives and support from information technology staff who maintained the platform for idea submission and voting ( table 1 ) . To note , the budget did not include the cost of developing and implementing the winning ideas ; we anticipate that cost savings , patents and licensing will recoup these costs . The EDC comprises five phases : ideation , crowd voting , application , awards and implementation . Ideation Based on problem areas and trends identified by nursing and PCS leaders , front - line nurses and staff were asked to submit pain points and solutions that addressed one of four catego - ries : capacity management , care team and patient communica - tion , the complexity of the clinical environment , and an ‘other’ category to allow for submissions of solutions not captured in the previous three categories . Ideation lasted 4 weeks . We held virtual office hours to help participants navigate the EDC platform and articulate their ideas . The first 100 participants received a $ 10 Amazon gift card , and all participants received an EDC - branded pen . Crowd voting All staff , regardless of whether they submitted an idea or not , were eligible to indicate which ideas they would like to move forward on a scale of 1 ( ‘this idea should not move forward’ ) to 5 ( ‘this idea should move forward’ ) . The voting platform presented all submitted ideas anonymously and in random order . Crowd voting lasted 4 weeks , and all staff who voted received an EDC - branded sticker . The 40 employees who submitted the 10 ideas with the highest scores in each category received $ 20 Amazon gift cards . Application The planning team worked closely with hospital leadership to review the 40 top - voted ideas and screen out any unfeasible ones or those already in the implementation process . This review process ensured that we had leadership support for the 10 ideas from each category that advanced to this phase . Invited partic - ipants had 5 weeks to complete the application , which required identifying relevant stakeholders , defining evaluation metrics and implementation milestones and developing a budget . We held virtual and in - person office hours to support participants through this process . Two tiers of judges reviewed the submitted applications . Tier 1 judges comprised steering committee members , including leaders from nursing and other disciplines from the PCS exec - utive committee , reporting directly to the senior vice president for patient care and chief nurse . Additional members from ambulatory , community care and unit - based leadership were added to ensure broad representation . Judges were randomly assigned three or four applications to review , and we adjusted assignments with known conflicts of interest . Judges reviewed each application using a rubric that we developed , based on how prior organisational improvement proposals were evaluated in our organisation . The rubric included six dimensions : ( 1 ) oppor - tunity summary ( problem , current state ) , ( 2 ) solution summary ( proposed solution ) , ( 3 ) plan for implementation , ( 4 ) plan for resources and stakeholders , ( 5 ) overall impact and ( 6 ) budget . For each dimension , judges gave a score on a scale of 1 – 9 , with higher scores indicating a favourable review . A subset of applications selected by tier 1 judges moved forward to tier 2 judging . Tier 2 judges included the chief nurse , MGH business and clinical division leaders and a design company executive . They selected the winning ideas using the same rubric and scale as tier 1 judges . Awards We hosted the award event in a hybrid format to celebrate the winners and the end of the EDC while adhering to COVID - 19 hospital protocols . The celebration was filmed for everyone to view as time allowed . Figure 1 Idea submissions . EDC , Ether Dome Challenge ; IDEA , Innovation , Design , Excellence and Awards . 3 Nadel HM , et al . BMJ Leader 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 Brief report Implementation EDC winners received up to $ 10 000 in funding and received mentorship and project management support to develop and implement their ideas . Mentorship support includes 1 - hour biweekly meetings and training on human - centered design prin - ciples as the ideas move through the complex steps of concept , design , prototyping and implementation . This process typically takes a year or more . RESULTS We received 225 ideas from 177 nurses and staff ( some indi - viduals submitted more than one idea ) . This was a massive improvement compared with the IDEA awards from previous years ( figure 1 ) . Of the 177 individuals who submitted ideas , 117 ( 66 % ) were nurses , 19 ( 11 % ) were advanced practice nurses , 18 ( 10 % ) were allied health professionals , 15 ( 8 % ) were in middle management ( eg , directors , managers ) and 8 ( 5 % ) were from a combination of nurse assistants and clerical staff . Most ( 90 % ) ideas were gener - ated from the inpatient staff compared with only 10 % from ambulatory sites . We received 15 362 votes from 928 individuals , representing 11 % of our entire nursing and PCS staff . The 10 top - voted ideas in each category were invited to develop an application elaborating on their ideas . Of the 40 ideas invited , 27 completed the application process . Tier 1 judges selected 12 applications to move forward , which tier 2 judges then evaluated . This process resulted in four winning ideas , one from each category . Since front - line clinicians and staff are typically unfamiliar with innovation , there were many requests for assistance concerning framing and communicating their ideas effectively . In response , we organised numerous one - on - ones , 1 - hour coaching sessions at various times and on weekends to accommodate the 24 - hour Figure 2 Promotional poster ( Source : Rachael Acker , Founder of Healthero and Director of User Experience at WCG , a WIRB and Copernicus Group merger ) . PCS , patient care services . 4 Nadel HM , et al . BMJ Leader 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 Brief report nature of clinical work . During ideation , we helped participants refine the scope of their ideas , and over this 4 - week period , we spent about 3 hours / week mentoring participants . We reviewed ideas as they were submitted during the 4 weeks of ideation . This gave us a window into the nature of the ideas that informed us of the types of judges we would need for later stages and identifying inappropriate submissions . The electronic platform enabled us to efficiently review and activate the ideas for crowd voting . Once we identified the top - voted ideas , we vetted them in advance to ensure they were feasible for imple - mentation , not duplicating current initiatives , and supported by leadership . These activities required one to two full - time equiva - lent hours weekly over the 4 - week period . They were crucial to the programme’s final success as only ideas we had confirmed support were put forward for implementation . For 27 employees who submitted a detailed application , we provided training on framing the problem , articulating how their solution solves the stated problem , identifying stakeholders , developing evaluation metrics and outlining implementation milestones with a budget . This required approximately 3 hours of support each week over the 5 - week period . Employees who received support on their application shared that without the technical assistance and encouragement provided in these sessions , they would not have been able to complete the appli - cation , because they felt that they did not have enough time , capacity and experience in innovation to dedicate to the applica - tion . Hearing this led us to believe that the 13 staff who chose not to submit an application likely felt that the amount of time and effort required to complete the application was too burdensome . The four winning ideas are in various stages of development and implementation . Each idea is being built and developed by the winner with support from the CICD . ► Capacity management category : ‘MedBox’ is a multilayered solution for complex discharge medication management that includes both a physical and digital component . Nursing , pharmacy , social workers and the CICD team are collabo - rating to test the efficacy of using physical pill organisers as the initial step . We are also working to better streamline medication management and teaching on discharge . ► Care team and patient communication category : ‘Fluid Intake Monitor’ is a digital platform that providers and patients can use to enter data on oral fluid consumption while in the hospital or at home . We have collected data from clinical staff from multiple disciplines to understand the pain points associated with fluid intake monitoring . Next , we will collect patient data to understand their behav - iours regarding oral intake monitoring . We will then use the results to develop the first Fluid Intake Monitor prototype . ► Growing complexity of the clinical environment category : ‘Patient Acuity Tool’ aims to provide data to optimise nurse - patient assignments by identifying staffing and resource needs for the ambulatory oncology transfusion unit . A proto - type was developed and implemented in February 2023 . The tool used over 700 data points of predictable and unpre - dictable factors affecting nursing workload . We are currently building the algorithms that will populate the software tool from this learning . ► Other category : ‘PH Syringe’ . To avoid the need for repeated radiological confirmation of a nasogastric tube placement , our initial thought was to create a syringe incorporating a pH strip . Although this solution was not feasible because pH testing is no longer considered a validated test in our institu - tion , identifying this pain point spurred collaboration with bioengineering groups to develop an alternative solution . The remaining 221 ideas that did not win continue to be discussed among hospital leadership as several have great merit , and leaders do not want to discourage future idea submis - sions . Many of these ideas were easy to implement , and four have already been implemented . The submitter has been invited to engage with existing workgroups for other ideas already underway . Seven committees are involved in these discussions . Updates are being communicated monthly to all staff , encour - aging future participation in innovation . In fact , staff continue to reach out to ask when the next EDC will take place so they can submit their ideas . The monthly updates serve as ongoing engagement and inspiration . DISCUSSION The process of opening up the idea generation and voting process to the entire nursing and PCS employee population served as an effective means to facilitate communication between front - line employees and leaders at all levels . Although we did not system - atically evaluate staff satisfaction following the EDC , many staff shared anecdotes about being pleased to voice ideas and sugges - tions to organisational leaders and colleagues via the EDC and asked about the next iteration of the EDC . This process lowered the barrier to idea submission and encouraged high engagement in idea selection via voting . Perhaps more important , several worthwhile ideas were submitted , some of which have already been implemented while others are in various stages of development . We hope one or more of these ideas will result in a marketable product that will give us a favourable return on investment and improve patient care . Our success was based on the following principles . Formulate the call for ideas We carefully defined the scope of the call for ideas in an iterative manner with nursing and PCS directors and leaders . The problem statement in an open innovation challenge directs the search for ideas . 7 8 Thus , articulating a clear call for ideas to which the large and diverse groups of front - line nurses and staff can effectively respond is essential . Our ‘Other’ category allowed for additional pain points and solutions to be submitted , facilitating the inclu - sion of insights into problems we had not identified . Table 1 Budget Item Quantity Cost per item Total cost Idea submission pens 500 $ 1 . 04 $ 520 . 00 Idea submission Amazon gift cards 100 $ 10 $ 1000 . 00 EDC flyers 200 $ 1 . 18 $ 170 EDC posters 6 $ 60 $ 360 . 00 EDC digital announcements 11 $ 7 . 73 $ 85 Voting branded stickers 1000 $ 7 per square foot $ 448 Voting Amazon gift cards 75 $ 20 $ 1500 EDC platform programming $ 8137 . 50 Award event ( eg , A / V support , graphics for winning ideas ) 1 $ 2000 . 00 Journey maps of winning ideas 4 One time quote $ 1250 Total $ 15 470 . 50 A / V , audio / video ; EDC , Ether Dome Challenge . 5 Nadel HM , et al . BMJ Leader 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1136 / leader - 2023 - 000777 Brief report Secure leadership buy - in Leadership and decision - maker support are critical to encour - aging participation and supporting the implementation of ideas . In our case , we engaged senior and middle managers throughout the EDC . Examples of their input included identifying the focus areas and selecting the winning ideas . Generate excitement The open innovation process can be a fun opportunity for front - line healthcare workers to share ideas with each other and voice concerns to management , especially as many were experiencing high stress due to the COVID - 19 pandemic . Accordingly , we branded the challenge with a tagline , ‘Challenge the Norm : Be an Innovative Disruptor’ , which created an atmosphere of excitement and innovation . Small things like branded stickers and pens became coveted items and fostered a sense of pride for participants that contributed to their engagement . Our intervention entailed several limitations , highlighting opportunities to improve the future iterations of the EDC . First , all communications related to the EDC were via email , and we later learnt that not all nurses and PCS staff have access to email while at work . We plan to expand our modes of communica - tion in the future and promote the EDC in morning huddles and other already existing in - person staff meetings . Second , based on feedback that the application process was perceived to be burdensome , we plan to simplify the application and be clearer about what is expected in the application . Third , it is important to recognise that only 10 % of ideas came from ambulatory and community centres . Future iterations will attempt to elicit more widespread participation by using more targeted promotion approaches , such as focusing the scope of the ideas to address the needs of ambulatory units , community centres and inpatient units . Lastly , only 5 % of ideas came from nursing assistants and clerical staff . We will need to improve ways to engage non - direct nurse staff . Understanding staff behaviour around sharing their ideas will be important . The following questions remain : Do staff members have enough confidence to speak up when they discover a pain point that they want to solve ? Do they work in an environment where they are routinely asked for their input ? Recognising and communicating everyone’s value from their unique lens will lead to better engagement and solutions . CONCLUSIONS We successfully implemented an open innovation process with high workforce participation despite the stress associated with the COVID - 19 pandemic . This process generated important ideas that aimed to increase efficiency and improve patient care . The money and effort that went into this programme were well rewarded by both these ideas and helping employees feel heard and empowered . Given such success , we plan to use this process annually to continue engaging our front - line nurses and staff in innovation . Depending on its resources , a smaller hospital or health system may choose to run a contest less or more often . Twitter Hiyam M Nadel @ hiyamnadel and Olivia Jung @ _ ojung Acknowledgements We thank the Connell Family for their generous philanthropic support for this work . We thank Mikhail Pivovarov , Katherine Abuhadal and Daniel Guettler for their help in building the Ether Dome Challenge platform . We also thank all front - line nurses and patient care services staff who participated and shared their insightful ideas . Contributors All listed authors contributed to the work’s planning , conduct and reporting . Funding The philanthropic funds from the Connell Family supported the implementation of the Ether Dome Challenge and winning ideas . Competing interests None declared . Patient consent for publication Not applicable . Ethics approval This study involves human participants and was approved by the Mass General Brigham IRB ( protocol number : 2021P000995 ) . Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking part . Provenance and peer review Not commissioned ; externally peer reviewed . ORCID iD Hiyam M Nadel http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 5025 - 2543 REFERENCES 1 Amabile TM . The social psychology of creativity : A Componential conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1983 ; 45 : 357 – 76 . 2 Kaya N , Turan N , Aydın GÖ . A concept analysis of innovation in nursing . Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 2015 ; 195 : 1674 – 8 . 3 von Hippel E . Democratizing Innovation . MIT ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Press , 18 February 2005 . 4 Nembhard IM , Tucker AL . Deliberate learning to improve performance in dynamic service settings : evidence from hospital intensive care units . Organization Science 2011 ; 22 : 907 – 22 . 5 Jung OS , Jackson J , Majmudar M , et al . Engaging frontline employees using innovation contests : lessons from Massachusetts general hospital . Healthc ( Amst ) 2022 ; 10 : 100615 . 6 Jeppesen LB , Lakhani KR . Marginality and problem - solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organization Science 2010 ; 21 : 1016 – 33 . 7 Gillier T , Chaffois C , Belkhouja M , et al . The effects of task instructions in Crowdsourcing innovative ideas . Technological Forecasting and Social Change 2018 ; 134 : 35 – 44 . 8 Blohm I , Zogaj S , Bretschneider U , et al . How to manage Crowdsourcing platforms effectively California Management Review 2018 ; 60 : 122 – 49 .